QVADRIGA SALVTIS. OR THE Four General Heads OF CHRISTIAN RELIGION SURVEYED,
AND EXPLAINED 1. First, In Aphorisms or positive Maxims. 2. Secondly, Resolved
into Questions and Answers.


WITH Some few Annotations annexed at the latter end.

Ita doce, ut cum dicus nove, non dicas nova.
Vincent: Lirinen. Commonitor. cap. 27 LONDON, Printed by Sarah Griffin, for
Philip Chetwind, 1657.

TO THE HONORABLE AND My worthily honored Lady, the Lady Eleonor Williams, of
Gwerneuet.
IT is the advice of one of the Greek Orators, Aristid. Adrian. orat. 8.
that we should dedicate Temples to the gods, and Books to them that are like
them, that is, to persons of Honor and Virtue.

Madam, we build no Temples, but if we can contribute any thing toward the
Temple of God to repair the ruins thereof, it is the highest point of our
ambition and hopes. This small Treatise which is designed to that end, you have
a double right in.

1. By the general obligation you have upon the Author, whose best of services
and endeavors, you may justly lay claim unto, by the constant favors,
wherewith you have cherished him (for many years) through all the sceans of
fortune: when the Countenances of others were shut up and wrapped in clouds and
darkness toward him, yours was always open and serene; -- Vt sine faece dies.
whereby you gave a silent Testimony to his innocence, and raised up his
Spirits when they were at their lowest dejection and abatement.

2. By a particular interest you have in this work, which you (with some of
your nearest and dearest Relations) have with a propitious hand promoted
toward the press, especially the Counter-part of it, whereby if our
Contrymen shall reap any benefit (which is my hearty wish) they must bless
God and you for it.

It is my joy, and it will be your Crown, that you and your children like that
Elect Lady (in St. John) and her children, 2 John 1.4.
do walk in the Truth and persevere therein, in these days of apostasy: In
this hour of temptation which is come upon all this Kingdom, Rev. 3.10.
to try them that dwell therein.

The principles which are here treated of, and upon which, your faith is
grounded and your eternal hope is built, have been your ballast and
anchor-hold, to keep you firm and steadfast in the day of your temptation, when
you were beset with two contrary winds, one that would have filled your sails
for Rome, and the other that would have hurried you a clean contrary way to the
other extreme, for some Spirits know no mediocrity or moderation. But by the
strength of your own judgment and education, and by virtue of these Catholic
principles of the Christian faith, which you imbibed in your younger years
instead of Romances, you have been able (through God) to defeat the designs and
to withstand the suggestions of those that thought to lead you away captive, as
easily as the first Tempter did her, (...). Mat. 4.3.
that was the first of sex.

In the strength of the Lord hold on your course, and finish your race, and
hold fast your Crown, that no man take it from you.

Madam, I am infinitely engaged to all the fair Issue of your Body, and since I
cannot requite their kindness severally, I hope it will be some satisfaction of
my debt and engagement that I pay this homage to you that are the Fountain of
them: as in ancient times, men paid certain rites and observances to the
springs of those fair streams, which bathed their houses and watered their
lands: magnorum fluminum capita veneramur, Sen. Ep. 47
etc.

Indeed, so strong a pulse of gratitude beats in my breast, that if my power
were equal to my will, I would erect a monument of brass to your memory, and
unto all those, Virtus heroica est eminentia and splendour virtutis, qua homine
supra conditione^ humanam elevat, Piccol: de mor: Philosophia.
whose Heroic charity durst look (with favor) upon the Lords Ministers in
these sad and evil days: when some others (of baser alloy) would shun them, as
things blasted, and would scarce speak with them, much less for them, or succor
them, in the day of their distress, like that vulgar Herd, in the Poet: Which
follows fortune, -- Vulgus sequitur fortun^, ut semper, and odit

Damnatos. Iuv. Sat. 10.


(it is their guise)
And men condemned, allwaies flies.


But Madam, you and Yours are acted by nobler and more Christian principles
than these drossie and earthly things; and I shall sooner meet with them that
will envy, and secretly repine at this character, I give you, than such as will
study to deserve the like; though I shall never envy them the praise of
well-doing, wherever I shall find the least measure of desert.

I do not know, whither I may live to finish a better Piece than this, being
long since taken away from the book, Forced to be Secular Priests.
by secular cares and encumbrances, to make up the breaches of a ruinous
fortune, seldom retiring within my self, and that but by snatches and broken
intervals: I have therefore thought it best to record my gratitude upon these
leaves rather than to leave the duty to future contingencies: And instead of a
richer monument which I would erect to your Virtues, I have shadowed forth my
thoughts by an Hieroglyphick or Emblem in the ensuing page, which may chance
last as long as some Tombs of grosser materials, and serve to as good purpose.

Now the God of peace who brought again from the dead the Lord Jesus, Heb.
13.20, 21.
the great shepherd of the sheep, make you perfect in every good work to do his
will: until you have finished your course with joy, and be translated hence
full of days, honor, and contentment.

Madam, this is the hearty wish of him who does unfeignedly pray for the
welfare and happiness of your whole Family, even

Your Ladyships ever engaged, Tho. Powell.



I Have delineated this Tree in the precedent page, according to the
description of Benzo an Italian, who spent 14 years in surveying the vast
Continent of America and the adjacent Islands.

It grows in an Island called Hierro or Ferro, which is one of the Canaries:
There is no other Tree in all the Island besides, neither any water to refresh
the Inhabitants but what this tree affords, the bowels of the Country being
iron, from whence it has its name.

It may be a fit Emblem of a charitable person in an uncharitable Country, and
may have other fit and apposit applications.

It is mentioned by sundry Geographers and Travelers, as Hugh Linschotten,
Petr: Bertius in his description of the Canaries: Sir Rich: Hawkins in his
Navigations, and described by the excellent Du Bartas, thus, In the I Will of
Iron, one of those same seven
Whereto our Elders happy (...) Insulae fortunatae:
name have given,
The savage people never drink the streams
Of wells and rivers, as in other realms;
Their drink is in the air, the gushing spring
A weeping tree out of it self does wring:
A tree whose tender-bearded root does spread
In driest sand; his sweaty leaf does send
A most sweet liquor: and like as the vine
Untimely cut, weeps at her wound the wine
In pearled drops, incessantly distills
A royal stream, which all their cisterns fills.


A PREFACE.
WHat books are abroad in the world, either of this kind or any other, I am but
little acquainted with, of late times; living remote from the Kiriath-Sephers,
Josh. 15.15
the common Marts, and Staples of such marchandises; and being rendered both
unable to buy and incapable to employ them.

Yet my reason tells me, and it is the common voice and vote of diverse others
as I hear, that Catechizing is a very necessary expedient for the preservation
of Christian Religion among us, and the most probable means, if not to recover
the Diseased from infection, yet to preserve the Sound from being infected.

The principal way of fortifying against false Teachers, is to be well-grounded
in the principles of true teaching, that is, of the doctrine of Christ; without
which, men are like chaff, Sine magno molimine ab area excutitur, quod nullo
pondere intra aream tenebatur. Vinc. Lir. c. 2.5. ^rona sunt in ruinam quae
sine fundamentis creverunt. Sen. l. de ira. cap. 16.
without any solid grain in them, which are soon blown away from the floor of
the Church; and tossed to and fro, with every wind of vain doctrine, like a
ship without ballast or anchor; and like a building, that having no basis or
foundation, is easily stormed down, and demolished.

And hence it is, that the Master Builders of our Sion (who have spent much
pains in the Pulpit, yet) because they have spent so little in foundation-work,
have found that they did but aedificare in ruinam, and that all their labor
was but lost in building.

The smallest of Gods creatures do often read Lectures unto their Master, man:
Prove. 6.6.
the Pismire reads a Lecture of providence and industry: and the Be reads a
lesson of wit and sagacity. For this wise little foul, Apis Sapi, entissima
avicula. Basil. Hexaem. c. 8. Ecclus. 11.12.
when she goes abroad a forraging, and is (perhaps) surprised with
windy-weather; before she adventures back again, she takes up some gravel in
her fangs, to balance her little body, and then she hoises sail, and steers her
course homewards, more stedily.

-- Saepe lapillos
Ut cymbae instabiles, Virg l. 4. Georg.
fluctu jactante, saburram
Tollunt, his sese per inania nubila librant.
If men would learn the like providence, before they adventure forth in
windy-weather, among the storms and counter-tydes of disputes and controversies
in the world, as to take in the ballast of Catholic principles which are here
treated of, they would certainly hold their road and course with more safety,
and less danger of making shipwreck of Faith and a good Conscience.

They would not fluctuate like those unstable souls that Optatus speaks of,
Inter licet nostrum et non licet vestrum, L. 3. contra Donatistas.
nutant and remigant populorum animae. For let the winds blow, and the waters
flow, and the Devil storm never so much, a well-principled Christian knows how
to steer his course, and where to rest and cast anchor.

This is the benefit and advantage of Catechistical exercises and of building
up a Christian Methodically, from the foundation upward. Such an Edifice, Ephesians.
2.21.
being (...), an harmonious building; the super-structure being cemented to the
foundation, and the roof and covering being adapted to the super-structure, and
all parts being framed and compacted according to the Rule of Proportion, Romans
12.6.
is most like to last and bear up, and to prove storm-proof.

Now the subject matter of Catechizing (as all know) are the first principles
of Christian Religion, which St. Paul calls the Elements, (...). Heb. 5.12.
(...). Heb. 6.1. Sermo qui rudes in Christo inchoat. So Beza renders it. Ass
artium, and Scientia Scientiarum est regimen animarum. Esa. 29.8.
and the beginnings of the doctrine of Christ. As there are principles in all
Sciences upon which the whole Art depends, and upon which it is built as upon a
foundation: So in this Architectonical Science, and the Art of saving souls,
there are certain principles which are of such moment and consequence, that he
that has not these, has nothing; he graspeth a cloud, his soul is empty, like
a hungry man that dreameth he is eating, and lo, when he awaketh, he is empty.

And the principles of this Divine Art, are these four: the Creed, the
Commandments, the Lord Prayer, and the Sacraments. Append: to the Reformed
Catholic.
These are the Catholic Principles of the Catechism (says reverend Perkins)
which have been agreed upon, ever since the Apostles days, by all Churches of
the World: Cul. Paris.
These are fundatoria Religionis, the foundations of that City that came down
from heaven, Rev.
which was four square; these are the four Elements that do constitute the
Christian Faith; the Vials wherein the vital substance of Religion consists.
(...) and (...).
They are (in brief) the ancient Landmarks that have been settled since the
foundation of Christendom, and points that have been generally and universally
received, wheresoever Christ had a Church; being Heyr-looms (as it were) and
standing implements of the Church from the beginng; Haereditaria signacula, St.
Am^brose calls them. l. 3. ad Great. Imper. Communem Thesaurum and haereditatem
paternam, St. Basil terms them, Ep. 70.
and descending down from age to age (indisputably) to the Heirs of salvation.

Amidst all the garboils of the Church when it has been (most) torn with
Schi^ms and over-grovwn with the Tares of Heresy; in those times, when it
required some wit to be a Christ^^, and to continue so, God reserved this seed
unto his Church and people, and preserved the vitals of Christianity
un-invaded, at least among most men, and in most parts of the world.

True it is, that Satan's Pioners have been busy (in all ages) with these
foundations, and have turned up every stone in it yet that will not prejudice
the universality of them, no more than some hills and valleys do perjudice the
roundness of the earthly Globe.

So that, I may here fitly apply a piece of that Remonstrance, which the
renowned Athanasius Patriarch of Alexandria (together with the Bishops under
his Patriarchate) presented to the Emperor Jovinian, being newly advanced to
the Empire, to induce him to quit the Arrian party and to embrace the Orthodox
Faith.

The Confession of Faith which we present unto your Highness (most sacred
Emperor) is received by all the Churches of God every where, Auguste
Sanctissime Yheodor. l. 4 Eccl. Hist. c. 3.
as in Spain, Britain, France, Italy, Dalmatia, Mysia, Macedonia and all
Greece: By all the Churches of Africa, Sardinia, Cyprus, Creet, Pamphylia,
Lycia, Isauria; the Churches of Egypt, Lybia, Pontus, Cappadocia, and the
neighboring Regions of all the East, excepting some few of the Arrian faction
that do oppugn it, Non tamen inde praejudicium fieri potest orbi universo: They
are but as the dust of the balance, and their paucity cannot prejudice the
universal consent of the Christian World, as bearing no proportion with it.

I may say the same of these Catholic Principles that are handled in the
ensuing pages: and therefore it is safe yea necessary to embrace, Vinc Lirin.
cap. 3.
Quod ab omnibus, quod ubique, and quod semper, etc. For there is nothing of
this nature, that has such an impress of Universality, Antiquity and Consent
upon it, Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum, sed semper
retentum, non nisi authoritate Apostolica traditum rectissine creditur. Aug. l.
4. de Bapt.
that is not Apostolical. For as the Apostles, in all points that they
preached, were unius labii, of one lip and language, though their bodies were
far a sunder: so were the Churches that were planted by them. (...) Tim. 6.20.
They had all the same Depositum, the same Body of Theology, form of Doctrine,
and System of saving and necessary truths, entrusted to them, which they also
transmitted to the next generation, as faithful Trustees and Depositaries,
from whom they were handed over unto us, under the same trust and obligation of
bequeathing them to our posterity, until Christ himself cut off the entail.

Let none therefore overlook these things, or despise the day of small things,
Zach. 4.10.
for by over-looking these, we have almost lost our religion: while we wander
in vain fantasies, following after new notions, or new-nothings, Chemical and
Chymerical Divinity and such quelques-choses to please the fastidious and
irregular appetites of this age, Via trita est vita tuta.
we are bewildred, like Travelers that disdaigning the beaten and obvious
road-waies, We would go to the heavenly Canaan by the Kings high way, and turn
neither to the right hand nor to the left. Numb. 20.17.
are always seeking out short cuts and compendious traverses, till they be
entangled in some thickets, and can hardly meet with the right way again.

Lucret.
Ardua dum quaerunt, amittunt vera viai.
Non contemnenda sunt parva, sine quibus magna esse non possunt. Hiero. Ep. ad
Laetam
Wherefore despise not (I say) these small things, without which, none ever came
to be great, in solid and saving knowledge.

God hangs great weights upon small wires: All Religion hangs upon these few
plain principles which are Radical verities, Principia majora sunt vi quam
magnitudine. Arist. de Coelo, l. 1. c. 5.
from whence all others are extracted, as numbers from their roots, and
conclusions from their premises.

When the French called upon the English (that came to the aid of Henry the
4th.) to hasten their slow march, one of the English Commanders replied: Sir,
To. Williams his Commentaries.
With this march, our Forefathers did once overrun all France: we may say in
like manner, that how meanly soever some may deem of these things, we know that
by these ways and means the Gospel marched over the World, the Primitive
Christians won the field, subdued whole Kingdoms unto Christ, and at last, won
heaven for themselves.

By this means the Protestants got ground of the Papists, Pius the 4th. in his
Bull de motu proprio, perfixed to the Trent- Catechism
as the Pope himself once did complain; and diverse Dr. Gropper. Stapleton. Lud.
Carbo.
Romanists have confessed that the Protestants never used a more mischievous
engine against Rome than Catechizing; And thereupon they fell to counter-work
them by the same way, and framed Catechisms of several sorts; And surely if
ever they get back of us that ground which they have lost, it will be (as a
Reverend man has long since premonished) by this way, Mr. Rich. Greenham*
above 50. years agone.
by their more exact care in requiring of this duty from the Parochial
Ministers.

I will preface no farther in this business, but advertise the Christian Reader
that this Synopsis was intended for an explanation of the Church-Catechism, and
(indeed) to succeed it in the order and method of teaching: for this
presupposes the learning of the other, and the having it by heart before hand,
Cyrill. Catech. 4.
as the (...), the milky way, which all Children should first tread in, and
learn to order their steps by.

Ediscebant pueri 12. Tabb. leges, ut Carmen necessarium. M. Tull. l. 2. de Ll.
The Romans caused their Youth to learn the Laws of the 12. Tables by rote; and
why should not Christian Children learn that more excellent Law of the Two
Tables and the other Heads of Christian Love in their tender years, when the
memory is most receptive of good impressions, and most retentive of what is
committed to it? This (indeed) is fitted and set to the elevation of men's
capacities at 12. and 13. years of age, when it begins to be day-breaks in
their understandings in matters of this nature.

A year or two will not serve to be Discipulus Catechismi, under the discipline
of the Catechist: This foundation-work will require more time and pains than
so: Let none make too much haste out of this lower form, Debile fundamentum
fallit opus. Cypr. praefat ad opuscula.
till Christ be formed in him, and until these prima fidei lineamenta, the
first lines and traces of Christ's face, be drawn upon the Tablet of his mind.

The variety and multiplicity of Catechisms which I hear to be abroad, has
kept this (a while) under my wing: But at last I adventured it abroad, because
I understand, there are but few of those framed according to the Scheme of the
Church-Catechism; and another motive of the publication was, Vtile est plures a
pluribus fieri tractatus, diverso stylo, non diversa fide, etiam de
Quaestionibus iisdem, ut ad plurimos res ipsa proveniat; ad alios sic, ad alios
autem sic. Aug. de Trint. cap. 3.
the Counsel of a pious and learned Father of the Church, which was, that men
should publish various Tract^ touching one and the same subject, that the same
thing coming forth in various dresses, into men's hands, they might be reduced
to read and affect them, one way or other.

For sometimes the person of an Author (being familiarly known unto us) invites
us to read: sometimes a singular method, and sometimes neatness and elegancy of
style, prefers a Book to the Readers acceptance.

If any of these circumstances shall befriend this small piece, and procure it
a favorable aspect from the Christian peruser, I may hope of some good may be
done by it. And God give a blessing to it, according to the sincerity of my
intentions therein.

And thine ears shall hear a word behind thee, saying: This is the way, walk
ye in it, when ye turn to the right hand, and when ye turn unto the left. Isa.
30.21.
YOung man, if thou would Christian be
In truth, and in reality;
Four things imprint upon thy mind
Whilst it is tender (yet) and kind.
1.
First learn the Creed, that golden Key
Of true Belief, which lets in day.
2.
The Precepts next must be thy Lore
To guide thee safe from shore to shore.
'Midst rocks of Vices, and the Sands
Which threat thy Vessel on all hands.
3.
Then that most holy Prayer take,
Which for thy use thy Lord did make
To teach thee to send fit desires,
Lest thou offend with foolish fires.
4.
The Sacraments in the last place
With bended knees and heart embrace,
The Seals of thy Redemption, and
Thy title to the Holy Land:
Make use of these, if thou would fain
That life which knows no Death obtain.
BIs tria Orat: Dom:
sunt Oranda tibi, Credendaque, Symbolum.
bis sex:

Quae Decalogus.
Peragenda, december: Sacramenta.
Participanda, duo.

OF THE CREED.
I.
THere are four general parts of Christian Religion, In his capitibus
Catecheticis universae Scripturae pomaeria, se^ potius Latifundia continentur.
Alsted Th. Catechet. c. 1.
which are received and embraced of the whole Church of God throughout the
World, and do virtually contain the whole Body of Divinity: namely, The Creed;
the Commandments; the Lords Prayer; and the Sacrament^.

II.
AS man was made after a differen^ manner from other subluna^y Creatures: so he
was designed for a different end God made him lower than the Angels in this
life. Psalm. 8.5. But he shall be made equal to the Angels hereafter. Luke 20.36.
, to weet eternal happiness after this life: For the attainment whereof, God
has showed him what to do Deuteronomy. 10.12. Micah 6.8.
, prescribed the means thereunto conducing, if he make use of them.

III.
St. Paul does reduce all to these two heads faith and Love. 2 Timothy 1.13
THe means that God appointed unto man for to arrive at happiness, are chiefly
these two. 1. To believe rightly in God. 2. To walk uprightly before him; that
is, according to his Will and Command, revealed in his Word; This is the whole
duty of man.

IV.
Perfectus Scripturae Canon, ad omnia, satis supe^que* sufficit* Vinc: Lirin*
cap. 2.
THe Word wherein God declared his Will, is the Scripture, which is the
Authentic Rule of Faith and Manners; Life and Belief; containing all points of
necessary and saving truths to make the man of God perfect, and to carry him on
to his designed end of happiness and glory.

V.
ALl the chief points of Faith and right Belief, and which are necessary of all
men to be received (to whom they are propounded) are summed up in those 12.
points or Articles that are contained in the Apostles Creed: Which Creed is the
Key to all other doctrinal points of Religion.

VI.
THe Patriarchs and Servants of God in old time, The Patriarchs Creed, see the
Annotations annexed. (...). Tit. 1.3.
were saved by the faith contained in this Creed: every Article thereof being
revealed unto them, and to be sound (dispersedly) in the writings of Moses Act.
26 22.
and the Prophets: For as there was but one Cant. 6.9. Ephesians. 4.4, 5.
Church from the beginning of the World: so there was but one Tit. 1.3.
faith, which is common to us and them, and to all that shall come after us.

VII.
OF those twelve Articles, some do concern God the Father, as the first
Article: some concern God the Son, The distribution of the Creed into 4. parts.
as the six Articles immediately following; and some do concern God the Holy
Ghost, as the eighth Article. The four last, do set forth the state of the
Church, both in this World and in the nex^.

VIII.
The Desinto Hell.
THe Article of Christ's descent into Hell may safely be understood and
believed, either of these two ways.

Dr. Hammond's Practical Catechism, 2d. edition page 236.
1. That the soul of Christ descended (locally) among the Infernal Spirits; not
to suffer, but to manifest the power of his Godhead: which is the
interpretation of the Fathers, and diverse eminent Writers Dr. Latimer. Dr.
Nowel. Dr. Babington. Dr. Bilson. Dr. Crachanthorp in his defense of the Church
of England -- C. 39.
of later age. 2. By descending into Hell, no more is to be understood than
that Christ descended into the state of the Dead, and was (there) continued for
the space of three days; which is more generally received of the later
Writers.
IX.
TO believe the Holy Catholic Church, is to believe that among all the Tribes
Rev. 5 20.
and Nations of the World, God has some chosen servants and a peculiar people,
whom he has taken Act. 15 14.
out for his name; sanctified with his Spirit Act. 20 32. Romans 15.16
; called unto the state of grace Romans 8 28.
; and ordained unto eternal Glory.

X.
TO believe the Communion of Saints, is to believe that the Saints and Servants
of God are knit (by an invisible tie of faith and love) to Christ their head
Col. 2.19. 1 John 1.3. (...). Ephesians. 4.4.
; and to each other, by common participation, and mutual communication of all
good things, both spiritual and temporal, as if they were but one body, and
were acted by one soul and spirit Phil. 2.12.
.

XI.
TO believe forgiveness of sins, is to believe that God does freely pardon sin
to penitent Luke 24 47. Act. 2.38.
sinners, thtough faith in Christ Romans 3.24, 25, 26.
, without any other merit or satisfaction; And that he has given power to his
Church Mat. 18 18. Joh. 20.25
to declare and pr^nounce this pardon (in his name) upon just and lawful
occasions.

XII.
Symbolum patrum est tantum declarativum symboli Apostolici, sic propter
haereticos exigente necessitate. Aquin: Sum: p. 2. c. 1.
THe Nicene Creed and the Creed of Athanasius, are but Paraphrases and
Explanations of the Apostles Creed, upon occasion of Heresies that sprung up in
the Church (about those times) touching the holy Trin^ty and the Incarnation of
Christ: But they contain nothing material or substantial, that is not couched
in the short symbol of the Apostles.

XIII.
The Doxology, a little Creed.
THat little Hymn of glory, called Gloria Patri, etc. is (as it were) a little
Creed, and an Abridgement of the Apostolical; brought into the Church about the
time that Arrianism prevailed, As the word shibboleth distinguished the
Ephraimites from the Gileadites, Jud. 12.6.
for to be a badge to distinguish the Orthodox Believers from the Heterodox or
mis-believers: For by giving glory to God in this form, they confessed the
Trinity in Unity, which the Arrians opposed.

A PRAYER.
BLessed be thy holy name, O Lord, for all the holy Scripture which thou have
given us, for a light unto our feet Psa. 119 105.
and a lantern unto our paths: And particularly for that part of it, which thy
holy Apostles have delivered for a Summary of Faith, and a Rule of right
belief; to teach us, to know thee the only true God, and Jesus Christ Joh. 17
3.
whom thou have sent. Lord strengthen and confirm this faith in us more and
more, that we being built upon the Rock 1 Cor. 10 4.
, and the firm foundation of the Prophets Ephesians. 2.10.
and Apostles, may stand up steadfast, unshaken and unmovable, against all the
temptations of Satan; both against the strong blasts of persecution, when any
shall arise; and against the breath of seducers, which do daily lie in wait to
deceive, and to beguile unstable souls.

That so holding fast this 1 Timothy 6 20.
pledge, which was once delivered unto the Saints, we may (at last) obtain the
end 1 Pet. 1 9
of our faith, even the salvation of our souls, through him, who is the Author
Heb. 12 2.
and finisher of our faith, Jesus Christ the Righteous.

Unto whom, with the Father and the blessed Spirit, all glory be rendered, by
all the Church, as in the beginning, so now, and to all ages of the World, Amen.

OF THE COMMANDMENTS.
I.
THe second general H^ad of Christian Religion are the Commandments, Decalogus
est Symbolum Agendorum. Dr. Davenant Adhort: ad pacem cap. ^.
which are the Breviate of the Law Moral, and of all the practical duties of
humane life: It is the Rule of our obedienc^, ^he Tree Genesis 2 17.
of knowledge of good and evil, showing what is good Deuteronomy. 30.15.
and what is bad, what is to be followed, and Romans 3.20.
what to be eschewed.

II.
OUr Savior Christ did not abolish the Ten Commandments, (...). Arist. Eth. l.
5. c. 7.
for it is a law founded in Nature R^m. 2 14, 15.
, and natural equity, and therefore is unmovable and unchangable. It is the
eternal Rule of Justice to all persons, to the end of the World: for the Gospel
does not exempt any persons from natural or moral obligations, at any time.

III.
Wherein Christian liberty does consist.
CHrist freed us from the Ceremonial Law (which was grown to be Mat. 23 4.
unsupportable) but not from the law of good manners Mat. 5.18. and 19.17. Romans
3.31.
, which was promulgated upon. Mount Sinai: He has freed us also from the
rigor, and punctuality of this Law, but not from the regiment of it. And lastly
he has freed us from the curse Deuteronomy. 27.26.
of this law, or the curse annexed to the breach of it, when he was himself
made ^ curse, by suffering an accursed death for our sins Gal. 3.13.
.

IV.
The moral law, a perfect law for parts and degrees.
THis Law called Moral, is a holy Romans 7 12.
and perfect Psa. 19.7.
Law, having a spiritual Romans 7.14.
as well as a literal sense: being made to regulate the whole man, both
outwardly in his members, and inwardly for the thoughts and intentions of the
heart Exodus 20.17.
.

Christ did fulfill this Law by doing it, not by filling up the vacuities of
it: for there was no defect or imperfection in it Psa. 119 96.
.

V.
GOd summed all moral duties in ten general Precepts, In the original it is in
the abstract, viz:
or Ten (...)
Words as Moses calls them.

Our Savior Christ reduced these ten into two, and St. Paul into one, even
Love: Decas verborum. Deu. 10 4.
Love Romans 13.10.
is the fullfilling of the Law, and the end and complement Joh. 14
of it: Mat. 22.40.
that is, Love toward God, and Love toward our Neighbor; this is the total
sum of the Moral Law.

VI.
How far the Law may be performed by us.
THough the Law be so nice and exact Deuteronomy. 6.5. Mat. 22.37
in it self that we cannot perform it so fully as we ought, or as it requires
Romans 3 20.
, nevertheless we may (Gods grace assisting us) perform it so far as to find a
gracious acceptance with him, through Christ Genesis 4.7.
: The doing the uttermost of what we can 2 Chronicles. 30.18.19*
, and the bewailing of what we cannot do, is all that the merciful God
requires at our hands in this point.

VII
This law of the two Tables surpasses all the laws of the 12. Tables among the
Romans.
THe precepts of the first Table do contain the duty of man toward God, being
given to direct him in the service of his Maker, and in performing both the
internal Psa. 59 6. Romans 12.1.
and external worship that is due unto him: For he that made both soul and
body, expects the service of both, and to be glorified in both 1 Cor. 6.20.
.

VIII
THe precepts of the second Table do contain the duty of man toward his
Neighbor, obliging him to love him Lev. 19 18. Mat. 22.39
as himself, as his fellow creature Gal. 6.10.
, hewn out of the same Act. 17 26. Isa. 58.7
rock, made by the same hand, and bearing the same stamp impress and
superscription with him, even the 1 Cor. 11 7. Jam. 3.9. Exemplumque Dei
quisque est sub imagine parva. Manil:
image of him that made both the one and the other.

IX.
THe Commandments are but few in number, and short in words, but they contain
much in a little: Praecepta sunt angus^a, and augusta. Zanch: in Decalog:
For where any particular Virtue is commanded, all Virtues of the same kind are
(under that name) commanded: And where any Vice is forbidden, all Vices of that
race and kind are forbidden likewise.

X.
WHere any Virtue is commanded, there the opposite Vice is forbidden: He that
commanded us to hate the evil, did command us to love the good. Amos 5.15 Isa.
1.16, 17.
and where any Vice is forbidden, the opposite Virtue or duty is commanded, by
the Rule of Contraries. As where stealing is forbidden, there honest labor
frugality and industry in our calling is (im^plicitly) commanded, that men need
not be forced to steal.

XI.
WHere any duty is commanded, there all lawful means conducing to that duty
are (cacitly) commanded: Qui destinat ad finem, destinaat ad media. Arist: 2.
Phys:
And where any vice is forbidden, there all the means and occasions Mat. 5.21,
28. 1 John 3.15. These ampliations and extensions of general precepts in the
Law, are virtually inherent in them; and so by easy natural Logic, and by a
free and unforced inference, are deducible from thence; whereof Alsted in his
Theologia Catechetica, Zanchius upon the Decalogue, Perkins in his Armilla
aurea, and diverse other Commentators on the Moral Law have treated.
, as also the allurements and provocations that do any way tend or induce
thereunto, are likewise forbidden.

THE PRAYER.
MOst holy God, who art glorious Exodus 15.11.
in holiness, and who wilt be sanctified Lev. 10 3.
in all that come nigh unto thee: Thou have been graciously pleased to declare
thy will unto us, and to show how thou would be served and obeyed Deuteronomy. 10
12.
, and what thou Micah. 6.8.
requirest of us, while we dwell in Tabernacles of flesh.

Thou have given us a holy and a perfect Psa. 19 7.
Law to be the Rule of our obedience, and the square of all our actions; Lord
open our eyes, that we may see the wondrous Psa. 119.18.
things of this Law, see the fullness, and purity, and perfection of it.

Write it (we pray thee) in the Tables 2 Cor. 3.3.
of our Hearts, that we may see it there, and do it; and assist us with thy
good Spirit, that we may embrace and follow every virtue that is there
commanded, and shun every vice that is forbidden, and study to be doers of the
word, and not hearers only, deceiving our own souls Jam. 1 22.
.

And though we are not able (through our natural depravedness and corruption)
to perform thy Law and Commandments so exactly as we should, yet O Lord our
God, we beseech thee to accept of our sincere endeavors, who know our
weaknesses and disabilities, know what is in man, and whereof he is made
Psa. 103 14.
, and do often accept of the will for the deed, even so accept of our
imperfect obedience, for his sake, who has fullfilled all righteousness, and
accomplished thy will in all points, even Jesus Christ, our only Mediator and
Redeemer.

OF THE LORDS PRAYER*
I.
THere is none in this World that is so full and self-sufficient, but does want
something, and must seek out of himself for a supply of that want: Deo nihil
deest, He is (...) self-sufficient and all-sufficient. -- Ipse suis pollens
opibus: --
Nature Jonah 1.5, 6. Act. 10 2.
dictates and suggests, that prayer and supplication is an effectual means to
obtain this supply; And that humble address must be made to him that has all,
and wants nothing 2 Cor. 3.5.
.

II.
Why we must pray.
Though God be rich Ephesians. 2.4.
in mercy toward all, and knows all our wants better than our selves, yet he
expects to be asked before he gives Mar. 6.5.21.22. Psalm. 50.15. Phil. 4.2.
: He requires us to acknowledge our Jam. 1.6.
wants and weaknesses, and to lift up a prayer in faith, and then he will meet
our desire^, if they be just Jam. 4.3. Job 35.13.
and convenient.

III.
MOst men are ignorant Job 37 19.
in the duty of prayer, How we must pray.
and know not how to pray as they ought Romans 8.26.
, or to pray according to Gods will 1 John 5 14.
; Therefore our Savior Christ (at the request of his Disciples) did prick down
a lesson for that purpose, as St. John had done for his Disciples Luke 11 1, 2.
: He gave them a prayer which they might use without fear of offending, by
presenting unfit or unlawful desires.

IV.
THat form of words delivered by Christ in the sixth of Matthew and the eleventh
of Luke, See the notes annexed, upon this Head.
is not only a pattern to pray by, but also a formal prayer, and a full
comprehensive one; being an Inventary of all our wants, and suiting with all
persons, times and occasions.

V.
AS it is a prayer of it self: so it is the law and line of all our prayers:
The Rule and Directory for composing of all prayers that suit with men's
particular occasions; And the standard whereby those prayers are to be
examined, whether they be made according to the pattern showed in the Mount The
Mountain whereon Christ preached his first Sermon, and delivered this prayer.
Mat. 5.1.
.

VI.
The preeminence of the Lords prayer. Oration Dominica est orationum domina.
THe Lords prayer must (in all reason) be esteemed above the best of h^mane
compositions.

1. By reason of the excellency of the Author, who was the Wisdom 1 Cor. 1 24.
of his Father: and in whom were hid all the treasures Col. 2.3.
of wisdom and knowledge; and unto whom the Spirit was not given by measure
Joh. 3.34.
.

2. For the acceptableness thereof with God: for when we supplicate the Father,
not only in his sons name Joh. 16 23.
, but also in his sons words, we may (with good reason) suppose, that our
requests will be the sooner heard, and return with better success.

VII.
YEt, The best qualifications of prayer.
neither the eminency of the composer, nor the art of the composition, do
recommend a prayer so much, as true says Mat. 21 22. Ja. 1.6.
, and fervent affection Ja. 5.15, 16.
, as also humility Luke 18 13.
, and due reverence Eccles. 5.1. Ephesians. 3.14:
; which are necessary dispositions and qualifications in any person that shall
send up this prayer, or any other.

VIII.
A ^^ayer composed by another (whither read or repeated by heart) is as useful
and prevalent as any made by our selves, And Jesus left them, and went again,
and prayed the third time saying the same words. Mat. 26.44. Mat. 14.43.
if devotion be in the heart. And the same prayer may be often used ( as Mat.
26.44.
Christ did) if the same grace be still wanting: God is not delighted with
varying of phrases, or suits of several dresses.

IX.
IN the Lords Prayer we are taught to say, our Father: In the Creed to say, I
believe, Pacis Doctor, and unitatis magister noluit sigillatim precem fieri.
Cypr: de Orat. Dom:
etc. To instruct us that every man must believe for himself, being to be saved
by his own Habh. 2 4.
says: But we must pray for others 1 Timothy 2.1. Jam. 5.16.
as well as our selves: for as charity begins at home but does not end there:
so does prayer; though it has one foot in the center of a man's self, the
other foot does fetch a compass about the World.

X.
THe Lords Prayer does consist of six Petitions, equally divided between God
and man: Whereof,

Tres petitiones dei gloria destinatae sunt tres reliquae nostri curam gorunt.
Cal^: l. 3. Inst: c. 20.
The three first.

1. Hallowed be thy name, (...) 2. Thy Kingdom come* (...) 3. Thy will be done,
(...)
The other three 1. Give us this day, etc. Do concern man. 2. Forgive us our
Trespasses, Do concern man. 3. Lead us not into, etc. Do concern man.


XI.
Of unpremeditated prayer.
TO pray in some language, not understood by the Congregation, is unlawful,
because it is unfruitful to edification 1 Cor. 14.14, 15, 16
. To pray with an unprepared heart, and unpremeditated words, delivering rude
and crude and undigested thoughts, does not consist with that Eccle. 5.2.
reverence that is due to the Majesty of God, when we make our addresses unto
him.

XII.
HE that composed this prayer did also impose it, and command it to be used,
and therefore it is not warrantable to lay it quite aside, though we be
qualified to make prayers of our own: for as this does not exclude other
prayers 3. so neither must other ^^^yers exclude this* But it may be use^ (...)
at the beginning of our devotion, or at the close of it, as the ancient Church
indifferently used it.

THE PRAYER.
MOst glorious Lord God, whose Essence is infinite, and whose Majesty is
incomprehensible, how little do we know of thee Job 37 19.
, at this distance from thee? we cannot order our speech unto thee by reason of
darkness; we are weak and feeble creatures, full of wants; and we are vain
things full of vain imaginations and fond desires, and therefore are often
frustrated in our requests unto thee, and expectations from thee; we Jam. 4.3.
Job 35.13.
ask and have not, because we ask amiss, our very prayers being often
offensive, because they are mingled with folly and vanity.

Thou have therefore (in great mercy and kindness toward thy servants) given
us a form of wholesome words, to direct us how to speak unto thee, to teach us
what is necessary for us to ask, and fit for thee to grant.

Gracious Lord, as thou have put thy words Isa. 51 16.
into our mouths: so put thy Spirit into our hearts, that we may ^^^y in the
power and demonstration of the Spirit, that we may lift up clean hands and pure
hearts unto thee, and put on reverence and godly fear in all our approaches
unto thee, supported with this assurance, that thou art our father, though we
be not worthy to be called thy sons Luk: 15.18.
, and that we have an Advocate with the father 1 John 2.1
, who has taught us to pray, and say, our Father, etc.

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
I.
THe New Testament Sacraments, Sacramenta sunt signa signantia, and obsignantia.
are certain visible signs and seals, ordained by our Savior Christ, relating
to some invisible grace, represented by them, and conveyed in them to the
meet and worthy Partakers.

II.
THe Sacraments are ordained in corporeal and visible elements or symbols, The
eye does better instruct than the ear: (...),
in regard of man's weakness and frailty, whose understanding must be instructed
in heavenly mysteries; and whose affections must be excited or stirred up to
religious duties, by the help of visible forms, representations and objects.

III.
The virtue and efficacy of the Sacraments.
THe Sacraments do not work grace of themselves, by some inherent virtue in
them: But in regard of the strict 2 Cor. 10.16.
union and relation between the sign and the thing signified, and the spirit
and power of Christ concurring Mat. 28.20.
with his own Ordinances (who does not delude men with mock-shews) much benefit
is derived in them and by them; where the partakers do not put a bar or
obstacle by their own unworth^ness.

IV.
THere are but two Sacraments that are properly so called, and which are
necessary (for all persons) unto salvation; namely Matthew. 28.19.
B^ptism and the Lords Supper Matthew. 26.26, 27*
: Illud, est nasci de sp^ritu; hoc, autem pa^sci. Aug: de verb: Apostoli. Sermon:
11.
Whereof the one, is a Sacrament of our initiation or entrance into the visible
Church; The other, of our continuation in it.

V.
THe Word and Sacraments are essential characters of Gods Church, or tokens to
know it by: where these are rightly dispensed, Faciunt favos vespae; faciunt
Ecclesias and Marcionitae. Tert: adv: Marc:
there is a true Church Mat. 18.20. Mat. 28.19. Act. 2.42.
; and where these are wanting, though there may be a convention or assembly of
men, yet it is not (properly) a Church of God.

VI.
BAptism is not only a sign of the new Covenant Genesis 17.11. Romans 4.11. Act.
2.38.22.16.
, Circumcision was a sign of the old Covenant, and Baptism comes in the room
of that. Co. 2.11, 12.
made ^o Christ, or a distinguishing ordinance between believers and
unbelievers: B^t also a ( b) seal to ratify consign and make over (as it were
under seal) the promises of God made in Christ, unto every true Believer.

VII.
THe sleighting or neglecting of the Baptism of water, The danger of sleighting
baptism, where it may be had.
where it may be had, or any other Ordinance of Divine institution, is a soul
endangering sin, and imports a contempt of the Author, See the Annotat:
and a rejecting of the counsel of God Luke 7.30.
. Gods anger was highly incensed against Moses Exodus 4.24.
for not Circumcising his child in due time, according to the command Genesis 17
12.
.

VII.
Infants to b^ Baptized. See more in the notes.
THe young children of believing Parents are capable of Baptism, as the children
Genesis 17 12.
of the Israelites (being but eight days old) were of Circumcision. And where
but one of the Parents is a believer, the children are admitted unto those
favors and privileges of the Church that do belong unto that Parent as a
believer 1 Cor. 7 14. Romans 11.16.
.

IX.
THe Lords Supper was instituted by Christ, not only for a memorial of his
death Luke 22.19: 1 Cor. 11.24.
, but also for a means of applying his merits to the partakers 1 Cor. 10.16.
; Verbum est fundamentum fidei; Sacramenta sunt firmamenta and columnae Calv:
l. 4. Instit. c.
for the increasing of love and amity among the faithful; and for the
strengthening of their faith and love toward God, by these outward tokens, and
pledges of his love to them 1 John 4.11.
.

X.
FOr the due receiving of this Sacrament, it is necessary that a man ^ Cor.
11.26.
examine himself, Qui indigne manducat, sibi judicium manducat, non tibi. Aug.
but not so expedient that he should examine others, whether they be worthy or
unworthy. No man is partaker of another man's sins, except he be accessory
thereunto, either by counsel 1 Samuel 12.9.
, or consent Act. 8.1. Act. 26.10.
, or approbation, or some such way.

XI.
THe frequent use of the Lords Supper (in due manner) besides other benefits,
serves much to the advancement of piety and a holy life: For thereby we are
called to a re-inforcing of our watch; to descend to that most useful and
necessary duty of self-examination 1 Cor. 11 28.
, or searching our own Psa. 77.6.
bosoms, to purge out 1 Cor. 5.6.
the old leaven and all impurity that is there contracted: and lastly to a
renewing of our vows and promises (made in baptism) of serving God, with more
circumspection and vigilance,

XII.
Sacraments of perpetual use to the ^aithfull.
THe Sacraments are not temporary Rites, but standing appointments in the
Kingdom of Christ, and of perpetual use in his Church, until his second coming
1 Cor. 11.26.
. None can arrive at such Phil. 3.12. Romans 7.14.
perfection in this life, as to be above Ordinances, or not to stand in need of
them, for the uses before mentioned; for which purposes all sober and humble
Christians, have found them useful, and efficacious.

XIII.
Only those that are law (...) to Ecclesiastical Ministeries, (...) Mat. 28
19, 20.
lawfully Administrators of the Sacraments; They are the Keepers of the Seals,
and are entrusted to apply and dispense them to such persons as desire them,
and are meetly qualified for them.

THE PRAYER.
BLessed Lord, thou have been gracious unto thy people, and wonderful in all
thy doings toward the children of men: Thou have been pleased (since thou have
created us for thy self) to guide our steps unto thee, and to set us in the
paths that lead unto everlasting life, By teaching us to believe In the Creed.
rightly in thee; to walk In the Command:
uprightly before thee; and in all our Addresses In the Lords Prayer.
, to speak advisedly and discreetly unto thee.

And thou have been farther pleased to afford thy servants suitable and
convenient helps for the performance of those Duties thou have enjoined them,
even thy holy Sacraments; which thou have ordained to nourish and strengthen
our says in thee; to inflame our love toward thee, and to embolden our
addresses unto thee, by assuring and sealing Romans 4 11.
unto us all the gracious promises that thou have made unto thy Church, in thy
beloved Son.

Lord teach us to use these helps and means discreetly, reverently and
thankfully, as thine own holy institutions; Continue them still unto us, and
let thy holy Spirit be ever present with them, that they may be instrumental
and effectual to those ends and purposes for which thou have ordained them.

Lord hear thou in heaven thy dwelling place, and have mercy, and pardon the
sins of this most sinful Nation; Heal all our rents and breaches: Thou whose
name is, the Repairer Isa. 58.12.
of the breaches and the Restorer of the paths to dwell in, let this ruin Isa.
3.6, 7.
be under thy hand, and be thou a Healer.

Say unto this Nation, as thou did (once) to thy ancient people Jer. 33.6.
: I will bring it health and cure, and I will cure them, and reveal unto them
the abundance of peace and truth.

Grant this for thy mercies sake, and make haste to help, O Lord God of our
Salva^ion.

How long O Lord! at length repent,
And of our miseries relent:
Psalm. 90.
Thine early mercy show.
That we may unknown comforts taste,
And for long days of sorrow past,
As long of joy bestow.

The preceding Aphorisms resolved into Questions and Answers; for the better
fixing of them in the memory, and a farther illustration of them to weaker
understandings.
THis short Abstract is framed and contrived first, Axiomatically, by way of
Theses, Aphorisms, or Axioms, as Hippocrates summed up the* Rules of his art in
Aphorisms; Piscator, Junius and Grynaeus have delineated the Body of Theology
in the like form.

In the second place, These Theorems are handled Dramatically, by
inter-locutions, or by Questions and Answers; which was the ancient way, not
only of teaching Philosophy, used by Socrates and Plato, but also of planting
the Christian Faith, and propagating it over the world.

This Method and Economy will much conduce not only to illustrate the matter
in hand, and insinuate it to the understanding, but will serve also to rivet it
the faster in the minds of the learners, that they may be as go^ds and nails,
fastened by the Masters of the Assemblies. Eccle. 12.11


It is a command of Moses concerning the Law: Thou shall teach them diligently
to thy Children, Deuteronomy. 6.7. In the Hebrew it is Exacues, I^^it studium and
diligentiam, qu^ pueris praecepta dei ^nculca^i debent. V^^abl: in locum.
thou sh^lt sharpen these precepts, and set a point on them, that they may
penetrate, as men sharpen a stake to drive it into the ground, or set an edge
on a knife by often drawing it over the whetstone: So it is needful that such
Rules should be often inculcated and repeated that they may pierce deeper and
hold faster.

And lest I might seem to obtrude any thing Magisterially or like a Dictator on
any man's belief, I have pointed to the rock from whence they were hewn, by
subjoyning Scripture-citations to each of them. I have also confirmed them by
the authority of some ancient and modern writers, such as were the Heads of
their Tribes, and renowned men in their Generations.

The Protestants of France took just offense at the Sorbon Doctors, Histor: of
the Counsel of Trent l. 1.
when they published the Capital points of Christian Religion in 25.
Propositions, without any proofs of Scripture for any of them, but obtruded
naked Conclusions and Axioms, tanquam pro imperio, nullis rationibu^ aut
firmamentis adjectis; But I hope I have prevented such objections, by what is
added to these Theorems.

OF THE CREED.
HOw many parts be there of Christian Religion?

There are four general parts thereof, which are universally embraced of the
whole Church of God, through the World, and do virtually contain the whole Body
of Divinity: namely the Creed, the Commandments, the Lords Prayer, and the
Sacraments.

What is the preeminence and excellency of man above other creatures?

As man was made after a different manner from all other creatures here below:
so he was made to a different end, namely eternal happiness after this life:
For the attainment whereof, God has showed him what to do, prescribed the
means thereunto conducing, if he make a right use of them.

What are those means that God has appointed unto man, for obtaining eternal
happiness?

They are chiefly these two: first to believe rightly in God: secondly, to live
uprightly before him, that is, according to his will revealed in his word.
Living and believing making up the whole duty of man.

What word do you mean?

The word wherein God declared his will is the Scripture, which is the
authentic Rule of faith and manners, life and belief; containing all points of
necessary and saving Truth^* to make the man of God perfect, and to carry him
on to his designed end of happiness and glory.

What are the chiefest points of faith and right belief?

The chief and fundamental points of faith and true belief, and which are
necessary to be received of all to whom they are propounded, are summed up in
these 12. points or articles, which are contained in the Apostles Creed; which
Creed is the key to all other doctrinal points of Religion.

How did the Patriarchs and Servants of God (of old time) believe, before this
Creed was framed?

They believed as we do, and were saved by the says contained in this Creed;
every article thereof being revealed unto them, and to be found (dispersedly)
in the writings of Moses and the Prophets: for as the^e was but one Church from
the beginning of the world; so there was but one Faith, which is common to us
and them, and to all that shall come after us.

What do these 12. articles contain or concern?

Some do concern God the Father, as the first article; some God the Son, as the
six articles immediately following; and some do concern God the Holy Ghost, as
the eighth article: The four last do set forth the state of Gods Church, both
in this world and in the next.

What is meant by Christ's descending into Hell, which is mentioned in the
Creed?

That article or period, may safely be understood, either of these two ways:

1. First, that the soul of Christ descended (locally) among the infernal
Spirits, not to suffer, but to manifest the power of his Godhead: which is the
interpretation of the Fathers, and diverse eminent Writers of later age.

2. Secondly, by descending into Hell, no more is to be understood, than that
Christ descended into the state of the Dead, and was continued under the power
of Death for the space of three days: which is more generally received of the
later Writers.

What is meant by this article, I believe the Holy Catholic Church?

To believe the Holy Catholic Church, is to believe that among all the Tribes
and Nations of the World, God has some chosen Servants, and a peculiar people,
whom he has taken out for his name; sanctified with his Spirit; called unto
the state of grace; and ordained unto eternal glory.

What do you understand in the same article by the Communion of Saints?

To believe the Communion of Saints, is to believe that the Saints and Servants
of God are knit (by an invisible tie of faith and love) to Christ their Head;
and unto each other by common participation and mutual communication of all
good things both spiritual and temporal; as if they were but one Body, and were
acted by one soul and the same spirit.

What do you understand by this article, I believe the forgiveness of sins?

We believe that God does freely pardon sin to penitent sinners through faith
in Christ, without any other merit or satisfaction; and pronounce this pardon
(in his name) upon just and lawful occasions.

Are there not some other Creeds besides that of the Apostles?

Yea; the Nicen Creed, and that of Athanasius: yet these are but Paraphrases
and Explanations of the Apostolical Creed, upon occasion of Heresies that
sprung up in the Church (in those times) especially touching the Trinity, and
the Incarnation of Christ; but they contain nothing material, or substantial,
that is not couched in the short symbol of the Apostles.

What is the use of that little Hymn, called Gloria patri?

It is (as it were) a little Creed, and an Abbridgment of the Apostolical,
brought into the Church about the time that Arrianism prevailed, for to be a
badge to distinguish the Orthodox Believers, from the Heterodox or
mis-believers: For by giving glory to God in this form, they confessed the
Trinity in Unity, which the Arrians opposed.

OF THE COMMANDMENTS.
WHich is the second general part of Christian Religion?

The Commandments, which are a Breviate of the Moral Law, and of all the
practical duties of humane life; the Rule of our obedience; the Tree of
knowledge of good and evil, showing what is good and what is bad, what is to be
followed, and what to be eschewed.

Did not Christ abolish these Commandments?

No, for this is a Law founded in Nature, and natural equity; and therefore is
unmovable and unchangable; It is the eternal Rule of Justice to all persons to
the end of World. The Gospel does not exempt any persons from natural and moral
obligations at any time.

But it is said, that we are not under the Law, but under Grace: therefore we
are freed from the Law.

Indeed, Christ has (wholly) freed us from the Ritual or Ceremonial Law (which
was grown to be unsupportable) but he has not discharged us from the law of
good manner^ promulgated on Mount Sinai: yet he has freed us in part from this
Law, freed us from the rigor and severity of it, filed the teeth of it (as it
were,) he has freed us from the curse annexed to the breach of it, when he was
made himself a curse, by suffering an accursed death for our sins.

Was this Law a perfect Rule of obedience, and such as needed no amendment?

Yea, it was a holy and a perfect Law, having a Spiritual as well as a literal
sense, being made to regulate the whole man, both outwardly in his members, and
inwardly for the thoughts and intentions of the heart. Christ did fulfill this
Law, by doing it, not by filling up the vacuities of it; for there was no
defect or imperfection in it.

Are not the duties of man very numerous in this life?

Yea s^^e: but God in his wisdom, has summed them all up in Ten general
precepts, or Ten words, as Moses calls them.

Our Savior Christ reduced these 10. into two, Mat. 22.40. and St. Paul into
one, Romans 13 10. namely Love* Love is the fullfilling of the Law; the end and
complement of it; that is, Love toward God, and Love toward our neighbor:
This is the total sum of the Moral Law.

Is it possible for any to perform or fulfill this Law?

Though it be so nice and exact in it self, that we cannot perform it so fully
as we ought, or as it requires: nevertheless we may (Gods grace assisting us)
perform it so far, as to find a gracious acceptance with him, through Christ.
The doing the uttermost of what we can, and the bewailing of what we cannot do,
is all that the merciful God requires at our hands in this point.

What do the precepts of the first Table contain?

They do contain the duty of man toward God, being given to direct him in the
service of his Maker, and in performing the internal and external worship that
is due unto him: ^or he that made both soul and body, expects the service of
both, and to be glorifi^d in both.

What do the precepts of the second Table concern?

They do concern and contain the duty of man toward his Neighbor, obliging
him to love him as himself; and that, as his fellow creature, hewn out of the
same rock, made by the same hand, and bearing the same ^^amp, image and
super*scription with him, ev^n the image of him that made both the one and the
other.

The Commandments are but few in number, and short in words, have they not some
farther latitude in sense, than in words?

Yea surely: and there are certain Rules to show what latitude they bear, that
is, how far they may be amplified and extended; as, First, where any virtue is
commanded, all virtues of the same kind, are (under that name) commanded; and
where any vice is forbidden, all vices of that kind or race are forbidden
likewise.

What other Rules have you to measure the latitude of these Commandments?

Take these two more: where any virtue is commanded, there the opposite vice is
forbidden; and where any vice is forbidden, there the opposite virtue is
commanded, by the Rule of Contraries: As where stealing is forbidden, there
honest labor, industry, and frugality is commanded, that men need not be
forced to steal.

What is the other Rule?

Where any duty is commanded, there all lawful mean^ conducing to that duty,
are (tacitly) commanded: And where any vice is forbidden, there all the means
and occasions, as also the allurements and provocations that do any way tend or
induce thereunto, are likewise forbidden.

OF THE LORDS PRAYER.
WHat is the use of prayer?

Since there is no man in the world so full, and self-sufficient, but does want
something, and must seek out of himself for a supply of that want, Nature
dictates and suggests, that prayer and supplication is an effectual means to
obtain this supply; and that humble address must be made to him that has all,
and wants nothing.

God is of his own nature good, and also knows all our wants, what needs then
of praying and entreating?

Though God be rich in mercy toward all, and knows all our wants better than
our selves, yet he expects to be asked before he gives: he requires us to
acknowledge our wants and weakness^s, and to lift up a prayer in faith, and
then he will meet with our desires, if they be just and convenient.

Will any prayer serve, however it be framed and composed?

No, Therefore our Savior Christ, knowing that most men are ignorant in the
duty of prayer, and know not how to pray as they ought and according to Gods
will, did at the request of his Disciples prick down a lesson for that purpose,
as John the Baptist had done before, for his Disciples: He gave them a prayer,
which they might use without fear of offending, by presenting unfit or
unlawful desires.

Are those words of our Savior, recorded in the sixth of Ma^thew and the
eleventh of Luke a prayer?

They are a formal prayer, and not only a pattern to p^ay by; a full
comprehensive prayer, and a general Inventary of all our wants, suiting with
all persons, times and occasions.

May not other prayers be made and used besides this?

Yea doubtless; only this prayer must be laid before us as the law and line of
all other prayers; the R^le and Directory for composing of such prayers as suit
with private and particular occasions, when every man shall touch his own sore
2 Chro. 6.29.
, and his own grief: This must be the standard or measure, whereby thos^
prayers must be examined, whether they be made according to the pattern showed
in the Mount. Mat. 5.

May not other prayers be esteemed as good as this?

No sure: This prayer must (in all reason) be reputed above the best of humane
compositions.

1. First by reason of the excellency of the Author who was the Wisdom of his
Father, and in whom were hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge: and
unto whom the Spirit was not given by measure.

2. For the power or acceptableness thereof with God: for when we supplicate
the Father, not only in his Sons name, but also in his Sons words, we may
(with good reason) believe that our requests will be the sooner heard.

Is this prayer so acceptable, without any other conditions in the person that
prays?

No, neither the eminency of the composer, nor the art of the composition, do
recommend a prayer so much, as true faith and fervent affection, as also
humility and due reverence; which are necessary dispositions and qualifications
in the person that presents this prayer, or any other.

Is a prayer made by another man useful?

Yea, a godly prayer composed by another, (whether read or repeated by heart)
as may be useful and prevalent, as one made by our selves, if devotion be in
the heart: And the same prayer may be often used (as our Savior did) if the
same grace be still wanting. God is not delighted with varying of phrases, and
suits of several dresses.

Why are we taught to say [Our father] in the Lords prayer: and [I believe] in
the Creed?

To instruct us, that every man must believe for himself, being to be saved by
his own faith: but we must pray for others, as well as our selves: for as
Charity begins at home, but does not end there; so does prayer: if it has one
foot in the center of one's self, the other foot does fetch a compass about the
world.

How many petitions are contained in the Lords prayer?

There are six, equally divided between God and man: whereof the three first 1.
Hallowed be thy name, Do concern God. 2. Thy Kingdom come, Do concern God. 3.
Thy will be done, etc. Do concern God.


The other three
1. Give us this day, Do concern Man. 2. Forgive us our trespasses. Do concern
Man. 3. Lead us not into, etc. Do concern Man.
Is it any way useful to pray in an unknown tongue?

No, neither to him that prays, nor to the Congregation, because it is
unfruitful to edification: So to pray with an unprepared heart, and
unpremeditated words, delivering rude, and crude, and undigested thoughts, is
unlawful, as not consisting with that reverence that is due to the Majesty of
God, when we make supplications unto him.

May not this prayer be wholly forborne and laid aside by them that can frame
prayers of their own?

No, the omission of it gives great offense to godly Christians; for he that
composed this prayer did impose it, and command it to be used, and therefore it
is not warrantable to lay it quite aside, though we be qualified to make
prayers of our own: For as this does not exclude other prayers; so neither must
others exclude this: but in may be used either at the beginning of our
devotion, or at the close of it, as the ancient Church did (indifferently) use
it.

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
WHat is the end and use of Sacraments?

The New Testament Sacraments are certain visible signs and seals, ordained by
our Savior Christ, relating to some invisible grace and goodness, represented
by them, and conveyed in them, to the meet and worthy partakers.

Why were Sacraments instituted in corporeal and visible elements?

It was in consideration of man's weakness and frailty, whose understanding must
be instructed in heavenly mysteries; and whose affections must be excited and
stirred up to religious duties, by the help of visible forms, representations,
and objects.

Can the Sacraments work grace upon the soul?

No, as of themselves, or by some inherent virtue in them; yet in regard of the
strict relation that is between the sign and the thing signified, and the
spirit and power of Christ concurring with his own Ordinances (who does not
delude men with mock-shews) much benefit is derived in them and by them, where
the partakers do not put a bar or obstacle by their own unworthiness.

How many Sacraments be there?

There are but two, which are truly and properly so called, and which are
necessary (for all persons) unto salvation: namely Baptism and the Lords
Supper, whereof the first is a Sacrament of our initiation or entrance into the
visible Church; the other, of our continuation in it.

What are the marks to know the visible Church by?

The preaching of the Word and the administration of the Sacraments are
characters or tokens of Gods Church, whereby it may be known and discerned: For
where these are rightly dispensed, there is a true Church; and where these are
wanting, though there may be an Assembly or convention of men, yet it is not
properly a Church of God.

What is the intent or use of Baptism?

It was ordained, not only as a sign of the new Covenant made in Christ, or a
distinguishing Ordinance between believers and unbelievers; but also for a seal
to ratify, consign and make over (as it were under seal) the promises of God
made in Christ, unto every true believer.

What is the danger of wanting the rite of Baptism?

There is no danger in the bare want of it, where it may not be had, but in the
neglect or contempt of it, where it may be had; this is a soul-endangering sin;
and imports a contempt of the Author, and a rejecting of the counsel of God:
Gods anger was highly ince^sed against Moses for not Circumcising his child (in
due time) according to the command.

Are young children capable of Baptism?

Yea, the children of believing Parents are, as the children of the Israelites
(being but eight days old) were of Circumcision: And where but one of the
Parents is a believer, the children are admitted unto those favou^^ and
privileges of the Church that do belong unto that Parent as a believer.

Wherefore was the Lord Supper instituted?

It was instituted by Christ, not only for a memorial of his own death, but
also for a means of applying his merits to the partakers; for the increasing of
love and amity among the faithful, and for the improving and strengthening of
their faith and love toward God, by these outward tokens and pledges of his
love to them.

What is necessary for the due receiving of the Lords Supper?

It is expedient that a man examine himself, but not so necessary that he
should examine others, whether they be worthy or unworthy: for no man is
partaker of another man's sins, except he be access^ry thereunto, either by
counsel or consent, or approbation, or some such way.

Is it expedient that a man be a frequent partaker of the Lords Supper?

Yea: for often approaching to the Lords Table (in due mann^r) besides other
benefits, conduces much to the advancement of piety and a holy life: for
thereby we are called to a re-inforcing of our watch; to descend to that most
useful duty of self-examination, or searching our own bosoms; to purge out the
old leaven, and all impurity that is there contracted; and lastly, to a
renewing of our vows and promises (made in baptism) of serving God with more
circumspection and vigilance.

Are these Sacraments to continue for some certain time only, or for ever?

They are not temporary ^i^es, but standing appointments in the Kingdom of
Christ, and of perpetual use in his Church until his second coming: None can
arrive at such perfection in this life, at to be above Ordinances, or not to
stand in need of them, for the uses before mentioned: for which purposes, all
sober and humble Christians have always foun^ them useful and efficacious.

Who are lawful Administrators and Dispensers of the Sacraments?

Only such as are lawfully called to Ecclesiastical Ministeries, are lawful
Administrators of the Sacraments: They are the Keepers of the Seals, and are
entrusted to apply and dispense them to such persons as desire them, and are
meetly qualified for them, and none other.

FINIS.
A review of the precedent Aphorisms: Wherein some of the most material points
and passages that have been most liable to mistakes (in these times) are
farther illustrated and verified.
1. OF Fundamentals. 2. Of the Authors and authority of the Creed. 3. Of the
fullness and sufficiency of it. 4. Of the Patriarchs Creed. 5. Of believing the
Catholic Church. 6. Of the Nicen and Athanasian Creeds. 7. Gloria patri, a
short Creed.
1. OF the obligation of the Moral Law under the Gospel. 2. Of the perfection
of the Moral, at the first enacting of it. 3. How this Law is possible to be
performed.
1. OF men's ignorance in the duty of prayer. 2. That the Lords Prayer is a
prayer. 3. It is the Rule and Law of all prayers. 4. Surp^sseth all other
Compositions. 5. Of set forms of Prayer. 6. The Lords Prayer may not be laid
aside.
1. SAcraments, why instituted? 2. Their virtue and efficacy from the Author.
3. They are Seals as well as Signs. 4. Absolutely necessary, where they may be
had. 5. Infant Baptism more ancient than Christ and his Apostles. 6. Where the
Sacraments may not be had, desire supplies the defect.
APHOR. 1. Of the four fundamentals of Religion.
MOst men do divide this Sovereign Science of Theology into four parts. Dr.
Nowel in his Catechism, calls those four, by the names of Faith, Obedience,
Invocation, and Sacraments; which amounts to the same with this division which
we here follow: for faith is summed up in the Creed; obedience in the
Decalogue; Invocation in the Lords Prayer; and the Sacraments make the fourth
part.

Mr. Perkins calls these four H^^ds the grounds and Catholic principles of the
Catechism; Append to the Ref: Cathol:
and Dr. D^avenam (that ^d. Jewel of Salisbury) calls them the Fundamentals of
Christian religion.

By Fundamentals, Pro fundamentalibus ea sola haebendae sunt quae omnibus
cognitu and creditu necessaeria sunt: Adhort: ad pacem cap: 7.
he understands such things as are absolutely necessary to salvation, and as
such, to be embraced of all men, when they are sufficiently proposed unto them.
And such are (says he) not only mysteries of faith comprised in the Creed,
but also the dictates of the Divine Law, contained in the Decalogue, which he
calls Symbolum Agendorum, as the other is Symbolum Credendorum.

A Speculative knowledge of Divine M^st^ries will not carry us one step forward
toward heaven, without the practical knowledge of Divine Mandates, and it is
no less damnable to er^ in moral principles than in speculative, that is, it is
as great a Heresy (dogmatically) to imp^gn one of the Commandments as one of
the Articles of the Creed.

For he that affirms that God is not to be worshipped, or that Parents are not
to be honored; or teaches that theft and murder are no sins, is an absolute
Heretic: for every practical dictate of the moral law is a fundamental truth,
and ought as firmly to be believed as any article of the Creed: for it is
implicitly contained in it.

There are some general verities and propositions also in the doctrine of
prayer, and Sacraments, which are no less fundamental than the other; and which
to d^ny or oppose, would be both impious and heretical.

Those Churches that are built upon these fundamentals and do firmly retain
them, have that which may suffice them to salvation; they have a foundation
sufficient to bear that super-structure which they are intended for, even man's
eternal salvation. And if men endeavor to live according to these principles,
they are to be deemed members of Gods Church, and such to whom all Christians
should give the right hand of fellowship; and not s^parate from, though they
might be guilty of sundry failings otherwise.

This is the substance of some chapters of that pious man's Irenicon, or
exhortation to peace, directed to the Pro^estant Churches of Germany, which are
divided into Lutherans and Calvinists.

APHOR. 2. Of the Authors and authority of the Apostles Creed.
MAgno certe verterum consensu, etc. surely by a general vote and suffrage of
the ancient Fathers, Instit. l. 2.
this Creed is ascribed unto the Apostles, says Mr. Calvin. and ab ultima
memoria, Sacro-sanctae inter pios omnes authoritatis ^uit, as he goes on, and
it was esteemed of sacred authority among all Gods servants, from the first
spring of Christianity.

L. 1. adv. haereses c. 1.2.3.
Ireneus one of the antientest of them, living in the year 160. says, that the
whole Church of God dispersed through the World, received it from the Apostles,
and carefully preserved it entire; who by their agreement in this faith, did
seem to dwell in one house, and to be animated with one Spirit.

More testimonies to this effect are ama^sed together, by the worthy pains of
Mr. Ashwell, in his Fides Apostolica.

Ep: dedicatory to the E: of Bedford before his exposit: of the Creed. In his
preamble to the exposit: of the Creed.
In this Creed (says reverend Perkins) is the pith and substance of Christian
Religion; taught by the Apostles, embraced by the ancient Fathers, and sealed
by the blood of Martyrs.

It was composed (says he) either by the Apostles, or Apostolical men, who
were their Hearers, and immediate Heirs of their belief: and is of more
authority than any writings of Church or Churchmen whatsoever; was approved by
the universal consent of the Catholic Church in all ages, is next in authority
to the Scriptures: and the order of the words ought not to be altered. Thus he.

The Creed is called the Apostles quia ab ore Apostolorum receptum, because it
was taken from the mouths of the Apostles, says Nowell; Part 2 de doct:
Chrisstian^s.
or as V^sin does express it, because they delivered that Summary of Doctrine
to their Disciples, from whom the succeeding Churches did afterward receive
the same and transmit it to posterity.

The substance or matter of it is ipsissima Scriptura (says learned Iunius)
pure Scripture. Animadv. in Bellarm: l. 2.
Et nihil in eo est, quod solidis Scripturae testimoniis, non consignetur,
says Calvin; there is no article, joint or limb in it, that has not a
scriptum est written upon it; that is not found for the sense and substance
(though not terminis terminantibus) in the authentic Canon of Scripture.

The whole Sys^^m or body of it, is mentioned or hinted (at least) by these
circumlocutions in Scripture: the (...), 1 Timothy 6.20. that precious ^ag^, jewel
or depositum, that was betrusted ^o Timothy; the (...), 2 Timothy 1.13. that form,
draught or pattern of wholesome words: and is (...), Romans 6.17. that form of
doctrine, that is, that frame or system of doctrinal Truths, which the Apostles
did (in the first place) deliver as the groundwork of all other
super-structures: and such expressions.

APHOR. 3. The fullness and sufficiency of the Apostolical Creed.
IN this Creed, there is neither want nor waste, nothing defective or
redundant; it is breve, simplex and plenum says St. Augustine, short and plain,
Sermon: 115. de Tempore
but full and comprehensive; doctis, indoctisque commune; the meanest Christian
must know so much, and the greatest Clerk need know no more, for the substance
of his belief.

Epist. ad Epictet.
We may say of this, as Athanasius speaks of the Nicen Creed which is (for
substance) the same with it: that it is, (...), a full and sufficient system of
fundamental verities, for the averting of impiety and the establishment of
piety in Christ.

De Velandis Virginibus. cap. 1.
It is Regula, una, immobilis et irreformabilis, in the language of Tertullian,
the sole Rule of Faith, and such a one as is immovable and unreformable, See
Dr. Potter's answer to charity mistaken. Sect. 7.
that admits neither supplement nor correction.

As in other Sciences: so in this, there must be some principles that are
(...), worthy of belief of themselves, and that are fixed and immovable and
indemonstrable; otherwise, there would be no end of disputes and controversies,
or any satisfaction to the busy mind of man: for when a proposition is
resolved into these principles, there we must take up our rest, there is the
ultimate resolution and non-ultra in that point.

As in the Mathematics, omne mobile movetur super immobili, every movable mo^^^
upon something that is immovable: so in all discourses, every demonstrable
proposition is reducible to some indemonstrable principle, which is the dernier
ressort, the last appeal, and (by consent of parties) the final decision of all
controversy.

The Church of Rome, Deerant quoque littora ponto.
( whose Sea has on shore) being not contented with this number of Articles,
and catalogue of Fundamentals, which the Apostles left us, has doubled the
Cube and enlarged the Philacteries of our Creed as wide again, (...) papistica.
by an addition of a dozen articles more, qui pari passu ambulant, So the Bull
of Pius the reditu.
that are of equal dignity 4th. perfixed before them; and Spalato in conside
and necessity with the others; so material (every one of them) that there is no
salvation to be expected without them; a curse is denounced against every man
that shall rej^ct or deny them. So that the Pope is not only Dictator and Lord
of our faith, but is himself a prime article in it, and the very cornerstone
of our Religion, as a Cardinal Champion of his Holiness has given us to
understand, Bellarm: prefat: ad lib: de Rom: Pontifice. Pontificia potestas est
cardo and fundamentum and summa fidei Christianae. Skulken: Apol: pro Bellarm.
in these words, Romani Pontificis potestatem and infallibilitatem esse rei
Christianae summam, ejusque sententiam pro norma and Regula fidei habendam,
asserimus.

Erasmus a sober and learned man, does wish that the Christian World had been
contented with that one Creed of the Apostles in lieu of all the several
Confessions that are in the World: for (says he) there was never less faith in
the World, than since the time that confessions of faith were multiplied.

Vbi caepit minus esse fidei inter Christianos, mox increvit symbolorum and
modus and numerus. De Ratione verae Theologiae.

APHOR. 4. Of the Patriarchs Creed.
IT were not difficult to demonstrate the truth of this Aphorism* by giving
proof of each article in order: But in^^nding only some strictures and short
animadversions in this place, I may not take so much liberty, to expatiate.

I shall (at present) only show that the main substance of the Christian Faith
was known to Gods chosen, from the beginning, even long before Christ came in
the flesh.

1. The article of the blessed Trinity, to wit, the triple personality of the
Godhead, was revealed unto them, as is proved by Zanchius in his eight books de
tribus Elohim; Non latuit Judaeos de Trinitate fides, ut cunque sub Evangelio
multo sit explicatior Pride: Fasci:
by Petrus Galatinus, de arcanis veritatis Catholicae; and by that learned
Noble man of France, Sieur du Plessis, de veritate Relig: Christ: cap. 6.

2. Christ the second person of the Trinity was abundantly revealed unto the
Fathers of the old Testament, that they might be saved (says Augustine) by
faith in Christ that was to come, Confess: l. 20. cap. 43.
as we are saved by faith in Christ who is come; Their faith and ours, had the
same object (there is but one faith, Vna fides justificat universorum temporum
sanctos. Leo de pass: dom: Sermon. 14.
Ephesians. 4.5.) the difference was only in the tense or time, but the effect was
the same.

All the periods and several acts of man's Redemption by Christ (as his
Incarnation, Passion, Resurrection, etc.) were not unknown to the servants of
God in old time; and the glorious fruits and effects of the^ were not hidden
from them, but were assured unto them, through faith.

A Redeemer was promised even to the first sinner after his prevarication: the
seed of the woman shall bruise the Serpents head, Genesis 3 15. This was the first
Gospel in the World, extant in the first book of the Bible; this was
proto-Evangelium, Pride: Fasc:
and Evangelii aurora, the first dawning of Gospel-comfort. If ye believed in
Moses, ye would have believed in me (says Christ to the Jews) for Moses wrote
of me, See Deuteronomy. 18.15. compared with Act. 3.21. 2 Chro. 20.7. Isa. 41.8. Joh.
2.23.
Joh. 5.46. Moses wrote of Christ, both in the forecited Text and else where.

Abraham saw Christ's day and rejoiced, John 8.56. he saw the day of his
Incarnation, which God revealed (by some means) unto this his friend, and which
ministered cause of joy unto him; this was the Gospel which God preached unto
him, Gal. 3.8. for there was Gospel in the World before Christ came to preach
it.

Some of the Prophets tongues dropped some of this balm now and then; Lex
promissiones misericordiae passim continet. Calv^l. 2. Inst: c. 10*
more especially Esaias, who was the Evangelist of the old Testament, and ante
Evangelia, Evangelicus: Isaias saw Christ's glory and spoke of him, John 12.41.

Now the Gospel that was preached in those days, was the same with ours, to
wit, justification by faith in Christ, remission of sins, and life and
immortality through him, as a reward of faith and sincere obedience.

Habbakkuk preached, Chap. 2. v. 4.
the just should live by faith, in case he was defective in obedience.
Circumcision was a Seal of their justification, Romans 4.11
or righteousness which was through faith; even a seal of pardon and remission
of sins to all believers.

3. The Resurrection of the body was a point that Job a Gentile and an alien
from the Commonwealth of Israel was well assured of: Chap. 19. v. 25, 26.
It is a point generally believed and embraced in the Jewish Church, Dan. 12.2.
as St. Paul declares in express terms, Acts 26. verse 6, 7, 8.

Verse 6. And now I stand and am judged for the hope of the promise made of God
unto our fathers, i. the promise of a resurrection from death.

Verse 7. Unto which promise, our twelve Tribes instantly serving God day and
night hope to come, for which hopes sake King Agrippa, I am accused of the Jews.

Verse 8. Why should it be thought a thing incredible with you, that God should
raise the dead?

Nay, the women of the Country were strong in this faith: for when Christ told
Martha, that her brother Lazarus should rise again, Joh. ^1.23, 24.
she replied, I know that he shall rise again, in the resurrection at the last
day.

4. Then for the last point or article of our belief, even everlasting life, I
doubt not but they had knowledge and assurance of it, many of them: life and
immortality was proposed to them as a reward of their obedience, if they had
kept the Law: which if a man do, Ezech. 20.13. Legem servantibus, aeterna vita
promissa est. Mat. 19.17. Luke 10.28. Raynolds. These. 4.
he shall even live in them; live, not only a long life here, but an endless
life hereafter.

The Law is the administration of death, says St. Paul, but that is not the
proper work of it; that is by accident, not in the primary intention of it; The
Commandment was ordained unto life (says the same Apostle) but he found it
unto death, Romans 7.10
by reason of his sins: 1 Cor. 15.56.
the sting of death is sin; it is sin (and not the Law) that bites like a
Serpent and gives the mortal wound.

The old and new Testament do not differ materia promissionum, Vetus and novum
Testamentum, unum re, geminum ratione. Raynold. These: 4. Fest Hommius in
Specim. Controvers: Belgicarum cap. 25. L. 2^. Iustit. c. 14. 5.
in the subject matter of the promises: as if the promises (of old) were only
temporal, and under the Gospel only eternal promises were propounded. The
Belgic Remonstrants did teach so, indeed, and so did Michael Servetus, whom for
this, and other Heresies, Calvin calls exitiale monstrum. These make no other
esteem of the ancient people of God (the seed of Abraham) than of a herd of
Swine, Mich: Servetus, Veterem Ecclesiam Israelitica^ in haram porcorum
transfomavit. Beza Epist. 1.
who had their portion in this life without hope of any other: as if God had
proposed no other guerdon to them (nor they expected any) but fullness of
bread, carnal pleasures, worldly pomp and power, and children to inherit all
these after them.

Michael Servetus, whom Calvin terms prodigiosum Nebulonem in another place of
his Institutions, Historia Concilii Tridentini. l. 5.
was by birth a Spaniard of Arragon, who of a Physician became a Divine, and
did pass for a Protestant: He was convented at Geneva for sundry heretical
opinions, that he bad broached both there, and elsewhere, and persevering
therein, without hopes of reclaiming him, he was by the Counsel and consent of
the Divines of Bearne, Zurick, Schaffhauson and Geneva, burnt at Geneva in the
year 1555.

You may see a Catalogue of his errors in Lucas Osiander's Epitome of Eccles:
History. l. 2. Cent: 16. c. 21. and in Schlusselburgius, and the Anabaptists
speak the same dialect, Li. 2. c. 10.. 1.
as Calvin does inform us in his Institutions; which pestiferous error (as he
terms it) is there fully refuted by him; and all Protestant writers tilt at it
with their pens, where ever they meet it; among the rest, the Church of England
has laid it under her feet; if I do not mistake her meaning, In the 7th.
Article of her confession, where these words are to be found.

In the old Testament, everlasting life, is offered to mankind by Christ:
therefore they are not to be heard that feign that the old Fathers did look
only for temporal promises.

They looked for a City whose builder and maker was God, and for a heavenly
Country, Heb. 11.10, 16. Fides Abrahae non Palastinae duntaxat regionem
spectabat, sed caeleflem illam patriam and beatorum sedem, is a note of
Justinian upon that place.

APHOR. 5. Of believing the Catholic Church.
WE must remark that the phrase of this article runs: I believe the holy
Catholic Church, not in the holy Catholic Church: Hac syllaba* creator a
creaturis secernitur; divina ab humanis separantur. Ruff: in Symb:
for the particle [ In] perfixed to the former articles, must be out here, and
it is out in St. Augustines exposition, and Ruffinus, and other ancient
Expositors upon this subject, and also in the Trent Catechism And in Petr:
Canisius his Catechism.
.

We may not believe in the Church, because it is not dominus but domus, not the
Master of the house, but the house, as St. Augustine gives the reason: We may
credere Ecclesiae, not in Ecclesiam, we may believe the Catholic Church very
far, and give it the highest credit next Gods own word, in matters of fact and
practice especially, and some points which the Scripture does not clearly
define; herein we may follow the practice and embrace the Arrest or judgment
of the Catholic Church: For it is a staple rule and maxim in St. Aug: What is
universally Quod universa tenet Ecclesia, nec Conciliis institutum sed semper
retentum, non nisi Apostolica authoritate traditum rectissime creditur. L. 4.
de Bapt: Contra Donatistas. Necesse est propter tantos, tam varii erroris
ansractus, ut Propheticae and Apostolicae interpretationis linea, secundum
Ecclesiastici and Catholici sensus normam dirigatur. Vinc: Lirin. c. 2.
received and retained in the Church, we may rationally conclude, that it was
derived from the first planters of it, even the Apostles.

But we may not rest or rely upon the Church, as the chief guide of our
Salvation; her authority is venerable, but it is not the Rule of our faith.

Wherefore the word Credo I believe, in the four last Articles of the Belief,
imports no more than, Theol: Catechetica.
Credo esse, and meo bono esse, as Alsted does well expound it: I believe that
such things (mentioned in those several articles) truly are, and that I have a
share and interest in them.

The Catholic Church here mentioned, is not visible: for it is an object of our
faith, not of our sight, and faith is of things not seen, Heb. 11.1. This
Holy-Guild society, Fraternity of the Rosie-Cross (as I may not unfitly term
it) is invisible; So Whitaker de Eccles: Raynolds. Mor^ney, and Davenant on,
Col. 1.18.
for it is Caetus praedestinatorum, a company of men predestined to Salvation,
whose names are written in the book of life, enrolled in that sacred Register,
Luke 10.20 Heb. 12.23
among the Candidates of eternity.

Now who those are, and whose names are there registered, we are not allowed to
know; that such there are, we know and firmly believe, but who they are, we
know not, having no certain (...) or infallible indication to know them by: for
they do not carry the marks of their election in their foreheads; God alone
knows them that are his. 2 Timothy 2.19


We have not the gift of knowing men and discerning spirits by inspection: we
may know their persons, but for their eternal state and condition, we may
probably guess at, but not make a sure, and infallible judgment; Romans 2.28
There is Indaeus in occulto and Judaeus in propatulo, we may know the one, but
do not know the other: to know the reins and the heart is the prerogative of
him that made and molded both. Tu vides quousque oculos habes, sed oculi
domini sunt alti. Tert: de praescript:


As this Church is not visible; so it is not topical or confined to one place,
but is Catholic or universal, both for times, places and persons. They robb
Christ of his inheritance that confine his Kingdom or Church within one Nation,
Canton or Conventicle; Oprat: l. 2.
as Donatus did arrogantly affirm, That God had no Church in the world, Nisi in
part Donati. August: de haeresib:
but in that part of Africa, where he and his party swayed: none was within the
Ark of Gods Church, but who had entered into his Cock-boat.

Psa. 2.8. Isa. 14.2. Huic ego nec metas rerum, neque tempora pono: imperium
sine fine dedi. Virg: Act. 20.28 Bishop of Milevis in Africa. L. 2. Contra
Donatist:
God gave his Son the Heathen for his inheritance, and the uttermost parts of
the earth for his possession: of his Kingdom there is no end, no limits of
duration or extension. They are therefore injurious to him, that would retrench
his inheritance, and robb him of any part of his purchased possession, by
denying a Catholic Church

Hear the expostulation of Optatus with the old Donatists upon this point.

Si sic pro voluntate vestra, in angustam coarctatis Ecclesiam, si universas
subducitis gentes, ubi erit illud quod silius dei meruit? quod libenter
largitus est ei pater, dicens, Dabo tibi gentes haereditatem tuam? ut quid tale
infringitis promissum ut a vobis mittatur quasi in carcerem latitudo regnorum?

APHOR. 6. Of the Nicen and Athanasian Creeds.
THe Nicen Creed (which is extant in our Liturgy) was framed by the Fathers of
the first general Council that was held at Nice a City of Bythinia, Sulpit.
Severus l. 2. Hist: Sacrae. Peuc: Chro: l. 3. Genebr. Chron: Epist. ad Damasum.
and was convened by the renowned Emperor Constantine in the year 325. where
318. Bishop^ were assembled; whence St. Hierom calls this Creed fidem 318.
patrum, the faith of the three hundred and eighteen Fathers or Bishops.

In this Council, the Heresy of Arrius, (a Presbyter of Alexandria, who denied
the Divinity of Christ, and thereby did much disturb the peace of the Church)
was arraigned and condemned.

It is reported by Sozomen that the Arrians held another Council at Nice in
Thrace, L. 4. Eccl: Histor.
in opposition to the former in the year 359.

Here was Nice against Nice, Et in Conciliis, and in Doctorum collisionibus,
semper tandem triumphavit fides de Trinitate Catholica. Dr. Pride: fasc: Contr.
p. 99.
but the truth did at last (...) prevail and overcome, and (...) canere trumph
over Error and Heresy.

Athanasius was (in those days) a stout opposer of the Arrians, and stood up
single in defense of the truth, Baron: An^nal: ad An: 340. (...) Athanasius
when all the world was (almost) turned Arrian, as Hierom complains: whereby he
got a fame suitable to his name.

He was (by their means) four times banished, and often times brought into
jeopardy of his life, so violent was this storm in the Church: Cap. 6.
Commonitorii.
so that Vincentius Lirinensis rightly terms the Arrian Heresy a Bellona and a
Fury, for the bitternss of i.

During his banishment at Rome, this good man composed the Creed that bears his
name, and presented it to Pope Julius, and afterward to the Emperor Iovinian,
when he was elected Emperor, and when he himself (after all troubles) was
advanced to the Patriarchal dignity of Alexandria.

So that these Creeds were made, not as supplements, Articuli fidei non possunt
crescere quoad numerum credibilium, sed quoad explicationem. Aquin. Sum: p. 2.
but explanations of the Apostolical Creed; occasioned by the turbulency of
some Spirits, Arrius erat vir laudis and gloriae, magis quam very. tatis
Cupidus. Platina in vita Sylvestri.
who (out of some vain glory or discontented singularity) raised those sad
tragedies in the Church, which continued long, and sharp: for we read of 120
Bishopt banished at one time, into the I Will of Sardinia by Thrasimundus, In vita
B. Fulgentii.
an Arrian King of the Goths.

The 3. Creeds, the Nicen, Athanasian and Apostolical Creeds, ought thoroughly
to believed and received, because they may be proved by most certain warrants
of holy Scripture: so the 8th. Article of the Church of England, which is also
received among the Articles of Ireland, in terminis.

APHOR. 7. Gloria patri, a little Creed.
AS the Apostles Creed was called Symbolum, that is, a badge or token or mark
of difference, Russ: in Symb:
quod fideles and perfidos secerneret, to distinguish believers from
unbelievers; or a certain watchword (as they have in the Wars) to know a
friend from a foe: So this little Hymn of glory (which is symbolum parvum, a
little Creed) was brought in, Judge. 12.6.
as a Shibboleth, a privy mark or token to make discovery of dissembling
professors and Covert Arrians, who desired to live in the bosom of the Church,
though they were enemies to the faith and peace of it.

It was not (as the great symbol) to distinguish believers from unbelievers,
but true believers from mis-believers, or such as believed amiss touching the
article of the holy Trinity. It was brought in use about the time of the Nicen
Council, or as some say, before:

Eusebius: l: 4. cap. 15.
For long before this period, we read that Polycarpus (that blessed Martyr) in
the very place and at the hour of his martyrdom, had a kind of Doxology, very
near and much like to this, who concluded his prayer and his lif^ ^n these
words.

Therefore in all things I praise thee, I bless thee, I glorify thee, O Father
Almighty, through the eternal Priest of our profession, Jesus Christ, thy
beloved Son. To whom, with thee O Father, and the Holy Ghost, be all honor and
glory, now and for evermore, Amen.

Basil: Ep. 78.
As we have received, (says St. Basil) so we baptize; As we baptize, so we
believe; and as we believe, so we give glory.

His meaning is, that as we believe in three persons and one God, so we baptize
into the names of these three: And as we baptize into their names, so we give
glory unto them, jointly and severally.

So that in the most solemn Offices of the Church, as Confessing, Baptizing,
and giving Praise, the holy individual Trinity is professed and acknowledged.

This was the use and purport of the Gloria patri, originally in the Church.

Mr. Cartwright (in his Exceptions against the public Liturgy of our Church)
thought it meet that both this and the Athanasian Creed should (now at last) be
laid aside; because (says he) the fire of Arrianism is well quenched: and the
sore being healed, there is no need of a plaster.

How well this fire was quenched in the first hearth of it, I know not: if it
was extinguished in Egypt or Asia, it brake forth in other places far more near
unto us, as Poland, Transylvania, and other places; and from thence the sparks
have flown over into this Kingdom, and the fire has prevailed much and gotten
no small strength since this Hymn and Creed have been cashierd among us: so
that if this little bucket was of use to quench that fire at first, there is
very great need to revive it and resume it again, for that purpose.

OF THE COMMANDMENTS.
APHOR. 1. Of the obligation of the Moral Law under the Gospel.
THe Moral Law is legibilis honestas, as Parisiensis terms it, L. de leg:
honesty made legible in characters, and transcribed from that original copy
within us, which every man carries about him, in scrinio pectoris.

It is the voice of common reason, prescribing nothing but what every man
(endued with reason) would judge to be aequum and bonum, to be very honest, fit
and reasonable to be done, if they had never been commanded: yea if there were
neither heaven nor hell, Sir W. Raghleigh. 1. p. of his History.
neither reward for well-doing, nor punishment for evil-doing, after this life.

Cicero in his book de Republica cited by Lactantius, give^ this character of
it: It is the law (says he) of right reason, agreeable to nature, a constant
sempiternal Law, that calls every man to his duty, teaching what he should, and
what he should not do: A Law that admits of no addition or defalcation, much
less of dissolution; which neither Senate nor People can dispense with, and
which needs no Interpretation or Comment. An universal Law which binds all men,
in all places; and rules at Rome as well as at Athens, yea rules the Rulers,
and is irreversible and unchangeable.

Of this delineation, De Vero 6. cultu l. c. 8.
the same Lactantius gives this Elogy, Quis Sacramenta dei sciens tam
significanter enarrare legem dei posset? what Theologue (well verst in
Scripture) could so Graphically describe Gods Law as the pen of this Heathen
has done? This Law is the fundamental Law of all Nations, the ^ared Pandects:
all the laws that are extant, are but the issues and emanations of the Moral
Law. By this, civil governments do stand, and humane societies subsist.

Our Savior came not to dissolve this Law, or to absolve men from it: some
other Rites and Ceremonies and temporary Ordinances he abrogated, but not this;
He did not mean that his followers should be a lawless crew, sons of Belial
without yoke, and the Christian Commonwealth a Synagogue of Libertines.

Let no man deceive himself or others, with scraps of Scripture misunderstood,
which too many (being enchanted with this Circean cup of liberty) do often
wilfully mistake and wire-draw to their own sense and destruction both.

There is never a line in all the New Testament to countenance disobedience to
superiors, or a loose and licentious course of life: We were not called to
uncleaness, but unto holiness, 1 These. 3.13
says the good Apostle Paul, And without holiness we shall never see Gods
face, Heb. 12.14
as the same Apostle assures us. Which holiness consists in a sincere and
hearty desire, endeavor and study to walk in all Gods Commandments, and to
live conformable to his pure and holy Laws, quoad nosse and posse, according to
the best of our skill and power.

They that pr^tend to the Spirit, and yet wallow in all filthy and libidinous
desires, Ego nescio quem Christum fabricantur, quem Spiritum eructant: I know
not (says Mr. Calvin) what Christ they profess, L. 3. inst. c. 3. Non ille
Spiritus, adulterii vel homicidii, vel fraudis patronus. id.
or what Spirit they breath or belch rather, for surely it is not the Spirit of
God, which is a clean spirit, and loves clean bodies and souls to dwell in, as
the Dove (which is its emblem) loves a clean coat.

It is a duty incumbent upon all Ministers (as a good man admonishes) to teach
the people the perpetual obligation of the moral law: Legis doctrina retinenda
est, sine qua Christus non potest retineri. Dr. Daven: ^dh: ad pacem.
and that it must be retained and upheld, or else Christ cannot be retained;
for the contrary persuasion i^ destructive to piety and morality, and disposes
men to turbulencies and rebellions, and lets loose the reins to all
extravagant, and inordinate desires, as the experience of late ages has made
it evident and legible to the world. Lex moralis est aeterna Regula justitiae
omnium gentium ac temporum hominibus praescripta, qui ad dei voluntatem vitam
suam Componere volunt. Call: l. 4. Inst: c. 20. Liberantur fideles a rigore
legis, non regimine: habet enim in eos imperium politicum, non despoticum;
poedagogiam exercet, non mastigogiam, est index non judex nostrarum actionum.
Pride aux fase: contr:


APHOR. 4. Of the perfection of the Moral Law at the first enacting of it.
God spoke these words and said. Exodus 20.1.
HOw that Law that came forth from the mouth of God, and was by him prescribed
as a Rule of obedience to his chosen people Israel, was an imperfect Law, a
kind of monogram or rude draught, that was to receive full proportion, colors
and consummation by a skilfuller hand, I do not (yet) well apprehend.

For King David who was a sedulous student of the Law (all the day long was his
study in st) tells us that the law of the Lord is a perfect law, Psa. 119.97
Psa. 19.8.
converting the soul. And the same student mooting this prime question: How
shall a young man cleanse his way? Psa. 119.
makes answer, even by ruling himself after thy word. So that the Law is
sufficient to cleanse a man's ways, that is, to keep him in an exact frame of
dutifullness and conformity to Gods will, and to regulate his thoughts, word^,
and actions, which is totum hominis, the all of man. Lex divinitus traedita,
perfectam nos justitiam docet. Calv: l. 2. c. 8. Lex est perfectissima norma
justitiae. Nowel. Cat: est vitae regula perfect absoluta. Id.


And (sure) no Law can go higher or be screwed to a higher pitch: There is but
internal and external obedience requlred by the most exact Law that is imposed,
and both these is included in every precept of this Law: for the Law, like the
Lawgiver, is spiritual: Romans 7.14.
There is not only a literal but a spiritual sense in every mandate; and this
is the perfection of it, that i^ reaches to the thoughts and intentions of the
heart, which other Laws do not, nor cannot do. Interna and externa obedientia
requiritur in singulis praeceptis, interpret Christo Mat. 5. Ames: Med: Theol:
l. 2. c. 5. Leges hominum ligant manus, lex dei conscientiam.


We are forbidden to worship, not only the Images of our hands, but also the
Imaginations of our hearts: false Opinions and Heresies, having no reality or
existence in the word, (and which some men do passionately dote upon) come
within the compass of the Law of the second Commandment. Sculptile and
con^latile reor dogmata esse falsa and perversa, quae ab his quibus facta sunt,
adorantur. Hieron: in Habb: c. 5. Qui falsum dogma componunt, auream statuam
faciunt, and persuadent homines, ut cadentes, adorent idolum falsitatis. Id. in
Dan. cap. 3.


We are forbidden also to kill, not only with the hand, but also with the
tongue, by slander, and with the heart, by inveterate malice, and unmeasurable
wrath, these are incruenta homicidia, dry murders, which stain the soul as
deeply as where life is destroyed.

Nay, all the legal administrations of the old Testament did carry a spiritual
importance and intendment: See Ecclus 35 1, 2, 3.
the Circumcision of the foreskin did betoken the Circumsion of the heart, Romans
2.28.
which is inward in the spirit not in the better; and Gods whole drift and
design in that Economy was to make men holy as he is holy; Lev* 17.44 19.2.
a royal priesthood, and a holy nation, Exodus 19.6.

The Sacrifices of the Law were not only figures of that great Sacrifice that
was to be offered (once for all) to put away sin, but the slaying of beasts did
also import the killing of our lusts, the mortifying of our earthly members,
and the offering up of our selves a holy and lively sacrifice: Romans 12.1.
Sacrifices of righteousness were the true sacrifices which God required, Deuteronomy.
33.19. these should have been done, and the other not left undone; for both
were under precept, the omission and neglect of the one, made the other
unacceptable, Isa. 1.13, ^4. Jer. 6.20.
yea, made them to stink before God.

And the true servants of God were not ignorant hereof: and the Doctors of the
Law were not wanting to teach it in the Schools: Sacrificia laudis and
charitatis erant sacrificia primae intentionis, says one of the best Scholars
of the Jewish Nation, to wit, R. Moses Ben Maymon: of whom Cunaeus gives this
testimony, Maimonides primus solusque in illa gente (fato quodam nascendi)
recte intellexit, quid hoc esset, non ineptire. De Rep: Hebr:

Indeed the greatest part of the Jewish Nation (through corruption of manners,
not any defect in the Law) did rest in outward performances; and some that sat
in Moses his chair, did gratify the peoples humors with false glosses upon the
Law; and persuaded themselves first, and the people nex^, that they were
righteous enough, if they kept the Letter of the Law, and had a varnish of
sanctity enough to blind the eyes of men.

But Christ told his Disciples: Mat. 5.10.
that except their righteousness exceeded that measure of Pharisaical sanctity,
they should come short of heaven; and notwithstanding their frequent
purifications and washings, yet except they were pure in heart, they should
never see God; Mat 5.8.
and therefore in the first Sermon that ever he made, he laid open the true and
genuine sense and meaning of the Law, to his present auditory, and did wind up
the strings of each precept to its right key, and tuned the So St. Augustine
calls the Decalogue in his b^ok de o chordis.
Decachord of the Commandments as it had been tuned at first: which in process
of time, had been disordered, some strings being stretched too high, and some
being let fall too low.

-- Medium tenuere Beati.
The learned Author of the Fundamentals speaks right herein: Cap. 11.
That Christ did bind some parts of the yoke closer than they were before
thought to be bound upon them; Ex^ending the precepts farther than they were
thought to extend; and in raising them to more elevated degrees of perfection,
sinking them deeper than the outward actions even to the purity of the heart.

Some men persuaded themselves, or were persuaded by others, that if they had
an outside sanctity, they were well enough: which conceit our Savior Christ
does every where reprehend, and beat down, and pronounces a woe to the Scribes
and Pharisees, Hypocrites: who made clean the outside of the platter, and left
the inside soul and nasty; that seemed lambs without, but within were ravening
wolves.

Introrsum turpes, Pers: Sat: 2
speci^fi pelle deco^^.
APHOR. 3. How the Law is possible to be performed.
NOa^, Genesis 6.9* Jo^, Job 1 1. Lo^, 2 Pet. 2.8. are termed ^^ghteous persons by
the Spirit of God, that is, such as had kept Gods Laws, and fullfilled his
Commandments.

But this is to be understood cum grano s^lis, in a sense of favor and ^q^ity,
not precisely and categorically; but either in comparison of others of their
generation, or in a benign and courteous interpretation, they were esteemed
righteous before God.

It is said of David, that he kept Gods Commandments, and followed him with all
his he^rt, 1 Kin. 14.8.
to do that (only) which was righteous in Gods sight: and of good Josiah, that
there was no King before him like unto him, that turned unto the Lord with all
his heart, and all his soul, and all his mind, 2 Kin. 23.25. so of Asa 2 Chro.
15.15.

These are high expressions and Elogies, And yet we know that these men did
bestow (sometimes) a piece of their heart (that is of their affection) upon the
world and some carnal designs.

The magnet is not so constant to the North, or Pole Star, but it has its
variations and digressions from it; And so the best of Gods servants do not so
wholly fix their eyes upon their Master and Maker, but they give an oeillad
(sometimes) an amorous glance upon other objects.

Nevertheless, because God has the best share of their love, and because they
soon recall their hearts, and do not suffer their affections to wander far, nor
to dwell long upon excentrical objects, and desire to love God sincerely and
with an upright heart, non cord and cord, 2 Chro. 12.33.
God accepts of their love: and so they are said to love their Maker with all
their hearts.

Psa. 86.4.
And moreover, God is (...), of a benign and gentle nature, not (...), (...),
benignior legis interpretatio, Aristot. 5. Eth* c. 10.
as Aristotle interprets the word, not rigid or severe to mark what is done
amiss, or one that stands upon his points, and power, and strict terms of Law
with his subjects, (...), one apt to extenuate faults, and give them a
favorable gloss or construction, and being rather unwilling to find faults
where they are, than to make some, where there are none.

Gods Law is high and excellent, pure and exact in it self, worthy of that
infinite wisdom and purity that did frame and enact it: But in exacting the
duties of it, and in examining our obedience, Mercy and Benignity fit in
Commiss^^n with his Justice; so that he never stand^ upon the rigor of his
Laws, and nice puntilios of obedience, with humble and p^nitent sinners (which
he might do, and do no man wrong) but remembers whereof we are made, that we
are men, not Angels, and that the best of men are but men at the best.

Wherefore, that the Law is abs^lutely possible or impossible are both false
E^^^tiations, if taken without l^mitation or distinction; but with some
restriction, both are true, and the Question may be stated either way, with
equal truth, though not with equal convenience, or prudence.

For (with submission to better judgments) I conceive, that it were more
prudent to hold forth a possibility of fullfilling the Law, than the contrary:
for this later, damps all our endeavors, weakens our hands, dulls our edge,
and makes all our hopes faint and languid: whereas a persuasion that Gods Law
is feasible, though not facil, that it may be performed to such a degree and
measure, that may find acceptance with him who sets us on work, makes us
stretch and strein our faculties, and keeps us in heart, while we run the race
that is set before us.

Non habeo vires, Christus sed jussit, habebo:
Auson^ ad Theodos: Imp^rat:
Cur me posse negem posse quod ill^ putet?
Invalidas vires ipse excitat, and juvat idem
Quijubet, obsequium sufficit esse meum.
In the Arausican Council it was made a Canon: Concilium Arausicanum.
Quod omnes baptizati, Christo auxiliante and co^operante possent and deberent
qaae ad salutem pertinent (si fideliter laborare voluerint) adimplere.

Dicat Pelagius per gratiam nos posse implere legem dei; and pax est. August:
contra Pelag:

THE LORDS PRAYER.
APHOR. 1. Of ignorance in the duty of Prayer.
SUch ignorance and darkness does possess our minds, that we often fail in our
best duties, and those that do most concern us; our very prayers are
(sometimes) extravagant and offensive, as propounding things either unlawful
for the matter, -- Paenam pro munere pascunt, like Phaeton. Ovid: Metamo: l. 2.
or unfit for the condition of them that make them.

Of both which, since God is better able to judge than we our selves, let no
man murmr or repine, when his prayers do find a repulse, but let him rather
suspect that there is something amiss on his part; Multos non audit deus ad
Voluntatem, ut exaudiat ad salut em. Isid: de summo bon^.
and make this inference, that God has turned a deaf ear to his desires for
his good, and denied them in courtesy. For this is the confidence (says St.
John) that we have in God, Joh. 5.14.
that if we ask any thing according to his will, he hears us: our prayers
must be (then) according to Gods will, not according to our own, e're they find
admission or success.

It was then a good advice of a Heathen in this particular.

Iuv. Sat: 10
-- Si consilium vis,
Permittes ipsis expendere numinibus quid
Conveniat nobis, reb^sque sit utile nostris:
Nam pro jucundis aptissima quaeque dabunt Di,
Charior est ipsis Homo, quam sibi: --
Consonant to which, Plato cites a prayer of a Greek Poet, which he commends
for the temper and prudence of it, and Homo quidem Ethnicus sapit in hoc, quod
judicat quam periculosum sit a domino petere, quod Cupiditas nost^ a
dictaverit. Calvin. l 3. Inst: c. 20.
Calvin commends him for commending it: and it was thus: (...):
(...).


Mr. Calvin gives this meaning of it. O Jupiter, give us those things that are
best and fittest for us, whether we beg them (particularly) or no: but such
things as are hurtful, keep them from us, though we earnestly desire them.

Nihil autem magis ignorari, Dan: Heinsius Exercit. in Lu. 11.
quam quid singulis expediat, aut quid petendum sit, ne Gentiles ignorarunt;
inter hos, qui scripsit. -- Evertere domos totas, optantibus ipsis,
Di faciles, etc.


The Disciples request to their Master that he would teach them to pray, ( Luke
11.1.) did imply their ignorance and unskilfullness in this duty: and to
prevent mistakes, and to succor men's ignorance in this performance, it was,
that Christ framed this prayer, L. 3. inst. ^. 20.
as Calvin rightly teaches.

Came videret quam angusta esset nostra* paupertas, quid aequum postulare, quid
e re nostra esset, huic nostrae ignorantiae occurrit, and quod captui nostro
deerat, de suo ipse supplevit ac suffecit.

APHOR. 2. That the Lords Prayer is a Prayer,
In his preamble to the Exposition of the Lords Prayer. So Mr. Henry Greenwood
a godly man, in his Exposition of the Lords Prayer.
THis is acknowledged by Mr. Perkins (a man of some esteem once in this Kingdom)
and the contrary persuasion condemned for error and ignorance by him.

The Assembly of Divines in the Directory for public worship do term it, a full
and comprehensive prayer, and not only a pattern.

Mr. Calvin does style it orationem omnibus numeris absolutam, L. 3. inst. c.
20.
a perfect prayer in all points.

Beza, omnium Christianarum precum summam ac formulam, In 6. c. Matthai.
a short sum and model of all Christian prayers.

Since then it is a prayer, let no man doubt or fear to use it as a prayer, and
do as Christ bade him, Luke 11.2.
when thou prayest, say, Our Father.

The primitive Christians did interpret this as a Command: so that it was the
ordinary and usual prayer of the Church in Tertullians time; and I do believe
that those that do forbear it now do construe it so, and that is a chief reason
why they forbear it.

Tertullian in his Exposition of the Lords Prayer (which was made above 1400
year since) has these words, praemissa hac ordinaria and legitima oratione,
tanquam fundamento, jus est accidentium desideriorum, and superstruendi
extrinsecus petitiones.

Of which words, this is the sum: 1. That the Lords Prayer was the most usual
and ordinary prayer in his time. 2. That it was esteemed the legitimate, that
is, the authentic and most current prayer of the Church. 3. That this prayer
was premised or used at the beginning ( as the foundation) of all private and
public oraisons: Their service consisted of sundry other prayers, but this was
caput caenae, the chief mess.


In St. Austine's time, Enchirid: ad Laurent: c. 71.
it was used Coronidis vice, for a close or up-shot of all their devotions, and
for a Crowning prayer, reserving their best wine until the last.

Mr. Cartwright who condemns the frequent repetition of it, Hooker. l. 5 Eccl:
polit:
in the Service book, does allow that the Church should conclude the Liturgy
with it, and that Ministers should end their Sermons therewith; as in the
English Church at Geneva it is used with the prayer after Sermon.

The continuater of Sulpit: Severus tells us, that in the Spanish Church, the
manner was (for some time) to use Orationem dominicam tantum in die dominico,
the Lords Prayer only on the Lords day. But the fourth Council of Toledo,
which we^ in the year 632. did condemn the practice, and commanded that it
should be used daily in the public Services of the Church.

APHOR. 3. It is the Rule of all other Prayers.
THis Prayer is both forma precationis and norma precandi, both a form of
prayer and a rule of praye^, or the Law of prayer, as I may term it, in that
sense that Tertullian calls the Apostle's Creed legem fidei, Lib: de Veland:
virg:
the law of faith.

Primum in unuquoque genere est mensura reliquorum. Arist. 4. Phy.
We may call it the standard of prayer; as we may also term the Creed the
standard of faith; and the Commandments, the standard of duty and obedience.

Now public standards or measures that were (anciently) kept in Temples (as the
sacred shekle in the Sanctuary) or under the Magistrates custody, Exo. 30.13
had this use; to be both measures themselves, and also patterns to make
measures by.

As that rare piece or picture made by Polygnotus (which for the excellency and
artifice of it, was termed the Canon, i. the Rule) was not only a complete
picture of it self, but also an arch-type or Idea, unde artifices artis suae
lineamenta peterent, as Pliny speak^ of it, Not: Hist. l. 8. c. 34.
a Sampler whence Artists of that faculty, should learn the true lines, touches
and strokes of a picture.

Whatsoever the mode or form, and language of our prayers may be (says
Quamlibet alia verba dicimus, nil aliud dicimus, quam quod in ista oratione
positum est, si recte and congruenter oremus. Aug: Ep. 21.
St. Augustine) we must fetch the matter and substance of them, from the royal
mine of this prayer, if we pray regularly; which is as copious in matter, as it
is parcimonious in words, and in Tertullians judgment Breviarium totius
Evangelii. De Ora^:


If any petition or request be made that does not square with this prayer or is
not reducible to it, Lev. 10.1.
it is a spark of strange fire that profanes the sacrifice: it is not secundum
Vsum Sionis.

APHOR. 4. It surpasses all other prayers.
THe Lords Prayer is the Lady of all prayers: Tertullian is of opinion that
this prayer has some kind of privilege in heaven above other prayers, ^. de
Oratione.
Haec oration, suo animatae privilegio ascendit in coelum, etc. and St. Cyprian
(who ^rod in his Master's steps, De Orat: Da Magistrum.
for so he used to call Tertullian) speaks much like his Master in this point:
God the Father (says he) does acknowledge his sons words, and gives a readier
ear and a more favorable audience (if faith and devotion does accompany it)
when requests are presented to him in his sons language.

Eccles: pol. l. 5. 35.
Hooker does hit upon the same string: Though men (says he) should speak with
the tongues of Angels, yet words so pleasing to the ears of God as those which
the son of God himself has composed, are not possible for men to frame.

Sir R. Baker's Meditat: on the Lords Prayer.
We need not doubt (says another) of a gracious hearing, since the Prince that
must hear, was the Orator that did pen our prayer, and put words into our
mouths. This is stylus Curiae, It is a petition made in the style and form of
the Court, even the Court of Requests in heaven, and therefore is the more
passable and current there.

This cherishes much confidence and consolation in us (says Calvin) that our
requests contain nothing that is absurd or offensive to God, L. 3. inst. c.
20.. 34.
qui (pene) ex ejus ore rogamus, since we ask nothing, but what he himself did
dictate unto us, and put into our mouths.

The prayer which John the Baptist pricked out for his Disciples (intimated Luke
11.1.) is not now extant upon record. It is probable that it soon grew obsolete
and out of use, when this came up: As John himself gave place to Christ: so did
his prayer to Christ's prayer, as the lesser lights use to vanish or grow dim,
Nox victa vagos contra^it ignes, luce renata cogit nitidum Phosphorus agmen.
Sen: Herefurens.
at the presence of nobler Luminaries.

Sed quorsum perditio haec? What needs this waste of words upon such a subject?
truly the aim is this, that since others have decried this prayer so much, not
only disusing, but abusing it (with some derogatory expressions) it is a duty
we ow to it and the Author of it, to cry it up again to its just value and no
farther. And therefore I shall ( Super-pondii loco) add to the former Elogies,
this of Dan: Tilenus, a learned Protestant of Germany.

Nulla praestantior formula reperiri potest ^ut excogitari, quam quae a summus
illo pre^candi magistro, Syntag: Theol: Tit: 51.
exauditionis mediatore Christo nobis est tradi^a: nam sive sapientiam spectes,
ipsamet sapientia dictavit; sive perfectionem, omnia g^uera rerum expetendarum
complectitur; sive ordinem, divina sane est methodus and artifictum.

APHOR. 5. Set forms of prayer needful for some, and lawful for all.
THe truth of this Aphorism was little questioned in former ages: the Lords
Prayer, and other Leiturgies may be read with feeling and understanding, says
Mr. Ainsworth, Def. of the L. pr:
an eminent man in his generation.

A form of prayer being read, does not cease to be a prayer, Expos: of the L.
pr:
if the Spirit of prayer and supplication be not w^^^ing in the reader or
hearer, says Mr. Perkins, who taught England to preach (as one says of him,)
and who always did use one form of prayer before his Sermons.

Concerning the lawfullness of forms and book-prayers, Saints Rest p. 3.
I make no doubt to concur with Bishop Hall, in his Soliloquies, says Mr.
Baxter, a late writer of good note.

Some reject forms prescribed, only because they are prescribed, they affect
freedom and liberty so much, that they would account their girdles and garters
to be bonds and shackles, if they were commanded to wear them.

David's Psalms make no music in their ears; their own Ditties are more
harmonious because they are their own, though they father them upon a better
Author. l. the Spirit


The Saints of old times did not think such prescribed lessons to be restraints
upon the Spirit, or a quenching of it. For that Royal Composer David did give
in writing the 105. Psalm to Asaph, 1 Chro. 16.7.
and his brethren to praise the Lord withal: And 7. they did not quarrel at
it, for long after this King Hezekiah commanded the Levites, 2 Chro. 29.30.
to sing praise unto the Lord, in the words of David and Asaph the Seer.

The 136. Psalm, which begins, O give thanks unto the Lord, for he is gracious,
etc. was wont to be sung upon several occasions, as at going forth to war, by
Iehosaphat, 2 Chro. 20.22. and at the laying the foundation of the new Temple
by Zerubbabel, Ezra 3.11.

And the learned Iunius in his notes on that Psalm says, that this Ode
Epainetic, or song of praise, was sung daily in the congregations as the moral
part of the public service.

And it is vouched by good warrant, that the Jews had set forms of praises and
prayers in all ages; Thornedike of Rel: Assemb. c 7 Synagoga Judaica. cap. 1.
Eccl. 5.1, 2
and Buxtorf says, that the thirteen articles of the Jewish Creed, was
collected by R. M^ses Ben Maimon, out of the ancient Jewish Liturgies.

A wise Prince gives thee counsel not to be rash with thy mouth or hasty to
utter any thing before God: But to be well advised what thou speak, to take
heed of too much familiarity with thy M^ker, and to remember thy distance, that
he is in heaven and thou on earth; he is a glorious God, and thou art but dust
and ^sh^s.

It was a rash vow of Iephte; the first thing that comes to meet me, shall be
the Lords, Judge. 11.31. so if thou say, the first words that come upon my
tongue shall be the Lords, they may prove rash, and foolish, and offensive,
even the Sacrifice of a fool.

Before thou prayest, prepare thy self, and be not as one that tempts the
Lord; Ecclus 1.2*
it is an Apocryphal Text, but Canonical counsel.

Hod^e majorem licentiam illicitis suis cupiditatibus homines in precibus
indulgent, quam si pares cum paribus joco e fabularentur. Calvin. l. 3. I^st.
cap. 20 5.

APHOR. 6. Prayer in a language not understood, unlawful.
I Will pray with the Spirit, and pray with the understanding also, says St.
Paul, I will sing with the Spirit, and sing with the understanding also; else
how shall he that occupies the room of the unlearned say Amen to thy giving of
thanks, seeing he understands not what thou say: For thou verily give
thanks well, but the other is not edified.

From which words, it may be irrefr^gably concluded, that the congregation must
understand the prayers that are put up in the ass^mbly, else they cannot say,
Amen, and they cannot be edified thereby.

And this may be also clearly inferred thence, that he that is the mouth of the
Congregation, or else prays in private, must understand himself what he prays,
else it is but the carcass of a prayer without soul or life in it, oration sine
ratione; for the heart cannot be affected, with what it does not understand:
and praying is a work rather of the heart than of the tongue, no lip-labor.
Cardinal Cajetan upon this Text, does ingenuously confess, that it would be
more for the edification of the Church, if public prayers were performed in a
language that is common both to Priest and People.

Pope John, the 8th. of that name, could not elude or resist the force of this
Text, or the reasonableness of the practice of the Moravians, Hist: of the
Council of Trent lib. 6
who did celebrate divine service in the Sclavonian tongue, which was the
vulgar or mother tongue of that Nation. For in an Epistle written by the said
Pope in the yea^ 808 to Stentor Prince of Moravia, touching this point, he does
cite this parcel of Paul's Epistle, and says, that he that made the Hebrew and
the Latin tongues, did make other tongues also, for the glorifying of his name
withal.

When this business of having the public service in the vulgar-tongues, was
hotly controverted in the Church, there was a voice in the air heard to say:
Let every spirit praise the Lord, and every tongue confess his name; as Z^inger
reports, cited by Dr. James. Manud: art 6.

Si populus intelligat orationem sacerdotis, Lyra in 1 Cor. 14.14.
melius reducitur in deum, and devotius respondet Amen.

APHOR. 7. It is not warrantable to lay aside the Lords Prayer.
IF it be a prayer, and there is a command extant for the using of it, there
cannot be any just pretensions for discarding it out of our Liturgies.

In the Posie of godly prayers, this was ever held the most fragrant flower, it
is sal omnium divinorum officiorum, the salt of the spiritual sacrifice; Lev.
2.13.
for as every sacrifice under the Law was seasoned with salt: so all devotion
(which is a Gospel^Sacrifice) should be seasoned with this prayer, (...) (...),
left it prove insipid or unsavory.

Let none suppose that it was intended only for Christians of the lower form:
for St. Austin assures us, Ep: 89.
that it was made, not only for the Lambs, but even for the Rams of the flock;
De meritis and remiss: l: 2. c. 24.
arietibus gregis, i. Apostolis suis dominus dedit; and elsewhere he adds it to
be a form necessary for every particular believer.

Apol: 2.
Justin Martyr says, that the Apostles themselves did use this prayer at the
celebrating of the Eucharist, which was very frequently in those days: and we
may presume that he delivered but his knowledge herein; for he living so near
the Apostles, might very well understand their practice in this, or any other
affair.

If it has been too often used heretofore, (as some urge) sure I am, it is
(now) used too seldom, which is the worser fault of the two: as of two
extremes, one may be far worser than the other. And it may be well supposed
that they have too mean a conceit of this prayer, and too high an esteem of
their compositions, that will not vouchsafe it a room among them.

One of the reasons given for abolishing the Common Prayer Book was, Preface to
the Direct:
because it gave offense to diverse godly Christians: sure I am, that the
omitting of this prayer, or casheering of it (for company) with our other
prayers of the Church, gives greatet offense to persons really godly; who are
as much grieved in spirit at this affront as at any other put upon the
Christian Religion in these frantic Corybantiasms that have (of late years)
possessed this Nation.

The omitting of this Prayer, and Creed, and Commandments, in the public
Assemblies, have made some men believe that they were but some Grotesques, and
superfluities in our Religion; some parentheses (as it were) or things
indifferent, that might be used or omitted at pleasure: so that the people have
often (since) mused what Religion has been taught them these 1600 in this
land, when the very corner-stones of it are now taken away, and the foundations
are dug up.

Where zeal (not guided with discretion) is in the Commission of Reformation,
it knows not where to stop or stay, but is always pulling down, but knows not
how to build up or erect any thing, like an Apollyon being only skillful to
destroy, to unravel, and root up all, -- Et convellere tota Fundamenta quibus
nixatur vita, salusque. Lucret: l. 4.

OF THE SACRAMENTS.
APHOR. 1. Sacraments, why ordained?
HE that made man and knew best how to instruct and teach him in the great
interest of his salvation, thought fit to enclose apples of gold in pictures of
silver, Pro. 25.11. Vel ut Pythagorei qui parvas res magna. rum rerum tesseras
esse voluerunt. Plat. Qu: Romanae. Genesis 28.12
heavenly mysteries in earthly representations and objects: because it is
natural * to man to a^cend to supernatural verities, by natural help^: and to
^cale heaven by a ladder, whose rounds are made (as it were) of gross
materials; and whose bottom (like that of Jacob) stands upon the earth, though
the top reaches to heaven.

Geom^ters do use certain Schems, and Diagrams (drawn in the sands, (...).
or on paper) to assist the weak capacities of their Scholars, to understand
some Conclusions or problems of their Art: So,

God vouchsafes to instruct his Scholars, not only by words, but also by signs
and symbols, to speak not only to the ear, but also to the eye: Vt prophe^tae
olim prophetabant, non solum sermon sed etiam visione and conversatione and
actibus typicis quos faciebant. Iren: l. 4. c. 37.
the preaching of the word was not thought Providentia divina unicuique rei
providet secundum modum suum. Homini autem connaturale est, ut per sensibilia
ad cognitionem intelligibilium perveniat. Aquin. 2.2.
sufficient to inform men's dull capacities, and to stir up their other
faculties to their proper duties but Sacraments are also added, which are a
kind of a visible word. Both have the same use, the one to teach the mind by
the sense of seeing, as the other by the sense of hearing.

And to this purpose the Sacrament is more effectual than the word, having a
greater energy Quia infirma and languida est fides nostra, ideo deus, non
contentus objectum ejus auribus nostris, per praedicationem Evangelii
inculcasse, insuper illud, per Sacramentum (tanquam visible verbum) oculis
ingerit, and auribus inserit. Tilenus Syntag: Theol: p. 851.
and force upon the mind, because the eye is a better instructor than the ear
Hoc habent Sacramenta prae verbo peculiare, quod promissiones velut in hac
tabula depictas, nobis ad vivum representent, and fub aspectum graphice (...)
expressas statuant. Calv. l. 4. Inst. c. 24.


Segnius irritant animos demissa per aures
Quam quae sunt oculis sub^ecta fidelibus.
Horat: de art Poet:
APHOR. 2. Their efficacy from the Author alone.
THere is no such virtue inherent in the Sacramental symbols to work good upon
the soul, as there is in herbs or mineral waters, to work good upon the body:
the very applying of the Sacraments (as an active to a passive) or the opus
operatum (a^ the Romish writers express it,) the very action or deed done does
not do the deed, as is pretended.

God does not tie his grace to the Means, nor to the Ministrators; whose
worthiness does not contribute to, nor unworthiness derogate from the
Sacraments: but the work depends wholly upon the good pleasure of the Ordainer
and Institutor of them, who does preside in this grand Agend of the Church, and
who does exhibit grace therein to all; but it is not effectual and beneficial
to any but to the worthy Receiver, qualified by previous dispositions, and
expedients.

We do not depreciate the Sacraments, or make them lower, or lesser than what
(indeed) they were intended to be, by asserting the efficacy and virtue derived
from them, to him that ordained them. We do not overvalue nor under-value
them: we know who have offended in these extremes.

We do not make them empty Pageants, and bare shadows or dumb shows: the Church
of England declares otherwise, in few words.

Sacraments are not only badges of Christian profession, Art. 23
but also sure witnesses and effectual signs of grace: agreeable to the Belgic
confession; Sacramenta non sunt vana, and vacua signa ad nos decipiendos
insti^uta, etc.

For where they are administered and received, in the due form and manner, we
acknowledge that they really give what they promise, and are what they
signify: on Gods part, they give an investiture and possession of the heavenly
promises, as firmly as a Bishop is invested in his Office, per baculum and
annulum, as St. Bernard makes the simile, Sermon: de Caena Dom.

The unworthy Receive^ (indeed) does frustrate, and defeat the good that is
intended by them and presented in them, makes divorce between the sign and
thing signified, Panem domini, non panem. dominium. Lambit petram sed inde nec
mel sugit, ne* oleum Cyprian:
eats the Bakers bread, not the bread that came down from heaven, Sacramentum,
non rem Sacramenti.

If this Romish fancy of the opus operatum were current, I marvel why the
Sacraments of the old Testament did not confer grace as well as those of the
new, which they deny, making that the main difference between them: whereas the
truth is, they differed only in the outward symbols, not in the inward sense,
and substance, nor yet in the effects: for their Sacraments had the same
materiam substratam, the same invisible grace presented in them, though the
visible signs were not the same; and the worthy partakers did feed on Christ as
lushiously and savourly then, as others do now; they did eat the same spiritual
meat, and drink the same spiritual drink, which was Christ, as St. Paul does
expressly teach, 1 Cor. 10.3, 4.

APHOR. 3. They are Seals as well as Signs.
THe Gospel is the Grand Charter of man's Salvation, and the Sacraments are (as
it were) seals appendant thereunto, they are not only signs of some grace
exhibited, Nou tantum signa signantia, sed etiam obsignantia.
but also seals to ratify and confirm the promises contained in the Instrument
before mentioned: As seals are put to civil Contracts and Indentures for a full
and final ratification of them.

This comparison is used by most Writers of the Reformation, Comparatio tam
inepta ut nihil inoptius. l. 1. de Sacram. c. 14.
but it is so foolish in Bellarmine's conceit, that nothing can be more; and
which ought with all diligence (says he) to be beaten down.

Sacramenta dici sigilla vel signacula, nusquam legimus nisi in Evangelio
secundum Lutherum, is the Cardinals witty sarcasm in the forecited Treatise:
that the Sacraments are called seals (says he) we read no where, but in the
new Gospel, according to St. Lather.

But he might have read it in an old Epistle according to St. Paul, who calls
Circumcision (...) the seal of the righteousness which is by faith, Romans 4.11
that is, a seal whereby it was ratified and made sure unto Abraham, that he
was justified or made righteous before God, through faith in Christ. Romans 4.3.


Nay, the Cardinal himself to prove the Septenary number of the Sacraments does
fetch an argument from the book with seven seals, Rev. 5.1. which was the new
Covenant with seven Sacraments appendant thereto, as he interprets the place:
if that Text will be of force to evince the Sacraments to be seven in number,
it will also evince them to be seals for use.

APHOR. 4. Absolutely necessary where they may be had.
THe Divine Precept has laid the highest obligation (that may be) upon us of
using the Sacraments, Medull: Theol: l. 1. c. 20.
and that with reverence and religion, says Dr. Ames.

If the Sacraments be wanting unto us through our own default, it involves us
in guilt (says Augustine) neither can that man pretend to a sincere conversion
or love to God, L. 4. contra Donat. c. 25
that contemns any Sacrament of his institution Sacramentorum vis
inerarribiliter valet plurimum, and ideo contempta sacrilegos facit: inipie
quippe contemnitur, sine quo non potest perfici pietas. Aug: l. 19. contra
Faustum Manich. c. 11.
.

Faith will not avail any man, who receives not the Lords Lords Sacraments when
he may, says St. Bernard.

If this be a duty commanded, why may we not slight any other (and all other)
duties as well as this?

What reasonable hopes has any man that God will save him by some other means
(or without means) when he has declared, that by these means (in conjunction
with some others) he intends to save?

Ames calls Baptism one of the ordinary means of Salvation; Bellarm: Enervat:
l. 2.
and ex ista hypothesi, upon that account, he affirms it to be absolutely
necessary to Salvation, where it is to be had Baptismus est necessarius non
rantum ut res praecepta, sed etiam ut medium salutis ordinarium; it a tamen ut
non desperandum est de salute non-baptisatorum. Amesius Bellarm: enervat. l. 2.
.

Except a man be born of water and the Spirit (says Christ) he cannot enter
into the Kingdom of heaven. Joh 3.5.
From hence the ancient Fathers did infer the necessity of Baptism: But some
later Writers have ratified this water into spirit; and interpret the words
tropically: except a man be born of water, that is, of the Spirit: for water is
here but an emblem of the Spirit (say they, as fire is elsewhere, Mat. 3.11.

But to these, I shall oppose the sense, and censure of the learned Hooker,
Eccl: pol: l. 5. ^9.
you shall have his own expressions, for they cannot be mended.

I hold it an infallible rule in the Exposition of Scripture, that where a
literal construction will stand, the farthest from the Letter, is commonly the
worst: there is nothing more dangerous than this licentious and deluding are
which changes the meaning of words, as Alchimy does or would do Metals, makes
any thing what it lists, and in the end, brings all truth to nothing.

The general consent of antiquity, concurres in the literal interpretation, and
must the received construction be (now) disguised with a toy of novelty? We may
by such Expositions, attain in the end (perhaps) to be thought witty, but with
ill advice; so he.

Non possum quin simplicissimam Theologiam, hoc est, Dan. Heins. exercit: in
Mar. 13.30.
quae minime recedit a litera, caeteris ut commodiorem, praeferam.

APHOR. 5. Infant Baptism more ancient than the Apostles.
TO secure the interest of children in this Sacrament, Lib. de Baptismo.
who ( ex praerogativa s^minis, as Tert: speaks) are entitled thereto, enough
has been spoken (of late years) by our English Writers, to the conviction of
all gainsayers; more particularly by the excellent Dr. Hammond, in his Quaer^s.

When we find the practice of baptizing Infants in the Christian Church to be
so ancient, as the very next age to the Apostles: and so universal, that it was
received through all parts of the world, where Christ had a Church, I cannot
see, how it could have any other original than from the Apostles who founded
the Churches through the World.

St. Augustine speaking of this usage or custom, Sermon: 10. de v. Ap.
says, That the Church of God ever had it, ever held it, and received it Hanc
praxin Ecclesia Catholica ubique diffusa tenet Home de Adamo and Eva. from the
Religion of former ages: and Calvin says, That the antientest Writers that we
have of our Religion, do (without any scruple) refer the original of this
practice to the Apostles.

L 4. Inst. c 16.
Nullus Scriptor tam vetustus qui non ejus originem, ad Apostolorum tempora pro
certo, referat.

But this practice did not begin with, or by the Apostles neither: for they did
but continue what was before in use in the Jewish Church, who admitted
Proselytes into their Religion by this Rite or Ceremony of Baptizing, besides
that of Circumcision; as has been observed unto us by men well verst in
Rabbinical Wirtings, and the Rituals of all ages, as Ainsworth on Genesis 17.12.
Heins. his Ex^r^: on Act. 18.3. Lud: de Dieu his Append: on Matthew. 23.15. and
more fully and copiously Doctor Hammond in his fourth Quaere.

But indeed, the Jewish and the Christian Baptisms had different purposes and
designations: by the one, the Proselytes were baptized into Moses, that is, the
Mosaic Law and O^conomie: by the other, into Christ, that is, into his Faith,
Rule and Discipline.

And it is farther observed by the forementioned Writers, that of the Jewish
proselytes, not only men of years were baptized, but their young Children were
also baptized with them, and received into the bosom of that Church, to be
instructed in their Law, when they should come to years.

Which usage was taken up by John the Baptist, and afterward by Christ and his
Apostles, and continued in the reformed Common wealth, though to another
purpose and design, as we touched before; and this Ceremony was thought
sufficient to be retained for that end, when Circumcision was abolished.

If the issue of the Question touching Infants Baptism lay upon this: Whether
the Apostles of Christ did baptize Infants? The Scripture (by its own light)
does not clear the doubt, it tells us they baptized whole households, which
testimonies do (of themselves) make it but probable, that they baptized the
children of those households: but if Catholic tradition, and the voice of the
Church he allowed so much civility and credit with us, as to be believed for a
matter of fact and story; then the business would soon be put beyond all
pretensions of scruple, and made as secure and firm to our sense, as any
Article of our Creed: As upon the testimony of Travelers, and credible men, I
might be induced to believe firmly and undoubtedly, that there is such a City
as Constantinople, though I neither saw it, nor does the Scripture make any
mention of it.

APHOR. 6. Where it may not be had, desire supplies the defect.
THis must be understood of the adulti or men in years, that have not
participated of the holy mysteries, but do earnestly desire and long for them,
but by some impediment and invincible necessity, cannot obtain them: If the
fault be not on their side, there is no danger, but the internal benefit of the
Sacrament, is communicated to them, without the external symbols.

The penitent Thief on the cross went to heaven without Baptism, when Simon
Magus went to hell with it: the children of Bethlehem that were baptized in
their own blood, were qualified for heaven by that Baptism, without the Baptism
of water; and Martyrdom in any other, does entitle them to a crown, even a
crown of glory, though unbaptized.

When the Emperor Valentinian died without Baptism, but had determined to
receive it, but that he was prevented by death; St. Ambrose does state his case
thus; Quem regeneraturus eram, In Orat: funebri.
amisi, sed ille no^ amisit gratiam quam poposcit. I lost him (says he) whom I
was about to regenerate or baptize: but he has not lost the grace o^ fruit of
that Ordinance which he desired.

In such cases, Baptismus flaminis supplet baptismum fluminis, the Baptism of
the Spirit does supply the want of water baptism; and the Spirit himself does
officiate for the Minister sometimes.

From hence we may infer, that the case of children dying without Baptism, is
not forlorn and disperate: we may not be such Rhadamanths as to pass
damnatory sentences upon them, for want of that which was not in their power to
compass: God does not tie any to those ordinary Laws and methods whereby he
saves man, but such as may have them, and are capable to use them. If the
Parents be wanting to their child in this duty, the sin (sure) lies at their
door and not the child's; and God will require it at their hands, as he did at
the hands of Moses.

In like manner the Church of England, has declared her judgment, touching
the want of the Eucharist, if there be no more than the bare defect. If any
person by extreme sickness, or any other just impediment, do not receive the
Sacrament of the Lords Supper, if he truly repent him of his sins, and
steadfastly believe that Christ died for him, he does eat, and drink the body
and blood of Christ profitably, to his souls health, though he do not eat the
Sacrament with his mouth.

So the Rubric for the communion of the sick.

A Prayer occasionally conceived, 1655.
upon the entering into a ruinous Church, where no Prayers or Sermons had been,
in many years before.
O Eternal Holiness and immense Goodness! how sad and desolate is this place,
which was (lately) frequented by a people called by thy name, to call upon thy
name; to seek thy face, and to find thee here, in thine own appointments and
holy dispensations: how forlorn is it now become, being made a Court of Owls,
and a place for Satyrs to dance in? Aula ululantium. Isa. 34.13: Isa. 13.22.


I acknowledge the handwriting upon the walls, and the charactets of thy just
displeasure, who do proportion punishments to the offenses, and make the
one legible in the analogy, and suitableness of the other.

Lord, Isa. 34.11.
if my sins have drawn th^se lines of confusion and of stones emptiness; if by
any remisness or perfunctoriness in holy Ministeries, if by want of zeal for
thy glory, or any other way, I have awaked thy justice, lo, here (in all
humility,) I prostrate my self before thee, imploring mercy and pardon, and
confessing to thy glory, that thou art just in all that is come upon us.

And if the sins of the Congregation (that used to meet here,) have contributed
to this judgment, and turned away thy presence from this place, either by
sleighting the Mysteries that were here dispensed, or the Dispensers of them:
we must say again, that righteous art thou, O Lord, and true are thy
judgments. Thou have been just in shutting up the doors of thy House against
them, that did shut their ears and hearts against thee; and in taking away that
food from before them, which they loathed or lightly regarded.

Yet, O Lord, be merciful both to Priest and People, and turn not away thy
face utterly (in displeasure) from them; as we confess thy justice, so we
implore thy mercy, Lift up the light of thy countenance upon thy Sanctuary that
is desolate, Dan. 9.17.
and cause thy face to shine upon it. Lam. 5.21
Turn thee unto us, O Lord, and renew our days as of old. Have mercy upon a
distressed Church, and a distracted ^tate: Behold thy Ministers that are
smit^en into Corners, and their respective Congregations that wander like sheep
without a shepherd, Amos. 8.11
that travel to and fro, ^o seek the word of the Lord, and cannot ^ind it.

Gather them O thou Shepherd of Israel, and do thou guide and lead them forth,
and let thy rod and staff comfort them.

Pi^ty the ruins of thy Church, build up ^he old wastes, it is time that thou
have merry upon them, yea the time is come.

Let not the Watchmen that are set upon ^he walls hold their peace day nor
night, Isa. 62*6.
nor those that make mention of the Lord keep silence, nor give him any rest,
until he establish his people, and make this Church a praise on the Earth, that
it may no more be termed desolate or forsaken, but make it an eternal
excellency, and a joy of many generations.

And so shall we learn by thy punishments to amend our lives, and for thy
Clemency, to give thee praise and glory, through Jesus Christ our Lord, Amen.

PSALM. 123. Mr. Sands*
1.
THou mover of the rolling Spears,
I through the glasses of my tears,
To thee my eyes erect.
As servants mark their masters hands,
And maids their mistresses commands,
And liberty expect:
2.
So we, deprest by enemies,
And growing troubles, fix our eyes
On God who sits on high;
Till he in mercy, shall descend
To give our miseries an end,
And turn our tears to joy.
3.
O save us Lord, by all forlorn
The subjects of contempt and scorn,
Defend us from their pride,
Who live in fluency and ease,
Who with our woes their malice please,
And miseries deride.
FINIS.

