THE SOVLES LIFE: Exercising it self in the sweet Fields of Divine Meditations
and Prayers. Collected for the comfort of all those who willingly adventure
their lives for the defense of the Gospel, in these blood-thirsty times of War.

LONDON, Printed for R. Harper, and are to be sold at his shop in Smithfield,
1645.

The Printer to the Reader.
When this Book came into my hands by means of a wel-wishing friend: after I
had perused it, and the Title thereof, I thought it very sitting, as well in
regard of the Subject, being Divine Meditations, as of the devotion and intent
of the Religious Author, to raise up the minds of men from the troublesome
thoughts of these tempestuous times, that their Souls sole hope might take
Anchor hold upon God. The Subject of our Meditation is diverse, as also of our
prayer and thanksgiving; in regard whereof Hilary compares the Psalms of
David to a bunch of keys, which (as by several doors) give us access to God:
as some admiring him in his creatures and wonderful works, some of
thanksgiving for his mercyes and wonderful deliverance of his people the
children of Israel; others of exhortation to al Nations to know and rejoice in
him, and the like. Meditation (it is true though it be most proper to the
private and solitary Soul retired from worldly affairs and business; yet is it
a duty most necessary for all the servants of God at all times and in all
places wheresoever to exercise themselves in. Isaac we read went out to
meditate at the eventide, Genesis 24. 63. When I remember thee upon my bed, says
David, Ps. 63. 6 and meditate upon thee in the night watches. So that
Meditation being so generally necessary for every true servant of God, and a
Subject of such excellent use and worth, I could not but publish this to the
view of the world, though the pious Authors modesty is such, that he could be
content to live, sibi notus, ignotus aliis. Farewell.

The Souls Life.
MEDITATION I. Meditations and confessions of man's sinful ways.
O Blessed God, when I consider with my self, how I have spent my time, nay
rather mis spent it, I tremble; for when I should have served thee, my God, I
served mine own lusts and evil affections; I walked too often in the vanity
of mine own ways, and hearkened not to thy will and Commandments, which
should have been as a lanthorn and light to guide me in those darker paths.
It has been mine unhappy error to mind more the things of the world, then
the things which concern thee. I confess, O Lord, that I have offended thee
in all my ways, both in thought, word and deed, and have served the creature,
more then the Creator. But, O Lord, I humbly beg pardon of thee who art the God
of mercy: Pardon therefore my misdeeds, I beseech thee, and cast not away thy
servant in displeasure. O Lord, I come unto thee upon the bended knees of my
heart, and cry with the Publican, Lord be merciful unto me a sinner: for I
know, O Lord, thou delightest not in the death of a sinner, but that he should
repent and be saved. Save me therefore, O Lord, and make my ways so direct for
the time to come, that I may keep thy commandments, and that I may do
nothing but that which is acceptable in thy sight: make me humble, for thou
stand afar off from the proud: make both my soul and body as they ought to
be, a fit Temple for the Holy Ghost, out of which, do thou, O Christ, drive
away all worldly thoughts and vain imaginations, chase buiers and sellers of
my heavenly treasure, and make me meditate on things above. Cleanse me, O Lord,
from all filthiness of sin and evil concupiscence, and grant that for the
time to come, I may serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of
my life; that when death shall ceaze on my body, my soul may without fear
rejoice, and long to be with thee my Savior and Redeemer, there to enjoy that
happiness and bliss, which thou have prepared for them that love thee.

MEDITAT. II. Meditations of a penitent sinner, hoping for pardon through the
merits of Christ.
O Lord, how are my days wasted and come to an end, even as a dream that is
told; how do my nights pass away and are not to be recalled again? and how
do I forget what I have done against thee, my God? the sins, alas, that I
have committed are as innumerable as the sand on the sea shore, not to be
numbered by any but thy justice: and what account shall I make to thee, O Lord,
when this tabernacle of mine shall be dissolved, and my soul appear before
thy Majesty at the last and dreadful day of judgment? where all that I have
done shall be laid open, and shall be as so many witnesses against me, and I
not able to answer one of a thousand: what shall I do, Lord, or whither shall
I go for succor, no place can hide me from thy presence, for thou fillest all
places, and art not excluded from any place; therefore I have no place to fly
from thy justice? O Lord, I beseech thee to remember the precious blood of thy
dear Son, which was shed for me, his blood is a sufficient ransom for the
whole world, and for as many worlds as there are people; therefore, O Lord, I
will not despair of a share in my Saviors sufferings; he dyed as well for me
as for others, and I hope through his merits I shall be saved; therefore I
beseech thee, O my Savior, answer for me, and plead thou my cause, for in thee
alone shall I be reconciled to my God, and shall have forgiveness of all my
sins, be they never so many or grievous: Therefore, O my Soul, be not
dismayed, but comfort thy self in thy Savior; for in stead of punishment thou
shall have a reward, thy reward shall be a Crown of everlasting glory, thy
reward shall be the rewarder, even God himself; thou shall see and enjoy him
whom none can see and not be blessed: thou shall see and enjoy the fellowship
of all the blessed Apostles, the holy Angels and Saints of God, and shall sing
Hallelujahs and praises to the heavenly King, for ever and ever.

MEDITAT. III. Meditations of the wonderful goodness and love of God to
mankind.
O God, how wonderful art thou in thy works; in wisdom have thou made them
all, the Earth is full of thy riches, and so is the great and wide Sea also:
this was thy great care and providence to mankind, that before the creation of
man, thou createdst all things for his use, before thou sentest him into the
world, to the end he might not perish, but be relieved with all things
necessary, convenient and delightful for him. O God, when I see the fields
clothed with corn, it makes my heart rejoice with an exceeding great joy, and
when I think thereupon, I consider with my self, it was thy providence that
provided that for me, which without I could not subsist: And when I see the
ground bedecked with grapes, the green meadows with pasture, the multitude of
woods abounding with trees, both for timber, fuel, and thousands of other
uses; as also the varieties of fruit trees in abundance; the rare mineralls
which spring from the bowels of the earth, affording infinite wealth. I cannot
but admire to see the multitude of cattle, both for food, clothing, and many
other accommodations; the infinite store of foul of all kinds, the sweet
flowers in abundance; and the innumerable sorts of vegetables, all profitable
and delightful. I cannot but wonder at the great Ocean, and the innumerable
varieties of fish, besides the great commodity we enjoy by the shipping,
voyaging to all parts of the world for commodities, both for profit and
pleasure. When I consider the firmament, how thou have bespangled it with those
glorious creatures, the Sun, Moon and Stars, and all for the use of man, to
give light both by day and by night; but above all, that thou have given thy
only begotten Son to dye for us; this is love beyond all the love that ever
was, these things transport me into an admiration, and compel me to praise and
to love thee, O my God, with an exceeding great love: who is he, or what is he
that will not praise thee, O Lord, for these thy unspeakable mercies to
mankind? O grant that I may no longer live, then I love thee! O God, I will
love thee, I will bless thee, I will magnify thee so long as I have any being!

MEDITAT. IV. Meditations of the love and sufferings of our Savior Christ for
mankind.
O Sweet Savior, what have thou suffered for my sake, and what have I done to
deserve thy sufferings? alas, my sin was the cause of thy sufferings; yet
had thou not suffered for my sin, I had utterly perished, and been out of
all possibility of being saved. I was guilty of sin, but thou knew no
sin, neither was there guile found in thy mouth: and what shall I render to
thee, my Savior, for thy unspeakable love toward me! all I have is thine, and
therefore I have nothing to give thee, or make any satisfaction to thee for thy
love. O Savior! thou have given me a tongue and understanding to the end I
should praise thee, therefore I offer unto thee my Redeemer, the sacrifice of
praise and thanksgiving, exrolling thy infinite mercy and clemency to thy poor
creature. Thou, O sweet Savior, wast naked, and I clothed, thou my Redeemer
wast hungry, and I satisfied with bread; thou wast scourged and buffeted, and I
at ease feeling no pain; thou wast spit on and railed on among thine enemies,
and I in rest and quiet among my friends; thou wast in prison, and I at
liberty; thou suffer storms and tempest at Sea, and I being upon dry land,
was safe upon my pillow; thou wast crucified upon the cross for my sake, and
suffered'st death for me. O unspeakable love, for ever to be had in
remembrance: never can I sufficiently magnify thy wonderful mercy, patience
and long suffering.

O Savior! give me a heart that may always be mindful of these thy
wonderful kindnesses and unparalled sufferings, and that I may endeavor by
all means possible, to love thee, and to dye for thee, as thou dyedst for me:
make me seriously to ponder and think of thee continually, and that my soul
may so desire thee, that it may never be at rest till it enjoyes thee.

MEDITAT. V. Meditations of Gods preservation of man.
I Confess, O God, thou preservest me, yea when I think not of thy
providence, it is my dull sottishness and ingratitude that makes me thus
forget my God: How often have I been in dangers both by sea and land, ready to
perish, and yet it was thou alone that preservedst me, and I knew it not,
because I remembered not thee, O God, as I ought to have done? Thou have
preserved me from the venom of false tongues, and I on a sudden forgot it: I
might have perished often in my going abroad and coming home, but it was thy
mercy that preserved me: I might have miscarried in my very meat and drink,
but for thy providence: thou have preserved me from thieves and murderers, who
would have confounded me: but above all, thou have preserved me from that
roaring Lion, who still seeks to devour me, and from those that lie in wait
to catch my soul. O Lord, how shall I extol thy mercy sufficiently for these
unexpresseable favors to me, wretched man that I am: thy love is wonderful to
me, and far be it from me to think that I merit any thing from thee, O God:
O Lord, make me, I beseech thee, to think on thee continually, and to meditate
on thee day and night, always expressing my thankfulness to thee for these thy
mavelous preservations: make me to praise thee, and to love thee with an
exceeding great love: knit my heart to thee, that I may fear thee and keep
thy commandments: O let me do nothing that may offend thee, lest thou draw
thy care and providence from me; for if thou, O Lord, should leave me to my
self, I were utterly lost, and deprived of all help and comfort: I could be
no where safe, because of mine enemies which are mighty and strong, who leek to
destroy both body and soul: leave me not therefore O my God, but hold thy hand
of providence over me continually: watch over my ways and suffer not the enemy
to have any advantage over me, hide me under the shadow of thy wings, and
preserve both my body and soul, so shall I be safe from mine enemies.

MEDITAT. VI. Meditations of the miseries and calamities of the time.
O God, how happy were we, when we enjoyed that great blessing of peace and
tranquillity? how were we both a mirror and a terror to all the eyes of the
Christian world? how did our corn spring up with increase of an hundred fold,
so that the people did rejoice and sing? how fruitful was our Land with all
manner of grain? how full of all creatures fit for the use of man? yea how did
we abound in all things, so that we were able to live of our selves without the
succors of any other Nation? what a sweet harmony and agreement was there
among our selves, which made our enemies stand amazed at our felicity, when
they themselves enjoyed none of these blessings? O God, how comes this change,
and unexpected misery upon us that now we are in? Surely we did not value that
blessing of peace, as we ought to have done; surely it is our sin and
ingratitude that has drawn thy vengeance upon us: what a sight is it to see
the father shedding the blood of the son, and the son the father? brother
against brother; kinsman against kinsman; one neighbor cutting the throat of
another, and all the whole Kingdom divided and plunged into a world of
miseries: how do our fields lie barren for want of tillage, our p^stures
trodden and spoiled with armies, our woods cut down, as if it were intended no
more should grow in our Land? How are our Cattle driven in flocks and heardes
from place to place, and devoured by the enemy, so that a famine must needs
ensue? How are the poor people driven from their habitations, for the
preservation of their lives, being bereft of house, goods and land, as if they
had no right to those possessions their Ancestors left them? How are whole
Towns burned without either pity or mercy? How many thousands suffer for want
of their means, which heretofore they received at pleasure? O God! make us to
prize that blessing of peace hereafter, at a higher rate, and give us
thankful hearts for all our enjoyments. Cleanse the Land from sin, and
turn away thy wrath from us. Help us, O God of our salvation! for the glory
of thy name: O deliver us and be merciful unto our sins* for thy names sake:
so we that are thy people, and sheep of thy pasture, will give thee thanks
for ever and ever.

MEDITAT. VII. A Prayer upon the same subject.
O Most glorious Lord God! creator both of Heaven and Earth, and of all things
contained therein; Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, and Judge of all the World:
We miserable sinners acknowledge that we are a sinful people, laden with
sins and iniquities, we have deserved thy wrath and indignation, and these
heavy judgments which are now inflicted upon us, are deservedly befallen us:
there is no goodness in us, but we are filled with filthy corruption and sin:
there is no whole part in us, from the crown of the head to the sole of the
foot, all are corrupted, sinful, and abominable: we have walked in the vanity
of our own desires and evil concupiscence, we have not hearkened to thy will
and commandments, but have gone astray after our own ways and sinful lusts:
we confess, O Lord! that we have broken all thy commandments, and have
offended thee continually, both in thought, word, and deed. Our desires and
thoughts have been more bent to the world, then to heaven and heavenly things.
O God! we cannot but admire thy patience and long suffering, for it had been
just with thee to have cut us off long ago, and that we should have perished
in that lake which burns with fire and brimstone for ever. What shall we
render to thee, O Lord, for thy unspeakable mercies? We will take the cup of
salvation, and call upon the Name of the Lord. O Lord, we beseech thee to make
our ways so direct for the time to come, that we may keep thy commandments:
bridle our wills, tame our unruly affections, and suffer them not to stray so
far from thee. Fasten and imprint thy Laws in our hearts that we may fear
thee, love thee, and obey thee in all things, and that our study may be to
serve thee as thou have appointed: take away our stony hearts, and give us
hearts of flesh. Lord give us faith, hope, and charity, for without these
graces, we shall never see thy face. Purge away all evil from us, and give us
to serve thee in holiness and righteousness all the days of our life. Give
us peace in our time, O Lord, but especially the peace of conscience: O Lord,
unite the hearts of King and People together, that righteousness and peace may
kiss each other: and we beseech thee, O God, out of thy bowels of compassion,
to suffer no more blood to be shed in our land, and that we may hear the
voice of joy and gladness in our dwellings. Grant this, O Lord, and all other
things needful for us, even for thy dear Sons sake, JESUS CHRIST our Lord
and blessed Savior. Amen.

MEDITAT. VIII. Meditations of Gods great love and mercy to his servant.
O God, how am I bound to thee for thy unspeakable mercies toward me,
wretched sinner: how can I forget thy exceeding love to me, that have given me
my limbs, my eye sight, and my senses, when many others want all these, who
deserve as well as I. Do I not see, as I pass in the street, one poor man
want arms, another legs, one wanting eye sight, another being dumb, some
bowed together, others distracted wanting all manner of sense, some their bodies
festred and ready to perish for want of succor. Thou, O God, could have done
the like to me, sure I am, I deserved no less punishment then they. Lord, let
me live no longer then I shall praise thee for giving me al things these poor
souls want and stand in need of. O let me extol thy name for ever, and let
me not forget to show forth thy praise: let me be telling of thy kindness to
them that fear thee, and let my soul rejoice in thee that have done such
great things for me. For what am I, O Lord, that thou should esteem me more
then they; perhaps I have deserved greater punishments, and yet thou sparest me
and afflictest them; sure I am, my sins have deserved as great punishments as
thou have laid upon them: Lord! I fear that thou have greater punishments in
store for me, unless I repent and become a new creature: Lord give me grace
that I may timely repent, lest thou afflict my body here in this valley of
tears, and utterly confound my soul in Hell for ever. Make me, O Lord, to
watch over my ways, and to walk in that way thou have appointed: let me
meditate upon thy Laws and commandments, o let me not go wrong for fear of
thy Judgments: let me love thee, fear thee, and obey thee in all things; so
shall I be happy, and enjoy that happiness which thou have prepared for all
those that love thee.

MEDITAT. IX. Meditations of the judgments and afflictions that attend people
in this world for sin.
WHen I consider with my self, the wants, accidents, and afflictions, which
attend people in this world, it amazes me; when I see great men with their
stately Palaces, flowing and abounding in great riches and possessions, both
for profit and pleasure, and on a sudden they fall and come to nothing; nay,
many times are they constrained to be beholding to inferior men for relief:
Surely, these sudden chastisements come from thee, O God; surely, thou did it
to bring them home to thee; thou afflictest the body to save the soul. I have
seen many of all sorts live in great prosperity, dreaming that time would last
ever, and yet have I seen them come to want, being in a most miserable
condition: I my self have had a share of these sufferings, but not according
to my deservings: for, Lord, if thou should mark what were done amiss, who
were able to abide it? Therefore I acknowledge, O Lord, thou have been very
favorable unto me; for in judgment thou have remembered mercy: therefore will
I praise thy Name, and render thee thanks even for ever and ever. O LORD, what
need I care how or what my body suffers, so thou save my soul: these meats,
drinks, clothing, riches, and honor, they are but transitory things; for when
the breath of man is gone, all these things vanish away: but it is the
immortal soul that I esteem and prefer before all things of this world.
Lord, though my body want bread, feed thou my soul with the bread of life: if
my body want clothing, cloth thou my soul with thy righteousness; if all
the riches, profits and pleasures of this world fail me, let me enjoy thee,
and I shall want nothing; let me have thee, and I have all things; if I want
thee, I want all things. Thou, O God, art my life, my health, my riches, my
pleasure, my food, my raiment, my delight, the joy of my heart, and the
fountayn of all happiness. Thou, O God, take care of sparrowes, and feedest
young ravens that call upon thee: how much more for us Christians, who are made
in the image of thee, O God? Lord, I beseech thee, give me neither poverty nor
riches, feed me with food convenient for me, lest I be full and deny thee, and
say who is the Lord? or lest I be poor, and steal, and take the Name of my
God in vain, Prove. 30. Give me what thou will, do with me as thou will, and
in all things dispose of me according to thy good pleasure. Lord, I submit my
self to thee, humbly desiring thee to take me into thy gracious protection,
not only for this day, but for ever.

MEDITAT. X. Meditations of the misery of Man, from his Infancy, to his old Age.
O God, I cannot but consider how miserable Man is from his infancy to his
grave. What a poor silly creature it is, being newly sprung from the womb of
the mother, what danger was there in his very entrance into the world, when
oftentimes it costs the life of the mother, the child, or both? be it so that
he live, it is not able to help it self, either to food or clothing, wanting
both wit and strength, being in a far worse condition then the beasts of
the field, for they bring their clothing with them into the world, and
naturally can and do apply themselves to the Tett that yeeldes them
nourishment. How is this poor infant nursed and brought up with much ^endernes,
care, trouble and charge to the Parents, and let them do all they can, now
when they have done their uttermost, no sooner is it able to go, but it is
attended with many hard accidents. Sometimes it falls into the fire, some times
into the water, as if, poor thing, it were possessed with the spirit of
mischa^ce. Sometimes it falls down the stairs to the ground, and then again
into a pit below the ground, and many such like accidents it is obnoxious to.
Now me thinks it is a wonder that it lives and comes to speak, and when it
has gotten the tongue, how perversely does it prattle, how hardly is it brought
to school to learn to know it self, leave it but to its own bent, and it
will neither be serviceable to God nor man. Now when it is got up to what we
call man, how wild and like an untamed beast is he, though all are not such,
we must confess that many are? what dangers and troubles do they fall into,
and it is almost a miracle they come to old age? for some are drowned in the sea
or land waters, some are killed in duels, some in the wars, and some are put
to death for heino us crimes, some by their lewd courses come to mere beggary,
and are in a manner lost. And if it happen a man comes to old age, his miseries
are intolerable, having little or no joy of himself. How are the eyes dimmed,
which deprives him of the comfort of all holy Books? How do his senses fail
him, rendering him incapable of knowing or doing any thing as formerly: how
feeble are his limbs, being not able to go without the help of a staff or
man? what a multitude of diseases attend him, as the stone, gowt, palsy, and
many other; so that being bereft of his senses, he has small comfort but what
he enjoys in his soul? Now, O miserable man, what encouragement have thou to
live in this world, or to set thy heart upon it? thou see thy whole age is
nothing but labor and sorrow, thy comforts are few, thy sorrows many and
grievous: therefore look to it, thou young man, and remember thy Creator in the
days of thy youth, whilst thou have strength and use of thy senses, for in
age it may be too late: serve thy God always, and pray to him for grace, and
then thou need not fear old age, nor any thing that does accompany it;
thou needst not fear death nor Hell, but shall be happy here on earth, and
shall receive thy reward hereafter in the kingdom of Heaven.

MEDITAT. XI. Meditations on the ill life and actions of man.
NOw, good God! how circumspect ought we to be of our actions in this life,
knowing that we must one day give an account for all the sins that ever we
committed? And if men would lay these things to heart, surely there would not
be so much wickedness in the world. But, O the blindness of this world, how
many live and spend their time, as if there were neither a heaven to enjoy, nor
a hell to suffer? what bloodsheds are committed for a trifle, nay even for a
rash word, men are ready to murder one another? How often do men rob on the
high way, and break houses for a small gain oftentimes, ventring both soul
and body in these unhumane actions; yea many times doing these wicked actions
for their mere recreation, and thus sport away their souls. How many are there
that commit whoredom, adultery, and many such like crimes, even with
greediness? How does this Land flow with excess of drunkenness and glutony,
vain swearing, covetousness, despising the holy Scripture, and profaning the
Lords day? What perjuries, lying, cousening, backbiting and slandering one
another? What revenge, what envy, hatred, malice, and all manner of
uncharitableness is there amongst us, committing all sins that can be
imagined? How do men set their hearts upon the world and worldly things, which
profit nothing, and neglect the weighty matters that concern salvation? How
willingly are they led away to serve the world, the flesh and the Devil,
making vain pleasures and profits of this world their sole delight? O God, how
foolish and besotted is vain man, to neglect thee, thy service, and his souls
good? Consider, O man, if thy soul were in hell, what would thou not give or
do to be redeemed out of those scorching flames, where the worm dies not,
neither is the fire quenched, and where thy torment shall be everlasting.
Would thou not give a world, nay a thousand worlds to be eased of those
pains? would thou not cast off all those sins before mentioned, and
strive to serve thy God with all thy heart; yes surely thou would, but then
it will be too late: for what can buy thee from thence, when thou have lost
Christ, that price of thy redemption? Therefore endeavor, O man, before it be
too late, to make thy calling and election sure, so shall thou be happy both
here, and eternally blessed hereafter.

MEDITAT. XII. Meditations of the ingratitude of friends.
What cause have thou to build upon the friendship or favor of man; I
confess when they see thee in prosperity, wanting nothing, then they will be
ready to offer their service, and thou shall have all the friendship and favor
they can do thee? I can compare this friendship to no fitter thing, then the
casting of water into the Sea that needs it not; but give me that man who will
relieve thee in thy poverty, yea when all friends and acquaintance forsake
thee, one dram of that man's friendship is worth a thousand of those friends.
But when I consider that man that has been beneficial to others, nay has
been secondarily the cause of all they have, and those friends to cast him off
in his poverty, and prove worse to him then strangers, nay oftentimes become
his enemies: O God, what ingratitude is this? Surely these people have neither
charity, humanity, nor any brotherly affection, and are far worse in their
nature then brute beasts, for they help and succor one another at all times.
O God, let me cleave only to thee and thy providence, and then I am sure to
have a friend at all times, I need not fear poverty, nor ingratitude of
friends; if I depend upon thee, I am sure to want nothing, I shall have riches,
friends, peace, plenty, and joy in the Holy Ghost, I shall have all contentment
that can be imagined. I beseech thee, O Lord, to mold and fashion me as thou
would have me to be, then shall I in prosperity remember that all I have
comes from thee, O God, and shall always be mindful to give thee thanks for
those blessings I enjoy: And in adversity I shall humble my self under the
mighty hand of thee, O God, and shall acknowledge that my sins have justly
deserved those sufferings, and shall patiently wait upon thee, O Lord, until
thou have mercy, casting all my care upon thee, who abundantly providest for
all those that put their trust in thee.

MEDITAT. XIII. Meditations of the vanity of Pride.
O God, when I consider what man is in himself, what a poor frail, weak and
miserable creature he is, not able so much as to think one good thought of
himself, much less to do any thing that is good, it makes me wonder how he
can be proud, or what he should be proud of: Is it thy clothes thou vain man
that puff thee up to pride? thou have little or no cause for that, for thou
art beholding to the worms and beasts of the field for them, they are but the
rags they cast off, therefore thou have no cause to be proud of them. Is it
thy learning, knowledge, wit and memory, or any other endowment? Surely thou
may not be prond of these; for what have thou that thou have not received?
if thou have received those things from God, why do thou boast? Is it thy
riches, store of bags and great posessions, thy honor, beauty or person? Alas
poor man! deceive not thy self, for those things cannot last long, this night
thy soul may be taken from thee; and what art thou the better for those
things which of necessity thou must leave behind thee, nay rather how much
worse art thou by the possession of those things which thou have employed to
thy own destruction? Now may thou clearly know and understand that thou
have no cause to be thus exalted, and the Scripture says, That the beginning
of Pride is, when a man departs from God; if it be so, what a miserable case
art thou in? for surely if thou leavest God, he will leave thee; and if he
leave thee, what joy or comfort can thou have in thy garments, wit or
learning, or in thy riches, honor or beauty, or in any other thing? nay what
discomforts shall attend thee, when thou pondrest with thy self that thou art
a lost man, and have forsaken thy God, who is the fountain of riches, honor,
beauty, peace and plenty, and from whom comes every good and perfect gift?
how sad will thy soul be when it is bereft of all heavenly comfort? how
fearful will the very name of death be unto thee, when thou shall consider
that thy soul shall after this life remain in hell for ever, being deprived of
all hope of comfort, unless thou repent? Consider therefore these things thou
proud man, and humble thy self betimes; cast away all vain imaginations of
Pride, and serve thy God with fear and reverence, with meekness and true
sorrow for thy sins, and then shall thou be happy both here and hereafter.

MEDITAT. XIV. Meditations of Summer and Winter.
O God, I cannot but admire the wonderful goodness of thy providence to us
miserable sinners! what care thou have, O my God, to provide all things
necessary and delightful for us. With what joy do we welcome Summer after a
cold Winter, and certain it is, we are not able to live without it: do but
see how many thousands of acres all grown with corn; see all trees, herbs,
flowers, pasture, and all manner of green things, each striving to set forth
other; see the birds how sweetly they chirp and welcome both Spring and Summer
with their warbling notes; see how that glorious lamp the Sun, cheers all
creatures with his bright beams; how temperate and delightful is the air,
inviting every man to take the benefit of it, in the sweet meadows, bedecked
with variety of flowers, the pleasantness of this time is such, that a man
could wish it would last ever; but on a sudden, after all these comforts,
joys, profits and delights, we forget them and him that sent them; then comes
in cold hoary Winter that bereaves us of these delights; see how all things
change their hew, how dull and dead do the trees, meadows, and all other
things look, the discomfort is such, that men are unwilling to behold them;
how sad and dull are the birds, as if they had lost their quality of warbling;
how dead and doleful does every thing appear to us, how black and
dungeon-like are the long and cold winter nights? Methinks this sudden
alteration should put us in mind of our prosperity and adversity; how do men
flourish in prosperity, having all things at will? how do they abound in their
great possessions of lands and houses, having coin at all times to purchase
all the delights the world can afford, and the ingratitude of these men is
such, that they forget him that gave it them; then comes in the cold winter of
adversity that changes their hue, and plungeth them into a world of dolours
and griefs; then how unwilling are they to appear to the world, hiding
themselves like an Owl in a bush; how sad and dejected are they for want of
those things which heretofore they did abound in? O God, thou in thy wisdom
know what is fittest for us, we beseech thee make us in prosperity to
remember that all we have or enjoy, comes from thee, and that we may make a
right use of them to thy glory, rendering thee thanks continually for them. And
in adversity, order us so, that we may remember and acknowledge that what we
suffer is deservedly for our sin and ingratitude. Lord make us as thou
would have us to be, then shall we be happy.

MEDITAT. XV. Meditations of the covetous rich-man, and the poor labouring-man.
SEe the difference between the rich-man and the poor-man: how penurious and
griping is the one, being never at rest nor quiet for fear he shall lose that
he has, or that his plots, bargaining or overreaching will not take effect.
How does he labor and toil to increase his wealth, scarce enjoying one good
hour? how does he impoverish himself by his greedy desires, depriving
himself of the benefit of those good things God has given him, when the other
is content with little, being not certain of that little neither, having
nothing but what he labors for, and many times fails of that by reason of
sickness or ill pay-masters; and yet this poor man I Will warrant you enjoyes
more happy days in one year, then the rich-man does in seven, and sleeps
more sounder ten to one then the other. What difference is there in their diet,
the rich-man perhaps has variety of dainties at his table, and may have them
when he will, if covetousness hinder not: the poore-man he is sure of nothing,
but if any comes its welcome, be it more or less; nay if it be but a dish of
herbs or roots, he is as well content with it as the rich-man with all his
dainties. See the difference of their habiliments; the rich-man he is clothed
in purple and fine linen, when all the pride the poor-man has, is to cover
himself with a homely garment to keep out the weather, not regarding either
fashions or costly raiment. See the difference of their minds, how proud,
scornful and above measure exalted is this rich-man? how disdainfully does he
look upon his inferiors, as if they were not worthy to behold his pride? how
does he trample the poor underfoot, and looks as high as if all the world were
under his power, when the poor-man, he contents himself with his humility and
low thoughts, being courteous, loving and kind to his neighbors, living
meekly and in the fear of God. See the difference of their lives, the rich-man
his thoughts are most on his lands, goods cattle, tenants, purchasing, and
what he shall eat and drink, when the poor-man his study is to serve his God
and to get his bread by the sweat of his brows, this is all his delight. Now
you may see the difference, the rich-man he spends all or the greatest part of
his time in pride, covetousness, gluttony, idleness and worldly vanity, the
poor-man in his daily labor and service of God. O rich-man, consider that thou
have a soul to save or to damn, therefore spend not thy time so lavishly and
foolishly; let God have a part of it here, lest he deprive thee of the riches
of his heavenly Kingdom hereafter. Consider that thy wealth was not given thee
on those terms thou should forget him that gave it to thee: Tell me what
joy can thou have with all thy riches and possessions when death comes to
summon thee to another world, where thou must give an account for all thy
actions? will thy riches save thee? no, all the riches and possessions of this
world will not keep thee from that fearful sentence, Go ye cursed into
everlasting fire; nay rather will they increase thy account. Therefore have a
care whilst thou have time to spend it in the service of thy God, remembering
that upon this moment depends eternity.

MEDITAT. XVI. Meditations of the sufferings of Gods dear children in this
world, and of the benefit they shall receive thereby.
O God, what need we care for these light afflictions here in this world, they
cannot last long, and who would not willingly embrace them to purchase a better
world, nay to gain the Kingdom of Heaven? Our Blessed Savior he suffered ten
thousand times more then any of us; nay he suffered more then we are able to
suffer, and are we to good to bear a part? rather let me not live, then to be
such a son as the father will not correct. Suppose a man has a wound in his
body, and that wound full of dead flesh, would he not willingly endure to have
that dead flesh cut out, rather then to have it gangren and destroy the whole
body? even so is it with the soul, there is a wound in the soul by sin, and
God sends crosses and afflictions to cure the soul: Lord, let my wound smart,
rather then my body perish; let my body smart for a little time here, rather
then my soul burn for ever in Hell. Holy David said, It was good for him that
he was afflicted, for before, he went astray; was it good for him, and is it
not good for us? sure none of us are so good as he, for he was a man after Gods
own heart, and knew very well that afflictions were good for him, otherwise he
would not have said so; he remembered that whom God loves he chastises, even
every son whom he receives; nay they are bastards and not sons that will not
endure correction. Lord, how did the blessed Apostles and Martyrs suffer, these
were sawne asunder, others stoned, some whipped and scourged, others crucified:
their faith was exercised in watchings, fastings, shipwracks, imprisonments,
being naked and destitute of all comfort? How were many others of Gods dear
children tormented; Daniel in the Lions den, Jonas in the Whales belly, Sampson
among the Philistims, Jeremy in the Dungeon; besides multitudes of others,
whose tortures have been very great? and certainly none of these should have
suffered thus, had not God loved them, and saw it fit for them; surely he did
it to weane them from the world and worldly things, and that their everlasting
happiness in the Kingdom of heaven, might by their patience here be
improved, where is all joy and no sorrow, where is fullness of all beatitude.
Therefore consider, O my soul, and comfort thy self with these Meditations,
and fear neither want, imprisonment, nor death, for all these shall work for
the better to them that love God.

MEDITAT. XVII. Meditations of the covetous desire men have to attain riches.
LOrd, what ado is there in this world to gain riches? how do men labor and
toil to get a little muck or dirt, they think nothing too much, no time so
well spent in any thing as in the purchase of this unrighteous mammon, when God
knows whether they shall live to enjoy it one hour? How vigilant and careful
are they to rise early, and sit up late, scarce enjoying one good hour in all
their life time? Nay, many men there are, and God knows too many that scarce
make any conscience how they come by their wealth; they will cosen their
friend, their kins-man; nay their own father if it lie in their way, and will
venture both soul and body rather then fail of their desires. What delight do
they take in the sight of their musty bags? and what pleasure have they ^^
their gold, no music in the world is so delightful to them, as the chinking
of this fine dirt? But what, says our Savior, Where your treasure is, there
are your hearts also? and again, How hard is it for a rich man to enter into
the Kingdom of heaven, it is easier for a Camel to go through a needles eye,
then for a rich man to come there? if it be so, have a care thou worldling that
thou art not snatched away from thy riches before thou have made thy peace with
thy God. Set not thy heart too much upon those things thou can not keep, and
remember that God sent thee not into the world to serve only thy self and thy
covetous desires, but to do him service, and to lay up treasure in Heaven for
thy souls good. I dislike not an honest and lawful gain, and true it is, that
it is a glory to a Nation to be rich, they may do much good with it both to
King and Kingdom; they may build Hospitalls, Schools and Almes-houses, they
may erect houses to set the poor on work, they may relieve the widow, the
fatherless, and all that stand in need. If they employ it thus, they do well,
but let them have a care they get their wealth honestly and conscionably,
otherwise all this will do them no good. Therefore be sure thou covetous man,
to prefer God and his service in the first place, for otherwise, thou robbest
him of his honor, and endangerest thine own soul which Christ died for.

MEDITAT. XVIII. Meditations of the fear of death.
O God! with what dread do men expect death? how loath are they to quit this
their earthly Tabernacle? Methinkes it is an ill sign, either that they have
not lived so well as they should have done, or they love the world too well, to
part with it. For mine own part, I see nothing in the world that should so
invite me to embrace it; I meet with nothing but care, trouble, vexations,
sorrow and a world of miseries. O God, I certainly know that the thing I most
delight in, I am weary of on a sudden, and I find it a burden to me. Perhaps
some will say, I have riches in abundance, so that I can purchase all the
delights the world can afford. But what says Solomon, that exceeded all the
world in wisdom, riches, honor, and all delights whatsoever, All is vanity,
says he, and vexation of spirit. Suppose thou do enjoy all these things,
they cannot last long, they are but moment any, either they are taken from
thee, or thou from them; for David says, Thine age is but a span long,
therefore thou can not possess them long: It may be this day thy soul shall
be taken from thee, nay perhaps this night, it may be this very hour;
therefore there is no cause why thou should be unwilling to part with that,
which thou art not sure of one hour: and if thou have lived well, surely the
very thought of death will be a great comfort to thee, and death it self a
welcome guest: For certainly all the life of man is but labor and sorrow, and
where a man enjoyes one comfort, he has a thousand discomforts for it, and
there is no true comfort nor perfection in this world. Consider therefore that
thy days are few, and thy griefs many; wherefore then would thou live? O
God! who would not exchange a miserable and wretched world, for a heavenly
Kingdom? who would not be willing to leave the society of wicked and ungodly
men to enjoy thee? who would not gladly leave his riches, honor, and vain
delights, to enjoy him who is the fountain of everlasting riches, honor and
delight, and to be among the Angels and Saints of God, where is all joy and
no sorrow, where thou shall be satisfied with all things thou desire, and
there shall be no end of thy happiness; thou shall follow the Lamb wheresoever
he goes, and shall be ravished with exceeding great joy, and delight in him
that lives for evermore.

MEDITAT. XIX. Meditations on the same Subject, with satisfaction to him that
fears death.
THou, O man, what soever thou art that fears to dye! what can thou say for
thy self? perhaps thou will say thou fear the pangs of death, or that thou
art unwilling to leave thy profits, pleasures, and delights of the world; or it
may be thou art doubtful whither thy soul shall go after death. To the
first I answer, That true it is, the pangs of death are great, but they endure
not long; I am persuaded, that there are many torments in this world that are
as great, and are of a longer durance: as for example; a fit of the stone, or
gout, or the pains of a woman in her travel. These I conceive are no less
torments, and of longer continuance: and this is certain, that many men dye
with lesser pain then any of these inflict, for I have observed, they lie
quietly, seldom or never complaining, and so depart without either groan or
sigh; if this be true, as I am sure it is, thou have no cause to fear death.
Then thou will say, thou art unwilling to leave thy profits, pleasures and
delights of the world. Certainly there can be no profit, pleasure or delight
here, that can be compared to those in heaven, where thou shall have the
Kingdom of heaven for thy possession, a Crown of glory for thy reward, with
true pleasures and bliss for evermore. The profits of the world are but for a
short time, but those are for eternity: and surely if the profits and delights
of this world please thee so much, as that thou art unwilling to leave them,
without all question those in heaven will much more delight thee, and they must
needs be far exceeding these, where God himself is in a more special manner
then upon earth. Perhaps thou will say, my soul is safe here, but when it
shall depart from my body, I know not whither it goes. Thou vain man, how
have thou spent thy time? have thou served thy God as thou ought? have thou
visited the fatherless and widow in their afflictions? have thou kept thy
self unspotted of the world? If thou have done these things, thy soul shall
as surely go to heaven, even as sure as thy body is here upon earth: for the
Scripture says, He that believes in me, although he dye, yet shall he live.
And Job says, My Redeemer lives, and I shall see him with these eyes. O thou
vain man, now have thou no excuse for thy self; thou needst not fear the
pangs of death, nor be unwilling to leave the profits and pleasures of the
world, neither needs thou doubt whither thy soul goes, for certainly it shall
be with God for ever in Heaven, where it shall enjoy the society of all the
blessed Saints and Angels, where it shall have riches, honor, peace and
plenty, where this soul shall be ravished in her fruition, which fruition
like herself, shall be everlasting.

MEDITAT. XX. Meditations of the joys of Heaven reserved for the godly.
THe joys that are prepared for the Elect, are infinite beyond the capacity of
any mortal man to conceive, but so far as they are revealed in the holy
Scripture, I may safely set down here: First, that as soon as thy soul is
departed from the body, it goes to Heaven, where thou shall see God thy
Creator and Protector, the Son thy Redeemer and Intercessor, the Holy Ghost
thy comforter and directer: where thou shall see Angels, Archangels, Virtues,
Powers, Principalities, Dominations, Thrones, Cherubins and Seraphins: and
these are a multitude of the heavenly host, who are always praising God. Thou
shall see the Celestial Citizens arrayed in comely Robes of linen, pure and
white, like their innocence. These are the souls of just and perfect men,
which even in the very in stant of departure from this life, are presented by
the Angels to their Savior, and by him adorned with these invaluable Robes of
Righteousness. Here may thou see the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles,
Martyrs, Virgins; and besides these, an innumerable multitude of all Nations,
Kindreds, and People, and Tongues, standing before the Throne of God, and
before the Lamb, with palms in their hands, in token of assured victory, and
crying with a loud voice, Salvation to our God which sits upon the Throne,
and unto the Lamb: And thou may hear all the Angels answering and saying,
Blessing and glory, and wisdom, and thanksgiving, and honor, and power, and
might be unto God for ever and ever; when God shall wipe away all tears from
thine eyes, and there shall be no more death, neither sorrow, nor crying,
neither shall there be any more pain, for the former things are passed away. Oh
God! what soul would not desire to be uncloathed and to be clothed upon, and
to be at rest with thee, and to enjoy all this happiness which far exceeds any
happiness we can possibly think off? Be joyful and glad, O my soul, for thou
have a Kingdom provided for thee, a Crown of glory, a place where all joy and
bliss abounds. This world is but dung and dross in comparison of it,
therefore mind not the world, nor worldly things; but let thy conversation be
in Heaven, let thy sole delight be there, think upon it continually, and give
thy soul no ease nor rest, till it attain that eternal rest.

MEDITAT. XXI. Meditations of man's vain mispending his time.
HOw comes it to pass that many men set their hearts and sole delight upon the
world and worldly things, neglecting the service of God and their souls good,
spending the greatest part of their time in carking and caring how they shall
gain riches, being never satisfied with that portion of means God has lent
them, but coveting for more and more, as if they made this world the end of
their happiness. Others there are that spend most of their time in the
pleasures and delights of the world, as if they were sent hither to no other
end and purpose, but to serve their own vain wills and filthy desires,
sporting and delighting themselves in courting of women, in chambring and
wantonness, in lusts and evil affections, setting their hearts wholly upon
the pleasures and delights of the world, and so trifle out their own time.
Su^e these men know not what the power of religion is, for if they did, they
would consider that this is no abiding place, they must not remain here long,
this is not their home, their home is Heaven. But let me tell this sort of men,
they are travelers and pilgrims, and if they loyter and wander out of the way,
perhaps they may come short of home. O God, what soul content can these men
have when they shall consider seriously how they have spent their time? what
account will they make, when thou, O God, shall reckon with them for all the
sins that ever they committed? what a sad and dismal day will that be, when
they will not be able to answer one of a thousand? how terrible will it be to
think on the torments of Hell, where there is nothing but howling and crying,
weeping and gnashing of teeth, and where those torments shall be everlasting?
how sad will they be to think how they have neglected the service of God and
their souls good, in pleasing themselves with their ungodly vanities? Consider
these things in time all ye that forget God, and be sure to spend your time in
his service; casting away all covetous desires and worldly vanities, then shall
you be right Pilgrims and Travelers indeed, and shall never go out of your
way, your journey shall be pleasant and delightful to the end, your home
shall be Heaven, and your entertainment shall be riches, honor, delight, and
pleasures for evermore: Such as eye has not seen, nor ear heard, nor ever has
entered into the heart of man, what God has prepared for them that love him.

MEDITAT. XXII. Meditations on the sight of a pleasant Garden.
ME thinks when I come into a fair and pleasant Garden, and see the infinite
varieties of flowers and herbs, I cannot but admire the wonderful goodness of
God, his power, wisdom, and love to mankind! I cannot but consider that these
things had never been but for the bountiful providence of the Almighty,
intending the good of his creature man. How pleasant and delightful are these
flowers to the eye, we see various sorts of them, yet not one like the other?
See the rareness of their dress, the beauteous variety of their colors, how
richly they are set forth and shadowed, no Painter in the world is able to come
near them for excellency, Art is but Natures ape: do but pluck them and make
them into a Nose-gay, and you shall see a most glorious show, and the scent of
them will infinitely delight you. See the different sorts of herbs, they are all
green, and yet if you view them well you shall find them all differ both in
color and fashion. How pleasant and delightful are they to the eye and scent;
nay, that is not all, they are useful to some for food, others for physic,
and many for green wounds and bruises: nay the natures and uses of them all,
are not known to the rarest and most learned Herballist or Physician in the
world; certainly none ever knew them rightly but King Solomon. See the
goodness of God to his people, how he does not only provide clothing, food,
and such necessaries, but sends things delightful, medicinal and healing too.
My thinks this Garden puts me in mind of that heavenly Garden of Gods Word,
you may see there varieties of comfortable flowers, both for soul and body,
and for all necessities. There you may see comfort for the afflicted, whether
in body or mind. You may see Gods providence and power, delivering his people
out of prison, out of the fire, out of the Den of Lions, out of the hands of
their enemies, out of shipwreck at Sea. His feeding Elias by a Raven in the
wilderness, and thousands of such like preservations and deliverances; you may
see and learn wisdom, temperance patience, faith, hope and charity, humility,
meekness and brotherly kindness. Here you may see all sorts of sin, and how
to avoid them, and you may see that bitter herb too, called punishment due to
sinners: also you may see the good lives of Gods children, and the rewards they
have in the Kingdom of Heaven. You may see Gods Attributes, his power, wisdom
and love to mankind. You may see our Saviors love in his sufferings for man,
his miracles and wonders, and thousands of other comfortable flowers. Certain
it is, that no Garden in the world is like this, this is pleasant and
beautiful, it yields comfort to all; the happiness of this Nation is such,
that they may walk and delight themselves in it at all times, when other
Nations are hardly permitted to look in. Let us then consider, admire, love
and praise our good God for his infinite mercy to us, in affording us that
happiness which no Nation in the world exceeds us in. Let us adore and
magnify his mavelous clemency and goodness to us unworthy sinners, let us
extol and land his name, and let us be showing forth his praise from
generation to generation.

MEDITAT. XXIII. A Meditation on Music, in which as it were by way of
digression, the lawfulness of that Science is asserted.
O God! thou great Architect and composer of all things, though I cannot but
wonder at, and admire those rare Arts and Sciences, with the knowledge of
which, thou have endued the sons of men; yet of all, that of Music, as it
most nearly affects my sense, so does it most highly raise my admiration. What
a multitude of inventions is there in this Science, that although it has been
studied by millions of men, for thousands of years, and ever since Iubal (who
was the father of all such as did handle the Harp and Organ, as we may see in
Genesis, Chap. 4.) yet none could ever attain to the full scope or perfection
of it. Yet thus much I may safely say for the honor of our Nation, that for
the generality of Music, they have not been inferior to any Nation in the
world. And as this Science is none of the meanest, so I am sure it is one of
the most difficult; for let a man read the Theory all the days of his life,
and he shall come short of the Practicke; so let him use only the Practicke,
and he will yet be unskilful for want of the Theory; so that the way to make a
Musician complete, is to study both. But let us view this Science in some
particular branch of it; see but the quality of a singer, let him begin at the
age of five or six, and continue until gray hayres, and he will, I am sure,
confess that he is not yet perfect in his quality, there is something more
for him to do, if he could find what it is, he discovers a want of skill, and
will be studying for alteration or addition; now all this while, this is but
one part of the Science; neither is it otherwise with Instrumental
Practitioners; although they labor either upon the Organ, Virginal, Lute,
Violl or Harp, all their days, yet they will find themselves much below that
Alt of perfection. Now if it be thus difficult with vocal and instrumental
men, surely it must needs be far more difficult with composers, who profess
the greatest and most excellent part of Music; surely their study and travel
must undoubtedly far exceed all others. I could show you the infinite variety
exacted to be in a composer, but I am not now to dispute, but meditate: And for
the repute of this Noble Science, it has always been in highest esteem
among the best and greatest Worthies of the world; for it is well known; that
diverse Kings and Princes, took great pleasure, and have arrived to an high
pitch of knowledge in it: for instance, King Henry the eight, who composed a
Song of eight parts, a thing worthy his great name: Lewis, the late French
King, composed diverse Songs, and many Princes of Italy have been excellent in
this Science, having published to the world, diverse sets of Songs: famous
Queen Elizabeth, of happy memory, was no small Practitioner of this Art. Nor
may we without great admiration observe the strange power and efficacy of this
Science. When David played on his Harp, the evil Spirit liked it so well, he
would not stay to hear it, but left Saul, who of a King, was become his
subject; and certainly if there be any that hate the laudable use of this
quality, we may suspect, that this evil Spirit delights to dwell with them,
where he may not be troubled with it. Nay which is more strange, the Prophet
Elisha could not prophecy until an Instrument was brought to him and played
on, as you may see in the second of Kings, Chap. 3. But now bring me a
minstrell, and it came to pass, when the minstrell played, that the hand of
the Lord ^ame upon him, and he pr^phesied. Observe we the twentieth Chap. of
the second Book of Chron. that when Iehoshaphat had consulted with the people,
he appointed Singers unto the Lord, that should praise the beauty of
holiness, as they went out before the Army, and to say, Praise the Lord, for
his mercy endures for ever: And when they began to sing, and to praise, then
the Lord set ambushments against the children of Ammon, Moab, and mount Seir,
which were come against Judah, and they were all smitten, and ^^e escaped. See
the tenth Chap* of Samuel, verse 5. After that, thou shall come to the hill of
God, where is the Garrison of the Philistines, and it shall come to pass, when
thou art come thither to the City, that thou shall meet a company of Prophets
coming down from the high place, with a Psaltery, and a Tabre^, and a Pipe,
and a Harp before them, and they shall prophecy, and the Spirit of the Lord
will come upon thee, and thou shall prophecy with them, and shall be turned
into another man, and the Spirit of God, came upon Saul, and he prophesied
among them. See the first of Chron. Chap. 25. Moreover David and the Captains
of the host, separated to the service of the sons of Asaph, and of Heman, and
of Iedutbun, who should prophecy with Harps, with Psalteries, and with
Cymbals. See cap. ib. The six sons of Ieduthun, under the hands of their father
Ieduthun, who prophesied with Harps, to give thanks, and to praise the Lord.
Now we may plainly see, that Kings and Prophets went both to prophecy, and to
battle with Music. And surely Music was a furtherance to them, otherwise
they would not have made use of it. You can hardly meet that holy Musician
David, without either an Instrument in his hand, or a Song in his mouth, with
which he played and sung praises to God; as in the second of Samuel, Chap. 6.
And David and all the house of Israel played before the Lord, on all manner of
Instruments made of Firwood, even on Harps, Psalteries, Timbrels, Cornets, and
cymbals. Surely had not Music been pleasing to God, David durst not have
played before him, nay I am confident he would not; and if God himself
delights in this harmony of his creatures, shall man whose breath is in his
nostrils, despise that which the ever living God seems to delight in. We may
observe also, that Music was used ofttimes, before the Ark of God, and when
the Prophets prophesied, and usually before a deliverance, and after. And we
may read in the first of Chron. the esteem that David had of Music and the
Professors of it, for he appoints Musicians to attend continually on the
Arc. And in the the Book of Psalms, he dedicated three and fifty Psalms to
the Chief Musician Ieduthun, to the end, he should compose on them skilfully.
And in Nehem. cap. 12. you may take notice, that the Musicians builded them
villages round about Jerusalem, that they might be near the City to praise the
Lord. Nor is it unworthy our observation, that when God had recovered King
Hezekiah of a dangerous sickness near unto death, adding fifteen years to
his life, having also miraculously set the Sun ten degrees backward for his
sake; he expressed his thankfulness to God, in this Song of his: The Lord was
ready to save me, therefore we will sing my Songs to the stringed instruments,
all the days of our life, in the house of the Lord. See the 15 Chap. of
Exodus, how that after the Children of Israel were delivered out of the hands
of Pharaoh and his host; Then sang Moses and the Children of Israel this song
unto the Lord, and spoke, saying, I will sing unto the Lord: for he has
triumphed gloriously, the horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea, etc.
And in the same Chapter, And Miriam the Prophetess the sister of Aaron, to^ke
a Timbrel in her hand, and all the women went out after her with Timbrels and
with dances. And Miriam answered them, Sing ye to the Lord, for he has
triumphed gloriously; the horse and his rider has he thrown into the sea.
Likewise in the second of Chron. Chap. 15. The people entered into a covenant to
seek the Lord with all their heart and soul. They swear unto the Lord, with a
loud voice, and with shouting, and with Trumpets, and with Cornets. I yet more
admire when I read the second of Chron. Chap. 5. The Levites which were the
singers, all of them of Asaph, of Heman, of Ieduthun with their sons, and their
brethren, being arrayed in white linen having Cymbals and Psalteries, and
Harps, stood at the East end of the Altar, and with them an hundred and twenty
Priests sounding with Trumpets: And it came to pass, as the Trumpets and
singers were as one, to make one sound to be heard in praising and thanking the
Lord: and when they lift up their voices with the Trumpets and Symbals, and
instruments of Music, and praised the Lord, saying, For he is good, for his
mercy endures for ever: that then the house was filled with a cloud, even the
house of the Lord. So that the Priests could not stand to minister, by reason
of the cloud, for the glory of the Lord filled the house of God. You see that
God was pleased to grace this facred consort with the glory of his own
presence, whereas had he been displeased, they could not expect to have had
more then Moses lot, when he saw only the back parts of the Almighty. Nay when
we observe the poor Birds, how they delight in chirping and warbling out their
notes, expressing their joy at the approach of the Spring, as if God had sent
them on purpose to tell us of the good tidings of a Summer near at hand, we
must needs fancy that those pretty creatures by a natural instinct are
affected with Music as being themselves the Choristers of the air; and we see
that a bird, though prisoner in a close cage, cannot leave his nature, but will
imitate those sounds which are whistled to him, and had not this bird been
naturally pleased with those noats whistled to him, all the world could never
have compelled him. We see that irrational creatures naturally love and are
delighted with Music, and why should not man, being endued with knowledge and
understanding far above all other creatures? True it is, the most commendable
end of Music is the praise of God; and very meet it is, that Music should
praise him, whose gift it is. My soul, thou have discovered the lawful use
and rare excellency of this Science; now a while entertain thy self with its
manifold accommodations and benefits: There is no law to be compared with Love,
nor any Art to the Art of Music; it is a refreshing to the mind oppressed with
sorrows; the heart quickens the rest of the members, and Music that heart. It
is commendable, I had almost said necessary for youth, to exercise themselves
in this divine Art, for it fills the mind and affections with clean thoughts,
and will not leave so much as one corner or cranee for unchaste imaginations;
so that the serious Practioners thereof, are I may safely say at that instant
of time, not obnoxious to any sin, either in thought, word or deed. O my
soul, do thou ever love that which does resist sin, for it must needs be of
God. Now some perhaps will object, that Music is hurtful, in regard of diverse
wanton and lascivious ditties? but to this, I deny that the Music is hurtful,
for take away those ditties, and either sing or play those notes that were
composed upon those ditties, and you shall find nothing but innocence and
harmony in them; now the fault is partly in the Poet, and partly in the
Musician; the fault on the Poets part is, that he contrives such wanton and
idle words; and on the Musicians part for composing on them: And I confess
ingeniously, that I could wish there were no room for them in England; also it
is to be wished that people of all sorts could sing their parts, especially
those that have ill ears; for if you please to observe at the singing of
Psalms in the Church, you shall hear such untunable voices, and such
intolerable discords, that no man or woman that has well tuned voices, but
are exceedingly displeased with it, it being a hindrance to devotion. And the
Apostle says, Let all things be done decently and in order. But sure I am,
there is no good soul, but is pleased and delighted with harmony, nay they
must needs be so, if they love their own soul, which it self is composed of
harmony. If all this cannot indeare Music to the Reader, rather then he
shall remain disaffected, we will fetch arguments from Heaven to persuade
him: And without doubt, the glorified souls of Men and Angels, do perpetually
rejoice and sing Halelujaes to God in Heaven, from whence once they brought a
consort to this lower world, when that quire sung at the birth of our Blessed
Savior, Glory be to God on high, etc. if then the Angels in Heaven, do seem to
exercise themselves in this divine Art, by using this metaphor of Music, and
musical instruments; I wonder what is in it which displeases? which to make
good, see Revelation Chap. 8. And I saw seven Angels, which stood before God,
and to them* were given seven Trumpets. And in the 14 Chap. And I heard the
voice of Harpers, harping with their Harps. And in the 15 Chap. And I saw as it
were a sea of glass, mingled with fire, and them that had gotten the victory
over the beast, and over his image, and over his mark, and over the number of
his name, stand on the sea of glass, having the Harps of God; and they sing
the song of Moses the servant of God, and the song of the Lamb, saying, Great
and mavelous are thy works, Lord God Almighty, just and true are thy ways,
thou King of Saints. Yet O my soul, though thou love Music so well, I wish
thou might loose the pleasure of all, to hear the blessed harmony of those
glorious Instruments, those Harps of God. But of all, this one consideration
may warrant this my Meditation; that when the exercise of Arts fail, yet in
heaven, as long as there is a God to praise, so long there will be Music, even
to eternity: for there it shall not want time to measure it, where infiniteness
shall be its proportion; and sure if we may admire the similitude and shadow of
any thing, then is Music to be admired, which is nothing but the shadow and
emblem of Paradise, of which it puts us in mind; by which only heaven
expresses its triumphs to us mortals, when it is pleased we should know them
here, that we may enjoy them hereafter. And O, that now I could but pierce
thorough that glorious bespangled Canopy! O that I could but hear some soft
eccho's only of that celestial harmony! O how should I be ravished with the
sweet mixture of that heavenly Music! O that I could be wrapped up and for
ever dwell there! yea, would I were but a door keeper in that quire, twere too
much happiness, to bear a part in that celestial consort; and yet not to
desire it, is to lose it. Therefore, O my soul, till thou art fitted for this
glorious Quire, let the sweetest Music thou enjoyest here, seem harsh
discords, compared to that heavenly consort, that quire of Angels, where thou
may see what here thou could not attain too; Jehovah praised in the height
of harmony; in the perfection of Music.

The Table.
I MEditations and Confessions of man's sinful ways. II Meditations of a
penitent sinner, hoping for pardon through the merits of Christ. III
Meditations of the wonderful goodness, and love of God to mankind. IV
Meditations of the love and sufferings of our Savior Christ for mankind. V
Meditations of Gods preservations of man. VI Meditations of the miseries and
calamities of the time. VII A prayer upon the same subject VIII Meditations of
Gods great love to his servant. IX Meditations of the judgments and
afflictions that attend people in this world for sin. X Meditations of the
misery of man from his infancy, to his old age. XI Meditations on the ill life
and actions of man. XII Meditations of the ingratitude of friends. XIII
Meditations of the vanity of pride. XIV Meditations of Summer and Winter. XV
Meditations of the covetous rich-man, and the poor laboring man. XVI
Meditations of the sufferings of Gods dear children in this world, and of the
benefit they shall receive thereby. XVII Meditations of the covetous desire men
have to attain riches. XVIII Meditations of the fear of death. XIX Meditations
on the same subject, with satisfaction to him that fears death. XX Meditations
of the joys of Heaven, reserved for the godly. XXI Meditations of man's vain
mispending his time. XXII Meditations on the sight of a pleasant Garden. XXIII
A Meditation on Music, in which as it were by way of digression, the
lawfulness of that Science is asserted:
FINIS.

