A POSTSCRIPT OF Advice from GENEVA, To be added to each of Mr. Care's several
Volumes of Advice from Rome.
Hanc maximam seu regulam habent Calvinistae licere pro gloria Christi mentiri,
Osiander in Epit. etc. Centur. page 796.
TO go along with Mr. Care in his Method and Design of exposing the Papists, I
think it will be but a very necessary and equal piece of Justice, to give the
world an Abstract or short view of the Lives, Deaths and Doctrines of some of
the first and principal Reformers of the Calvinian or Puritan Sect; In the
doing whereof, I shall purposely avoid the Testimony of any Popish Author, and
make use of others of great Reputation for Learning and Integrity: To begin
then with Mr. John Calvin, as the principal Establisher of that Reformation in
Geneva, and several other places (though the same had been set on foot before
by Zwinglius, who was slain in the Sedition occasioned by his Doctrine in those
of Tigure and Berne, against Rhodolf King of the Romans, as Gualter confesses
in Apologia pro Zuinglio, and operibus ejus.) The Life and Death of John Calvin
was writ by Hierom Bolseco, Doctor of Physic, who lived in Geneva with him;
and in the beginning of his Book printed Anno 1577. he makes this solemn
Protestation: [ I am here, for the sake of Truth, to refute Theodor Beza 's
false and shameless Lies in the praise of Calvin; protesting before God, and
the holy Court of Heaven, before all the world, and the Holy Ghost it self,
that neither Anger, nor Envy, nor Evil-will, has made me speak or write any
one thing against the truth of my conscience. But in regard that (upon the
scandal he took at the manner of Calvin's life) he afterward became a
Catholic, I shall rather choose to present the Reader with a short draught of
it, in the words of Conradus Schusselburgh, a man of principal estimation in
the Protestant Church, and no less enemy to the Pope than was Calvin; who in
his Theologia Calvinistarum, lib. 2. fol. 7. writes thus: God in the Rod of his
Fury visiting Calvin, did horribly punish him before the fearful hour of his
unhappy death; for he so struck this Heretic (so he terms him, in regard of
his conceived Doctrine concerning the Sacrament, and God's being the Author of
Sin) with his mighty Hand, that being in despair, and calling upon the Devil,
he gave up his wicked Soul, Swearing, Cursing and Blaspheming; He died upon the
Disease of Lice, and Worms, increasing in a most loathsome Ulcer about his
Privy-parts, so as none present could endure the stench. These things are
objected to Calvin by public writing; In which also horrible things are
declared concerning his Lasciviousness, his sundry abominable Vices, and
Sodomical Lusts, for which last he was by the Magistrate at Noyon (under whom
he lived) branded on the shoulder with a hot burning Iron. Thus far writes
Schusselburgh of Calvin. Now as concerning Theodor Beza, another principal
Reformer of that Sect, though his life be likewise written by Dr. Bolseke, and
his Book dedicated to the Magistrates of Geneva, wherein he charge him with
many great and heinous Imputations, best known to themselves; and that even in
Beza's lifetime, purposely (as he says) he might be able to answer for
himself; Yet I shall wave his Testimony, further than confirmed by other
learned Protestants, as Conradus, Schusselburgh, and Tilmannus, Heshusius, who
charge him with writing those obscene and licentious Poems of his Candida and
Andebertus; in which he debateth whether sin he may prefer; and in the end,
concludes with preferring the Boy before his Candida; Orbi notum est quam
salax fuit Beza qui publicatis poematibus paidastrias suas celebrare non
erubuit, Galliae probrum, simoniacus, sodomita, omnibus vitiis coopertus. As
for John Bale, Peter Martyr, and Bucer, with others of that Reformation, they
began with the breach of their solemn Vows of Obedience and Chastity, flying
from their Monasteries, and marrying vowed Nuns; And as to other their enormous
Actions and Doctrines, I shall refer you to the two Books of dangerous
Positions, and a survey of the pretended Holy Discipline, writ by Dr. Bancroft
Archbishop of Canterbury, and to Dr. Sutcliff his Answer to a Libel
supplicatory, out of whom I shall only present you with some few of their
Doctrines, viz.

I. That Temporal Princes may not by Gods Law have Supreme Authority in the
Church, or Ecclesiastical matters, but only their Presbytery.

II. That the People have the same power to punish, put down and destroy
Princes that offend, that Kings and Princes have over any particular man.

III. That the Ministers of the Presbytery chosen by themselves, may
Excommunicate, Arraign and Depose their Prince, when they see him govern amiss.

IV. That the Ministers (with the People) may require of the King to have true
Preachers; And if he be negligent, they may provide themselves, and may
maintain and defend them against him, and all others, and curb the King in his
Excesses, where need is.

V. That the whole Ecclesiastical Government of the Protestant Church now in
England, (to wit) by Bishops, Archdeacons, Deans, and the like, is unlawful,
wicked and Antichristian; whereof ensues, that all Ministers ordained by them,
are unlawful, and all their actions are only actions of mere Laymen; and
consequently, That they have no lawful public Ministry at all.

VI. That all Ministers ordained by the Authority of the Bishops, and coming
afterward to be of the Puritan Sect, must renounce before the Presbytery and
Classes, his former Vocation and Ordination, and take another by their
Allowance, and Imposition of Hands.

VII. That the Parliament of England has no Authority to meddle in matters of
Religion, nor to determine wha^ Religion is to be admitted, or not; but only
this belongs to their Presbytery of Ministers.

VIII. That they only are the true Church of God that be of this Presbytery,
and all other to be damned that are not of it.

For the horrid effects and consequences of these Doctrines, we need not go to
look for them into other Countries, though all Modern Histories yield plentiful
Examples; our own Kingdom of England affords us too late and direful
Remembrances of them, and the barbarous Murder of the best of Kings occasioned
thereby, will never be forgotten; Nor do I think that any Sect, no not that of
the Circumcellians themselves, so terrible in old time, and namely to St.
Augustine, either is, or can be thought so perilous or pernicious to Kingdoms
or Commonwealths, as is this of the Puritans, where they may have Power.

Now, for a Conclusion, instead of a Courant, I shall give the Reader a short
view of the great change in the general morality of Christians, occasioned by
the Doctrine and Practices of these pretended Zealous Reformers, in the very
words of their Brethren abroad; as Luther, Calvin, Melancton, Brutius, Bucer,
Eberus, Wigandus, and diverse others; and at home, of Mr. Jeffrey and Mr.
Stubbs, and the Puritans mild Defense, faithfully extracted out of the Treatise
of the Protestant private Spirit, chap. 9.. 8. subdivis. 4. viz. Under the
Papacy men were Religious, and given to the practice of good works; but that
the Professors of your Gospel, relying on their Justification by only Faith,
are become careless of good works, dissolute, proud, envious, malicious,
disdainful, covetous, ambitious, that your eyes ought to gush out with tears,
to behold the misery of your supposed Church, the great Ignorance, the
superficial Worship of God, the fearful Blasphemies and Swearing in houses and
streets, the dishonor of Superiors, the Pride, Cruelty, Fornications,
Adulteries, Drunkenness, Covetousness, Vsuries, and other like Abominations;
that Youth amongst you becomes daily less tractable, and more bold to commit
those Vices, which in former times men of years knew not; That instead of
Fasting, you have brought in Bibbing and Banqueting, and instead of Praying,
Swearing; And finally, that you equal the Jews in Hypocrisy, the Turks in
Impiety, and the Tartars in Iniquity; And lastly, your learned Brother Eberus,
in his Praefat. Coment. Philip. in Ep. ad Cor. sticks not to say, That in
regard of the enormous wickedness of your Ministry and Church, any man may
justly doubt whether you are the true Church.

Whoever desires to see more stuff of this nature, may peruse a Book entitled
Pasquil of England unto Ma^tin junior; or the other of Pasquil and Marphorius;
and Dr. Sutcliff's Answer to a Libel supplicatory; from which, and several
other Authors of that kind, the ingenious Reader may easily collect how obvious
and facile it is for any party to recriminate, by raking in the Dunghill of
personal errors and defects of former ages, and exposing all he finds, without
regard either to the credit of Authors, or falsity of their Assertions, often
contradicted by others of the same times, of much better esteem and reputation;
and what scandal must necessarily follow thereupon to all Christians, even to
the introducing of Atheism and Infidelity, as it happened on the like occasion
to David George, Professor at Bazil; Bernardine Ochine, a man highly commended
by Calvin; Neuserus, chief Pastor of Heidelburgh; Almanus, a Zwinglian, and
some others, who out of hatred to Popery, and scandal taken at the Lives and
Doctrines of their own fellow Reformers, renounced Christianity, and became
Jews, as you may see in Schusselburgh his Thelogia Calv. and Osiander Cent. 16.
From consideration of the great mischiefs and ill consequences of this way of
exposing, (as Mr. Care is pleased to phrase it) he, or whoever else is the
Author of The Weekly Packet of Advice from Rome, may easily conclude what
fruit or advantage he is like to reap from his laborious Collections, more than
the loss of his time, and the exposing to the world his own malice and folly,
for, Turpe est Doctori cum culpa redarguit ipsum.

SOME QUERIES For Mr. CARE to Chew, Relating to His Ignoramus-Iuries,
I WHether or no Magna Charta, and the rest of our Laws, are more careful in
preserving the Life and Reputation of the King, or of the Subject? If of the
former,

II. Whether some men now in power must not think the Lawmakers Fools, or
acknowledge themselves Knaves?

III. Whether if an Insurance-Office for Commonwealth-malefactors were set up,
the City security would not be the best?

IV. Whether the Money that used to be spent in Hospitality by
City-Magistrates, might not be laid out more to the Honor of the City, in
rewarding True-Protestant-Evidences and Ignoramus-Juries?

V. Whether some late Officers did not forbid Wine at their Tables, lest their
Friends drinking too much should tell truth?

VI. Whether a Perjured Pillory*d Thief, Beggar, Fool or Knave, be not as good
Evidence against a Whig, as against a Papist?

VII. Whether, had it not been for People so qualified, we had ever known of a
Popish-Plot?

VIII. Whether if the last Long Parliament had sat this time, we had ever been
blessed with Narratives, Ignoramus-Juries, or True-Protestant-Informations?

IX. Whether if the same Evidence should swear the same things against the
Pope, and against a True-Protestant-Peer, a Jury (by care and industry) might
not be packed, to save his Holiness, rather than lose a Friend?

X. Whether when Hell broke loose by Heavens permission, upon this Protestant
City the Devil did not employ the Whigs as well as the Papists? Or,

XI. Whether he did not reserve the former for greater purposes, viz. to blow
up the sparks of Rebellion, and serve on Juries?

XII. Whether if an Highway-man was to be tried by a Jury of his own Gang, they
would not act more like brute Beasts than rational Creatures, if they found the
Bill?

XIII. Whether there is not just ground for suspicion of Guilt in the Prisoner,
when his Friends are forced to pick up Jurymen (contrary to custom) from one
end of the Town to the other?

XIV. Whether he that made a Scandalous and Seditious Speech (to say no worse
of it) publicly in the House of Peers, may not be supposed to speak Treason
privately?

XV. Whether some people who deserve not, yet are sorry they have a Just and
Merciful Prince?

XVI. Whether if an Angel from Heaven should descend, and testify a Design by
the Fanatics against the Government, this Scripture should not be brought to
invalidate his Evidence; Stand fast in the Liberty whereunto ye are called?

XVII. Whether the same Jury would not (upon the Devils Testimony) find a Bill
against another sort of People?

XVIII. Whether a True Protestant believes Perjury to be a Sin?

XIX. Whether if the Indictment against some late Criminals had been found, and
they Executed for the Treason therein contained, (viz. Conspiring the Death of
the King) a Vote of a late House of Commons had not been violated, wherein it is
resolved, That if the King come to any unnatural Death, they will Revenge it on
the Papists?

XX. Who is the Author of these Queries?

Ignoramus.

FINIS.

