(...) OR THE Bird in the Cage, CHIRPING Four distinct Notes to his Conforts
abroad. I. Of Consideration, Counsel, and Consolation. II. Some Experiences and
Observations gathered in Affliction, and first intended only for private use.
III. The Lamentations of Jeremiah, in the ordinary measure of singing Psalms.
IV. A true Christians Spiritual Pilgrimage, setting forth his afflicted and
consolatory state in another Meter.
And as a Preface hereto, an Epistle to the Welsh Churches, and a brief
Narrative of the former Propagation, and late Restriction of the Gospel, (and
the true Preachers and Professors thereof) in WALES. And a short Vindication of
the Author and others, from the Calumniation of their Advesaries concerning the
same.

By VAVA. POWELL.

Job 29.16. The days of Affliction have taken hold on me.

Ion. 2.2. I cried out of my Affliction to the Lord, and he heard me.

Deuteronomy. 33.15. As they days, so shall thy strength be.

Ier. 50.34. Their Redeemer is strong, the Lord of Hosts is his Name, he shall
thoroughly plead their Cause.

London Printed, for L. C. at the next shop to Pope's Head Alley, on the
West Side in Cornhil, 1661.

V. P. A Servant of Jesus Christ, and your Brother; To the Churches of God, and
scattered Saints throughout all Wales.
GRACE, Mercy, Peace, and Patience be unto you all from God our Father, through
Jesus Christ the Son of God, and our Savior.

Beloved Brethren, Whom I love dearly, remember daily, long for greatly, pray
for earnestly, and praise God heartily: To whom I could write with my purest
blood, and do send these lines from my very inwardest bowels; (my eyes even at
the writing hereof, pouring forth tears for you as God knows) partly out of
endeared affection, but chiefly out of tender consideration, and compassion of
your late and present sufferings (especially some of you) of which I am a
sharer and with whom (yea for whose sakes in part) I now suffer, and am ready
if God count and make me worthy, and able, to lay down my life for so deserving
a Lord as ours is, and for so dear a People as you are, to whom also I am a
debtor, though at present disabled to pay that Pittance lent me for your sakes:
Ps. 3.8. marg. That I swore the members of my Chur. against all Magistrates,
and Ministers and went preaching sedition and rebellion throw two Counties,
whereas I was a prisoner above 2 months before. This is like the Accusation
against Nehemiah and Paul Neh. 6.6. Act. 24.4, 5, 13.
yet many of you (and the Lord himself) do bear me witness that I was unwilling
to be a slothful servant, or to hide my Talent in a Napkin, whilst I enjoyed my
liberty, but to exercise it among you, laboring day and night, in perits
often, and many ways: meeting, and encountering with great difficulties, but
most of al with self-discouragements and weaknesses, some whereof were known
to my Observers, ( as David calls his enemies) many to you my friends, more to
my self, but all to God: Who yet made use of me (a nothing Creature) in his
hand among better and worthyer Instruments, to call, gather, and edify you, at
which work I would have still been, had not some of our own Country men laid
hands unjustly upon me, and also informed against me falsely (as you well know)
whether out of hatred to the truth I preached and professed: or that they might
offer me as a Peace Offering to the Prince (they know for what, and I could
tell) God will in due time discover.

Nevertheless I desire to pity them, pray for them, and willingly to pardon
the wrongs they have done to me, and though I cannot say I am so transported
with affection, Romans 9.2, 3.
and zeal ( as Paul) to wish my self accursed from Christ for their sakes. Yet
I am persuaded I could be contented with Jonas to be cast into the Sea, for the
pacifying of Gods wrath toward them, or their fury toward you.

But my faithful Fellow-travellers, let us not be troubled that the wind now
blows in our faces, or that like Lazarus we receive our evil things in this
world; Lu. 16.15.
knowing that there is no Hell to the Saints, but what they have in this
present life; and that to live persecuted, and to die sainted are commonly
inseparable; and therefore as our Lord and his Apostle exhorted; Rev. 2.10. 1
These. 3.3. Heb. 10.32. 1 Pet. 4.12.
Fear none of those things which you shall suffer. Neither be moved by these
afflictions, nor count them strange, for some of you, when you were first
illuminated, endured afflictions; and others of you who are Summer-converts,
were told that you must suffer, it being the highway and shortest cut to
Heaven. Consider then, if all your way be fair and smooth what cause you have
to question it, and if any of you have the favor, and friendship of the world,
let such a one suspect himself to be one of it, Jo. 15.19.
for the world will love only it is own. A day of close discovery and through
trial is come, or coming upon us, and the leaves of profession are like to hide
hypocricy no longer; Mat. 13.20 21, 22. and 25, 8, 9.
you know the stony and thorny ground were not discovered until the time of
temptation, nor the foolish Virgins discerned till the very coming of Christ:
Judas was neither suspected (nor did probably at all doubt himself) till within
few hours of his death. Copper-coin may lie in the bag with gold and silver,
but when it comes to the Touchstone it is found reprobate; and Alcomy, (as
some say) will bear six fires, but not the seventh: The words therefore of
Christ, Luke 21.8. Heb. 4.1.
Take heed that ye be not deceived: and of the Apostle, Take heed least any of
you seem to come short of the promise; are very seasonable. And never more need
then now of Self-suspition, Self-examination, and self-searching, whether we be
in the Faith, and Christ be in us, yea, or no? What we build upon, and whether
we can stand before the Son of Man at his appearing: Sincerity always
surpassed gifts, and all flourishes of Religion in the sight of God, and that
will be of greatest request among good Men henceforth; for the dross must be
taken away, to make a vessel for the Refiner; Pro. 25.4.
and it is to be feared when the Churches are searched, they will be found like
Sardis, to have but a few names, that keep their garments undefiled, and all
those that came in as self-seekers, will steal out again to save themselves:
which, is indeed the only way to lose themselves; yet the foundation of God
stands sure, Mat. 10.39 2 Timothy 2. 19 Pro. 10.25. Esa. 4.5. Psa. 33.11. Heb.
7.24. Psa. 89.28. Esa. 54.10. Jer. 32.40. and 33.20, 25.
and no member though never so mean or il-formed, if it be of, and in the body,
and really united to the Head, shall be cut off; but all that are living stones
shall continue in the building, and upon the whole glory ( i. e. the whole
Church, 2 Cor. 8.23.) shall be a defense; therefore be comforted, that the
counsel of God, the Priesthood of Christ, and the Covenant of peace are
unchangeable, and abide for ever; which is the sure foundation of every true
Christians confidence, and comfort. Be not slothful in proving your knowledge
of, faith in, love toward, walking after, and suffering for Christ: For the
visible and seeming differences, are little and small between the right
Christian, and the Hypocrite therein. But in the Anointing, Spirit, Virtue,
Power, and Life within, which like the oil in the Lamp, feeds the wick of
profession.

I beseech you also in the Lord, Heb. 6.2. 2 Jo. v. 9. Pro. 4.2. 1 Timothy 4.6. 1 Timothy 1.10 Tit. 1.9. and 2.1.
(as dear Brethren) that you be not moved from the Doctrine, which was delivered
to you; which is the same with the Doctrine of the Apostles, called the
Doctrine of Christ, good Doctrine, and sound Doctrine. In opposition to these,
are the Doctrines of Devils, 1 Timothy 4.1. Mar. 7.7. Col. 2.21. Heb. 13.9. 1 Jo.
v. 10. Rev. 2.14, 15, 24.
and the Doctrines of men, which either directly deny Christ, or much derogate
from him, who is the perfect Lawgiver. And that Satan, and his Instruments may
the better introduce their own Doctrines; they make it their design and
endeavor to batter down the Scriptures ( for their Dagon, cannot stand before
Gods Ark.) As the Jews make it death for any of their Religion, to read and
keep the New Testament. The Papists also, make it an Article of their Creed,
that unwritten verities, (as they call them) and the Canons, and Traditions of
their Church, are of equal authority with the Scriptures; and hold that they
should not be translated into vulgar Languages, nor the Common People be
permited to read them Contrary to Dut. 6.6. to the 10. Josh. 1.8. and Ps.
119.19. 16 105. Joh. 5.39. Act. 17.11. and 18.24. To. 15.4 2 Timothy 3.16 17. Col.
3.16.17. Rev. 13. and 22.10.
. Also the Quakers generally deny, the Scripture to be the Word of God, which
are so called; See and compare Mat. 15.6. with Mar. 7.13. and Lu. 8-11. with
Mat. 13. 37 and To. 10.8. with Deu. 30 14 See also Jo 10.35. Act. 4.31. and
12.49. and 13.44 46. and 19, 20 Ephesians. 6.17. 1 Timothy 4.5. H.S. in his book called
the Everl. Rule. pa. 28.
or a Rule; affirming there is no other Rule, Way, or Means, etc. but that
which is manifest in men. And one of the learned of them, disdainfully calls
the Scriptures broken Cisterns, your Scripture, your Word, and your Letter;
S.F. In his book called Rust. ad Acad. pa. 115.116, 117. These 3 last instances
I and diverse others heard from the Parties own mouths.
and some upon that account, call it the great Idol: others affirm the writings
of their Teachers, to be of equal inspiration and Authority with it; and that
which is yet worse, one woman, put her Bible under her foot, another Burnt it;
and yet these two were great Quakers, but now are turned Singers, a degree as
they concieve above them. But beloved you are better taught, and I hope will
still retain your love of, diligence and delight in, and zeal for this word of
God: And especially to walk more according to it, then those that pretend to
experience alike power with a greater mesure of perfection, than either the
Prophets, or Apostles ever did. I am fearful and jealous, that this attempt, of
taking away the authority of the Scriptures; will end in taking away the very
Bibles from us. Therefore I exhort you again in the words of Christ and Paul;
Search the Scriptures and give attendance to Reading, and be steadfast in those
truths, which you have been taught, (from them, by the servants of the Lord;
some whereof are now glorified, and others through grace ready to seal it with
their blood) Concerning God and his Atributes, Christ, and his Offices, the
Holy Spirit, and it is manifestations, the decrees of God before time, the two
Covenants (viz. the Law and the Gospel) the wreched state of all men by Nature,
and out of Christ; the freeness of Gods grace, Joh. 5 39. 1 Timothy 4.13
in opposition to man's free will: The Doctrine of Justification, by the imputed
Righteousness of Christ, apprehended, and received by Faith, Sanctification
(distinct from Justification) wrought by the Spirit in us. Perseverance,
Assurance, and growth in Grace by virtue of our union with Christ, and his
spiritual in dwelling and operating in us. Living Godlily, Righteously, and
Soberly in this present World: Denying our selves, following Christ, shunning
sin, resisting Satan, separating from the world in matters of Gods worship: not
meddling with, nor mingling the Traditions of men with Gods truths: joining your
selves to, and continuing in the fellowship of Saints; and using carefully and
conscientiously all the Ordinances of Christ, as Preaching, Hearing, and
expounding Scriptures, keeping up public, family, and private prayers,
Prophesying, and singing of Psalms, Hymns, and spirial Songs in the Churches,
Repetition of Sermons, Observing the Sabbath, Baptism, and the Supper of the
Lord; and upon occasion, days of solemn fasting, or Rejoicing, visiting one
another, especially the tempted, and the sick, relieving the poor; and in case
of scandal and heresy, to deal with offending members, by Admonition,
Suspention, or Excommunication, according to the Nature of the Offense, and
carriage of the Offender; doing all your duties to magistrates, Masters,
Parents, Husbands, Brethren, Neighbors and Enemies; according to the blessed
commands of Jesus Christ: Withal expecting the destruction of Antichrist, the
Restoration of the Jews, the Coming, Kingdom, and Reign of Christ; and still
remembering your latter end, the immortality of your precious Souls, believing
the Resurrection of the Body, the Judging of all, and the Salvation of the
Righteous.

Finally, my Brethren, the hour of temptation being come upon us, let us redeem
time, be watchful and sober, keeping our lights burning, our Lamps shining, our
Loins girded, our consciences awakned, and our garments unstained. Let us fear
God more than men, Sin more than suffering, self more then others, living
basely more than dying Christianly and Nobly. Let us wisely consider Gods
works, Ps. 64.9. Esa. 5.12.
and wonders (though others should slight them) and maintain Gods Ways and
Cause, though they be despised by most; and let us not carnally comply with,
nor superstitiously conform to the world, to save our estates, Liberties or
Lives: Nor yet forsake the assembling of your selves together, but edify,
confirm and comfort one another; Encouraging the weak, helping to restore those
that are fallen, and to establish those that yet stand: Doing your duties
commanded by God, what ever danger may come thereby: Keeping your selves from
error and every evil thing, by the holy spirit in you: And ( as our Savior
commands, John 14.1. be not troubled) praying also earnestly, that neither I
nor you may suffer for sin, or sin in suffering, not be senseless under present,
or faint under future trials. Let us cry and pray mightily to the Lord, that we
may escape the evils that are coming upon the world, and to stand before the
Son of Man at his appearing. To that King of Kings be honor, power, dominion,
praise, and glory, now and for ever, Amen.

My dear friends, If the publishing of this inoffencively intended little Book,
be well or ill; Know my love to you chiefly was the motive to it: and that of
all other things, if God did please, I would choose to be doing the work to
which I was called amongst you, rather than any where, or any thing else;
though I were to be fed with bread and water and to carry my chains and bonds
with me. And I should not count my life dear to me, so that I might have the
liberty to Preach Christ, for the Salvation of my dear Countrymen, and for
your further edification; if not the will of the Lord be done concerning me,
and his work by whom else he pleases. I am persuaded he will take care of you,
Esa, 65.10. Psa. 73.24. Esa. 45.27.
and the rest of his Flocks; and therefore to him again I commit you, who has
promised to be your God and guide until, yea, will be in and after death your
salvation. The grace of our Lord Jesus Christ be with you all Amen.

A brief Narrative of the former Propagation, and late Restriction of the
Gospel (and the godly Preachers and Professors thereof,) in Wales.
FOrasmuch as some have heretofore enviously and falsely reported, and others
credited (nay to this day believe and affirm) that my self and some others
instead of propagating the Gospel, have extirpated it, and the Preachers
thereof in Wales, and converted all the profits of the Tiths to our own uses.
These are briefly to certify the very truth thereof; as also some of the late
and present sufferings, and state of the congregated Churches, their Teachers,
and others there. In the year 1641. or there-abouts, it was humbly and truly
presented in a Petition, (by many credible persons) to the then King and
Parliament; that there were not upon strict Inquiry, so many conscientious and
constant Preachers, as there were of Counties in Wales, and those too either
silenced or much persecuted. The Professors of Religion also, exceeding Rare
and Few, unless in some corners of 2 or 3 Counties: about which time, was the
first, if not the only gathered Church in all the Country: But the late War
coming suddenly on, there could be then no Redress obtained; but on the
contrary most (if not all) of those Preachers with the Professors, were forced
through the violence of their Persecutors, to leave their Habitations and
Country; and diverse of them having their Goods and Cattle seized upon by their
adversaries, their Wives and Children were necessitated to live in distress,
and danger, till the War was ended, and the Country settled again in peace; by
which, Encouragement was given, to the banished to come back, and those few
Laborers that were turned out of the Vinyard to return again; which being
done, and God blessing their labors with success in the conversion of many
Souls; it gave hopes, that there was a further blessing in the Cluster, and
more straying sheep on those mountains to be brought home to Christ's fold; yet
the idle and self-feeding shepherds, Eze. 34.10.
did as much as in them lay to hinder it, till many of them (by virtue of an
Act of Parliament, passed in Feb. 1639. as their Brethren before in England)
had been justly ejected for Ignorance, Scandal, etc. and upon evident proofs
against them; yet not all (as falsely was reported) for in the County where I
lived, Mountgom.
there were 11 or 12 never ejected; so in all other Countries, some more, some
less: nor any that I know that were rightly inducted before, and that had the
qualifications of true Ministers in them, such was the tenderness and care of
most or all the Commissioners (who were diverse of them Englishmen, and the
rest of best reputation for Piety and integrity in the several Counties) that
they did this work gratis, receiving no allowance at all, no not toward their
own charges; and indeed there was none granted them by the Act. But the great
Cry was, As Malefactors make against their Judges and Jury, that they are
wronged.
that the Country was left without Preaching, that the Churchdoors were shut,
the Sabbaths profaned, and generally the People were turning Papists, and
Heathens, for want of the word of God; and that all the profits of the Tithes
were put up in the Commissioners and other private men's pockets. For me to wipe
off all these Aspersions, much less to remove the credit of them, sunck so
deep into the hearts of Prejudicated persons, were but like Micha^ah, to give
my single Testimony against many hundreds of the Clergy that have spoke the
contrary. But Reader if thou art not resolved against truth, I shall offer thee
in a few words, In a Book called Examen and Purgamen Vavasoris, printed about 8
years ago.
enough to satisfy thee of the falsehood of this whole Charge; the which has
been already sufficiently done diverse years ago, as well by the Testimony of
many Magistrates, and Ministers, as other credible persons of different
opinions: however take this for a truth, til the contrary be pro ved (which will
never be) besides what I said before; many of the Clergy were never outed, and
some that were ejected, did also some times (to please their old Parishoners,
some of which would hear none else) preach; there was not any lawful means
unatempted to gain godly Preachers for supply there, as going several times,
and sending diverse letters to the Universities and London, which were the
likeliest places to afford helps, and diverse were obtaind by that means though
not so many as we wished: partly because that at the same time, there was the
like Act for several Northern English Counties; but especially because they
wanted the Welsh-tongue; yet the Lord that gave the word, did also raise up
more men to preach it, than he was pleased to sendout at first, to all Judea,
nay, to all the world; vi. 12 Apostles, and 70 Disciples; in one Chapter viz. in
the County where I lived, were at least 16 preachers at once, Mount gomry shire.
whereof 10 University-men, some of the meanest of which (since turned
Apostates) are approved by the Bishops, and settled in Parishes; and for the
profits of the Tyths, which before went wholly to the Clergy, they were
afterward divided (according to the Act) six ways; One part to the ejected
Ministers; Another part to other Ministers settled, and Itinerant; A third to
maintain Free-schools (whereof some of the ejected Ministers, and their Sons,
were Schoolmasters) set up in all (or few excepted) Market Towns, and in other
convenient places, and in some of them two Schoolmasters: A fourth part to the
ejected Ministers widows, and children: A fifth, to such officers as did
attend that work (as Treasurers, Soliciters, Sequestrators, etc.) Lastly, some
allowance was granted to the widows of Ministers deceased. These things
Considered, and the low rates at which the Tiths were Let and Set at, in diverse
Counties, (because some would not pay, others would not take them to Farm, and
the Country poor, and worse stocked, so soon after the wars,) will evince,
there could not be much spare, espcially considering, that the Act lasted but
for three years; viz. till fifty three, and what was done since, let them
account who meddled therein, and acted under O. C. which I and many more of my
brethren did not, nor took any Salary at all, nor any other Maintenance
whatsoever since; withal, what was settled upon me, (together with some other
Preachers) was by the Committee for Plundered Ministers long before that. And
let me deal freely, and truly with all the world in this particular, I never
received by Salary; and all other ways, for my Preaching in Wales, from
Christians, and from the States putting all together, since the beginning
(which is above twenty years) but between six and seven hundred pounds at most;
and I can with much clearness, confidence, and comfort, call God the searcher
of all hearts to witness, and I do call him to record on my Soul, that to my
knowledge and remembrance, I had not any thing, directly nor indirectly, but
what was ordered me; nor have I, nor any other for me, ( I express it without
any Collusion or Reservation) so much as a Pound or Shilling of any money from
any tyths or otherwise in my hands, belonging to the Public; and I humbly
challenge and bid defiance to envy it self, to prove the contrary, and I desire
to be called to an account, if I be suspected, for I will maintain my innocence
herein till I die. And yet my Accusers, have some by writing, (who were ashamed
to put their names thereto) and others by word, published, That I had many
thousand pounds of the Tyth-mony; nay had purchased of Kings-Rents and Lands,
some thousands yearly, or at least many. Hundred pounds per annum; where as now
it is returned to the King again, it appears, it is under seventy pounds
yearly; and I never received any year of that, above sixty six pounds ten
shillings: this the Auditor and Country know sufficiently; and let them, or
any other disprove me herein, if they can.

And whereas it is charged, that many good and godly men were turned out of
their livings.

But I did not know any such, and I suppose it will be yet easy to prove the
contrary, by their former and present practices; however for my own part, I
often publicly tendered this to the ejected Ministers, that if they could bring
any in, that could manifest they received any spiritual good from them, they
should (as far as it lay in my power) be restored, but none produced such.
Further as a Consequence thereof, it was complained, that the Sabbaths were
profaned, whereas men might ride throughout some Counties, and neither see men
working, traveling, nor playing upon the Sabbath; the like I am sure; neither
was before, nor now is, our enemies themselves being Judges.

But they further object, that the people were turned Infidels and Papists. So
many do where the powerfullest means are, if they come not under them: But why
then do these men complain, so many are turned to be quite contrary; and were
these accusers fallen out with such men then; how come they now to own them so
much? But to disprove that, take this single instance. In a few years time a
great part of former Edition of the Welsh-Bible, was bought up, and afterward
two Editions more, one of the New Testament, and another of the whole Bible,
and of these two I believe are sold off, at least between 5 and 6000. by this
you may perceive, that Religion did grow. Also in the beginning of the Wars,
there was but one or two gathered Congregations in all Wales, and in some
Counties scarce one that made Profession; yet it has pleased the Lord so to
bless the weak means there, that there were lately (and hope are still) above
20 gathered Churches, in some 2, in some 3, some 4 or 500 members, with their
officers, differing little in opinion and Faith, and walking in love, and the
fear of the Lord.

Having given this brief account of the former endeavors of some, (who yet
acknowledge their weakness, and want of wisdom therein) to propagate the Gospel.
Be pleased now to cast your eye upon the late Restriction, (which I might well
call persecution) of the Gospel in Wales. To omit mentioning the great wrong
unto many scores, about May and June 1660, in committing and continuing them in
Prison, without any cause, but to fulfill that saying, Quicquid volumus facimus;
since there has been very violent proceedings, (especially in some Counties)
where some poor and peaceable people have been dragged out of their beds, and
without regard of Sex, or Age, have been driven, some twenty miles to Prison on
their feet, and forced, (though in heat of Summer, till their feet were much
blistred, and they ready to fall with faintness) to run by the Troopers horses,
receiving many blows and beatings. In Merionydd. sh.
Others, (as if they had been Brute-beasts) driven into Pinfolds, or Pounds,
where they were kept several hours, their enemies in the interim drinking in an
Alehouse, and forcing the poor people to pay for it, though they tasted not of
the drink: then bringing them to the Seaside, and leaving them in the night,
in danger of being swallowed up by the Sea. Others were committed to Prison at
pleasure, and kept there many months, and yet their cattle and sheep, to the
number of above six hundred, taken from them and sold. Others forced (when they
were called to the Quarter Sessions) to walk in chains, which should not by law
upon any such ground be put upon them, unless they had atempted to make an
escape or break Prison. Others, who were quietly met together (after their
usual manner for many years, to worship God, and edify one another) were cast
into Prisons without any Examination or Commitment upon them, (that they could
understand) contrary to the Jewish, Roman and our English Laws.

Nay, such was the enmity of the seed of the Serpent, against the seed of the
Woman, that though the King was pleased to grant by his Proclamation) Christian
liberty for some time, yet upon the next Lord's Day following, after the receipt
of the said Proclamation, some of the Officers of one Corporation dragged and
haled some poor women, that were hearing of the Word of God, into an Alehouse,
and kept them there till after night, and until they made them pay for the Ale,
which these disturbers did drink.

Besides all this, ejecting the Godly Preachers that would not conform, and
indicting many hundreds for Recusants, which are not indeed so, and under the
notion of suppressing Conventicles and unlawful Assemblies, hindering the
meetings of Christians to serve God, which according to the letter of the Law,
and the opinion of many learned Lawyers, are not so. A Conventicle being a
meeting together, for a bad end or work, and not for a good, as the meetings of
Christians, to worship God, are. Having thus hinted some few of the many
sufferings of others; I come in the last place, to give a short Intimation of
my own: which I mention, not either to accuse my Countrymen, or to expect any
benefit thereby to my self (hoping to learn contentment in Christ, with
godliness, in the meanest and miserablest condition) but to remove falls
reports, and to manifest (as I am confident to expess it) that I suffer from
men, only upon the account of Godliness, and Religion, though upon other
information but false) against me, as that I should swear, the members of my
Congregation, against all Magistrates, and Ministers, (a thing I hate, and
directly contrary to my Judgment) and that I should go up and down two
Counties, preaching Sedition, and Rebellion; though I have not preached in all,
but either 2 or 3 days publicly, since April was 12 Month, being in several
Prisons ever since (only about 24 days intermission) since my first
imprisonment: And I am not conscious to my self of Preaching or doing any thing
against the present Powers, or their Laws, neither can my Accusers prove any
more against me, Act. 24.13.27.
than the Jews could against Paul, when they accused him of sedition; but on
the contrary, these men break the Laws, and are fineable to the King for false
information, however they think, as a wise man said, by other men's harms, 27
He. 3.9. 5. Eliz. 3.6. and 25.3, 4. and 37.3.18. Lord Bacon.
to make redemption for their own sufferings. But I will bear the indignation
of the Lord, (because I have sinned against him, till he plead my cause, and
pray as Jesus Christ has taught me: Father forgive them, for they know not
what they do.

A Word in Season; OR, Some suitable, and seasonable Considerations, Counsels,
and Consolations, sincerely intended, and humbly proposed to All, but more
especially to the Afflicted, and Persecuted.
SOlomon advised men, In the day of adversity to consider Eccl. 7.14
, for God has set it, and the day of prosperity, one against another; and both
are of him: Adversity being but the night, and dark part of men's time in this
world, to which notwithstanding, God has assigned some work for his people to
do. And it is no small part of godly wisdom, to understand the time, and to
know what is the proper work of the day; both which, some of the men of Issacar
had understanding in 1 Chapter 12.32.
: And this, as the wise man faith, is heart-understanding. A wise man's heart
diseerneth time and judgment Eccl. 8.5.
: Time when, and Judgment how, and what to do. And doubtless what was said ofa
word fitly spoken, may be as truly said, of a work done in season; That it is
as Apples of Gold in pictures of Silver. Pro. 25.11
My aim in these few pages (of the first part of this little Book) is not to
discover the nature of the present time, or to prove it to be evil (for it
discovers it self sufficiently to be so, both in respect of the sins and evils
committed by men, and the punishments justly inflicted by God for those Sins,
which two things the Prophets Am. 5.11. Mic. 3.12.
and Apostles, 2 Timothy 3.1, 2, 3. etc. 2 Pe. 3.3.
make to be the main signs of evil times) But to stir up the minds of all those
that are wise-hearted, though like Christ, and his Prophets and Apostles,
called madmen or fools Jo. 10.20. 2 Ki. 9.11. Jer. 29.26. Mar. 3.21. 1 Cor.
4.10.
, or as the Duch translation Englished, in some places, renders the word
Fanatics. But be it so, that such are mad, yet wiser then the Father of that
man which gave the name, gives the reason why, a wise man is mad. Oppression
(says Solomon) makes a wise man mad Eccl. 7.7.
. And Hosea says, The Prophet is a fool, and the spiritual man is mad, for the
multitude of thine iniquity, and forth great hatred Ho. 9.7.
) and to be like Daniel searching the Scripture, and so to get an insight into
the present time and work, and a Foresight of what God intends to do; for God
has promised to declare, reveal, and frequently performed his secrets to his
people. Ps. 25.14. Amo. 3.7. Genesis 18.17. Dan. 8.13.
Therefore they should be like those holy-ones, in Daniel, inquire how long it
will be to the end of the vision. Also learning those three exellent Lessons,
pointed out for evil times. viz. To prove what is that acceptable will of God
Romans 12.2.
, to redeem time Ephesians. 5.16 17. n Jo. 12 35.
, and to do the work of the day, in the day.

In order thereunto, here follow some seasonable Considerations, Directions,
Encouragements, and Consolations for all men, especially Christians in times of
any Affliction.

will, and hand, in all the Actions, matters, occurrences, and things in this
world, which concern all persons and all Ages: Yea, those that are most strange
and most sinful. (with reverence to his blessed Majesty be it spoken, and
without fathering the least evil upon him, whose pure eyes cannot behold
iniquity Hab. 1.13
. This consideration being well understood, and weighed, will silence all the
Soul-disquietings, and unruly thoughts of the hearts of Gods people. Therefore
mark some Scriptures, and clear instances to that purpose: As the selling of
Joseph into Egypt (though a sin in Joseph's brethren) yet he says himself unto
his brethren, It was not you that sent me hither, but God Genesis 45.8.
. So the hardening of Pharoahs heart to hinder Israel to go out of Egypt, was
of the Lord, as God told Moses he would do it before he went to him, I will
barden his heart ( viz. Pharoahs) that he shall not let the people go Ex.
4.21. and 7.3.
: So Sihon King of Heshbon, would not let Israel pass by him; but why? for the
Lord thy God hardened his Spirit Du. 2.30.
: Like as the Lord is said to move David to number the people, The anger of the
Lord was kindled against Israel, and he moved David to number the People 2 Sa.
24.1
. And the Lord is said to set up the adver saries of Rezin against him, and
join two of his enemies together, the Syrians before, and the Phylistines
behind, and they shall devour Israel with open mouth Esa. 9.11.12.
. And David looked upon Saul's persecuting of him, to be from God; For mark his
words to Saul, Now therefore I pray thee, let my Lord the King hear the words
of his servant: If the Lord have stirred the people up against me, let him
accept an offering 1 Samuel 19.16.
. So it is said twice in one Chapter, that God stirred up two enemies against
Solomon; And the Lord stirred up an Adversary unto Solomon, Hadad the Edomite,
etc. And the Lord stirred up another Adversary, Rezen. etc. 1 Kin. 11.14, 23.
The like is said of Gods stirring up the King of Assyria, to carry some of the
Children of Israel Captives into Babylon 1 Chapter 5.26.
. So God said he would strenghen the King of Babylon, and put his Sword into
his hand: Ez. 30.24
These with many more instances, prove that Gods will, and hand, are in all the
matters that are done upon Earth.

But these are Old Testament proofs, and God dealt at that time in another way,
than he does now in the Gospel daits.

New Testament: Christ himself allows, and in effect affirms, That the power
that Pilare had to condemn and Judge him, was given him from above Jo. 19.11
. And the Apostles jointly acknowledge, That Herod, Pontius Pilate, with the
Gentiles, and the people of Israel, were gathered together, to do what soever
Gods hand, and his Counsel determined before to be done Act. 4.28
. So it is said, That the Key of the bottomlesse-pit was given to the Angel
that fell from Heaven Rev. 9.1, 2. Rev. 9.1, 2
; And this must be Christ, ( who is said to have the Keys of Hell, and of death
Chapter 1.18.
.) But what to do? Even to open and make way for the smoke of Errors and
Wickedness to ascend, as there it follows: Likewise the Gentiles have
Commission, to trample upon the Church (for so much the words will bear) And
the Holy City shall be trodden under foot, for forty and two Months. Chapter 11.2
Nay it is said further: That God has put it into the hearts of the ten Kings,
to fulfill his will, to agree, and to give their kingdom unto, the Beast, until
the Word of God shall befulfilled Chapter 17.17.
.

But some may object, and say, by his will is meant, hating the Whore, making
war with her, and making her desolate.

Though that be part of his will, yet the other may as well be his will; and so
taken here, and agreeable to other Scriptures: As God said unto Satan, (before
the destruction of Ahab) Thou shall be a lying spirit, and go forth and do so,
and thou shall prevail with him 1 Ki. 22.22.
. So it' s said, That the dwellers of Jerusalem, and their Rulers fulfilled the
Scriptures; (that is Gods will) in condemning Christ. Act. 13.27.
Consider then, you that fear God, if you are under any affliction or suffering
whatsoever, that it is God that is the efficient and first cause of it. As the
Church in the Lamentations said, Though he (meaning God) causes grief, etc.
La. 3.32.
And it is he that forms Light, and creates darkness, Esa. 45.7.
and there is no evil in the City ( i. e. of affliction) but he does it Am. 3.6.
. If your enemies hate you, look upon it as Gods turning their hearts to hate
you l, (as the Egyptians did the Israleites Ps. 105.25
; If they curse you, look upon it, as David did on Shimei's cursing. For the
Lord (says David) has bidden him Sam. 16.10, 11.
. If robbed, spoiled, and reproached by them, remember, That it is the Lord
that gave Jacob for a spoil, and Israel to the Robbers Es. 42.24.
, and Jacob to the curse, and Israel to reproach and 43.28.
. And if you be delivered up into the hands of your Enemies, yet say as Job
did, God has delivered me up to the ungodly, and turned me over into the hands
of the wicked Jo. 16.11.
. And if they slay you, yet know, they are but Gods Instruments, and hand
therein. Ps. 17.13, 14.
And therefore, conclude, and say to them (as Joseph did to his Brethren) As
for you, ye thought evil against me, but God meant it unto good Genesis 50.20
.



Elisha's saying unto Israel. ( I know the evil that thou will do unto the
children of Ifrael, 2 Ki. 8.12.
etc. Give him ground to kill and slay, as he did afterward; or the words of
Christ, said of Judas, One of you shall betray me, tend to move him to betray
Christ. And though God may give up wicked men to their own hearts lusts Ps.
81.12.
, and suffer them to walk in their own ways, and commit such wickedness, Act.
14.16.
and leave them to discover what is in them, and give the Devil leave to delude
and harden them (as he did Ahabs Prophets) and permit them as he did Pharaoh,
to pursue the Israelites, who threatened and resolved six things. I will pursue,
I will overtake, I will divide the spoil, my lust shall be satisfied upon them,
I will draw my sword, my hand shall destroy them Exo. 15.9
; yet he could perform but one of them, and God will turn the rage of man to
his own praise, and the remainder of wrath he will restrain Ps. 86.11
.

Secondly, as we should consider, that whatsoever is done, is done by the will,
and appointment of the Lord (and therefore we should with the Prophets learn to
be silent, because he does it Psalm. 39.9.
) So we should also consider, wherefore the Lord does all this, doubtless it
is not without cause; as God told Israel of old. And they shall know, that I
have not done without cause, all that I have done to it Eze. 14.23.
. If, like self-justifying Judah you ask, Wherefore the Lord our God has done
all these things unto us Jer. 5.19.
: I may (and oh that I could with tears mention it, and that my blood were fit
to write it!) answer with the same Prophet; For the greatness of our
iniquities Cha. 13.22.
: But alas whose tongue can utter, or whose pen can express the nature, or
number the greatness grievousnesse of the sins of the Professors (nay of the
choicest Christians) of this age; to whom it may be truly said (as formerly to
Jerusalem) That they have multiplied their transgressions, more then they Ez.
16.51
: (i. e. then the Samaritans with whom the Jews had no dealings, Joh. 4.9.
) And may not the Lord say to his people now, as formerly, Thou have also
taught the wicked ones thy ways Jer. 2.33.
. Nay, may not the Saints of God generally cry out, Woe to us we have sinned,
Lam. 5.16
and transgressed like men! Yea woe to us we have sinned such sins, as
unrighteous men could not sin, against light, and love, assurance, and
experience, after sealing, and consolations! Has any generation since the
Apostles days, had such powerful Preachers, and plenty of Preachings as this
generation? But we have esteemed this good Word and bread of Life, as the
Israeliles did the Manna Number. 21.5
(light bread) we have been stomach-ful, sick and surfeited, with the sweet and
fat things of Godshouse, yea (as it is said) We have been almost, in all evil,
in midst of the Congregation, and Assembly: Pro. 5.14.
We trampled and trod under foot the good pastures, which God had provided for
us (and which the Saints and Martyrs of former days, would have greatly
Prized.) The fire of Religion was much vanished into the smoke and air of brain
Notions, and self-conceited opinions, many taking up profession, as they do
fashions, because they would be in the Mode of the times; and like the
Gibeonites feigning themselves to be, what they were not, becoming Proselytes
either for fear, (as many became Jews when they saw them prevail, for fear of
them Esa. 8.17.
) or advantages, creeping through Churches into Councils, Armies,
Custom-houses, and other places of honor, and profit. And others under
pretense of being for Reformation, Uniformity, Order, and Church-Disciplin,
drove on (as it may be well suspected) their own particular designs, for now
being themselves persecuted, they urge the same Scriptures, and arguments for
liberty of conscience which they then would not allow to their dissenting
brethren. How also has the name of the Lord been blasphemed, by the sad
principles of some, who under pretense of higher seize, endeavored to
root up the very foundation, and main principles of Christianity? And others,
by their loose, and licentious behavior and practices, have given cause to
God, to say, as once Jacob did to his Sons, Simeon and Levi; Ye have troubled
me, to make me stinck among the inhabitants of the Land. Ge. 34.30.
Has not Christ been again wounded in the house, and by the hands of his
friends? Yea, pressed Amos 2.13
, wearied, Esa. 7.13 43.24.
and his heart broken, Ezekiel. 6.9.
with the sins of his own servants. Was he not forsaken (as formerly) by his
own Disciples? Did not the chiefest of his Ministers too much embrace this evil
world, by removing from lesser, to greater Livings? and did they not over
dispense with their own principles, to comply with the contrary, where Earthly
booty did byasse, choosing that end of the Scales, that did weigh heaviest of
the World? And did not the Rulers, (yea those that pretended to be the greatest
Reformers) make it a great part of their work, to get to themselves, and to
give to one another, and their friends, not only the chiefest and gainfullest
Offices, but the Estates of their Ememies; nay, have not some been
delinquifyed, and decimated, more for their Estates, than for their Crimes? Ah!
how miserably did most men forsake their principles, and former practices,
building what they did once destroy, and deny what they had before in words,
and writings professed: and when they had dismounted, and dethroned their
enemies, and got up into their Saddles, and seats, and trampled upon their
pride, with as great pride; till God had rejected their confidences, and
suffered them to crumble to nothing, and their strength (which was made an
Idol) to depart from them. And not only they, but the gathered Churches, though
increased with Members, Gifts, and Wealth, did decline and decay in Love, Zeal,
Spiritual watchfulness, Self-denial, Humility, Pity to, and praying for
others; and how bitter, sour, and selvish were we grown? besides the secret
sins, which God and our own consciences only knew, our apparent sins became a
stumbling block to the poor world. And God had cause to say to diverse of his
Churches, as he once did to Israel, How art thou turned into the degenerate
plant of a strange Vine unto me Jer. 2.21.
? And what has my beloved to do in my house, seeing she has wrought lewdness
with many, and the holy flesh is departed from her Chapter 11.15
?

present trial upon Gods People is, if need be (says Peter) you are in
heaviness, through manyfold temptations. 1 Pet. 1.6
God saw a need of it before it came, and we see a need of it now it is come:
It came as seasonable as ever Frost did in Winter, or Rain in Spring: We should
account this preventing Grace, and say with Job, Thy visitation has preserved
my Spirit Job. 10.12.
; The heat of prosperity would have burnt us, if God had not sent this Cloud of
affliction to cover us. Oh where had the most part of professors been in a
short time, if God had not stepped in! Our wise Physician Christ, knew by our
complexions, that we were running into a dangerous distemper, and therefore
has given us preventing Physics, and this is the way that God sometimes takes
to heal his People. He went on frowardly in the way of his heart (mark that) I
have seen his ways, and I will heal him Esa. 57.17, 18.
. God has brought us into the pound, not to starve us, but (being shrewd
Cattle) to keep us from further mischief: According to that saying, I will
hedge up thy ways with Thorns, and make a Wall that she shall not find her
paths, Hos. 2.6.
and she shall follow her lovers, and shall not overtake them.

Jubilee, a long Vacation, and as good, and seasonable a Harvest to provide,
and lay up in store against the Winter, as any could desire.

And now we should consider, what stock we have gotten and laid up: For every
true Christians heart, Can. 7.13.
lays up somewhat for Christ, and something for himself; and he is like the
wise Scribe or Householder, mentioned in the Gospel, able to bring forth things
new and old, out of his treasury Mat. 13.52.
. The time of Prosperity, ought to be a time of gaining, and the time of
Adversity, of spending grace, and of bearing and enduring. A Christian should
never do any thing for Christ 2 Timothy 1.11, 12.
, but he should expect to suffer for so doing; for how can an enemy, that
flings a stone, or shoots an Arrow against his Enemy, been facere, and male
audire.
but expect the same flung or shot to him again: and every Christian is so to
the Devil and his Kingdom.

That they might be partakers of his Holiness He. 12.10
. God blesses this Ordinance, to do good when other Ordinances fail; and God
prepares by this fire, such Physic (nay indeed it is Physic it self) as
removes, and cures those Cronical, old, and long continued diseases, and sins
of the Soul, which are not healed otherwise, or by other means. And David
experienced this, when he said unto God, Thou art good, and do good; Psa.
119.68.
That is, good in affliction, and do good by affliction; for so the words
before and after clearly show; Before I was afflicted, I went astray, but now I
have kept thy word. verse. 67.
And it is good for me that I have been afflicted, that I might learn thy
Satutes verse. 71.
. Affliction is the spiritual shepherds hook, with which he drives back
straggling, straying, and out-skipping sheep: or as the Salt that new seasons,
the almost quite corrupted flesh; And the book wherein all Christ's Scholars
learn experience; as the Apostle makes experience the fruit of patience, and
patience, the product of tribulation; Ye glory, says he, in tribulation,
knowing, that tribulation works patience, and patience experience. Romans 5.3.
-- Musar.
The same word in the Hebrew, signifies Inctruction, and Correction; for in
both, God makes out himself to the Soul; So that what they once heard by the
voice of the word, they hear again from the voice of his rod: And in this sense
it is said of Christ, that he learned obedience: (that is, experimentally) by
the things he suffered Heb. 5.8.
. By Afflictions true Christians come to learn over again what they heard
before, and to do better what they knew before.

we are but entered into the Affliction, and the floods are but beginning to
rise, like as it is said, (in another case) of Ezekiels waters Ezekiel. 47.
: and the furnace yet, is but making hot, and scarcely, have any tasted such
bitter afflictions, as the primitive Martyrs did. And most of the Christians of
this age have scarce suffered so much for Christ, as those they count their
persecutors suffered for man; though like dainty Coy Citizens, we are ready to
complain, when we begin to touch the Wet, or feel the Cold; and as one of the
Martyrs that cried out, when his executioner did strike his Foot with the
Hammer, as he fastened the Chain, whereas he (dear soul) was immediately to be
burnt. Its bad and thin cloth that will not bear one wetting, without
shrinking; and a heartless Soldier, that at the first Charge, and with a
slight Wound, forsakes and flies the Field. We have cause, yet to say as the
Apostle; our affliction is but light 2 Cor. 4.18
, and short. Considering the long and sore afflitions of the Jews, the ancient
People of God, who were afflicted for 400 years, then 70, and since that,
without any intermission above 1600 years. Also the primitive Christians, that
had scarce in 300 years, so much liberty, peace, and freedom from Persecution,
as we had within these few years: We cannot say as the Prophets) That from our
youth we have been afflicted Psa. 88.15
or that all Gods Waves and Billows, are gone over us and 42.7.
: What if God should say now, (as he did formerly) That the Enemies should
devour Israel with open mouth Esa. 9.12.
: And that the present Phaenix, the Church of God should be burnt up, that a
more pure, sinless, and spiritual seed may spring up in the room thereof, that
may be counted to the Lord for a generation? And what if it be the Lords mind,
that this Generation shall Sow in Tears, or Blood, (as former Generations have
done for us) that following Generations may reap with joy? Our cares and
desires should be that God would put an end to our Sins, rather than to our
Sufferings; and we should, account it (as our Savior, Mat. 10.41 Acts 20.35
and his Apostle said in another case) more blessed to give than to receive.

Trial may prove, yet it is stinted and limited; both in respect of Nature,
Degree, and Time.

There has no temptation, says the Apostle 1 Cor. 10.13.
(that is no kind of trial) has taken you, but such as is common to man; that
is, but either befell others before you, or what you shall be able to bear; as
the words following intimate: Who will not suffer you to be tempted above what
you are able, i.e. to bear: God has the measuring also of the Affliction; and
this is the difference between Gods correcting his people, and punishing the
wicked. To his people he says, Jer. 30.11
I will not make a full end of them: but to their enemies, he says, I will
make a full end of all the Nations Cha. 46.28.
: Yea, he will destroy them both Soul and body, as another Prophet speaks Esa.
10.17
: But when he was very angry with Israel, and bid the enemy destroy them, but
(yet says he) make not a full end Jer. 5.10.
.

And Christ himself will stand by, as atender Physician, to see not only all
the Ingredients put into their Potion, but also the compounding and weighing to
a grain, every Dose that shall be given to these his Patients, (being such
extraordinary friends, as his Wife, and Children, his Brethren, Sisters, and
Companions) yea he will be like a just Judge, taking care that the Executioners
(for no better are the Persecutors of Gods people) shall not vent out their own
malice, but give due correction, not one stroke more than the royal Law (i.e.
the Gospel New Covenant) allows; for the afflictions of the people of God, is
one of the New Testament Legacies: And therefore the Apostle says: It is given
unto you to suffer Phi. 1.29.
. And whilst this his Gold and Silver is in the fire, he sits there himself, as
the Refiner Mal. 3.2.
: he does not come, and go, as if he were about some ordinary work. Likewise
for the time it is limited, and therefore the time of the deliverance of Gods
Church, is called the set time Psa. 102.11.
. And the Tribulation of the Saints of the New Testament is reckoned up still
by days, (which under the Old Testament was by years; as the bondage of Egypt,
43 years, and the Captivity of Babylon 70 years;) Rev. 2.10.
Ye shall have tribulation ten days; so the Church was in the Wilderness 126
days; Yea and all the while she was there too, she was in the place prepared
her of God, and there also fed by them Rev. 12.6
; but by whom? surely either by Angels, such as ministered to Christ, when he
was in the Wilderness Mat. 4.11.
, or the two Witnesses, as some suppose, or those that carried them Captives;
for God makes them treat his people well, as he made Nebuzaradan do: The poor
of the People, to whom he gave Vine-yards, as the text says, at the same time
(or in that day) and so Nebucadnezzar gave command to the same Nebu. that he
should look well to Jeremy and do him no harm, Jer. 36.10 12.
etc. So Julius one of the Emperors Captains, was made to entreat Paul
courteously Act. 27.1.3.
, no thanks to him, for he had a command from a greater than Augustus, even
from God to do it; though indeed the Heathens granted more liberty, than
professing Christians do now; for then a man might not be judged before he was
examined Act. 28.18
, nor committed, without first signifying the crimes laid against him Act.
25.27.
. The Romans gave liberty for Paul to go to his friends, and his friends to
Minister, and to come unto him Chapter 24. 23 and 27. 3.
. In those days a poor Prisoner might hire a house; and a persecuted Preacher
and Prisoner (as Paul was,) had liberty to preach the Kingdom of God, and
teach the things which concerned the Lord Jesus Christ with confidence, no man
forbidding Chapter 28. 30. 31.
: And for the poor people that had not the Law, to do more than those that have
both Law and Gospel, is to them a praise, and to us a shame.

Scriptures. If then (that is, in their captivity) their uncircumcised hearts
be humbled, and they then accept of the punishment of their iniquity; Then will
I remember (says the Lord) my Covenant, Lev. 26.41, 42.
etc. Mark what kind of spirit God requires, to be in his people in the time of
their Affliction, namely a Humble, Meek and Patient Spirit; a Spirit offended
neither at God nor men, nor the Affliction it self; but only at themselves:
also justifying God as Ezra did; Thou have punished us less than our iniquities
have deserved Ezr. 9.13 see Job. 11.6.
. And David, When thou with rebuke do correct men for iniquity Psa. 39.11.
, and judging themselves 1 Cor. 11.31.
, and becoming more guilty in their own eyes, as God said by the Prophet; I
will go to my place till they be guilty Hos. 5.15 marg.
. And say as Job said, If I be righteous, yet will I not lift up my head, I am
full of confusion, therefore see thou my affliction Job. 10.15
: As if Job had said, Oh Lord my work is to behold Sin, and be sensible of my
confusion; but thine is to take notice of my affliction, and to show
compassion; Or as Nehemiah prayed, Spare me according to the greatness or
multitude of thy mercy Neh. 13.22.
. And Christians work in afflicton, is to be weeping, mourning, sorrowing,
afflicting, humbling searching, cleansing, and fearing themselves, and
trembling at Gods Judgments, and soaking in the suds of true repentance,
sighing, and being greatly ashamed, and deeply afflicted, and self-miserable
Jam. 4.9.
, lifting up their voice earnestly unto the Lord, like people that have their
houses and Beds on fire, crying out, what shall we do? or like people in a
great flood, every one sticking close to one another, and seeking to help each
other through. And bringing old sins, (yea, and our own rather than others) to
remembrance, as there was under the Law, an offering of memorial, bringing
iniquity to remembrance Number. 5.15.
; we should now like Joseph's brethren, remember our old iniquities, and fall
down to the ground; and say as Judah said, What shall I say unto my Lord? what
shall we speak? how shall we clear our selves? God has found out our
iniquities Genesis 44.16
. Christans work in time of affliction, is not to be jarring one with another,
and upbraiding each other with former miscarriages (though they may in love and
meekness admonish and mind one another thereof) or to stand upon their tiptoes
and plead their own innocence, (for who can say his heart is clean?) or strive
about controversal truths; as those two Martyrs, (in Q. M. days) that strove in
the Bishops house about Infant Baptism, which the Bishop soon decided, by
comitting them both to Prison, and soon after to the Fire. Neither is this a
time to fret (or as the Hebrew word signifies, Thunder) against our enemies, as
good Hannah did against her adversary, that did sore provoke her 1 Sa. 1.6.
; nor yet to cry as Micha did after his Idols; Ye have taken away my Gods Jud.
18.23
, when the things of this World are taken away from us: much less to go on in
sin, or to trespass more and more 2 Chr. 28.23.
, as wicked Ahaz did, or as Israel did sin from Canaan to Caldea Eze. 16.29.
under affliction, and so add more fuel to the fire, to augment the fierce
anger of the Lord Number. 32.14.
: but rather let every one turn speedily from his Sins 1 Ki. 8.35
; and if there be iniquity in his heart, hand or house, to put it far, Job.
11.14 and 22.
(and for ever) away, as Jacob did cause his household to do when he was in
danger of the Canaanites and Perizites Genesis 35.2.
; that God may according to his promise, return to his people in mercy 2 Chr.
30.6
, from the fierceness of his anger, which they have so greatly kindled.

Ways, and their Works, (as well as the frame of their spirits) For Gods eyes
are upon the ways of man, and he sees all his goings, Job. 34.21
and weighs all his Actions 1 Samuel 2.3
: when the people of God were going, or gone into Captivity, one main duty
which they were called to perform, was to search and try their ways Lam. 3.40.
. Another Prophet also most solemnly (and twice in one Chapter) tells the
people from God, when they were careless and minding their own concerns, and
things; That that was the time for them to consider, or set their hearts on
their ways Hag. 1.5.7.
. Oh that every one of us would consider the secret and hidden ways of our
hearts; for such there are Ecl. 11.9.
: for our spirits and our thoughts, desires and affections may be traveling in
bypath, or going and hunting after some sinful prey, as the hounds in the
night, some after pleasure and fleshly Eze. 6.9.
lusts; others after covetousness, and the things of the World: as it is said
of some, that their eyes, and hearts, are not, but for their Covetousness Jer.
22.17
, and exercised with covetous practices 2 Pet. 2.14
; other men's hearts lifted up to destruction, and others melting Josh. 14.8.
and failing for fear of men Esa. 7.2.
, and of the things that are coming upon the Earth Lu. 21.26
: And as there are the ways of the heart, so there are the ways and the
walkings of the outward man, to be considered, whether pure or impure, whether
above or beneath, whether crooked or straight, whether forward or backward, or
sideward, whether the old way of Saints, or the old way of sinners ( for there
are both Jer. 16.6. Job. 22.15.
) whether ways of Darkness or Light, sincerity or hypocrisy, spirituality, or
formality, undefiled or spotted, the way of Gods Commandments, or of men's
Traditions, the way of honesty or dishonesty. It Is bad standing, worse sitting,
but worst of all walking, running, persisting, (and especially pleading for)
any sinful way; Take heed therefore you Sons and daughters of Zion, lest you be
and continue in Babylon; but flee out of the midst there of Jer. 51.6.
. When God threatens to destroy her, going or running out of her, will not
serve the turn, but you must fly, for her Judgments will come suddenly, in
one day (nay, in one hour) Death, Mourning, and Famine, and she shall be
utterly burnt up Rev. 18.8 19.
: And beware lest you lodge in her Suburbs, or be backward as some will be, to
come out of her: as it appears, that notwithstanding, One Angel cried, and that
mightily: That Babylon that great City is fallen, is fallen verse. 2.
: Yet another voice was heard from Heaven saying, Come out of her my people,
that ye be not partakers of her sins, lest ye be partakers of her Plagues verse.
4.
: Lot in Sodom was necessitated to be sent and plucked out of the midst of the
overthrow Genesis 19.26
. In the name of the Lord, therefore be exhorted by the words of the Apostle
Peter to save your selves, Acts 2.40 41.
from this untoward generation.

Consider one another Heb. 10.24.
, as the Apostle exhorted the Hebrews, in a time of great and sore persecution
and affliction; for without this, there cannot be a performance of those other
duties, as exhorting, comforting, edifying and bearing with one another. This
consideration is very necessary in a day of affliction and trial; because then
there will be the greatest temptation, to be selvish and sensorious; and every
one will be ready (as the Proverb is) to seek to save one, or himself; but
every one should like Nehemiah, seek the welfare of Israel Neh. 2.10
, of all the people of God; or like Mordecai, That did seek the wealth of the
people, and speak peace to all his seed Est. 10.5.
: For all believers are like the boards of the Tabernacle, that were perfectly
joined both above and beneath Exo. 26.24.
; and God has tempered the whole body of his Church together, so that every
part should Sympathize with each other, and care one for another. And whether
one member suffer, all the members shoud suffer with it; or one member be
honored, all the members rejoice with it 1 Cor. 12.24, 25.
, putting on bowels of mercy, kindness, humbleness of mind, meckness,
long-suffering, forbearing one another, and forgiving one another Col. 3.12, 13.
; pitying the tempted, strengthening the Weak, helping to recover and set in
joint again those that are fallen, relieving the poor, gathering up the halt and
lame, giving the same measure of allowance to others, which we expect from
them; making the falls of others, our own fears, and seting before our eyes the
trials of others, for warning to our selves

God has done, and that he is doing; So the people of God did formerly. Thou
art the God that does wonders, thou have declared thy strength among the people
Psa. 7.14
: And David, being in affliction, wrote a Psalm, which he calls, a Psalm to
bring to remembrance Psa. 70.
; and Caleb remembered the words that God had spoken of him, to Moses forty five
years before Josh. 14.6, 7, 10.
. And wherefore did God cause Manna, Arons rod, etc. to be laid up, or the
Stones taken out of the bottom of Jordan, to be pitched upon the other side? or
does God so often put the Israelites in remembrance of their Redemption out of
Egypt; but that he would have them still mindful thereof, it being also so
great a Sin in men, to forget the works of the Lord, as that it is said to
forget God himself, as appears clearly by comparing two Psalms together, where
the same story is related; in the one it is said, that they (i. e. the Children
of Israel) forgot his works Psa. 78.11
; and in the other, that they forgot God their Savior with 106.21.
.

yet as God formerly wished it Deuteronomy. 32.29.
, and complained that men did not do it Lam. 1.9.
: So doubtless (as by sad experience we find) it is now; notwithstanding the
weapons of death, are drawn and pointed at our hearts and heads, and this King
of terror himself, is ready to come in at our windows and doors daily, and
many younger, stronger and better than we, cut off suddenly: yet we lay it not
to heart, but put off thinking of this great Debt; and little think, how
amazing, and perhaps unwelome it will be to us when it comes. We find many of
Gods Worthies and stout Champions, as Job, David, Hezekiah, and Peter, when
they came to encounter with this Leviathan, like the men of Israel when Goliath
appeared to them, fearful. Job when he thought to comfort himself, grew afraid
of sorrows: And why? Because says he, I know, that thou will not hold me
innocent Job. 9.27, 28.
. Fear of Gods imputing Sin to him, made him fearful lest God should impose
more affliction upon him, and so take him away with his stroke: another time he
says, The Graves are ready for me Chapter 17 1.
: he thought where ever he came, he was to dye, and there was a Grave pointed
out for him, and ready to swallow him up. David also though a man of great
faith, is said to be one while sore a fraid of Achish, another while of going
up to Gibeah, 1 Sa. 21.12.
(because of the danger of death in both places) another while he cries out,
That the terrors of death were fallen upon him Psa 55.4.
: and therefore (doubtless) he prays unto the Lord, to spare him a little
39.13.
. Also when Hezekiah was but bid prepare, for he must die; see what a sad, and
lamentable writing he wrote thereupon; I am deprived (says he) of the residue
of my years, I shall see man no more; mine age is departed from me, and removed
as a shepherds Tent Esa. 38.1011.12.
, etc. And did not our Savior foretell Peter, When thou shall be old, and
another shall gird thee; (as the custom in that kind of execution was,) and
carry thee whither thou would not. This spoke he, signifying by what death
he should glorify God John 21.18, 19.
: Peter as far as he was flesh and blood, was unwilling to suffer. Nay, our
Savior Christ himself, as he was man, prayed, that if it were possible, his
Father would let the Cup pass from him. By all these instances, Mat. 26.29
we may take warning, how unfree, even many choice Saints may be to dye, when
they are brought to it; and yet some like Paul, may desire it; Phil. 1.21.
and it is like to be most easy, and lest terrible to them that fear it most,
and consider of it, and wait for it most seriously, and constantly.

Tribulations, Persecutions, and Death it self; Consider Christ He. 3.1. and
, and the cloud of witnesses 12.7.
, and Martyrs that are gone before, who are passed over and through all those
floods, and are safely arrived to shore, and got off this troublesome,
turbulent Sea of the World; to the Calm, and quiet Haven of Salvation. For
consider him that endured such contradiction of sinners against himself, lest
ye be wearied, and faint in your minds Chapter 12.3.
; or as it is in the verse before, look on him, consider him in his suffering
state; and behold him in his glorified state. By his sufferings, he taught us
the way, by his now living in Heaven, he shows us the wages. Jacob went gladly
down into Egypt, because Joseph was there. It should be no more to a believer,
to follow Christ through suffering and Death, than for a woman, that lives from
her husband in a Cottage, and strange Country, to pass over a River or a narrow
Sea (in a safe vessel too) to go to her husband to live in a Kingly-pallace,
and in her own Country with him for ever.

Having finished the Considerations; In the next place be pleased for to
hearken to a few Counsels, which are judged necessary, and seasonable.

God to your Souls: For whom the Lord loves he chastises Heb. 12.6
; and as many as I love (says Christ) I rebuke Rev. 3.19. Amo. 3.2.
: As God said to Israel of old, therefore you only have I known of all the
families of the earth: whereas on the other side, the not punishing of the
wicked, is a sign of Gods hatred to them Hos. 4.14.
: And therefore have no hard thoughts of God, how long and sore soever he
whippeth, and Chastises Esa. 63.8.
; For when he sees blood on the Rod, his pity will fly up into his face,
toward you, and fury toward the Rod Exek. 38.18.
, which are the wicked in his Es. 10.15.
hand.

Corrections, will be for your good and profit. As David by experience could
say, It is good for me that I have been afflicted Psa. 119.71.
: And the Apostle says, He (i. e. God) corrects us for our profit He. 12.10
; As a disobedient Child, after his father has corrected him, is received into
his Fathers favor again; so says the sixth verse of that Chapter. Affliction
draws the Anger with it out of God his Father, and the cause of anger, which
is Sin, out of the Child. See Esa. 1.25. and 27.8. Jer. 30.15, 17, Dan. 11.35.
and 12.10. Zach. 13.9. Heb. 12.11. 1 Pet. 4.14. and 5.10. and more in the
experiences following.

selves, and all your concernments to the Lord, even as Christ and the servants
of God formerly did: He (i. e. Christ) Committed himself, or as it is in the
margent, his Cause) to him that judges righteously 1 Pe. 2.23.
. So it is said, That the poor man committed himself to God Ps. 10.14.
: or (as it is in the Hebrew) he leaves himself to him; that is, when he
suffers unjustly, he gives up himself and cause to the Lord, judging that there
is safety in no other; and by doing this patiently, God takes it so acceptably
(that he should trust him with all, and that before and above all others too)
that he counts it as the Apostle says, (a wonderful expression!) thank worthy,
or worthy of thanks 1 Pet. 2.19.20.
from him: As a Nobleman or Landlord, when one of his poor Neighbors or
Tenants refers his life, and all he has to him, to determine thereof, will
say, I thank thee Neighbor or Tennant, for thy good opinion of me. There must
be a good persuasion in that Soul, (as Paul had 2 Ti. 1.12.
) of Gods power, and faithfulness, that will commit the keeping of such a
Jewel, as the Soul is, to him: and yet, why not? for he is said to keep it Pr.
24.12
: And Peter. who had experience of self-keeping or rather loosing his own Soul,
had learned that Lesson, and therefore taught it unto others: Wherefore (says
he) let them that suffer according to the will of God (mark that, not if they
suffer otherwise, for then he will not keep them) commit the keeping of their
Souls to him, in well-doing, as unto a faithful Creator 1 Pe. 4.19
. Do but secure your Souls in that safe hand, and then you need not fear
suffering. Further,

Fear not; Moses gives this exhortation both to Israel, Deuteronomy. 13.6
and Joshua distinctly, fear not, nor be afraid of them, fear not, neither be
dismayed page v. 7.
; and three times does God in one Chapter exhort his People Israel not to fear,
Esa. 41.10.13, 14.
though their enemies were strong, and did strive against them, and they but
like a Worm, yet they were not to fear them: Our Savior Christ likewise gives
the same exhortation three times in the tenth Chapter of Matthew Mat. 10.26, 28, 31.
. And it is worth consideration, what little cause men have to fear poor
Mortals, who are but grass, worms, and thimbles full of dust; as likewise that
it is Idolatry in a high degree to fear Creatures; and the fear of man brings
a snare, (that is, draws men into a snare:) But whosoever puts his trust in
the Lord shall be safe Pr. 29.25.
: Also the fearful, are the first sort that are threatened, to have their part
in the Lake which burns with fire and brimstone Rev. 2 8.
: And God commanded Jeremiah, not to fear his enemies, (and yet, of all the
Prophets, he seemed to have most cause) upon pain of being consumed, or broke
in pieces before them Jer. 1.17. Rev. 2.10.
: Fear God, self, and sin, and you need fear no more. And as Christ says Fear
none of those things that you shall suffer.

But are not men commanded by Solomon, to fear the Lord and the King? Pro.
24.21.

Paul resolves that case clearly, Romans 13.3, 4.
To. 13.3, 4. where he says, Rulers are not a terror to good works (or
workers, Ephesians. 5.11.) but to the evil: Will thou then not be afraid of the
Power? (or nearer the Greek) But will thou not fear the power, do that which is
good, and thou shall have praise of the same. But if thou do that which is
evil, be afraid. Doubtless, Rulers are to be obeyed, and submitted to in all
lawful things (whether the King, or those that are sent by him) and this
willingly and sincerely; for the Lord 1 Pet. 2.23.
, and for Conscience sake Romans 13.5
: and its Christians duties to give them honor, and pay them Tributes and
Customs, as Christ did Mat. 17.27.
, and not to resist, for he that resists, resists the ordinance of God, and
shall receive to themselves damnation, or as the word rather signifies, (...).
Judgment, and is so translated by our last Translators in four places Joh.
9.39. Gal. 5.10. 1 Cor. 11.29 34.
; and as Pisator renders it, paenam sibi auferent, They shall receive
punishment, that is from the Magistrate. And I conceive there is no warrant
(from the Scriptures) to affirm, that either there are no Magistrates now in
being in the World, or that the Magistrates, under and belonging to the fourth
Monarchy, are not to be obeyed. For before Christ and the Apostles days, the
fourth Monarch was up, (begun in Julius Caesar) and yet the Apostles
acknowledged and obeyed hem (even Nero, etc.) as Magistrates; and I see no
reason, why the later Magistrates belonging to the 4th. Monarch, should not be
obeyed (in all lawful things, as I said before) as well as the first. And I
could never meet with any convincing argument, to prove that the fifth Monarchy,
(which I am persuaded of and expect will be, and as many Ancient Just. Mar.
Lact. Jren.
, and Modern Alsted. Arc. Dr. Twiss. Dr. Ho. Mr. Mead. Bur. Fenick. Dr. Homes
Phy. Mat. etc.
learned men, have unanswerably proved) will begin before Christ the Monarch
himself, appears in the head of it, and to erect it, as the other four wordly
Monarchs did before. And being now upon this point let me hint a line or two to
King, and Rulers, who are taught from the Scriptures, their duties as well as
their Subjects. As the King to write the Law of the Lord, read, and keep it all
the days of his Life, that he may learn to fear the Lord his God, and to keep
all the words of this Law, and these statutes to do them, that his heart be not
lifted up above his Brethren, and that he turn not aside from the commandment,
to the right hand or to the left Deuteronomy. 17.18, 19, 20.
, etc. And that he set up the true worship of God, according to his own divine
Will, and like good Jehosophat, Asa, Josias, 1 Chr. 13.5. and 28.12. and
2.29.25.
and Hezekiah, pull down all Idolatry, and Profanesse. And as Solomon says,
Scatter the wicked, and bring the wheel over them, Pr. 20.26.
which elsewhere, he also says, is the way to stablish his Throne 25.5.
: And like David, have the faithful of the Land to dwell with him; and not to
suffer Liars nor Flatterers to stand in his sight Psalm. 101.6, 7.
: But as the Apostle says, to be a terror to evil works Romans 13.3.
, for the punishing of evil doers, and for the praise of them that do well 1
Pe. 2.14.
: giving also encouragement, and liberty to all good Christians, to profess and
practice the doctrine and ways of Christ and his Apostles, (who were then
falily called, and counted as those are now, that walk after their Teachings,
and conversations, See before p. 1, 2.
Madmen, Heretics, Scismaticks, Turbulent, Seditious persons, etc.) that they
may lead a quiet and peaceable life in all Godliness and honesty 1 Timothy 2.2.
: This would be acceptable to God, and give encouragement to Christians, to
pray for, and pay customs to them. But if they command any thing contrary to
the word of God, they are not to be actually obeyed: see Esther 3.2, 3. Dan.
3.18. and 6.10, 13. Act. 4.19. and 5.29. See Bp. Andrews on the third Com. and
Par. on Romans 13.

Christians should also redeem and improve time Ephesians. 5.16.
, (it being short and uncertain, and before evil and worse days come Eccl. 12.1
) for private exercises especially, as Fasting, Prayer and exhorting one
another, which if you mark, is to be kept up in times of affliction and
persecution, more than at other times. For it is said, Then they that feared
the Lord, spoke often one to another: When was that? Look in the verse before,
When they that did work wickedness were set up, and when they that did tempt
God, were delivered Mal. 3.15, 16.
. So the Apostle says, Not forgetting the assembling of our selves together,
etc. He. 10.25.
so much the more as ye se the day approaching

Christ commanded his Disciples, be wise as Serpents Mat. 10.16.
: which use to keep, and preserve their heads, (wherein chiefly the Life is)
they also shut their ears, and run in any danger, to their holes. Christians
should thence spiritually learn to be careful of Christ's glory, and not to
hearken to temptations, and fly in danger to the Lord, (as David did) to be hid
with him Psa. 143. 9 Pro. 28.12
: David is said, to behave himself wisely 1 Samuel 18.15.30, and
, yea again, more wisely, 23.22.
which Saul took notice of, and was afraid of him, so much the more. Its a
great piece of prudence in an evil time to be silent Amo. 5.13
, yea and to keep the door of thy mouth from her that lies in thy bosom Mic.
7.5.
, for not only (as the Prophet speaks) Wicked men will lay wait, as he that
sets snares, or a trap, to catch men Jer. 5.26.
: But as our Savior says, The Brother, shall betray the Brother to death, and
the Father, the Son, and the Children shall rise up against their Parents Mar.
13.12.
; (as it was in some of the ten Persecutions) Therefore mark the Apostles
advice, 1 Pet. 3.10
He that will love life, and see good days, let him refrain his tongue from
evil, and his lips, that they speak no guile.

Cause, and Call: God threatened some Israelites, that would fly for fear to
Egypt, that the Sword which they feared, should overtake them in Egypt Jer.
42.15, 16.
; And a time may come when those words may be fulfilled, The shepherds shall
have no way to fly, nor the principal of the flock to escape Cha. 25.35.
. Its remarkable, that when Jeremy went to separate himself to the Land of
Benjamine, he was taken in the gate Jer. 37.12.
; but another time, and in greater danger, God hid Baruch and him; So one of
the Martyrs, Chap. 36.26
by letting him down over the Wall of a City, a stone fell out of the wall, and
broke his Leg; the Sentinel hearing the noise apprehended him, and he was
taken, and put to death. In some cases, doubtless it is altogether unlawful to
fly; as when the persecution is general; or when a standing, or witnessing may
be to Gods glory; or when a man has a special boldness given to him to suffer,
such as Stephen and Paul had; Act. 6.10. and 7.51.20.22.18.10.
yet in some cases, as well Preachers as other may flee. See Mat. 10.23. and
2.13. Joh. 10.39. Acts 8.1. and 11.19. 9.25. and 19.13. 1 Kings 11.13. and
19.3. Mic. 2.10. Heb. 11.37. Rev. 12.6.

Lord by an earnest following after what is before you, and do not forsake God,
or draw back to any sin, or sinful service, but giving your selves to prayer
(for before the Angels descend to sound the Trumpets or pour the Viols, the
smoke of the incense must ascend to God Rev. 8.5.
: And it is very remarkable, that where God says, The Lord our God is one God;
the word Eched, which signifies one Deuteronomy. 6.4 (...)
in the Hebrew, is written with a great D in the end of it thus, Each D: also
where it is said, Thou shall worship no other God; the word Achar, which
signifies other is written with a great R thus, Acha R Ex. 34.14
, signifying, that God is exceeding jealous in his worship to a letter, and
that he alone, and according to his own word only, must be worshipped; for he
that worshipeth any other, or otherwise, worshipeth the Beast, and he that
worshippeth the Beast, worshipeth the Dragon and Devil Rev. 13.4
: Therefore do not as the Jews did, change the word Baal, into Bosheth, but
still retained their Idolatry, change names, and keep things: Defile not your
selves Rev. 3.4.
, but come perfectly out of Babylon, and all false worship, and cleanse and
keep your selves pure from all iniquity, and touch not any unclean thing, That
God may receive you 2 Cor. 6.17
, and count you worthy to escape the evils that are coming upon the Earth, and
enable you to stand before the Son of max at his appearing. Luc. 21.36


Patient, for of all other lessons, that is to be exercised in time of
tribulation To. 12.12.
, for without that Christians cannot possess or enjoy their Souls Luke 21.19.
. And of all graces patience sometimes has the Pre-eminence: When Paul reckons
up many instances, by which he and Timothy did prove themselves to be the
Ministers of God, and desired to be so approved among the Corinthians, he
begins with patience. It is a needful He. 10.36
, commendable Ja. 5.11. Rev. 2.2.9.
, and much rewarded grace Re. 13.10. and 14.12. Jam. 1.4. Chapter 5.7.
; It begins in Christ, and ends in a Crown and Kingdom, and they do best and
most overcome that use it: Therefore let patience have its perfect work. Whilst
the husbandman sigheth for the hard season, the Corn rooteth; and whilst he
waits, the harvest comes; and this shall begin the words of Consolation.

Satan and his Instruments) is Christ himself, and the hatred of men against
him; as he says, Ye shall be hated of all men for my namesake Ma. 10.20
: And all these things will they do unto you, for my namesake Jo. 15.21.
; And because they follow the thing that is good Ps. 38.20.
: And run not with them (i. e. the wicked) into the same excess of riot, or
confused mixtures 1 Pet. 4.4.
, (as it is in some margents) These are properly the causes (as appears
clearly, by their not persecuting the same Persons, whilst they continue
Profane, or if they turn Apostates) though the Persecutors pretend it it is for
disobedience to Rulers, etc. which was the main pretense the enemies of the
Jews and against Nehemiah, and Ezra Neh. 6.6.
; the ^ewes against Christ Luke 23.2.
, (though Pilate himself could see it was only for envy Ma. 27.18
) this also was imputed to the Apostles and Martyrs in all Ages, as now it is,
but falsely; and the worst enemies may say, (if they speak what is in their
consciences) as Daniels enemies did, We shall not find occasion against this
Daniel, except we find it against him, concerning the Law of his God Dan. 6.5.
: And that they might have occasion against him, they would make a Law directly
contrary to the Law of God. This is just as if a Schoolmaster, that has feud
against one of his Scholars father, will give that Scholar a strict command to
obey him, but to disobey his Father (whereas he is willing to obey both) and
upon the breach of this unlawful command, he beats the Scholar; let any judge,
which is most worthy of blame, the Master or Scholar.

They that sow in tears shall reap in joy, and be that goes forth weeping,
bearing precious seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his
sheaves with him Psa. 126.5, 6.
; Here is promised Joy for Sorrow, Rejoicing for Weeping, reaping for sowing, a
coming back for going forth, and sheaves for handfuls, and all this certain.
And whilst Gods people are sowing the precious seed of tears, God is sowing
Light, or comfort, and gladness of heart for them: Therefore a Christian
should like a Husbandman; Ps. 96.11
sow in hope, and his afflictions, should no more discourage him, than the
former rain does the natural Sower: for Christ foretold his Disciples, that
they should weeep Luke 6.20.
, and lament here Jo. 16.20
, but their weeping is as the labor and pangs of a woman, in order to
following joy v. 21.
. But mark,

Christ commanded his Disciples, in such time especially to rejoice, and be
comfortable, Rejoice says he, and be exceeding glad Mat. 51 2
, or as another Evangelist writes, Lu. 6.23.
Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy; suffering days are most proper
days for rejoicing, for then Christians partake of the sufferings of Christ 1
Pe. 4.13
, and the Spirit of God and of Glory, then rests most upon them v. 14.
: Suffering unto a true Saint, is like Vinegar, which though it be sower, yet
it does make the blood thinner, and causes it to run more effectually through
every part.

The Apostles, rejoiced that they were counted worthy to suffer shame for
Christ's Name Act. 5.41.
; So other Saints took the spoiling of their goods joyfully He. 10.34
, The Martyrs, like the Crickets, were merry in the fire, and like the
Nightingale, that sings with her bare Breast upon the Thorns. They were as
Paul, more than exceedingly joyful in all their tribulations Cor. 7.4.
: And as Christians tribulations do abound, so their consolatoins do much more
abound 2 Cor 1.3.
.

But Paul was a strong, and an assured Saint, one that had been in the third
Heaven, and had a sign of his eternal happiness: But I am a poor weak and
doubting Creature, fearing that I shall not be able to stand in times of great
trial, and so have not such cause of rejoicing.

Jam. 2.6. and 3.14. and 5.5.
,) are to count it all joy (that is, cause and matter of all joy) when they
fall into diverse temptations Jam. 1.2.
, or tribulations: or as Peter writing to the same people says, If any man
suffer as a Chaistian (that is for Christ, and like Christ) let him glorify
God 1 Pe. 4.16
; or make his boast of him in tribulations; nay let him like Paul, glory in his
infirmities, and let the brother of low degree rejoice, that he is brought low:
For though a weak Christian should fall, yet his fall will not be so
dishonorable to God, as the fall of a stronger Christian. But if he stands it
will be more to the glory of God, than if he were stronger: But God bids the
weak say, I am strong Joe. 13.10.
, and he gives power to the faint, and to them that have no might (that is in
their own eyes) he increases strength, Es. 40.29.
. Art thou a worm? He will hide thee in the hollow of his hand Es. 51.16.
. Art thou a Lamb? He will carry thee in his bosom and 40.11.
. Art thou but a grain of Corn (that is ready to go through the seive) thou
shall not fall Amo. 9.9.
, nor perish. Art thou a halfpenny or farthing Christian? yet if thou have the
superscription, and Image of Christ upon thee, thou shall pass: as Moses would
not leave a hoof, belonging to Israel behind him in Egypt, no more will Christ
leave any of his in Babylon, or corruption; Fear not Lu. 12.32.
, (says he) little flock, for it is your Fathers good pleasure, to give you
the Kingdom: The least veins receive blood from the Liver, as well as the
greatest, and the lowest, and meanest members protection, and influence from
the head, as well as the highest and chiefest; and the smallest and lowest
boughs, are in less danger of being blown down, than the greatest and tallest;
and as I read of a great bodied fowl, whilst she upbraided the Swallow with the
littleness of her body, was her self shot at and killed by the Fowler. Many
poor illiterate Tradesmen, and Husbandmen (as in the former Persecutions) will
stand when many learned (and highly accounted of) Preachers and Professors will
fall. Also God will do most of his great works by such mean instruments: as God
said, that out of the mouth of Babes and Sucklings, he will ordain Strength,
that he may still (or make to cease, marg.) the enemy and the avenger Pas. 8.2.
; and by the feet of the poor, and the steps of the needy, God will tread down
the mighty; And the least of the flock shall lead them out Es. 26.5.6
; yea the worm Jacob, shall thresh the Mountains, and beat them small, and make
the Hills as Chafe Es. 41.15.
: These (as a little sort of flies, that so trouble the Lions, as to make them
scratch out their own eyes, by which they are taken and overcome) will be too
hard for the mightiest men, if they meddle with them. Therefore you Rulers of
the earth, touch not Gods anointed, and do his Prophets no harm, (which are
his Saints, as Abram, Isaac and others) for here God rebuked Kings, as Abimalek
Pharaoh, Uzziah, yea good Asa for their sakes Psalm. 105.14, 15. Genesis 12.17. and
20.3. 2 Chr. 26.21 and 2.16.10, 12.
.

heirs-male upon whom (next Christ) heaven is entailed. For theirs (meaning the
persecuted) is the kingdom of Heaven Mat. 5.10
: nay persecution is as necessary a condition of salvation (in some sense) as
any other. If we suffer with him, we shall be glorified together Romans 8.17
; and if we suffer with him, we shall reign with him 1 Ti. 2.12.
: leave the cross and loose the Crown, but bear the cross, and wear the Crown.

1. Pet. 3.13.
Who is he (says Peter) that can harm you, Pro. 16.7.
if you be followers of that which is good? Job 5.17, 23.
be at Peace with God, and he will make all creatures to be at peace with you

Jesus Christ, offered whilst he was in the flesh: nay the Prayers, Tears and
sufferings of all the Saints and Martyrs, do cry and call for Judgments upon
the last generation of Persecutors, Hab. 2.17. Mat. 23.35. Rev. 6.10. and 18.24.

Christ himself lives, as well as his people, in expectation of having his
enemies subdued, and of his kingdom: and to that end will he come, Heb. 10.30.
Lu. 18.7, 8. He. 10.37. 2 Th. 1.10. Lu. 12.15.



Mat. 24. and Mar. 13, with what we have heard and seen, Job. 37.14
and let us wisely consider, Ps. 111.2.
and search out Gods works, though others slight and will not see them.

(I may say Prophesy) that the end of the Churches troubles, would be about our
time; and add thereto, se Ps. 102.13 Deuteronomy. 11.27 Jer. 51.6. Rev. 10.6.
the apprehensions, and expectations, of the godly and learned living yet: with
what is said in Pr. 11.5. The wicked shall fall by his own wickedness.

Lastly, it is matter of comfort to Gods suffering people, that God sees their
afflictions, Act. 7, 34 that he is sencible thereof, afflicted with them, in
all their afflictions, Esa. 63.9. Jer. 31.20. that he intends them much good,
and no hurt thereby, Jer. 29.12 and 25.6. that he does not willingly put this
yoke upon them, Lam. 3.33. but does most willingly take it off, Hos. 11.4. he
does afflict them in measure, Je 46.28. he does it to prove and try them, Deu.
8.2. 2 Chr. 32.31. He repents him for afflicting them. Deu. 32.36. Ps. 135.14.
He feeds, fans, and purifies them by afflictions, Mich. 6.14. Esa. 1, 25, and
27, 9. Heb. 12.10. he then remembers them, and the Covenant he made with them
most of all, Psa. 136.23. Ne 9.17. he is not ashamed then to own them for his
people, He. 11.16 he shows them mercy purposely, that their enemies may show
them mercy, Jer. 42.12. 1 Ki. 8.5. he will thoroughly plead their cause against
their enemies. Je. 50.34. and 51.3. and he stretches his hand against the wrath
of their enemies, and restrains it: Ps. 138.7: 86.11. and rescues them out of
their hands, when they think they hold them fastest, Je. 50.33, 34. And he
says he will cut off their enemies, before their faces and they shall no more
oppress them, but they shall fee their fall, Ps. 58.8, 9, 10, 11. Es. 17.19.
Je. 46.18. Pr. 29.16, and they themselves shall be in due time perfectly
delivered, Ps. 37.4 Pr. 12, 13 Je. 24.7. 1 Coe 10.13. And God will yet, set his
Son upon his holy hill, and Kingdom, in despite of his enemies. Ps. 2.6. Es.
9.6. and if any will detain Gods Ark the Church, they will have cause to say, as
the Philistines did, woe to us, 1 Samuel 4.7. Let all therefore that fear God
love Christ, and wish well to Zion, say with Jeremiah, so be it, O Lord, Jer.
11.5.

Some Scriptural Observations, Spiritual Experiences, pithy Sentences, and
plain Comparisons, tending to Edification.
IN the first Creation, The Old and New Creation compared
God created the matter and substance of the Creation first, and afterward
divided and formed the same: So in the second or New Creation (or in the work
of Regeneration, Genesis 1.2.
so called; 2 Cor. 5.17. Gal. 6.15. Ephesians. 2.10.) first, God creates
Principles, or infuseth the habits of Grace (so called) into men, when there is
none, ( Phil. 2.12. Act. 9.4, 5.) and then distinguishes and divides the same.

2. In the distinction between the parts and Works of the first Creation, Ver.
4.
some are higher and some lower; as the Firmament higher than the Earth: So
some part of the work of Grace is in the supernal, or uppermost room of the
Soul (that most stately building of God) the Understanding, in which is placed
true Light and Knowledge; and in the Will (the Wine-Celler of God) is seated
Obedience, 1 John 5.20. 2 Cor. 10.5.

3. Between these two, are placed the Affections; some whereof (as Joy, Love,
Desire, and Hope) are like the Waters above the Firmament, V. 7.
and the other (as Sorrow, Grief, and Hatred) like the Waters below the
Firmament.

4. In the first Creation God's Spirit moved upon the Waters: V. 2.
So in the second Creation, the Spirit convinces, quicknet^, sanctifies, etc.
Jo. 16.8. and 6.63. 1 Pet. 1. ^.

5. In the first Creation, V. 3, 6, 9.20, 26.
God by his Command and Word made all things; so by his Word God works
Regeneration and Grace in the Soul, John 4.41. and 6.63. 1 Pet. 1.23. Jam.
1.18. Psalm. 19.7.

6. In the order of the first Creation (or rather Formation, V. 3.
Division, or Distinction) God created and formed Light: so in the order of
Regeneration, God first creates Light and Knowledge, 2 Cor. 4.6. Acts 26.15,
18. 2 Cor. 3.16. Heb. 8.10.

7. In the first Creation, the Lights (as the Sun, Moon and Stars) were
appointed to divide, V. 14, 16.
and distinguish the day from the night: So in the second Creation (or
Regeneration) Jesus Christ, his Spirit and Graces, do distinguish Believers
from Unbelievers, and between themselves in the state of believing and
regeneracy, and the state of unbelief and unregeneracy, in which they were in
before, Romans 8.10, 11. Ephesians. 2.12, 13. and 5.8. 1 Thessalonians. 5.5. 1 Pet. 2.10. 1 John 3.4.

8. In order the Evening, Ver. 5, 13, 19, etc.
or time of darkness and disconsolation is before the morning or day of comsort
and consolation; (set down in the first Creation) So is the darkness, sorrow,
fear, trouble, bondage, doubts and disconsolations of a Christian first in his
Conversion; or, his whole time in this Life is the evening of that Eternal Day
they are to live with Christ in Heaven: See Prove. 4.18. Psalm. 88.6. Isa. 50.10.
1 Cor. 13.9. 1 John 3.2.

9. In the first Creation, the Trees, V. 12.
(and so doubtless the Herbs) had their Seed in them which brought forth fruit:
So the Trees and Herbs of Grace, true Believers and Regenerate Persons have the
seed of the Spirit, the Word of God, and his Grace in them, which is the cause
of their bearing spiritual fruit, 1 John 3.9. Mat. 13.23. 2 Pet. 1.4.

10. When God in the first Creation had made the Creatures, V. 21, 25, etc.
he saw them all good: So when God has wrought the second Creation, or work of
Sanctification in the hearts of men, he sees them good (and not before) Psalm.
37.23. Romans 5.7.

11. In the first Creation God made Man after his own Image (that is, in
sovereignty over the Creatures, or like the Father, Son and Spirit, that is,
consisting of spirit, soul and body, 1 Thessalonians. 5.23.) So in the second Creation
or Regeneration, God does create Men after his own Image, in Knowledge,
Righteousness, true Holiness, and Love, Col. 3.10. Ephesians. 4.24. 1 John 4.17, 18.

12. In the first Creation God made some Creatures one day, V. 5, 13, 19, etc.
and some another, till He had finished the whole. So God he makes some new
creatures one day, and some another; and some in one Age, and some in another,
till He has converted his whole (Elect and Redeemed) number.

13. In the first Creation, V. 27.
God created the Woman in the Man, and then out of the Man, and for the Man. So
in the Restitution of Man, and Chapter 2.18, 21, etc.
the Church of God is chosen in Christ, and made holy by his Holiness, and for
his Glory, Ephesians. 1.4. and 3.9. Ezekiel. 16.14. Hos. 3.3. 1 Pet. 2.9.

14. When God made the Creatures at first, he commanded them to multiply, and
accordingly they did. So when God works Grace in the hearts of his People, he
commands that they grow in grace, and they do so, 2 Pet. 3.18. Psalm. 84.7. and
92.12, 13, 14.

Lastly, When the Lord had ended the work of Creation, he rested, Chapter 22.3.
and the Sabbath begun: So when the Lord has finished the work of converting
all his People, then the Eternal Rest and Reign of the Saints will begin,
Matthew. 13.48, 49. Mark 13.20, 27.

Saints should fear every Sin, but no Sufferings, Psalm. 4.4. Revel. 2.10.

There is a guilt that Saints may communicate to others, and contract from
others; both to be removed by new acts of Faith and Repentance.

It is a great ease to, and unburthening of the Soul, to confess Sin, sensibly,
humbly, brokenly, and with hatred to it.

It is the property of a true Christian, to justify God, and to judge himself
under the greatest Afflictions.

Christ and Sin are most magnified in the eyes of Believers in their
Affliction, but in a different manner, and to a different end: and then Christ
is most desired, and Sin most despised.

It is the duty of a Christian, to suspect and search himself, when he does not
know evil by himself.

It is, and should be the care of a Christian, not to suffer for Sin, nor sin
in suffering.

Account the least spiritual thing, better than the greatest and best outward
and temporal things.

There is no real bondage, but what is either from, or for Sin.

Christians will sooner overcome their outward Enemies by praying for them,
than by praying against them.

Bad times well improved, are far better than good times not redeemed, or
misspent.

The heaviest afflictions on Earth, are but light in comparison of Christ's
sufferings, Sins deserts, or the punishment of the Wicked in Hell.

Let not Christians by their own prudence, think to prevent Afflictions, for
they cannot avoid them, 1 Thessalonians. 3.3. 2 Timothy 3.12.

The World's Jury may find Christians guilty; but God can forbear pronouncing
the Sentence, or reprieve and pardon the Condemned.

Shut thy eyes from beholding, thy ears from hearing, and thy heart from
entertaining Sin.

He has a good command over his spirit, that can stop it when moved with
passion; over his Affections when they are under sail; and over his Tongue,
that can silence it when he will.

fire, before they will be brought to close: for it is impossible to join cold
pieces, or one cold, and another hot.

(that knows best) may not think so.

In the way to Heaven, there are three narrow and hard passages, the entrance
into the new birth, herein a man must leave behind him sinful self: the
entrance into assurance, therein a man must leave and deny religious self:
(that is, look off his own evidences:) and lastly, the gate of death, then a
man must part with natural self, religious self, and sinful self. The two first
I have experienced, the last I expect.

He that is willing to part with his dearest Lust, will be willing to part with
his dear Life also.

If a Christian be made free to lay down his Life for Christ or his Cause; yet
let him sell or lose it at as dear a rate as he can for Christ.

A Christian will have but little comfort to suffer for that which is but a
Notion in his head, and not a settled Truth in his heart. Yet,

Note, that the lesser the Truths are which Christians do suffer for, (if
rightly) the more their love does appear to Christ therein.

God's Minnums (or least things) are better than the World's Mountains, or
greatest things.

The Saints are to bear a threefold Testimony to, and for Christ and his
Truths: Breath-testimony, Life-testimony, and Bloodtestimony.

Speaking words, maintaining Opinions, and the outward performing of Duties,
and partaking of Ordinances, are but the least things in Religion.

Affections, Parts, or Applause from the World, or from Christians, are very
dangerous, and not to be trusted in.

I never trusted Christ, but I found him faithful: nor my own heart, but I
found it false.

In looking upon the Scriptures, and good men, I did learn often to know what I
should be: but I found it hard to be what I knew I ought to be.

From the first change wrought in a true Christian, he may fear and suspect
himself to be a Hypocrite: but he never intends to be, never approves of being
a Hypocrite, nor never countenances himself in Hypocrisy.

Let God's hiding thy infirmities, and secret sins from thy Enemies, make thee
the freer and willinger to confess them unto him.

Learn to know Sin, disallow of it, despise it, overcome it inwardly, and to
put it from thee; to fear its return, and to be more estranged toward it, more
watchful to avoid Temptations, and wise to shun Occasions that lead to it.

The strength of all Corruptions sometimes appears in one; and do but overcome
your Master-sin, and you overcome all.

The power and strength of Corruption is but seldom known, to wit, when
Temptations, Opportunities and Occasions of Trial come.

The best way to keep from Sin, is, to set God in his Power, Purity and Glory
still before our eyes; to fear our selves; to keep near to Christ; to fast and
pray privately; to engage other Saints for our help; to cherish the holy Spirit;
to keep up constant practice of Holiness; to provide contrary means against it;
to resolve strongly to withstand it: to eye God's Promises, Commands and
Threatenings; to withstand the first occasions; to reason it off at a distance;
to believe it away when it comes near; to avoid all occasion thereof.

When you would repent for some secret sins you have committed: it is better
and safer sometimes to do it in a general way, than to think and speak of the
same particularly: for Satan and Sin will be ready to step in, when they know
we are attempting any thing against them.

It is advantageous for a Christian to disclose Satan's secrets to God and to
his People; but to keep his own secrets from him as much as he can.

That soul does soon grow empty, that is always letting out, but not careful
to lay in.

It is not for one that has but little Grace (and particularly knowledge) to
be too forward among more able and knowing Christians: for then is his time to
learn.

Christians should not be to learn their Duties when they should be doing them;
nor doing them, when they should be suffering for them.

Concubines and not Queens, Cant. 6.8.

Lusts: but be like the Field, or Garden, bringing forth fruit for the
Husbandman and Dresser.



Sin to a man before his Conversion, is like cold Iron, which he can hold in
his hand without trouble:

Lay in, lay up, and lay out for Christ.

Remember that you will shortly reach Immortality, but never Eternity.

Make Christ your All, and you will be sure to lay down your self All.

Soul-Preservative-Physick; Repentance for Sin is Soul-Restorative-Phyfick.

Consider that when you are not assaulted with Temptations, Satan is damming
and pounding, and he will suddenly draw up his sluice and let loose upon you.

Satan does not (like God) warn before he strike.

Christ's Work is Wages, and his Service perfect Freedom.

The Love of the Master, the Sweetness of the Service, and the Greatness of
the Reward, are sufficient Encouragements to serve Christ.

Afflictions sink the flesh, and raise the Spirit.

To receive Evil ( viz. Affliction) for doing Good, is sweet.

A Christians security and safety, is in doing his duty: and he should study
his duty more then his safety.

He that loves not Christ more than his lust, or his life, is like to lose
Christ, and his life: but he that loves Christ more then his life, will be sure
to save, and keep both.

Strive greatly, to have and to exercise a good Conscience toward God, and
men; to commit thy soul, life and cause to the Lord; and to expect the worst of
men, and the best of Christ.

Some Saints do ill in seeking to do well; espeially in provoking and pressing
other Christans in dark and doubtful things, beyond their own Apprehensions,
Consciences, the bent of their spirits and abilities. This is,



Lodestone to the Iron, dawing it to it Self: or the Crystal to other stones,
putting beauty and luster on them.

Sense overrules Imagination; Reason, Sense; and Faith all three in a true
Christian.

A Christian beholds Christ in the deepest affliction as well as in the most
spiritual Ordinance.



A true Christian when he goes hence, changes neither his Work nor Company; but
his Place and Condition only.

God leads many of his best friends by the hand without Candle light (or
assurance) to their rests.

Bridge, Field, where a man has been working, to his own house to take his
rest.

To be able to refist strong Temptations, there must be either store of in-laid
Grace, or faith must fly quickly to that Grace laid up in Christ for it.

tender Parent that is careful to bring up his Children; but many Professors
like Undutiful, and Unnatural Children, forget them in their straits: Contented
to be maintained by Truth in Prosperity, but not to maintain Truth in Adversity.

maw or stomach, which will eat through the soul, unless scattered, killed, and
purged out.

Cannon or Musket fired against him.

Adamant, turning only toward one Point, even Christ.



Make have to do thy work (Christian) and God will make haft to give thee thy
wages.

On Christian, why should not that please thee who art but finite; that pleases
God who is infinite, even Christ? Pray that thy last days, and last works may
be thy best; And that when thou come to dye, thou may have nothing else to
do but dye.

Thou must dye once whether thou Suffer or no, and thou can dye but once if
thou suffer.

The sins of Saints are new Sufferings to Christ; and the Sufferings of Saints
are the wounds of Christ.

A Saint should desire to die that he may be fully freed from sin; have a full
fruition of Christ that he may be above all fears and doubts, and able to serve
the Lord uncessantly, and unweariedly.

Reading the Scriptures helps Metitation, Meditation Prayer, and Prayer every
good Work.

When you come to die, it will trouble you not only that you lived sinfully (or
in doing evil) but sloathfully, in not doing good: nay, not only that you were
sloathfull in good, but that you spent so much time in things less profitable,
which should have been spent about, and in the things which were most
advantageous.

Man may come too late to God, (when the door is shut) but God never comes to
late to men.

Christ may come in to afflicted Souls, through some backdoor (or Affliction)
which they do not expect him to come through, or in at.

what Christ gives you, and you shall want nothing.

To see the want of Grace, is much, the worth of Grace more.

It Is hard to get Grace, hard to get assurance of Grace, hard to use it, and
not abuse it.

It Is very hard to behold our own gift without pride, and the gifts of others
(if they excel ours) without envy.

Candle-stick becomes a small Candle; so a little Church a Pastor or Teacher
that has but little grace, and weak gifts.

It is better and surer for thy self to be a Toe than an Eye; a Member, then a
Teacher in a Congregation. And this I often wished might have been my condition.

Take heed of covering any man's good with his Evil, but let the one plead for
him as well as the other against him.

Do not commend thy friend, nor discommend thy foe too much; lest thou be
judged to be partial.

Lose not thy reward by seeking thy self in thy work.

warehouses, but will sell but in Whole-sales: And other young Professors like
pidling-pedlers crying about the streets every trifle.

learning and parts, or of great wealth and power, have (for the most part)
disturbed and divided Churches.

Also that those Churches never stood long, that made Opinion, and not
Godl-fess and Christianity, the foundation of their nellowship.

The best way for a Teacher, and his Congregation to live quietly, and
comfortably together; is for either of them to give to the other what God
requires, and not to demand, expect or exact one from another: and so Husband
and Wife and all other Natural Relations.

He commands most, and best, that commands in love, humility and self-denyingly.

He is most a Master, that is most a Servant. Be not ye Christians called
Masters: and yet the People give them honor, according to their place, grace,
years and labors.

He has not learned to rule, that has not learned to obey.

An even, through-pac'd, self-fearing, heart-melting Christian, is always best.

Ruffling opinion sowing, and Church-renting Persons and Professors, have
commonly more self then grace.

white Cloud, and that he might go out of the world, as a Perfume, and not as
a Snuff.

The world is a great nothing; deluding the bad, disturbing, and distracting
the good.

Satan works more upon men by slight then by might; avoid his cunning, and thou will avoid his cruelty.

The holy Law of God teaches a man to see his own deformity; and requires from
him to it conformity.

Some Sins floate on the Top, or appear in the lives of Christians: but others
sink to the bottom, and lurk secretly.

sleepy Lion in the Soul, which temptation soon awakens.

hearts are like stinking Ponds, wherein Frogs live, and fish die; lusts feed,
and grace (if it were there) starves.

Devil is like the Turkie-cock (or Crocodile) if you turn upon him he will fly
from you; but if you flee from him, he will pursue you.

It is better sometimes to slight the Devil, then to fight him.

Christ puts most of his oil in broken Vessels; in broken hearts there is most
grace, and best kept.

Be never at peace with Satan, sin, or Christ's implacable enemies.

The less a man strives for himself, the more will Christ strive for him.

O my Soul! look for death hourly, long for it greatly, prepare for it
carefully, meet, and welcome it joyfuly: for it is Christ's Servant to direct his
Spouse (the soul) to him, and thy friend that comes to set thee at liberty from
thy sins. It will discharge thee from thy prison, dismiss thee from thy debts,
and bring thee at once to enjoy all thy desires.



Though God has baricado'd the street of man's Soul with grace, strength, and
strong fence, yet the Enemy Satan often assaults it; But by faith's making
Christ a shield, and a Second, the Christian resists, and overcomes.

Thoughts of our own death, will tend much to deaden sin.

Christians should be contented to have a propriety in things sometimes when
they do not partake of them; as the wicked partake of them when they have no
propriety in them.

God has set the tongue between the brains and heart, that it may a dvise with
both, and within two guards to keep it in, and yet it is unruly.

Prayer is a good preparative to Suffering; when Christ had prayed he went out
to meet Judas, Joh. 18.4.

He that will not take example, shall make an example.

Afflictions are Christ's love tokens, Jer. 12.7. Heb. 12.6. Rev. 3.9. And
Christians are never more tendered, then when most afflicted, as Ephraim, Jer.
31.20.



Small sins yielded to, make way for greater, and one sin for another.

He that converts a sinner, Covers a world (or multitude) of sins, and gains
more then a world, to wit a Soul.

Saints should labor to Lord it over their Corruptions; as their Corruptions
did formerly Lord it over them.

The best Saints have need to be cautioned and warned, and to take heed of what
they are like to be most free from, Luke 21.34.

God has given a man a little mouth, and a narrow throat, that man may not
exceed in Eating.

To take pains about unnecessary, and unprofitable things, is laboriously to
mispend time.

A heart unconverted, is contented with nothing but what is helping it on to
hell: and it has never enough of that (to wit sin) and a heart converted is
never satisfied but with what helps it toward heaven, and yet thinks he has
never enough thereof; to wit, of Christ, and grace.

It is good to curb natural, and acquired gifts, but to give the reign to
grace; and let grace always lead, rule, and master gifts.

Zeal without knowledge to guide it, is like mettel in a blind Horse, which
stumbles, and overthrows the Rider.

Young Christians (commonly) want a curb, and old Christians a Spur.

greater parts, before an old Saint of meaner; nor a young man of wealth,
before an old man of wisdom.

Be not ambitious of love, and thou shall not be so soon an object of envy.

Get Christ (O Christian) to bind thy Conscience to the peace, and thy
affections and flesh to the good Behavior.

Spend all thy grace against thy Lust, but none upon it.

Had I neither Scripture nor Reason to dissuade me from being one of those
called Quakers, their self-conceitedness, censoriousness, and that their
chiefest Godliness does stand in the least things of Religion, (as in thouing,
keeping on the hat, etc.) and in outward affliction of the body, according to
those Scriptures, Pro. 11.17. Col. 2.23. I could never be of their Judgment
and way. I have tried them enough to know them to be worse, and less then they
yet seem to be.

A difference I found between City and Country Professors: In the City there is
much meat had with little labor, and much eaten but undigested; but in the
Country little Spiritual food, with great labor, which causes good digestion
and stomach.

Self, and to destroy sin.

The ship of Christ (the Church) is now under sail and bound homewards
(Heaven-wards) The Pilot (Christ) is Skilful and the wind (the Spirit) strong
and direct; though the Sea (this world) be boisterous, and tempestuous. I am
sure we shall lose but the trash, the Jewels will be safe.

As the Martyr professed he had rather be a Martyr then a Monarch; so should
every Christian.

It is a special favor, and great promotion to Suffer.

A Christian should seek to live so holy, that he may keep Christ in Heaven
undispleased (as a Cylent his Advocate) and the Spirit within him ungrieved,
his Conscience undefiled, unwounded, and unseared, his Profession unstained,
his Brethren unoffended; and poor sinners unstumbled.

Take heed Christian of tempting Satan by letting thy thoughts run out
sinfully, by thy Eyes, Ears, tongue, etc. which he observes, and which he will
take as an Invitation to tempt thee.



Satan accuses God to men, and men to God; But Christ excuses, and answers all
his Accusations against his people.

Christians should do as the Shechemites did, Jud. 9.
when their City (their own Souls in strength) was beaten down, fly to their
Tower, even Christ.

star (which is thought to be the same) still follow the Sun, Christ.

Welcome thou (thy Landlord) Christ into thy Cottage now, and he will welcome
thee into his Palace here-after.

The true knowledge of Christ brings Consolation, and the right Profession and
Practice of him, Persecution.

Clear knowledge of Christ in the understanding, begets fervent love in the
heart, and both, Godliness in the life.

When a man is imprisoned, and shut up from men, he is the more shut up with
God.

Account it not restraint as long as thy heart can go out toward God, and his
people, and ways, in affection and Prayer.

Retiredness, and close imprisonment, drives a man to hold closer Communion
with God, and to a stricter Search of himself.

I would be glad to be out of the World, when I have no Service to do for God
in it.

He that would live for himself (only or chiefly) in the world, is not worthy
to live a day in it.

If I may not have Liberty to serve Christ, I would have the Glory to Suffer
for Christ.

Never fear Death, but when sin is in the way to it, either as a cloud hiding
thy assurance, or as a provoking Cause pulling death as a punishment upon thee.

heaven in Anger; As a master seeing his Servant sleepy or sloathful, turns him
out of the field, and from his work to sleep and take his rest at home.

I would willingly work for Christ to eternity (if I could) without asking any
more wages then I had already, and skill, power, and delight to do his work.

If an Earthly Jubilee, or outward deliverance come to Gods people whilst thou
live here, be rosolved to give both thy Ears to be bored through, and to abide
with him, and return no more to sin, or the world.

Never reckon what thou have of outward and wordly things, unless it be to
Praise God for them, or to Serve God better with them.

meditation (to prayer) does not prevent Prayer it self; or put you beside
Prayer.

Secret Prayer is either a familiar Speaking to God, and with God: or a pouring
out of the heart before God, through his Son (our Savior) by his Spirit.

Sometimes ejaculations, or short and sudden Pantings and breathings out of
desires to God, may be more acceptable to him and prevailing with him, then
long prayers.

One of the three Radical sins spoken of in 1 John 2.16. is every man's
master-sin.

My strongest, greatest, and most fervent frequent desires, were to be found in
Christ's reghteousness, to convert sinners, to be Holy in all manner of
Conversation, and to have my lot and living among and with the people, and
Saints of God.

There may be great difference between the temper of a Christian one time and
another, yea in the excercising of his gifts, in Praying, Preaching, etc.

I often found my heart in days of humiliation, more affected, and melted by
the Prayers of weaker, then stronger Brethren.

And likewise observed, that (sometimes) in matters of counsel, and advice in
the Church, God has given out his mind more clearly and convincingly by such
as were less esteemed in the Church, then those that were most esteemed. Even
as the hindermost Hound hits upon the Scent, when all the pack besides lose it.

True Godliness and Hypocrysie, are best discerned in turnings, and changes:
either when they change their conditions by Marriages, or are exalted to
offices: or when new opinions begin to grow.

Professor that has been careful to walk with other Christians, and to follow
the Ordinances of God constantly, and closely: if he begin to lagge behind, and
to withdraw, he is surely under some sore temptation: or has fallen into and
under some sin, or, which is worse, may be dangerously suspected for a
Hypocrite. The like of one that has been very confident, and cheerful, and is
grown doubtful and sad.

temptation and corruption: 1 do not remember that ever fear and threatening did
as mnch prevail with me as love and kindness: or that I did atempt to overcome
any man so much by might and cruelty, as by persuasion and mercy.

I never repented me (since my Conversion) of any thing I said, did or suffered
for Christ; or for walking in his way, of joining with his people: nor resolved
to go on in any sin, or turn back from the way of God, or aside from the
Commandments of God; or to leave Church-Society.

One sin has cost me more Sorrow, then all my Sufferings.

It is happy to dye in the Lord, and honorable to dye for the Lord.

A Prison or persecution is to a Christian, as some scaring thing that one sees
in the night at a distance, but when he comes near it, and to know it, he is
not at all afraid of it.

hot-iron, ready to fling it out of his hand: but hold the Gospel, and his
Profession as a man would hold a Silver-cup that has dainty meat in it (which
though it be hot, yet he will not let it fall) or like a glass that has wine
in it, which a man will not willingly let slip out of his hand.

Errors, before another find them out: and to write your own Errata's.

Morsels and mamocks of worldly things, which they have swallowed down, to the
wicked again, then have them lie as guilts upon their Consciences, or blocks
between their Souls and Christ.

The Kings of the earth will ere long be Fanatics (that is wise fools) and see
their folly and madness in joining with the Beast against the Lamb. But first,
the Lamb must give one sound overthrow, and fall to the Beast, Rev. 17.14, 16.

When the Lord is trying his People, they should be trying themselves.

I never remembered that I had such a hard thought of God, as to think he did
wrong me in or by any thing he laid upon me.

deliverance before the time appointed; for that is as if a woman should desire
to have her child born, before the full and due time.

big-belly'd mercies, that have many mercies in their wombes, as Election,
Redemption, etc.

Election is like the conception, Redemption like the quickening in the womb,
Conversion like the birth, and Perseverance in holiness, like growth.

two or three steps of the stairs at once: so a soft-pac'd Christian by
continuance and perseverance, will reach heaven at last.

It is a commendable thing in a Traveller so to travel in the mornning, as to
continue, or mend his pace in the Evenning: So for a Christian to run faster,
the nearer he comes to the mark, and end of the race.

Christians are apt to feel, and fear Punishment, more then sin, which is the
cause of it.

Gods people must expect in the world, the Entertainment of Strangers.

When Gods people are humble enough, and the wicked high enough, and the Lords
appointed time come, then expect deliverance to the Godly and not before.

Take heed of being humbled, and yet unhumble, that is, of being brought
outwardly low, and yet the heart continue still high.

Sins in Saints are like weeds weeded out of a garden, or field, which lie in
the Alleys, or Reanes, but never grow there again.

the highway, which an Enemy casts into the garden again, but yet cannot make
them grow there any more: So Satan cannot make the Sins of Saints grow in them
again, when they are once separated from them.

white-stone in the water among other Stones, and of the same nature with other
stones there, hard, heavy, cold, and inflexible, and differs only in color.

flint-stone, which though it fall into water, yet it keeps, and retains fire
in it still: so does he retain his grace, notwithstanding his corruption.

Labor to act those graces chiefly, that are most contrary to your master-sins
and chief corruptions.




Christians are now as Abram was, was driven out of Egypt, and come where they
were before, or into their first state; therefore they should offer to the Lord
as he did, Genesis 13.3.

God is now spoiling us, of what would otherwise have spoiled us.

He that serves the Lord without assurance, serves him without so much as an
earnest: and doubtless that Servant must needs love his Master much, that
serves him, and yet knows not his Masters love to him.

The Lord has Saints enough odivide into three Bodies, some o suffer for him,
some to destroy Babylon, and some to be for Seed-corn, torrow again in the
earth.

Sisters to be his wife, the one will not marry him unless he will make her a
Jointure presently: the o her is free to refer that wholly to him: which of
there two will he be likelyest to take for his wife? So it is between Christ,
and one that will take him upon self-conditions; and another that is willing to
take Christ upon Christ's conditions: or to refer himself wholly to him.

Learn by lighter crosses, to look and prepare for heavier.

part or Member is sorely tweak'd; or as the Grapes when they have most weight,
and pressure, give forth their Juice most freely.

In two cases it is hard to act faith, (1) when there is no hing sencible or
visible to second and support it: or (2) when there is very much to till the
outward senses.

It is a very common and ordinary thing for most, or all Professors, to be in
one of two extremes: either to overvalue, or undervalue Instruments, Creatures,
and Ordinances.

Churches gathered in Prosperity will hardly stand, or continue together in
Adversity.

The more Saints do believe, and suffer, the more they may expect of the
Spirit, Joh. 7.38. 1 Pet. 4.14.

sin by Christ's sufferings: for if that strong Bar of steel did bend under the
weight of our sins: what shall poor weak man do who is but a reed, or rush?

Be more thoughtful and careful, how to use what you have to Gods glory, then
to gain more.

As our good works and performances, should have an operation upon our souls
and hearts, to strengthen faith: so should our weaknesses, and sins, to work
repentance.

The Lord freely gives, and justly takes away.

The excercising of graces, do naturally destroy sin; and the more you abound
in Acts of grace, the more you increase the habit, Heb. 6.22.

The Law causes sickness of Soul, but the Gospel heals the same.

When Saints perceive their sins growing weak, they should then prosecute them
most.

A Saint is to put forth his Faith in Prayer, and afterward follow his Prayer,
with Faith.

In the midst of earthly businesses, the soul should redeem some special time
for secret and private duties.

It is the will of Christ, that Saints should rejoice more in what Christ has
done for them, then in what they have done or can do for him.

Its a great condescension in God, to afflict or lay his hand upon man: and in
that sense the Apostle exhorts Believers, not to despise or think little of the
chastning of the Lord, Heb, 12.5.

Learn to observe what God gives without asking, and what he gives in answer to
Prayer: for the one begets thankfulness the other more Prayer.

legally, Believers heep it Evangelically: he perfectly, they purposingly, and
endeavouringly.

A Believers assurance and chiefest joy, does not arise from his
Sanctification: (because that is imperfect here in degrees) but from his
Justification, Romans 5.2.1 Pet. 1.8.

A Believer is to shut the eye of Reason, if he will clearly see with the eye
of Faith.

perspective, and his Faith his eye, with which he looks through it upon
Christ, and God the Father in him.

Look upon Christ first without you, then search for him within you.

Ask thy Soul whether it be willing to receive Christ upon his own terms, and
for his own sake, and to accept of Pardon and Life through him freely, without
looking at all upon thy own Righteousness; and art thou contented that Christ
should be honored in, and by thee, and thou despised, and dishonored for his
sake.

God carries on the work of grace in believers, usually.

1. According to their natural constitutions, and parts. 2. According to the
means they are under, whether Legal or Evangelical. 3. According to the things
he has to do by them, or he intends to call them to suffer. 4. According to
the shortness or length of time they are to live in the world. 5. According as
they have been before their Conversion greater, or less sinners.
In Duties Christians should, 1. Look for to meet with God, and enjoy communion
with him. 2. Expect to hear, and receive from God. 3. To return somewhat to
God; but yet know thou canstreturn but of his own to him, 1 Chronicles. 29.14.


1. God did take off, and from his people their sins, before he laid them on
Christ. And,

2. God cannot (in justice, and to speak with Reverence) take them off Christ,
and lay them on them again.

God makes us feel him (or his hand) that he may hear us; strokes makes cries,
and whippings mournful complaints to him.

God troubles us that we may turn to him, and leaves us a while, for to see
whether we will follow after him.

saint sometimes is like a little Child in the Arms of the Father, or Mother,
who may have Sugar offered to it by a stranger, which it may look upon, and
have some liking to, yet he will not thereby be drawn from the Father or
Mother, to the stranger: So the bait of Temptation or Corruption, cannot, and
shall not draw a Saint quite from Christ.

My soul bear up with Christ, bear off from Satan and the world; bear down thy
corruption, and bear forth thy Testimony.

The present Afflictions upon Gods people, are partly for their sins, and let
them thank themselves, ( yet God too) for their Sufferings.


Its strange, and a very bad Sign to see Saints look more upon the sins of the
wicked to ripen them for misery, then after self-humiliation and holiness, to
ripen and fit themselves for mercy.

wickeds Eternal destruction, for the obtaining of our own temporal, and
corporal liberty, safety, and honor: As if one should desire to have another
cast into the fire, and be burnt, that himself may be warmed.

He that cannot pity the Sinner, and hate sin, does not reprove out of love to
Christ, nor from a gracious Spirit.

He that loves not a Reprover, and prises not his reproof, neither profits
thereby; is more his sins, than his Souls friend.

Strong-water will be much prized (though but small) when one is fainting; or a
little knap of Sugar after a bitter pill: so will a little comfort in or after
affliction, be esteemed by a Christian.

If thou have fallen into sin through violent Temptations, seek speedily for
Repentance for it, recovery out of it, and reformation from it.

If God has kept thee from falling, still fear, watch, pray, and live by Faith
on Christ.

I have experienced sometimes, that thoughts of Gods goodness, and my own
vileness coming in at once, have drawn tears of joy, mingled with sorrow.

No power can keep him in bonds, whom truth and innocence acquits.

Our end in being in the world, is not to be to our selves.

Though the people of God may be killed, yet they can neither be hurt nor
overcome.

Christians though disagreeing in opinion, should agree in affection: and
differing in Controversy, yet should agree in Charity.

It is a very sad thing neither to be careful to do well, nor to repent for
doing ill.

The Potion that Christ gives us is not near so bitter, as his Cordial is sweet.

hand or face, which causes a Blister: only to make her sensible what he
suffered for her. Christians sufferings are but as a drop to the Sea, in
comparison of Christ's sufferings: or a little water put over the cup of poison,
whereof he drank.

As the nature of man does seek prosperity, to likewise it does abuse it.

Sain^s may partly know one another by grace, as well as by face.



Fear not fire, if sin be not the fuel that maintains it.

Physic works most effectually, that removes most bad humors, and purges away
most Excrements: so does that effliction that purges the heart, and life most
from sin.

Rivers when they come near the Sea, the Tides come forth to meet them: so does
Christ by his fain, and comolation, those Saints that are near heaven: and the
greater flood there is in the River, the faster is runs; so Chris^^ans the more
their Persecutions are, he swifter they fly by faith, and run in Holiness
Heaven-wards.

Children are too many Christians.

Things are not to be beloved for the place sake, but the place for the things
sake;
as Gregory Bishop of Rome said. A good observation for those that put holiness
in places.

The fear of Death is ingrafted in the common-nature of all men, but Faith
works it out of Christians.

Nothing will be terrible where the love of God is apprehended; and nothing
grievous: where love to Christ is exercised.

Learn to prefer Christ before self, and suffering above sinning.

Look for suffering as for exaltation, for it is an honor to be accounted
worthy, and a double honor to be enabled and carried through safely.

I would not dye as long as I might live to honor Christ: nor live unless I
might either live to do, or suffer for him.

little Infant will not be content with the Mother without the breast: nor the
breast without the Mother: so a Saint will not be content with Christ, without
his Ordinances: much less with the use of Ordinances without Christ.

Physician leaves a man that (he sees after all means used) grows worse, and
desperate: so does the Lord, the hopeless sinner, that has rejected all the
Means of his own Salvation.

Millstone turns easily, and swiftly, by the strength of water: so does the
heart of man, by the powerful water of Gods Spirit.

Christ has more to do, to bring men to be reconciled to God, then God to men:
And that, 1. Because, God is willing and inclinable thereto, but men unwilling.
2. Because, God is Satisfied with his Son, which men are not.


course Cloth though put into the same Fat, and continued there a like time
with Cloth which is finer, yet will not take so perfect a color: so a man that
is of a bad nature, though he be converted, will not appear so gracious, as he
that has a better nature; viz. one that is quiet, or meek by nature.

Olive, though it be grafted into the Vine, yet still brings forth Olive his
own fruit as well as Grapes; so a Christian that's grafted into Christ, brings
forth some Fruit of Nature, as well as of Grace.

If every Christian did follow closely his own work, the Trade of Religion
would go better on.

It is a great part of a Christians trouble, that he can be no time what he
would be: (viz. sinless, and serviceful) nor at all times, what he is some
times; viz. slighting sin, judging self, loving Christ, and despising the world
greatly.

Bird (before his Feathers grow) hops from one Bough to another, and returns to
his Nest again;
but when his feathers are grown, forsakes the Tree: so a Christian till his
Faith be grown, goes from sign to sign, turning in to his own righteousness,
but when his Faith or assurance is grown, he flies off himself to Christ.



My most Sanctifying Thoughts.

1. The thought of Gods most free, and continued love to me. 2. The thought of
what Christ has done for me. 3. The thought of what I have been, and done
against him. 4. The thought of what God, and Christ are to me, and I to them.
5. The thought of Christ's Excellency, and some Saints Eminencies. 6. The
thought of Death, and of Judgment. 7. The thought of what I shall be, and
shall have hereafter.
Church, and Ministers receive all their knowledge from Christ.

Atrue Christian will desire to be freed, From 1. Doubts of his Eternal
condition. 2. The power of corruption. 3. The fieryness of the Law in the
Conscience. 4. The fierce Temptations of Satan. 5. Scruples in matters of
Opinion. 6. Wicked places, and persons, where a man can neither do, nor receive
Good, nor be without danger of Evil. 8. The fear of Death.


A true Christian should be (and will be) much taken with, and rejoice at,
1. The least revelation of truth. 2. The least Communion with God, and Christ,
through the Spirit. 3. The least additional measure of holiness. 4. The least
good Success God gives him in his work. 5. The least prosperity Gods people
Enjoy in the world. 6. To be counted worthy and made able to suffer for Christ.


A Believer should learn, 1. To know God in Christ. 2. Himself in Christ. 3.
Christ in him. 4. Himself as he was without Christ, 1. Wicked, and wretched. 2.
Unwilling and weak in good.


The life of a true Believer; is, 1. In the Lord, 1 These. 1.1.1 Joh. 2.27. 2.
On the Lord, Romans 1.17, Gal. 2.20. 3. By and from the Lord, Joh. 6.57. 4. To
the Lord, Romans 14.8. Luke, 20.38. Gal. 2.19. 5. With the Lord, 2 Cor. 13.4.1
These. 5.10. Romans 6.8.


Suffering is not only a duty, but a Dignity, and not only a matter of
necessity, but of choice to a good Christian; For the Cross is inlay'd with a
Crown.

God has taken away some that were too good for the world, and God leaves
others in the world to grow better by afflictions.

God requires from Saints but Sincere obedience, and utmost endeavor, but from
Christ perfect obedience.

Some Signs and Characters of a true CHRISTIAN.
1. A true Christian is one that has had clear convictions of sin, (especially
his master-sin and unbelief) and of Christ; that is, of the want, and worth of
him; and of Judgment, that is, of punishment as the due desert of his sin,
Joh. 16.8.

2. He is unbottomed, and broken off from himself, he has no confidence in
himself: his Birth, Education, Parts, Performances, and best works are impure,
and imperfect in his own sight, Phil. 3.3. Isa. 64.6.

3. He is hardly brought to believe, he hardly believes that he does believe,
and hardly casts away his confidence when he does once truly believe.

4. He upon self-suspition does greatly desire to be searched, and does
earnestly search himself, Psalm. 139.1. and last, and 77.6.

5. He does never resolve to go on in any sin.

6. He prays to God most against his dearest and master-sin; and praises God
most when he has power against it.

7. He never repents for any sin forsaken, good he has done, or affliction he
has Suffered for Christ.

8. He has amity to all Saints, and seeks unity among all Saints, and makes
Union-ship, and Saint-ship, the ground of his fellowship, and Communion-ship,
Phil. 1.5.1 Pet. 2.17. Romans 14.4.1 Cor. 1.9, 10,

9. In reading of Scripture he observes what helps on his holinss, and teaches
self-denial, as well as what increases knowledge.

10. He cares not what he has, whither he goes, nor what he suffers with
Christ, and without sin.

11. His faith helps on his holiness, and his holiness helps up his faith.

12. He is one that always resolves to follow Christ through every condition,
(or through thick, and thin) yet much suspects, and fears he shall not be able
to hold out.

13. He seeks, and prises holiness, to serve God here, as much or more then
happiness hereafter.

14. He keeps himself from his own (i. e. his dear and master) sin, and
iniquity, 2 Samuel 23.24.

15. He fears God, and sin, more then men and suffering, Genesis 39.9. Dan. 3. 17,
18.

16. He neglects not his duty, though he knows there is great danger in doing
it, Dan. 6.10.

17. He is one that is careful to lay in, and to get true grace in his heart,
as well as in his Profession, as the wise Scribe, Mat. 13. and wise Virgins,
Mat. 25.

18. He can and dare do no hing against the truth, 2 Cor. 13.8. Especially if
he knows it.

19. He cleaves to the Lord, and follows after the Lord fully in the worst
times, and when others forsake him, Number. 14 24. Joh. 6.68.

20. He respects all, (and rejects none of Gods) Commandments, Psalm. 119.6. 2 Samuel 22.23.

21. He takes patiently and thankfully the harshest words, and the hardest
dealings of God, 1 Samuel 3.18.2 Kings 20. 19. Job 1.14. to the end.

22. He is much affected with, and afflicted for the Sufferings of the Godly,
and Sins or the Wicked; as David, Jeremiah, Lot, Paul, etc.

23. He is one that when he is recovered out of his Backsliding, remembers his
former good condition, and prizes it; and praises God, and hates his sin more
than he did before, Hos. 2.7. and 14.2, 3, 8.

24. He seeks and esteems Sincerity more than any garnishing gifts, and prizes
plain and poor Saints that are honest and upright, more than those that have
parts and wealth, if they be less sincere.

25. He has a great desire to join himself with the Saints of God, and to
continue with them when he comes to know them, and to be convinced thoroughly of
their ways, Psalm. 47.9. marg. and 27.4. Cant. 1.7. Isa. 56.3.1 Joh. 2.19.

26. He is one that knows the Voice of Christ, and will hear only his Voice,
Joh. 10.4, 5.1 Joh. 4.6.

27. He is greatly afflicted and troubled at and for the Affliction of the
Righteous, Nehem. 1.3, 4. Lam. 3.51.

28. He is one that exercises a good Conscience in all things, Heb. 13.8.

But what are the easiest Signs, or Marks, for young and weak Saints to find in
them?

29. He desires to fear God and His Name, and desires Grace for Grace sake,
Nebem. 1.11.

30. He does enquire how he may be saved, Act. 2.37. and 9.6. and 16. 30.

31. He is one that prays at his first Conversion, Act. 9.11. God has no
stillborn Children.

32. He desires earnestly the sincere milk of the Word, 1 Pet. 2.2.

33. He has a soft, circumcised, and new heart, and is a new Creature, Ezekiel.
36.26.2 Cor. 5.17.

34. He is either one that suffers himself, or is a companion of such, 2 Timothy
3. 12. Heb. 10.33.

The care of a true Christian is, 1. To wait on God, Isa. 8.17. and 25.9. 2. To
walk with God, Genesis 5.22, 24. and 6.9. and 24.40. 3. To work all his works in
and for God, Joh. 3.21. Romans 6.10.1 Cor. 10.31. 4. To bring his will to submit
to the will of God in every thing, Mark 26.42. Heb. 10.7.


Take heed of sinning presumptuously, (i.e.)

1. Knowingly, Luke 12.47. Heb. 6.4, 6.2 Pet. 2.20. 2. Willingly, and wilfully,
Hos. 5.11. Heb. 10.26. 3. By contemning the Law and Love of God, Prove. 3.13.
Romans 2.4. 4. By flighting Jesus Christ's Person, Power, and his Blood, Mat.
12.24. Luke 19.14. Heb. 10.29. 5. By blaspheming and doing despite to the
Spirit of God, Luke 11.15. Heb. 10.29. 6. By falling into the hands of God
without Christ, and true Sanctification, Heb. 10.29.
Wife or a Child that a Husband or Father brings into a Wood or Water,
yet they are confident it is not to hang or drown them.

It is a sign that People do not repent, when they grow worse, Rev. 16.9, 11.

A passionate and troubled spirit is like a little Pryll of Water, which every
shower of Rain, or Beast that passes through does change the color of it, and
make muddy.

Quick Onsets and Endeavors to Reform, are far better than many Purposes and
Resolutions.

It should trouble a Christian much to have such Graces which he receives from
God, beget so little good in him.

Oh my soul! will neither great Love, great Mercy, great Forbearance, great
Entreaty, nor great Wages prevail with thee to serve Christ freer and better!

A deep sense of sin, begets deep sorrow for sin: and true sorrow for sin leads
to welgrounded Faith, from hence flows inward Peace, Joy, and Holiness.

The Lord would soon turn from his Wrath, if men were turned from their
Wickedness.

A Christian is not only to be contented with any condition, but he is to be
religiously contented (or in a religious manner) not as a mere man, and to see
that the least things he has more than he deserves, and the worst things that
he endures, yet sweetened and sanctified to him.

Affliction and Persecution.

washing or scouring day, when the Clothes or Vessels are all out of order; but
it is in order to set them in a better frame speedily.

Of all men a Christian may be freer to lose, or to part with any thing than
another man: for he loses nothing but either what is hurtful to him, (to wit,
his sins) or what he shall regain and recover of a better sort, and in a more
abundant degree: As if he lose a small temporal ESTATE, he has in reversion an
Eternal INHERITANCE: If he lays down a body that is full of Corruption, he
shall have another free from Corruption: and therefore he may say (better than
the Heathen could) What I keep I lose, and what I give, or lay out, I save.

The Lord has (I am persuaded) done more by the Afflictions which he has
lately brought upon his People, than either was done, or like to be done by any
other ways, or means: Viz.

1. He has driven his People more together, and made them more one Vnio in
Larine, signifies Union, or a Pearl.
Oneness among Saints is a Pearl of great value.

2. He has separated more between them and the World, like winnowing, drives
the Chaff further from the Wheat.

3. He has convinced them more of their miscarriages, both toward him, and
toward one another.

4. He has made them to know persons and things better.

5. To prize Spiritual Privileges and Ordinances more. Such a fullness as
Christians had of Ordinances made them despise them, like the Israelites the
Manna.

6. To experience their own weakness of Faith, together with their great
misbelief, by checking the overmuch Confidence of his Saints.

7. To cry more earnestly to him, and wait more constantly on him.

8. They are unloaded and much discharged of the burden of the World.

A Christian should take heed lest he be giving way to his heart, to steal out
now and then to sin, and get some sweet-bits thereof between Duties.

He should be careful also, to fence that Gap most, by which the strongest
Temptations do enter oftenest in.

There will be a reviving of old sins, if there be not effectual Repentance for
them, and a care by Faith through all Duties and Ordinances to get new strength
against them, and a constant watch kept over them.

When God makes the World too hot for his People to hold, then they will let it
go.

A Christian comes not to know the weakness of his Grace, till the Spirit
ceases to work in and by it: nor the power of his Corruption, till Satan works
therein by his Temptation.

A Christian's flesh shonld keep from the show, and his Conscience from the
guilt of Sin.

Sin's best is before, but its worst is behind; and the sting and tail of it
longer than it self.

Where Sin is not killed, it will kill.

Sin was condemned by Christ to save the sinner, Romans 8.3. Oh then let not the
Sinner seek to save the Sin to condemn Christ again.

As the natural Sun the nearer it is to us, and the more direct over us, the
less shadow it casts: So Christ the nearer he is to us, the less Darkness and
Sin we have.

Christians should account restraints from Sin, great Mercies to them; but
Recoveries out of Sin with advatage, greater.

Sin has no mother but a man's heart, nor father but Satan.

Sin draws the Soul into it, either by power of policy, by force or by fraud.

Christians should not give offense carelessly, nor take offense causelessly.

Fear thy Friends more than thy Foes, thy Sins more than thy Sufferings, and
Liberty more than Bondage.

Some Christians have four Thorns that grieve them, a Thorn of Affliction from
God, a Thorn of Persecution from men, and a Thorn of Temptation from Satan, and
of Corruption in themselves; which is the worst, and that which should trouble
them most.

Though a man may be bled in time of self-ostentation both by God and men; by
God in Affliction, and by men through Persecution, Reproaches, etc. yet that
Vein is apt to fill up still.

Christians should desire to be handfasted, and heart-tied to the Lord, and to
be strong in Faith on Christ, Love to him, and Resolution for him.

Self-loathing destroys self-love much; and the more we loath our selves, the
better we love others.

Christians should not envy the patience of God toward their Enemies; for it
is nothing in comparison of what grace he shows to them.

If Affliction does us good, we should not desire to be free from it, till it
does us more good, much less, if it has not done us any good at all.

The reason why men do not more magnify GOD's Grace, is, because they do not
behold their own vileness; and the reason why men do not see their own vileness
more, is, because they do not apprehend God's Goodness more clearly and fully.

God's Goodness and Grace are experienced much, 1. In keeping the soul from
sin, or recovering the soul, after falls, out of sin. 2. In succouring the soul
in time of temptation. 3. In supporting it under Affliction. 4. In quickening
it to, and carrying it through Duties.


When a Christian comes to be as weary of his Sins as of his Sufferings, God
will certainly put them to an end.

One of the chiefest works of the soul, is, self-examination; and yet a
Christian will find himself most backward thereto, and soonest weary therein.

The more a soul is exercised in spiritual meditaion, the less with carnal
temptation.

The more frequent and powerful in private Prayer, the more free from, and the
more potent against Corruptions.

sick and sinful fit, he can praise God that he was kept from it.

Take the best Christian at the worst, and you cannot discern any difference
between him and a wicked man; and so a Hypocrite on the contrary.

Seasonable and unexpected Mercies, are very sweet, and acceptable.

Divi-Duck upon the Water, sometimes swimming pleasantly upon the top of the
Water, and sometimes again diving under Water, and yet as safe then, as at any
other time.

Justice should go by rule in all things, and neither fame, falsehood nor favor
should point out persons for suffering.

Fame, False-witness, or Zeal for the Truth, I expect will bring me to my
Death, if it be unnatural.

It is a common principle in Nature, That no man can or should judge his Enemy,
or be Judge in his own Cause.

A suffering Christian should see that Innocence be the groundwork of his
Suffering, and Patience the perfection thereof; or Innocence the beginning, and
Patience the effect thereof.

To be in a little Prison, is in one sense better than to be in a great one:
for a man shall not weary himself so soon in walking in it: And what is the
whole World but a Prison to a Christian?

Slothfulness is the Cradle of Sin, which the Devil rocks.

Christ will be soon sensible of those Saints Sufferings, that are sensible of
their own Sins.

It is the least of Afflictions to be afflicted by men, for they can afflict
but the outward man only; and of all Enemies Man is the weakest. But God,
Conscience, yea Satan, and Sin, can and do afflict the Soul, which is more
intolerable.

There is no power in the Creatures to do either good or hurt, but as God
disposes them; for it is God that puts his Sword into their hand, Ezekiel. 30.24.

Heaven, and they think they harm them in casting them into their own Center.

Christians should no more fear Men, nor care for Afflictions or Persecutions
from them, than Wives and Children should fear to see their Husbands, or
Fathers, carry Swords, Axes, or Rods in their hans: for so, and no otherwise
are the Wicked in God's hand, Psalm. 17.14. Isa. 10.15.

Take heed of reproving or upbraiding another in self-passion, or to provoke
his passion.

The Lord now shakes his visible Church, as a Tree is shaken, that the rotten
fruit may fall off.

Christians in and under their Sufferings, should be growing holy; and through
their Sufferings, be going and growing more happy.

They have but a slight Profession, whose Profession does not lead them out of
Sin, and through Suffering.

Some Observations and Experiences concerning Dreams.
1. That some are divine, and doubtless from God.

2. Some others natural, either from the constitution of the body, the
business wherein one's mind or body have been exercised about, or from the
nature of the meat that one has eaten, or of the weather, if wet and moist,
then doleful and sad Dreams, etc.

3. Some diabolical, or from the Devil: sometimes these are obviously wicked;
as murderous, malicious, unclean, gluttenous, etc. But those that are most
dangerous, are delusive Dreams (such doubtless as the false Prophets had, Jer.
23.25. and 29.8. Zech. 10.2. Jude v. 8.) whereby the Devil deceives them, and
they deceive others.

Satan can spin a fine small thread from our fancies and imaginations, and then
weave a Cobweb to take the foolish Flies, that are more doted about Dreams,
then diligent to learn, or to do their duties according to the Scriptures. Yet
let not this make Christians either condemn or cast away all their Dreams: For,

1. God promised that in Gospel-days, some Christians should dream Dreams, Joel
2.28. Act. 2.17.

2. God did in Gospel-dayes, to wit, in the days of Christ and his Apostles,
manifest himself to diverse of his People in that way, Matthew. 1.20. and 2.12.
Act. 18.9.

3. This way of revealing Knowledge, and God's Mind unto men, was before the
Law, Genesis 31.10, 11, 24. and 37.5. Job 33.15. Numb. 12.6. and by no Scripture
appears to cease.

Careless hearing makes carnal hearts, and carnal hearts make cursed lives.

Be not too forward to draw on Persecution, but rather be preparing for it
against it comes: for do but keep a good Conscience, and show it in a godly
Conversation, and you will be sure not to want suffering.

He that will be much in self-denial, must be much in self-tryal.

If we could be contented to be altogether without Christ, or with part of
Christ; we need not suffer Persecution.

An Erroneous Conscience is a sore Judgment; for a man sins if he follow it,
and a man sins if he goes contrary to the dictates of it.

That Preacher preaches well, that (by the help of the Spirit) draws his
Sermon out of the Scripture and his own heart, and shows it in his practice
before he utters it in the Pulpit; and he speaks to the heart, that speaks from
the heart.

For what a Preacher does, as well as what he speaks, is Doctrine to the People.

The chief end of all the Scriptures, is to know God, and to worship him
rightly being known.

Truth brings no Absurdity with it.

The end of the Law is not to bring men under its Righteousness, but under
Christ's Righteousness.

Christ, is like a man that has a great Stock, it will make him active.

Christ is a Retreating-Place to Believers, Psalm. 116.7.

Garden, we are never the better for them unless we know their nature, and how
to use and apply them.

Pumps that have water in them, and yet seem dry till some fresh water is
poured into them: So they are as those that have no Grace till the Lord gives
them some fresh Grace to act Grace formerly received.

Let none marvel that a Cloud covers and hides the splendour of the Stars, when
there has been such an Eclipse upon the Sun: no more that such small
sufferings should befall the Saints, when the Son of God did suffer so much.

Christians should take heed lest God should sue them upon an Action of Waste,
for wafting Time and mis-spending Mercies, etc.

Likewise, lest they over-shoot themselves in things lawful: for mark this,
most of a Christian's failings are either from good ends, or excess in lawful
things.

Sense of Misery must precede sense of Mercy.

There are two degrees or sorts of Miseries, (1.) sinning, (2.) suffering for
Sin. And two degrees or parts of felicity, (1.) Freedom from Sin and Suffering,
and (2.) Fellowship with God in Grace and Glory.

At the day of death (but specially at the Day of Judgment) a Saint will wish
he had sinned less, served God better,
and suffered for him more.

He is a strong Christian that seeks God's Glory more than his own Salvation;
but no Christian that seeks neither.

As it is the character of all Hypocrites (especially these of the latter days)
to love themselves and their pleasures, more than God, 2 Timothy 3.2, 4. So of
true Christians to love God better than their own lives, Revel. 12.11.

Satan is said twice to be cast out of Heaven, and once cast down, Rev. 12.9,
10.

Duties ill performed (or carnal Duties) are spiritual sins.

Take heed of Unbelief: for, 1. It cuts you short of Christ and all his
benefits and promises. 2. It binds all your other sins upon you.


It is both Humanity and Christianity to be courteous, kind and merciful to
all; but not to be friendly with all, much less to confide in all, or commit
your counsels to all.

Christians are apt often to be most weary of that condition that does them
most good.

It is a great evil in Christians to desire to come out of Affliction, before
it has wrought Gods end upon, and in them. As a man that is weary of his
Physic whilst it is working.

husband, takes them away again from her: So Christ does with his People when
he sees them abuse the good things he besows upon them.

When, and where Wickedness is most, then and there the godly should strive to
be most godly.

Snow covers many fowl and dirty places, and things; yet when it is melted,
those things will appear: So profession covers many corruptions, which when men
fall from, their base wickedness will appear: God does never out-speak, or
outpromise his Power, Truth, and Faithfulness.

If Gods people could be diligent at their own work, and leave God at his work,
they need not fear success.

Stars, the higher they are, the swifter their motion: So Christians, the more
spiritual, the more Active in the service of God.

Want of love to the Saints, and sensible thoughts, and consideration of their
Condition, makes us pray so seldom, and so strait-hearted for them.

Godliness is an eying of God, owning of God, and imitaing, and respecting of
him in all our ways.

Nothing comes amiss to a Godly man, but Sin.

Sin undiscovered, or unconsidered, becomes Sin unrepented.

Christians may with Godly boldness, and reverence as well expect (through
Christ) that God will do his work, which he has promised, as he requires they
should do the work they are commanded.

There are many, that serve themselves of Christ, but few that serve Christ,
for his own sake.

It is hard to be skilful in the work of believing, and diligent in the work of
sanctification at once, because there is a double self-denial therein, of our
righteousness and sins. A Christian should learn to discern the Good, and Evil,
and strive to improve the Talents he has received better.

If Gods people were not sometimes afflicted, they would forget both
themselves, and others; for affliction works humiliation in men themselves, and
compassion toward others.

Christians should labor, to see so much bitterness in Sin, as may sweeten
Christ; and so much sweetness in Christ, as may imbitter sin to them: and
labor to attain to more knowledge in the Covenant of Grace; and to such a
measure of true Repentance, and Reformation, as may make believing easy, and
Holiness delightful.

It is a hard thing for a Profane man to attain to the shadow; a careless
(though true Christian) to the substance of Religion: So for the true Saint,
that has the substance, to keep up the sense, and savor either of good Jesus,
or bad Sin, in his heart always. Oh, what time do Saints mispend? what duty
neglect? what Mercy slight? what Corruptions embrace? what Temptations lie
under? what corrections undervalue? Oh, what heart-qualms and fleshly
weaknesses cry upon them to make ready? and yet, how unready, how unripe,
unwilling unmindful, and unthoughtful are we of our latter end? and this,
because we are unassured of grace, unweaned from the world unweary of Sin,
unbroken from self, and unapprehensive of the glory to be revealed, and enjoyed
hereafter.

Christians, should be always pressing for some clearer, and fuller Tokens of
Christ's love; for more of his constant and continued presence, for more sense
and experience of the inward workings of his spirit, and for more of his
likeness, and Image in Heart and Life.

Gospel and Godliness.

Gods people have the love of God showed to, and set before them, shed in them,
and sealed to them.

Christians should be like fish in salt water, keeping themselves among the
wicked pure and uncorrupted; and not as glowwormes making a show of having
light, but not having it indeed in them.

Let not a Christian leave off his running, till he comes to the end of his
Race, but like the Moon though she be eclipsed, yet forsakes not her Orb, nor
discontinues her Course at all.

Men that are converted, may say as the woman of Samaria faid, Joh. 4.39. etc.
Now we believe not because of thy saying, for we have heard him our selves;
That though the Preacher tells them things outwardly, they come also to see and
hear Christ himself in their hearts.

Christ has sufficient power to propagate his Gospel, and work in the World,
though all his Messengers should be slain, or shut up: And therefore they
should not do evil, in hope of doing good, comply with men's Ceremonies, under
the Notion of propagating truth; or pretend their ministry, when they intend
their maintenance.

It is a sad thing to be armed with knowledge, but not with power against Sin.

I have often experienced the truth of that Scripture, Psa. 46.1
That God is a present help in time of trouble; especially, when I cry unto the
Lord for help, even in the hour and moment of violent temptation, God has
heard me, and frightened away the Temptation.

The wonderful work of God is much seen in preserving the Saints, from the
worship of the Beast, Rev. 15.2, 3.

Be sure to praise God, when you receive power against Sin, and Temptation; and
you shall be sure to find God ready to give you power another time, when you
want it.

When thou art talking with thy Eenemy, be sure to have thy eye upon his Sword,
and thy hand upon thy own; watch how Satan or Sin intends to overcome you, and
how you may best disadvantage them.

Be still employed in doing good, and you shall not be much tempted, or
troubled with Evil.

Some Christians have more trouble from, and for temptation and Sin, in one
day, than they have for suffering many Months.

Though a Christian should not adventure, or dare to do, or commit the least
evil, to gain the greatest good: yet sometimes, God makes some sin to do more
good to a true Saint, than many Ordinances, and services: Plague-sores, after
they have been broken and healed, the party becomes more healthy many years
after, (or as some of the Physicians say) the strongest poison (as Opium) if it
can be mastered and corrected, it becomes the most Sovereign Physic. But no
other Physician but Christ, can make Sin work good to the Godly, as that
expression of the Apostle, Romans 8.28. All things work together for good;
Perkins in his Case of Cons.
is judged by many Interpreters, to comprehend Sin in it, as well as suffering;
(as the same words, All things, are taken in other Scriptures, Act. 13.39. Ephesians.
5.13.) And some say, that the drinking of the wine, wherein the Viper (which is
one of, if not the most poysonful Creature) has been drowned, will cure the
Leprosy. But this Viperous Poison, Sin, is warily to be thought on, and
understood; and it is as when a Husbandman sees a Mole spoiling his ground, he
is moved the rather to turn water over it; which is a means to kill and drown
many more: So a true Christian, sometimes at the sight or sense of one
corruption, makes search for, and finds out many, which puts him more
earnestly to wrestle with God for more of his Spirit, Power and grace against
them all.

A Hypocrite knows more than he is willing to do; but a true Saint desires to
do what he knows, and to know more that he may do more and better.

The liberty of a Saint, is not to be indifferent to do this, or that, but to
be free in things that are excellent. The actual sins of Men, do not so much
offend Christ, as that they will not have him to be their Savior.

Some means to help on Assurance, and Holiness.

1. Labor after a clearer knowledge of the Covenant of Grace, and Testament of
Christ; as what Christ has done, and suffered; for whom, and upon what
conditions men come to partake thereof.

2. Consider these two works, of Holiness, and Assurance, to be the proper
works of the Spirit of God, and therefore is called the Spirit of Holiness, and
of Grace, because it does sanctify and Seal the people of God, Romans 1.7. Zach.
12.10. 2 These. 2.13. Ephesians. 4.30.

3. The Soul is to be perfectly off from beholding or depending upon any thing
in self, or done by self, Esa. 64.6. 2 Cor. 1.9. Rev. 3.17. When the spirit of
God seals our Souls as witnesses, we do believe, and are Gods Children, Ephesians.
1.13. Romans 8.16. there will be none of our own Signs, or qualifications seen:
but like the Stars, they will disappear when the Sun shines, yet are still
Stars, and fixed; so are Graces in believers.

4. Be diligent in praying for Assurance, and in using other means, epsecially
self-examination, Heb. 6.12. 2 Cor. 13.5.

5. Take heed of all Sins, for they put back the Soul, both in beleiving and
holiness, Psalm. 51.8, 11. Luke 22.31 32.,

6. Give not way to hard thoughts of God, neither entertain that principle of
falling from Grace (which cannot possibly consist with Assurance) See Esa.
63.16 and 64.8. Jer. 3.19. and 32.40. Phil. 1.6. Romans 8.35, 36.

7. Look narrowly to your Hearts, Tongues, Steps, and Ways, and keep a Diary
of Gods dealings, and your own walkings. Prove. 4.23. Psalm. 24.25, 26. Heb.
12.13.

8. Exercise Repentance constantly upon every slip, and fall into sin; confess
them, mourn for them, be ashamed and humbled for them, and labor to hate them,
and loath your selves for them, Lev. 26.40, 41. Psalm. 32.15. Jer. 3.21. Ezekiel.
7.19. 2 Cor. 7.11. Jam. 4.8, 9. Eze. 20.43.

THE Lamentations OF JEREMIAH IN MEETER.
CHAP. I.
HOw does the City sit alone
that full of People was?
How is she become a widow?
she that was great (alas!)
Among the Nations, and Princess
in Power and Glory
Among the Provinces; Is she
become Tributary?
2
She weepth now sore in the night,
and on her checks are tears:
She has none for to comfort her,
among all her Lovers.
All her Friends have dealt treach'rously
with her, and now they are
Become her real Enemies,
she could not them beware.
3
Judah is gone into Bondage,
because of Affliction,
For their greatness of Servitude,
how sad is dear Zion?
She dwells among the Heathen,
she finds no rest, but waits,
Her Persecutors overtake
her between the sore straits.
4
The ways of Zion do mourn much,
because none come of late,
Unto the solemn Feasts: but all
her Gates are desolate:
Her Priests do sigh, her Virgins are
afflicted too, no less,
And she, Jerusalem her self,
is in great bitterness.
5
Her Adversaries are the chief,
her Enemies prosper,
Because the Lord himself, for sins,
has so afflicted her:
For her many Transgressions,
into Captivity,
Her little children are now gone,
before the Enemy.
6
And from the Daughter of Zion,
all her beauty departs:
Her Princes have lost their Courage,
and are become like Hearts
That find no pasture any where
and they are gone fainty
Without strength before the face of
the Pursuer they be.
7
Jerusalem minded in the
days of her Affliction,
And of her Miseries, all her
pleasant things that are gone,
That she had in the days of old,
when her People did fall
Dutch Transt.
By the hand of the Enemy,
and none helped her at all,
The Adversaries look on her,
and at her Sabbaths mocked,
8
Jerusalem sinned grievously,
therefore she is removed:
All that did honor her before,
hate her, and not regard;
Because they saw her nakedness:
she sighs and turns backward.
9
Her filthiness is in her skirts,
she her last end not minds;
Therefore she came down wonderfully,
no comforter she finds.
O Lord behold my affliction,
for the proud enemy
Against thee, and against me Lord
himself does magnify.
10
The adversary has spread out
his hand on all strongly,
Her pleasant things for she has seen
into the Sanctuary:
The heathen entered whom thou did
command that there should none,
Of them at all enter into,
thy Congregation.
11
All her People do sadly sigh,
they seek bread but in vain,
They gave their pleasant things for meat,
to bring their souls again.
See O Lord and consider me,
for vile I yet remain.
12
Oh is it nothing unto you,
all ye that do pass by?
Behold and see if that there be
any sorrow like my
Sorrow, which is done unto me,
wherewith the Lord now has
Afflicted me, in the day of
his fierce anger, and wrath.
13
Fire from above, into my bones,
in justice he has sent,
And it prevails against them
by which my strength is spent.
For my feet he has spread a net,
he back has turned me,
Yea, he has made me desolate,
and all the day fainty.
14
The yoke of my transgressions,
is bound by his own hand;
They are wreathed and are come up
on my neck as a band.
He has made my strength for to fail,
the Lord delivered me;
Into their hands, from whom I now
cannot rise or get free.
15
The Lord has trodden under foot
all my men once mighty,
And in the midst of me he has
called an assembly,
Aganst me to crush my young men:
the Lord trod the Virgin
The comely daughter of Judah
in a wine press for sin.
16
For these things do I weep, mine eye,
mine eye pours water down,
Because the Comforter that should
relieve my Soul, and own,
Is far from me, and my children
are desolate, you see,
Because the Enemy has so
prevailed over me.
17
Sad Zion spreads forth her hands,
to comfort her there is none:
The Lord commanded concerning
Jacob, and his Zion.
That his Enemies should surround
him: yea Jerusalem
Is as a menstruous woman now
abiding among them.
18
The Lord is wonderful righteous,
for I rebelled have:
Against his just commandment
for all this he can save.
Hear I pray you all People then
and this my sorrow see:
My maids, and my young men are gone,
into Captivity.
19
I called unto my Lovers,
but they deceived me,
My Priests, and my Elders gave up
the ghost in the City;
While they sought their meat that their souls
therewith relieved might be.
20
Behold O Lord for I am in
grievous distress and woe,
My bowels are troubled mine heart
is turned within me too.
Because I have most grievously
rebelled this is come,
Abroad the Sword bereaveth much,
there is like Death at home.
21
They my foes, have heard that I sigh,
there is none to comfort me,
Yea all mine Enemies have heard,
of this my misery.
They are glad that thou have done it,
thou yet the day wilt bring
That thou have called, and they shall be,
like unto me suffering
22
Let all their wickedness, O Lord,
in time come before thee:
And do unto them according
as thou have done to me;
Because of all my transgressions,
committed against thee,
For my sighs are many for sins,
and my heart is fainty.
CHAP. II.
HOw has the glorious Lord covered
the daughter of Zion,
With a thick cloud in his anger,
and from Heaven cast down
Unto the earth, (the lowest state)
Isreal's whole beauty,
And forgot his footstool in the
day that he was angry?
2
The Lord has swallowed up all the
inhabitants, well known,
Of Jacob and has not piti'd;
in his wrath he threw down
The daughters of Judah's, strong holds:
he brought down to the ground,
He has polluted the kingdom
and her Princes once crowned.
3
In his fierce anger he cut off
Isreal's horn fully:
He has drawn back his right hand from
before the enemy.
And he is grievously incensed
against Jacob (with ire)
Which round about, sorely devoured
like to a flaming fire.
4
He also bent his mighty bow,
like as an enemy,
He likewise stood with his right hand
even as an adversary.
And slew all things that did appear
pleasant unto the eye:
In Zions daughters tent like fire
he poured out his fury.
5
The Lord was as an enemy,
he Israel swallowed,
And all her stately Palaces
he has quite devoured.
He has destroyed his strong holds,
and has increased in
The daughters of Judah's mourning
and sorrow for her sin.
6
And his Tabernacle away
he did take violently,
As a Garden he destroyed his
places of Assembly:
The Lord caused Sabbaths and solemn
feasts to cease in Zion,
He has despised the King and Priest
in his indignation.
7
The Lord has cast off his Altar
he loathed his sanctuary,
Her palace walls, he gave up to
the hand of the enemy,
And they in the house of the Lord
have lifted up a voice,
As in the solemn feasting-days
appointed to rejoice.
8
The Lord has purposed also
the wall to undermine,
Of the dear daughter of Zion
he has stretched out a line:
And he has not withdrawn his hand
from cruel destroying
For he made rampart and walls mourn
they join in languishing.
9
Her gates are sunk into the ground
her Bars are spoiled and burst,
Her King and her Princes carried
among the Gentiles cursed:
The Law is no more to be seen
her Prophets also find
No vision nor Revelation
from the Lord, of his mind.
10
The Elders of Zions daughther
sit on the ground silent;
They have cast dust upon their heads,
in great astonishment;
They have girded themselves also,
with sackcloth they are found;
The Virgins of Jerusalem
hang their heads to the ground.
11
Mine eyes do greatly fail with tears;
my bowels are troubled:
My liver (and my inward parts)
on the earth is poured:
For the breach of the Daughter of
my People in misery;
For the babes, and sucklings swoon in,
the streets of the City.
12
They say to their Mothers, where is
the Corn and Wine? (we die)
When they swoon'd as the wounded in
the streets of the City.
When their precious soul was poured
and surrendered again,
Into their dear mothers bosom,
but all this was in vain.
13
What thing shall I at this time take
to testify for thee?
Or, what thing shall I parallel
to thee in misery,
O daughter of Jerusalem?
what shall I (think upon)
Equal to thee that I may give
the consolation?
O Virgin daughter of Zion,
for thy breach is very
Great, like the sea, who can heal thee?
of this thy misery.
14
Thy Prophets have beheld both vain
and foolish things for thee,
And they have not discovered,
thy great iniquity.
To turn away thy sore bondage,
by bidding thee repent;
But saw for thee false burdens, and
causes of banishment.
15
All that pass by, do now at thee
clap their hands together,
They hiss and wag their heads now at
Jerusalem's daughter.
Saying, is this the City that
men call the perfection
Of beauty, the joy of the whole
earth? Is this that Zion?
16
All thine enemies have opened
their mouths wide against thee;
They hiss and gnash the teeth, they say,
(and that triumphantly)
We have now swallowed her up quite,
this is the day surely
That we looked for, we it have found,
we have seen it fully.
17
The Lord has done what he devised,
and he has fulfilled
His words, that in the days of old,
himself had commanded:
He threw down, and has not piti'd,
and caused thine Enemy to
Rejoice over thee, and he set up
the horn of this thy foe.
18
Their heart cried unto the Lord,
O wall of the Daughter
Of Zion; day and night, let tears
run down like a river.
Give thy self, O Jerusalem,
no rest nor quietness,
Let not the apple of thine eyes
cease, whilst thy foes oppress.
19
Arise and cry out in the night:
in the first watch (with grace)
Pour out thy heart like water now
before Jehovah's face.
O lift up thy hands toward him,
for the life of thy sweet
Young children that for hunger faint,
in top of every street.
20
Behold O Lord, and consider
to whom thou this have done:
Shall the woman eat their own fruit,
and babes of a span-long?
Shail the Priest and Prophet be slain
in the Lords Sanctuary,
21
The young and old lie on the ground
in the streets openly.
My Virgins and my young Men are
fallen by the sword sadly:
Thou slew'st them in thy angry day,
thou kill'st without pity.
22
Thou cal'st as in a solemn day
my terrors round about,
So that in the day of the Lord's
anger none escaped (out)
Nor remained: those that I have
swadled and brought up, so,
Mine Enemy has consumed,
my sin has caused this woe.
CHAP. III.
the man that affliction saw
by the rod of his wrath:
Into darkness but not to light,
he led and brought me has.
Surely against me he is turned,
he turns his hand all day.
My flesh and skin has he made old
he brake my bones always.
He built against me, and compassed
with gall and travel me,
He set me in dark places, as
they that of old dead be.
He hedgd me round, I cannot escape:
he made my chain heavy,
He also shuts out my prayer,
when I do shout and cry.
With hew'n stones he enclosed my ways,
my paths he made un-straight:
Like Bear or Lion secretly,
for me he lies in wait.
And he has turned aside my ways,
and in pieces pulled me:
Yea he has made me desolate,
great is my misery.
He bent his Bow, and set me as
a mark for the Arrow:
The Arrows of his Quiver he
made through my reigns to go.
I was a Scoff and derision,
to all my own People,
Also their song all the day long
(this to my sore trouble)
He filled me with bitterness, he
made me drunk, with wormwood,
He brake my teeth with gravel-stones,
with ashes he me clad.
And thou have also removed
my soul far off from peace.
And I forgot prosperity
by this my bitterness.
And I said my strength and my hope
from the Lord is quite gone:
Minding the wormwood and the gall
in this my affliction.
My soul does still remember them,
and is humbled in me:
This I recall to mind, therefore
have I hope, Lord, in thee.
It is of the Lord's mercies that
we are not consumed quite,
Because his compassions fail not,
we live still in his sight.
They are renewed every morning,
great is thy Faithfulness. The heb. word signifies also Truth
truth in them;
The Lord's my portion, says my soul,
therefore 'ile hope in him.
The Lord is good unto them that
wait for him patiently,
And good unto the soul that does
seek him effectually.
It is good that a man should both
hope, and wait quietly:
For the salvation of the Lord,
which unto his is Psalm. 85.9.
nigh.
It is good for a man that he,
the yoke in his youth bear;
He sits alone and silence keeps,
for on him he bar't there:
He puts his mouth in the dust,
if perhaps hope may be;
He gives his cheeks to him that smites,
frl'd with reproach is he.
Nevertheless the Lord will not,
cast off for ever such,
But though he cause grief, yet will he
express compassion much.
According to the multitude
of his mercies, often.
For he afflicts not willingly,
nor grieves the sons of men.
To crush under his feet all the
poor prisoners of the world.
To turn aside man's right before
the face of the high Lord.
To subvert a man in his cause,
the Lord does not approve,
Who says, and it comes to pass, when
God wills it not above.
Out of the mouth of the most High,
proceeds not good and evil,
Why does the living man complain?
man's plagued for being sinful.
Let Us search, and try our ways and turn
back to the Lord, quickly.
Let Us lift our hearts with hands to God
that is in the heavens high.
We have transgressed and rebel'd,
thou have not pardoned:
Thou have covered us with anger
and us persecuted:
Yea, Jehovah thou have us slain,
and have not pitied.
Thou coveredst thy self with a cloud,
and our condition now,
Is such that our prayers could not
unto thee Lord pass throw.
Thou made us as the offscouring,
and refuse among men:
All our enemies against us,
their mouths daily open.
Fear and a snare is come on us
distress, and destruction:
Therefore with rivers of water,
mine eye still runs down,
For the daughter of my People,
most sore destruction;
Mine eye drops down and cease not
without intermission.
Till the Lord look down and behold.
my case from heaven high,
For th'daughters all of my city
my heart's moved by mine eye.
Mine enemies chased me sore
like a bird causlesly,
In the dungeon they cut of my life
and cast a stone on me.
Waters flowed over mine head,
then I said, I am gone,
I called upon thy Name, O Lord,
out of the low dungeon.
Thou heardst my voice, hide not thine ear
at my breathing, my cry.
Thou drewest near, bid'st me not fear,
that day I called on thee.
My soul's causes, O Lord, thou plead'st
thou did my life redeem.
Judge thou my cause, O Lord, again,
for thou my wrong have seen.
Yea all their vengeance at all times
thou perfectly did see;
And their imaginations all,
wrongfully against me.
Thou have heard their reproach, O Lord,
all their So in the Hebrew.
thoughts against me still,
The lips of those (my foes) that rose
against me, to my ill.
Also their ungodly device
against me all the day,
At their down-sitting and rising,
I am their So in the Hebrew. See in Job 30.9. the same word.
song always.
Render to them a recompense,
O Lord, according to
Their handy works, give them thy curse
yea them hearty sorrow.
Persecute and destroy them in
anger from under The
thy
Glorious heavens, who only art
the Lord God Almighty.
CHAP. IV.
HOw is the gold now become dim!
How Is the most fine gold changed!
In So heb.
the head of ev'rystreet the stones
Of the Heb. sanctity.
Sanctuary out are poured.
2
The precious sons of Zion like
to fine gold, how are they?
Esteemed as works of Pottets hands,
the prtchers made with clay!
3
Yea the Heb. See Mal 1.3.
Dragons draw out the breast,
they give suck to their young.
My Peoples daughters like fierce Marg.
owls
of deserts is become.
4
The sucking child's tongue cleaves to the
roof of his mouth for drought:
The So Isa. 3.4.
babes ask bread, and no man does
break it to them, though sought.
5
They that delicately did feed,
in the streets are des'late:
They that in scarlet were brought up,
dung-hils embrace of late.
6
For the punishment of the (sin,
and of the) iniquity
Of the daughter of my People,
is greater in degree
Then the punishment of the sin
of Sodom, that is orethrown
As in a moment, and no hand
staid on her (falling down.)
7
Her Naz'rits were purer than snow,
than milk they were whiter:
Their bodies ruddier than rubies
their Polishing.
decking of Saphir.
8
Their visage blacker is than cole:
not known in the streets of some,
Their withered skin cleaves to their bones
like a stick it is become.
9
The slain with the sword, are better
than those by hunger killed:
For these flow out, struck through So Hebr.
with want
of the fruits of the field.
10
The pitiful women's own hands
sod their own children dear,
They were their meat in the slaughter
of my Peoples daughter.
11
The Lord accomplished his fury,
his fierce wrath out he poured,
He kindled fire in Zion, and
her foundations devoured.
12
The kings of the earth, and all the
inhabitants below,
Would not have believed that the
adversary, or foe;
And that the crule enemy,
should (prevail over them)
Have forcibly entered into,
the gates of Jerus'lem.
13
For the sins of her Prophets, and
her Priests iniquities,
That have shed the blood of the just
in amidst her is this.
14
They Heb. the same
moved as blind men in the streets
they have polluted, much,
Themselves with blood, so that men could
not once their garments touch.
15
They cried unto them, depart ye,
for it is polluted;
Depart ye, depart ye, touch not
when away they had fled,
And wandered: they said among
the heathen every where;
They shall no longer inhabit
nor sojourn with us here.
16
The Lord's anger divided them,
he will them no more esteem,
The Priests persons they did not favor
prize,
nor the Elders highly deem.
17
As for us, our eyes as yet failed,
for our vain help we have
Watched in watching, for a Nation
(which yet) could us not save.
18
They hunt our steps that we cannot
go in our streets safely;
Our end is near, our days fulfilled,
for our end's come quickly.
19
Our persecutors swifter are
than the Eagles of Heaven,
They pursued and laid wait for us,
on hills in desert then.
20
The breath of our nostrils is gone,
which refreshed our spirits;
The anointed of Heb.
Jehovah,
was taken in their pits.
Of whom we said, and surely hoped,
that under his shadow;
Among the heathen we shall live,
which hope is vanished now.
21
Rejoice and be exceeding glad,
O daughter of Edom:
That dwell in the land of Vz,
the cup also shall come,
And likewise pass through unto thee,
and thou drunken shall be,
And make thy self naked, because
of thine iniquity.
22
The punishment accomplished is
of thine iniquity,
O thou sad daughter of Zion,
he will no more carry
Thee away to captivity;
thy sins he will visit,
O daughter of Edom, he will
thy sins discover yet.
CHAP. V.
O Lord, Heb. signifies to remember or mind.
mind what is come on us,
think on and see our shame,
Our portion is turned to strangers
our houses aliants claim.
We are orphans, and fatherless,
our mothers as widows,
We drank our water for money,
our wood is sold to us.
Our necks are under grievous
and sore Persecution:
When labor and we have no rest
our state Lord think upon.
We have through want given the hand
to the Egyptians,
And to be satisfied with bread
to the Assyrians.
Our fathers sinned and they are not,
and their Iniquities.
sins born have we,
Servants ruled over us: there is none that
from their hand does us free.
We gat our bread with the peril
of our lives, and no less,
Because of the devouring sword
of the dry wilderness.
Our skin was black like an oven,
through sore famine likewise.
They ravished the women in Zion,
and maids in Judah's Cities.
Princes, once powerful, are now
by their hand up hanged;
The faces of our grave Elders
were no whit honored.
They took the beautiful young men
to grind, to make them food,
And the children, through their weakness
did fall under the wood.
The Elders have ceased from the gates,
the youths from their ^sick.
playing,
The joy of our heart is now ceased,
our dance turned to mourning.
The Crown is fallen from our heads,
woe to us we did sin.
For this our heart is faint, for these
things our eyes now are dim.
Because the mountain of Zion,
which is now desolate:
The cunning foxes upon it
do boldly walk of late.
Thou O Lord for ever, remain'st
like to thee there is none,
Thy throne from generation
to generation.
Wherefore do thou forget us Lord,
and that for evermore,
And us forsake So Heb. and in the Margin
for length of days,
this makes our suffering sore.
Turn thou us unto thee, O Lord,
and we shall be turned:
Renew our days as thou of old
did, and have promised.
But thou, O Lord have utterly,
(we fear) rejected us.
Against us thou art very wroth,
yet justly thou deal'st thus.
A true CHRISTIANS PILGRIMAGE, Or, AFFLICTED-STATE: Setting forth Pathetically
and Mystically, a Saints Night and Day, or Sorrow and Joy; Most of it being A
Vision seen in Affliction, and profitable for Edification and Consolation.
The flying Sun, the fading Shadow,
The dismal Night, the welcome Morrow.
O Glorious Sun that run'st with joy thy race!
And daily shewst the world thy goodly face,
Shine forth upon my Dyal (tho but clay)
That I may rightly know the time of Day.
I thought it was scarce Noon, but now I see,
The shadows of the Evening covering me.
Alas! where have I been, what have I done?
Had I my back all this while on the Sun?
Or did I sleep, or dream that all my year,
A Summer without Winter would appear?
Alas! my Those six Words signify the Conscience.
Watch, Alarm and my Clock,
My mourning Dove, my Sentinel, and Cock.
Slept all at once, until that audibly
One said, the King and all his Train past by.
Then startling out of slumber I looked out,
And saw his whirling Chariots fly about.
Ah thought I then! I must lurk in the shade,
Until the Worlds great light does Retrograde.
Where am I now? on what ground do I stand?
I cannot see my right, from my left hand.
Is this a Hill, or Plain? is it Land, or Water?
Oh! whither shall I step, or flee for shelter?
I am soon doted and quite at a loss,
Already turned into my first Chaos.
Is there no hope of Light? Oh I see none!
Where are the Angels.
Pleiades and Orion?
Are all God's sparkling Scriptures.
Diamonds divine
So clad with clouds that none of them do shine?
I see not one about this Canopy,
Sad soul how fast comes on thy misery!
But where art thou fair Church.
Moon, will thou appear?
O True Christian.
herb of Grace, lo here, but never the near.
Where is thy light, O help if ever now,
Ah I cannot! for the Which is the cause of the Moons Eclipse.
earths thick shadow
Has interposed so between me, and thee,
I am eclipsed, look for no light from me.

