HISTORY Of most Manual Arts,

Deducing the Original, Progress, and Improvement of them. Furnished with
variety of Instances and Examples, showing forth the excellency of Humane Wit.

(...). Euripid. LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at
his Shop, at the Blew-Anchor, in the Lower Walk of the New-Exchange. 1661.

To the READERS.
Gentlemen,
THough this Curious Piece you are here presented with, needs neither Preface
nor Apology for its publication, yet I perceive you are now grown to that
delicacy or rather state in your Diet, you will not eat without a Taster. Give
me leave therefore to acquaint you, That those to whose censure I permitted
this Book, before I sent it to the Press, (and in whose Judgment I have some
reason to confide) have assured me it has in it those two Graces of
Attraction, Novelty and Excellency in its kind; That the Title (which is a
fault you may the more easily pardon, because not often committed) does
modestly vail many perfections in the Work it self, in which you have several
curious remarkes on Music, Limning, and other Noble Arts, as well as those
that are properly ^ermed Manual; and those too so hand^omly treated of, with
that excellency of Wit, that fair abundance and variety of judicious reading,
that roundness, strength, and dignity of Style, that you will imagine your
selves even amongst the Mechanique Arts, to be conversant in the Liberal. The
meanest things are ennobled here by the Expression; and all our Author touches
he turns to Gold: So that for what concerns my self, I may confidently affirm,
I have in the publication of this Treatise, performed an acceptable service to
all ingenuous persons: And for the Author, I may adventure to say, He has by
this Work particularly honored that Art of which he gives you so handsome an
account; I mean, The Invention of PRINTING.

The Principal Authors mentioned in this Work.
Abraham Gelnitz. Aristotle. Aldovrand. Athanas: Kircherus. Apuleius.
Archimedes. Aul: Gellius. Augustine. Aelian. Baker, Sir Richard. Bartas. Bacon
Roger. Bacon, Vic. St Albans. Busbequius.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. I.
(...): or, The Invention of Dials, Clocks, Watches, and other time-tellers.
page 1
Chap. II.
(...): Of some curious Spheres and Representations of the World. 14
Chap. III.
(...): Of sundry Machins and Artificial Motions, by Water, and A^r. 24
Chap. IV.
(...): Or the Art and Mystery of Writing, with the Instruments thereunto
belonging. 46
Chap. V.
(...): Of the Mystery of Printing: Also of Printing-Presses. 62
Chap. VI.
(...): Or the Art of Limning and Painting: Also of the Plumary Art. 70
Chap. VII.
(...): Or the Art of Spinning and Weaving; with the several materials of
Garments amongst sundry Nations. 84
Chap. VIII.
(...): Or the Original of Music, and Instruments thereunto belonging: Also
of the power and efficacy of Music. 102
Chap. IX.
(...): Or the invention of Glass, and of sundry Glass-works. 133
Chap. X.
(...): Or the Invention of Shipping and Sailing: Also of the Mariners Compass.
144
Chap. XI.
(...): Or the Art of Cicuration, or Taming of Wild Beasts. 164
Chap. XII.
(...): Or certain pretty Knacks and extravagancies of Art. 180
An Index.
A.
AEOlipiles what, and of what use? Arion wafted to shore by a Dolphin.
Apelles's Masterpiece. Archimedes a great Mathematician and Engineer. Inventor
of a self-moving Sphere.
Amphitheaters made of Glass. Argo, Jason 's Ship. Arts, perfected by degrees.
Arras work, where made?
B.
Baboon taught to play on the Guittar. Beasts of all sorts tamed. delighted
with Music. Bear playing on a Tabor, and dancing. Balsas what, and of what
use? Boethius a rare Mathematician* Boats made to sail under water, made to sail
of themselves, made of a Tortoise shell, made of Osier or Wicker, made of Paper
or Reeds.
Biting of the Tarantula cured by Music. Bellows filled with water to blow
fire.
C.
Cambricks made at Cambray. Coco-trees the great benefit of them. Crow taught
to fly at Partridges. Clocks of curious workmanship. Chains very curious made
by Vulcan. Corn. van Drebble a great Mechanique or Engineer. Curracles
described by Lucan. Cicuration, or taming of Wild Beasts. Crystal Glass
impatients of heats. Cloth made of dowle growing upon a shellfish, made of
incombustible flax. made of a hairy stone called Trichitis or Salamanders
wool, made of the Barks of Trees, made of Camels hair, called Camelots, made
of wool fallen from the sky.
Cloth made clean by throwing it into the fire. Coaches going with Sails.
Chariots drawn by Lions, by Tigers, by Staggs, by Dogs, by Estriches, by
Elephants, moved by Sails.

D.
Dials invented by Anaxamenes, made with Heliotrope flowers. Dolphins made use
of to catch fish. Deer used for the Saddle. Dove artificial made to fly. Devil
hater of Music. Damask- works. Dancing Horses.
E.
Eagles taught to fly at fowl. Eagle artificial made to fly. Eloquence, the
great force and power of it. Erasmus his Spherical Ring. Elephants taught to
dance, and how. Very docil, and taught to perform sundry Offices.
Estriches put to draw a Coach.
F.
Flavio of Amalphi, first inventor of the Mariners compass. Feather works of
rare Art. Fish Nautilus, first Type of a Ship. Flea with a chain about her
neck. Fossil and fulfill glasses. Fishes affected with Music.
G.
Glass where made, and whereof. Glass Galley. Glass chains. Glass Organs.
Glasses made to burn Ships. Glass made malleable. Grograms made of Coats hair.
Garments made of feathers.
H.
Hours, so named from Horus Apollo. Horses taught to dance. Hydrautick Organs,
Heavens artificial.
I.
Instrument of perpetual motion invented by Van Drebble. Incombustible Flax.
Iron Spider made to move like a natural one. Iron mill that one could carry
about him*
L.
Leopards taught to run at Deer like Greyhounds. Linen the general wear of
Priests. Limning or Painting how begun. Letters invented by the Phoenicians.
Lions tamed for several offices. Loadstone described by Claudian, very useful
by Land and by Sea, comparable to all the precious stones in the world. Locks
of curious work. Lute, why called Testudo. Looking-glasses, some strange feats
to be done by them. Load-stars, which they be. Looms weaving Webs of
themselves.
M.
Music the first Invention of it, the power and efficacy of it, upon men and
beasts, upon good and bad Angels, in curing diseases of body and mind, in
corrupting manners, or reforming.
Memnon's Statue Musical. Mariners Compass, by whom invented. Mills of Segovia,
Toulouse, and Dantzick, admirable. Mill of Iron that one could carry in his
sleeve. Monky very skilful at Chess-play. Moon inhabited. Mosaic work, what it
is. Myrons brazen Cow.
N.
Navigation a bold Art. Navigation very imperfect before the invention of the
Compass. Navigation by land, and under water.
O.
Organs tuned by the motion of water, by the Sunbeams.
Opsidian glass, what kind. Orpheus his powerful Music. Ovid's Pen preserved.
Organ Pipes made of Glass, made of Alablaster.
Otters taught to drive fish into the net.
P.
Parrot taught to sing the Gam-ut. Painting or Limning a useful and delightful
Art. Plumary art what it is. Pictures made of feathers. Pictures highly valued.
Panthers tamed for hunting. Picture called Deaths-dance. Printing, where
invented. Printing-Presses. Paper made of seggs or rushes, made of lint and
rags.

R.
Rare shows on the Roman Amphith^aters. Roger Bacon a great Mathematician.
Reversus, a fish used to catch fish withal.
S.
Sea-dial; See Mariners Compass. Spiders in the Summer Islands making silk.
Spider of Iron moving like the natural. Sybarits horses taught to dance.
Sailing Coaches. Sailing by stars before the invention of the Compass. Sailing
in Taprobana by the direction of birds. Ships with Gardens and Orchards on the
tops. Ship first invented by Jason among the Grecians. Silkworm first brought
into Europe. Sea-silk. Silk whether any vegetable or growing upon trees.
Spiders tissue admirable. Spit to turn by a Sail, by the motion of Air.
Spheres representing the heavenly bodies and motions. Specular stone what it
was. Statues vocal. Salamanders wool, what it is.
T.
Thermo-meters, or Weather glasses. Traveling by the direction of Stars.
Tortoise shell used for a house and a boat. Tortoise shell first pattern of a
Lute. Triton artificial, sounding a Trumpet. Tredeskins Ark. Tyrians the best
Navigators.
V.
Velvets and Sattins made of the bark of the Palm tree. Vulcans chains very
subtle. Venus rising out of the Sea, was Apelles his masterpiece.
W.
Wagon and Oxen of glass, that a Fly could cover with her wings. Weaving by
whom invented. Waterworks of sundry sorts. Watches made in the collet of a
Ring, hanging at Ladies ears. Weather-glasses of what use. Wind-motions,
sundry instances. Writing an excellent invention. Writing in lead and brass, in
rocks and stones, in leaves and barks of trees, in cedar and box, in waxen
tables.
Writing in short hand, by whom invented. Writing with the feet. Wool, whether
growing upon trees. Wool rained from the sky made into cloth. Wooden Palace of
Henry VIII.
Z.
Ziglography what, and of what use. Zeuxes his picture of an old woman deceived
by a painted curtain.
CAP. I.
(...): OR The Invention of Dyals, Clocks, Watches, and other Time-tellers.
TIme is the most precious commodity that man does enjoy; because time past,
cannot be revoked; and time lost, cannot be repaired.

Damna fleo rerum, sed plus fleo damna dierum.
Rex poterit rebus succurrere, nemo diebus.
Lost Treasure I bewail, but lost Days more;
Kings can give treasure, none can days restore*
Therefore men should set a due estimate upon this commodity, and expend it
thriftily and wisely: to which purpose the ancient Sages of the world have
ingeniously devised a way to divide even the Natural day (which is one of the
least measures of time) into hours, and those into quarters and minutes, and
into lesser Fractions then they; that by this Horometry, they might mete out
and proportion business to the time, and time to the business in hand. The name
of Horae, Hours, came from Horus Apollo, an Egyptian Sage, who first divided
the day into those portions we call hours, as Macrobius Saturnal. l. 1. cap.
21. informs us.

In Egypt there was a Beast of a very strange kind, called Cynocephalus, kept
in the Temple of Serapis, which in the time of the two Aequinoxes, did make
water twelve times in a day, and so often in the night, and that regularly, at
even spaces of time; from the observation whereof they divided the natural day
into twenty four hours; and that Beast was their Clock and Dyal, both to divide
the day, and reckon the hours by. This gave a hint (belike) to the Clepsydrae,
or waterglasses (invented by Ctesibius of Alexandria) which distingu^shed the
hours by the fall or dropping of water, as Clepsammidia or Sand-glasses did by
the running of sand: Miro modo in terris aqua peragit, quod Solis flammeus
vigor desuper moderatus excutrit. Cassiod. de Divin. Lection. c. 30. And to
show they owed the invention to this creature, they used to set one carved on
the top of these Water glasses, as may be seen in Kirker in Mechanica
Aegyptiaca. The Heavens are the grand universal clock of the world, from whose
incessant and regular motion, all times here below are distinguished and
measured.

And because time is in continual flux or motion, and passes away with silent
feet, insensibly and invisibly, therefore it was necessary to invent a way how
to make the motion of time (according to the several divisions thereof) visible
to the eye, or audible to the ear, that it should not steal away without our
notice, but that we might tell and count its steps and stealth.

Anaximenes the Philosopher was the first that took an account of time by
shaddows projected on the ground, and which changed and moved according to the
motion of the Sun, from which observation he devised Sun-dyals called
Scioterica. Though Vitruvius ascribes the Invention to Berosus the Chaldean,
who framed Vasa Horoscopa, and Epicyclia ex cavavata cum stylo (as he terms
them) certain hollow Dyals (like dishes) with Styles or Gnomons erected in the
middle. At Rome they counted the day (for a long time) by the shadow of a
brazen Obelisk or Pillar: when the shadow of the pillar did fall in such a
place, they did account it Noon or Midday, and then a Crier was appointed to
cry it about the Town; So likewise at Evening, when the shadow fell in such a
place, the Crier proclaimed horam supremam, the last hour of day: other
distinctions they had none as yet.

The Nasican Scipio was the first that brought the use of Water-glasses amongst
them, and distinguished the hours of day and night; until his time, Populo
Romano indiscreta lux fuit, says Pliny, the Roman people had no division of
hours; as the Turks (at this day) have no distinction of their ways by miles,
nor of their days by hours, as Busbequias relates Ep. 1. Legate. Turc. In
Plautus his time, there was great store of Sun-dyals in Rome, which he calls
Solaria; for in one of his Called Baeotia, which is lost: but these words are
cited by Aul. Gellius c^p. 3.
Comedies, he brings in an hungry servant complaining of the number of them,
and cursing the Invention in these expressions.

Ut illum Dii perdant qui primus horas repperit,
Quique primus adeo statuit hic Solarium,
Qui mihi comminuit misero articulatim diem.
Nam me puero venture hic er at Solarium
Multum omnium istorum optimum ac veriss imum.
Ibi iste monebat i. Edere
esse, nisi cum nihil erat.
Nunc etians quod est non estur nisi Soli lubet
Itaque jam oppletum est oppidum solariis
Major pars populi, aridi reptant fame.
Among the Persians every ones belly was his Dyal: so it was in Ammianus
Marcellinus his time: But these ways of Horometry were rude and imperfect. By
Water-glasses the account was not regular: for from the attenuation and
condensation of the water, the hours were shorter or longer, according to the
heat or coldness of the weather. Then for the Sun-dyals they did serve but at
some times, only by day time, and then not always neither, but when the Sun
shined. To remedy these defects, some wits did cast about how to distinguish
the hours of the night as well as of the day; and of cloudy days as well as of
serene and clear. Hereupon some Engines and contrivances have been composed by
Trochilique art, or the artifice of Wheels; which by the motion of several
Wheels, and Springs, and Weights, and counterpoizes should give an account of
the time, without Sun or Stars; and these were called Horologes.

Severinus Boethius a worthy Patrician of Rome, and a most eminent P^ilosopher
and Mathematician, was the first (that I find) that contrived any Engine of
this sort: Theodoricus King of the Goths wrote a Letter to the said Boethius to
beg one from him for to bestow on his brother in law Gundibald King of
Burgundy; in which Letter he calls it, Machinam mundo gravidam, Caelum
gestabile, rerum compendium: A portable heaven, and a compendium of the
heavenly Spears, as Cassiodor has it, who was the penman, in the first book
of his variae lectiones.

Aaron King of Persia sent such an Instrument for a present to Char^s the great
King of France, in the year 804. it was made of Copper, and Art Mechanica
mirifice compositum, says Hermannus Contractus, who does describe the same
more largely in his history.

Of these Horologes, some are mute, and some vocal: Vocal I call those which by
the sound of a Bell striking at just intervals and periods of time, do proclaim
the hour of the day or night, yea, even half hours and minutes; by the benefit
whereof, even blind men that can see neither Sun nor shadow, and those that
lie in their beds, may know how the time goes, and how long they have bin
there, although they slept all the while; and are properly called Clocks, from
the French word Cloche, a Bell.

It rota nexa rot is, tinnulaque aere sonant.
Mute Horologes are such as perform a silent motion, and do not speak the time
of the day, but point at it with an Index, such as are Sun-dyals and Watches;
the last of which go by springs and wheels, as the others by weights and
wheels: yet some of these are vocal too, and carry Bells and Alarums, to
signify unto us the stealth of time. Many carry Watches about them that do
little heed the fabric and contrivance, or the wit and skill of the
workmanship; as there be many that dwell in this habitable world, that do
little consider or regard the wheel-work of this great Machin, and the fabric
of the house they dwell in. A King of China upon his first seeing of a Watch,
thought it a living creature, because it moved so regularly of it self, and
thought it dead when it was run out, and its pulses did not beat.

The wit of man has been luxuriant and wanton in the Inventions of late years;
some have made Watches so small and light, that Ladies hang them at their ears
like pendants and jewels; the smalness and variety of the tools that are used
about these small Engines, seem to me no less admirable then the Engines
themselves; and there is more Art and Dexterity in placing so many Wheels and
Axles in so small a compass (for some French Watches do not exceed the compass
of a farthing) then in making Clocks and greater Machines.

The Emperor Charles the fifth had a Watch made in the Collet or Jewel of a
Ring; Causs. Hier.
and King James had the like: and one Georgius Caput Blancus, or George
Whitehead was expert at making such knacks at Vicenza in Italy, as Schottus
tells us in his Itinerary of that Country.

Andrew Alciat the great Civilian of France, had a kind of a Clock in his
chamber, that should awake him at any hour of the night that he determined, and
when it struck the determined hour, it struck fire likewise out of a slint,
which fell among tinder, to light him a candle: it was the invention of one
Caravagio of Sienna in Italy.

In some Towns of Germany and Italy, there are very rare and elaborate Clocks
to be seen in their Town-Halls; wherein a man may read Astronomy, and never
look up to the skies.

Sydereos vultus, Cantataque vatibus Astra,
Non opus est Coelo quaerere, quaere domi.
So Grotius of these Globes.

In the Town Hall of Prague, there is a Clock that shows the annual and
periodical motions of the Sun and Moon, the names and numbers of the months,
days and Festivals of the whole year, the times of the Sunrising and setting,
throughout the year, the Aequinoxes, the length of the days and nights, the
rising and setting of the 12 Signs of the Zodiac: The age of the Moon with
its several Aspects and Configurations; as George Bruy describes it in Theatro
Urbium.

But the Town of Sraesburgh carries the bell of all other steeples (of Germany)
in this point. A Scheme of the Strasburg clock you may find in Coriats
Travels, with a full description thereof: it was made by one Conradus
Dasypodius a German, Mich. Neander Greg.
and Professor of the Mathematiques in that City.

One Linnus a Jesuit of Liege, l. de Magnete.
and an Englishman by birth (as Kircher tells me) had a Phial or Glass of
water, wherein a little Globe did float, with the four and twenty Letters of
the Alphabet described upon it, and on the inside of the Globe was an Index or
Style, to which the Globe did turn and move it self, at the period of every
hour, with that letter which denoted the hour of the day successively, as
though this little Globe kept pace and time with the heavenly motions, Gassend.
de vita Peyresci.

Kircher above mentioned had a Vessel of water, in which, just even with the he
^ghe and surface of the water, the twenty four hours were described; upon the
water he set a piece of a Cork, and therein some seeds of a certain Heliotrope
flower, which (like the flower it self) would turn the cork about, according to
the course of the Sun, and with its motion point the hour of the day, ibid.

I^ that famous Stable of the Duke of Saxony at Dresden, there is a Room
furnished with all manner of Saddles; among the rest, there is one that in the
Pommel has a gilded head, with eyes continually moving; and in the hinder
part there of has a Clock, as M. Morison (an eye witness) relates in his
Travels.

Of a portable Clock or Watch, take this ensuing Epigram of our Countryman
Thomas Campian, de Horologio Portabili.
Tempor is interpres parvum congestus in orbem.
Qui memores repet is nocte dieque sonos.
Ut semel instructus jucunde sex quater hor as
Mobilibus retulis irrequietus agis.
Nec mecum (quocunque feror) comesire gravar is
Annumerans vitae damna, levansque meae:
Times-Teller wrought into a little round, Translated H. V.

Which count'st the days and nights with watchful sound;
How (when once fixed) with busy Wheels do thou
The twice twelve useful hours drive on and show.
And where I go, go with me without strife,
The Monitor and Ease of fleeting life.
But the exactest Clocks and Watches that are, are defective, and want
corection; for in Watches, the first half hour goes faster then the last half,
and the second hour is slower then the first, and the third then the second;
the reason whereof is, because Springs when they are wound up, and then begin
their motion, move faster in the beginning then in the ending; as it is with
all violent motions^. But in Clocks it happens contrary; the last half hour is
faster then the first, because the weights by which they move, move slowly at
first, as all ponderous things do, but accelerate their motion when they draw
nearer to the earth. Besides, the lines or cords by which the weights do hand
(being drawn out into some length) add some weight to the plummets, and
consequently some speed to the motion. Both which inconveniences William
Landgrave of Hessen, and Tycho Brahe took into consideration how to rectify,
as Tycho relates; but how they sped in the enterprise, he does not tell us.

CAP. II.
(...): OR, Some curious Spheres and Representations of the World.
ARCHIMEDES of Syracuse was the greatest Mathematician and the rarest Engineer
that was in his time, or has been ever since (as it is believed) both for the
Rational and Chirurgical part, the Theory and the Practick of the Mathematics.
Cicero calls him Divinum ingenium, 2o de nature a Deorum. He was not only, Caeli
Syderumque Spectator assiduus (as Livy speaks of him) a diligent Spectator of
the heavenly Orbs and their Motions; but also Cyclorum and Staticorum indagator
acerrimus, as the same Livy, a great Experimentator and devisor of Machanical
Motions and Inventions. He was the first, qui stellarum errantium motus in
Sphaeram illigavit, says Cicero, 1o Tusc. that made a Sphere and an artificial
heaven, wherein he did represent the rotations and revolutions of the Planets,
and that with as true time and measure as they perform the same above. Of this
Sphere Claudian has an Epigram that acquaints us with some thing of the
Fabric of it.

Jupiter in parvo cum cerneret aether^ vitro;
Risit, and ad superos talia dicta refert.
Huccine mortalis progress a potentia curae:
Jam meus in Fragili luditur orb labor.
Jura Poli, Rerumque fidem, Legesque Deorum,
Ecce Syracusius Transtulit art Senex sc. Archi modes.

Inclusus variis famulatur Spiritus astris,
Et vivum certis motibus urget opus.
Percurrit proprium mentitus signifer annum,
Et simulata nove Cynthia mense redit.
Translated thus by Mr Nathaniel Carpenter in his Geography.
In a small Glass when Jove beheld the skies,
He smiled, and thus unto the Gods replies;
Could man extend so far his studious care,
To mock my labors in a brittle sphere?
Heavens Laws, Man's Ways, and Natures Sovereign Right
This Sage of Syracuse translates to sight.
A soul within on various Stars attends,
And moves the quick Work into certain ends;
A feigned Zodiac runs its proper year,
And a false Cynthia makes new months appear.
And now bold Art takes on her to command,
And rule the heavenly Stars with humane hand.
Who can admire Salmoneus harmless Thunder,
When a slight hand stirs Nature up to wonder?
This is mentioned also by Ov. 6. Fast.

Art Syracosia suspensus in aere clauso
Stat Globus, immensi parva figura poli.
From that description of Claudian, we observe first, That this Machin did move
of it self, it was an Automaton, a selfmoving device; and which moved regularly
by certain laws,

Et Vivum cert is, motibus urget opus.
As the Poet says. 2. We learn from him, that these motions were driven and
acted by certain Spirits pent within,

Inclusus variis famulatur spiritus astris.
About which spirits Kircher has often beaten his brains, what to make of
them, that he might know what was the inward principle of motion in that
machin: But after all his study and scruting, he could never find it out, but
he contends that the Circles of that Sphere were of brass, and the outside
(only) was of glass or specular stone, (which the Poet might call vitrum,
glass, for the perspicuity of it.

Yet Authors do make mention of a Sphere of glass which Sapor King of Persia
had, which was so large, that he could enter within it, and sit in the midst of
it, and see the Spears and Planets whirling round about him; which did swell
him with such a conceit, that in his Letters he did use this style, Rex regum
Sapor, Particeps Syderum, Frater Solis and Lunae.

We read of a silver Heaven sent by the Emperor Ferdinand for a Present to
Soliman the grand Signior, Paul^^ Jovius sabellicus.
which was carried by twelve men with a book along with it that showed the use
of it, and how to order and keep it in perpetual motion. Du Bartas makes
mention of both, and concludes his description of them with this Rapture
touching humane wit.

O complete Creature! who the starry Spears
Can make to move, who 'bove the heavenly Bears
Extend'st thy power, who guidest with thy hand
The days bright Chariot, and the heavenly brand.
Kercher does highly extol and admire the Artificers of this latter age for
making Spears and Globes, and such representations; who can make them (says
he) with such exactness and perfection in all points, that Jupiter might have
juster cause to complain of them, then he did of Archimedes (in Claudian) for
their presumptuous emulation of his handyworks.

Among the Moderns, one Cornelius van Drebble a Dutchman of Alcmar, may deserve
just admiration: This man lived here in England, and was Regi Jacobo a
Mechanicis (as one saith^ King James his Engineer, he presented the King with a
rare Instrument of perpetual motion, without the means of Steel, Springs, or
Weights; it was made in the form of a Globe, in the hollow whereof were Wheels
of Brass moving about, with two pointers on each side thereof, to proportion
and show forth the times of days, months, and years, like a perpetual
Almanac; it did represent the motions of the heavens, the hours of Rising and
Setting of the Sun, with the Sign that the Moon was in every 24 hours, and
what degree the Sun was distant from it; how many degrees the Sun and Moon are
distant from us day and night, what Sign of the Zodiac the Sun was in every
month; it had a circumference or ring which being hollow had water in it,
representing the Sea, which did rise and fall, as does the flood, twice in 24
hours, according to the course of the sides. This Bezaleel was sent for to the
Emperor of Germany, who sent him a chain of gold: A rude Scheme of this
Instrument may be seen upon paper in Mr Tho. Tims Philosophical Dialogue,
Dignus rex Archimede isto altero; Dignus Archimedes Batavus mag no illo rege,
as Marcellus Vrankheim (another Dutchman) speaks of King James and his
Engineer, in his Epistle to Ernestus Burgravius. Of this Microcosme or
Representation of the World which we now mentioned, the excellent Grotius has
framed this Epigram following.

In organum motus perpetui quod est penes Maximum Britanniaeum Regem Jacobum.
Perpetui motus indelass ata potestas
Abique quiet quies, absque labor labor,
Contigerant coelo, tunc cum Natura caducis,
Et solidis unum noluit esse locum.
Et geminas parts Lunae dispescuit orb,
In varias damnans inferiora vices.
Sed quod nunc Natura suis e legibus exit
Dans terris semper quod moveatur opus?
Mira quidem res est sed non nova (maxim Regum)
Hoc fieri docuit men's tua posse prius.
Men's tua quae semper tranquilla and torpida nunquam,
Tramite constanti per sua regna meat.
Ut tua men's ergo motus caelestis Imago:
Machina sic haec est mentis Imagot^ae.
Translated thus.
The untired strength of never-ceasing motion,
A restless rest a toyl-less operation,
Heaven then had given it, H. V.
when wise Nature did
To frail and solid things one place forbid;
And parting both, made the Moons Orb their bound.
Damning to various change this lower ground.
But now what Nature has those Laws transgrest,
Giving to earth a work that never will rest?
Though it is most strange, yet (great King it is not new;
This Work was seen and found before in You.
In You, whose mind (though still calm) never sleeps,
But through your Realms one constant motion keeps:
As your mind (then) was Heavens type first, so this
But the taught Antitype of your mind is.
One Janellus Turrianus a Citizen of Cremona, made brazen heavens in imitation
of those of Archimedes, and far surpassing them for Art, says Gaffarellus in
his book of Curiosities; and Ambrose Morinus in his description of Spain.
Erasmus had a golden Ring given him by one of the P^inces of Germany, which
being explicated, was a perfect celestial sphere, just of that form we call the
Armillary sphere, as we read in his life.

Janellus before mentioned did recreate the Emperor Charles the fifth (when he
had resigned up his Empire, and retired to a Monastique life in Spain) with
ingenious and rare devices: Oftentimes when the cloth was taken away after
dinner, he brought upon the board little armed Figures of Horse and Foot, some
beating Drums, other sounding Trumpets, and others of them charging one another
with their Pikes. Sometimes he sent wooden Sparrows into the Emperors Dining
room, that would fly round about, and back again; so that the Superior of the
Monastery coming in by accident, suspected him for a Conjurer. He framed a Mill
of Iron that turned it self, of such subtle work and smalness, that a Monk
could easily hide it in his sleeve; yet would it daily grind so much wheat as
would abundantly serve eight persons for their days allowance. This was he who
made the Water work, which by a new Miracle of Art, drew up the River Tagus to
the top of the Mountain of Toledo. All this we have from Famianus Strada's
excellent History of the Low Country Wars.

CAP. III.
(...), Of sundry Machins, and Artificial Motions.
GOd framed the world by Geometry (as we may say) that is, Wisd. 7, 10 (...)
Plutarch Sympos. l. 8. q. 2.
with wonderful Art; he did all things in Number, Weight, and Measure.
Aristotle calls him (...), The great Engineer of the world, that tacked this
rare Systeme of heaven and earth together, tackt the Center to the Spears, and
made the whole Frame to move in a wonderful order from its first creation to
this day. The earth is a rare piece of his Staticks, being hanged upon nothing,
as Job says, Job 26. 7. it hangs in the very Center and middle of the world,
like a Ball in the Air, but fixed and immovable, being evenly balanced and
counterpoized with its own weight: Ov. Met. l. 1.
Ponderibus librata suis. So those pendulous Mountains (the Clouds) whose
ballancings that great Philosopher Job admired, Job 37. 16. and those fiery
Mountains (the Comets) are Gods Isorropica, and some admirable parcels and
pieces of his Mathematiques. But the whole Machin of the world being taken in
the entire frame and fabric of it, is a greater wonder then all other wonders
in the world, De Civit. l. 11.
as St Augustine gives his judgment. This is a kind of an Automaton or Engine
that moves of it self, much like a great Clock with wheels and poyzes, and
counterpoyzes, that is always in motion, though no body moves it.

For I cannot believe that the Angels (those glorious creatures) are tied to
the heavenly bodies (like dogs in a wheel) to give them motion, but that that
great Engineer which made them, gave them a seeing or motion at first, that
continues to this day, and will continue so long as the Sun and Moon endures.

As the great world is an Automaton, so is the little world (man) a sort of a
selfmoving Engine, that performs its several motions by certain Springs, and
Wheels, and Chords that are acted by one secret principle of all motions, to
wit, the heart and spirits therein contained, and which are from thence
dispersed through the whole frame of the work.

Men's agitat molem, and parvo se corpore miscet.
Now it is observed, that the wit of man by a diligent and attentive perusal of
the world and himself, has framed sundry useful Machins and artificial
motions, after those patterns, after the frame and model of those two primary
Automata that God himself made. A Mill was first made after the pattern of a
man's mouth, (...).
as Seneca tells us in his ninth Epistle; An Organ pipe had its pattern from
man's weazand, which is inspired with the Lungs, and many other Inventions have
been hinted unto us from the Organs of man's body, and the actions performed by
them.

For Engineers, such as were expert in the practical part of the Mathematiques,
these were the most renowned in ancient times. Archimedes of Syracuse, Architas
of Tarentum, Severinus Boethius of Rome, Proclus, Heron, and Ctesibius, both of
Alexandria, of later times, Regiomontanus of Norimberg, Simon Stevinus of lower
Germany, Cornelius van Drebble his Countryman, whom we mentioned before,
Athanasius Kircher by birth a German, but living (of late) in Rome, and Marinus
Marsennus, a Friar of Paris. These were Magi and Thaumaturgi Mathematici
wonder-workers, or such as performed mavelous feats by their great skill in
Mathematical Sciences.

Cassiodorus a grave learned man, and Secretary to Theodorick King of the
Goths, gives this character of the abovenamed Boethius in a certain Letter
written unto him: You know ( says he) the secrets of Nature, and can work
wonders by your Art, Metals do bellow and make a noise: Diomedes cast in
brass, sounds his Trumpet louder; Here the brazen serpent hisses, and there
artificial Birds (that had no voice) sing melodiously; yet these are but
trivial things to relate of him, who can imitate the motions of the heavens
here on earth.

All art^ficial motions (generally) are performed by Air, or by Water, and so
all Engines, at least such as move of themselves, are (or may be) divided in
spiritalia and Aquatica. Heron of Alexandria writ books de spiritalibus
Machinis, or wind motions or machins moved with the air or wind: and Paptista
Porta has some thing de pneumaticis experimentis, or wind-motions, in his
fifth book of Natural Magic, and Marinus Mersennus has written Phenomenon
pneumatica. I will here produce some instances or examples of both kinds, and
first of pneumatic or wind motions.

De Spiritalibus Machinis, Or WIND-MOTIONS.
OF this kind (I conceive) was that Wooden Dove of Architas, which he made to
fly in the Air, which was by the means of Air pent or enclosed within, which in
the motion being something rarefied, kept it up aloft, and with some wheels
contrived in the concavity thereof, did set it forward; so Aulus Gellius gives
us some hint of the contrivance of it; No^t. At* l. 10. c. 1^.
Ita erat librament is suspensum, and ^ura spiritus inclusa, and occulta
consitum, etc. Julius Scaliger understood the feat full well (it seems) for he
professes the skill to make the like with a wet finger, as we say. By the same
art did Regiomontanus make a wooden Eagle to fly from Norimberg to meet the
Emperor on his way thither; Exercit. contra Cardan. 326.
and when it met him, it hovered over his head with a Tonick motion, and then
returned along with him the same way that it came. The Iron Fly was the like
device, made by the same Regiomontanus, which springing from under his hand,
would fly round about the room with a humming noise, and then return back under
his hand again.

Simon Stevinius a Dutchman, made a chariot to go with sails, which was as
swift almost as the wind that drove it; for it would carry eight or nine
persons from Scheveling in Holland to Putten in two hours, which was the space
of forty miles and upwards.

Monsieur Peyresc a learned Antiquary of France, made a journey to see it, and
was in it, and did use ever after to mention it with wonder, as Glassendus
tells us in his life: It was made in fashion of a boat with four wheels, two
sails, and a stern. Grotius has excellent Poems in commendation of that
Invention, two of the concisest I thought good to insert here,

In currus veliferos.
Ventivolam Typhis deduxit in aequora navem?
Jupiter in terras, aethereamque domum
In terrestre solum virtus Stevinia, nam nec
Typhy tuum fuerit, nec Jovis istud opus.
Aliud in eosdem.
Hactenus immensum Batavi percurrimus aequor,
Oceani nobis invia nulla via est.
Nerea C^ttorum soboles consumpsimus omnes ^. Mare.

Jam nihil est ultra, velificatur humus.
Translated
Typhis to Sea the first Ship brought, and Jove
To heaven, where Argo now a star does move:
But first by Land in Ships Stevinius went:
For that, nor Jove, nor Typhis did invent.
Another.
The va^^ Sea hitherto the Dutch have sa^^led
Searched every Coast, found each point, and prevailed;
The Ocean's all made pervious by their hand,
Now nothing more is left, they sail by land.
We read that in China and the Island of the Philippines, there are the like
devices, as Boterus relates in Politia Illustrium; and Hondius in his Map of
China has a type thereof; so that now we sail on the land, and on the water,
and under the water too; and an ingenious Gentleman of this Nation talks of
sailing in the Air too (in a flying Coach) which he conceives to be feasib^e,
and promises some attempt that way.

Cael^us Rhodiginus relates, that the Egyptians had made some Statues of their
Gods, both to walk of themselves, and also to utter some words articulately:
For their motion, it must be ascribed to some wheels and springs within, like
the contrivances of Daedalus his Statues, and Vulcan's Tripodes: But for their
voice or speech, it must be ascribed unto some Air forced up through some pipes
placed in the heads and mouth of (...) Statues. So we must conceive of the
artificial Lions that roared like the natural ones; and the artificial Birds
that imitated the voices and tunes of real Birds, which Luit-Prandus saw at
Constantinople in the Emperors palace, when he was sent thither upon an
Embassy from Berengarius King of the Lombards, Anno Dom. 950. as the said
Luit-Prandus relates in the sixth book of his History. Such was that Statue of
Albertus magnus which spoke to Tho. Aquinas, and that brazen head of Roger
Bacon a Carmelite Friar of Oxford, and perhaps that Image that Sir Richard
Baker says was made by Necromancy in the time of Richard the second, and not
long before the Parliament that wrought Wonders, as Histories speak; which
Image uttered at an hour appointed these words, The head shall be cut off, the
head shall be lift aloft. the feet shall be lift up above the head: Sir Richard
Baker in the life of Rich. 2.

Gornelius van Drebble that rare Artist we spoke of) made a kind of an Organ
that would make excellent Symphony of its self, being placed in the open Air
and clear Sun, without any fingering of an Organist; which was (as we conceive)
by the means of Air enclosed, and the strictures of the beams rarifying the
same; for in a shady place it would yield no Music but where the Sunbeams
could play upon it, as we read of Memnons Statue that would make some kind of
Harmony when the Sun did beat upon it; whereof we speak more hereafter.

At Dantzick a City of Prussia, Mr Morison, an ingenious traveller of this
Nation, saw a Mill which (without help of hands) did Saw boards, having an
iron wheel, which did not only drive the saw, but also did hook in, and turn
the boards unto the Saw. Dr John Dee makes mention of the like which he had
^een at Prague in his preface to Euclide; but whether the Mill moved by wind or
water, they do not mention: We heard of the like device set up in Kent here in
England, and some other places.

Archimedes his Sphere was some pneumatical Engine, that moved of it self by
means of some enclosed Spirits, as appears by that Verse of Claudian in the
description of it.

Inclusus variis famulatur spiritus Astris.
There are certain Aeolii Sclopi, or wind-muskets that some have devised to
shoot bullets withal, without powder, or any thing else, but wind comprest into
the bore thereof, or injected with a spring (as boys use to shoot pellets with
Elderguns, by breathing air into them) which will shoot with as great force as
powder.

Aeoliae pilae (which by contraction they call Aeolipiles) are also of this
kind, which are little things made of brass or copper in the form of a ball,
or pear, or bellows (but concave) with a little small hole; these being filled
with water (which they do by heating them in the fire, Baptista Porta l. 8.
Mag. Not.
then throwing them into water) and then being set near the fire, the water
rarifies into air, the air being scanted of room bursts out with great
violence, and for a long season. They are used by Chemists to blow their coals
with, as I have heard, and by some others to excite heat for melting of glass
and metals, and are called by some the Philosophical bellows.

A spit may be turned as Cardan shows, without the help of weights or hands, by
the motion of air rarefied by the fire, and ascending up the chimney, only a
pair of ^ails must be placed in that part of the chimney where it begins to be
narrow, and a wheel below, to the Axis whereof the spit-line must be tied; the
air so ascending will turn the wheel, and the wheel the spit, as long as there
is any fire in the chimney.

De AQVATICIS MACHINIS, Of WATER MOTIONS.
OUr ordinary Water mills that move by the force of water, are an excellent
invention, if we consider the various implements that belong unto them, and
with how little labor they are kept up to perform their work, when they are
once set in order.

I will show you (says Rodulph Prince of Camerino to the Duke of Anjou) two
stones that do excel all in your Cabinet, and showed him two Millstones. These
cost but ten florins, said he, and they bring two hundred florins yearly. But
the Mill called the Basacle at Thelous in France, Itiner. Gallo Belg
is a Machin of more then common art, as Abraham Golnitz (that saw it) tells
us; It is a thing worth your seeing (says he) for there is not such another in
all France: So is that at Dantzick in Prussia, which has eighteen rooms, and
brings a gold gulden of profit every hour to the public Treasury, says Mr.
Morison in his Travels.

At the Mint of Segovia in Spain, there is an Engine that moves by water so
artificially made, that one part of it distendeth an Ingot of gold into that
breadth and thickness as is requisite to make coin of; it delivers the plate
that it has wrought unto another that printeth the figure of the coin upon it,
and from thence it is turned over to another that cutteth it (according to the
print) in due shape and weight; and lastly, the several pieces fall into a
reserve in another room, where the Officer (whose charge it is) finds
treasure ready coined, as a noble and learned Gentleman of this Nation in his
Treatise of Bodies relates. Sir K. D.


The Italians make rare devices by the motions of water; In the Duke of
Florence his garden at Pratolino, is the picture of Pan sitting on a stool with
a wreathed pipe in his hand, and Syrinx beckning unto him to play on his pipe:
Pan putting away his stool and standing up, plays on his pipe; this done, he
looks on his Mistress, as if he expected thanks from her, takes his stool again,
and sits down with a sad countenance.

There is also the Statue of a Landress beating a buck, and turning the clothes
up and down with her hand, and the battled or wherewith she beats them in the
water. There is the Statue of Fame, loudly sounding her Trumpet; The picture of
a Toad creeping to and fro, and a Dragon bowing down to drink water, and then
vomiting it up, with diverse other knacks of wonder and delight, as Mr Morison
relates.

At Tybur or Tivoli near Rome, in the Gardens of Hyppolitus d' Este Cardinal of
Ferrara, there are the pictures of sundry Birds on the tops of Trees, which by
Hydraulic art and secret conveyances of water through the trunks and branches
of the Trees, are made to sing and clap their wings, but at the picture of an
Owl appearing suddenly out of a Bush, they are all mute and silent, as Schottus
in his Itinerary of Italy. It was the work of Claudius Gallus, as Possevin
informs in l. 15. of his Biblioth. select. c. 1.

There are in sundry places of Italy and elsewhere, certain Organa Hyaraulica,
that is, Organs that make good Music of themselves, only by forcing the water
up the p^pes, and by the collision of the Air and Water therein: The lower part
of the pipes are placed in the water (as Petrus Victorius describes them) which
water being forced up with a scrue, or such device, does inspire the pipes, as
well as the wind that is made with a bellows. Among the waterworks in the Duke
of Florence his garden, there was an Hydraulic Organ that with the turning of a
cock would make sweet harmony, as Mr Morison relates; the invention is ancient,
for Ammianus Marcellinus makes mention of one l. 14. and Claudian describes one
thus in his Poem de consulatu Mallii Theodori.

Et qui magna levi detrudit murmura tactu
Innumer as voces segetis moderatus Ae nae
Intonat erranti digito, penitusque ^rabali
Vecte, laborantes in carmina concitat undas.
Which invention is by some ascribed to Ctesibius, an ingenious Artist of
Alexandria, by others to Archimedes of Syracuse, as Tertullian writes, of which
he speaks thus, Specta potentissimam Archimedis munificentiam (scilicet)
Organum Hydraulicum, tot membra, tot compagines, tot parts, tot itinera vecum,
tot compendia sonorum, tot commercia Nodorum, tot acies tibiarum, and una moles
erant.

In those Roman spectacles or public shows exhibited by the Roman Emperors,
we read of diverse rare devices, and artificial motions, some whereof may not
improperly be inserted in this place.

There were Amphitheaters both at Rome and Verona, and elsewhere, Insana^ Moles.
which were prodigious piles, both for magnificence of cost, and inventions of
Art; whole groves of great Trees (with green branches) were brought and planted
upon the sandy Theater, and therein a thousand Estridges, a thousand wild
Boar^, and a thousand Stags put in for the people to hunt. This Forest being
removed, they would on a sudden overflow all with a deep Sea, fraught with Sea
monsters, and strange Fishes; then might you see a Fleet of tall Ships ready
rigged and appointed, to represent a Sea Fight: then all the water was let out
again, and Gladiators or Fencers fight, where the Galleys stood but even now;
which things are expressed in verse by Juvenal in his third Satyr thus:

-- Quoties nos descendentis Arenae
Vidimus in parts, ruptaque voragine terra
Emersisse feras and iisdem saepe latebris
Aurea cum Croceo creverunt Arbuta libro?
Nec solum nobis Sylvestria cernere monstra
Contigit, Aequoreos ego cum certantibus Ursis
Spectavi vitulos and equorum nomine dignu^
Sed deforme pecus --
Translated by H. V.
How often have we beheld wild Beasts appear
From broken gulfs of earth, upon some part
Of sand that did not sink? How often there
And thence did golden boughs ore saffron'd start?
Nor only saw we monsters of the wood,
But I have seen Sea-Calves whom Bears withstood;
And such a kind of Beast as might be named
A horse, but in most foul proportion framed.
Sometimes they caused a steep mountain to rise in the midst of the
Amphitheater, covered with fruitful Trees, with streams and fountains of water
gushing out: sometimes a tall Ship would float up and down of its self, which
splitting asunder, would disgorge five or six hundred beasts to be baited, then
vanish away: sometimes odoriferous waters would spout out to bedew the people,
and refresh them with the scent; sometimes they would represent the Fable of
Orpheus, and then the Trees must move up and down, as the Poets fame they did
when Orpheus played on his Harp.

Repserunt scopuli, Mart. Epig. 23.
mirandaque sylva cucurrit
Quale fuisse nemus creditur Hesperidum
Affuit immixtum pecudum genus omne ferarum
Et supra vatem multa pependit avis.
The Rocks did creep, vast Woods did strangely move,
Such ('it is believed) was the Hesperian Grove;
Wild Beasts and tame profusely came to sight,
And ore the Poets head, birds did alight:
So Martial speaks of this representation by Domitian the Emperor, wherein
those things were really performed on the Theater, which the Poets had but
fabled, as he says,

Quicquid fama canit donat arena tibi.
Which motions were performed per Machinamenta (...), as Mr Farnaby conjectures
in his Annotations, or by men placed in the hollows of the Trees and Rocks; but
in this creeping Forest there were beasts of all kinds among the trees, and
birds on the tops of them, all attentively listening to the ravishing harmony
that was made by some Musician that did personare the Thracian Lutinist.

In Rome there were versatilia Coenationum Laquearia, Epist. 90.
as Seneca tells us, that is, certain dining chambers made with that art, as if
they were moveable Scenes; for whilst the guests sat at Supper, they should be
turned about to several rooms adorned with differing furnitures; at every new
course of meat, they should be transported into a new chamber, they sitting
still all the while in their seats, Sen. Ep. 20.

That Plicatilis domus, that portable Palace made of Wood by Henry the 8th, and
carried over to France to that famous interview that he had with Francis the
first, was a work of great magnificence and art, and much spoken of by foreign
Writers, especially Paulus Jovius; and among our own, by my Lord of Cherbury in
his History of that Prince, the model whereof was preserved, and was to be seen
of late years (as he says) in the Tower of London.

Of MEMNONS Statue.
MEMNON was a King of Egypt and in memory of him, there was a Colossus or
mighty statue made of black marble Called Basalius.
, and set up in that magnificent Temple of Serapis in Thebes.

It was made by the Theban Priests with such art and contrivance, that in the
morning upon the striking of the beams of the Sun upon it, it made a kind of
Music; it was so famous a piece, that men traveled from far to see it. Lucian
the Sophister went to see that Miracle, as he calls it, as he relates in his
Philopseudes; so did the Emperor Severus, as Spartianus tells us, and
Germanicus, as Tacitus; and Strabo that judicious Geographer went to see it,
and heard the Music, and a great multitude of people at the same time with
him; so did Apollonius of Tyana, as Philostratus relates.

This Colossus upon a certain earthquake that happened, was broken in the middle,
and yet it was as Musical as when it was whole, as Strabo affirms in the 10th
of his Geography, and Juvenal Sat. 15: avers the same,

Dimidio Magicae resonant ubi Memnone chordae.
This matter need not seem fabulous or incredible (nor will not says Natalis
Comes) to any that understand the power of Art and humane Wit, and how expert
the Theban Priests were in Astronomy, and all other Philosophical Sciences,
see, Pliny hereof, l. 35. c. 7.

Ath. Kircher in his Oedipus, conceives it was a Telesme, Who li^t to kno^ more
of Telesmes and Talismanic Art, may read Mar^il. Ficinus de vita coelitus
comparanda l. 3. c. 18. Joseph Scaliger l. 3. Epistola 226. a. and learned M.
Gregory his Opuscula, cap. 8.
or made by Talismanic * Art, and that the Devil was conjured within the hollow
of it to perform that effect, because it continued for so long a time, namely
to the time of Apollonius Tyanaeus, which from the first rearing of it was
about eleven hundred years.

But yet he shows, that such a Musical statue may be made by Mathematical and
natural contrivance upon the ground of rarefaction: magnam enim vim in natura
rerum, rarefactionem obtinere, nemo ignorant, says he, Tom. 2. O^d. Egypt.
where you may find more examples of pneumatical devices among the Egyptians
in their Temples.

CAP. IV.
(...): OR, The Art and Mystery of Writing, with the Instruments thereunto
belonging.
AMong all the Inventions and productions of humane Wit, there is none more
admirable and more useful then Writing, by means whereof a man may copy out
and delineate his very thoughts and mind, and make that visible which none can
see but he that made it; whereby a man can utter his mind without opening his
mouth, and signify his pleasure at a thousand miles distance, and this by the
help of four and twenty letters, and fewer in some places; by various joining
and combining of which letters, as also by the transposing and moving of them
to and fro, all words that are utterable or imaginable may be framed; for the
several combinations of these Letters and different ways of joining them, do
amount (as Clavius the Jesuit has taken the pains to compute and observe) to
5852616738497664000 ways; In sphaer^^ Joh. de Sacro ^osco c. 1.
so that all things that are in heaven or in earth, that are, or were, or shall
be, that can be either uttered or imagined, may be expressed and signified by
the help of this mavelous Alphabet* which may be described within the compass
of a farthing.

The Chinois have 40000 letters at least, as Purchase and others tell us, which
makes the language so difficult, that a man cannot learn it in an age, which
renders our Alphabet of 24 letters the more admirable.

Though the vulgarity and commonness of this art has made it less esteemed and
set by, yet wise and considerate men that look upon things erudit is oculis (as
Cicero speaks) do much admire the Invention.

The Hebrews call it Dick-Duk, inventum subtle, a subtle and ingenious
Invention: Greg. Theolosanus, Divinum Miraculum, l. 16. de Rep. c. 2. a Divine
miracle; Cicero speaks of it with admiration, Quis sonos vocis, qui infiniti
videbantur paucis litterarum notis terminavit? l. 1. Tuscul. The Indians
admired it not a little, Purchase l. 8. of America.
when they saw the Spaniards send Letters to and fro, and maintain a kind of a
dumb Commerce among themselves by this way; they fancied that these Letters
were some Spirits that were the Internuncii or Interpreters between them.

Quisquis erat meruit senii transcendere metas
Tho. Readi inventa Adespota
Et fati nescire modum, qui mystica primus
Sensa animi docuit magicis signare figuris. etc.
So a modern Poet sings in commendation of it.

For the first Invention of Letters, the Phoenicians carry most voices.

Phoenices primi (Famae si credimus) ausi
Mansuram rudibus vocem signare figuris.
Phoenicians, that (if Fame we dare believe)
To Humane Speech first Characters did give.
Among the Phoenicians Cadmus had the honor of this Invention; whence one
calls letters (...), and another, ingellas Cadmi filias, the black and swarthy
daughters of Cadmus: Auson. Epigr.
But the truth is, they did but borrow them from the Hebrews, as all other
Nations did; though perhaps by adding some few, or varying and altering their
form and character, they seem now to have different Alphabets, Herm. Hugo.

The Librarians of old, who lived by writing books which others had made, were
very admirable in handling the pen as appears by ancient manuscripts, which are
so neatly and artificially done as if they were printed. Some of the latter age
have been excellent in this Mystery. One Francis Alumnus did write the Apostles
Creed and the first fourteen verses of St John's Gospel, in the compass of a
penny, and in full words, which he did in the presence of the Emperor Charles
the 5th, and Pope Clement the 7th, as Genebard relates in his Chronology, and
Sim. Maiolus out of him, who had also in his own possession such a miracle (as
he calls it) or the very same I believe, Nos domi idem miraculum servamus,
these are his words in his 23d Colloquy. Pliny has a parallel example of one
(whom he does not name) that wrote all the Iliad of Homer in a piece of
Parchment that was so little, that it was contained in a Nutshel. Cicero and
others mention the same, though Lancelotti puts it among his Farfalloni, and
reckons it for one of the popular errors of Pliny.

I read of one Thomas Sweicker, a Dutchman, who being born without hands and
arms, could write with his feet, and that elegantly; he could also make his pen
with his feet, and many other feats, which I find expressed in these verses.

Mira fides! pedibus dextre facit omnia Thomas
Cui natura Parens brachia nulla dedit.
Namque bibit pedibus, pedibus sua Fercula sumit
Voluit and his libros praeparat his calamos.
Quin and litterulas pede tam been pingere novit
Artificis superet grammata Ducta manu.
Maximus hoc Caesar stupuit quondam Aemilianus * Maximilian the Emperor.

Donaque scribenti largus honest a dedit.
The Duke of Saxony does keep some Copies of his Writing among his (...), or
Rarities, as Fell. Platerus relates in his observations. There was a woman in
this Kingdom of late years that could write with her feet, and do many other
things to the wonder of the beholders, and went about the Kingdom.

Besides the common way of Writing, there are some mysteries and secret ways,
and that either by abbreviation, setting a letter for a word, and a word for a
sentence for brevity sake, as the Hebrews and Romans anciently used to do; or
else by using different characters from the common and vulgar ones, such as
none can read or understand but the author or deviser of them, and such as he
is pleased to impart the mystery to, and give him a key to decipher and open
the secret by; which sort of characters the Ancients used to call Furtivas
notas, and Sifras, and Ziglas, and the Art it self Ziglography and
Brachygraphy, it is very useful for two respects, 1. For haste and brevity. 2.
For privacy and secrecy.


1. For brevity and expedition; it is a good way to take a speech or a sermon,
or any thing else that is dictated, as fast as it is spoken; hereby the
Notaries hand will keep pace with the speakers tongue, and outstrip it too;

Current verbalicet, Mart. l. 14.
tamen est velocior illis,
Nondum lingua suum, dextra peregit opus.
This is scribere (...), as Cicero Ep. 13. l. 5. l. 5.
ad Atticum. Dion ascribes the invention to Mecoenas,

(...).
He first found (says he) these Abbreviatures and compendious way of Writing
for expeditions sake.

Hic erit and foelix scriptor, Manil. l. 4. Astron.
cui litterum verbum est,
Quique notis linguam superet, cursumque lequentis,
Excipiat, longas nova per compendia voces.
2. This Ziglography is useful for secrecy or privacy ad elusionem examinis;
for hereby a man may carry a letter open in his hand, and understand never a
word of it; and they that make no Religion of opening letters, find themselves
deluded; which is of good use in time of war, and at other times against
paperpyrats that lie in wait for such poor booties; Quod ad te de december legatis
scripsi, parum intellexti credo, quia (...) scripseram, says Cicero to his
friend Atticus, who did not understand all the letter that Cicero had written
unto him, because he had written part of it in characters.

Julius Caesar had found out such a device for secrecy, sic structo litterarum
ordine ut nullum verbum effici posset, he did so tumble, invert, and transpose
the Alphabet in his writing, that no man could pick any sense out of it; and
this he devised when he began to think of the Roman Monarchy, and was by him
used but to private and tried friends that were his confederates, and privy to
his Design.

An Appendix of the Instruments of Writing.
THe Instruments of Writing are either 1. Active, or 2. Passive. That is,
either the Instruments wherein we write, or wherewith we write.

The instruments wherein we write are diverse; as Stone, Brass, Wax, Lead, Barks
and Leaves of Trees, Paper and Parchment.

The first Writing that we read of was in stone, God did write the Law in two
Tables of Stone, Exodus 19. which Salvian calls Rupices paginas. Moses wrote in
Saphyr and Onix, Exodus 28. 10. Saxo Grammaticus speaks, that the Danes did
record the noble Acts of their Ancestors in verse, which were cut in stone, in
saxis ac rupibus (as he says) voluminum loco, vastas moles amplectebantur,
codicum usum a cautibus mutuantes. Marmora Arundell. ^^oliisque (...) and ^
Apud Seldenum.

The Sybils books were written in the leaves of Trees; the Indians of the west
do write in the leaves of the Plane tree, which are as broad as any sheet of
paper, and four times as long, says Jos. Acosta l. 4. cap. 21. So in Malabar,
and other parts of the Levant, they write in the leaves of the Palm, as the
Syracusians did in an Olive leaf; from which manner of Writing the pages of
books are termed to this day folios or leaves.

The ancients used also to write in sheets of lead; this is intimated by Job, O
that my words were graven with an Iron pen, and lead in the rock for ever, Job
19. 23.

The Poems of Hesiod called (...) were found in Boeotia written in plates of
lead, says Pausanias in Boeoticis. There was a common manner of writing also
in thin rindes of trees growing under the upper bark, which is called by the
Latins Liber, or Caudex and Codex.

Udoque docent inolescere libro. Virg. Georg. l. 2.
Whence books are called Libri and Codices; for liber properly is interior
tunica corticis quae ligno cohaeret in qua antiqui scribebant, as Isiodor
defines it. The Indians of the East used such a kind of writing, as Q. Curtius
mentions l. 8. libri Arborum teneri, haud secus quam Cerae, litterarum notas
capiunt: They wrote also in the leaves of certain reeds, which Isaiah called
papyr-reeds, Isa. 19. 7. growing in the marshes of Egypt, which reed ^or sedge
is called Biblus or Byblos, so Lucan,

Nondum flumineas Memphis contexere biblos
Noverat -- Which the Translator does english papyr.

The River yet had not with papyr served Egypt. Tho. May.

From which term or name of Biblos, books are by the Grecians called Bibloi and
biblia dimunitively; and that book of books the Bible; because books were
usually made of this kind of reed or sedge; and the manner was thus; they
divided these leaves into thin flakes called Phylirae, into which they
naturally divide themselves, then laying them on a smooth table, and moistning
them with the water of Nilus (which is of a glutinous nature) they placed one
cross under the other, like a woof and warp in a weavers loom, and then having
pressed them, they set them to dry in the Sun, as Pliny relates in l. 13. of
his Natural History.

The Roman Laws called the Laws of the 12 Tables, were written in leaves, or
tables of brass.

Small boards or tables of wood waxed were in frequent use among the later
Romans to write in, which were called Cerei pugillares in sundry Authors, and
Ceratae tabulae or tabellae, whence Letter-carriers were called Tabellarii.
These were the Writing tables that Zacharias called for Luke 1. 36. Write these
things upon a table: Isa. 30. 8. (...) Septuagint, box tables. These boards
were sometimes made of Box and Cedar^wood, whence that of the Poet Persius,

-- Cedro digna locutus:
He spoke things worthy to be written in Cedar, and worthy of immortality.
Eumenes King of Pergamus devised a way to dress the skins of beasts, and to
make them fit for writing, as Vellam and Parchment. This latter is called
Pergamum, from the Town of Pergamus, where it was first made. But the modern
invention of paper surpasses all in this kind. My Lord Bacon reckons it inter
monodica artis among the singularities of Art, as being a singular and
excellent invention; adeo ut inter materias artificiales vix inveniatur simile
aliquid, says he, it is a web or piece of cloth that is made without a Loom,
and without spinning or weaving* as a modern Poet is pleased to describe it,

Denique compacta est nullo subtemine tela,
Exuperans candore nives, AEtate metella, etc.
It derives its pedigree from the dunghill, being made of rags, and things
cast out of doors as useless; we do not go to the expense of making it of
Cotton-wool, as the Mexicans do, but of nasty clouts; Magnarum usque adeo
sordent primordia rerum; of so mean a birth and original is this commodity, Qua
humanitas vitae and memoria maxim constat, imo qua hominum immortalitas, as
Plin. lib. 13. cap. 11. which Grotius describes thus:

Nunc aurata comas, and sicco pumice laevis
Charta, senis scabri fascia nuper eram.
In some parts of the East they make paper of silk, as was to be seen in
Ferdinand Imperatus his Cabinet of Rarities.

Now speak we of the active instruments, or those wherewith we write: The two
Tables of the Law were written with a miraculous pen, to wit, Gods own finger:
for writing in brass or lead they had certain Graving tools that were hollow,
called by the Latins c^lum and celtes, from the hollowness thereof,
(...),(...).
In waxen tables they wrote with pointed bodkins of iron, steel, or brass
called stylus; this was sharp at one end for to make impression in that wax;
but it was flat and broad, and somewhat hooked at the other end, for to scrape
or blot out the letter if need were. Men write in glass with pointed Diamonds,
which yield to be cut by nothing else, except the Smiris or Emeril.

In ancient paper made of seggs, they wrote with a reed called calamus
scriptorius and arundo, which kind of reed grew much about Memphis and Cnidos,
and the banks of Nile.

Dat Chartis habiles calamos Memphitica tell us. Mart. l. 14. Epigr. 38.

In parchment and the modern paper, they write with a pen or quil plucked from
the wing of some Fowl, called by Ausonius Fissipes, from the slit that is made
in it for to let down Ink, which is a very useful invention, and commended by
an ingenious Muse of the Low Countries.

Praeteritos reddit, praesentes prorogat annos, Barlaeus de Penna.

Invidiamque feri temporis una domat:
Absenti loquitur, laedit rostra^a juvatque;
Dumque aliis vita^ foenerat, ipsa caret.
Past years it rescues, makes the present spread
To ages, and times envy strikes dead,
Instructs the absent, hurts and helps at need,
And wanting life, makes others live indeed.
Opmerius makes mention of the three last in his Chronicle, In pugillares
scribebant stylis ferreis, in papyros autem arundineis calamis and postmodum
etiam avium pennis; so he. Some write with coals, but the verse tells you who
they are,

Stultorum calami carbones, moenia chartae.
The Cutlers of Damascus write in iron steel, and brass, with corroding waters
only, wherewith they make frets of curious figures and characters in sundry
colors; as may be seen on Turkish Scimiters, and those Gladii Damascinati,
Swords made at that City of Damascus, beautified with Damask work and
Embroidery. It lasts long, for with one pen did Dr Holland a Physician of
Coventry, a learned and industrious man, write out the great Volume of Pliny,
translated into English by himself, which (for a memorial) a Lady preserved,
and bestowed a silver case upon it. The Queen of Hungary in the year 1540 had a
silver pen bestowed upon her, which had this Inscription on it,

Publii Ovidii Calamus.
Found under the ruins of some Monument in that Country, as Mr Sands in the
life of Ovid (prefixed to his Metamorphosis) relates.

CAP. V.
(...): OF Printing, and Printing-Presses.
THis is a divine benefit afforded to mankind, De invent. rerum.
says Polydor Virgil; an Art that is second or inferior to none; (says
Cardan) either for wit or usefulness: it puts down handwriting for neatness
and expedition; for by this, more work is dispatched in one day, then many
Librarians or book-writers could do in a year.

-- Quam nulla satis mirabitur aetas
Ars Coelo delapsa viris; consumere nata
Materiem, veloxque omnes transcribere libros, Readi inventa adespota.

Cum positis, quadrata acie (miro ordine) signis.
This Art by multiplying books, has multiplied knowledge, and has brought to
our cognizance both persons and actions remote from us, and long before our
time, which otherwise had perished in oblivion, and never come to our ears.

To whom we owe this Invention, we do not certainly know, it is one of the
Inventa Adespota, of the masterless Inventions.

Laus veterum est meruisse omnis praeconia famae,
Et sprevisse simul --
Ancient Worthies were more studious of doing good then ambitious of Fame or
praise for so doing. That it is a Dutch invention is agreed upon by most voices.

O Germanica muneris repertrix
Quo nihil utilius dedit vetustas,
Libros scribere quae doces premendo.
But whether higher or lower Germany shall have the honor of it, is yet in
strife and undecided; and in the upper Germany, whether Mentz, or Basil, or
Strasburg; for all these do challenge it, and do no less contend for the birth
place of this mystery, then the Grecians Cities did for the Cradle of Homer.
The general voice is for Mentz, and one John Guttemberg Fust (as others term
him) a Knight and Citizen of that City to have been the true Father or Inventor
of this Art, about the year 1440. as we have heard it boldly affirmed by the
Citizens of that City, says Polydor, l. 2. de Invent. rerum. c. 7. for a
testimony hereof they produce a copy of Tully's Offices printed in parchment,
and preserved in the Library of Ausburg, bearing this memorandum at the latter
end of it, Praesens M. Tullii opus clarissimum Jo. Fust Moguntinus Civis, non
Atramento plumali Canna, ne^* aerea, sed art qua dam per pulchra manu Petri
Gerskeim pueri mei foeliciter effeci, finitum Anno 1440. die 4o mense Feb. This
is cited by Salmuth in his Annotations on Pancirollus, who stands stiffly for
Germany (his own Country) in this point, and cites another argument from the
Library of Francfort, wherein an old copy of the decisions of the Rota are
kept; at the latter end thereof it is said, that it was printed in Civitate
Moguntiae, artis impressoriae inventrice and elimatrice prima.

But Hadrianus Junius a very learned man of the Low Countries, is as stiff on
the other side for Haerlem, and thinks to c^^ry it clearly from the High Dutch,
and make the Town of Haerlem the birth place of this Noble Art: You may see
what esteem men do make of it, when they do so zealously strive and contend for
the original Invention of it. his Junius tells us (in his History of the
Netherlands) that one Laurence John, a Burger of good Note and Quality of
Haerlem, was the first Inventer of it, and says that he made Letters first of
the barks of Trees, which being set and ranked in order, and clapped with their
heels upward upon paper, he made the first essay and experiment of this Art: At
first he made but a line or two, then whole pages, and then books, but printed
on one side only. Which rudiments of the Art Junius saw in that Town.

After this the said Lawrence made Types or characters of Tin, and brought the
Art to ^urther perfection daily: but one John Faustus (infaustus to him) whom
he had employed for a Compositor, and who had now learned the mystery, stole
away by night all the Letters and other Utensils belonging to the Trade, and
went away with them to Amsterdam first, thence to Collen* and lastly to Mentz,
where he set up for himself, and the first fruit and specimen of his Press
there, was the Doctrinal of one Alexander Gallus, which he printed Anno Dom.
1440. Thus far Junius from the relations of sundry grave ancient Burgomasters
of Haerlem. Hegenitz a Traveller says, that the house of Lawrence John is yet
standing in the Market place of Haerlem, with this Inscription in golden
Letters over the door,

Memoriae sacrum.
Typographiae Ars Artium Conservatrix, hic primum inventa, circa An. 1440.
Vana quid Architypos and Praela (Moguntia) jactas?
Harlemi Archetypos praelaque nota scias.
Extulit hic monstrante Deo Laurentius Artem
Dissimulare virum hunc, dissimulare Deum est.
So Petrus Scriverius, who calls it palladium praesidium and tutelam Musarum,
and omnis Doctrinae. Joseph Scaliger contends that the first Printing was upon
wooden Tables, the Letters being cut or carved in them, and he says, that he
had seen Horologium Beatae Mariae (to wit) our Ladies hours done upon Parchment
after such a manner, in his answer against Shcioppus, called Confutatio Fabulae
Burdomanae. Yet let not the Germans or any others be too proud of this
Invention, for the Chinois had such an art long before the Europeans saw or
heard any thing of it, as it is affirmed by Parus Maffeus, and sundry others of
his fellow-Jesuites that have traveled that Country. One Nicol. Trigault that
had been of late years in that Country affirms, that that Nation had this art
above 500 years since. But their Printing and ours do very much differ from one
another, for they do not print by composing of Letters, but as we use for Maps
and such pieces, they make for every leaf a board or table with characters on
both sides, which is more laborious, and less neat then the European way, as
Gonsalvo Mendoza a Spanish Friar and others do affirm of it. Now if our
Printing surpass for neatness and expedition. and is so far different from that
of the Chinois as is before alleged, it is a sign that the Germans did not
borrow from them this art; so that the praise and commendation of this
Invention remains to them whole and entire without diminution.

Mrs. Joan Elizabeth Weston, one of the Muses of England, has composed a
Latin Poem (among sundry others of her compositions) in the praise of this
art, which is indeed the preserver of all other arts.

AS Printing it self is praise worthy, so some Print-houses deserve here to be
remembered, especially that of Christopher Plantin at Antwerp, which a Traveller
does not stick to call Octavum orbis miraculum, the eighth wonder of the world.
He describes it thus. Over the Gate is Plantine's own Statue, made of
Freeze-stone, and of Moret his Son in Law, and Successor in the Office, and
also of Justus Lipsius with his Motto,

-- Moribus Antiquis.
Here are twelve Presses, and near upon an hundred sorts of Characters: two
sorts of Syriac, ten of Hebrew, nine of Greek, forty seven of Latin, and the
rest of several other Languages, with Musical characters of sundry sorts, and
admirable brass cuts for Frontispieces of books. Here that excellent work
called the King of Spain's Bible was done.

The first Printing Press in England was set up in Westminster Abbey by Simon
Islip Anno 1471. and William Caxton was the first that practiced it there, as
Stowe in his Survey of London affirms.

CAP. VI.
(...): OR, The Art of Limning and Painting.
PAinting comes near an Artificial Miracle, Of Architecture. Elinguis umbrarum
and luminum eloquentia; muta line^rum poesis.
says Sir Henry Wotton, to make diverse distinct eminences appear upon a Flat
by force of shaddows, and yet the shaddows themselves not to appear, is the
uttermost value and virtue of a Painter, says that Learned Knight.

-- miror

Praelia rubrica picta aut Carbone velut si
Re vera pugnent, feriant, vitentque moventes
Arma viri --
This is a lawful dissembling or counterfeiting of natural things; it is a
witty and subtle Art, it gives life (in a manner) to the dead; by this we see
those that have lived many ages before us in their true and proper colors, and
read not only the shape and stature of their Bodies but their Attire,
Habiliments and Fashions, which no relation of History can so well represent
unto us or inform us of. By this we see our absent Friends, and call to mind
what is far out of sight. By this Apelles showed to King Ptolomy the servant
that brought him to the Kings Dining-Chamber, by drawing his picture on a wall
with a coal, when he could not find his person. By this, ancient Histories are
acted (in a dumb show before us, and every real becomes a book; wherein the
most ignorant man can read something, and understand by the pencil what he
cannot by the pen. St Gregory spoke right enough in this: quod legentibus
Scriptura, haec Idiotis pictura praestat cernentibus; quia in ipsa etiam
ignorantes vident, q^od sequi debeant, in ipsa legunt qui litter as nesciunt.

And because the eye is a better informer than the ear, and conveighs things
more effectually to the mind, and imprints them deeper; therefore some visible
Representations are as useful for our instruction as those things that we
take in at the ear. Upon this consideration, that excellent Emblem of Mortality
called Chorea Mortuorum, or Deathsdance, that was pourtrayed on the wall of a
Church in the Town of Basil in Germany being decayed with time, Hentzneri
Itinerarium.
was thought fit (by the Aedills or public Surveyors of that City) to be
renewed; ut qui vocalis picturae divina monita securi audiunt, mutae saltem
Poeseos miserabili. spectaculo, ad seriam Philosophiam excitentur, as the new
Inscription there speaks.

This Art had but rude beginnings, as all others had; the shaddows of men
projected upon the ground or the wall, gave it birth; whence p^ctures are
termed shaddows, which very name betrays their original. A Coal was at first
both the pencil and the color, and a white wall was their table and canvas.

Pictorum Calami carbones, maenia Chartae.

From one color they rose to ten; they have december palmarios colores, as
Bullinger says; ten colors of principal note, besides others. Painters (of
old) were desired to set a name on every thing they drew, that men might know
what they meant.

Thus it was, when this Art was yet (...) (as Aelian speaks) in its swathes and
cradle. At first they pourtrayed but the bare Lineaments and natural
Representations of things in one solemn posture and scheme called (...), and
Aristides the Theban was the first, qui animum pinxit and sensus, says Pliny;
that added the Ethick part of Painting, and expressed the passions with his
pencil; that made his mute tables to laugh or weep, smile or frown, as the
drift of his fancy suggested unto him.

Apelles brought this Art to perfection, as the same Pliny affirms; for he
surpassed omnes prius genitos, l. 35. Hist. Not. c. 10.
futurosque postea, as he says; all that went before him or ever should come
after him. He painted things that could not be painted, as Lightening and
Thunders, as Pliny relates of him, l. 3. 6. 10. Paint me a voice (says the
Angel in Esdras, and call back yesterday; intimating both to be impossible. His
Masterpiece was the picture of Venus rising out of the Sea, and wringing the
water out of her disheveled hair. This was called (...), whereof Ovid makes
mention, l. 4. de Pont^.

Ut Venus artificis labor est and Gloria Coi,
Aequoreo madidas quae premi^ imbre comas.
When this Apelles came to Rhodes, where Protogenes (another famous Painter)
lived, he went to his house, and not finding him within, he drew with a pencil
a straight line, very small and slender, and left it as a challenge, and went
his way. Protogenes coming home and finding this line, did guess that Apelles
had been there, and thereupon drew another line through the very midst of that
line of Apelles with a different color, which was (in effect) an answer to the
challenge; Apelles returning again to Protogenes his shop, and finding a line
most artificially drawn through the midst of his, took the pencil and drew a
third line in a different color, from the two former, nullum relinquens
amplius subtilitati locum (says my Author) leaving no room for further art or
subtilty, and so was Victor in this invention.

However, Protogenes was esteemed nothing inferior to Apelles, whom Petronius
mentions; Protogenis Rudimenta cum ipsius naturae veritate certantia, non sine
quodam horrore tractavi, says Petronius Arbiter.

There is a pretty story in the same Pliny to this purpose, touching Zeuxes and
Parrhasius, two famous Artizans and Masters of the Pencil in their times: for
Quintilian calls this Parrhasius the Legislator among the Painters, that is,
one that gave Law to all others in this Art, l. C. 12. C. 10. Zeuxes for his
Masterpiece hung forth a Table wherein he had drawn a Boy carrying Grapes in
his hand, which were so lively done, that the Birds flew to the Table to peck
at the Grapes: But Parrhasius painted a Curtain upon a Tablet so artificially,
that Zeuxes thinking it had been a Curtain indeed, stretched his hand to draw
the Curtain aside, that he might see the picture which he thought to be behind
it; at which error he was so abashed, that he yielded the best to Parrhasius,
adding this ingenuous confession, That Zeuxes his piece had deceived but silly
Birds, but that of Parrhasius deceived an Artist.

The same Zeuxes painted an Old Woman so lively and so deformed, that he died
with extreme laughter at the spectacle and his own ridiculous fancy and conceit
therein, as Quercetan reports in his Diaetat. Polyhist.

Pliny makes mention of some Women painters; and of one Lala a Virgin of
Cyzicum, that drew her own picture by a Glass: and Mountaigue in his Essaies
speaks of a picture which he had seen at Barleduc that Ren King of Sicily had
made of himself and presented to the French King Francis the Second.

It is a pretty Art, that in a pleated paper, and table furrowed or indented,
men make one picture to represent several faces; as one I have seen, that
looking from one place or standing, represented Edward the Sixth; from another,
Queen Elizabeth; and from a third place, King James. Another I read of, that
being viewed from one place, did show the head of a Spaniard, and from another
the head of an Ass. This was the conceit of a Frenchmen (I believe) who can
neither speak well nor think well of a Spaniard.

One of the late Chancellours of France had in his cabinet a picture which
presented to the common beholder a multitude of little faces, which were the
famous Ancestors of that noble man; but if one did look on the said picture
through a Perspective, there appeared only the single pourtraicture of the
Chancellor himself: the Painter thereby intimating, that in him alone were
contracted all the virtues of his Progenitors. So the ingenious translator of
Pastor Fido in his Epistle Dedicatory relates. Mr. Fanshaw.


Painting in Oil is a modern Invention, which was wanting to the full
complement and perfection of this Art; for hereby Colors are kept fresh and
lively from fading, and pictures are made to bear against the injuries of time,
air, and age; when their Prototypes and originals cannot, notwithstanding all
the Fucusses and decorations and Adulteries of Art among our Women-painters,
who can never repair the decays of nature with all their boxes and shops of
Minerals.

The Art of Sculpture or Engraving in brass (which the French call de taille
Douce) is near of kin to this art, and herein to be preferred before it; for
that when a picture in this kind is finished upon a table of Brass or Copper,
or the like metal, a thousand Copies may be taken of it (by the help of a
Rolling-Press) in a few hours space, as in Printing, when one page of a leaf is
set and composed, that one form will serve to make a thousand more by it, and
that in a trice, whereas a picture in colors is not so soon copied out.

But the highest piece of perfection in this art (in my judgment) are those
perspective pieces which do represent Temples, wherein the vulgar eye discerns
nothing upon the Tablet but arched lines and steps, degrees, or ascents; but
with a Perspective glass you may see (as it were) the inside of a Temple at full
length with the arched roofs above, and windows on each side: Some Statues cast
in brass do show much wit and art. The brazen Cow of Myron is made famous by
the Epigram of Ausonius translated out of Greek, which was so lively done, that
Bulls passing by thought to cover her; as the Poet (if he do not overreach)
informs us.

Bucula sum, coelo genitoris facta Myronis
Aerea, nec factam me puto sed genitam Ausonium Epig. 57.

Sic me Taurus init, sic proxima bucula Mugit
Sic vitulus sitiens ubera nostra petit:
Miraris quod fallo gregem? Gregis ipse Magister
Inter pascentes me numerare solet.
But the chiefest of this art of Foundery or Imagery was Lysippus, Plin. l. 35.
cap. 8.
who did cast one Image of brass so rare and exquisite, that Artificers called
it the Canon, that is, the rule or standard from whence all Artists must fetch
their Draughts, Symmetries, and Proportions, as from the pattern and most
absolute Masterpiece.

Of late times the Italians and Germans do surpass in these Arts, Michael
Angelo Buonarota of Florence, was both an Architect, a Painter, and a Sculptor.

-- Veras depingere formas,
Naturam ipse doces, victam subigisque fateri:
Dextra sed ingenio non infoelicior, and te
Nobilitant Calami, sicut coelo atque colores
So one of his countrymen writes of him.

Albertus Durerus of Norimberg was not inferior to Apelles, as Wimphelingius
tells us; Van Dijk a Dutchman was very famous in London, and attained to very
great wealth by his art; Paulus Rubeus of Antwerp is vivum Europae miraculum,
(if he be yet alive) as an ingenious Traveller styles him, whose Table of the
Last Judgment was valued at five thousand Florins; Tabulae oppidorum opidus
emptae; so Pliny of the Curiosities of his time.

The Art of Painting in Glass, which they call Annealing, is very ingenious:
when they have laid the colors upon the Glass, they put the Glass into some
hot Furnace for fifteen or twenty days to imbibe the colors: This art was
known unto the Ancients, as Bullinger is persuaded, and cites a Distich of
Martial for it;

Non sumus audacis plebeia Toreumata vitri
Nostra nec ardenti gemma feritur aqua.
But the Poet means no such matter there, but he speaks of certain cups made of
Crystal, or some subtiler and finer sort of Glass which cannot brook hot
water, as common glasses can, but crack presently when it is poured into them,
as appears by his words in another Epigram which give light to this;

Nullum sollicitant hoc Flacce torreumata furem
Et nimium calidis non vitiantur aquis. l. 12. Epig. 57.
The Egyptians had a device of making pictures in their fine linen cloth,
which was thus; when they had drawn the colors upon the cloth, and those
pictures and fancies they thought fit, nothing would be seen upon the cloth
until they had cast it into a c^uldron of boiling water, wherein certain herbs
and juyces had been boiled, and having sokened them there, in a little while
they drew them forth with perfect and lively pictures; so Bulenger de Pictura
and Statuaria, lib. 1. c. 12. out of Pliny.

To work pictures not only upon cl^th out in cloth, to inlay and incorporate
them (as it were) into the very substance and contexture of the Webb, and that
so lively, as the Pencil can scarce mend them, as we have seen in Carpets and
Chamber-hangings, which is an art no less subtle and ingenious then any of the
rest. These are called Picturae textiles by Tully l. 4. contra Verrem, and by
Lucret l. 2. By this Art we have Fountains, Gardens, and Forests in our
chambers, Roses that never fade, Flowers that look fresh all the year, also
Groves and Forests that are always green, with all manner of Beasts and Birds
therein, with chases and Hounds so lively represented, that there wants nothing
but noise and sound to make up the Game, as Martial said of the carved Fishes
made by Phidias so lively, that there wanted nothing but water to make them
swim.

Artis Phidiacae toreuma clarum
Pisces Aspicis? add aquas, natabunt;
Phidias did these Fishes Limn,
Add but water, they will swim.
The Babylonians were the first that taught this art, as Polydor Virgil
acquaints us: But the Artificers of Arras in Flanders whence our rich Arras is
fetched, and called Arras-work, are not thought inferior to any Nation in this
Workmanship. I will conclude this chapter with Mosaic work, which the French
call Marhuetrie, the Latins Musaeum, and Musivum opus, the Greeks (...), it is
a work wrought with stones of diverse colors, metals, marble, glass, and all
wrought into the form of knots, flowers, and other devices, wtih that
excellency of cunning, that they seem all one stone, and rather the work of
nature then art. The Ancients were not ignorant of this Art, see Pliny lib. 36.
Not. Hist. cap. 25. and more copiously in Bulenger, de Pict. l. 1. c. 8.

The picture of La^co and his two sons with the serpents clasping about their
middle, according to Virgil's description in the 2d of the Aeneis, is now in
the Popes Palace at Rome, and is esteemed the most absolute piece of Art in the
whole world, and which Mich. Angelo (one that could well judge of such things)
did not stick to call artis miraculum, the miracle of art, as Laurent.
Schraderus in l. 2. of the monuments of Italy. It is a piece of antiquity,
mentioned by Pliny, labored by three Rhodian Sculptors, that were the
excellentest in their times, as the said Pliny has recorded.

CAP. VII.
(...): OR, The Art of Spinning and Weaving; with the several Materials of
Garments among sundry nations.
WE come now ad Vestificin^ ingenia (as Tertullian speaks) to the Art of
Spinning and Weaving; l. de Pall.
which, though they be vulgar Occupations, yet are no vulgar Mysteries and
inventions, as appears by the various instruments that are used for both. The
former invention, to wit Spinning, is ascribed to less Deity than Minerva the
Goddess of Wisdom: (...) Hes.
Ovid calls it

-- Divinae Palladis artem.
He that considers the Wheel, the Wherve, the Spindle, with other Tacklings
and Accoutrements that belong to Spinning, with the fabric of the Loom and
Shuttle, and other instruments of Weaving, will confess that it was no vulgar
wit that devised and framed them.

In Dantzick in Poland there was set up a rare invention for weaving of 4 or
five Webs at a time without any humane help; it was an Automaton or Engine that
moved of it self and would work night and day: which invention was suppressed,
because it would prejudice the poor people of the Town; and the Artificer was
made away secretly (as it is conceived) as Lancellotti the Italian Abbot relates
out of the mouth of one Mr Muller a Polonian that had seen the device.

The first Garments that we read of, were made of Figg-leaves sowed together,
as our first-parents did, Genesis 3. 7. Paul the Hermit (desirous to take the
thriftiest way and simplest to live) made him a suit of the leaves of
Palm Trees.

Nexilis antefuit vestis, quam textilis unquam.
Suits of the primitive fashion were made of the skins of Beasts, which men
killed for food: cum antea induviae hominum, erant brutorum exuviae, H^urn. l.
1. Spinning is a subordinate Art to Weaving, and therein Arachne was excellent
in her time, and presumed so much on her skill that she challenged Pallas her
self to a trial of skill in this Mystery.

-- Tantus decor affuit arti,
Sive rudem primos lanam glomerabat in orbs,
Seu digitis subigebat opus repetitaque longo
Vellera mollibat, nebulas aequantia tractu.
Whether she orb-like rolled the ruder wool,
Or finely fingered the selected Cull,
Or draw it into cloud-resembling flakes,
Or equal twine with swift-turn'd Spindle makes.
As thread is spun and made of wool, silk, hair, hemp, flax and the like: so
cloth is weaved and webs are made of these several sorts. The nettle affords a
kind of thread like hemp, whereof Nettle-cloth is made. I have seen cloth made
of the innermost bark of a tree; Mr Purchase makes often mention of the like;
Strabo of the Massagetes has the same: Massagetae vestiuntur libris arborum,
quod lana careant, Strabo l. 11. Geogr. And Purchase says farther, That of
certain Palm Trees, Velvets, Sattens, Damasks, and Taffita's are made, in the
6th book of his Pilgrimage and description of Africa: which Art the Europaeans
are ignorant of, I suppose. The Mexicans make cloth of the bark of the Maguei
that famous Tree, which bears the Coco which we call Coker-nut, and which is a
Cornu-copia of it self, as ^u-Bartas describes it.

-- which serves in Mexico
For weapon, wood, needle, and thread, to sow,
Brick, honey, sugar, sucket, balm and wine*
Parchment, perfume, apparel, cord and line.
Monsieur Peyresc, that great storer and preserver of the rarities of Art and
Nature, had a kind of a Pumpion brought from Mecha, that was thready within
like silk; and he had also a little web of cloth that had been made of that
thread, which was very good silk, as Dr Gassendi relates in the life of the
said Peyresc. Besides this, there is no Sericum vegetabile, no vegetable silk,
as some have supposed; there is no such delicate wool as to make silk of,
growing upon the leaves or barks of trees, as Virgil sings of the A^thiopian
and Cathaian Forests.

Qui nemora Aethiopum molli canentia lana, Georg. l. 2.

Velleraque e foliis depectunt tenuia seres?
Whose mistake Pliny has followed, speaking of the Seres lanificio sylvarum
nobiles, etc. in the 6th book of his not. hist. c. 17. and Indos suae arbores
vestiunt: which Authors Lipsius follows in his Commentaries on Tacitus. But,
the truth is, that silk is made and spun out of the bowels of a little Grub or
worm, which is called the Silkworm, which feeds upon lettices and the leaves
of Mulberries, and no otherwise, as Julius Scaliger learnedly shows in his
Exercitations against Cardan. Exer. 159. c. 9. and the Seres or people of
Cathaia were the first that made use of this Spinners thread, and keemed it and
weaved it into a web, from whence it has the name of Sericum: from them it
came first into Europe, tam multiplici opere, tam longinquo orb petitur, ut in
publico Matrona transluceat, says the excellent Pliny, who inserts many a
moral lesson among his natural observations: so far these thin aerie stuffs,
this ventus Textilis (as Petronicus calls it, and (...) as Gr. Nazianzen) is
fetched, that it may be fit for Ladies; who delight in such diaphanous wears
and foreign wares: it was of high esteem in all ages.

This precious fleece was only used to adorn
The sacred loins of Princes heretoforn,
says the divine Bartas. And in another place;

-- flecces fit for Princes robes
In Serean forests hang in silken Globes.
But not growing naturally upon the trees, but spun by the worm that feeds upon
them in the forest.

One Pamphilia of the Isle of Coos was the first that weaved silks: whence Coa
vestis properly is used for silk; the first that wore a garment hereof in
Europe, was the Emperor Marcus Aurelius Antoninus. The worm was first brought
into Europe in the Emperor Justinians time, by certain Monks that had
traveled Cathaia: They brought the eggs only to Constantinople, and then
hatched the worms by putting the eggs in warm dung.

The Spiders lawn or web which he hangs upon the hedges, and (sometimes) in our
windows, though it affords matter of wonder to the considerate beholder, that
shall observe the accurateness and ^venness of the thread, and the Geometry and
regularity of the work in all points, yet it is of no use, except the sight of
it has (perhaps) given a hint to the art of Weaving. Only in the Summer
Islands and in some other parts of the West Indies there are Spiders that (in
Summer) spin perfect raw silk, both in substance and color; the thread so
strong that birds are entangled therein. These spiders are bigger than ours,
and of rich, orient colors, as Oviedo the Spaniard has related, and Captain
Smith our Countryman in his description of those Islands.

The Prophets of old wore garments made of Hair, whence Elias is called vir
pilosus, the hairie man, 2 Reg. 1. 8. St John the Baptist had a garment made of
Camels hair, Matthew. 3. 4. Grograms are made of Goats hair, pulled from off
their backs: which kind of Goats, B^bequius reports that he had seen in Asia,
whose hair was very fine and glistering, not inferior to silk, and hanging to
the very ground: they have four horns, says Seal, Ex. 199. Camelots or
Chamlets are made of Camels hair, which is so fine, especially those of Persian
race, that they may compare with Milesian wool for fineness, as Aelian reports,
and the great ones used to wear thereof in those Countries.

Flax and hemp were first dressed in Egypt; Fine linen, with broydered work,
and sails, first came from Egypt, says the Prophet Ezekiel. C. 27. V. 7. and the
Egyptians are decyphered by this periphrasis in Isaiah, They that work in fine
flax, and weave Net-works, Isa. 19. 9. The Egyptian priests did always weave
linen in the Temples, and therefore are termed linigeri; so did the Jewish
Priests, their Ephods, Miters, and other Vestures were linen; and so the
Priests of most Nations,

Velati lino and verbena tempora vincti. Virgil.
Of finest Flax their Vestures are,
And on their heads they vervain wear
The fine linen so often mentioned by Moses for the holy garments, is made of
the Bombase or Cotton that grows in balls upon certain shrubs; which kind of
shrub is termed (...), by Theophrast, the Wool-bearing Tree, and (...). simply,
the Tree; whence Linum Xylinum in Tremellius his Translation is still rendered
in the English Bible fine linen; so that the fine linen vestments of the
Priests were made of Bombase, as the learned Salmasius has observed in his
Exercitations upon Solinus: so that the woolbearing Trees in Aethiopia which
Virgil speaks of, and the Eriophori arbores in Theophrastus, are not such trees
as have a certain wool or dowl upon the outside of them, as the mall-Cotton,
but short trees that bear a ball upon the top, preg^ant with wool, which the
Syrians call Cott, the Grecians Gossypium, the Italians Bombagio, and We
Bombase.

But I believe that some part of their vesture was also of Flax, Mundissima
lini seges indatui and amictui sanctissimis Aegyptiorum Sacerdotibus usurpatur,
says Apuleius in Apologia.

Hadrianus Junius a most learned man in his description of the Netherlands,
does highly extol the fine linen made by the soft hands of the Belgic Nuns in
Holland and the Town of Cambray, called from thence Hollands and Cambricks;
quarum cum nive certat candor, cum sindone tenuitas, cum bysso pretium; so he
speaks of them, and calls them Regum and Reginarum praecipuas delicias; the
chiefest delight of Kings and Queens.

There is a certain Shellfish in the Sea called pinna, that bears a mossie
dowl or wool whereof cloth was spun and made, as Tertullian speaks in his book
de pallio. Et Arbusta nos vestiunt, and de mari vellera. These are his words;
not only Trees afford wool, but also the Sea to clothe us withal; this wool or
moss is so soft and delicate, that it is nothing inferior to silk says
Lacerda, and therefore he calls it Byssum marinum, Sea silk, in his notes upon
Tertullian, though the true Byssus be lost, and also the Carbasus, whence
Carbasinae vestes, insomuch that great Clerks can scarce tell us what they
were, but that fine Stuffs were anciently made of them. One Ferdinand
Imperatus, a Drugster of Naples, a great storer of exotique and domestique
Rarities, had some of this Sea-silk both weaved and unweaved, and also the
Shellfish that did bear it. Men have found a way not only arbores Nere, sed
and lapides, not only to spin threads from Trees, as Tertullian speaks of the
Seres, but also from stones. There is a stone called Lapis Caristius, and Lapis
Cyprius, from the Countries that this stone or mineral is found, to wit Cyprus
as Strabo, and mount Caristus in Attica, as Trallianus and Dioscorides report;
it is like Allom in color, and being beaten with a Mallet, it shows like a
small hair, therefore called Trichitis, or the hayrie stone by some Greek
Authors, and Alumen Plumaceum, or downy Alom, by the Latinists it is also
called for the resemblance of it, villus Salamandrae, Salamanders wool: Langii
Epist. Medicin.
This hair or dowl is spun into thread, and weaved into cloth, and the cloth so
made has this strange property, that being cast into the fire it will not
burn, but if it be foul or stained, comes forth more bright and clean out of
the flames; it is therefore called also Amiantus. Ferdinand Imperatus (before
mentioned) had a piece of this cloth much like white silk. Of this hairy stone
some made wick for candles that would not consume or burn out: such a candle
was made by Callimachus, and hung up in the Temple of Minerva at Athens, as
Salmasius relates in his Plinianae exercitationes:

There was a vegetable of this kind, a sort of Flax called by the Grecians
Asbestos and Asbestinos, that had the like property with the mineral before
mentioned, says the same Salmasius, whereof Pliny makes mention in l. 9. of
his History, c. 1 and calls it Indian flax, and linum v^vum, quick
inconsumptible flax. Solinus makes mention of some sayls made in Crete of this
stuff, quae inter ignes valebant (as he says) that would not take fire, if it
has this property indeed, it is pity to put it to such vulgar use as to serve
for sayls, that would better serve at our tables; for if men had table-clothes
and napkins of this stuff, they might prefet them before Diapers and Damasks,
for it would save some cost and no small trouble in washing and drying such
household implements, it is but throwing them into the fire, and they are
presently washed and dried at once.

Pliny indeed esteemed it equivalent to pearl and precious stone, for it was
hard to be found, and difficult to be weaved, for the shortness of it (as he
says) the bodies of Kings were used to be wrapped in this kind of cloth when
they were to be burnt, that the ashes might be preserved unmixt, for to be laid
up in urns or pitchers, as the manner then was.

Pliny saw some Napkins of this sort in his time, and the experiment of their
purifying demonstrated. One Podocattar a Cyprian Knight, and who wrote de rebus
Gypriis in the year 1566. had both flax and cloth of this sort with him at
Venice, and one Thomas Porcacchius has seen the same in that Knights house,
and many others with him, as he relates in his work concerning the Rites of
Funerals. Ludovicus Vives also saw a Towel of that kind at Louaine in Brabant,
as he relates in his Commentary upon St Augustine de Civitate Dei, l. 21. c. 6.

Baptista Porta saw the same at Venice with a woman of Cyprus, and calls it
Secretum optimum, perpulchrum, perutile, a very useful and profitable secret,
Not. Magia, l. 4. c. 25.

As stones and trees have been spun and weaved into cloth, so some metals may
be wrought to that use; Attalic garments were weaved all of gold and thread,
which sort of Vesture the Italians call Vest di Brocato dioro: Such a garment
Mary the wife of the Emperor Honorius was buried in; for her Marble Coffin
being dug up at Rome in the year 1544. where the foundation of St Peter's
Church was laid, all her body was found consumed save the Teeth and a few
bones, but her golden apparel was fresh; out of which (being melted) was
extracted 36 pounds weight of pure gold, as Aldourand relates in the first book
of his Musaeum Metallicum. The Sidonians made the like kind of garments, as
appears by these verses in Virg. Aen. xi.

Tum geminas vestes ostroque auroque rigentes
Extulit Aeneas, quas ill^ laeta laborum
Ipsa suis quondam manibus Sidonia Dido
Fecerat, and tenui telas discreverat auro.
St Hierom in one of his Epistle^, and and Paulus Diaconus do make mention of a
sort of wool that was rained down in the year 1119* in the Reign of Valentinian
and Valens, which fell most about Atrebatum, or the Province of Artois in
Flanders, which was spun into cloth, and did much enrich the Country
thereabouts.

The heavens rained down meat once for the people of Israel, now it rains down
clothing; l. 1. de Provid.
as there was coelum escatile, as Salvian speaks of the admirable Manna, when
men did eat Angels food, so here was coelum textile, as I may so term it; the
sky affords both food and ^ayment! Some of this wool in memorial of the
miracle, is preserved to this day in the chief Church of Arras; to wit, St
Mary's Church there.

De Plumificiis.
An Appendix of the Plumary Art.
IN Florida, and other places of the West Indies, the Inhabitants make garments
of Feathers with mavelous Art and Curiosity; as also rare and exquisite
pictures; for in those Countries there are Birds of rare plumage, of very gay
and gaudy colors, that have a gloss like silk, and put down the pride of the
Peacock; some are of orient green and some of excellent carnation and scarlet,
more especially in their Phenicopters, Parrots, and Tomincios.

Their manner is to strip the Feathers from the Q^ills with neat pincers, and
then to join them together with paste, mingling variety of colors in such a
rare medley, that they make a very glorious show. Ferdinando Cortes the
Spaniard found abundance of these curious works in the Palace of Motez^m^, the
wealthy Emperor of the Mexicans, which were such and so excellent, that none
could make in silk, wax, or of needlework any things comparable to them; so he
speaks in his second narration; and in his third he adds this, that they were
so artificial and neat, that they cannot b^ described in writing, or presented
to the imagination, except a man sees them.

Cardinal Paleottus had the picture of St Hierom kneeling before a Crucifix
made of this Workmanship, which was sent him from Spain; some Friars that had
resided in those Countries of America, had learned the Art (it seems) from the
Natives.

These pictures are made so accurately, that it would pose a judicious eye to
discern or distinguish them from those that are made with the pencil, or the
art of the painter.

This art was not unknown to the Ancients in this Hemisphere of the world: St
Hierom makes mention of operis Plumarii, this plumary workmanship, in his
Commentary upon Exodus l. 26. 1. and on chap. 39. of Exodus v. 29.

Seneca makes mention of it in his Ep. 90. Non avium plumae in usum vestis
conservantur, etc. So also Julius Fermicus l. 3. Astronom. c. 13. and Prudent.
in Ha^martig.

-- Hunc videas lascivas praepete cursu
Venantem tunicas; avium quoque versiculorum
Indumenta novis Texentem plumea telis.
If this art be lost in the old world (as indeed we can no where find it on
this side the Globe) it is preserved (it seems) in the new, and that in the
highest perfection, insomuch that it puts down not only the admired pieces of
Zeuxes and Apelles of old, but also those of Michael Angelo, and Raphael Urbin
of later times: and the plumes of those birds seem to surpass all their
colors, not only for luster and beauty, but also for duration and lasting.

See more of this Art in the learned Fuller his Miscellanea sacra, l. 4. c. 20.
in Jos. Acostal. 4. La Gerda his Adversaria sacra. Pancirol. de novo Orb tit.
1.

CAP. VIII.
(...): OR, Of the Art of Music, with sundry Instruments thereunto belonging.
THere is Music in heaven and Music on the way thither, in the spears, as
the Pythagoreans affirm: and therefore the soul of man being descended from
heaven, and passing through those harmonious spears, does naturally delight in
Harmony: Anima in corpus defert memoriam Musicae, cujus in coelo conscia fuit,
says Macrob. l. 2. in somn. Scipionis. Nay, God made the body of man (wherein
this musical soul is to sojourn) a kind of a living Organ or Musical
instrument: Life is an harmonious Lesson (as one says) which the soul plays
upon the Organs of the body. There is but one pipe to this Organ (to wit) the
Weasand; the Lungs are the bellows to make wind, and to inspire this pipe; yet
with this one pipe (being variously stopped) we can express a thousand sorts of
notes and tunes, and make most ravishing music; for there is no Harmony that
is so delightful and pleasing to man as vocal, or the music of man's voice.

In imitation of this musical pipe in the throat of man, men devised to make
music with a Syringe or Reed; which being bored with holes, and stopped with the
fingers, and inspired with man's breath, was made to yield various and
delightful sounds. This was Pastoral Music or Shepherds Delight, and was the
invention of Pan the God of Shepherds, and of the Arcadian plains, in those
golden days.

Pan primus calamos cera conjungere plures
Instituit. -- Virg. Ecl. 2.
Whence the Poets have feigned Pan to be in love wit a Syrinx, Ovid. l. 1.
Metam.
a Nymph of that name, but (in the moral) in love with that Pastoral music of
the Reed then in use. Lucretius does ascribe the first hint of this Pastoral
music to the whistling of the winds among the reeds, in his 5th book.

Et Zephyri cava per calamorum sibila primum
Agrestes docuere cavas inflare cicutas,
Inde minutatim dulces didicere querelas,
Tibia quas fundit digitis pulsata Canentum.
Avia per nemora ad sylvas saltusque reperta,
Per loca Pastorum deserta, atque otia Dia.
By murmuring of winde-shaken reeds, rude Swains
Learnt first of all to blow on hollow Canes,
Then pipes of pieces framed, whence Music sprung
Played on by quavering fingers as they sung,
Devised in shades and plains, where shepherds graze
Their bleating Flocks with leasure-crowned lays.
In imitation of the Reed, some have made tunefull pipes of the shank-bone of a
Crane, which is called Tibia; from whence the pipe is also called Tibia, or a
Flute, and he that plays thereon Tibicen, a Flutinist. This was called Manulos
(as Pliny testifies) that is, single or simple Music, and therefore probably
the first; for men naturally do light upon single or simple notions, before
mixed or compound, and begin with plain things before they proceed to finer
curiosities; as plain songs were before descants and chromati^ moods.

There were Musical Instruments in the world before Pans time. Jubal the son of
Lamech was pater omnium tractantium citharam and organon, as the holy Spirit
speaks, Genesis 4. 21. pater, that is, in Hebrew sense, the Author and Inventor of
the Harp and Organ, but what kind of Instruments these were, Moses does not
inform us.

The Egyptian Mercury was the first Inventor of the Lyre or Harp. Horace calls
him curvae lyrae parentem. The Invention was casual, thus: Finding a
Tortoise-shell near the Nile-side, to the which some nerves or strings did
hang, reaching from the one end to the other; these strings having been dried
by the sun and well stretched, and being accidentally touched with the fingers,
gave a shrill sound or twang from the hollow of the shell; which gave him
(being sagacious) a hint of framing the Lyre, or (as others say) the Lute. As
du-Bartas (for one) who speaking of this Mercury and the Tortoise-shell, sings
thus, in his Handicrafts.

And by this mould frames the melodious Lute,
That makes woods hearken and the stones be mute;
The hills to dance, the heavens go retrograde,
Lions be tame, and tempests quickly vade.
Indeed, the Lute does much resemble the Tortoise-shell, and from that
resemblance it it called Tostudo. So in Propert. lib. 2.

Tale facis carmen docta testudine, quale
Cynthius impositis temperat Articulis.
What some have invented, others have perfected: Terpander made a Lyre or Harp
of seven strings which before had but three, answerable to these three
principal notes of Treble, Mean, and Base,

Obloquitur numeris septem discrimina vocum.
Simonides added an eighth string, and Timotheus a ninth, and holy David makes
mention of a Decachord or ten-stringed Instrument.

Many Instruments have been invented by K. David for to be used in Gods
service. But all sorts of these vafa Cantici, (as Amos calls them, Am. 6. 5.)
of these musical Utensils, are divided into (...) and (...) I may express them
in English either Mouth-Instruments or hand-Instruments, sounded either with
the breath of the mouth or the touch of the hand: Of the first sort, are all
Flutes, Pipes, Trumpets, Cornets, Sacbuts, etc. Of the other sort, are the
Lute, Harp, Organ, Psaltery, Virginal, etc. All Instruments of Music were by
the Latins called Organa, Organs. But that which is more especially called by
that name, makes a grave solemn Music like the sober Doric, and has been very
anciently used (with Psalmodies) in Divine Service; the Inventor whereof was
King David, as some affirm. Since his time, men have proceeded to mavelous
Curiosities both in Music and Musical Instruments. Not many years since, there
was a pair of Organs made in Italy that would sound either Drum or Trumpet, or
a full quire of men, as the Organist pleased; so that men would think they
heard boys and men distinctly sing their parts in Consort, as Leander Alberti
(an eye and ear-witness thereof) relates, in his description of Italy.

A Neapolitan Artizan made a pair of Organs all of Alabaster stone, pipes,
keys and jacks, with a loud lusty sound, which he aftrrward bestowed upon the
Duke of Mantua, and which Leander Alberti saw in the said Dukes Court, as he
relates in his description of Thuscany.

The same Leander saw a pair of Organs at Venice made all of Glass, that made a
delectable sound. This is mentioned also by Mr Morison in his Travels. Pope
Sylvester the Second made in his younger years a pair of Organs that should
play without an Organist; Genebr. Chron. ad Ann. 997.
he used only warm water to give them motion and sound. Such Hydraulics are
frequent in Italy, that are moved with cold water as well as hot.

Gaudentius Merula in his 5th book de mirabilibus mundi makes mention of an
Organ in the Church of St Ambrose in Millain, whereof the pipes were some of
wood, some of brass, and some of white Lead; which being played upon did
express the sound of Cornets, Flutes, Drums and Trumpets with admirable variety
and concord.

Many persons can sing very well naturally, but this natural Music may be
improved by Art, when they are taught to sing by Rules and Notes, and to govern
their voices by acquired habits; and so there is an Art of Music, as there is
artificial Logic besides the natural: but because these natural Singers are
but few and scarce,

Apparent rari nantes in gurgite vasto;
therefore to supply this defect, some have musical Instruments for harmless
pleasure and delight, to appease the cares of life, and for many other laudable
and honest uses, which I shall more largely handle in the ensuing Appendix of
the Power and efficacy of Music.

The Power and Efficacy of Music.
THe Poets may be thought too lavish, and to strein themselves beyond Ela in
praising the efficacy and force of Music, when they extend it to things even
without life and sense: when they sing of Orpheus, that trees and rocks and
things without sense were sensible of his powerful Lays; that winds were
silent and waters stopped their courses to listen to his ravishing Numbers.
Horace is much upon this string in several of his Odes; and Claudian sings the
same note in the beginning of his second book de Raptu Proserpinae.

Vix auditus erat, venti sternuntur and undae,
Pigrior astrictisTorpuit Hebrus aquis.
Ardua nudato descendit populus Aemo,
Et comitem Quercum Pinus amica trahit.
Englished.
No sooner heard, but Winds and Waves were laid;
And headlong Hebrus (as if frozen) stayed:
The lofty Poplars left high Aemus bare,
The Pine came with the Oak to hear his air.
So he speaks of that rare Musician Orpheus. Virgil says the like of Silenus,
when he sung

Tum vero in numerum Faunosque ferasque videres
Ludere; Tum rigidas motare cacumena Quercus.
Mr Randolph's Muse is in the same key in commendation of Music, who because
he has expressed the power of Music to the height of Fancy, I thought good to
insert his Rapture in this place.

Music, thou Queen of Souls! get up and string
Thy powerful Lute, and some sad Requiem sing;
Till Rocks requite thy Echo with a groan,
And the dull Cliffs repeat the duller tone.
Then on a sudden with a gentle hand,
Run gently over the Chords, and so command
The Pine to dance, the Oak his roots forgo,
The Holme, and aged Elm to foot it too,
Myrtles shall caper, lofty Cedars run
And call the Courtly Palm to make up one;
Then in the amidst of all this jolly train,
Strike a sad Note, and fix them Trees again.
That Music has any such power over things inanimate I shall suspend my
faith; but that it has a great impression upon all things endued with sense, I
shall evince by good proofs.

This Regina sensuum, as Cassiodor calls it, Queen Regent of our senses, and
sovereign Mistress of our affections.

Of all the creatures that God made, there is none that makes Music or Harmony
but Man and Birds; but as among men all do not sing tuneably to delight the ear
if they would never so fain: So among Birds, all are not fit for the Quire or
Cage; There are but few sorts among the infinite variety of them, that are
Musical. Nevertheless though all men cannot make Music; yet all are delighted
with it; so for birds and beasts, though all do not sing, yet are all affected
with melody and singing.

But to come from the Thesis to the Hypothesis, I will descend to some
particular instances, to show the regency and power of Music over insensible
creatures. Over the Rational Creatures Irrational

The Roman Orator in his Oration pro Archia Poeta tells us, that Bestiae
^nnanes cantu flectuntur, and consistunt, that savage and innane beasts are so
taken with Music, that they will turn back and stand still to listen thereto.
Henry Stephens that learned man of Paris testifies, Praefat. ad Herod.
that he saw a Lion in the City of London, qui Musicen audiendi gratia epulas
suas desereret; that would forsake his meat to hear Music. Mulcentur Cervi
fistula Pastorali and Cantu, says Pliny, Deer are much taken with the Music of
the Pipe; Elephants with singing, and the sound of Tabrets, as Strabo; and
among all beasts there is none but the Ass that is not delighted with harmony,
Aelian. ^ist. Animal. l. 10.
as the Pythagoreans affirm, Birds also and Fowl are generally affected with
sweet sounds and harmony;

Non solum calamis, Martial.
sed cantu fallitur ales.
And

Fistula dulce canit volucrem dum decipit Auceps,
says the grave Cato. I heard from Falconers that singing did much conduce to
the cicurating of Hawks: Nay Music commands in all the Elements, and rules not
only in the Air, but also in the Water among the Mutes; as that famous story of
Arion and the Dolphin does testify: That story is recorded by Herodotus, and
Aul. Gellius, and many other grave Historians, and it was briefly thus, Arion
being at Sea, and sailing toward his own Country of Lesbos, some of his
companions that were with him on shipboard knowing that he had money about him,
conspired to rob him, and then to throw him into the Sea; Arion being made
acquainted with their purpose, and having his Harp with him, desired so much
respite that he might give them a lesson for a farewell, and then let them do
their pleasure; when he had ended his lesson, and (like the Swan) has sung his
own Dirge and last Notes (as he thought) in this world, he was thrown
overboard; but it happened that some Dolphins having gathered together about the
Ship to hear his ravishing notes, one of them (in requital of his Music) took
Arion on his back, and wa^ted him safe to his own shore, and there laid down
his load. In memory whereof the picture of the Dolphin was set up near that
shore with a Greek Distich, which Volaterran translated into Latin thus,

Cernis Amatorem qui vexit Ariona Delphin:
A Siculo subitas pondera grata mari.
The story is touched by Ovid in his third book de Art Amandi;

Quamvis mutus erat, voci favisse putatur
Piscis, Arioniae fabula nota lyrae.
Nay, the irresistible power of Music reaches deeper then the Sea, even as
far as hell, it sways among the infernal fiends upon presumption of his
powerful strains; Orpheus went down among them to fetch his wife Euridice from
thence, as Virgil sings of him.

Ausus at est manes accersere Conjugis Orpheus
Threiscia fretus lyra, Aen. 6.
fidibusque canoris.
On whom Mr Brown speaking of the commendation of Spencer, has this reflection
in his Pastorals,

He sung the Heroic Knights of Faery land, Spencers Fairy Q.

In lines so elegant, and of such command,
That had the Thracian played but half so well,
He had not left Euridice in Hell.
In the second place, for rational creatures, there is nothing more evident and
more commonly seen, than that all sorts of people (more or less) are affected
with harmony. And with most men it has such power over their spirits, that it
can mould them into any temper; Omnes animi habitus cantibus gubernantur (says
Macrob.) ut and ad bellum progressus and receptui canatur: cantu and excitants
and sedante virtutem. It commands all our passions as it lists, Somn.
Scipionis, l. 2, c. 3.
either of anger or mildeness, joy or sorrow, according to the several streins
and tunes it makes, as if there were some (...) (as Aristotle speaks) some
imitations or ecchoings, Polit. l. 7. c. 3.
some secret sympathy between the strings of the Heart and the Harp, or any
other Instrument that gives mel^d^e.

To illustrate this, I will give certain historical instances or examples of
each kind.

1. Music stirs up Anger and Courage, especially that which they call Phrygian
Music, which consists of violent and loud notes and sprightfull motions, and
this is useful for the wars; and therefore Drums, Trumpets and Cornets have
been (anciently) used among most nations to encourage the soldiers in the
field. Virgil speaking of Misenus (Aeneas his Trumpeter) gives this character
of him.

-- Quo non praestantior alter
Aere ciere viros, Martemque accendere cantu.
Tyrteus that brave Commander of Lacedaemon made use of the Trumpet against the
Messensians, with whose unwonted sound they were much terrified, as his own
soldiers were much animated therewith, as they were also with his Songs and
Poems, as Horace testifies in his Art of Poetry.

-- Post hos, insignis Homerus,
Tyrteusque mares animos ad martia bella
Versibus exacuit. --
Horace, who had been a soldier for some years himself, speaks of his Barbiton
which he had used in the war, and which now he meant to hang up for a monument
after his return home:

Defunctumque bello Barbiton, hic paries habebit.
2. As it stirs up Anger, so it does allay and appease it, and conjures down
that spirit which it raises up; Cantando malos affectus incantamus. Timotheus
the Musician could both enrage and becalm the Great Alexander at his pleasure,
only by the different streins of his Music. Clinias the Pythagorean when he
began to be heated with anger, would take his Lute to compose his affections;
and Achilles (the great Soldier) was wont to do the like, as Aelian reports of
them both. Var. l. 14. c. 23. this is Caduceus pacis.

The Harp is Tela Musarum loquax, as Cassiodor wittily styles it, a speaking
kind of Instrument, whereby a man speaks his passions without a tongue, and by
those verbosa stamina does tell his tale more effectually then he can with the
natural Organs of his speech. Therefore the Getes (knowing the power of Music
to move clemency) did use to send harps and Musicians with those Ambassadors
that went to treat for peace and amity. Ludovicus Pius the Emperor did set
Theodulpus at liberty when he heard him sing an Anthem, which he had composed
in Prison.

3. Music exhilarateth the spirits and expels the evil spirit of
melancholy, as David (the sweet singer of Israel) drove (with his celestial
streins) the evil spirit out of Saul, and put him out of possession, without
any other exorcism then that of Music: It seems the devil does not love
Music; but I know nothing else but does. Scimus Musicam Daemonibus invisam and
intolerabilem esse, says Luther in Epist. ad Senfelium Masicum. This may be
better called Fuga Daemonum than the herb Hyperion. Melancholy is the Devils
Bath, wherein he takes much delight. And therefore, since Music is an enemy to
Melancholy, we may conclude that it is an enemy to the Devil: Music has too
much of heaven to give him any delight; he loves jarrs and discord better than
concord and harmony.

4. This does compose men to gravity, contemplation, and godly sorrow,
especially the grave Doric Music of the Church. Saint Augustine did shed tears
when he heard the solemn Music of the Church at Millain, as he confesses in
the 9th of his Confessions. Hereby our devotion is exalted, our souls lifted up
to heaven with those ecchoing sounds, and our spirits better prepared and
disposed for prophetic raptures and divine illuminations. When Elisha was
desired to Prophecy by King Jehoshaphat, he called for a Minstrel to make
music, thereby to defecate and clear his spirits; and as the minstrel played,
the hand of the Lord came upon him and he prophesied victory and good tidings
to the King, 1 King. 3. 15. and that the Prophets did commonly use musical
Instruments for that purpose, as we may learn from the first book of Sam. cap.
14. v. 5.

5. To these I may add in the 5th place, that Music does avail (not a little)
to chastity, sobriety and civil conversation, as it may be used and applied.
When some young men of Taurominum were about to force open a house upon some
women that they had a mind to, Pythagoras coming casually by, did appease
their minds and reduce them to a better mood, by making a Minstrel (that they
had with them) to change his notes from nimble Dactyls or triple time into slow
Spondaics, and so did becalm their hot and unruly spirits. Spondae^ resonante,
as C^cero relates in his Tuscul. and Boethius in Prooemio de Musica, and
Quintilian also in Orator instit l. 1. cap. 10. A Spondey or Spondaic foot is a
grave time consisting of two long syllables, so that if there be many of them
in a verse, they make it to be of a slow heavy motion, like the Spanish gate
and gravity; as in that verse,

Conturbabantur Constantinopolitani.
Whereas the nimble Dactyls (whereof Galliards consist) are aerie and sprightly
like the French disposition, and like that verse in Ennius (which runs all upon
Dactyls)

Et tuba terribili sonitu Taratantara dixit.
The very sound and pronunciation whereof rouseth the spirits and maddeth them
in a sort; as Aristotle speaks of the Phrygian mode in Music, that it is
(...), 4o Polit. It is reported of Agamemnon, that when he went to the wars,
he left a Musician with his wife Clitemnestra for to keep her chaste, by
singing grave Doric tunes unto her. Modus Dorius prudentiae largitor est, and
castitatis effector, says learned Cassiodor lib. 9. Var. c. 3. ut Phrygius
pugnas excitat, and Aeolius animi tempestates tranquillat. Id.

6. Lastly, by the power of Music rude and savage people have been civilized,
and brought to humanity and gentleness, brought from Woods and Caves to live in
Towns, taught to build houses, to live under Laws and in civil society and
correspondency with their own kind; so the Thebans were mollified by Amphion,
and the rude Thracians by Orpheus: and this is the true meaning and moral of
those Poetical Fables touching those two famed Musicians, as Horace tells us.

Sylvestres homines sacer interpresque Deorum
Caedibus and victu foedo deterruit Orpheus.
Dictus ob hoc lenire Tygres, rabidosque Leones;
Dictus and Amphion (Thebanae Conditor Arcis)
Saxa movere sono Testudinis, and prece blanda
Ducere quo vellet. --
Orpheus the Gods interpreter, from blood
Deterred wild men and savage livelihood.
Hence came the fable, that by Music he
Did Tigers and wild Lions lenifie:
And hence Amphion (who built Thebes) is said
To have moved stones with his sweet streins, and led
Them where he would, etc. --
As Music has power over the spirits of man, so it has over his body too,
and that in two respects; partly, to keep it from drooping and weariness, while
it is at work; and partly to cure it of some maladies, as I shall produce
examples of both.

1. It avails to keep the body from weariness and irksomness, and drooping from
under its daily cares, toil and labor. Horace calls his Lute Dulce laborum
lenimen, the gentle easer of labor and pains-taking. And Quintilian says,
That Nature seems to have given this gift of Music to mankind for this very
purpose; and from hence it is that all sorts of people use commonly to deceive
the tediousness of their dayly-task with with some melody. Parrhasius the
Painter used to sing while he was at work. Cantu and modulatione submissa,
laborem artis mitigare solebat; so Aelian tells us, lib. 9. cap. 11. The
Husband man sings or whistles at his work.

Alta sub rupe canit frondator ad auras.
And his good wife at her wheel at home makes some notes also that serve to
please her, if they please no body else.

Interea longum cantu solata laborem
Arguto conjux percurrit pectine telas.
And if men over-toyl themselves and be tired out with labor, Music is very
helpful to recreate their spirits, and to make them fresh and vigorous again:
Musica est medicina molestiae illius quae per labores suscipitur, says (the
Patriarch of Philosophy) Aristotle. And Tully says of the Pythagoreans, that
after they had been weary with intentive studies, their usual manner was to
solace themselves in the evenings with Music, as hard students in our
Universities use to do now adays.

2. As this heavenly gift expells weariness from our bodies, so it expells some
maladies too. The Old Greek Bard (Homer) says, the Grecians did cure the
plague with Music, in the first book of his Iliads. The reason of this cure
is, because Music chears up the spirits and expells sadness, than which
nothing is more fatal in a time of Mortality, or makes the body more obnoxious
to the tyranny of diseases.

Corporibus vires subtrahit ipse timor: Fear and sadness betrayeth the succors
that nature has provided for her own defense, and does expose our bodies naked
to the malignity of the air and invasion of any malady. Hereof you may find
more in the writings of Physicians, and particularly Langius in the 3.d book of
Medicinal Epistles tells us of Xenocrates, that he used to cure Phrenetick
persons with songs and music; and of Theophrastus, who by his own experience
found that the pains of the Sciatica is much assuaged by Music. They say in
France, that Music does not cure the Toothache: but yet some aches are cured
by it; for Macrobius, to the other virtues of Music, adds this, Corporis
morbis medetur. But there are two diseases that are proper (in a manner) to
Germany and Italy, which are cured by no other means than Music. In Italy,
they that are bitten with that venomous Spider called the Tarantula become
Phrenetick, and the only way to cure them is to play upon Instruments unto
them; at the sound whereof they fall a dancing, and bestir themselves so long
until they are quite tired and have sweated out the venom that was shot in by
that Insect. In Germany also that disease which they call Chorus Sti Viti, or
St Vitus his dance, is cured with Music. It is a kind of a Frenzy too, and
when the Patients hear any Minstrel play, saltant ad lassitudinem simul and
sanitatem, as Shenkius says; they dance presently, and never give over till
they are both tired and cured.

And these are sufficient proofs to show the power and efficacy of Music both
over man and beast, and in man both over his body and mind. The truth is, we
may observe, that soluta Oration, plain prose, without harmony or meter, has a
great sway over men's minds, if it be gracefully and pathetically delivered.
The Orators among the Grecians had the power of fire and water, to inflame and
to extinguish, to make peace or war; such was Demosthenes in Athens.

-- Quem mirabantur Athenae
Torrentem and pleni moderantem fraena Theatri. Juv. Sat.

That ruled and managed the people with his eloquent and voluble tongue, as a
rider does his horse with the reins. Eloquence is flexamina and (...), there is
some sorcery and enchantment in a well-composed Oration. Hierom. Savanorola,
that pious man and eloquent preacher of Florence, did manage that Commonwealth
with his tongue. ^ancelotti.
M. Antonius milites armatos facundia sua exarmavit. Vell. Paterc. l. 2. cap.
20. And when Ferdinand the Second besieged Rome, one Ugolin a Friar, by a
Sermon he made at the Vatican, did move all his Audience to weep, and did so
inflame their courage withal, that they took arms unanimously to beat off the
enemy from the walls; and they sallyed out with so good success, that they
raised the seige. If a plain Speech delivered with gravity and gracefulness
has such force, how much more moving are words joined with Harmony and Numbers?

All the powers and virtues of Music which we have here at large exemplified,
are briefly comprised by the Noble Salust in these following verses.

Sweet Music makes the sternest men at arms
Let fall at once their anger and their arms.
It chears sad souls, and charms the frantic fits
Of Lunaticks that are bereft their wits.
It kills the flame and curbs the fond desire
Of him that burns in Beauties blazing fire.
It cures Serpents banefull bite, whose anguish
In deadly torments makes them madly languish.
The Swan is rapt, the Hind deceived withal,
And Birds beguiled with a melodious call.
The Harp leads the Dolphin, and the busy swarm
Of buzzing Bees the tinckling brass does charm.
O! what is it Music cannot do,
Since th'al inspiring spirits it conquers too?
And makes the same down the Empyreal Pole
Descend to earth into a Prophets soul.
Baptista Porta does ascribe the wonderful effects of Music to the several
sorts of trees that the instruments are made of, whether the Vine or the Elder,
the Poplar, Laurel, or the like; which (says he) have a secret property to
cure diseases, more then the sounds that are made by them: but he is mistaken
herein; for we know what power inartificial sounds and bare words (without
Music added) have over men's minds and spirits. Scaliger argues the case thus:
The Vibration or trembling of the air (caused by vocal or instrumental Music)
does move and affect the spirits in man's body, which are subtle vapors of the
blood and the instruments of the soul in all her operations; which spirits
affect the soul as well as body, so that apt concordan^ sounds, carried in the
curled air to the inward spirits, cause there a ^itillation or pleasure, and
sometimes other affections or passions according to ^he stre^s of the Music,
and according to the complexion of the hearer.

The Ancient Sages (as Aristotle reports) affirmed the Soul it self to be
Harmony or harmoniously composed; so that there is a sort of affinity between
^t and Music, and every man is natural^y delighted therewith; so he in the 8th
of his P^liticks. Macrobius comes very near to this of the Philosopher; Jure
^apitur Musica omne quod vivit (says he) (...) coelest is Anima, qua animatur
uni^ersitas, originem sumpsit ex Musica. That it is no wonder that every
creature that has a living soul is taken with Music, since the soul of the
Universe (whereof every particular soul is a part or parcel) is made of Harmony

Pericles liberis Athenarum cervicibus jugum imposuit Eloquentia; he held
captive the free born Athenians by his Eloquence: Eamque urbem egit and
versavit arbitrio suo; steered and winded that people which way he listed
himself. V. Max. l. 8. c. 9.

Hegesias a Philosopher of the Cyrenaic sect did so pathetically set forth the
evils and discommodities of this life, that diverse of his Auditors did take a
resolution to make themselves away; so that the Philosopher was commanded by
King Ptolomy to spend his Eloquence upon some other subject. Cic. Tuscul.
Quaest. lib. 1.

CAP. IX.
(...): Touching the Invention of Glass and Glass-works.
GLass is made of bright shining sand, and the ashes of a weed called Cazal and
Zuhit, -- Calices vili de pu^v^re nati. Mart.
and the Fern called by the Arabians Kali Alkali, that is Glass-wort.

The invention was casual, and hinted thus, Certain glebes or large pieces of
Nitre being brought out of a ship upon the shore, and taking fire by accident,
melted the sand round about, so that it ^an in a liquid transparent stream, as
Pli^y relates l. 36. Not. Hist. and Josephus ^1. de bello Judaico; and the
Sidonians ^vere the first that took the hint or document therefrom; Sidon
artifex vitri, Plin. ^5. This noble liquor (as Pliny calls it) ^ so obsequious
and pliant (while it is hot) that it may be spun into thread, and wrought into
any form that a man can fancy; nay Art does here imitate the Creation; for as
God made creatures by the breath of his mouth, so the Artist makes glass with a
breath, and blows it into what shape and figure he pleases. Vitrarius suo
spiritu vitrum in habitus plurimos format, qui vix diligenti manu
^ffingerentur, as a contemplative Philosopher observed of old touching this
business, Sen. Epist. 90.

When it is cooled, it will not yield to the point of any Iron or Steel, but
only the Diamond; and the restless Quicksilver, that which pierces through Iron
gold, and brass, will not pierce through this. Cups and Vessels made of gl^ss
are very neat, clean, and wholesome. For they do not impart any ill taste or
tincture to any liquor that is contained in them.

And they were (no doubt) as precious at first in this Hemisphere of the world
as now they are in some parts of the I^^dies; for in the Kingdom of Tydor and
other places, they exchange gold for glasses, as Pigafetta and sundry others d^
do relate; so much are they taken wit^ the aerie brightness and transparency
(...) them: Moreover glass does not wear with the using: It admits no poison,
but be^rays it by breaking; any excessive cold or heat breaks it, especially if
it be fine, like that of Venice; so Crystal is impa^ient of heats, as Pliny
tells us, and Martial the Epigrammist in an Epigram we quoted before,

Non sumus audacis Plebeia Toreumata.] This word shows that glasses were
^omtimes wrought upon the Turn, or the Tu^ners wheel, as earthen ves^els are;
the word comes from (...) to turn; And Pliny does ^xpresly teach, that glass
was wrought either by blowing of it, or by being Turned, or by being engraven
like silver, l. 36. Not. Hist.
toreumata vitri
Nostra nec ardenti flamma feritur aqua.
The best of this kind are made at the Murano, a place within 2 miles of
Venice, so that the Venice glasses do bear the bell from all others: Here to
make their glasses so clear and transparent, and so like Coristal, they dip it
(while it is hot) in clean water, whereby it is clarified, and made like the
water it self, wherein it is so tincted and seasoned. Though the glass we now
use be brittle ware, and easily shattered in pieces, yet there was an Artist in
Rome in the Emperor Tiberius his time, that had found a way to make glass
malleable and yiedling, and such as would bow rather then break; for the man
bringing a glass-phial for a present to the Emperor to show his art, he threw
the Vessel against the stone pavement, with which blow it was not broken, but
dented; then taking his hammer he beat in the dent again, to the no small
wonder of the spectators, as Dion relates in the 56th of his History, and
Suetonius, with others. The man was secretly made away, and so the Art was
suppressed, lest gold should be discountenanced and become vile, as the same
Suetonius adds in the life of that Emperor.

The use of glass is various and manifold, not only for making cups and
vessels, but also for Looking-glasses, Telescopes, Microscopes, Thermometers,
Spears, Spectacles, Ocularia.
or Lunulets, as the French, and Bis-oculi, as my Lord of St Albans calls them;
by the help of glasses, weak eyes are strengthened, and old eyes become young
and vigorous; small objects are magnified and represented much bigger, things
invisible are made visible, and things that are behind us, brought before us:
Yea, what things are done in our neighbors houses, and in our enemies tents,
are brought to our knowledge without any Mephistophilus or Magic Art. See
Baptista Porta his third book of his Natural Magic.

Cornelius van Dreble, a Citizen of Alcmar in Holland, and a rare Engineer, who
lived in King James his Court here in England (as we mentioned before) invented
the Vitra Microscopia, the Microscopes or glasses whereby we plainly see and
discover the subtilest objects and the smallest, as the distinct colors and
members of Flies and Worms and Nits, and the spots and small grains in Gemms,
as also in Urine or Blood, which the eye could not otherwise discern. With these
the Anatomists (in dissecting of bodies) discover the smallest veins and
strings and fibers in the body of man or beast. There are Glasses called
Thermosc^pi and Thermometers, which being placed in a man's chamber, will
discover the disposition and temper of the air, whether it be hot or cold,
moist or dry, or inclining to either, invented by one Sanctorius, a Physician
in Padua.

There are also Glasses called Telescopes, from their use in discovering things
afarr off. invented first by Jacobus Meti^s of Alomar, as Des Carts tells me,
and perfected (since) by Gallileo Gallilei the Florentine, whereby they have
discovered many new stars in the firmament, which no mortal eyes had noted
before, which will represent objects thirty times bigger than their apparent
quantity, and a hundred times nearer than their apparent distance. By these men
have discovered not only new stars, but also new worlds in the stars, brought
the moon before them to be better surveyed and perused, which they find to be
another America, full of pleasant rivers, hills and dales, and also well
inhabited with people (such as they are) viz. Lunatic people. One Telesius a
Dane has (of late) given us a Selenographia or description of the Countries
and Provinces there, with their several maps. Cornelius Drebble
beforementioned had a little glass (but of a hands breadth in Diameter) which
he called Fabus Opticus, wherewith he could distinctly see all the hills and
spacious plains in the Lunary world, as also all the forests, cities and
buildings there, as Dr Gassendi relates it in l. 5. written of the life of
Peyresc.

There are Burning-glasses, wherewith (like Prometheus) we fetch fire from
heaven; to wit, that celestial coal the Sun, by gathering his fiery beams into
some narrow compass, and uniting them to that strength, that they can set any
combustible stuff on fire: With such glasses Archimedes fired the Roman ships
in the Harbor of Syracuse, Mar^ell^s being General, as Plutarch reports in the
life of Marcellus. With the like glasses Proclus (after him) defended
Constantinople, by firing the ships of Vitalianus, who was beleaguering the
town by sea, as Zonaras has recorded in the life of Anastasius Dicorus. Roger
Bacon out Countryman, a Vir tam vastae d^ctrinae, ut Anglia, imo orbis, ca re
nihil haberet simile aut secundum Voss. de artibus popular Artis magnae, l. 10.
great Scholar and an acute man, told the Pope, That if he would be at the
charge of making certain Burning-glasses after his direction, he would annoy
the Turks more than all the Galleys of Italy, or an Army of an hundred thousand
men could do, as Gaffarellus and others relate.

Kircher, a great Scholar (now living in Rome) confesses that he has busied
his head very much about those glasses of Archimedes and Proclus, and about
making the like, but he could never hit upon the experiment; and he says, that
he never saw or heard of any glasses (of late) that would burn above 15 paces
distance. But Baptista Porta professes a way how to make glasses that would
burn and fire things at any distance. And John Dee, an eminent Mathematician of
this Nation, does profess (in a preface to a book of his called Monas
Hieroglyphica) the Art to make a Glass that should calcine stones and reduce
them to impalpable dust: these are magnalia Artis. But these things have been
yet but in speculation for ought I find; not but that very strange and
wonderful things might be done in this kind and many other ways, if there
were any encouragement for Artists, or if any would go to the expense of
proving some useful experiments, that are projected and thought feasible by
ingenious and rational heads for the public benefit.

Archimedes, that rare wit of Syracuse, made a Sphere of Glass, which did
represent the perfect order and motions of the Heavenly bodies, which (besides
many others) Claudian makes mention and describes in one of his Epigrams, which
is set down before in the 7th Chapter.

But Athanasius Kircher. de Magnete, l. 1.
(whom we often mentioned) does affirm, That the Sphere was not all of Glass,
but only the outside of it, that men might the better discern the wheels and
motions within; yet Petrus Ramus tells us, that he saw at Paris two Spears of
Glass like those of Archimedes; one brought from the Sicilian, the other from
the German spoils.

Marcus Scaurus made an Amphitheater of Glass, as Pliny relates in the 36th
book cap. 15. But I find by others that the Pavement was of Marble, and but
the middle scene or story of Glass; which Glass was not our common Glass,
neither (as I suppose) but rather Obsidian glass, which the same Pliny mentions
elsewhere, and is found (or rather was found, for we hear of none now) in
Aethiopta, which is very black like jet, and transparent as glass, friable and
easy to be wrought with the cheesel; of which sort of glass was the stately
Tomb which Ptolomy King of Egypt built at Alexandria for a Monument of
Alexander the Great, as Strabo relates: And Herodotus also tells us, l. 17.
Geogr.
that this natural fossil-glass called Obsidian, was wont to be wrought hollow,
and placed about dead bodies, as a Case through which they might be seen of the
beholders. The Specular stone was of this kind, but that it was brighter and
liker to Crystal.

It was (anciently) used for windows (as Martial shows) to keep out cold.

Hibernis objecta notis specularia puros
Admittunt soles, and sine faece Diem.
It ws also used for a defense to some choice fruits, that they might not be
nipt in the bud with the cold frosts and Northern winds; but this kind of
Stone is not now extant; Guido Pancirollus returns it inter non inventa. Tit. 6.

Leander in his description of Italy makes mention of a complete Galley of
Glass that he had seen at Venice, and also a pair of Organs of Glass; to wit,
of fusile or common ordinary Glass. Mr James Howell saw such a Galley at the
Murano of late times, as he informs us in his History of Venice.

As Glass is diaphanous, and permits a free passage of species through its
body, as freely as air or water does, so it is also reflexive, and beats back
the said species that fall upon it; if the back side of it be lined with
Tinnfoil, that is, the leaf of Tinn, Silver, or or other metal; and thus
Lookingglasses are made, whereof there is manifold use, besides what Ladies use
them for: for with such kind of Glasses many strange feats may be performed,
so strange, that it has betrayed some men to a suspicion of Magic and
unlawful Arts, who have used to show some representations and apparitions,
either in the air or otherwise, when ignorant people did not understand the
Contrivances or art of them.

CAP. X.
(...): OR, The Invention of Shipping and Sailing; as also of the Mariners
Compass.
Sailing was an Invention no less useful than bold; the Sea is a rough and
dangerous Element, yet men have taken the boldness to set their foot upon the
back of it, and ride upon the surging billows with a wooden horse: Equo ligneo
vehuntur per vias caeruleas, says the Comical Plautus. How far will Art
(joined with courage) carry a man? Illi robur and aes triplex circa pectus
erat, etc. That man (says Horace) had a heart of oak and a breast lined with
brass, that did first adventure to confront the winds and waves in a small
tottering bark, when at every step he goes, he treads upon his grave.

Et prope tam lethum quam prope cernit aquam.
Which the Author of the book of Wisdom has expressed thus.

Verily, desire of gain has devised Shipping, and the workman built it by his
skill.

But thy Providence, O Father, governs it, for thou have made a way in the sea
and a safe path in the waves.

Showing that thou caust save from all dangers, yea though a man went to sea
without Art.

Nevertheless, thou would not that the works of thy wisdom should be idle;
and therefore do men commit their lives to a small piece of wood, and passing
the rough Sea in a weak vessel, are saved. Wisd. 14. 2, 3, 4, 5.

We shall admire their holdness the more, if we consider what Implements they
had in the first ages to sail in, and some people at this time. The Egyptians
used to make boats of Reeds and Bullrushes, says Pliny. l. 13. Not. Hist. and
Lucan. l. 4. Phars:

-- Sic cum tenet omnia Nilus
Conseritur bibula Memphitica cymba papyro.
Which kind of boat or basket Moses was put to swim in, when Pharoah's
daughter took him up. The Prophet Esaias makes mention of such Utensils, in that
Periphrasis of Egypt; Woe to the land shaddowing with wings, that sends
Ambassadors by sea in Bulrushes, Isa. 18. 12. Papyraceis navibus armamentisque
Nili naviga nus, Plin. Not. Hist. The Indians had the like boats, Indorum rates
Scirpeae, atque etiam vestes, Herodot. l. 1.

The Britains of Old had their Naves Vitiles, as Pliny calls them; the Irish
and the Natives call them Corraghes, and some Corracles; they were little
Vessels of wicker, covered with leather, and not much bigger than a basket, with
which they would as proudly bestride the seas as Jason with his Argo. Lucan
mentions and describes them thus, l. 4.

Primum cava salix, madefacto vimine, parvam
Texitur in puppim, caesoque induta Juvenco
Vectoris patiens tumidum superenatat Amnem:
Sic Venetus stagnante Pado, fusoque Britannus
Navigat Oceano: sic cum tenet omnia Nilus
Conseritur bibula Memphitica cymba papyro.
-- Of twiggs and willow bored,
They made small boats, covered with bullocks hide,
In which they reached the Rivers farther side.
So sail the Veneti, Mr May,
if Padus flow:
The Britains sail on their calm Ocean so:
So the Egyptians sail with wooven boats
These kind of Baskets or Boats described by Lucan, were (...) by Julius
Caesar, to transport his army over the river Sicoris ^^ainst Petreius, and
other rivers elsewhere; and he had learnt the ^aking of them (as it seems) from
the Britains, when he was (...) this Island, as himself confesses in his
first book de Bello ^^ivili; Cujus generis, cum superioribus usus Brittanniae
docuer^^: (...) h^e describes them thus: carinae primum ac statumina ex le^^
materia fiebant, reliquum corpus navium vimi nibus contextum ^iis integebatur.
Loco citato.
Of papery rushes, in their Nilus floats.
They have the like Vessels on the river ^uphrates to carry commodities to
Babylon, and so like to these British ones, that (according to Herodotus his
description of them) a man would think that either the Britains borrowed the
pattern from the Babylonians, or the Babylonians from them: For Herodotus in
Clio, that is, the first book of his History, says, that they had boats made
of Osier or Willows of an orbicular for, in fashion of a Buckler, without prow
or poop, and covered over on the outside with the hide of a bullock tanned: In
these, besides other Countrey-commodities, they used to carry Palm-wines (in
tonns) to be sold at Babylon; two men with an oar a piece in their hands
guiding the Vessel.

These Vessels were so light, that the owners used to carry them upon their
backs to and from the water; the Master would carry his boat by land and the
boat would carry it is Master on the water: As the Arabian Fisherman uses to
do with his Tortoise shell, which is his shallop by sea and his house on the
firm land, under which he sleeps; which we have expressed in this Latin
Epigram.

Haec ratis atque domus; nostrae en compendia vitae!
Hac habitat sollers, hac mare sulcat Arabs.
Se tegit hac terris, hac vict^m quaerit in undis:
Ipsa domus dominum portat, and ipse domum.
This I found expressed (afterward) by the excellent du-Bartas, and his no
less excellent interpreter Sylvester, thus:

The Tyrian Merchant or the Portugez
Can build one ship of many trees;
But of one Tortoise when he list to float,
The Arabian Fisherman can make a boat.
And one such shell him in the stead does stand,
Of Hulk at sea, and of a House by land.
Much like these are those which the Aeg^yptians use (at this day) upon the
Nile, which they took upon their backs when they came to the Cataracts and
steep falls of that River.

Boterus calls them Naves Plicatiles, De politia illustrium, lib. 4.
and which they use in some places of the West Indies. For in the year 1500,
we read that there were brought to Roan seven Indians in one small vessel or
boat, which was so light that one man could lift it up with his hand, as the
same Boterus relates.

In some places of the West Indies they fish with Fagots made of Bulrushes,
which they call Balsas; having carried them upon their shoulders to the sea,
they cast them in, and then leap upon them* and then row into the main sea with
small reeds on either side, themselves standing upright like Tritons or
Neptunes; and o^ these Balsas they carry their cords and nets to fish with.
Joseph. Acosta, l. 3. c. 15*

Strabo sailed to Egypt in a small thing like a Basket made of wicker, as
himself relates in the seventeenth of his Geogra^phy. The Indians have long
boats called Canoas, neatly made up of one tre^ made hollow. In Greenland the
Fishe^^mens boats are made like Weave^ shuttles, covered outwardly with ski^^
of Seals, and fashioned and strengthened with the bones of the same fishes;
which being sewed together with many doubles, are so strong, that in foul
weather they will shut themselves up in the same secure from the rocks, wind
and weather. Purchase l. 8. of America. These are about 20 foot long, and 2 foot
and a half broad, and so swift that no ship is able to keep way with them; and
so light, that one man may carry many, and they carry but one oar.

I saw a ship (says a learned man, and one that spent 40 years in travels, and
the only man that I read of that outstript Sr John Mandevill, who traveled
but 33 years (as Balaeus delivers) laden with Arabian Merchandise, which was
made up without Iron, but the plancks and ribs weres sewed with cords, and the
sutures covered with sweet smelling Rosine, which came from the Franckincense
tree. The tacklings, sails, and every part of the ship was made of one tree,
which bears the Indian Nut. So Petrus Gellius in his description of the
Thracian Bosphorus.

-- The Indian Nut alone
Is clothing, meat and trencher, drink and kan,
Boat, cable, sail, and needle all in one.
So that pious and Seraphic Poet Mr George Herbert.

At first, one small tree did serve to make a boat, being made hollow: After
this, men stitched large plancks and boards together with Prows and Poops, fit
to plow up the liquid plains; then they added Masts and Sails, and gathered the
wind in a sheet, for to drive those Hulks on their way. The Tyrians, who were
famous Navigators of old, are said to be the first that made such kind of
Vessels.

Utque maris vastum prospectet turribus aequor,
Prima ratem ventis credere docta Tyros.
Ovid tells us, that Jason King of Thessaly was the first contriver of ships;

-- primaeque ratis molitor Jason.
And that his ships name was Argo, wherewith he fetched the Golden Fleece from
Colchos, and which the Astronomers afterward have stellified or fixed as a
Constellation in heaven.

Vellera cum Minyis nitido radiantia villo,
Per mare non notum prima petiere carina. Ovid. Metam. l. 6.
Lucan confirms the same, l. 3.

Inde lacessitum primo mare, cum rudis Argo
Miscuit ignotas temerato littore gentes.
The Fish called Nautilus, or the Little Mariner, was Navigiorum Archetypus,
the first type or pattern of a Ship; for when he is to swim, he composeth his
body and finns into the form of a Galley under sail: from the sight whereof,
some (as Pliny conceives) took the first hint of framing a Ship. As from the
sight of a Kite flying in the air and turning and steering himself with his
tail (as fishes do in the water) some have devised the stern of a ship, Natura
monstrante in coelo, quod esset opus in profundo, as Pliny l. 10. and Seneca
also Epist. 91. Nulla ars intra initium suum steterit: As there is no art but
receives addition and perfection by degrees, so has this: Suet. in Vita.
Caligula made a stately Galley of Cedar, with spacious Halls, and costly rooms
therein, with gardens also and trees (fresh and green) upon the Decks, like the
Pensill gardens of Semiramis; so that it seemed a floating garden, as well as a
floating Castle. But Ptolomaeus Philopater outstript him far, who built a Ship
(says my Author) that the like was never seen before or since; Pancirol. de
rebus nuper inventis, tit. 38.
It was two hundred eighty cubits in length, fifty two cubits in height from
the bottom to the upper Decks; it had four hundred banks or seats of Rowers,
four hundred Mariners, and four thousand Rowers, and on the Decks it could
contain three thousand soldiers; there were also Gardens and Orchards on the
top of it, as Plutarch relates in the life of Demetrius.

Thus what was invented at first for necessity, is now improved to Riot and
Luxury.

The Ancients had a way to drive their ships without Oar or Sail, so that they
could never be wind-bound; Vitruv.
they had in their ships three wheels on each side, with eight radii of a span
long jetting out from every wheel; six Oxen within did turn this Machin and
wheels, which casting the water backward, did move the ship with incredible
speed and force; they had in these ships an instrument called Garrum, which
went with wheels in fashion of a Dyal, which at the end of every hour did let
fall a stone into a Basin, and so divided the hours of the day.

There have been Boats made here in England to go under water, which my Lord of
St Albans seems to touch, No. Organum, l. 2.
Audimus inventam esse Machinam aliquam Naviculae aut Scaphae, quae subter
aquis vehere possit ad spatia non nulla: We are not now content to sail upon
the waters, but we must sail under them too.

I know not whether Julius Scaliger was a braggard or no, but he does
confidently aver, that he could make a ship that could steer her self as easily
as kiss his hand (as we say) Naviculam sponte sua mobilem ac sui remigii
authorem faciam nullo negotio; and to frame a flying Dove like that of Archyt^s
velfacillime profiteri audeo, says the same great Scholar, Exer. 326.

In a Naumachia or representation of a Naval fight in the time of Claudius
Caesar, a Triton (or Sea god) sprung up in the midst of the Lake, sounding
aloud with a silver Trumpet, Suet. in vit. Claudii. Juvenal makes mention of
earthen boats to sail with, used also in Egypt; for speaking of the deadly
feud and fighting between the Towns of Ombos and Tentyra about their gods, he
speaks thus, Sat. 15.

Hac saevit rabie imbelle and inutile vulgus
Parvula fictilibus solitum dare vela Phaselis,
Et brevibus pictae remis incumbere testae.
An Appendix of the Mariners Card or Compass.
THough these flying Coaches on Sea were brought to great perfection many years
since, yet there was no small deficience in the Art of Navigation before the
use of the Compass was found out; which was invented first here in Europe by
John Goia, or Flavius Goia, as others call him, of the Town of Amalphi in
Campania, in the Kingdom of Naples*

Prima dedit Nautis usum Magnetis Amalphi:
Du Bartas calls him Flavio in these words,

We are not to Ceres so much bound for bread,
Neither to Bacchus for his clusters red;
As Signior Flavio for thy witty trial,
For first inventing of the Seaman's Dyal.
Before this invention, Pilots were directed in their right voyages by certain
stars which they took notice of, especially the Pleiades, or Charles his Wain,
and the two stars in the tail of the Bear, called Helice and Cynosura, which
are therefore called Load-stars, or leading stars; As Travelers in the Deserts
of Arabia and those of Tartary were always guided by some fixed stars in the
night time, to steer their courses in those pathless and uncouth ways, so
Seamen were directed by the like heavenly guides, in the pathless wilderness of
waters, before this excellent invention was found out.

Sidera Cuncta notat tacito labentia Caelo.
So Virgil speaks of Palinuras, who was Shipmaster or chief Pilot and Steersman
to Aeneas; but if the sky chanced to be overcast, and the stars to be curtain'd
with clouds, then the most experienced Mariner was at a loss, and must cast
Anchor presently, and take up his rest.

Cum neque Temo Piger, Star: l. 1. Theb.
nec amico Sidere monstrat
Luna vias, medio coeli pelagique tumultu
Stat rationis inops --
But the ingenious Amalphitan has devised a remedy against this grand
inconvenience, and found a way that men might steer a certain and infallible
course in the darkest nights, and this by the help of a little stone, called
(from the use and benefit) the Loadstone. This Loadstone ^s now our Load-star,
and the Mariners Directory. This stone (for the universal benefit and use of
it) is the wonder of all stones; as Rablais said, that a Millstone was the most
precious stone of any other, so I may say, that a Loadstone is comparable to
all the gems and precious stones in the world; it is but obscure and mean in
sight, no sparkling luster to be seen in it.

-- Lapis est cognomine Magnes
Decolor, ^laud. de Magnete.
obsaurus, vilis, etc.
Si tamen hic nigri videas miracula saxi
Tunc superat pulchros cultus, and quicquid Eoi
Indus littoribus rubr^ scrutatur in Alga
This stone has two strange properties, the one of Attraction, the other of
Direction; this property of Direction, (which chiefly concerns our present
business) is, that being set in a dish, and left to float freely upon the
water, it will with one end point directly to the North, and with the other to
the South, and will give this faculty or property to a needle that is rubbed or
touched with it.

From these two faculties of Attraction and Direction, many excellent, useful,
and ingenious Inventions have bin found out, especially this Pyxis Nautica, or
Mariners Card or Compass, which carries a needle touched with the Loadstone in
the middle of it, with two and thirty Rumbs or lines drawn round about it;
according to the number of the Cardinal and Collateral Winds. Now this animated
needle shows with the Lilly-hand (or point) the North in any part of the world,
which is a great help to the Pilot to direct him to what point of the Compass
to steer his course.

This Pyx or Card is no less useful by Land then it is by Sea; so that they
that travel through Deserts, as the Carovans do to Mecha and Medina, and other
places, do now make good use of this device, whereas heretofore some star was
their best guide by night.

Pliny speaks of the Inhabitants of Taprobana (now called Sumatra) that because
they do not see the Pole Star to sail by, they carry with them certain birds to
sea, which they do often let fly; and as these birds by natural instinct fly
always toward the land, so the Mariners direct their course after them.

In Syria, and some Countries of the East that are covered with sand, so that
there is no tract or path to guide the Traveller, and those sands are also
scortching hot, that they cannot be endured by day, they travel by night, and
by the direction of certain stars, which they use as certain way-marks to steer
their course by: As Mor Isaac in Philosophia Syriaca. So also in the Country of
the Bactrians, as Curtius relates: Navigantium modo Sidera observant, ad quorum
cursum iter dirigunt, Curt. l. 7.

Lud. Bartema relates, that they that travel over the Deserts of Arabia, which
are all covered with light and fleeting sands, so that no track can ever be
found, do make certain boxes of wood, which they place on Camels backs, and
shutting themselves in the said boxes to keep them from the sands, and by the
help of the Loadstone like the Mariners Compass, they steer their course over
the vast and uncouth Deserts. Some do ascribe this invention to that ingenious
people of China. Dr. Gilbert affirms, that Paulus Venetus brought it first into
Italy in the year 1260, having learned it from the Chinois, as he says l. 1.
de Magnete, c. 2. and Ludovicus Vertomanus, another traveller, says, that when
he was in the East Indies about the year 1500 (above an hundred and fifty years
since) he saw the Pilot of his ship direct his course by a Compass (framed
after the same manner as we have now) when he was sailing toward Java.

The Mariners Compass is not brought yet to that perfection, but that it
requires some rectification and amendment; for the Magnetique Needle does not
exactly point to the North in all Meridians. but varies and swerves (in some
places more, in some less) from the Direct posture, Configuration, and Aspect
of the North and South, which puts Seamen to much distraction, and makes them
run oftentimes on dangerous errors. Van Helmont a great Paracelsian of Germany,
professes a ready way to rectify this grand inconvenience, namely, how to
make a Needle that should never vary or alter from the right point, which may
be performed by a strong imagination, as he says, thus; If a man in framing
the Needle shall stand with his back to the North, and place one point of the
Needle (which he intends for the North) directly toward himself, the Needle so
made shall always point regularly and infallibly toward the North without
variation. I wish that some Fancy-full man of an exalted imagination would make
some Needles for experiment after Helmont's direction, since it is a business
of great concernment to the public Weal, to have this business rectified.

CAP. XI.
(...): OR, The Art of Cicuration and Taming wild Beasts,
WHile I look back upon the title of the Book, which is Historia Naturae
subactae, The History of Nature subdued and brought under the power of man; I
conceive this ensuing Chapter will be no digression or seem impertinent, but
will prove pertinent enough to the scope and design of the work. In this
Theater of man's wit, it will not (a little) illustrate the power of it, if we
bring wild Beasts upon the stage, to show that the most savage creatures have
been managed by man's wit and made docile and tractable for all services and
emploiments.

The Spirit of God has spoke it; That every kind of Beasts and of Birds, and
of Serpents, and things in the sea is tamed and has been tamed of mankind,
Jam. 3. 7. I shall verify and confirm this position of the Apostle by Examples
of several kinds.

1. For BEASTS; l. 2. de Ira
Aspice Elephan torum colla jugo submissa, says Seneca; behold the Elephant,
Which is the strongest and biggest beast in the Forest, yet this has been tamed
and managed and made serviceable for all the offices both of Peace and War. It
has been taught to draw and carry; some ride him for the Wars; some yoke him
for the plough; and some make him to draw their Coach, as the Emperor Gordian
had some to draw his, as Julius Capitolinus reports of him. Many stories (that
seem incredible) of the Officiousness and Docileness of this creature, you may
read amassed together (out of several Authors) by Lipsius in one of his
Epistles ad Germanos.

The Lion himself, whom some term the King of Beasts, has been (by the
dexterity of man's wit) made tractable and officious for many Menial Offices.
Mark Anthony had Lions to draw his Triumphal Chariot, as Pliny reports. Primus
Romae Leones ad Currum junxit M. Antonius, non sine quodam ostento temporum,
generosos spiritus jugum subire illo prodigio significante, Pl. l. 8. c. 16.
Hanno the Carthaginian had a Lion so tame and familiar, that he could either
ride him or lead him with any carriage for to bring it to Market, as Plin lib.
8. Not. Hist. cap. 16. and Maximus Tyrius sermon. 32. do relate. But this cost
him a Banishment; for the jealous Carthaginians began to fear that he might
soon put the reins in their mouths and ride them too, that had done so by a
Lion. It is no Poetical fable (perhaps) that Tigers drew the Coach of Bacchus,
which Silius Italicus makes mention of.

-- odoratis descendens Liber ab Indis
Egit Pampineos fraenata Tygride Currus.
For that Monster Heliogabalus had Lions and Tigers (at once) to draw his
Coach, as Lampridius relates in his life.

Martial, lib. 8. Epist. 26. mentions the same in Domitians time.

Vicit Erythraeos tua ( Caesar) arena triumphos,
Et victoris opes, divitiasque Dei.
Nam cum Captivos ageret sub Curribus Indos,
Contentus gemina Tygride Bacchus erat.
And that the fierce Bysons were taught to draw the Chariot; and also Stags at
their public shows, is affirmed by the same Poet. As I have seen in England by
Walton upon Thames 4 Stags drawing a small Coach; and it is no poetical fiction
that Stags drew the Coach of Diana, as Claudian the Poet sings of her.

-- Frondosa fertur ab Alpe
Trans pelagus; Cervi currum subiere jugales.
Fabricius Veiento, when he was Praetor of Rome, brought into the Cirque a
Chariot drawn by Dogs, as Lipsius tells me in his notes upon Tacitus: nay,
Estridges have been taught to draw in a Coach by the Emperor Firmus, as Textor
reports in his Officina.

The Count of Stolberg in Germany had a Deer which he bestowed on the Emperor
Maximilian the Second, that would receive a rider on his back, and a bridle in
his mouth, and would run a race with the fleetest horses that came in the
field, and outstrip them too, as Michael Neander relates, Physic. part. 1.
Martial, l. 13. Epigr. 96. makes mention of a Deer used to the bridle.

Hic erat ille tuo domitus, Cyparisse, capistro,
An magis ille tuus, Sylvia, Cervus erat.
Sir Hierom Bows at his return from Muscovia (where he had been Ambassador)
brought over certain Does of admirable swiftness, of the nature of the
Rangifer, which being yoked and coupled together in a Coach, would carry one
man with great speed, as Cambden in the Annals of Q. Elizabeth relates, part. 3.

The King of Cambaia has tame Panthers, Lions and Leopards, which he uses as
hunting dogs or Greyhounds to hunt Deer and Wild boars withal, as Aelian
reports, l. 17. variar. hist. and Scaliger, Excer. 189. At Prague, in the King
of Bohemia's Pa^ace, Mr Morison saw two tame Leopards that would (either of
them) at a call leap behind the Huntsman, when he went abroad a hunting, and
sit like a Dog on the hinder part of the horse, and would soon dispatch a Heart.

These Examples show forth the excellency of man's spirit, which (by a discreet
managery) can reduce those creatures (that have revolted from their Homage to
their natural liege Lord and Sovereign, Man) to their primitive obedience,
which they did once voluntarily and freely pay unto him before the fall of
Adam, and before the first man revolted (by sin) from his maker; and we may see
hereby that saying of Xenophon verified, (...), it is far easier taming and
managing any creature than man; and that of Seneca, Est nullum animal homine
morosius, aut majore art tractandum; there is no creature so wayward and
fierce and untractable as man.

2. For Serpents, that have been tamed by man (as the Apostle mentions) we may
vouch Strabo for a tame Crocodile in Egypt in the Lake of Myris: and Seneca
for a tame Dragon that took meat from the hand of Tiberius; he mentions
elsewhere, repentes inter pocula sinusque innoxi^olapsu Dracones, l. 2. de Ira.
Dragons that crept upon men's tables among their cups, and harmlesly along their
bosoms: and the four-legged Serpents in Cairo were tame and harmless, that we
spoke of before in the Chapter of Music.

3. For Birds and wild Foul, we may instance in the Estridges, that were put
to draw a Coach; in Eagles, that are trained in Turkey like Hawks to fly at any
fowl; Exer. 232.
in the Crow, that Scaliger saw in the French Kings Court, that was taught to
fly at Partridges, or any other fowl, from the Falconers fist; and lastly, in
Wild- Ducks, that are tamed and made Decoyes, to entice and betray their
fellows, which is commonly known.

4. Then fourthly, for things in the Sea that have been tamed, we may instance
in a fish called the Manati, or Sea-Cow, well known about Hispaniola and other
places of the West Indies; it has the form of a Cow, and has four feet, and
comes often to land to eat grass: Peter Martyr in his Decads speaks of an
Indian Cacique or Lord of the Country that had one of these tame Cows, that
would eat meat out of his hands, and was as sportfull as an Ape, and would
carry his sons and servants (sometimes ten of them at a time) on his back, and
waft them over a great Lake from one shore to another. We may instance also in
the Seahorse that has been tamed, and made tractable to carry men on his
back, as Leo Afer reports of one he had seen, in his History of Africa; and in
the Fish called Reversus, by whose help and admirable industry, the Indians
used to catch Fish in the Sea, as Bodin relates in the third book of his
Theatrum Naturae: He is let loose at the prey, as the Greyhound from the slip,
as Purchase says; and Peter Martyr has the like story of it in his Decads:
Pliny speaks the same of Dolphins, which he had seen (in some places) to be
used for to catch Fish, and to bring them to shore, and upon receiving some
part of the prey, to go their ways; and if they failed in some point of
service, they suffered themselves patiently to be corrected, as Setting-Dogs,
and Qua-Ducks, or Decoy Ducks (as we commonly call them) use to be. This same
is affirmed of the Dolphins by Oppianus a learned Writer, in his Halieuticks.
Otters have been tamed, and taught to drive Fish into the Net, as Dogs use to
drive cattle into the Fold, as Cardan relates.

But this is not all, wild beasts and birds have been tamed not only for the
service, but also for the pleasure and pastime of man: As man has learned some
Arts from them, so they have learned some from man: Camels have been taught to
dance, as the African Leo has seen in his Country. Elephants have also been
taught the same; and not only on the earth, but also in the air, ambulare per
funem, to dance upon the Ropes: Seneca is my Author for it, Epist. 85. The
manner of teaching them to dance is thus, Sands Travels.
They bring some young Elephant or Camel upon a floor of earth, that has been
heated underneath, and they play on a Cittern or Tabor, while the poor beast
lifts up his stumps from the hot floor very often, more by reason of the heat
then any lust to dance; and this they practice so often, until the beast has
got such a habit of it, that when ever he hears any Music he falls a dancing.
Bubsequius saw a dancing Elephant in Constantinople, and the same Elephant
playing at ball, tossing it to another man with his Trunk, and receiving it
back again.

Michael Neander saw in Germany a bear brought from Poland, that would play
upon the Tabor, and dance some measures, yea dance within the compass of a
round Cap, which he would afterward hold up in his paw to the Spectators, to
receive money (or some other boon) for his pains. There was a dance of Horses
presented at the marriage of the Duke of Florence, which Sir Kenelm Digby
mentions. Treatise (...) Bodies.
An Ass has not so dull a soul as some suppose; for Leo Afer saw one in
Africa that could vie feats with Banks his Horse, that rare Master of the
Caballistick Art, whose memory is not forgotten in England.

The Sybarites (a people of Italy being given to delicacies) had taught some
Horses to dance; The Crotonians hearing thereof, and preparing War against them
for some former quarrel, brought with them some Flutes and Flutinists to the
War, who had direction to pipe it as loud as they could, when the Sybarites
were ready to charge with their Horse; whereupon the Sybarites Horses, instead
of rushing upon the Enemy, fell a dancing, and so gave the victory to the
Enemies thereby, as three grave Authors have recorded, Diod. Sic. l. 12. Ael.
l. 16. c. 23. Plin. l. 8. C. 42.

A Baboon was seen to play upon the Guitta^; Baltasar Castilione de Aulico.
and a Monky in the King of Spain's Court was very skilful at Chessplay. Some
birds have been taught to speak man's language, and to utter whole sentences of
Greek and Latin articulately; There were seen in Rome Stares, Pyes, and Crows,
that could do this to the admiration of all men. Cardinal Ascanio had a Parrot,
that could repeat the Apostles Creed verbatim in Latin; and in the Court of
Spain there was one that could sing the Gam^ ut perfectly; and if he was out,
he would say, No va bueno, That is not well; but when he was right he would
say, Bueno va, Now it is well; as John Barnes an English Friar relates in a
most learned Book of his, De Aequivocatione. What witty feats and tricks Dogs
have been taught to do, are so well known, that I may spare instances of this
kind. Many of these examples that I have produced to make good the Title of
this Chapter, and the Apostles saying abovementioned, are briefly sum'd up by
Martial in his Book of Shows, the 105th Epigr. which I have here annexed, with
the Translation of M. Hen. Vaughan Silurist, whose excellent Poems are public.

Picto quod juga delicata collo
Pardus sustinet, improbaeque Tygres
Indulgent patientiam flagello,
Mordent aurea quod lupata Cervi;
Quod Fr^nis Lybici domantur Ursi,
Et quantum Caledon tulisse fertur
Paret purpureis Aper Capistris.
Turpes Brittis^ Chariots*
essed a quod trahunt Bisontes Wild Oxen in the Herc^^nian Forest called
Buffles.
,
Et molles dare jussa quod choreas:
Nigro The N^^gro or Black-Moor, the^rides hi^
Bellua The Elephant.
nil negat Magistro,
Quis spectacula non putet Deorum?
Haec transit tamen ut minora, quisquis
Venatus humiles videt Leonum, etc.
That the fierce Pard does at a beck
Yield to the Yoke his spotted neck,
And the untoward Tiger bear
The whip with a submissive fear;
That Stags do foam with golden bits
And the rough Lybic bear submits
Unto the Ring; that a wild Boar
Like that which Caledon of Yore
Brought forth, does mildly put his head
In purple Muzzles to be lead:
That the vast strong-limb'd Buffles draw
The British Chariots with taught awe.
And the Elephant with Courtship falls
To any dance the Negro calls:
Would not you think such sports as those,
Were shows which the Gods did expose;
But these are nothing, when we see
That Hares by Lions hunted be, etc.
Elephants (which are the most docile creatures of all others, and come nearest
in sense to man) are taught to understand the language of the Country, and to
perform all duties by the sole command of their riders. Horses and Mules
understand Carters language, who with their terms of Art, as Gee and Ree, and
the like, will make them go or stop, turn on the right hand or on the left, as
they please. Clandian observed this pretty discipline in French Mules, which he
thought worthy of a cast of his pen.

Aspice morigeras Rhodani Torrentis alumnas
Imperio nexas, imperioque vagas.
Dissona quam varios flectant ad murmura cursus,
Et Certas adeant voce regente vias.
Absentis longinqua valent praecepta magistri
Fraenorumque vices lingua virilis agit.
Mark how the docile Mules of Rhone now close
And forward draw, now wheelingly and loose;
What various courses at the Carters voice
They shape, and still tread new commanded ways;
Their distant drivers notes each one observes,
And his loud tongue for bit and bridle serves.
In France and Italy where they plow with Horses, one man serves to hold the
plough, and drive the horses too: Dogs have been trained up for the Wars by the
ancient Brittons and Gauls, as Strabo and Cambden relate; so have Bull^, and
Boars, and Lions, as appears by Lucret. lib. 5.

Tentarunt etiam Tauros in moenere belli,
Experti^ ^ues saevos sunt miltere in hosts.
Et validos Parthi prae se misere Leones
Cum Ductoribus armatis, saevis^ Magistris
Qui moderarier hos possent, vinclisque tenere.
Which instances have verified that Emblem and Motto of one of the German
Emperors, which was, a Lion in a chain with this word, Ars vincit Naturam: and
that of the Greek Poet,

(...).
Natura ubi super amur, art vincimus.
And this of another cited by Grotius ^ his Annotations on his excellent Trac^
de veritate Religionis.

(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Vis exiguaest, quamcun^ homini
Natura dedit: sed consili^^
Varils arts quae nata marl,
Et quae terra, aereque domant.
Una ratio omnes omnium animantium vires potestate in se continet. Plut. de
Fort. Romanorum.

A summo opifice cunct a animalia serva facta sunt animanti ratione utenti.
Orig. contra Celsum, l. 4.

CAP. XII.
(...): OR, Certain Sports and Extravagancies of Art.
AS Nature has her ludicra, so Art has hers too; that is, some pretty knacks
that are made, not so much for use, as to show subtilty of Wit, being made de
Gaiete de Ceur, and for pastime as it were; yet the workmanship and elegancy of
these may justly deserve admiration; and I may say of them as Virgil said of
his Poem concerning Bees, In tenui labor est, l. 4. C cor. l. 8. de Var. c. 43.
at tenuis non gloria: and we may further say of Artificial things, as Cardan
spoke of Natural things, Non minori miraculo in parvis ludit Natura (ludit Ars)
quam in magnis: Art (as well as Nature) is never more wonderful then in smaller
pi^ces.

Saint Augustine says, That he did not know whether to wonder at more, the
tooth of an Elephant, or that of a Teredo or Moth, which eats not only cloth,
but consumes posts and pillars, whose tooth is so far from being seen, that the
whole body of it is scarce visible. Some examples and instances of this kind,
which I have casually lighted upon in tumbling over books, I have thought fit
to annex to this former Rapsody.

Admiranda tibi levium spectacula rerum
Exhibeo --
One Callicrates a Stone cutter of Sparta, made Ants of Ivory, with all their
limbs, so small, that the eye could scarce discern them. Myrmecides the
Milesian made a Chariot of Ivory, with Horses and Charioteer in so small a
compass, that a Fly could cover them with her wings: He made also a ship with
all her tacklings, that a Be could hide it, Pl. l. 7. c. 21. and l. 36. c. 5.
And Aelian l. 1. var. hist. c. 52. are my Authors.

Ovid speaks of the admirable chains and nets which Vulcan made to apprehend
Mars in conjunction with his Venus, which were so fine and subtle,

-- Quae fallere lumina possent,
That the wanton Lovers could not see them till they felt them: Ovid describes
them thus, l. 4. Metam.

-- Exempla graciles ex aere Catenas,
Retiaque and laqueos, quae fallere lumina possent,
Elimat, non illud opus tenuissima vincant
Stamina, nec summo quae pendet aranea Tign^:
Utque leves tactus, momentaque parva sequantur,
Efficit, and lecto circundata collocat apt.
A VVaggon and Oxen made of glass that might be hidden under a Fly, are
mentioned by Cardan, l. 10. var. c. 52.

Leander Alberti in his description of Italy, makes mention of a Lock very
neatly and artificially made of VVood, without any Iron in it.

But one Mark Scaliot a Black smith and Citizen of London, for proof of his
skill and workmanship, made one hanging lock of Iron, Steel and Brass, of
eleven several pieces, and a pipe key, all clean wrought, which weighed but one
grain of gold, which is but one wheat corn. He also made at the same time a
chain of gold of 43. linkes, to which chain the lock and key being fastened and
put about a fleas neck, she drew the same with easo: all which lock and key,
chain and flea weighed but one grain and a half: A thing most incredible to
believe, but that I my self have seen it, says M. John Stow, in the Annals of
Q. Elizabeth.

Scaliger makes mention of a flea that he had seen with a gold chain about her
neck and kept daintily in a box; Exerc. 136.
which for her food did suck her mistresses white hand. Leo Afer saw the like
flea and chain in Memphis or Grand Cairo, and the Artificer l. 8. Hist. Afric.
that made the chain had a suit of cloth of gold bestowed upon him by the
Sultan after the manner of that Country.

Hadr. Junius saw at Mech in in Brabant, a cherry stone cut in the form of a
basket, wherein were fourteen pair of d^ce distinct, each with their spots and
number easily to be discerned with a good eye. l. ^. Animadvers.

Galen makes mention of a precious stone enchased in a ring, l. 17. De usu
pantium.
wherein was the picture of Phaeton, most accurately cut, d^iving the chariot
of the Sun, and being not able to rule his fiery Steeds, tumbling headlong into
the River Eridanus (or the Poe) The world being all set on a flame, according
to Ovid's description, l. 3. Metam.

George Whitehead whom we mentioned before, made a Ship with all her tacklings
to move of its self on a table, with rowers plying the Oars, a woman playing on
the Lute, and a little whelp crying on the deck. Schottus in Itinera Italiae.

G^fferellus a Frenchman makes mention of a clock that he had seen at Legorn,
made by a German (for these Germans are said to have their wits at their
fingers ends) on which clock a company of shepherds played upon the bagpipes,
with rare harmony and motion of the fingers, while others danced by couples,
keeping time and measure, and some others capered and leaped. Cap. 6. of
Unheard of Curiosities.

Cardan speaks of an Artizan at Lions, that made a chain of Glass that was so
light and sl^nder that if it fell upon a stone pavement, it would not break,
Card. l. 10. Var. c. 5^.

Amongst these (...), we may reckon an Iron Spider, mentioned by Walchius in
his ninth fable, which was exactly made to the form and proportion of a Spider,
and was also made to imitate his motions; which I confess was a singular piece
of Art, if duly considered. And though these knacks are but little useful, and
take up more time then needed to be lost, yet they discover a marvelous
pregnancy of wit in the Artificers; and may be experimenta lucifera, if not
frugifera hints of greater matters; of which Iron Spider I may say as Du Bar^as
speaks of the Iron Fly made by Johannes Regiomontanus, or John of Regensberg,
that rare Mathematician of his time,

O Divine Wit! that in the narrow womb
Of a small Fly, could find sufficient room.
For all these springs, wheels, counterpoize, and chains,
Which stood instead of life, and spur, and reins.
A Dutchman presented the Landtgrave of Hessen (not many years since) with a
Bear, and Lion of gold, that were hollow within, and each of the length of a
man's middle finger, and every part and lineament of them answering truly to
the proportion of the length, and both these did not exceed the weight of a
French crown; but the Prince gave him three thousand Crowns in reward of his
invention: A fair and Princely encouragement for ingenious Artists. Claudian
has an Epigram de Quadriga Marmorea, like that of Callicrates (mentioned
before) made of Ivory; and it is thus,

Quis dedit innumeros uno de Marmore vultus?
Surgit in Aurigam currus, paribusque lupatis
Unanimes froenantur equi, quos forma Deremit
Materies cognata tenet; Discrimine nnllo
Una silex tot membra ligat, ductusque per artem
Mons patiens ferri, varios mutatur in artus.
What artful hand into one shape did put
So many different shapes, and all well cut:
The Driver on his Chariot mounted sits,
His well matched horses with wrought marble bits
And reins, are curbed; and though each Figure varies,
Yet all are but one piece; one marble carries
Unsundered, all those shapes, the patient stone
Cut into various forms, shows all in one.
John Tredeskin's Ark in Lambeth, can afford many more instances of this
nature; and so can the Archives of sundry Princes and private persons, who have
their Pinacotheca's and Technematophylacia for to preserve all rarities; among
others, we find great mention of Bernard Paludanus a Physician of Enchuysen in
Holland; at the sight of whose rarities a Traveller composed this following
Epigram ex tempore,

Orb novo and veteri rarum and mirabile quicquid
Dat natura parens, Artificisque manus:
Una Paludani domus exhibet, ingeniumque
Sublime ac studium testificatur Heri.
Translated.
In the old world or new, what wondrous thing
Did art to light or nature lately bring,
This Paludanus house does show a rare
Proof of the owners sovereign wit and care.
Another you may find touching this business in Grotius his Poems.

FINIS.

