HUMBLE PROPOSALLS TO THE Honorable the Council FOR TRADE: And all Merchants
and others who desire to improve their Estates.

SHEVVING What particulars if Enacted by Parliament would (as with due
submission is conceived) conduce TO Advance Trade, Employ the Poor, Diminish
Interest, Improve Public Revenues; And prevent the cruelty of Creditors, and
the injustice of Debtors.

Tending (likewise) speedily to promote the Enterprise discovered in a late
treatise, entitled, The Key of wealth, And in an Abstract thereof, called, The
Trades-man's Jewel.

ECCLES. 3.13. That every man eats and drinks, and sees the commodity of
all his labor, this is the gift of God. PSALM. 82.4. Deliver the Poor and
needy, save them from the hand of the Oppressor. LONDON, Printed for Edward
Husband, at the Golden Dragon in Fleet Street, 1651.

To the Reader.
Courteous Reader,
WHen I first undertook to publish my Apprehensions concerning the Enterprise
mentioned in a Treatise called the Key of Wealth, truly I did expect much
charge and toil, but (considering as I then noted the general averseness of
men's minds toward those things which are vulgarly called new devices) I had
little hope of fruit during my present life, either to the Nation in general,
or to my self in particular, other then the comfort of doing my duty in sowing
that seed, which happily being rotted in the earth might in time spring up to
the advantage of some succeeding generation: And I must needs confess, my fear
of being esteemed one given to selfconceit, and bringing my name on the stage
upon that account, I found to be the strongest temptation I had to wrestle with.

But seeing through the good hand of providence, what I have hitherto proposed
is generally resented by those who haveperused the same, it gives me now some
ground to expect better things, which I cannot but esteem a special call to
lay out the utmost of my weak ability in prosecuting a matter of such
universal concernment.

And for that amongst other particulars already intimated, there is one which
tends by making Bills current throughout the whole Nation at once) to bring on
(with much greater facility and speed then otherwise can be expected) all the
rest of those wished consequences which will necessarily follow from the
practice of the aforesaid Enterprise; It is my purpose to show first how this
may be effected, referring other things (as in some sort depending thereon) to
such further opportunity as God shall be graciously pleased to grant: In the
mean time I defire still to remain,

Hopeful and sollicitous of Englands prosperity, W. Potter.

SECT. I.
THat according to the revolution of money, or that which goes for such, such
is the revolution of Commodity or Trade is doubtless (as I have intimated in
my former discourses) evident to all men.

Now if every person who has money owing to him, had a Bill expressing the
sum, and day of payment; and if this Bill would pass from hand to hand for
commodity, until such day of payment, this would tend exceedingly both to the
Advancement of Trade, Employment of the Poor, and Increase of Custom and
Excise.

For suppose a Debtor owes his Creditor 100. l. to be paid at Six months; if
this 100. l. passes no further till the end of those Six months, in this case
it lies like money hoarded up in the hands only of that Creditor; whereas if it
could in the mean time be made to pass in a Bill through six or eight hands
like so much money, it would beget six or eight times as much return of
commodity.

Now if all the debts of the Nation were given thus in Bills unto the
Creditors, it would amount to a sum of as great a value as the Credit of all
the Tradesmen in the Nation, which is usually two or three times as much as
their Estates.

This sum if it could be returned in commodity six or eight times in half a
year, that is, twelve or sixteen times in the whole year, would prove to be of
incredible advantage.

Again, if I have a Bill for 100. l. payable at six months with interest at 8
per Cent. and keep this Bill three months in my hands before I have occasion to
transfer it to any other; it will at the end of three months be valued at 102.
l. and he that receives it, if he keeps it the other three months is to be
allowed 104. l. for it.

So that whereas he who receives money has no kind of advantage during the
time of its lying by, he who receives these Bills, has that which like the
fruit of a tree, grows whilst it is in his possession.

Now if it be doubted how such a quantity of these Bills, may,

First, be dispersed throughout the whole Land immediately, and

Secondly, Made to pass from hand to hand in such sort as is here expressed: I
refer you for that to what follows.

SECT. II.
TO the end that the two things last premised may be speedily accomplished,
let it be admit,

That there were an Act of Parliament ford removing the obstructions in Law,
and other difficulties that are found in transferring of Bills from one to
another; to which purpose, there is a Petition it seems already presented,
whereof, I am very glad; yet, I humbly desire that the things following, may
also be considered, viz.

That it were enacted, that such Bills shall be payable in Law, before any Book
debts, Bills, or Bonds whatsoever, viz. in the same rank and order, and in all
respects in the same manner, as if a man had confessed a Judgment upon his
whole estate for the payment thereof.

That whosoever accepting of these Bills transfers them to any other person,
shall (being caused to subscribe them) be liable to the payment of them equally
with him that first gave them forth, as jointly bound with him, in such sort as
in Bills of Exchange the underwriter is obliged as well as the Drawer.

That whosoever has any debts owing to him at the time of this Acts
commencing, shall have power to demand such Bills of his Debtor, and the Debtor
shall not deny to grant the same under a certain penalty.

Provided, That all debts contracted before the commencing of this Act (for
which there is such Bills as aforesaid taken) shall be payable before any other
that shall afterward be contracted; and that in the same rank and order as
they would have been payable, though this Act had never been made.

Many other things which I shall refer to debates by word of mouth are
needful to be added; chiefly in order to the preventing of cheats by
counterfeit Bills: But these particulars being Enacted, it would follow,

That no man for the future would deliver ware upon trust without such Bills,
and those that had already so delivered ware, would immediately upon the
commencing of this Act demand such Bills from their Debtors.

The reason is clear, because no man would be willing that another should have
better security then himself, when he himself may have the same security for
asking; which if others obtaining he should miss of, it makes his debts liable
to secure the debts of those others, but not the debts of those others to
secure his.

Now if every man do at once demand of these Bills for his debts, it would
immediately follow that every man's hands would be full of these Bills; so as
there would be as many Bills dispersed at once throughout the land, as the
debts of all the men in the Nation do amount unto.

The means to accomplish which was the first thing to be discovered, the
clearing of the second particular follows.

SECT. III.
NOw that these Bills would hereupon become so far forth current as to pass
from hand to hand for commodity; let it be considered,

That there is scarce any Trader in England, but is used to trust some one
person or other, and is able to find out some one or other that is willing to
trust him.

Let it therefore be supposed that A. has taken up ware of B. and that this B.
has credit with C. though he should give him no security.

Then let B. taking a Bill from A. take up ware from C. and transfer that
Bill unto C. which he had of A.

Now in case C. is not willing to accept of this Bill, not knowing whether A.
be a sufficient man.

Yet in regard that C. is willing to trust B. (although he had no security from
him) let B. subscribe the same Bill which he had of A. engaging himself
thereby to make it good in case A. should fail so to do.

Hereby C. will have double security, for if B. should fail, yet A. is bound to
make good the debt, neither will C. much doubt but that A. is of some ability,
or else his friend B. would not have trusted him.

Further, let C. having credit with D. take up ware upon the same Bill,
engaging himself to make it good.

Thus shall D. have treble security, viz. both from A. B and C. which with his
own credit as a fourth person, cannot choose but enable him to take up ware
upon this Bill much better then upon his own single credit without it.

And for the same reason a fifth person may much more easily procure ware upon
it from a sixth person, and so on till the money become due.

So that from all this it is evident, that if Bills will but pass the first
hand, they will not fail to pass currantly through all the rest.

And the rather for that they increase by the interest in every man's hand,
during the time of their lying by, as I have already showed.

And it is as clear, that except men cease for the future to deal any more upon
credit, these Bills will not fail to be accepted at the first hand.

Especially in regard that, they will prove as good security at the very first
hand, as if the Debtor had confessed a Judgment for the payment of them.

Now if every man's hands were full of such Bills as would pass for money, what
man is there but for the improvement of his stock, would be taking up
commodity upon them?

And consequently the generality of men would be in present capacity to sell
their commodity by accepting of them, and to procure new commodity with them by
transferring them to others; whereby the commodity so taken up upon Bills,
would immediately be vended again by the revolution of the same Bills, and so
perpetually.

SECT. IV.
IF it be objected, that there would by this means be so many Bills stirring,
as men would receive little or no money werewith to pay their debts.

I anser, men's Bills going about uutill the day for payment of them in money,
will not make the money in the Land ever the less, nor the sums payable in
money ever the more.

2. He who is to pay money the first of June next, upon some Bills of his own
giving forth, if in the mean time he receive Bills payable upon the first of
May next, the money which he receives upon these Bills in May, will serve
toward the payment of his own bills in June.

3. Those Bills which he finds not payable till after the said first of June,
he may lay out again in commodity as fast as he receives, which commodity,
with all the rest of his stock, will give him credit to borrow money wherewith
to pay his debts.

And to the end that men who are able to give security, may never be driven to
extremities for procuring money to pay their debts at any day appointed
whatsoever, as now they usually are.

Let it be supposed that at each City or Town of considerable resort, there
were places appointed where those Bills should be made payable.

Hence it would come to pass, that the payment of al these Bills in those
places, would suddenly bring in all the money in the land into these houses as
into so many banks, as I shall make to appear when need requires.

By this means there would never want millions of money in bank to lend unto
those men who are able to give security for the repayment thereof.

Yet neither those that borrow pay to others, nor yet those others that are to
receive the money, will trouble themselves to take it out of the bank.

But to prevent the surprisall of the money by any Insurrection or Commotion,
it may be lent forth upon good security and small interest to all that are
willing to borrow it, which as fast as it comes in again by the hands of
others, may be lent forth again immediately; so as there should not at any time
be any considerable quantity thereof remaining in bank.

There are also other ways whereby the money might be dispersed into several
hands, so as each man's Chest should be in effect so many several Banks, and
yet sufficient security for millions of money to be forth coming at three days
warning.

The vast consequences of such Banks is already experienced in several parts
of the World: And if I might here enlarge, I could demonstrate that the same
quantity of money would by this means soon occasion ten times as much trading
as now it does and yield five times as much iuterest, although the Borrower
should not pay above half that rate per cent.

But if this way of Banks be not approved of, yet I desire that it may be
observed that the aforesaid way of Bills may be carried on, though they should
not be made payable in one place.

If any thing which is here taken for granted be questioned, I am ready to make
good what I say to those who desire it.

SECT. V.
What can be further objected against any thing that has been proposed
hitherto, I know not.

For if it should be alleged, that such an Act as is already mentioned, would
make all Creditors for the future to have equal title to the debts that are
owing to them.

Answ. 1. What Justice is there for the contrary?

2. Why should it be in the power of the Debtor to confess a Judgment to some
one of his Creditors, when his Estate will not serve to pay half the rest of
his debts?

3. Or why should that Creditor which deals most roughly with his Debtor have
all the Estate, whereby those that are more favorable are enforced to lose
their right?

4. This makes most Creditors (jealous lest others should prevent them) to be
more cruel with their Debtors then they should or otherwise would.

5. Such an Act would prevent an infinite number of Lawsuits, with the many
inconveniences incident thereunto.

Now if it be yielded, that an Act whereby to give each man equal right to the
debts that are owing to him (whether or no he use any violent means by Law to
procure the same) is no less then just, then the laying of a necessity upon men
to take some written or printed evidence whereby such their right may appear,
cannot be excepted against: for,

1. Otherwise the right could not so well appear. 2. There is no earthly
prejudice in taking of Bills more then in trusting men without Bills. 3. Men's
Words cannot pass about to the Advantage of trade as Bills may. 4. Rich men set
the Poor on work, and for want of ready money pay them at leisure, or if they
be so poor as they cannot stay for their money, they take an advantage
thereby to grind their faces by making them work at under rates; now if the
poor man had the rich man's Obligation in paper it would be ready money to him.
5. Though there were no such Act as whereby to make such Bills equal to
Judgments, yet it would not be the least prejudice to the Debtor to give
Bills, but much advantage to the Creditor demand them.
For the Creditor by demanding a Bill shall know whether his Debtor will give
him only his own single credit or assign him some Bill of a good debt besides
his own estate for his security, and therefore may trust him for more or less
accordingly; and likewise the same Creditor having received a Bill from the
Debtor, will by producing this evidence have much better credit with a third
person then otherwise.

Obj. But I have a Bill payable at London, which I have occasion to assign to
some friend living at York.

Answ. When the money is paid in at the bank in London, it may upon notice by
those are concerned therein be paid out again at the bank in York.

Obj. I had a bill made over to me, but it is lost or surprised by violence in
some journey, or otherwise.

Answ. This Objection holds as strongly against the use of money as of bills;
for if a man lose his money, what remedy, except he who finds it be willing to
make restitution?

2. He that has lost the bill causes proclamation to be made of what number
it is, and from what person originally it came. In which case seeing he that
has surprised or found this bill or his assignee must repair to the bank by
the day of payment, or else is like never to be the better for it, he must
there look to be apprehended for not discovering it upon the aforesaid
proclamation.

This might be much better cleared, but that I must be brief.

SECT. VI.
HOw much these last Proposalls tend to promote that other way of making bills
current by a Corporation of men engaged to pay them in money within six months
after the demanding thereof, mentioned in my former Discourses.

And how much that way does exceed in respect of the method here propounded,
though this be much more advantageous then the ordinary way of trading, shall
God willing be made to appear, if not in print publicly, yet in private
debates with those who are concerned therein upon the next opportunity.

In the mean time that such scruples as may possibly prejudice men (against
what has been already published) may be removed, if any who have not read the
aforesaid Treatise, called, The Key of Wealth, should be troubled at the
greatness of the undertaking in the Title page; let it be considered (as was
acknowledged by one who well understands things of this nature) that
whatsoever cannot be counterfeited is Gold (which he spoke not to flatter, but
to show his diffidence in order to what was affirmed in that particular) if
therefore Gold may be made of Paper without considerable charge, what is it
amongst earthly things that may not safely be undertaken?

If any say, that to prevent the falsifying of Bills is impossible, yet it will
be no great trouble to challenge him upon it who is both engaged and willing
to make it appear possible; wishing that the matter were once wholly brought to
that issue, not doubting in the mean time but through Gods assistance to
demonstrate that there was not any one thing promised in either of the
aforesaid Discourses, without such wariness as becomes a public undertaking.

If the difficulty and hazard of Suretyships be pleaded.

Some difficulty and some hazard was always acknowledged to be incident to
this attempt: but was there ever a thing of so great concernment so easily
accomplishable? Is not the ordinary way of trading incident to much greater
hazard? Is there any other imaginable inconvenience that can possibly be put
into the balance, against all those important effects which are the issues of
this attempt? And yet to silence all gainsaying, I have undertaken to discover
how both the difficulty and hazard of that manner of Suretyship which was
formerly proposed, may be removed, and possibly it will appear to be after a
manner better then is yet expected.

And to conclude in a word: How upon a bill of ten pound, or more one may
fetch ware of several persons to the value of two or three shillings the
piece, or less, as there shall be occasion, and that without considerable
trouble or prejudice, I shall also, as I have formerly undertaken, discover
when it will be seasonable, if that be thought needful.

FINIS.

