The Death of Good Josiah Lamented.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of our Late Most Gracious Sovereign Queen
Mary, OF Ever Blessed Memory.

Preached at Balsham in Cambridgshire, March 3. 1695.

By JOSEPH POWELL, M. A. Rector of Balsham in Cambridgshire.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns, near the Royal
Exchange, in Cornhill, 1695.

A SERMON Occasioned by the Death of the Queen.
2 Chronicles. XXXV. 24. And all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah. --


THese words are a record, how sensibly affected the Kingdom of Judah was with
the death of good Josiah; for this general concern there was great reason,
considering his station, his character, and the circumstances of their affairs,
when this excellent Prince was snatched from them. The notice you have now had,
of the approaching Funeral of our late Queen, of Blessed Memory, will, I hope,
render a discourse upon a Text of this nature very seasonable. I could not
satisfy my self, that so extraordinary a Princess (whose equal in all respects
we do not yet know to be left behind her in the whole compass of the world)
should pass to her Grave, without some notice taken of her in the most private
corner of her Kingdom; without paying some small, but well meant tribute to her
sacred memory; some public testimony given by us, her meanest Subjects, of our
thankfulness to God for those eminent gifts and graces which shined in her,
with so bright and glorious a luster; the esteem of the present age, and the
wonder of all that shall follow; of whom I may venture to affirm, alluding to a
passage of our Savior concerning a former Mary (whom she equaled in her
present piety, Mat. 26.14.
but was a great deal more happy in a constant innocence) that in the whole
world, wherever the praises of persons, famous in their generations, are
rehearst, there shall also the admirable graces and illustrious excellencies of
this our Mary be told, for a memorial of her. I could not but think it a
decency, on this occasion, to try to affect all of you, with so great, so
unexpressible a loss sustained by this Nation, in the Death of our incomparable
Queen; for whose death, the people of England have full out as much reason to
be sensibly concerned, as those of Judah could possibly have for the fall of
that Religious Prince here mentioned; of whom we read that all Judah, and
Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

I shall first consider the words, as they relate the death of Josiah, and the
behavior of his Subjects thereupon; and then I shall apply this historical
passage to the sad occasion of my present discourse.

1. The Person, whose death is here mourned, Josiah.

2. The Concern his Subjects expressed, at his death. They mourned for him.

3. This Mourning spoken of, as general and universal; his Mourners were not
barely a few Courtires, who attended immediately upon his person, or held
offices and employments by his Life, but all the people of his dominions, who
looked upon his death as a public judgment and calamity, in which their whole
Nation was concerned; and all Judah, and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

1. The Person, whose death is here related, was Josiah. He was King of Judah
and Jerusalem, and upon this account his life was of much more value than many
lives, where the Commonwealth receives no detriment. The whole body of the
people have an interest in the life of the Prince, their safety does much
depend upon the preservation of his person; and they commonly suffer not a
little by his fall, especially (as here it was) when it is sudden and violent.
Hence David, as a King, is styled the light of Israel, 2 Samuel 21.17. 2 Samuel
18.3. 2 Kings 24.19.
and said to be worth ten thousand of his Subjects; for something very like to
this is spoken of Zedekiah, who by the account the Scripture gives of him,
appears to have been none of the best of Princes; and his Fall from his Empire,
and Captivity in Babylon, very passionately lamented by Jeremy; Lam. 4.20.
The breath of our Nostrils, the anointed of the Lord is taken in their pit, of
whom we said, under the shadow of his wings shall we live; upon this reason is
that Apostolical Precept grounded, which the first Christians so very carefully
observed, 1 Timothy 2.1.
to pray for Kings, and all that are in Authority; inasmuch, as the community
is immediately interested in their preservations; and whatever their personal
qualifications were, their fall was found, by sad experience, to produce great
disorders in the affairs of the Empire.

But Josiah was an extraordinary Prince, of great wisdom unusual virtue, of an
exemplary piety, of an uncommon goodness; he had a great zeal for Gods honor,
a mighty regard to his worship, and noble designs for the promoting, and
advancing Religion. His general Character is, 2 Kings 22.2.
that he did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and walked in all
the ways of David his Father; and turned not aside to the right hand, nor to
the left. After this are remarkt the glorious actions of his reign, 2 Kings 23.
2 Chronicles. cap. 34. cap. 35. 2 Chronicles. 34.3.
for the imitation of succeeding Princes; and that the ages to come might call
him blessed. In the eighth year of his reign, while he was yet young, being now
not full sixteen years old he began to seek after the God of David his Father;
and with much application and seriousness, to do something of moment, and which
might be lasting, for the honor of God, and the interest of Religion; four
years after this, he resolutely undertook the removing all Idolatry, and
setting up the worship of the true God throughout all the land: Six whole years
he employed in bringing this great work to perfection; after this, he resolved
upon repairing the breaches of the house of God; and whilst some ruinous parts
of the Temple were pulled down, in order to rebuild them, in the Rubbish was
found a Book of the Law of the Lord given by Moses. 2 Chronicles. 34.14.
Grotius supposes this to have been the original copy of the Law, delivered by
Moses to the Israelites to be preserved. I rather think, with others, that
Manassah, in the long reign of fifty five years, designing utterly to abolish
the Worship of the God of Israel, and set up Idolatry, had gathered in the
Books of the Law and burnt them; at which time some pious person, who feared
God, and believed that he would still have mercy upon Sion, and restore beauty
and strength to his Sanctuary, hid a Copy of the Law in some secret place of
the Temple, which lay there concealed, all the age of Manassah, and the short
reign of his Son Amon; but upon repairing the Temple, was now discovered.
Josiah, upon perusing those severe threatenings contained in it, in case of
their falling off from the worship of the true God, and becoming dissolute in
their manners; and comparing those with the present state of Judah, 2 Chronicles.
34.19.
rent his clothes, which was a received sign of great sorrow and concern; and
calling his people together, exhorted them to a Reformation; and engaged them
to enter with him into a covenant, v. 31.
before the Lord, to walk after the Lord, and to keep his commandments, and his
testimonies; and his statutes, with all their heart, and with all their soul;
to perform the words of the covenant, which were written in the book; and to
render this more awful, the better to fix it upon their minds, that they might
remember to do it all the days of their life: and to begin the work of
diligently observing the Law, he appoints a solemn Passover, such a one as had
not been, from the days of Samuel, 2 Kings 23.22.
nor in all the days of the Kings of Judah to that time; this was the work only
of one year. He lived after this thirteen years, but all the remaining account
left of him, is only in the general, that he applied his time, and his power,
to the perfecting that good work he had began; and this remembrance of him
stands upon the Sacred Record, when his Life was closed; that like him, There
was no King before him, 2 Kings 23.24.25.
neither after him, arose there any like him.

It is hard to be conceived, what a Blessing a Prince of so much piety and
goodness is to a people; what a wonderful influence his authority, when thus
used, has upon reforming a Nation; what is the force of his example, and how
strange a change and alteration it soon works in the manners of a people; who
will ever be disposed to imitate and follow the pattern set them by those who
rule over them: The holy Books have noted it of Josiah's example, that it
provoked all Israel to serve, 2 Chronicles. 34.33.
even to serve the Lord their God; so that all his days they departed not from
following the Lord the God of their fathers.

I might add to this, a consideration of the eminent favors and unusual
kindnesses God sometimes shows a Nation, with respect to the piety and goodness
of those who have had the rule over them; so God is said to have done great
things for Judah, Isay 37.35.
for his servant David's sake and this a long time after David was dead.

But behold a dark veil overspreading all this glory, the scene is shifted, and
that which now appears strikes with horror and amazement, the heavens darken,
the Inhabitants of the earth are filled with trembling and astonishment, and
all faces gather blackness. This Prince of all their hopes, was snatched away by
a violent and immature death, in the flower of his age, being but thirty nine
years old; and at a time too when they had reason to promise themselves the
greatest blessings and advantages from his government. There is still a more
dismal thought, he was snatched away in Judgment, a very terrible and severe
Judgment to the Kingdom of Judah: God was angry with them and upon executing
often denounced threatenings against them; but good Josiah was first to be
gathered to his fathers, 2 Kings 22.20.
that his eyes might not see the evil God was bringing upon them: Of him those
words of Isaiah are supposed to be spoken, The Righteous perishes, c. 57.1.
and no man lays it to heart; and merciful men are taken away, none
considering that the righteous are taken away from the evil to come.

Jeremiah began to prophecy of this in the days of Josiah, and when he fell he
mentions it, as near approaching; that incomparable Prince, whose Piety and
Virtue had kept it off in his days, being removed: and the certainty of his
Prophecy was proved by the event: For soon after his death all things ran into
confusion, and evil hastened apace upon them, and their long captivity in
Babylon was at hand. His immediate Successor had but a short reign of two
months, and was carried into Egypt. and there dyed: The next, after eleven
years, was bound in Fetters, and carried to Babylon: The third came to the
Crown at eight years of Age, and left it again after three months and ten days,
when his Brother was placed in the Throne; in whose time the Wall of Jerusalem
was broken down, and all the Palaces thereof, with the house of God, burnt with
fire; his Sons slain in his sight, his own eyes after this put out, and he
bound with Fetters of Brass, and carried into that long captivity, which that
Nation endured in Babylon.

There is but one thing more to be observed in the Death of this excellent
Prince; though his death was sudden and violent, and in the vigor of his age;
yet the holy books speak of him, as one who came to his grave in peace; the
same phrase is used in the mention of Abraham his death, Genesis 15.15.
who died in a good old age. This phrase therefore of coming to his grave in
peace used concerning Josiah, notwithstanding the manner and circumstances of
his death, learns us, that Death, at whatever time he approaches, cannot be
untimely to a good man; and though it may be a severe Judgment to others, to
himself it is a great blessing. Well then may we allow them to be concerned for
the loss of such a Prince.

2. They mourned for Josiah. Mourning for the dead is very agreeable to the
softest and most tender passions in our nature; and some outward solemn
significations of this, have been in use and practice in all Nations. Solomon
speaks of it as a known and constant Funeral usage: Man goes to his long home,
Eccles. 12.5.
and the mourners go about the streets. This being by custom limited to a
certain time, the Scripture calls the days of Mourning. This was especially
observed toward those who had been in eminent stations in the world: whose
Funerals were ever attended with mournful lamentations, with regard to that
power and authority they once had. So David appointed a solemn lamentation for
Saul and for Jonathan his Son; 2 Samuel 1.
and composed a Funeral Song on this occasion; they took care also to deposit
the earthly remains of their dead in their proper Sepulchers; which places were
always accounted sacred, and not to be violated. Abraham had such a regard to
this, that whilst he was yet a stranger in Canaan, Genesis 23.
he purchased a place to bury his dead in: Where he himself and Sarah his Wise
were afterward buried; Jer. 22.19.
and the Prophet pronounces it as a Judement upon Jehoiachim, that he should be
denied that solemn burial, used to persons of his quality: they did not grutch
any cost expended upon their interments, as appears by the account we have of
Asa's Funeral; 2 Chronicles. 16.14.
and did all that was in their power to express an honorable regard to the
memory of the deceased, as we find done to Hezekiah at his death. 2 Chronicles.
32.33.
When great and good were in conjunction; when the person was as illustrious
for his piety and virtue, as for his power and authority; when he had used
those as instruments of doing honor to God, and procuring benefit to mankind,
had valued them as capacities of being more beneficial to the world; and made
it his aim, that others should enjoy the greatest good of his possessing them;
they then scarce thought any cost enough to be laid out in solemnizing their
Funerals: they lamented excessively, and yet were concerned that they could not
express a passion so sensibly as it was felt; and looked upon no honor great
enough to be done to their memory. Mourning then past from outward ceremony and
show, and external decency, into the most pungent and smartest feeling of the
mighty loss sustained by the public, in the death of such benefactors: They
spoke of their piety, called to mind their heroic, and their exemplary
virtues; recited all their noble and useful designs; told what they had done
for God, and for Religion, and for Mankind; produced the great numbers, who in
particular cases had received benefit by them; said all the worthy things they
could think of in their praise; and left others to supply (by raising in their
minds an Idea of the bravest man) what they complained, they fell short, for
want of expression, in describing. They feared no suspicion of flattery, where
a person eminently great, was equally good; but presumed all men would consent,
that whatever could be said, must fall far short of his due praise. This usage
we find observed in the Christian Church, toward the great and glorious
Champions for their faith; they followed them mourning to their graves. They
made Orations in their Praise, they registered their Names in the Church Rolls,
they rehearst them in their most solemn service, and built their places of
worship over their Tombs, and all this they did in honor to them; and to
excite others to follow their example. After this manner the people of Judah
mourned for Josiah; as there had been none before like him, so neither did they
mourn, in such a manner, for any before him; Zec. 12.11.
insomuch, that when the Prophet intended to express the most grievous and
bitter lamentation, he could not find out a more lively and proper figure, than
to compare it to the mourning in the valley of Megiddo; which became a
proverbical speech among the Jews; who, when they would describe the utmost
grief, had nothing higher to say of it, than that it is like the mourning for
Josiah; as if there needed nothing more to paint this passion to the life, than
to draw the Valley of Megiddo, with this good Prince fallen in it. When private
men fall, the mourning is little and is confined, and soon over; it reaches
only a small Family, and a very few select friends: their deaths make no noise,
and the notice scarce goes beyond the neighborhood; they creep silently into
their graves, and are in a little time forgot; the reason is, there are not
many who are interested in their lives; and their deaths make no changes and
alterations, to fall under public notice; but the life of a good Prince is
such a benefit to the community, that every one has a share in it; when he
falls the whole body of the people feel the stroke, and time is so far from
wearing out the sense of it, that hereby it is increased; they know not at
present what their loss is, till time and experience makes them understand and
feel it. It Is, in the Prophets metaphor, Amos 8.9.
like the Suns going down at noon, and the darkning the earth in a clear day;
it wraps a people up in night and horror, it frustrates all their hopes, and
brings a damp upon all their joys: It turns their feasts into mourning, and
their songs into lamentations; it brings up sackcloth upon all loins, and
baldness upon every head; and there is heard, as when Nature suffers an
universal graon.

3. And all Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah.

We read of Jonah, that he was so concerned for his gourd, that he fainted, and
wished he might dye; Jonah 4.8.
and said it was better for him to dye, than to live: what that was to him, the
same is a good Prince to to his people, a shadow over their heads, whilst he
rules over them; submission to the will of God is a duty in all cases, and
therefore when such a Governor is removed from a people, which may fairly be
accounted one of the most difficult instances of submission: But it is agreeable
to Nature, and Religion, on such occasions of a common Sorrow, to express an
universal concern, reaching as one continued mournful groan from one end of the
land to the other remotest point of it. It Is not a bare defect in piety, but
stupidity, and downright brutishness, not to be affected with so severe a
providence agreeable to the nature and consequence of it. When Elisha saw
Elijah going from him to Heaven, he cries out, 2 Kings 2.12.
O my Father my Father, the Chariots of Israel and the Horsemen thereof q. d.
Who shall be left to defend and promote Religion, and what shall become of the
Church of God, after thy departure? It is the character the prophet gives of
pious Kings and Queens, Isay 49.23.
that they should be nursing Fathers, and nursing Mothers to Gods Church. The
people needed no such prophecy, whilst Josiah was their King: They were
witnesses to the great regard he paid to Gods Worship, and the mighty designs
for Gods Honor, and the advancing Religion, which he was early engaged in, and
vigorously persued throughout the whole course of his reign. They saw what
countenance piety had from his authority, and of what influence his example
was; and that there was visibly a very different face of things from what they
very well remembered of the reign of Manassah. Such reflections were, upon this
occasion, enough to raise such a cry in Judah as was in Egypt, when in every
house throughout the whole land, there was one found dead; which Moses
describes as a great and terrible, as well as universal lamentation, Exodus 11.6.
such, as there was none before it, nor any like it any more. Had Josiah been
an old man, it would have been some ease to them to have reflected, that his
stay with them could not have been much longer; when events happen no otherwise
than men expect, and according to the course of Nature, there is less room left
for surprise or concern; but this Prince was in his prime, like to live many
years; half his gsass was still to run, many of his great designs lay
unperfected, he was under both a capacity and will of doing much more good, and
vast were the advantages which his Subjects yet expected to reap from his
government: Poor vain man! how are all his glorious expectations frustrated;
and his most promising hopes baffled in a moment. When the breath of a man
goes forth, all his thoughts perish. An argument wisely urged by the holy
Psalmist, Ps. 146.3.4.
not to trust in man, not in the greatest and best man, whose life is so very
uncertain; but rather to make this pious reflection upon all the withering glory
of this world; happy is the man, who has the God of Jacob for his help, and
whose hope is in the Lord his God. But yet, who is of so robust and morose a
constitution, as not to let fall a tear at the Funeral of a person, whose life
was so great a blessing to the world? who can assume so much of the Stoic, as
to permit no motion of the most tender and soft passions in his nature, when he
beholds mighty delights of good to mankind unravelled in an instant? who does
not find himself disordered at the sight of a Body, warm and beautiful,
vigorous and active, animated with a divine Soul, adorned with all the
accomplishments of wisdom and goodness; but now a cold and useless carcass,
noisome and offensive, and no longer to be endured above ground; all its
motions stopped, its curious and amazing clockwork broke in pieces, forsaken by
its heavenly guest, without the least traces of wisdom, or knowledge, or design
remaining.

Quis talia fando -- Who can forbear bewailing the lot of human nature? or
unconcernedly contemplate so sudden, but so strange an alteration in his state?
There remains yet one thing more, to swell their grief on this occasion: Jeremy
and others had spoken of great evil that was coming upon them; and Huldah the
Prophetess, of whom this good King had sent to enquire the time of the
execution of the threatenings in the book of the Law, 2 Kings 22.14.
had foretold that this should be respited till after the death of Josiah:
which answer he had caused to be read in the ears of all the people, and took
that opportunity to exhort them to temperance; this they could not but call to
mind, when they saw him unexpectedly taken away from them; and this naturally
suggested to them, that God removed him in his anger; that their sins had
rendered it unagreeable with the divine methods observed in governing the
world, that he should be continued any longer amongst them; that he was taken
away from that evil which was now hastening to come upon them; that having
filled up the measure of their iniquities, his death was the last warning of
their ruin, a sign from Heaven of their approaching fall, and like a fatal
knell, rung out to the Funeral of their State. In these circumstances what
could be looked for less, than that all Judah and Jerusalem should unite as one
man, in mourning for Josiah.

It is now time to apply this piece of Scripture history to the very sad
occasion of my present discourse. This is too melancholy, too dismal a subject
to dwell long upon. I found it no easy matter to command my self, whilst in
secret I was giving scope to my meditations; and saw it necessary to confine
them, for fear of a greater disorder in relating them.

The history of the Text applies it self, and I have endeavored to set it in
such a light that your own reflections may spare a great deal of my pains in
drawing the parallel. It would be hard to arbitrate betwixt these two Princes,
Josiah and our late Queen; which of them excelled in piety, and had the largest
designs for the honor of God, and the interest of Religion; whose authority
and example gave the highest countenance to virtue, and had the best influence
upon the different ages in which they lived; which of them did, or was most
likely to have done the most good; whose life was more desired, or tkeir deaths
more deservedly lamented by their Subjects. It would be vanity in me to pretend
to draw the character of our Queen, who have only heard of hers, as the Queen
of Sheba had done of Solomon's fame. This is already done, by those who had
opportunities to observe the constancy and fervor of her Devotions; the
admirable example she set to all about her; the visible effects of this, in
putting some vices, formerly very fashionable, so perfectly out of countenance,
as to sneak, and not dare to appear openly in her Court; to be witnesses to
many useful designs of such a nature, that it was impossible they could lie
concealed; and so many extraordinary works of charity (diverse of them done to
her enemies) which though done in the most secret manner, in regard of her
station, came necessarily under the notice of some near her. Happy are those
men, happy are those her servants, who stood continually before her, and heard
her Wisdom. It is said of her, that she not only perfectly hated all flattery,
but had so humble an opinion of her self, that she would not bear the least
part of the justest commendation. So that whilst she lived it would have been
rude, to have drawn her character, though in little; but being dead, it is fit
this should be now done in its full length. What has been attempted by several
hands has, I doubt not, proceeded from a laudable design of proposing such an
example, as the world stands in need of; and paying that just tribute to her
memory, which no Englishman, can have so much of ill nature in him, as to
dispute, much less to open his mouth, and slily slander that is reported of her.

Experience witnesses, of what great use it is to transmit to posterity the
lives and actions, of such as have been famous in their generations; these are
found to make a deeper, and more lasting impression, and to have a better
effect upon mankind, than the choicest collection of precepts. Here Virtue is
drawn more to the life, and according to the Philosophers wish, assumes a body,
and appears in a visible shape, commands with authority, and becomes the most
forcible, and prevailing rule of Practice. I am sensible much has been said of
our late Queen, but too much cannot be said on such a subject: Such an instance
of piety and goodness, is like the appearing of a new Star in the heavens, the
wonder and enquiry of the Age. It would argue a great degeneracy of manners,
and a small regard to the public good, to suffer such an example to lie by
neglected, or not to take care to have it faithfully recommended to posterity.
When we come to see her life whole at large, we shall be made sensible, that
her wisdom and piety do much exceed that we have yet heard of her; and that the
half has not been told. I am much deceived in my account of her, if she did not
every way answer the character given of Josiah, 2 Chton. 34.2.3.
that she did that which was right in the sight of the Lord, and served God,
and kept his commandments with all her heart, and soul, and might, declining
neither to the right hand, nor to the left. We are all sensible, that she was
snatched away by a violent distemper, in the vigor of her age, when we least
dreamt of it; and were struck with astonishment and trembling at the news;
whilst the age just began to be reformed by her authority, and example; and we
promised our selves lasting blessings from her long reign, and when we could
very ill have spared her. So unsearchable are Gods councels, and his ways past
finding out. We cannot, we must not dispute with Heaven: Gods will rules over
all: It Is as well folly as impiety not to acquiesce in it. This Church and
Nation stand highly indebted to God, that such a blessing was so lent us; and
one so dear to him; and so long sincefitted for the beatifical vision, so many
Years confined to this low and imperfect State, and kept from her reward for
the service of others: And to do good to the World. When it seems good to him
to resume his own gifts, it becomes us to take up with holy Job's pious
reflections. Shall we receive good at the hands of God, Job 2.10.
and shall we not receive evil. God has taught us by this instance, (and a
severe discipline it is, whereby he learns us this lesson) the Vanity of all
our blooming hopes, when they are placed any where, but upon him alone; and
that he can continue his Favors, though he lays aside what we have reason to
own, as one great instrument of a kind and happy providence to those Nations.
We must not envy our good Queen the rest and felicity She has reached to. This
would be foul ingratitude to a Person who has done us so much good to repine
that she has exchanged the troubles and cares of an earthly Crown, for one that
has nothing sticks to it to darken the brightness of it, or abate the happiness
of possessing it: Her Death was her reward for her uncommon goodness, as the
most early and sudden death is to every one that is fitted for, and goes
directly to bliss; but it is otherwise to be considered in respect of us, who
have reason to look upon our selves, as judged unworthy of her. Allow us then
to let fall a tear upon her Hearse, and at least to sigh out our loss; that if
there be any in the remotest corners of her dominions, from whom her virtues
lay concealed, they may here begin to understand something of that loss, which
time and experience will better explain, than it can now be expressed. And may
these inclinations be awakened in us all, to enquire further after her, that
what through the shortness of her reign was left unfinished, in encouraging
Virtue, and putting a restraint upon Vice, may in some measure be supplied, and
a Reformation perfected by the remembrance of her. It seems to me too bold a
judgment of divine Providence, to speak confidently of Gods anger, as hereby
declared to be gone out against us, and to forebode upon this occasion, some
amazing evil at our heels, to overtake us. We seldom guess aright, when we
assign a reason, and take upon us to account for Gods providence in this
world; which are so very dark, that we expect it to be a part of that
perfection of knowledge, which will be our reward hereafter, to unfold the
mysteries of them. This indeed was certain in Josiah's death, who was not to
see the evil coming upon Jerusalem: and this observation has been made of many
other excellent persons. When St. Austin prayed for an enthanasy, he hereby
expressed his desire not to live to see the desolations that were hastening upon
the African Churches; and his prayer was heard, for he died just before the
sacking of that City whereof he was Bishop. The like Mr. Calvin has noted of
Luther, that he often prayed he might not see the vials of wrath poured upon
Germany; which immediately after his death came upon those places in a storm,
and with the swiftness and execution of a whirlwind; but those reach only such
cases, as are evident 'twas either by Prophecy, or the event. It would be a
very undue return to God, for those signal favors we have so long enjoyed; It
would a gue a very small sense of that Providence, which has hitherto defended
us: and too fond a reliance upon second causes, upon this occasion (though a
very sad one) to anticipate evil, or despond of our safety. The only pious, and
safe use to be made of our fears, will be, to do all we can (which was the
great aim of our Quren) to promote a reformation of manners throughout the
Nation. This, after all other fruitless expedients without it, will be the only
sure, and effectual course to be taken to any lasting security; and since we
have suffered a loss not to be recovered, what is left for us, but wisely to
consider how religiously she used her power, and how admirable an example she
has left the age; that we may strive to be such true, and sincere Christians,
as she her self was, and desired, and prayed, and endeavored all her Subjects
might be. So may we hope, that God will still protect our King, amidst those
dangers he exposes his Royal Person to for our safety, to whom her Pravers were
a Shield, for a continuance of success to our arms, though we are deprived of
that benefit we owe to the purity and fervency of her devotions, for peace, and
quietness at home, whilst we are engaged in a war abroad; which it were great
ignorance of the World, not to own to have been hitherto the result of her wise
conduct of affairs, and the effect of the singular goodness of her temper, and
the remarkable Piety of her conversation, concurrent causes of calming the
feircest passions, and procuring Gods blessing upon us, and protection over us.
So may she still live, and rule, and do good to these Nations; and continue to
be what she foret her inclinations to accept the Government for, a happy
instrument of saving us from ruin, and making us a wise, religious, and a
prosperous Nation; which God grant for the sake of Jesus Christ our Lord, to
whom with the Father, and the Holy Spirit, be all honor and praise, now and
ever Amen.

FINIS.
Some Books Printed for, and Sold by Thomas Speed, at the Three Crowns near the
Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1695.
THirty Six Sermons, viz. 16 Ad Aulam, 6 Ad Clerum, 6 Ad Magistratum. 8 Ad
Populum; with a large Preface. By the Right Reverend Father in God, Robert
Sanderson, late Lord Bishop of Lincoln. The Eighth Edition Corrected and
Amended. Whereunto is now Added the Life of the Reverend and Learned Author.
Written by Isaac Walton, Fol. Price 15 s.

1. Conversation in Heaven; Part the First: Being Devotions Consisting of
Meditations and Prayers, on several considerable Subjects in Practical
Divinity: Written for the raising the decayed Spirit of Piety. The second
Edition in Twelves, Price 2 s.

2. Conversation in Heaven; Part the Second: Being Sacramental Devotions,
Consisting of Meditations and Prayers preparatory unto a Worthy Receiving the
Holy Communion. As also Meditations and Prayers, suited to every part of
Administering and Receiving it. Twelves Price 1 s. Both Written by the Reverend
Dr. Lawrence. Smith, Rector of South-Warnborough in Hampshire.

3. Of the Happiness of the Saints in Heaven: A Sermon Preached before the
Queen at White Hall, October 12, 1690. By William Beveridge, D.D. Rector of St.
Peter's Cornbil. The second Edition, 4to. Price 6 d.

4. An Anatomy of Atheism; a Poem, Written by a Person of Quality, 4to. Price 6
d.

5 Religion the only Happiness: A Poem, in a Letter to a Friend; 4to. Price 6 d.

6. A Sermon at the Funeral of the Reverend Mr. Thomas Gray, late Vicar of
Dedham in Essex; Preached in the Parish Church of Dedham February 2 d. 92, with
a shortaccount of his Life. By Joseph Powel A.M. Then Rector of St. Mary on the
Wall in Colchester; and now Rector of Balsham in Cambridge shire, Quarto, price
6 d.

7. Cursory Remarks upon a Sermon Preached before the Lord Mayor at St.
Mary-le-Bow, January the 30th. 94. In a Letter to the Honorable Sir P.D.
Barronet: By the late Reverend Mr. Thomas Rogers, A.M. Quarto, Price 6 d.

8. Tachygraphy: the most exact and Compendious Method of Short and Swift
Writing, that has ever yet been Published by any. Composed by Thomas Sholton.
Author and Professor of the said Art, approved by both the Universities,
Octavo, Price 1 s.

9. Zeiglographa: Or a new Art of Short Writting, never before Published; more
Easy, Exact, short and speedy than any heretofore. Invented and Composed by
Thomas Shelton, Author and Teacher of the said Art. Allowed by Authority,
Octavo, price 1 s.

10 In the Press, and will be published the next Term The Duties of the Closet;
being an Earnest Exhortation to Private Devotion, 12 mo. price 1 s 6 d.

FINIS.

