Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE.

By JOHN POTTER, M. A. and Fellow of Lincoln College, OXON.

Sheldonian Theater

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for Timothy Child at the Whitehart, and John
Jones at the Dolphin and Crown, in St. Paul's Churchyard, LONDON. AD. MDCXCIX.

Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE.

VOLUME THE SECOND: CONTAINING I. The Military Affairs of the GRECIANS: II.
Some of their Miscellany Customs.


-- Simili frondescit virga metallo.
Virgil. Quis reprehendet nostrum otium, qui in eo non modo nosmetipsos
hebescere and languere nolumus, sed etiam, ut plurimis prosimus, enitimur?
Cicero.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for Timothy Child at the Whitehart, and John
Jones at the Dolphin and Crown, in St. Paul's Churchyard, LONDON. A. D.
MDCXCIX.

Imprimatur,

Samuel FITZ-HERBERT ADAMS, Vice-Can, Oxon.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK III.
CHAP. I. Of the Wars, Valor, Military Glory, etc. of the Ancient Grecians.
page 1. CHAP. II. Of their Levies, Pay, etc of Soldiers. 6. CHAP. III. Of the
different sorts of Soldiers. 10. CHAP. IV. Of the Grecian Arms and Weapons,
with their Military Apparel. 20. CHAP. V. Of the Officers in the Athenian and
Lacedemonian Armies. 56. CHAP. VI. Of the several Divisions, and Forms of the
Grecian Army, with other Military Terms. 61. CHAP. VII. Of their manner of
making Peace, and declaring Wa^, their Ambassadors, etc. 71. CHAP. VIII. Of
their Camps, Guards, Watches, and Military course of Life. 77. CHAP. IX. Of
their Battles, the General's Harangues, the Sacrifices, Music, Signals,
Ensigns, the Word, and Way of ending Wars by single Combat, etc. 81. CHAP. XX.
Of their Sieges, with the most remarkable of their Inventions, and Engines used
therein. 97. CHAP. CXI. Of the Slain, and their Funerals. 107. CHAP. CXII. Of
their Booty taken in War, their Gratitude to the Gods after Victory, their
Trophies, etc. 116. CHAP. XIIII Of their Military Punishments, and Rewards,
with their manner of conveying Intelligence. 125. CHAP. XIV Of the Invention,
and different sort of Ships. 129. CHAP. XV. Of the Parts, Ornaments, etc. of
Ships. 135. CHAP. XVI. Of the Tackling, and Instruments required in Navigation.
141. CHAP. XVII. Of the Instruments of War in Ships. 147. CHAP. XVIII. Of the
Mariners, and Soldiers. 149. CHAP. XIX. Of the Naval Officers. 155. CHAP. XX.
Of their Voyages, Harbors, etc. 160. CHAP. XXI. Of their Engagements, etc. by
Sea. 167. CHAP. XXII. Of the Spoils, Military Rewards, Punishments, etc. 171.
BOOK XIV.
CHAP. I. Of the Care the Grecians had of Funerals, and of Persons destitute
thereof. 173. CHAP. II. Of the Ceremonies in Sickness, and Death. 188. CHAP.
III. Of the Ceremonies before the Funeral. 195. CHAP. IV. Of their Funeral
Processions. 206. CHAP. V. Of their Mourning for the Dead. 212. CHAP. VI. Of
their manner of Interring, and Burning the Dead. 225. CHAP. VII. Of their
Sepulcres, Monuments, Cenotaphia, etc. 237. CHAP. VIII. Of their Funeral
Orations, Games, Lustrations, Entertainments, Consecrations, and other Honors
of the Dead, etc. 247. CHAP. IX. Of their Love of Boys. 262. CHAP. X. Of their
Customs in expressing their Love, their Lovepotions, Incantations, etc. 266.
CHAP. XI. Of their Marriages. 285. CHAP. XII. Of their Divorces, Adulteries,
Concubines, and Harlots. 320. CHAP. XIII. Of the Consinement, and Employments
of their Women 335. CHAP. XIV. Of their Customs in Childbearing, and managing
Infants. 343. CHAP. XV. Of their different sorts of Children, Wills,
Inheritances, the Duties of Children to their Parents, etc. 362.
Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE. BOOK III.
CHAPTER I. Of the Wars, Valor, Military Glory, etc. of the Ancient Grecians.
THE ancient Grecians were an innocent and unpolished sort of Mortals, wholly
unacquainted with the modern, and more refined Arts of War and Peace. Persons
of the highest Birth and Quality, and whom they phansy'd to be descended from
the Race of the Immortal Gods, had little other business to employ their Hours,
beside tilling the Earth, or feeding their Flocks and Herds; and the rapine of
these, or some other petty Concerns, which was looked on as a generous and
heroical Exploit, occasioned most of the Wars: so famous in their Story.
Achilles in Homer tells Agamemnon, that 'twas purely to oblige him, he had
engaged himself in so long and dangerous a War against the Trojans, from whom
he had never received any just cause of Quarrel, having never been despoiled of
his Oxen, or Horses, or had the Fruits of his Ground destroyed by them Iliad.
^. v. 152.
: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
For though I here against warlike Trojans fight,
It Is not to vindicate my injured Right;
Since they by impious Theft have never detained
My Oxen, Horses, or on Pthia's Land
Destroyed my Fruits; for me, the craggy Way
Over pathless Mountains, and the boisterous Sea
Secure from what Invasion they would make:
But it is, ungrateful Man, it is for thy sake,
TO advance thy Triumphs that I hither come,
That thou with greater State may lord it home.
Mr. Hutchin.

And the simplicity of their Conduct may be sufficiently evinced, as from
several other Instances, so by those especially, where an Achilles, an Hector,
or an Ajax are introduced opposing themselves to vast Numbers, and by the force
of their own Valor putting to flight whole Squadrons of their Enemies. Nor is
the Poet to be thought blameworthy, or to have transgressed the rules of
probability in such Relations; which, though perhaps strange and incredible in
our Days, were no doubt accommodated to the manners of the Times, of which he
wrote. For even in the Sacred Story we find it recorded, that a single Goliath
defied all the Armies of Israel I Sam. XVII. 11, 14.
, and with a big look, and a few arrogant Words, put so great terror into
them, that they fled before him.

Notwithstanding this, in the revolution of a few Ages, Greece became the
celebrated Mother of the bravest, and most experienced Soldiers in the World:
For being cantoned into a great number of little independent States, all which,
though bordering upon one another, were governed by different Laws, and
prosecuted contrary Interests, it became the Seat of continual Wars; every
Hamlet being ambitious of enlarging it is Territory, by encroaching upon it is
neighbour-village, and contending for the addition of a few Lands with no less
heat and fury, than if whole Kingdoms had been the Prize: The consequence
whereof was, that the Grecians, being from their childhood inured to Martial
Affairs, and having to their native Bravery added long and constant Experience,
were rendered as well in good Order and Discipline, as true Courage and Valor,
superior to most other Nations. They became a terror to all the Countries
round about them, and with small Numbers often put to flight vast multitudes of
the Barbarians: The Persians frequently experienced the sad effects of it in
the loss of numerous Armies, and at length of the greatest Empire in the World.
And (to enumerate no more Instances in a thing so well known) the
Carthaginians, though Men of great Courage, and excellently skilled in the Art of
War, being worsted in Sicily by Timoleon the Corinthian in several Encounters,
and by unequal numbers of Men, were driven into an admiration of the Grecian
Valor; and forced to confess, that they were the most pugnacious and
insupportable of Mankind; and forthwith made it their business to entertain as
many of them as they could procure, in their Service Plurarchus Timcleanse.
.

But though almost all the Grecians had their share in Military Glory, yet were
the rest far inferior to the Lacedaemonians, who by the Laws of their Country
were under an obligation to make War their Profession; they never applied
themselves to any Art, or Employment, or the exercise of Trade, which they
accounted unworthy of Generous and Freeborn Souls; but, committing all such
cares to the Helots, who were a gentiler sort of Slaves, spent their Time in
manly Exercises, to render their Bodies strong and active. They were also
accustomed by hard Diet, by Stripes, and other severities, patiently to undergo
any hardships, to endure Wounds, to encounter any Dangers, and, if the Honor
of their Country so required, to throw themselves into the Arms of Death
without Fear, or Regret. Yet were they not so imprudent or foolhardy, as to
court Dangers, or Death; but were taught from their childhood to be always
prepared either to live, or die, and equally willing to do either; as appears
from those Verses, cited by Plutarch (...).
to this purpose; (...)
(...)
They died, but not as lavish of their Blood,
Or thinking Death it self was simply good,
Or Life: both these the strictest Virtue ^y'd.
And as that called, they gladly lived, or (...).
Nor was this Indifferency to Life or Death only discoursed of amongst them, as
a point of mere Speculation; but carefully and seriously instilled into their
tender Years, and always embraced as one of the first Principles of their
Actions; which begot in them such an undaunted Courage, and so firm and
unmovable a Resolution, that scarce any thing composed of Flesh and Blood was
able to stand before them. This extraordinary and unparalleled Bravery, being
adorned and strengthened with the wisest Conduct, and the most perfect Skill in
all the Stratagems of War those Times were capable of, has rendered them famous
in Story, and examples of Military Virtue to all succeeding Ages: For (these
are Plutarch's Telopida
words) the Lacedaemonians were most expert and cunning in the Art of War, being
trained up and accustomed to nothing more than to keep themselves, from
Confusion, when their Order should be broken; to follow any Leader or
Righthandman, so rallying themselves into Order; and to sight on what part
soever Dangers press.

It is therefore by no mean* to be wondered, that foreign and vastly remote
Nations should be desirous to entertain the Laceacmonians into their Service;
that Cyrus the Younger should think That the readiest and most effectual Method
to advance himself to the Empire of Persia: That Crasus, the wealthy King of
Lydia, and several of the Egyptian Monarchs, though surrounded with numerous
Forces of their own, should never esteem themselves secure without assistance
from Sparta; or that the Sicilians, Thracians, Carthaginians, with the
Cyrenaeans, and many others, were beholding to it for Protection, and
Deliverance from powerful Enemies. And for the Grecians themselves, whenever
any of their little States were in danger of being swallowed up by their more
powerful Neighbors, we find them having Recourse for Aid to the Spartans, who
were a common Refuge to the oppressed, and restrained the Ambitious Invaders of
other Men's Rights.

Hence likewise it came to pass, that in all Confederacies they were looked on
as the principal Associates; and in all Wars carried on by public
Contributions, they challenged the chief Command as their right and peculiar.
Nor could any Exigency prevail with them to depart from that Claim, or resign
it to the greatest of Princes: Gelon, King of Sicily, though promising to furnish
them with large Supplies against the Barbarians, on condition he might be
declared Captain General of the Grecian Forces, was rejected Herodotus lib. VII.
. Yet we find, that after the Victory over Mardonius at Plataeae, Pausanias the
Lacedaemonian General, having by his excessive Severity, and Tyrannical
Behavior to the rest of the Soldiers rendered the Spartans very odious, in
the end they revolted to the Athenians, the gentle and courteous Carriage of
whose Commanders, Aristides and Cimon, had endeared them to all the rest of the
Grecians: And here the Magnanimity of the Lacedaemonians was wonderful; For when
they perceived that their Generals were corrupted, and their Minds too much
elevated and puffed up by the greatness of their Authority, they left off
sending any more of them to the Wars, choosing rather to have Citizens of
Moderation, and that persever'd in their ancient Manners and Customs, than to
be honored with the Superiority of all Greece Plutarchus Aristide.
. But this Misfortune did not put an end to the Lacedomonian Greatness; for we
find them in a little time re-assuming their ancient Spirits, and disdaining
even Alexander himself (though submitted to by the rest of the Grecians, and
declared their General against ( Persia) for their Superior: Which is the
reason, that in the Monuments erected after the Persian Victories, and bearing
the Names of Alexander and the Grecians, the Lacedaemonians were excepted by
Name, as having no share in that Honor Plutarchus Alexandre, Arrianus De
gestis Alexandri lib 1.
.

The Athenians alone were able to dispute with the Lacedaemonians this
Prerogative; some few times excepted, when some unusual Success raised any of
the other States beyond their ordinary Grandeur; as it happened to the Thebans,
who, from a mean and despicable People, were by the Conduct of Epaminondas and
Pelopidas advanced to an Equality, is not a Superiority over the most
flourishing Cities of Greece.

Notwithstanding these, and some other Obstacles, the Lacedaemonians for the
most part made good their Pretensions, and, in most Wars carried on by a
Confederacy, were Generals of all the Landforces; but were at length
constrained to leave the Dominion of the Seas to the Athenians; who having laid
out their whole Strength in sitting out a Navy against Xer^es, for a long Time
reigned sole Lords of the liquid Element: During which Season we find a Decree
put so^th by their Senate, wherein it was ordered, That the Command of all the
Naval Forces of Greece should belong to Athens; but the Land armies should obey
a General from Sparta Xenophon (...) lib. VII.
. But the Rival Cities could not be long content with this equal distribution
of Power, each being jealous of the other's Greatness, and thinking her self
best able to govern the whole jurisdiction; till at length the Athenians,
having their whole Fleet, except twelve Trireme-Gallies, destroyed at once by
Lysander the Spartan Admiral, in the famous Battle at Aegos-potamus, were
constrained to own the Lacedaemonians for Sovereigns both at Sea and Land
Xemphon (...). lib. VI. Plutarchus Lysandro.
.

But the Lacedaemonians were not long able to maintain this Command; for the
Athenians, having recruited their Naval Forces, and engaged Evagoras the King
of Cyprus, and Pharnabazus the Persian Emperor's Lieutenant to their Interest;
by their Assistance, and the singular Conduct of their own Admiral Conon, gave
them so great an overthrow at Cnidus Isocrates pro (...), in Phili^pum,
Panamenaica, Xenoph^n (...) lib VI. Plutarchus (...).
, that they never after pretended to contest the Sovereignty of the Seas;
contenting themselves with the chief Command at Land, which the Athenians
suffered them to enjoy without farther molestation; both Cities being weary of
the Contention, and convinced at length of the Truth of what had been commonly
observed, That Fortune was most favorable to the Lacedaemonians by Land, but in
Sea-engagements sided with the Athenians Xenophon (...) lib. VII.
. This seems not to have been without reason, the Athenians by the
commodiousness of their Situation being disposed, and, as it were, invited by
Nature to apply themselves to Naval Affairs; whereas the Lacedaemonians were
placed at a greater distance from the Sea, and more inclined to Land-service,
(to which they were inured from their tender Years) than to venture themselves
on the Ocean, to which they had never been accustomed; for Lycurgus their
Lawgiver expressly forbad them Plutarchus Institut. La^cnices.
to visit foreign Countries, out of a wellgrounded fear, lest his Citizens
should be corrupted by the conversation of Strangers, and forsake that
excellent platform of Government, he contrived for them: And it happened to
them as he had wisely foreseen; for no sooner had Lysander rendered them
Sovereigns of the Seas, when they began by degrees to leave off their ancient
Customs, and sensibly to degenerate from the Virtue and Glory of their
Ancestors Demoslinenes Orat in Philip. III.
.

CHAPTER II. Of their Levies, Pay, etc. of Soldiers.
THE Grecian Armies consisted for the most part of free Denizons, whom the Laws
of their Country obliged, when arrived at a prefixed Age, to appear in Arms,
upon the summons of the Magistrate, or Commissioned Officer. In some places
they were more early admitted to the Wars, in others later; the Athenians were
sent at twenty, the Spartans seldom till thirty: The younger Men in both
Cities, with those, who by reason of their Age were discharged from Military
Service, were left at home to defend their Habitations.

Some Persons were excused by reason of their Age; for having spent their Youth
and Strength in serving their Country, it was but reasonable to discharge them
from farther Service, that they might end their Days in Peace. After threescore
Years it seems to have been usual in most places to allow them Liberty of
retiring. Others were exempt on account of their Function; such were at Athens
(...), the Farmers of the public Customs Demosthenes in Nearam.
; and several of the holy Orders, with those that were appointed to dance at
Bacchus's Festival Idem Midiana.
.

Others were excluded from-serving in the Wars; such were the Slaves, and such
others as lived amongst them, but were not honored with the Freedom of their
Cities. These were never admitted, except in cases of extreme Danger, when
there remained no other means of preserving the Commonwealth. Of this Custom I
have already given a large Account in one of the foregoing Books Lib 1 Cap. X.
.

All that served, were entered into a public List, or Register; whence the
Levy was called (...); and to make a Levy, (...), or (...). Amongst the
Primitive Grecians, it seems to have been frequently made by Lots, every Family
being obliged to furnish out a certain number, and filling up their proportion
by the Chance of Lots: Whence Mercury in Homer liad (...).
, pretending to be one of the seven Sons of Polyctor the Myrmidon, adds, that
he was appointed by Lots to follow Achilles to the Trojaen War, (...)
'Twas I, who when the Lots were drawn,
Was doomed to follow Peleus's mighty Son.
For the appointment of all Persons of a certain Age to be ready to serve in
the Wars, seems only to be an Institution of later Ages; whereas all such like
things were formerly managed at the pleasure of the Supreme Magistrate.

The Soldiers were all maintained at their own expenses; no Name was more
opprobrious than that of a Mercenary, it being looked upon as a Disgrace for
any Person of ingenuous Birth and Education to serve for Wages. For all this,
it was not permitted any Person to absent himself, except upon reasons allowed
by the Law; and whoever was found thus to have transgressed, was at Athens
deprived of his Voice in all public Business, and in a manner of all other
Rights of Citizens, and was forbidden to enter into any of the public Temples
Aeschines (...), Demosthenes Timocrates.
. And lest any of the Persons appointed to serve should make their escape, we
find they were branded in the Hand with certain Marks, called (...), to which
Custom Saint Paul is thought to allude in his Epistle to the Galatians Cap VI,
17.
, where speaking of the wounds he had received in his Christian Warfare, he
tells us, that he bore in his body the (...), or Marks, of the Lord JESUS.

The Carians were the first that served in Greece for Pay Strabo, He'ychius,
(...) Author.
, and have thereby rendered their Name infamous to Posterity; being represented
by all the Writers of those Times, as a base and servile Nation; insomuch that
(...) and (...), are Proverbial Epithets for Persons of abject and
pusillanimous Tempers, or servile Condition Hesychius.
; and (...), is a synonymous term for Slaves; as in that Proclamation at the
end of the Athenian Festival Anthesteria, whereby the Slaves were commanded to
be gone out of Doors; (...)
Be gone, ye Slaves, the Anthesteria are ended.
Thus they despised the poor Carians for introducing a Custom, which in a few
Ages after was so far from being looked upon as unworthy their Birth, or
Education, that we find it practiced by the whole Nation of the Greeks, who not
only received Pay for serving their own Commonwealths, but listed themselves
under foreign Kings, and fought their Battles for Hire; their chief Magistrates
not disdaining to accompany them in such Expeditions. Several Instances of this
sort might be produced, were not that famous one of the Great Agesilaus's
condescending to serve Ptolemee, King of Egypt, instead of numbers of others.

The first that introduced the Custom of paying Soldiers at Athens was
Pericles, who, to ingratiate himself with the Commonalty, represented how
unreasonable it was, that Men of small Estates; and scarce able to provide for
their Families, should be obliged to neglect their Business, and spend what
their Industry had laid up, in the public Service, and thereupon preferred a
Decree that all of them should have Subsistence money out of the Exchequer
Ulpranus in Orat. De Syntaxi.
; which seems to have been received with general Applause. What Sum they daily
received cannot easily be determined, it being increased, or diminished as
occasion required. At first we find the Foot-Souldiers had two Oboli a Day,
which in a Month amounted to ten Drachms Demosthenes Philipp. I.
. What we read in Thucydides Lib. III.
of the Soldiers that garrisoned Potidaea, to every one of which was allotted
a Dram a Day, with another to a Servant for attending upon him, must not be
understood, as if their ordinary Pay was of that value, that being only to the
common Seamen of Athens three Oboli, to those that manned the Sacred Vessel
called (...), and the Foot-Souldiers, four; whence (...) is a Proverbial
Expression for a Soldier's life Eustath. Odyss. (...).
; and (...) for serving in the War. The Horsemen's Pay was for the most part
thirty Drachms a Month, that is a Dram a Day; this we find to have been
termed (...) Saidu^ V
.

The ordinary Method of raising this Money, was by imposing a Tax on the whole
Commonwealth, whereby all Persons were obliged to contribute according to the
value of their Estates. But this was done only, when the public Treasury was
exhausted, and the constant Revenues from Tributary Cities, public Lands,
Woods, Mines, or from Fines and Amercements were not sufficient to desray the
charges of the War. In cases of greater Necessity, the Richer Citizens at
Athens were obliged to extraordinary Contributions, and there appears to have
been a generous and laudable Emulation amongst the Men of Quality in that City,
who voluntarily offered more than was required of them, and contended which of
them should most largely contribute toward the Honor and Preservation of
their Native Country.

Confederate Wars were maintained at the common Charge of all the Allies, every
one of whom was obliged to send forth a proportion of Men; as we find practiced
in the Trojan War, which was the first, wherein the whole Country of Greece
united against a foreign Enemy. Sometimes they were carried on by public
Contributions of Money, levied by Persons delegated by the common consent of
the Confederates, which was only the Practice of later Ages; the primitive
Wars, wherein the Soldiers served at their own Expense, and supplied their
Necessities out of the Spoils of their Enemies, being managed with less charge
to the Public. The first Tax, or Tribute of this Nature that we find paid by
the Grecians, was after the Expulsion of Xerxes out of Greece, when they
agreed to make an Invasion upon their common Enemy, under the conduct of the
Athenians: For then Aristides the Athenian, at the general desire of the
Greeks, surveyed the whole Country and Revenue, and assess'd all particular
Persons Town by Town, according to every Man's ability: Thus he taxed them four
hundred Talents, to which Pericles added about a third part more; for we find
in Thucydides, that in the beginning of the Peloponnesian War, the Athenians
had coming in from their Confederates six hundred Talents. After Pericles's
Death, being increased by little and little, it was at length raised to the sum
of thirteen hundred Talents Plutarchus Aristide.
; all which was managed at the Discretion of the Athenians.

CHAPTER III. Of the different sorts of Soldiers.
THE Armies were composed of various sorts of Soldiers, their Gross, or Main
Body usually consisted of Footmen, the rest rode some in Chario^s, some on
Horseback, others upon Elephants.

The Foot-Souldiers we find distinguished into three sorts; the first and
Principal of which were termed (...) Suidas v. (...).
, being such as bore heavy Armor, engaging with broad Shields, and long Spears.

2. (...), were Light-armed Men, who fought with Arrows, and Darts, or Stones
and Slings, annoying their Enemies at a distance, but were unfit for close
Fight. They were in Honor and Dignity inferior to the Heavy-arm'd Soldiers;
and therefore when Teucer in Sophocles quarrels with Menelaus, he is scoffingly
reproved by him in this manner, O (...) Sophocl. Ajac. v. 1141.
.
This Archer seems to think himself somebody.
It seems to have been frequent for them, having shot their Arrows, to retire
behind the Shields of the Heavy-arm'd for Protection; for so we find the same
Teucer doing in Homer Iliad. 6. v. 266.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Teucer the ninth from these at length appeared,
And all his Bows for certain Deaths prepared;
Lurked behind Ajax's Shield the Hero stood,
Which whensoe'er the Warlike Chief removed,
Around on all he casts his angry Eyes,
Threatening Destruction to his Enemies;
But when he saw or wounded one, or slain,
Back he betook him to his Shield again.
So timorous Boys, approaching Ills to shun,
With eager haste to careful Mothers run.
Mr. Hutchin.

3. (...) Sai^as loc. cit. Aelianus.
, though frequently comprehended under the (...) as opposed to the (...), where a
middle sort between both, being armed with Shields and Spears, but far
inferior in bigness to those of the Heavy-arm'd Men. From their narrow Shields
called (...), they received their Name.

The Horsemen amongst the Ancient Grecians were not very numerous, being only
such as were possessed of Estates, and able to furnish out Horses a^ their own
Charge. Hence both at Athens and Sp^^ta we find (...), or Horsemen, to have
composed the second Order in the Commonwealth, being placed above the
Commonalty, and next to those of the highest Quality and Fortune; The same is
recorded of the Roman Equites, and (to mention no more) we are told by
Herodotus Lib. V.
, that among the Chalcidians none but Rich Men were admitted into that Order.
Afterward, when Men of Estates began to court Ease and Pleasure, and thought
it more advisable to furnish out a Horseman, and maintain him at their proper
Expenses, than to venture their own Persons; they retained indeed their former
Name, but the Honor of Serving on Horseback was lost Xenophon (...) lib VI.
.

Who it was, that first instructed Mankind in the Art of Horsemanship, is not
agreed on by the ancient Writers of Fables; some attributing it to the Amazons
(...) Orator.
, others to the Centaurs Palaphatus lib. I.
, others to Bellerophon Plinius lib. VII. cap. LVI.
; others, lastly (to trouble you with no more) ascribe the Honor of it to
Neptune Homerus in Hymn. Sophocles Oedipo.
, the first Creator of this Animal; for which reason we find the various
Epithets (...) Pausanias Ach^icu.
, I (...) Pindarus Pyth.
, (...) Lycophron Cessandr.
, (...), etc. conferred upon him by the Poets, and Mythologists.

Whoever obliged Mankind with the first Invention of this Art, seems to have
left it very imperfect; for in those early Ages it is probable they understood
not the Method of governing Horses with Reins, and Bits, but managed them only
with a Rope, or Switch, and the Accent of their Voice; this we find to have
been the Practice of several other Nations, as the Numidians Silius lib. I.
, Getulians Idem lib. II.
Lybians Stra^o lib. XVII.
, and Mas^ylians of whom Lucan speaks thus Lu^anus lib. IV.
, Et gens quae nudo residens Massylia dorso,
Ora levi flectit fraenor^^ nescia virga^.
Without a Saddle the Mas^ylians ride,
And with a tender Switch their Horses guide.
Afterward Bridles came into Fashion, of which the most remarkable were those
called Lupata, having Bits of Iron, not unlike Wolves Teeth, and therefore
called in Greek (...), in Latin Lupi: whence Horace Lib. I. Od. VIII.
-- Gallica ne lupatis
Temperet ora fraenis.
Not with the sharper Bits
Manage the unruly Horse.
The first Invention of them is by Statius attributed to Neptune, -- Neptunus
equo, si certa priorum
Fama patet, primus tencris laesisle lupatis
Ora, and littoreo domuisse in pulvere sertur.
Neptune, if we may credit give to Fame,
First taught with Bits the generous Horse to tame.
By others to the Lapithae, or Centaurs, who inhabited a Town in Thessaly,
called Pelethronium: Thus Virgil Georgic. III 115.
, Fraena Pelethronii Lapithae, gyrosque dedere
Impositi dorso --
The Lapithae of Pelethronium rode
With Bridles first, and what their use was showed.
Though some are of opinion that the Poet speaks of Bridles, as invented not by
the Lapithae, but a Man of that Nation, whose Name was Pelethronius, to whom we
find P^iny also attributing the Invention of Bridles, and Harness Lib. VII.
cap. LVI.
: The last of these the Greeks term (...), and (...), which were made of diverse
sorts of Stuffs, as Leather, Cloth, or the Skins of wild Beasts.
Parthenopaeus's Horse is covered with the Skin of a Lynx in Staius; Aeneas's in
Virgil with a Lyon's Aen. VIII.
, -- quem fulva leonis
Pellis obit --
Covered with a Lyon's Skin. --
Sometimes we find them adorned with rich and costly Clothing; as in the same
Poet Aen. VII.
, Omnibus extemplo Teucris jubet ordine duci
Instratos ostro alipedes, pictisque tapetis,
Aurea pectoribus dem'sia monilia pendent.
For every Trojan straight it is decreed,
That sprightly Cour^ers be in order led,
Adorned with costly Trappings, to whose Breasts
The Golden Poitrels hang. --
Of the Saddles in use amongst us we find no mention in any ancient Writer; as
neither of the Stapia, or more properly Subex pedaneus, or Stirrup, which does
not appear to have been used till these later Ages; there being no notice taken
of any such thing in any Author, that I know of, before Eustathius, who
flourished about five hundred Years ago, and in his Commentaries upon Homer
has mentioned an Instrument of this sort. In former Ages they supplied the
want of such helps by their Art, or Agility of Body^punc; being able to leap on
Horseback, as the Heroes in Virgil Aen. XII.
, -- Corpora salin
Subjiciunt in equos --
And by a Leap bestride their Horses.
Or for their greater convenience, the Horses were taught submissively to bow
their Bodies to the Ground, and receive their Riders upon their Backs P^llux
lib. I. cap. XI.
, as we find practiced as well in Greece, as by the ancient Spaniards Strab^
lib. III.
, and other Nations. Hence Silius speaks of the Horse of Claelius, a Roman
Knight in this manner Lib. X.
, Inde inclinatus collum, submissus and armos
De more, inflexis praebebat scandere terga
Cruribus --
Downwards the Horse his Head, and shoulders bent,
To give his Rider a more fair ascent.
Sometimes we find them leaping up by the help of their Spears, or other
things. Several other Methods were used by Men of weak, and unactive Bodies:
Some getting up on the Backs of their Slaves Volatereanus Epit. Xeno^hon.
; others by the help of short Ladders; both which Support were termed (...).
Lastly, we find the Highways filled with Stones erected for this purpose;
which is said to have been done in Italy by Gracchus Plutarchus Graechu.
; and in Greece was always one part of the business of the Overseers of the
Roads Xenophon Hipparcho.
.

Let us now return to their Military Affairs, where we shall find it disputed,
whether the Warriors of primitive Ages were carried to the Field in Chariots,
or on Horseback: Lucretius indeed tells us, that the first Heroes were mounted
upon Horses, whereas Chariots were only a later Invention Lib. V.
, Et prius est reppertum in equi conscendere costas,
Et moderarier hunc fraenis de^traque vigere,
Quam bijugo curru belli tentare pericla.
Mounted on well-rein'd Steeds in ancient Time,
Before the use of Chariots was brought in,
The first brave Heroes fought. --
But we are informed by Palaephatus, that Chariots were first in use; the
Lapithae, who flourished about Hercules's Time, being the first that attempted
to ride upon Horses, a thing strange and unheard of by the Grecians in those
Days, who viewed them not without amazement, imagining them to have been
Monsters compounded of the different shapes of Men and Horses, or Bulls, which
they frequently backed instead of Horses; whence we have the Fables of the
Centaurs, and Hippocentaurs. And it is more than probable, that at the time of
the Trojan War, the custom of Riding and Fighting upon Horses was not commonly
received by the Grecian^; since the Heroes of Homer, whose Authority must in
such cases ever be held Sacred, are always introduced into the Battle in
Chariots, never on Horseback.

The Chariots of Princes, and Heroes were not only contrived for Service, but
Ornament; being richly embossed with Gold, and other Metals, as we read of
Orsines the Persians's in Curtius Lib. X.
, and several of Homer's, as that of Rhesus (...). ^.
, (...)
Silver and Gold his Chariot did adorn.
And another of Diomedes Iliad. V.
, (...)
Chariots richly adorned with Gold and Tin.
They were likewise adorned with curious Hangings; whence we read of Lycaon's
Chariot Iliad. V.
, -- (...)
(...). --
Like Wings it is Hangings are expanded wide.
And Achilles's the Poet calls (...) Iliad. X.
.

The Chariots in Homer are drawn for the most part by two Horses coupled
together; that of Achilles had no more, the Names of his Horses being only
Xanthus and Balius. So Lycaon's Iliad. V.
, -- (...)
(...) --
Two well-pair'd Steeds to every Chariot stand.
And Aeneas's in Virgil Aenid. VII. v. 280.
, Absenti Aeneae currum, geminosque jugales.
A Chariot, and two sprightly Steeds are sent
To absent Aeneas. --
To these two they sometimes added a third, which was not coupled with the
other two, but governed with Reins, and therefore called (...), etc. but in
Homer usually (...), and the Rein wherewith he was held in (...). The same
Custom was practiced by the Romans, till the time of Dionysius the
Halicarnassian Antiquit. Romans lib. VII.
, though left off in Greece long before. In the eighth Iliad, Hector's Chariot
seems to be drawn by four Horses for there the Hero thus bespeaks 'em, (...)
And however some ancient Critics will have the two former to be no more than
Epithets of the later, because Hector afterward speaks them in the Dual
Number, (...) --
Yet it is evident from other places, that even in Homer's time it was
customary to have Chariots drawn by four Horses; as when he tells us, the
Phaeacian Ship shap^^ her course, -- (...), Odyss. V.
.


Every Chariot carried two Men, whence it was termed (...), Eustathius.
; though that word does not in it is strict and proper acceptance denote the
whole Chariot, but only that part, wherein the Men were placed. One of these
was called (...), because he governed the Reins, which in those days was not a
Servile, or ignoble Office, but frequently undertaken by Men of Quality; for we
find Nestor Iliad. V.
, Hector Iliad. ^.
, and several others of Note employed in it; and that not on extraordinary
occasions, but frequently, some of them making it their Profession. Yet the
Charioteer was inferior, if not always in Dignity, at least in Strength and
Valor to the Warrior, who was called (...), and had command of the other, and
directed him which way to drive, as Eustathius observes Iliad. ^.
. When he came to encounter in close Fight, he alighted out of the Chariot, as
we find every where in Homer, and the rest of the Poets. So Hercules and Cyenus
about to engage, -- (...) Hesiodus Scuto
.
Leapt from their Chariots on the Ground.
And Turnus in Virgil Aeneid X.
, -- Desiluit bijugis, pedes apparat ire.
Dismounts his Horse, and fits himself to walk.
When they were weary, which often happened by reason of their Armor, being
heavyer than any other, they retired into their Chariots, and thence annoyed
their Enemies with Darts, and missive Weapons.

Beside these, we find frequent mention in Historians of Chariots called Currus
salcati, and (...), because armed with Hooks, or Scyths, with which whole Ranks
of Soldiers were cut off together. But afterward it being considered, they
were never of any use but in plain and open Ground, and were frequently turned
back by affrighted and ungovernable Horses upon their own party, to it is
confusion and ruin, several Methods also being contrived to defeat or elude
their Force, these and all other Chariots were wholly laid aside. Ac^^rdingly,
when Military Discipline was carried to it is height, the sometimes they were
brought into Battles by Barbarians, as may be observed of the Persians in
Curtius, yet we never find the Grecians make any use of them, or much damaged
by them; but contemning that old and unskilful Method of Fighting, they chose
rather to ride on Horseback, which Custom seems to have been received in a
short time after the^ Heroic Wars.

Of all the Grecians the Thes^alians have the greatest Name for Horsemanship,
and in all Wars we find their Cavalry most esteemed. The Colophonians had once
by many remarkable Actions arrived to such a pitch of Glory, as to be looked on
as Invincible; In all long and tedious Wars their Assistance was courted, and
the Party that obtained Supplies from them, was certain of Success and Victory:
Insomuch that (...), and in Latin Colophonem imponere was used Proverbially for
putting a Conclusion to any Affair Strabo lib. XIV
. The Lacedaemonians were but meanly furnished with Cavalry, and till the
Messenian Wa^s it does not appear that either they, or the rest of the
Peloponnesians employed themselves in Horsemanship, but reposed their chief
Confidence in Foot Pausanias lib. IV.
; Peloponnesus being a Mountainous and Craggy Country, and therefore unfit for
Horsemen Plato
, who in such places become almost useless in Fight. But the Messenians being
subdued, the Spartans carrying their Arms into other Countries, soon found the
great occasion they had of Horse to support and cover their Foot; and in a
short time supplied that Defect, by instructing their Youth in Horsemanship; to
which end we find they had Masters in that Art, called (...) Hes^ebius.
. But the greatest part of their Cavalry was furnished from Seiros Xemphon.
(...). lib. IV.
, a Town not far distant from Sparta, the Inhabitans of which claimed as their
proper Post, the left Wing in the Lacedaemonian Armies Th^cydide. lib. V.
. Attica was likewise an hilly Country, and therefore not designed by Nature
for breeding Horses: we find accordingly the Athenian Cavalry to have been
exceeding few in Number, consisting only of ninety-six Horsemen: For the whole
Athenian Nation being anciently divided into forty-eight Naucrariae, we are
told by Pollux, that the Number of Horses, each of these were obliged to
furnish to the War, was no more than two. And therefore it is no great wonder if
the M^des thought them deprived of reason, when at the (...) of Morathan they
had courage to encounter a strong and numerous Army with so small, and
appearingly contemptible a (...) Herod^tus.
. Having afterward expelled the ^edes and Persians (...) of (...), and raised
themselves to a flourishing Condition, they increased the Number of their
Cavalry to three hundred; and not long after, having once more restored Peace
to their City, and established it in great* Power and Splendor than before,
they augmented them to twelve hundred, and armed at the same time an equal
Number of Men with Bows and Arrows Aeschines Orat. de falsa legatione,
A^docides Orat. de pace.
, of which they had before no greater plenty than of Horses; For both then, and
afterward, the strength of most of the Grecian Armies consisted in their
heavy-arm'd Foot.

The (...) admitted none to serve on Horseback, till he had undergon a strict
probation; and if any Person was found to have fraudulently insinuated himself
into the List, upon Conviction he was declared (...), and disfranchis'd Lysias
Orat. de ordine deserto.
. This consisted, with respect to the Men, in a Search after their Estates, and
observation of their Strength and Vigor of Body: For no Persons were entered
into the List, but such as had plentiful Possessions, and were in good Plight
of Body Xenophon.
. Those that were found to be infirm, and worn out with Age, or Service, were
branded with a mark called (...), which was a token of their Discharge
Hesyclnus.
. In Horses, they observed their obedience to their Riders, and such as they
found ungovernable, or fearful, were rejected: This was examined (...), by the
found of a Bell, or some other instrument of that nature: Whence (...) is
expounded (...), to try, or prove; and (...) is the same with (...), unprov'd.
Such Horses likewise as were beaten out with long service, they branded upon
the Jaw with a mark, frequently termed (...) Hesychius.
, being the figure of a Wheel, or Circle, and sometimes (...), whereby the
Beast was released from farther service.

We meet with several Titles and Appellations of Horsemen, most of which were
derived from the variety of their Armor, or different manner of fighting, as
that of (...), who annoyed their Enemies with missive Weapons at some distance,
(...), with oth^^, the distinction of all which is sufficiently intimated in
their Names.

(...), sometimes by mistake, or corruption, called (...) Suidas, Pollax, lib I
cap X. n. V.
, were such as for convenience had two Horses, on which they rode by turns.
They were sometimes termed (...), because they lead one of their Horses; which
was not a late contrivance, but practiced soon after the Heroical Times, as
appears from Homer's Ilial. o^ 684.
mentioning it, -- (...)
(...)
Nor does he ever fall, though at full speed
He leap from one upon the other Steed.


(...), first instituted by Alexander the Great, were a sort of Dragoons, and
accommodated with Armor something heavyer than that of ordinary Horsemen, but
not quite so weighty as that of the Foot-souldiers; to the end they might be
ready to serve either on Horseback, or on Foot; for which reason they had
servants attending to take their Horses, whenever the General commanded them to
alight Vollux loc. cit.
.

They were also distinguished into (...), and (...), heavy, and light armed,
after the same manner with the Footmen. The (...), or Curassiers, were not only
fortified with Armor themselves, but had their Horses guarded with solid
Plates of Brass, or other metals, which from the Members defended by them
received different names, being called (...), etc. Idem eodem cap.
, sometimes they were composed of Skins fortif^^ with plates of metal,
curiously wrought into Plumes, o^ other Forms. Thus we find one of Virgil's
Hero's armed his Steed; Aen. XI. v. 770.
Spumantemque agitabat equum, quem pellis ahenis
In plumam squamis auro conserta tegebat.
He spurred his generous Horse, whose Clothing was
A Skin beset with Plates of Gold and Brass
Made in the Fash'on of a costly Plume.


They were likewise bedecked with various Ornaments, viz. with Bells, as we
find Rhesus's Horses in Euripides; with Clothing of Tapestry, Embroidery, and
other curious Work; with rich Collars, and Trappings, or what the Latins call
phalcrae, the Gre^ (...) which some will have to be an Ornament for the
^o^e-head, others for the Jaws^ nor are there wanting, who think (...) to
signify all the Ornaments belonging to Horses.

Of Camels and Elephants, which are so much talked of in the Wars of some
Countries, we have no Mention in the Grecian Story before the Times of
Alexander, when we find a great number of Elephants transported from the
Eastern parts of the World. These were wont to carry into the Battle large
Towers, in which ten, fifteen, and as some affirm, thirty Soldiers were
contained, who annoyed their Enemies with mi^ive Weapons, themselves being
secure, and out of danger Philostratus Vita^ Apollonsi lib. I. cap. VI.
. Nor were the Beasts idle, or useless in Engagements; For beside that, with
their Smell, their vast and amazing Bulk, and their strange and terrible Noise,
both Horses and Soldiers were struck with Terror and Astonishment, they acted
their parts courageously, trampling under Feet all Opposers, or catching them
in their Trunks, and tossing into the Air, or delivering them to their Riders
Curtius lib. VIII.
. Nor was it unus^^ for them to engage with one another with great Fury, which
they always doubled after they had received Wounds, tearing their Adversaries
in pieces with their Teeth Pelybius lib V.
. But in a short Time they were wholly laid aside, their service not being able
to compensate the great Mischiefs frequently done by them: For though they were
endu'd with a great measure of Sagaciousness, and approached nearer to Human
Reason than any other Animal, whereby they became more tractable to their
Governors, and capable to pay obedience to their Instructions; yet being sore
wounded and pressed upon by their Enemies, they became ungov^rnable, and
frequently turned all their Rage upon their own Party, put them into confusion,
committed terrible Slaughters, ^^d delivered the Victory to their Enemies; of
which several remarkable Instances are recorded in the Historians of both
Languages.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Grecian Arms and Weapons, with their Military Apparel.
THE Authors of Fables tell us, the first Person, that put on Armor, was Mar^
who perhaps for no other reason was honored with the Title of God of War; it
being very frequent with ^he ancient Heathens gratefully to acknowledge their
obligations ^o the first Contrivers of any profitable Invention, by ascribing
them unto the number of their Deities, and decreeing to them the perpetual Care
and Sovereignty of those useful and ingenious Arts, or Contrivances, whereof
they were the first Authors. The Work^an employed by Mars, was Vulcan, at that
time a Master-finith ^n the Isle of Lemnos, and so eminent in his Profession,
that Posteri^y advanced him among the Gods, and honored him with the
Super^ntendency and Protection of his own Trade: but his Countrymen the
Lemnians were not so fortunate; for they stand represented to ^ll Ages as
common Enemies of Mankind, and branded with all ^he marks and characters of
Infamy, for so execrable and perni^ious a Device. Whence t^ Poets have fixed
upon them the Name of (...), to continue the memory of the Harm they did ^o
Mankind. Thus Homer Iliad. ^. prope sinem.
; (...)
Turned out of Heaven the Lemnians me received.
Their Country likewise was called (...), as we find in A^ollonius Argon. II.
; (...)
To Lemnos, otherwise Sinteis called,
They sailed.
From the same original are derived those common Proverbs, (...), great and
intolerable Evils: (...), a fatal, or mischie^ous Hand: And (...), to have a
cruel and bloody Look Eustathius Iliad. ^. p. 119. Edit. Basil.
. Though some will by no means allow this Character to have been given to the
Lemnians for their Invention of Arms, but ^ather for the frequent Piracies, and
Outrages committed by them upon Foreigners, or for other Reasons: Whereas they
tell us that Liber, or Bacchus was the first that introduced into the World the
use of Weapons Isidorus Orig. lib. IX. cap. III.
.

The Arms of all the primitive Hero's were composed of Brass, as appears from
Homer, who is herein followed as well by the ancient Poets, both Greek and
Latin, as all other Writers that give account of those Times. Pansanias has
endeavored to prove this by a great number of Instances Laconicis.
; it is reported in Plutarch (...).
; that when Cimon the son of Mil^iades conveyed the Bones of Theseus from the
Isle of Scyros to Athens, he found interred with him (...) sword of Brass, and
a spear with an Head of the same Metal. More Examples would be superfluous,
since we are expressly told by Hesiod, that there was no such thing as Iron in
those Ages, but their Arms, all sorts of Instruments, and their very Houses
were made of Brass Oper. and Dieb.
; (...)
(...)
Not yet to Men Iron discovered was,
But Arms, Tools, Houses were composed of Brass.
Whence it came to pass, that after the World was acquainted with the use of
Iron, the Artificers, and their occupation still retained their old Names. Thus
we are told by Aristotle Poetica.
, that (...) denotes an Iron-smith: And (to trouble you with no more Instances
in a thing so commonly known) Plutarch Camilla, (...).
applies the word (...) to the making of Iron Helmets.

Some of their Arms were composed of Tin, especially their Boots; as we read of
A^hillers's in the eighteenth Iliad. This Metal was likewise frequently used in
other parts of their Armor, as appears from Agamemnon's Breast Plate Iliad's.
, and Aeneas's Shield Iliad. ^.
.

Several other Metals were made use of; Gold and Silver were in great esteem
among them, yet the most illustrious Hero's used them only as graceful
Ornaments; Those that had their whole Armor composed of them, are usually
represented as more addicted to effeminate and delicate Arts, than manly
Courage, and Bravery. Glaucus's Arms were indeed made of Gold, but the great
Diomedes was content with Brass. Amphimachus, who entered into the War with
Golden Weapons, is compared by Homer to a trim Virgin Iliad, ^ prope finem.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Trickt up in Arms of Gold for horrid War,
Like some trim Girl, does Nemion's son prepare,
The vain Amphimachus; but not that show,
Nor Pomp could ward off the unerring blow,
But by Aeacides deprived of life,
His Arms were seized by the more skillfull Chief.
Mr. Hutchin. ^n like manner the Persians, having given themselves over to
soft^ess and Pleasure, engaged with the rough and sturdy Grecians, ^ichly
adorned with Gold and Jewels, and became an easy Prey unto them. The Grecian
Hero's, though not so unpolished, as to debarr themselves the use of these
Ornaments, yet were not so excessively pro^use of them, nor applied them to the
^ame Ends and Purposes: Achilles's Shield so curiously engraved by Vulcan is a
Lecture of Philosophy, and contains a description of almost all the works of
Nature. The Arms of other valiant Princes are frequently adorned ^ith
representations of their noble Exploits, the History of the Actions of their
Ancestors, or Blessings received from the Gods; ^r filled with terrible Images
of Lions, or Dragons, and rendered ^right and shining to strike terror and
amazement into their Ene^^ies, according to that of Homer Iliad. ^.
; -- (...)
(...) --
The amazing Luster terrified the sight.
So it is reported of our British Ancestors, that they painted themselves with
diverse forms of Animals, thinking thereby to appear more terrible to their
Enemies.

The ancient Grecians were always armed, thinking it unsafe to ^dventure
themselves abroad without a sufficient defense against Aggressours. Hence
Aristotle has rationally inferred, That they were a barbarous and unciviliz'd
Nation: For being educated in ^he deepest Ignorance, and having very little
sense of that Justice and Honesty, to which all Men are obliged by Nature's
eternal and immutable Sanctions, being also in a great measure without the
restraint of Human Laws, all Persons thought they had a just Title to whatever
they could by any means take into possession, which they had no other method to
secure, but that whereby ^hey obtained it; and resigned their claim, whenever a
more po^ent Adversary exhibited his Pretensions. The Seas were filled with
Pirates, the Land with Robbers, who made a prey of whatever came to their
hands, and frequently made incursions into Countries, which they spoiled and
depopulated, and, if their Force was great enough, drove out the Inhabitants,
and compelled them to seek new Seats. By Men of this Prosession Io, Europa,
Gammede, and many others were stolen; which put Tyndarus into such a fear for
his Daughter Helen, that he caused all the young Princes, that made their
Addresses to her, to bind themselves by a solemn Oath to recover her, if ever
she should be conveyed away. The Sea, we are informed by Thucydides Lib. 1.
, was freed from Piracies by Min^os King of Crete, who with a powerful Navy
maintained for many years the sovereignty of it. But the Land was still
infested, and therefore when Theseus designed to make his first journey from
Trazen to Athens, Plutarch tells us, That his Relations would have persuaded
him to go by Sea; For (says he) it was at that time very dangerous to travel by
Land to Athens, no place of the Country being free from Thieves and Murderers:
For that Age produced a sort of Men, for strength of Arms, swiftness (...)
Feet, and vigor of Body excelling the ordinary rate of Men, and in Labors and
Exercises indefatigable; yet making use of these Gifts of Nature to nothing
good, or profitable to Mankind; but rejoicing, and taking pride in Insolence,
and pleasing themselves in the Commission of barbarous and inhuman Cruelties,
in seizing by force, whatever fell into their Hands, and practicing upon
strangers all manner of Outrages; who imagined that Civility, and Justice, and
Equity, and Humanity, (which they thought were commended by many, either for
want of Courage to commit Injuries, or Fear of receiving them) nothing at all
to concern those, who were most daring, and strong Plutarchus Thesea.
. Of these indeed Hercules and Theseus, and other generous and publick-spirited
Princes in a great measure freed the Country: But before that, 'twas not to be
wondered, if the Grecians always wore Arms, standing upon their guard,
especially since in those Days few of them were united into large Towns, but
lived retiredly in Country-seats, or at the best in small and defenseless
Hamlets. This Custom was first laid aside at Athens, the occasion and necessity
thereof being first removed in that City Thu'ydi^es Lib 1.
: For Historians generally agree, that the Athenians entertained the decent
Rules of Civility and Humanity, were modeled into a regular Form of
Government, and enjoyed the happiness of wholesome and useful Laws before the
rest of the Grecians.

Let us now return to the description of the Grecian Arms, which are
distinguished into two sorts, some of them being contrived for their own
Defense, others to annoy their Enemies. The primitive Grecians, we are told
Furipidu Sc^^liastes.
; were better furnished with the former, whereas the Barbarians were more
industrious in providing the latter: The Generals of these being most concerned
how to destroy their Enemies, whilst the Grecians thought it more agreeable to
the Dictates of Human Nature to study how to preserve their Friends* For which
reason Homer always takes care to introduce his brave and valiant Hero's well
armed into the Battle, and the Grecian Lawgivers decreed punishments for those
that threw away their Shields, but excused those that lost their Swords, or
pears, intimating hereby, that their Soldiers ought to be more careful to
defend themselves, than to offend their Enemies Plus^^dius Pelopida.
.

First let us take account of their Defensive Arms, as fitted to the several
members of the Body, beginning at the Head, which wa^ guarded with an Helmet,
called in Greek (...), etc. This was sometimes composed of Brass, or other
Metals; as Menelaus's in Homer, -- (...)
(...) --
He put his Headpiece on, composed of Brass.
And very frequently of the Skins of Beasts, which gave occasion to those
different appellations, derived from the names of Animals, whereby it signified
in Homer, as (...), and others, of which none is more common than (...), which
wa^ composed of a (...)'s Skin; (...) tells us 'twas (...), a Water-dog, and
was so frequently used by the Ancients, that we find it sometimes taken for the
Name of an Helmet, though consisting of another sort of Mat^er: Thus Homer Iliad.
^.
, -- (...)
(...) --
He put on's Helmet of a Bull's Hide made.
These Skins were always worn with their Hair on; and to render them more
terrible and frightfull, the Teeth were frequently placed grinning on their
Enemies. Thus the Soldier in Virgil Aenoid. VII. v. 666.
, Ipse ^edes tegmen torquens immane leonis,
Terri^^ili impexum seta cum dentibus albis,
Indurus capiti, sic regia tecta subibat.
He shakes his Lyon's Skin, whose grisly Hair
And dreadful Teeth create in all a Fear,
Thus having fortified his martial Head,
The Royal Roof he enters.
Homer likewise arms Ulysses in the same manner Iliad. ^. v. 261.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
His leathern Helmet on his Head he placed,
Whose inside with the strongest Thongs was laced;
But all the outward parts were fortified
With the white Teeth of Boars. --
The forepart of the Helmet was open, for the Hero's all entered into the
Battle with Faces uncovered; To the side was fixed a String, whereby it was
tied to the Warriour's Neck: This was termed (...), whence Homer speaks of
Paris thus Iliad. ^.v. 371.
; (...)
(...)
The well-wrought string, which tied his Helmet on
Under his Chin* now choked the Champion.
Some of its parts receive their names from the members guarded by them, as
(...), that part which covered the Eyebrows, and the rest in like manner. The
little Lappet erected over the Brow was by a Metaphorical term called (...),
the pent-house. But the most remarkable of all the parts in the Helmet was it is
Crest, termed (...), and (...) Hesye^ius, etc.
, which was first used by the Carians Herodotius Clions, Strabo lib. XIV.
, and thence called by Alcaeus (...), (...)
Shaking his Carian Crest.
For the Carians were once famous for Military exploits, and obliged the World
with this, and several other Inventions; hence we are told by Thucydides Lib. 1.
, that it was customary for them to reposite a little Shield and an Helmet in
the Graves of their Dead. Some will have (...) to be distinguished from (...),
that signifying the Com^s, this the Plume six'd to it Suidas; etc.
, but others allow no difference between them. The former of these was composed
of various materials, most of which were rich and chargeable, being designed as
an ornament to the Helmet. The other likewise was adorned with diverse sorts of
Paint, whence Pollux gives it the Epithets of (...) Lib. 1. cap X.
. Homer has enriched it with Gold Iliad. ^ 610.
, (...)
(...)
A strong and trusty Helmet next he made
Which when he would rightly seated on his Head,
The curious part colored Golden Crest
In beauteous form he over the Helmet placed.
Virgil's Hero has his whole Helmet of Gold, and his Crest painted with red
Aeneid. IX. 49.
, -- maculis quem Thracius albis
Portat equus, cristaque tegit galca aurea rubra.
Streaked with large spots of white the Thracian Steed
Carried the Hero, who had armed his Head
With Golden Helmet, and Crest painted red.
The Crest was for the most part of Feathers, or the Hair of horses Tails, or
Mains; whence we read of (...). Thus Homer Iliad. ^ v. 382.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Like some bright Star the crested Helmet shone,
The gilded Hairs, which Vulcan round the Cone
Had placed, were all in sportfull order moved.
The common Soldiers had only small Crests; the great Officers, and all
persons of Quality were distinguished by Plumes of a larger size; and
frequently took a pride in wearing two, three, or four together. Suidas will
have Geryon to have been famous in Poetry for three Heads, on no other account,
but because his Helmet was adorned with three Crests. Virgil describes Turnus's
Headpiece after the same manner Aen^id. VII. v. 785.
, adding also to it the figure of a Chimaera, Cui triplici crinita juba galea
alta Chimaeram
Sustinet --
Whose triple-crested Helmet did sustain
A terrible Chimaera.
This Helmet was called (...); when it was surrounded with Plumes, (...); and
when adorned with four, (...); Thus Apollonius Lib. III.
, (...)
A fourfold Plume with dazzling luster shone,
Whose nodding Top o'erlook'd the dreadful Cone.
The design of these was to strike terror into the Enemies; whence that of
Homer Iliad. III.
, -- (...)
For the same reason Pyrrhus, King of Epirus, beside a lofty Crest, wore Goat's
horns upon his Helmet Plutar^^us Pyrrho.
. We are told indeed by Suidas, that the (...), or Crest it self was sometimes
termed (...). Nevertheless some of the ancient Helmets had no Crest, or Cone at
all. This sort was called (...), as we learn from Homer Iliad. ^.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...) --
His Bull-skin Helmet on his Head he placed.,
(...) called, 'cause without Cone, or Crest.
Other sorts of ornaments were used in Helmets, as in that called (...), which
name signifies the ridge of a Mountain, and on that account is applied to
Helmets having several (...), eminencies, or parts jutting out Hes^ehius.
. Homer has taken notice of this sort also Iliad. (...).v. 96.
, -- (...)
Nor could his Helmet made of solid Brass
Ward off the Blow. --
Of all the Grecian Helmets the Ba^otian is said to have been the best P^llux
lib. 1. cap. X.
. The Macedonians had a peculiar one termed (...), which was composed of Hides,
and served instead of a Cap to defend them from the cold; according to the
Epigram in Suidas, (...)
(...)
Were I to choose what Armor I would have,
No Helmet sorg'd in brawny Vulcan's Cave,
Nor Bear's, or Lyon's grizly Skin I Would crave;
But an old broad-brim'd Macedonian Cap,
Whose spacious sides should round my Shoulders wrap.
Thus all Attacks with greatest ease I Would bear,
As well the Storms of Weather, as of War.
Mr. Hutchin. Pliny attributes the first Invention of Helmets to the
Lacedaemonians Lib VII. ^^p LVI.
, as likewise of the Sword, and Spear: But this must be understood only of the
peculiar Sorts of those Weapons used at Sparta; other kinds of them being known
before the first Foundation of the Spartan Government, or Nation.

The Heroes took great pride in wearing for their defense the Skins of wild
Beasts, which they esteemed as Badges of their Prowess. Instances of this kind
are every where to be met with in the Poets. Hence Theocritus (...).
, (...)
(...)
Over his neck and back a Lyon's Skin was thrown
Held up by 't's Feet.
Hercules's Lyon's Skin is very famous in story, and Homer's great Princes are
frequently introduced in the same Habit; in imitation of whom the other Greek,
and Latin Poets have armed their Heroes. Thus Acestes in Virgil Aeneid. V. v.
36.
, -- occurrit Acestes
Horridus in jaculis, and pelle Libystidos ^rsae.
Acestes dreadful for his horrid Darts,
And for the Libyan Bear-skin that he wears,
Met them. --


But we find they were not ashamed of using better and stronger Armor for
their defense; the ordinary sorts of which were these that follow:

(...), made of Brass, but lined with Wool, and worn next to the Skin,
underneath the Coat of Mail. This we learn from Homer speaking of a Dart that
pierced through the rest of the Hero's Armor, but was so blunted by the (...)
Iliad. ^. and Eustathius ibid p 345. Edit. Basil.
, that it only rased his Skin, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...), --
She to that part the deadly Shaft conveyed,
Where meeting Clasps a double Breast Plate made;
Straight on his Belt it fell, nor there could stay,
But through both Belt and Breast Plate forced it is way,
And now his last best hopes, the well-lin'd Brass,
Which against Darts his surest refuge was,
It rased, but could not through it make a perfect Pass.
Mr. Hiachin.

(...), or (...), reached from the Knees to the Belly, where it was joined to
the Brigandine Eustasbius ibid.
. But the latter of these names is more frequently taken for the Belt
surrounding the rest of the Armor. Thus Homer Iliad ^.
; (...)
(...)
His rich embroidered Belt he then unbrac'd,
And all his Armor underneath it placed,
Which by the hands of skillfull Smiths was made.
This was so essential to a Warrior, that (...) came to be a general name for
putting on Armor Pa^sanias Bae^ticis.
: Whence Homer introduces Ag^me^^on commanding the Grecians to arm themselves
thus Iliad. (...).
, (...)
Atrides straight commands them all to arm.
The same Poet, when he makes that Hero resemble the God of War in his (...),
is supposed (as Pausanias Loco citato.
tells us) to mean his whole Armor. The Romans had the same custom, as appears
from Plutarch Coriolane.
; And it prevailed also amongst the Persians; whence Herodotus relates, ho^
Xerxes having reached Abdera, when he fled from Athens, and thinking himself
out of danger, did (...), or disarm himself Urania, cap. CXX
. But (...) is a more general name than (...), and signifies the (...).

(...) consisted of two parts, one of which was a defense to the Back, the
other to the Belly; the extreme parts of it were termed (...), the middle (...)
Pollu^, Pausanias ^^: (...).
. The sides were coupled together with a sort of Buttons * Pausanias ibid.
. The same may be observed in Silius Lib. VII.
of the Roman lorica, which differed not much from the Grecian Thorax, whence
(...) is by Hesychius expounded (...). The Poet's words are these, -- qua
sibula morsus
Loricae crebro laxata resolverat ictu.
(...) was an half-thorax, or Breast Plate; which Pollu^ tells us was first
invented by Jason: and we find it very much esteemed by Alexander, who, as
Polyaenus Strateg. lib. IV.
reports, considering that the entire (...) might be a temptation to his
Soldiers to turn their backs upon their Enemies, those being equally guarded
by it with their Breasts, commanded them to lay aside their Backpieces, and arm
themselves with (...), Breast-plates; that so whenever they were put to flight,
their Backs might be exposed naked to their Enemies. The Thoraces were not
always composed of the same stuff; some were made of Line, or Hemp twisted into
small Cords, and close set together, whence we read of ^horaces bilices, and
trilices, from the number of Cords six'd one upon another. These were
frequently used in Hunting, because the Teeth of Lions, and other wild Beasts
were unable to pierce through them, sticking in the Cords; but not so often
carried into Battles, as Pausanias observes Attie^.
; Yet there are not wanting Instances of this sort, for Ajax the son of Oileus
has the Epithet of (...) in Homer Iliad. ^.
, -- (...)
Ajax the less a Linen Breast Plate had.
Alexander likewise is reported by Plutarch to have worn (...), or a
double-twisted ^horax: And Iphicrates caused his Soldiers to lay aside their
heavy and unwieldy Brigandines of Iron, and go to the Field in Hempen Armor,
as Cornelius Nepu has informed us in his Life of that Captain. The ordinary
matter the Thoraces were made of, was Brass, Iron, or other Metals, which were
sometimes so exquisitely hardened, as to be proof against the greatest force:
Plutarch Demetri^.
reports that Zoilus an Artificer having made a present of two Iron Brigandines
to Demetrius Poliorcetes, for an experiment of their Hardness, caused an Arrow
to be shot out of an Engine called Catapulta placed about twenty-six paces off,
which was so far from piercing the Iron, that it scarcely rased, or made the
least impression on it. This Armor was of two sorts; one of which, because it
consisted of one, or two continued pieces of Metal, and was inflexible, and
able to stand upright, was termed (...), or (...) Eustathius.
. Another was composed of a Beast's Hide, according to the Poet, -- (...)
Whence the Latin word lorica is thought to be derived from lorum. This was set
with plates of Metal cast into various forms; sometimes into hooks, or Rings,
not unlike a Chain; sometimes resembling Feathers, or the Scales of Serpents,
or Fishes; to which Plates or Studs of Gold were often added: Whence we read of
(...), etc. And the Greek and Latin Poets frequently mention them. Thus Silius
Lib V
, speaking of the Consul Flaminius; Loricam induitur, tortos huic nexilis hamos
Ferro squama rudi, permistoque asperat auro.
Virgil arms his Heroes after the same manner Aeneid. XI.
; -- Rutulum thoracae indutus, aenis
Horrebat squamis --
Dressed in his glittering Breast-piece, he appeared
Frightfull with Scales of Brass.
The single Plates being sometimes pierced through by Spears, and missive
Weapons, it was customary to strengthen them by setting two, three, or more,
upon one another; Thus Statius The^. VII.
, -- ter insuto servant ingentia ferro
Pectora --
With triple Plates of Iron they defend
Their Breasts.
And in another place Theo. XII.
, Multiplicem tenues iterant thoraca catenae.
The little Chains a mighty Breast Plate join.
Whence in the same manner as from the number of Cords, they were termed
bilices, and trilices; in Greek, (...) and (...). Virgil Ae^^id. III. 467.
, Loricam consertam hamis, auroque trilicem.
The threefold Coat of Mail beset with Hooks and Gold.


(...), Ocreae, were Greaves of Brass, Copper, or other Metal, which they wore
upon their Legs. Whence Hesiod Scuto.
, -- (...)
(...)
The Greaves of shining Brass, which Vulcan gave,
He round his Ancles placed. --
Homer frequently composeth them of Tin Iliad. ^. v. 612.
; (...)
He made his Greaves of beaten Tin.
The Sides were generally closed about the Ancles with Buttons, which were
sometimes of solid Gold, or Silver, as we have it in the same Poet Iliad. ^ v.
330
; (...)
(...)
The curious Greaves he round his Ancles closed
With Silver Buttons.
It is probable, that this piece of Armor, was at first either peculiar to the
Grecians, or at least more generally used by them than other Nations; because
we find them so perpetually called by the Poet, -- (...)


(...) were Guards for their Hands, which we find also to have been used by
some of them, with other Defenses for their Arms.

Aa^xis was a Buckler composed sometimes of Wickers woven together, according
to Virgil Aenei^. VII 632.
; -- flectuntque salignas
Vmbonian crates --
The Bucklers they of Osiers make.
Whence it is termed (...) Hesychius.
. It was likewise of Wood; and because it was expedient that the Warriors
should be able with the greatest ease to wield it, they usually chose the
lightest sort of Wood for this use, such are the Figg, Willow, Beech, Poplar,
Elder-trees, etc. as we are informed by Pliny Not. Hist. lib. VI cap. XL.
But it was commonly made of Hides; whence we find so frequent mention of
(...). These were doubled into several Folds, and fortified with Plates of
Metal. Ajax's Buckler was composed of seven Folds of Hide, and covered with a
single Plate of Brass, as we read in Homer Iliad. ^. v. 222.
; -- (...)
(...)
Made of the Hides of seven well fatted Bulls,
And covered with a Plate of Brass.
Achilles's was guarded with three Folds more, as the Poet tells us, -- and
aes, and proxima rupit
Terga novena boum, decimo tamen orb moratum est.
It pierced the Brass, and through nine Hides it broke;
But could not penetrat^ the tenth.
But the same Hero's in Homer was more strongly fortified by two Plates of
Brass, two of Tin, and a fifth of Gold Iliad ^. 270.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...) --
For with five Plates Vulcan it fortified,
With two of Brass, two Tin, and one of Gold.
The principal parts of the Buckler were these:

(...) or (...), the outmost Round, or Circumference.

(...), and (...), in Latin umbo, a Boss jutting out in the middle of the
Buckler, upon which was fixed another protuberant part termed (...). It was of
great service to them, not only in glancing off, and repelling missive Weapons,
but in bearing down their Enemies themselves: Whence Martial has this allusion,
In turbam incideris, cunctos umbone repellet.
Should you be in a Crowd, your Slave
Would with his Boss repel them all.


(...) was a Thong of Leather, and sometimes a Rod of Metal, reaching cross the
Buckler, whereby they hung it upon their Shoulders, according to the primitive
Fashion Eustathius Iliad. ^. p. 184. Edit. T^^^l.
: Whence Homer Iliad ^.
, -- (...)
(...)
Down from his Shoulders the huge Buckler fell
With it is loosed Thong.
It was sometimes called (...), except this may be understood of the Rod, to
which the (...) was fastened, as Hesychius expounds it, which seems most
probable, and that (...) were Rods, whereby the Bucklers were held, (as Homer's
Scholiast reports) but (...), the Thongs affixed to them, and hung upon the
Warriour's Shoulders, though Eustathius will have them to have been put to the
former use, and to be the ^^me with (...) Loco citato.
. Sometimes the Bucklers were held by little Rings called (...); But at length
most of the Grecians used an Handle called (...), or (...), which though
sometimes spoken of with the former names, and explained by them, was really
different from both, being invented by the Carians Etymologici Auctor, Homeri
Scholiastes, etc.
, and, as it is commonly thought, composed for the most part of small Iron
Bars, placed cross each other, and resembling the letter (...) Eu^^athius loco
citato.
. When the Wars were concluded, and the Bucklers, (as was customary) hung up in
the Temples of the Gods, they took off the Handles, thereby to render them
unfit to serve in any sudden Insurrection: Whence the Poet introduces a Person
affrighted, when he saw them hanging up with Handles, (...)
O sad! The Bucklers Handles have.
Which another had also found fault with a little before; (...)
(...)
Aeschylus speaks of little Bells hung upon Bucklers to strike Terror into the
Enemy, -- (...)
(...)


Most of the Bucklers were curiously adorned, having engraven in them all sorts
of Figures of Birds, and Beasts, especially such as were of generous Natures,
as Eagles, Lions, etc. Nor of these only, but of the Gods, of the Celestial
Bodies, and all the Works of Nature: which Custom was derived from the Heroic
Ages, and continued in later Times, being (as Herodotus) Lib. I.
re^orts) first introduced by the Carians, and from them communicated ^o the
Grecians, Romans, and Barbarians.

The Grecians had several sorts of Bucklers, the most remarkable of which seem
to have been those of Argos, which are thought ^o be bigger than the rest,
whence Virgil compares to them Po^pheme's monstrous Eye, which he tells us was
Aeneid. III
, Argolici clypei, aut Phoebaeae lampadis instar.
Like an Argolick Buckler, or the Sun.
^ost indeed of the ancient B^cklers seem to have covered the ^hole Body,
whence Virgil Aeneid. II.
, -- clypeique sub orb teguntur.
Under their Bucklers covered close they stand.
^yrtaeus enumerates the Members protected thereby, (...)
(...)
Thighs, Legs, and Breast, Belly, and Shoulders too
The mighty Buckler covered.
^his farther appears from the Custom of carrying dead Soldiers ^ut of the
Field upon their Bucklers * whence we read of the fa^ous Command of the Spartan
Mothers to their Sons, H (...), i.e. Either bring this, (meaning the Buckler,)
or be ^ought upon it; meaning they should either secure their Bucklers, ^r
loose their Lives in defending them P^ustarc^u^ Apophthegm.(...).
. And Homer, for the same ^ason calls them (...), and (...), which Eu^thius
interprets (...), i.e. of the same size with a Man Iliad. ^.
.

Their Form was usually round, whence Virgil's clypei orbis, and ^e frequent
Mention of (...), etc. Hence (...) it is outmost Circumference was called (...),
as has been al^^ady observed.

There were likewise Shields of lesser Sizes, and other Forms, ^e use of
several of which came into Fashion after the Heroic Ages.

(...), or (...), was squared, like the Figure rhombus, and (...) used by the
Persians Strabo lib. XV.
.

(...) was oblong, and usually bending inward: It seems ^^ have been the same,
which is called in Pollux Lib. I. cap. X.
(...).

(...) seems to have been shaped like the former, and composed of Hides with
the Hair, whence Grammarians derive it from (...), i.e. hairy. It was very
light, whence (as Eustathius Iliad. ^. p. 433 Ed. Basil.
observes) Homer gives it the Epithet (...), -- (...)
(...)


(...) was a small and light Buckler in the Form of an Ha^moon Isidorus Hispal.
Origin. Lib. XVIII.
, or, according to Xenophon, resembling an Ivy-leaf, an^ first used by the
Amazons. But Suidas will have it to be a kin^ of apiece Buckler, wanting
the (...), or exterior Ring.

This was the chief of all their Arms: The Regard they had o^ it appears both
from what has been already observed concerning their Care in adorning, and
preserving it; and from the common Story of Epaminondas, who having received a
morta^ Wound, and lying under the Agonies of Death, with great Concern inquired
whether his Buckler was safe Ammianus lib. XXV.
. Chabrias the famous Athenian, when his Ship was sunk, rather chose honorably
to resign his Life with his Buckler, than leaving it, to escape to another
Vessel Aemilius Trobisi in Chabris.
. Military Glory indeed being esteemed the greatest that Human Nature was
capable of, they had a profound Regard for all sorts of Arms, which were the
Instruments, whereby they attained it; whence to leave them to their Enemies,
to give them for a Pledge, or dispose of them any dishonorable Way, was an
eternal Disgrace both in Greece Aristophanis Scholiastes Pluto.
, and at Rome, and scarce eve^ to be wiped off, or atoned for.

Thus have I endeavored to give you a Description of the principal of the
Grecian Defensive Arms, which are in general termed (...), and (...).

The only Offensive Arms used by the Ancients, were Stones, or Clubs, and such
as rude Nature furnished them with. They were wholly ignorant of all those
Arts, and Contrivances to destroy their Enemies, which Necessity, and Thirst of
Glory afterward introduced into the World: Thus Horace describes the Fights of
those wild and uncultivated Ages, Unguibus and pugnis, dein fustibus, atque isa
porro
Pugnabant armis, quae post fabricaverat usus.
Sharp Nails, and Fists, the only first Arms were,
Then Clubs came into use, next Men took care
To make more hurtful Weapons.
Lucretius has an elegant Passage to the sam^ purpose Lib. V.
; Arma antiqua manus, ungues, dentesque fuere,
Et lapides, and item silvarum fr^gmina, rami,
Et flammaeque ignes, postque (...) ant cognita primum,
Posterius ferri vis est, aerisque ^ sperta;
Sed prius aeris erit quam ferri cognitus usus.
In the first Ages Nails, Hands, Teeth would please
A Combatant for Arms, and Boughs of Trees,
Or Stones, or flaming Brands with Anger thrown,
Were then the best, and chiefest Weapons known;
Men afterward in Mischief wiser far
Used Ir'n, and Brazen Arms in every War.
Of these Brass first began to kill.
Mr. Dechair. Their Clubs were called (...) and (...), whence Grammarians
conjecture that Squadrons of Soldiers were termed (...), and by the Latins
phalanges, from the primitive Way of Fighting Eustathius Iliad. ^. p. 357. ^d.
Basil. etc.
.

The principal of their Offensive Weapons in later Ages was (...) and (...),
Spear, or Pike, the Body of which was composed of Wood, in the Heroic Times
most commonly of Ash, whence we have so frequent mention in Homer of (...), as
when he speaks of Achilles's Spear Iliad. ^ v. 143.
; (...)
(...)
The Ashen Spear for Murder then designed,
When to his Father with a cruel Mind
Old Chiron gave it.
The Trojans were likewise armed from the same Tree Iliad. ^.47.
; (...)
The Head, (...), was of Metal. So was also the (...), which is so called
either q. (...), from (...), a Cross; or from (...), a Lizard, which it is said
to have resembled, being hollow at one End, where it was fixed into the Bottom
of the Spear; and sharp at the other, Eustathius. Pollux, lib. I. cap. V.
, which being thrust into the Ground upheld the Spear erect, when the Soldiers
rested from the Toil of War. Whence Homer, speaking of Diomedes's Followers
Iliad. ^. v. 151.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...). --
Sleeping about him all his Men they found,
Under their Heads were laid along the Ground
Great Shields, their Spears erected upright stood
Upon their Brazen Points.
Aristotle observes that the same Custom was practiced amongst the Illyrians in
his Days De Art Poetica.
. And it seems to have been common in other Nations, as may appear from the
first Book of Samuel Cap. XXVI. v. 7.
, where Saul is said to have slept with his Spear fixed in the Earth close by
his Head. In Times of Peace they reared their Spears against Pillars, in a long
wooden Case called (...), as we have it in Homer Odyss. ^.
; (...)
(...) --
Against a Pillar in a well-made Case
He hung his Spear.
Virgil speaks something to the same purpose Aenoid. XII. v. 92.
, Exin, quae in mediis ingenti adnixa columnae
Aedibus astabat, validam vi corripit hastam.
Straight he pulls down with all the Force he could,
A Spear, that in the Middle of the House
Was reared against a mighty Pillar.
Of these there were two Sorts, as Strabo has well observed Lib. X.
; The former was used in close Fight, and called (...), for the U^e, and
excellent Management of which the Abantes are celebrated in Homer Iliad. C. v.
543.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
The Abams followed him, whose Bushy Hair
Lies thick behind, Abams, who nev^r fear
Close fights, but bravely strike the Breast-plat^s through
With Athen Spears.
Where you may observe the Signification of the Word (...), which (as the S.
^^iat has observed) is applied to Arms used in in close ^ight; whereas (...)
belongs rather to missive Weapons, which are called by the general Names of
(...), and (...), of which Kind was the other sort of Spears; Whence we find
one making this Boast, (...)
I strike as far with a Spear, as another with an Arrow.
This was frequently used in the Heroic ^uels, where the Combatants first
threw their Spears, and then sel^ to their Swords. Thus Hector and Achilles
Iliad. ^.
, Mene^aus and Paris Iliad ^.
, and the rest of the Heroes attack one another. Theocritus has described the
Combat of Castor and Lyn^eus after the same Manner Idyll. ^^ v. 187.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
First with their Spears began the noble Strife,
Each sought to find an open Pass to Life;
But all in vain, the Shields the Strokes endured,
Their Spears were broken, and the Men secured,
Their Swords they drew, the Blades like Lightning shone
Before the Thunderbolt falls swiftly down,
Now rose their Fury.
Mr. Creech. The (...) had a peculiar sort of Spear called (...), which was
fourteen or sixteen Cubits in Length.

(...), a (...), which, according to ancient Custom, was hung in a B^lt put
round the Shoulders. Whence Homer I^^^d ^.
; (...)
His Silver-hilted Sword about his Shoulders hung.
Hesiod, and the rest of the Poets mention the same Custom Scuto Hercules.
; (...)
(...) --
-- A Brazen Sword
Placed in the Belt, down from his Shoulders hung.
The Belt reached down to their Thighs. Whence Homer's Hero Odyss^^.
; -- (...)
Straight from his Thigh his Sword he draws.
And Virgil's AEneas Aeneid. X. v. 86.
; -- ^^yus ensem
Eripit a femore. --
It may be inquired whether the Sword was hung upon the right Side, or the
left; to which some will reply, That Foot-souldiers were it on the l^ft,
Horsemen on the right; and Josephus Excidii Huro, (...). lib. III.
expressly mentions Horsemen with their Swords on their right Sides: But
whether this was constantly observed, or frequ^ntly varied, as Lipsius Militia
Romana.
has observed of the Roman Sword, (...) easily be determined. The Scabbard was
called (...), close to it was hung a Dagger, or Poniard, called (...), or
(...), according to Eustathius Iliad. ^.
, (...), or (...) and in Homer (...). It was seldom used in Fight, but on all
Occasions supplied the want of a Knife, as appears from the Poet, out of whom I
will give you this one Instance I^^^d ^.
; (...)
(...)
(...) --
Drawing his Dagger, which was always put
Close by his Sword, Atrides straightway cut
Some Hairs from the Lambs Heads.
Possidonius in Athenaeus tells us, the same Custom was practiced by the
ancient Gauls (...) lib XIV.
. Close by this, or rather instead thereof, the Soldiers of lower Ages used a
Dagger called (...), which was borrowed from the Persians (...) in vocibus
Atticis, Pollux, etc.
. They had sometimes another Sword called (...), which was the same with the
Roman ensis falcatus, and our Fauchion, or Scimeter; and was chiefly used by
the Inhabitants of Argos. Not much unlike this were the Lacedemonian Swords,
called, according to Pollux, (...), but, as Xenophon, (...), and, by the
Athenians, (...) Su^^as, Eustatheus (...). etc
: They were bent Fauchion-like, and in Length far less than those commonly used
in other Parts of Greece; The Reason of which Custom being demanded of
Antalcidas; It Is (said he) because we encounter our Enemies hand to hand
Plutarchus Apophthegm.
: And when another Person told Agesilaus in Derision, That a Jugler on a Stage
would make nothing of swallowing their Swords: Well (replied the King) ye with
these little Weapons we are able to reach our Enemies Idem loc. citat. and
(...).
. The only thing farther remarkable in the old Grecian Sword is the Hilt, which
they took a great Pride in adorning, not so much with Silver, and Gold, and
precious Stones, as with Figures of Lions Heads, etc. to make them appear more
terrible to their Enemies.

(...), a sort of Polax: With this Weapon Agamemnon was encountered by Pisander
in Homer I^^^d ^.
-- (...)
(...)
(...) --
The other from his Buckler straightway drew
A curiou^ Brazen A^, whose Handle sew
Could match for Length, for Olive, or for Work.


(...), was not much different from the former, and is joined with it in Homer
I^^^d ^. v 710.
; (...)
(...)
Both Parties fighting close together stood,
And unconcerned alike for Loss of Blood,
Axes and Hatchets used.


Several other Weapons of le^^ Note may occurr in Authors, whereof I shall
mention only one more, and then proceed to the missive Weapons: i^ i^ (...), a
Battoon of Wood, or Iron; from the Use of which the famous Robber Periphetes,
slain by Theseus, was named (...) P^^t^rc^^s Theses, D^^d^rus S^c. lib IV.
; which Title was likewise conferred upon (...), who, as ^omer tells the Story,
made nothing of breaking through whole Squadrons of Enemies with his Iron Club
I^iad. ^. v. 136.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Brave Freuthalion led these on; he wore
The Arms of King Arc^houss before,
Godlike Arcit^ous, Club-beare^ named,
And for his cruel W^^pon greatly famed,
Who with his Club whole Squadrons put to Flight,
But never Spear, or Arrow used in Fight.
Mr. Dechair.

(...), the Bow, the first Invention of which some ascribe to Apollo, who from
the Art of managing this Weapon has obtained diverse Appellations, as
(...),etc. All which, though moral Interpreters force to other Applications, yet
the ancient Authors of Fables referr to this Original. This new Contrivance the
God communicated to the primitive Inhabitants of Crete Diod^^s Sicu^^.
, who are reported to have been the first of Mortals, who understood the Use of
Bows and Arrows (...).
: And even in later Ages the Cretan Bows were famous, and pref^rr'd to all
others in Greece P^^lax lib. I. cap. X.
. Some rather choose to honor Perses the Son of Perseus with this Invention;
and others father it upon Scythes the Son of Jupiter Plinius.
, and Progenitor of the Scythians, who were excellent at this Art, and by some
reputed the first Masters thereof: Thence we find it derived to the Grecians,
some of whose ancient Nobility were instructed by the Scythians, which, as
those Times went, might justly pass for a grand Piece of Education. Thus
Hercules (to trouble you with no more Instance^) was taught by Teutarus a
Scythian Swain, from whom he received a Bow and Arrows of Scythian Make: Whence
Lycophron, speaking of Hercules's Arrows, (...) Cassandr. v. 56. Item ^zetzis
S^^^li ^ ibidem, and Theocrits Scholiastes Idyll. XIII.
.
With Arrows that he had from Teutarus.
And though Theocritus has changed his Tutour's Name into Eurytus, yet he also
was of Scythian Original: and we find the Hero in that Poet armed with a
Mae^tian, i.e. Scythian, Bow Idyll. XIII. v. 56.
, (...)
He went armed with a crooked Bow after the Maeotian Fashion.
Lycophron also arms Minerva with (...), a^ Maeotian Bow, and in the same Place
tell's us of Hercules's Scythian Dragon, whereby he means a Bow, which he
bequeathed to Philocletes for his Care in kindling the Pile wherein he was
burned alive (...). v. 914.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Minerva, who found out the Trumpet's Sound,
Drawing her Arrows with a skillful Hand
She aimed, and shot with a Maeotian Bow.
This crooked Bow the Godlike Hercules,
Whose Arrows, when they slew would always kill,
First used, and then to Philocte^es gave
A Present for the Pile at Dura's Banks.
Mr. Dechair. Both the Poets seem particularly to remark the Incurvation of the
S^ythian Bow, which distinguished it from the Bows of Greece, and other
Nations; and was so great as to form an Half Moon, or Semicircle Ammianus
Marcelimus lib. XX.
. Whence the Shepherd in Athenaeus Lib. X.
, being to describe the Letters in Theseus's Name, and expressing each of them
by some appo^ite Resemblance, compares the third to the S^ythian Bow, (...)
The third was like a S^ythian Bow.
Meaning not the more modern Character (...), but the ancient C, which is
semicircular, and bears the third Place in (...). The Grecian Bows were
frequently beautified with Gold, or Silver, whence we have mention of aures
arcus, and Apollo is called (...), but the Matter of which they were composed,
seems for the most Patt to have been Wood; though they were anciently, S^ythian
like, made of Horn, as we read of Pandarus's in Homer Iliad. ^. v. 1^^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Straight he pulls out an handsome polished Bow,
Once it a wanton He-goat's Horn did grow,
A Goat, that coming from his wonted Rock
He spied, and wounded with a mortal Stroke:
The Dart pierced through his Breast, and straight the Ground
Received him falling by so deep a Wound:
Long were his Horns, and these a Workman wrought,
And made the very Bow, with which he fought;
The Horn he smoothly polished, and affixed
A Golden Nob upon the Top.
Mr. Dechair. Whence Lycophron, who takes a Pride in antiquated and forgotten
Customs and Expressions, speaks thus of Apollo encountering Idas with his Bow
Cassandr. v. 564.
; -- (...)
-- In Battles bent his Horn.
But some ancient Glossographers by (...) would rather understand (...), or the
Bow-string, which was composed of Horses Hair, and therefore called also (...)
Hes^chius.
: To which Custom Accius alludes, Reciprocae tendens nervo equino concita
Tela. --
Drawing the Arrows with an Horse's Hair.
Homer's Bow-strings are frequently made of Hides cut into small Thongs: Whence
we read of (...); (...)
He drew the Arrow by the Leathern String.
As Eustathius observes-upon that Place Iliad. ^. p. 344. Ed. Basil.
. One Thing more is remarkable in their Bows: It is that Part, to which the
String was fixed; 'twas upon the uppermost Part of the Bow, and called (...),
commonly made of Gold, and the last Thing toward finishing a Bow; whence
Homer, when he has described the Manner of making a Bow, adds after all, --
(...)
Hence, Eustathius tell's us, (...) signifies to bring any Affair to an happy
Conclusion.

The Arrows usually consisted of light Wood, and an Iron head, which was
commonly hooked: Whence Ovid De Amore.
; Et manus hamatis utraque est armata sagittis.
Hooked Arrows armed both Hands.
Sometimes they were armed with two, three, or four Hooks: Hence Sta^ius
T^ebaid. lib. IX.
; A p^ra te^geminis acies se condidit uncis.
The Head with three Hooks armed
Entered his Body.
In this Sense likewise Hippocrates's (...) are to be understood. The Heads of
Arrows were sometimes besmeared with Poison; for which Piece of n^^uman Skill
Virgil's Amycus was famous Aeneid. IX. v. 771.
; -- ferarum
^astatorem Amycum, quo non felicior alter
Ungere tela manu, ferrumque armare veneno.
-- Amycus the Man,
Who many a wild and savage Beast had slain,
Famed for his Skill, and for his wondrous Art
In giving double Force to any Dart,
Or Arrow, with his Poison.
This Practice was more frequent in barbarous Nations, but seldom used, or
understood in Greece: Wherefore Minerva in Homer having assumed the Form and
Titles of Mentes King of the Taphians, and Son to Anchialus, pretends that her
Father, out of an extraordinary Love to Ulysles, obliged him with a Quantity of
this deadly Ointment, after he had been at the Pains of a tedious Journey to
Ephyra, to furnish himself, but had been denied it by Ilus the Son of Mermerus,
who (as the Poet tells us) rejected Ulysses's Request out of a Scruple of
Conscience, being afraid that Divine Vengeance would prosecute so criminal an
Action Odyss. ^. v. 260.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
-- When he had Ilus left
Returned from Ephyra; in Hopes to find
Some Poison he for Arrows Heads designed,
Ulysses thither failed, Ilus revered
The immortal Gods, and ^h^refore much he feared
To grant what he desired, but easier f^r
He found Anchialus, who straight took care
To give the killing Poison, that he asked,
For dearly well he loved him.
Mr Dechair. They were usually winged with Feathers, to increase their Speed
and Force, whence Homer's (...) Iliad. ^. v. 116. etc.
, (...) Iliad. ^. v. 171.
, Oppian's (...) (...).
, and (...) (...), ^.
, Sophoc^es's (...) Trachimit.
, with diverse other Epithets, (...) Names to the same Purpose Vide Commentarium
meum in ^ycopi^on. v 56.
. These they carried to the Battle in a Quiver, which was usually closed on all
Sides, and therefore (as Fustathius Iliad. ^ p. 29. Ed. Bas.
observes) joined with the Epithet (...). This with the Bow the Heroes carried
upon their Backs: Thus Apollo in Homer Iliad. ^.
; (...)
Carrying his Bow, and Quiver on his Shoulders.
Hercules is represented by Hes^od in the same Manner Scuto Hercul^^ v 130.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
-- toward his Back
He turned the hollow Quiver, which contained
Great Shafts, who^e Force no Mortal yet sustained,
And did not straight expire.
Likewise the famous Heroin in Virgil Aeneid XI. v. 652.
; Aureus ex humero sonat arcus, and arma Dianae.
The Golden Bow and Arrows loosely hung
Down from her Shoulders.
In drawing Bows the primitive Grecians did not pull back their Hand toward
their right Ear, according to the Fashion of modern Ages, and of the ancient
Persians Procopius de Bell Persi^ lib I.
; but, placing their Bows (...) before them, returned their Hand upon their
right Breast Eustathius Iliad. ^. p. 344. etc. Iliad. ^. p 6^2. Ed Basil.
; which was the Custom of the Amazonian Women, who are reported to have cut off
their Right Breasts, lest they should be an Impediment to them in Shooting; on
which Account their Name is commonly thought to have been derived from the
privative Particle (...) and (...), i.e. from their Want of a Breast. Thus
Homer of Pandarus Iliad. ^. v. 123.
, (...)
Up to the Head the mortal Shaft he drew,
The Bow-string touched hi^ Breast.


There were several sorts of Darts, or Javelins, as (...), called in Homer
(...) Eustashius Odyss. ^.
; (...), and many others; some of which were projected by the Help of a Strap
girt round their Middle, and called in Greek (...), in Latin amentum, the
Action is expressed by the Word (...), which is likewise sometimes used in a
more general Sense for any sort of Darting, though without Straps. The Javelin
thus cast was termed (...); the Custom is mentioned in the Roman, as well as
Greek Writers: Whence Seneca in his Hipp^lytus, Amentum d'gitis tend prioribus,
Et totis jaculum dirige viribus.
The Strap with your Forefinger draw,
Then shoot with all your Strength.


The ancient Grecians were wont to annoy their Enemies with great Stones. Thus
Agamemnon in Homer Iliad. ^. v. 264.
; (...)
(...)
But he to other Ranks himself betook,
And here his Spear, his Sword, and Stones too struck
The flying Enemy.
These were not Stones of an ordinary Size, but such as the joint Strength of
several Men in our Days would be unable to much as to lift. With a Stone of
this Bigness Diom^des knocks down Aeneas in Homer Iliad. ^. v. 3^2.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...). --
-- a vast and monstrous Stone
The brave Tydides took and threw alone,
A Stone it was, so h^^w, and so great,
Not two the strongest ^en could bear the Weight,
As now Men are, but he with Ease it hurled,
And broke Aeneas's Hip.
Ajax likewise, and Hector encountered one another with the same Weapons; and
the latter (as the Poet tells us) had his Buckler broken with a Stone scarce
inferior in Bigness to a Millstone Iliad. ^. v. 270.
; (...)
A Stone so big, you might a Millstone call,
He threw, which made the Shield in Pieces fall.
Nor did the Gods themselves disdain to make use of them; as appears from
Homer's Minerva, who attacked the God of War with a Stone of a prodigious Size,
which had been in former Ages placed for a Landmark Iliad. ^. v. 403.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
-- here stepping back
A Stone, that long had lain to part the Land,
She forces up with her commanding Hand,
A sharp, black, heavy Stone, which, when 'twas thrown,
Struck Mars's Neck; the helpless God falls down
With shivering Limbs.
Virgil has elegantly imitated some of these Passages in his twelfth Aencid V
8^6.
, where he speaks of Turnus in this manner; Ne^ plura ^^atut, sa^um
circum^picit ingens,
Sarum antiqu^m, ingens, campo quod forte jacebat
L^nes agro prositus, ^tem ut discerneret arvis:
Vix Iliad le^ti bis se^ ^ervi^e subment,
Qualia nunc hominum producit corpora tellus:
Ille man^ raptum trepida contorsit in hostem
Ae^i^r in^urgens, and cursu concitus heroes.
He spoke no more, but straight a Stone he spied,
An old prodigious Stone, which to divide
The Lands th^re lay, le^t Q^arrel, might en^ue,
And one should claim w^^ was another's Due.
Should Six the lusti^st Men together try
To bear this Stone, it would their Strength defy,
So weak, so frail the Bodies, that Men wear,
Such puny Men, as now on Earth appear;
He matched it up, and running on him threw
This many Stone.
Mr. Dechair. On all which Relations several modern, especially French Critics
insult with Triumph, imagining them grossly absurd and ridiculous; whilst
forming wh^t they call Rules of Probability from the Manner, of their own
Times, they can scarce meet with one Passage in all the Volums of ancient
Poetry, that does not on some Score or other soully disgust their curious and
distinguishing Palates.

But however the Heroic Fights might be carried on in this Manner, as most of
the ancient Poets wi^ness, yet in nearer Ages, when they tell us M^n's
Strength, and Courage were lessened, but their Policy, and Conduct improved, we
seldom find any Mention of Stones, except in Sieges, where the Defenders
frequently rolled down vast Rocks upon their Enemies Heads. They were likewis^
cast out of several Engines, of which the most common in Field-engagements was

(...) a Sling; which, we are told by some, was invented by the Natives of the
Balearian Islands, where it was managed with so great Art and Dexterity, that
young Children were not allowed any Food by their Mothers, 'till they could
sling it down from the Beam, where it was placed aloft Vege^^^ de re militari
lib I. cap XVI Lucius Florus lib. III. cap. VIII. Diolotus Sl^^^us lib. V.
Strabo lib. III.
; and when they arrived to be of Age to serve in the Wars, this was the
principal of their offensive Arms; it being customary for all of them to be
furnished with three Slings, which either hung about their Necks, according to
Eustathius Commentario in Dionysium.
; or were carried, one on their Necks, one in their Hands, a third about their
Loins Lycephron, ejusque Scholiastes v. 635.
. Hence the Balearian Slings are famous in all ancient Writers; Take only one
Instance out of Ovid M^tamorph. lib II. v. 727.
; Non secus exarsit, quam cum Balearica phonbum
Funda jacit; volat illud, and incandescit cundo,
Et quos non habuit, sub nubibus invenit ignes.
-- He burnt within
Just like the Lead the Balearian Sling
Hurls out; You hear the Bullet whistling fly,
And Heat attends it a^ long the Sky,
The Clouds the Fire, it wants it self, Supply.
Mr. Dechair. It was likewise common in Greece, especially amongst the
Acarnanians P^^lux ^ib I. cap X.
, who were well skilled in managing it, and are by some thought to have
invented it; Others give that Honor to the Aetolians Strab^.
, But none of the Grecians managed it with so great Art and Dexterity as the
Achaians, that inhabited Aegyum, Dyma and Patrae; who were brought up to this
Exercise from their Infancy Liviu^ lib. XXXVIII
, and are thought by some to have excelled the Balearians: Whence it became a
Custom to call any Thing directly levelled at the Mark, (...) Surdas.
. This Weapon was used for the most part by the common, and light-armed
Soldiers: Cyrus is said to have thought it very unbecoming any Officer Xenoph.
Cyro^a^. lib. VII.
; and Alexander endeavoring to render his Enemies as contemptible to his own
Soldiers as he could, tells them, They were a confused and disorderly Rabble,
some of them having no Weapon, but a Javelin, others were designed for no
greater Service, than to cast Stones out of a Sling, and very few were
regularly armed Curtiu^ lib. IV.
. The Form of a Sling we may learn from Dionysius, by whom the Earth is said to
resemble it, being not exactly Spherical, but extended out in Length, and broad
in the Middle: for Slings resembled a platted Rope, somewhat broad in the
Middle, with an Oval Compass, and so by little and little decreasing into two
Thongs, or Reins. The Geographer's Words are these (...). v. 5.
; (...)
(...)
(...). --
It Is Matter seems not to have been always the same; in Homer we find it
composed of a Sheep's Fleece; and therefore one of the Heroes being wounded in
the Hand, Agenor binds it with his Sling Iliad. ^. v. 599.
; (...)
(...)
A Sling of Wool he to his Hand applied,
One of his Servants held it.
Out of it were cast Arrows, Stones, and Plummets of Lead called (...), or
(...), some of which weighed no less than an Attick Pound, i.e. an hundred
Drachins. It was distinguished into several sorts; some were managed by one,
others by two, some by three Cords.

The Manner of Slinging was by whirling it twice or thrice about their Head,
and so casting out the Bullet. Thus Mezentius in Virgil Aeneid. IX. v. 587.
, Ipse ter adducta circum caput egit habena.
Thrice round his Head the loaded Sling he whirled.
But Vegetius commends those as the greatest Artists* that cast out the Bullet
with one Turn about the Head. How far this Weapon carried it is Load is
expressed in this Verse, Fundum Va^rro vocas, quem possis mittere funda.
It Is Force was so great, that neither Headpiece, Buckler, or any other Armor
was a sufficient Defense against it; and so vehement It Is Motions, that (as
Seneca reports) the Plummets were frequently melted.

Lastly, we find mention of Fireballs, or Hand-granado's called (...) etc. One
sort of them are called (...), or (...), which were composed of Wood, and some
of them a Foot, others a Cubit in Length: Their Heads were armed with Spikes of
Iron, beneath which were placed Torches, Hemp, Pitch, or such like combustible
Matter, which being set on Fire, they were thrown with great Force toward the
Enemy's first Ranks Head foremost, whereby the Iron-spikes being fastened to
whatever came in their Way, they burned down all before them Suidas.
: Wherefore they seem to have been of the greatest Use in Leaguers, to demolish
the Enemy's Works; though my Author mentions no such Thing.

Concerning Military Apparel nothing certain, or constant can be related; only
it may be observed, that Lycurgus ordered the Lacedaemonians to cloth their
Soldiers in Scarlet; The Reason of which Institution seems either to have
been, because that Color is both soonest imbibed by Cloth, and most lasting
and durable Xenophon de Rep. Laced.
; Or on the Account of it is Brightness and Splendor, which that Lawgiver
thought conducive to raise Men's Spirits, and most suitable to Minds animated
with true Valor Pluta^chus Institut Laconi^.
; Or, lastly, because 'twas most proper to conceal the Stains of Blood, a Sight
of which might either daunt and despirit the raw and unexperienced Soldiers of
their own Party, or inspire their Enemies with fresh Life, and Vigor
Plutarchus ^oc. citat. Aelianus lib. VI. cap. VI. Valerius Maximus lib. II.
cap. VI.
: Which Eustathius observes to have been well and wisely considered, when he
comments on that Passage of Homer, where the cowardly Trojans upon seeing
Ulysses's Blood flow from his Wound, receive new Courage, and animating one
another, rush with united Force upon the Hero Iliad. ^. v. 459.
; (...)
(...)
-- The Trojans saw Ulysses's Blood
Gush from his Wound, then with new Life inspired
Each stirred the other up, and with joint Force
Rushed on the Hero.
It Is farther remarkable of the Lacedaemonians, that they never engaged their
Enemies, but with Crowns, and Garlands upon their Heads Xenoph^n, item
Plutarchus Lycu^ge.
, though at other Times they were unaccustomed to such Ornaments: Hereby
ascertaining themselves of Success, and, as it were, anticipating their
Victory, Crowns being the ordinary Rewards presented to Conquerours in all the
Parts of Greece. So wonderful, indeed, were the old Lacedemonian Courage and
Fortune, that they encountered their Enemies fearless and unconcerned, joining
Battle with certain Hopes, or rather Assurance of Victory; which was a Thing so
common to them, that for their greatest Successes, they seldom sacrifie'd to
the Gods any more than a Cock: Not were they much elevated when the happy News
arrived, nor made Presents of any Value to the Messengers thereof, as was usual
in other Cities: For after the famous Battle of Mantinea, we find the Person,
that carried the Express of Victory, rewarded with nothing but a good Piece of
powdered Beef Plutarchus Agesilao.
.

The Soldiers usually carried their own Provisions, which consisted for the
most part, of Salt-meat, Cheese, Olives, Onyons, etc. To which End every one
had a Vessel of Wickers Aristo^h^nis Scholiast^s A^harnent.
, with a long, narrow Neck, called (...), whence Men with long Necks are by the
Comedian termed in Derision (...) Pace.
.

CHAPTER V. Of the Officers in the Athenian and Lacedemonian Armies.
THE Grecian Cities being governed by different Laws, the Nature, and Titles of
their Offices, whether in Military, or Civil Affairs, ^nust of consequence be
distinguished. Wherefore, it being an endless Undertaking to recount the
various Commands throughout the whole Grecian Nation, I shall only present you
in this Place with a short View of the chief Offices in the Athenian and
Lacedemonian Armies.

In the primitive Times, when most States were governed by Kings, the supreme
Command belonged to them of Course; and it was one principal Part of their Duty
toward their Subjects to lead them forth in Person against their Enemies, and
in single Combat to encounter the bravest of them at the Head of their Armies.
And it may be observed, that when any Prince through Cowardice, or other Weakness
was judged unable to protect his People, it was customary for them, withdrawing
their Allegiance, to substitute a Person better qualified in his Place: A
memorable Instance whereof we have in Thymates an Athenian King, who, declining
a Challenge sent by Xanthus King of Baeotia, was deposed without farther ado,
and succeeded by a Foreigner, one Melanthius a Messenian, who undertook to
revenge the Quatrel of Athens on the Baeotians Vide Archa^log. nostr. Vol. I.
p. 333.
.

Yet on some Occasions it was not impracticable for the King to nominate a
Person of eminent Worth and Valor to be his (...), or General, who either
commanded under the King, or, when the Emergency of other Affairs required his
Absence, supplied his Place: Which honorable Post was conferred by King
Erectheus upon Ion the Son of Xuthus in the Eleusinian War Pausanias Atti^is.
.

But the Government being at length devolved upon the People, Affairs were
managed after a new Method; For all the Tribes being invested with an equal
Share of Power, 'twas appointed that each of them should nominate a Commander
out of their own Body; This Nomination was made in public, and frequently
lighted upon the same Persons, if they behaved themselves with Courage and
Prudence, and executed their Office for the Safety and Honor of their Country;
Insomuch that it is reported of Phocion, that he was a Com^ander five and forty
Times, though he never su'd, or canvas'd for that Honor, but was always promoted
by the free and voluntary Choice of the People Plusar^^us Phocione.
. Before their Admission to Office they took an Oath of Fidelity to the
Commonwealth, wherein one Thing is more peculiarly remarkable, viz. That they
obliged themselves to inrade the Megarians twice every Year: Which Clause was
first inserted in the Oath by a Decree preferred by Charinus, on the Account of
Anthemocritus an Athenian Herald, whom the Megarians had barbarously murdered
about the Beginning of the Peloponnesian War: This done, the Command of all the
Forces, and warlike Preparations was entrusted in their Hands, to be employed
and managed as they judged convenient; Yet was not their Power absolute, or
unlimited, it being wisely ordered, that upon the Expiration of their Command,
they should be liable to render an Account of their Administration: Only, on
some extraordinary Occasions, it seemed fit to exempt them from this Restraint,
and send them with full and uncontrolable Authority, and then they were styled
(...) Suidas.
: Which Title was conferred on Aristides, when he was General at the famous
Battle of Plataeae; upon Nicias, Alcibiades, and Lamachus in the Sicilian
Expedition, and several others Plutarchus.
. These Commanders were Ten, according to the Number of the Athenian Tribes,
and all called (...), being invested with equal Power, and about the first
Times of their Creation frequently dispatched all together in Expeditions of
Concern and Moment, where every one enjoyed the supreme Command by Days: But
lest in controverted Matters an Equality of Voices should retard their
Proceedings we find an eleventh Person joined in Commission with them, and
called (...), whose Vote, added to either of the contesting Parties, weighed
down the Balance, as may appear from Herodotus's Account of the Athenian
Affairs in the Median War.

But in some Time it was looked on as unnecessary, and perhap^ not very
expedient, for so many Generals to be sent with equal Power to manage military
Affairs: Wherefore, though the ancient Number was elected every Year, they were
not all obliged to attend the Wars; but one, two, or more, as Occasion
required, were dispatched to that Service: The Polemarchus was diverted to
civil Business, and became Judge of a Court, where he had Cognizance of
Lawsuits between the Natives, or Freemen of Athens and Foreigners: The rest
of the Generals had every Man his proper Employment, yet none were wholly free
from military Concerns, but determined all Controversies that happened amongst
Men of that Profession and ordered all the Affairs of War that lay in the City
Demosthenes Philipp.
. Hence they came to be distinguished into two sorts, one they termed (...),
because they administered the City-business; the other (...), from their
Concern about Arms. The latter of these listed and disbanded Soldiers as there
was Occasion Idem Orat. de Epitrierch. Plutarchus Phocione.
, and, in short, had the whole Management of War devolved upon them during
their Continuance in that Post, which seems not to have been long, it being
customary for the Generals, who remained in the City, to take their Turns of
serving in the War Ulpta^us in Mid^anam.
.

(...) were likewise ten, (every Tribe having the Privilege of electing one)
and commanded next under the (...). They had the Care of Marshalling the Army,
gave Orders for their Marches, and what Provisions every Soldier should
furnish himself with, which were conveyed to the Army by public Cryers. They
had also Power to cashire any of the common Soldiers, if convicted of
Misdemeanors. Their Jurisdiction was only over the Foot Lysias Orat. pro
Mantitheo, and de neglecta militia, Aristophanes Scholiast. Avibus.
.

(...) were only two in Number Sigonius de Rep. Athen.
, and had the chief Command of the Cavalry next under the (...) Demosthenes
Midiana.
.

(...) were ten; one being nominated by every Tribe. They were subordinate
Officers to the (...), and invested with Authority to discharge Horsemen, and
to fill up the Vacancies, as Occasion required Lysius in locis citatis.
.

Thus much of the General Officers, the Inferiors usually derived their Titles
from the Squadron, or Number of Men under their Command: as (...), etc. Proceed
we in the next Place to the Commanders of the Spartan Army.

The supreme Command was lodged in one Person, for the Lacedaemonians, however
fond of Aristocracy in civil Affairs, found by Experience that in War a
Monarchical Government was on several Accounts preferable to any other
Isocrates ad Nic^^lem.
: For it happening that once upon a Difference in Opinion between their two
Kings, Demaratus and Cleomenes, the former withdrew his Part of the Army and
left his Colleague exposed to the Enemy, a Law was hereupon enacted, that for
the future they should never command the Army together, as had been usual
before that Misfortune Her^dotus lib. V. cap. LXXV.
. Yet upon great and emergent Occasions, when the Safety and Honor of the
State was in Dispute, they had so much Prudence, as rather by transgressing
the^^ Letter of the Law to secure their Country, than by insisting on Niceties
to bring it into Danger: For we find that, when Agis was engaged in a dubious
War with the Argians and Mantineans, Plistonax his fellow-King, having raised
an Army out of such Citizens, as by their Age were at other Times excused from
Military Service, went in Person to his Assistance Thucydedes lib. V.
.

The General's Title (as some say) was (...) (...).
, which others will have common to all other Military Officers. He was
ordinarily one of the Kings of Sparta; it being appointed by one of Lycurgus's
Laws, that this Honor should belong to the Kings: But in Cases of Necessity,
as in their King's Minority, a Protector, or Viceroy, called (...), was
substituted for the Management of Military, as well as Civil Affairs Xenor^^n
de Repub. Lace^^m.
. 'Twas under this Character, that Lycurgus reformed, and new modeled the
Lacedemonian Polity, and commanded their Armies, during the Infancy of King
Charilaus Plutarch^s ^ycurgo.
. Pausanias also was Tutour to Plistarchus, when he lead the Lacedaemonians, and
the rest of the Grecians against Mardonius, Xerxes's Lieutenant, at Pluaeae
Herodotus, Thacy^t^e^, Platarch^s, Cornel^^s Ne^os (...).
.

This only concerned their Land-armies, for the Laws made no Provision for
their Fleets, their Lawgiver having positively forbidden them to meddle with
marine Affairs. Wherefore when they became Masters of a Navy, they con^in'd not
their Elections of Admirals to the Royal House, but rather chose to commit so
great a Trust to their most able and experienced Seamen; as may appear from
the Instances of Lysander, and several others, who commanded the Spartan
Fleets, though never invested with Royal Power. Nor was it ordinarily permitted
their Kings, when entrusted with Land-armies, to undertake the Office of
Admiral: The only Person honored with those two Commands at the same Time, was
the Great Agesilaus Pluta^chus A^esila^.
.

The King, however limited and restrained when at Home, was supreme and
absolute in the Army, it being provided by a particular precept of the Law,
that all others should be subordinate to him, and ready to obey his Commands
Herodotus lib. VI. Th^cydides lib. V.
. Notwithstanding this, he was not always left wholly to himself, and the
Prosecution of his own Measures, it being customary for some of the Magistrates
called Ephori to accompany him, and assist him with their Advice Xenophon (...)
lib. II.
. To these, on some Occasions, others were joined; When Agis had unadvisedly
entered into a League with the Argians, at a Time, when it lay in his Power to
have forced them to accept of Terms far more honorable to his Country, the
Spartans highly resented his Imprudence, and enacted a D^^ree, that he should
never again command an Army, without ten Counselors to go along with him.
Whether the succeeding Kings were hereby obliged, does not fully appear; but it
seems probable, they were not sent to the Wars without a Council consisting, if
not of the same, however of a considerable Number of the wisest Heads in
Sparta: Agesipolis was attended with no less than thirty Xenopho^ (...) lib V.
; And though the Tenderness of his Age might occasion that extraordinary
Provision, yet in Wars of great Concern, or Danger, and such as were carried on
in remote Countries, Kings of greatest Experience, and most eminent for
Conduct, were not trusted without a great Number of Counselors; For we are
told, that Agesilaus himself, when he made his Expedition into Asia, was
obliged by a Decree of the People to take thirty along with him Plutarchus
Agesilas, and Xenophon.
.

Beside these, the General was guarded by three hundred valiant Spartans called
(...), or Horsemen, who fought about his Person Thacydides lib. V.
, and were much of the same Nature with Romulus's Lifeguards called Celeres, or
Light horse, as Dionysius of Halicarnassus reports. Before him fought all those
that had obtained Prizes in the Sacred Games, which was looked upon as one of
the most honorable Posts in the Army, and esteemed equivalent to all the
glorious Rewards conferred on those Victors in other Cities Plutarchus Lycurgo.
.

The chief of the subordinate Officers was called (...). The Titles of the rest
will easily be' understood from the Names of the Parties under their Command,
being all derived from them: Such as (...), etc.

CHAPTER VI. Of the several Divisions, and Forms of the Grecian Army, with
other Military Terms.
THE whole Army, as compounded of Horse and Foot, was called (...) The Front,
(...), or (...); The right hand Man of which, as in other Places, was (...);
The Wings, (...), ^^ which some make Pan, Bacchus's General in his Indian
Expedition, to have been the first Inventor; The Soldiers herein, and their
Leader, (...); Those in the middle Ranks, (...); The Rear, (...), and the
Person that brought up the Rear, (...), or (...) Orbicius.
; which seem to have been common Names for any others that obtained the like
Places in smaller Bodies.

(...) was a Party of five Soldiers; it is Leader, (...).

(...) of ten; it is Leader, (...): And so of the rest.

(...) consisted of eight, as others, of twelve, or, as some, of sixteen, which
was a complete (...), though some make that to contain no less than twenty-five.
It is sometimes termed (...), or (...), and it is Leader (...).

(...), or (...) was an half (...); It Is Leader, (...), or (...).

(...) was a Conjunction of several (...): Sometimes it is termed (...), which
consisted of four half, or two complete (...), containing thirty-two Men.

(...), however the Name imports only fifty, was usually a double (...),
consisting of four (...), or sixty-four Men: Whence it is Leader was not only
termed (...), but (...), and for (...) we sometimes find (...).

(...), sometimes called (...), consisted of two of the former, containing an
hundred-twenty-eight Men. It Is Commander was anciently called (...), but
afterward the Name of (...) generally prevailed. To every (...) were assigned
five necessary Attendants, called (...), as not being reckoned in the Ranks
with the Soldiers. These were 1. (...), the Crier, who conveyed by Voice the
Words of Command. He was usually a Man of strong Lungs: The most remarkable of
any in Story was Homer's Stentor, who, he tells us, was able to shout as loud
as any fifty Iliad. ^. v. 784.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
Juno there clamours with i^perious Sway,
Like bawling Stentor, when his Lungs gaye way,
Whose Voice would open in a mighty Shout,
As loud as fifty Men's. --
2. (...), the Ensign, remitted by Signs the Officer's Commands to the
Soldiers; and was of use in conveying Things not to be pronounced openly, or
discovered; and when the Noise of War drowned the Cryer's Voice. 3. (...), or
Trumpeter, was necessary, as well to signify to the Soldiers the Will of their
Commanders, when Dust rendered the two former useless, as to animate and
encourage them, so on several other Accounts. 4. (...), was a Servant, that
waited on the Soldiers to supply them with Necessaries. These four were placed
next to the fore-most Rank. 5. (...), the Lieutenant, brought up the Rear, and
took care that none of the Soldiers were left behind, or deserted.


(...), and, according to some, (...), was compounded of two (...), being made
up of two hundred-fifty-six Men. The Commander, (...).

(...), or (...) contained two (...), i.e. five-hundred and twelve Men. The
Commander's Name was (...), or (...).

(...), and (as some think) (...), was the former doubled, and consisted of a
thousand and twenty-four. The Commander, (...), or (...).

(...)four Fronted Phalange against all Attempts of the Enemy


(...), which by some is called (...), by others (...), contained two of the
former, i.e. two-thousand-forty-eight. The Commander, (...), or (...).

(...), sometimes called (...), and, by the Ancients, (...), was compounded of
two (...); and contained four-thousand-fourscore and sixteen, or
four-thousand-thirty-six, according to others. The Officer, (...), etc. (...).

(...), and (as some think) (...), was almost a Duplicate of the former, for it
consisted of eight-thousand, one hundred and thirty two. The Commander's Title
was (...).

(...) contained about two (...), or sixteen-thousand, three-hundred, fours^ore
and four. The Commander, (...).

(...) is sometimes taken for a Party of twenty-eight Men, sometimes of
eight-thousand; but a complete (...) is said to be the same with (...). Several
other Numbers are signified by this Name, it being frequently taken for the
whole Body of Foot, and as often in general for any Company of Soldiers.
Indeed the Grecian Battles were usually ranged into an Order peculiarly termed
Phalanx; which was of such Strength, that it was able to bear any Shock with
what Violence soever charged upon them. The Macedonians were the most famous
for this Way of Imbatteling; Their Phalanx is described by Polybius to be a
square Battle of Pike-men, consisting of sixteen in Flank, and five-hundred in
Front; the Soldiers standing so close together, that the Pikes of the fifth
Rank were extended three Foot beyond the Front of the Battle: The rest, whose
Pikes were not serviceable by reason of their Distance from the Front, couched
them upon the Shoulders of those, that stood before them, and so, locking them
together in File, pressed forward to suppo^t and push on the former Ranks,
whereby the Assault was rendered more violent and irresistible. The Commander
was called (...).

(...) was the Length, or first Rank of the Phalanx, reaching from the farthest
Extremity of one Wing to that of another. It Is the same with (...), etc. The
Ranks behind were called, according to their Order, (...), etc.

(...), or (...), sometimes called (...), was the Depth, consisting in the
Number of Ranks from Front to Rear.

(...), were the Ranks taken according to the Length of the Phalanx.

(...), or (...), were the Files measured according to the Depth.

(...), the Distribution of the Phalanx into two equal Portions, which were
termed (...), etc. or Wings: The left of these was (...), and (...); The right,
(...), etc.

(...), the Body, or middle Part between the Wings.

(...), the lessening the Depth of the Phalanx by cutting off some of it is
Files.

(...), or (...), acies recta, or the Hearse, wherein the Depth exceeded the
Length.

(...) differed from the former, by being broad in Front, and narrow in Flank;
whereas the other was narrow in Front, and broad in Flank Aelian. Tacticis.
.

(...), or obliqua acies, when one Wing was advanced near the Enemies, to begin
the Battle, the other holding off at a convenient Distance.

(...), when the Soldiers were placed back to back, that they might every way
face their Enemies: which Form of Battalia was used, when they were in Danger
of being surrounded.

(...) differed herein from the former, that it was formed lengthways, and
engaged at both Flanks; whereas the former engaged at Front and Rear.

(...), when the Leaders were placed in both Fronts, but the (...), who
followed* the Rear, transplanted into the Middle, so that their Enemies were
confronted on all Sides.

(...) was contrary to the former, having the (...) and their Rear on the two
Sides, and the rest of the Commanders, who were placed at other Times in the
Front, in the Midst facing one another; In which Form the Front, opening in two
Parts, so closed again, that the Wings succeeded in it is Place, and the last
Ranks were transplanted into the former Place of the Wings.

(...) was when both the Phalanx's had their Officers on the same Side, one
marching behind the other in the same Form.

(...), when the Commanders of one Phalanx were placed on the right Flank, in
the other on the left.

(...), when it is Form was changed, as the Ways required, through which it
marched.

Loxe-Phalanx or (...) Fronted Phalange


The Front


The Battle called Plinthium


The Diphalangia


Homoistomus


The Cyrte or Unequal Half Moon.


The Epicampios


The Coelembalos or hollow Fronted ^eda^


The Front


The Induction


(...), represented an Half Moon, the Wings turned backwards, and the main Body
advanced toward the Enemy; or on the contrary.

The same was called (...) and (...), being Unequal, and therefore hollow.

(...), when the Parts of the Battalia stood at an unequal Distance from the
Enemy, some jutting out before others.

(...), when both Wings were extended beyond the adverse Army's Front; When
only one, (...).

(...), called likewise (...), a Battalia with four equal, but not rectangular,
Sides, representing the Figure of a Diamond. This Fig^re was used by the
Thessalians, being first contrived by their Countryman Jason. Indeed the
common Forms of Battalia in Greece, in Sicily also, and Persia, seem to have
been devised after this, or some other Square Aelianus Tacticis, qu^ ubique in
hoc capite consulendus.
.

(...), rostrum, or cuneus, was a Rhombus divided in the Middle, having three
Sides, and representing the Figure of a Wedge, or the Letter (...). The Design
of this Form was to pierce, and enter forcibly into the Enemy's Body.

(...), or Forsex, was the Cuneus transvers'd, and wanting the Basis: It
represented a Pair of Sheers, or the Letter V; and seems to have been designed
to receive the Cuneus.

(...), laterculu^, an Army drawn up in the Figure of a Brick, or Tyle, with
four unequal Sides; it is Length was extended toward the Enemy, and exceeded
the Depth.

(...), Turris, was the Brick inverted, being an oblong Square, after the
Fashion of a Tower, with the small End toward the Enemy. This Form is
mentioned by Homer I^^ad ^.v. 43.
; (...)
Wheeling themselves into a Tower's Form.


(...) had an oblong Figure, but approaching nearer a Circle than Quadrangle.

(...), was an Army extended at length with a very few Men in a Rank, when the
Ways they marched through could not be passed in broader Ranks: The Name is taken
from a Worth that insinuates it self into little Holes in Wood. On the same
Account we find mention of (...), so ranged, as it were, to pierce through the
Passages.

(...) was the ranging Soldiers close together, so that, whereas in other
Battalias every Man was allowed four Cubits Space on each Side, in this he took
up only two.

(...) was closer than the former, one Cubit's Room being allowed to every
Soldier: It Is so called from Bucklers, which were all joined close to one
another.

Several other Forms of Battalia may occurr in Authors, as those drawn in all
the sorts of Spherical Figures. One of these was called (...), first invented
by Ilion of Thessaly, representing the Figure of an Egg, into which the
Thessalians commonly ranged their Horse Aelianus loc. citat.
. It Is commonly taken for any Party of Horse of what Number soever, but
sometimes in a more limited Sense for a Troop of sixty-four.

(...) contained two (...), i.e. one hundred and twenty-eight.

(...) was a Duplicate of the former, consisting of two-hundred-fifty-six: For
they commonly used a sort of Horsemen called (...), or (...), who annoyed their
Enemies with Missive Weapons, being unable to sustain a close Fight by reason
of their light Armor. There was likewise another sort of Tarentine Horsemen,
who, having discharged their missive Weapons, engaged their Enemies in close
Fight. Their Name was derived from Tarentum in Italy, which used to furnish out
Horsemen of these sorts: But whether the Name of this Troop was taken from the
sort of Horsemen, or the Number's being the same with that used by the
Tarentines, is not certain.

(...) contained two of the former, i.e. five-hundred and twelve.

(...) was a double (...), being made up of one thousand and twenty-four.

(...) was the former doubled, containing two-thousand-forty-eight.

(...) was equal to two (...), being composed of four-thousand-ninety-six.

The Lacedemonian Divisions of their Army had peculiar Names.

The whole Army was divided into (...), or Regiments. What Numbers of Soldiers
were ranged in each is uncertain; Some making them five-hundred, others seven,
and some nine Plutarchus Pelopid^.
; But at the first Reformation of the Commonwealth, they seem not to have
exceeded four-hundred, who were all Footmen. The Commander was called (...)
Xenophon de Rep. Laced.
; to whom was added a subordinate Officer called (...) Idem (...). lib. VI.
: The former was Colonel, the latter his Lieutenant.

(...) was the fourth Part of a (...): And though some affirm there were five
(...) in every (...) He^y^^^.
, yet the former Account seems more agreeable to the ancient State of the
Spartan Army: For we are assured by Xenophon, that in every (...) there were
four (...).

(...) was the fourth Part, or, as others, half of a (...), and contained fifty
Men, as appears from the Name. The Commander hereof was styled (...), or (...):
Of these there were* eight in every (...), as the forementioned Author reports.

(...) was the fourth Part, or, as others, the half of (...) contained
twenty-five Men, and so called, because all the Soldiers therein were (...)
Idem
, or bound by a solemn Oath upon a Sacrifice to be faithful and loyal to their
Country: The Commander was termed (...), or (...). Of these Xenophon tells us
there were sixteen in every (...); which, together with his Account of the
(...), and (...), makes it evident that the primitive (...) consisted only of
four-hundred: The Disagreement of Authors herein seems to have been occasioned
by the Increase of the Lacedemonian Army; For in succeeding Ages the Spartans,
having augmented their Forces, still retained their ancient Names, so that the
eighth Part of a (...), though perhaps containing several Fifties, was still
termed (...). The Roman Battalions, in like Manner, however increased by new
Additions, were still called Legiones; which, though at first they contained no
more than three-thousand, were afterward varied as Necessity required, and
consisted of four, five, or six-thousand: The same may be observed of their
Cohortes, Manipuli, Ordines, etc.

There are several other Military Terms, an Explication of some of which may be
expected in this Place.

(...) is the placing of any Company of Soldiers before the Front of the Army;
as (...), when the light-armed Men are drawn before the rest of the Army, to
begin the Fight at a Distance with missive Weapons.

(...) is contrary to the former, and signifies the ranging of Soldiers in the
Rear.

(...), when to one, or both Flanks of the Battle, Part of the Rear is added,
the Front of those, that are added, being placed in the same Line with the
Front of the Battle.

(...), when the Wings are doubled, by bestowing the light-armed Men under them
in an embow'd Form, so that the whole Figure resembles a threefold Door.

(...), or (...), the placing together of different sorts of Soldiers; as when
light-armed Man are ordered to fill up void Spaces between the heavy-arm'd
Companies.

(...) is distinguished from the former, as denoting the Completion of vacant
Spaces in the Files by Soldiers of the same sort.

(...) is a continued Series of Battalions in March, drawn up after the same
Form behind one another, so that the Front of the latter is extended to the
Rear of the former: Whence this Term is sometimes taken for the Rhetorical
Figure Inductio, where certain Consequences are inferred, in a plain and
evident Method, from the Concession of some Antecedents Aristoteles Topic. lib.
I. Quintilianus lib. V. cap. X. Cicero.
.

(...) differs herein from (...), that the Phalanx proceeds in a Wing not by
File, but by Rank, the Leaders marching not directly in the Front, but on one
Side; when toward the left, 'twas called (...): When toward the right, (...).

(...) and (...) are distinguished into four sorts; For when they expected the
Enemy, and marched on prepared for him only on one Side, they were called
(...), or (...): When on two Sides, (...): When on three, (...): When every
Side was ready for an Assault, (...).

The Motions of the Soldiers at their Officers Command were termed (...).

(...), to the right: Because they managed their Spears with their right Hands.

(...), the retrograde Motion, i. e. to the left.

(...), to the left: For their Bucklers were held in their left Hands.

(...) is a double Turn to the same Hand, whereby their Backs were turned on
what before lay to their Faces. There were two sorts of it: 1. (...), whereby
they turned from Front to Rear, which is termed (...), so that their Backs were
toward their Enemies; The Deduction
The Macedoman Countermarche by File
whence it is called (...). It was always effected by turning to the right. 2.
(...), or (...), from Rear to Front, whereby they turned their Faces to their
Enemies, by moving twice to the left.


(...), when the whole Battalion, close joined Man to Man, made one Turn either
to the right, or left.

(...) is opposed to (...), being the Return of such a Battalion to it is former
Station.

(...), a double (...), whereby their Backs were turned to the Place of their
Faces, the Front being transferred to the Place of the Rear.

(...), a treble (...), or three Wheelings.

(...), or (...), to turn about to the Places they were in at first.

(...), or (...), Countermarch, whereby every Soldier, one marching after
another, changed Front for the Rear, or one Flank for another: Whence there are
two sorts of Countermarches, (...), and (...), one by Files, the other by
Ranks; both are farther divided into three sorts.

1. (...), invented by the Macedonians, was thus: First the Leaders of the
Files turned to the right, or left about, then the next Rank passed through by
them on the same Hand, and, being come into the distant Spaces, placed
themselves behind the Leaders of their Files, then turned about their Faces the
same Way: In like manner the third Rank after them, with the fourth, and all
the rest, 'till the Bringers up were last, and had turned about their Faces,
and again taken the Rear of the Battle. Hereby the Army was removed into the
Ground before the Front, and the Faces of the Soldiers turned backward. This
appeared like a Retreat, and was for that reason laid aside by Philip of
Macedon, who used the following Motion in it is stead. 2. (...), invented by the
Lacedaemonians, was contrary to the former; That took up the Ground before the
Phalanx, this the Ground behind it, and the Soldiers Faces turned the contrary
Way; In that the Motion was from Rear to Front, in this from Front to Rear.
Aelian Tact. cap. XXVIII. cum Binghamii notis.
describes it two ways; One was, when the Bringers up first turned about their
Faces, the next Rank likewise turning their Faces, began the Countermarch,
every Man placing himself directly before his Bringer up; the third did the
like, and so the rest, 'till the Rank of File-leaders were first. The other
Method was, when the Leaders of Files began the Countermarch, every one in
their Files following them orderly: Hereby they were brought nearer to their
Enemies, and represented a Charge. 3. (...), or (...), was used by the Persians
and Cretans; it was sometimes termed (...), because managed like the Grecian
chori, which, being ordered into Files and Ranks, like Souldi^r, in
Battle-aray, and moving forward toward the Brink of the Stage, when they could
pass no farther, retired one through the Ranks of another; the whole chorus all
the Time maintaining the same Space of Ground, they were before possessed of;
wherein this Countermarch differed from the two former, in both which the
Phalanx changed it is Place.
(...), Countermarch by Rank, was contrary to the Countermarch by File: In the
Countermarch by File the Motion was in the Depth of the Battalia, the Front
moving toward the Rear, or the Rear toward the Front, and succeeding into each
other's Place; In this the Motion was in length of the Battalia flank-wise, the
Wing either marching into the midst, or quite through to the opposite Wing: In
doing this, the Soldiers, that stood last in the Flank of the Wing, moved
first to the contrary Wing, the rest of every Rank following in their Order. It
was likewise performed three ways: 1. The Macedonian Countermarch began it is
Motion at the Corner of the Wing nearest the Enemies upon their appearing at
either Flank, and removed to the Ground on the Side of the contrary Wing, so
resembling a Flight. 2. The Lacedemonian Countermarch, beginning it is Motion in
the Wing farthest distant from the Enemy, seized the Ground nearest to them,
whereby an Onset was represented. 3. The Chor^an Countermarch maintained it is
own Ground, only removing one Wing into the other's Place.


(...) is to double, or increase a Battalia, which was effected two ways; For
sometimes the Number of their Men was augmented, remaining still upon the same
Space of Ground; sometimes the Soldiers, continuing in the same Number, were
so drawn out by thinning their Ranks, or Files, that they took up a much larger
Space than before. Both these Augmentations of Men, or Ground, being made
either in Length, or Depth, occasioned four sorts of (...), which were made by
Countermarches.

1. (...), or (...), when fresh Men were inserted into Ranks, the Length of the
Battalion being still the same, but the Soldiers drawn up closer and thicker
than before. 2. (...), or (...), was p: 70. Doubling of Ranks in Action
when the Files were doubled, their Ground being of no larger Extent than
before, by ranging them close to one another. 3. (...), or (...), when the
Length of the Battalia was increased, without the Accession of new Forces, by
placing the Soldiers at greater Distances from one another. 4. (...), or
(...), when the Depth of Ground taken up by an Army was rendered greater, not
by adding new Files, but separating the old to a greater Distance.
To conclude this Chapter, it may be observed, that the Grecians were
excellently skilled in the Method of imbattelling Armies, and maintained
public Profe^sours called (...) from (...), who exercised the Youth in this
Art, and rendered them expert in all the Forms of Battle, before they
adventured into the Field.

CHAPTER VII. Of their manner of making Peace, and declaring War, their
Ambassadors, etc.
BEFORE the Grecians engaged themselves in War, it was usual to publish a
Declaration of the Injuries they had received, and to demand Satisfaction by
Ambassadors; For however prepared, or excellently skilled they were in the
Affairs of War, yet Peace, if to be procured upon honorable Terms, was thought
more eligible: Which Custom was observed even in the most early Ages, as
appears from the Story of Tydeus, whom Polynices sent to compose the
Differences with his Brother Eteocles King of Thebes, before he proceeded to
invest that City, as we are informed by Statius Thobaid. lib: II. v. 368.
, and several others, -- potior cunctis sedit sementia, fratris
Praetentare fidem, tutosque in regna precando
Explorare aditus: A^udax ea munera Tydeus
Sponte subit. --
The Council then vote it expedient,
That to the King a Legate should be sent,
Who might to prove his Faith the Oath declare,
And stop the Ferment of intestine War;
This Treaty Tydeus bravely undertook.
Nor was the Trojan War prosecuted with so great Hazard and Loss to both
Parties, 'till these Means proved ineffectual; For we find that Ulysses and
Menelaus were dispatched on an Embassy for Troy to demand Restitution; Whence
Antenor thus bespeaks Helen Iliad. ^.v. 205.
, (...)
(...)
With stout Atricles sage Ulysses came
Hither as Envoies, Helen, thee to claim.
The same Poet in another Place lets us understand, that their Proposal was
rejected by the Trojans as overruled by Antimachus, a Person of great Repute
amongst them, whom Paris had engaged to his Party by a large Sum of Money
Iliad. ^ v. 124
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Antimachus o'ersway'd the Embassy
Refused, and did fair Helena deny,
Since Paris had by Largesses of Gold
Secured his Trust. --
Invasions, indeed, without Notice were looked on rather as Robberies than
lawful Wars, as designed rather to spoil and make a Prey of Persons innocent
and unprovided, than to repair any Losses, or Damages sustained, which, for
ought the Invaders knew, might have been satisfied for an easier Way. It Is
therefore no Wonder, what Polybius Lib IV.
relates of the Aetolians, that they were held for the common Outlaws and
Robbers of Greece, it being their Manner to strike without Warning, and make
War without any previous and public Declaration, whenever they had Opportunity
of enriching themselves with the Spoil and Booty of their Neighbors. Yet there
wants not Instances of Wars begun without previous Notice, even by Nations of
better Repute for Justice and Humanity; But this was not ordinary, being only
done upon Provocations so great and exasperating, that no Recompense was
thought sufficient to atone for them: Whence it came to pass, that these Wars
were of all others the most bloody and pernicious, and fought with Excess of
Rage and Fury; the contesting Parties being resolved to extirpate each other,
if possible, out of the World.

Ambassadors were usually Persons of great Worth, or eminent Station, that by
their Quality and Deportment they might command Respect and Attention from
their very Enemies; And by what Injuries, or Affronts soever they were enraged,
yet Embassador^ were held sacred by all Sides, and received no Harm without
violating the Laws of Gods and Men, for they thought themselves obliged to
prosecute with utmost Vengeance so great an Impiety: Whence (to omit several
other Instances) we read that the Lacedaemonians having inhumanly murdered
Xerxes's Ambassadors, the Gods would accept none of their Oblations and
Sacrifices, which were all found polluted with direful Omens, 'till two
Noblemen of Sparta were sent as an expiatory Sacrifice to Xerxes to atone for
the Death of his Ambassadors by their own: That Emperor indeed gave them Leave
to return in safety without any other Ignominy, than what they suffered by a
severe Reflection on the Spartan Nation, whose barbarous Cruelty he professed
he would not imitate, however provoked by them; Yet Divine Vengeance suffered
them not to go unpunished, but inflicted what th^^^ Men had assumed to
themselves, upon their Sons, for being sent on an Embassy into Asia, they were
betrayed into the Hands of the Athenians, and by them put to Death, which my
Author concludes to have been a just Revenge from Heaven for the Lacedemonian
Cruelty Heredotus Polymn. cap. CXXXIV.
.

Whence this Holiness was derived upon Ambassadors, has been matter of Dispute:
Fabulous Authors deduce it from the Honor paid by the Ancients to the (...),
or Heralds, who were either themselves Ambassadors, or, when others were
deputed to that Service, accompanied them, being held sacred on the account of
their Original, because descended from Ceryx, the Son of Mercury, who was
honored with the same Employment in Heaven, these obtained upon Earth: It Is
true that these Men were ever had in great Esteem, and their Persons held
sacred and inviolable; whence, as Eustathius observes, Ulysses in Homer, when
cast upon foreign and unknown Coasts, usually sends an Herald to protect the
Men deputed to make Discovery of the Country and it is Inhabitants, Persons of
that Character being reverenced even in barbarous Nations, except some few,
such as the Laestrygones, or Cyclopes, in whom all Sense of Humanity was
extinguished Eustathius Iliad ^. p. 83, 84. Ed. Basil.
; They were likewise under the Care and Protection of Mercury the President God
of their Occupation, and Jupiter Idem Iliad. ^ p. 729.
; whence Achilles calls them the Messengers not of Men only, but of Jupiter
Iliad. ^.
; (...)
All Hail! ye Envoies of great Jove and Men.
But these Honors seem not to have been conserr'd upon them so much, because
they were descended from Mercury, (several other Families, to whom no such
Respect was due, bearing themselves much higher on their Original) as upon
account of their Office, which, being common to them with other Ambassadors,
seems to have challenged an equal Reverence to both: License, indeed, being
once granted to treat Persons of that Character injuriously, all Hopes of Peace
and Reconciliation amongst Enemies must be banished for ever out of the World;
and therefore in the most rude and unpolished Ages all sorts of Ambassadors
were civilly entertained, and dismissed with Safety: Whence Tydeus's Lady in
Statius Thebaid lib. II. v. 371.
is prevailed with to let her Husband go Ambassador to Thebes, because that
Title would afford him Protection in the Midst of his Enemies; -- Te,
fortissime gentis
Aetolium, mulium lacrymis conata morari est
Deiphile, sed jussa patris, tutique regressus
Legato, justaeque preces vicere sororis.
Thy tender Wise, Heroic Soul, did pine,
And scarce admit thy generous Design,
Until her boiling Passion did abate
By Argia's Prayers, and a Parent's Threat,
And that Tutelar God, who does on Envoies wait.


The Athenian Heralds were all of one Family, being descended from Ceryx the
Son of Mercury, and Pandrosus Daughter to Cecrops King of Athens

The Lacedemonian Heralds were all descended from Talthybius, Agamemnon's
Herald, who was honored with a Temple, and Divine Worship at Sparta Herodotus
loc. citat. Pausanias La^onicis.
.

They carried in their Hands a Staff of Laurel, or Olive, called (...), round
which two Serpents, without their Crests erected, were folded, as an Emblem of
Peace and Concord ^^^nius lib. XXIX cap III.
. Instead of this the Athenian Heralds frequently made use of the (...), which
was a Token of Peace and Plenty, being an Olive Branch covered with Wool, and
adorned with all Sorts of Fruits of the Earth.

(...), or Heralds, are by some thought to differ from (...), or Ambassadors,
in this; That Ambassadors were employed in Treaties of Peace, whereas Heralds
were sent to declare War Surdas.
: But this Distinction is not constant, or perpetual, the (...) being
frequently taken for Persons commissioned to treat about accommodating
Differences, which may appear, as from some of the The Peplegmene
The Plaesium
forecited Places of Eustathius, so from several Passages in Homer, and other
Authors.

Ambassadors were of two sorts, being either sent with a limited Commission,
which they were not to exceed, or invested with full Power of determining
Matters according to their own Discretion. The former were liable to be called
in Question for their Proceedings; The latter were subject to no
after-reckoning, but wholly their own Masters, and for that reason styled
(...), Plenipotentiaries Vide Archaeolog nostr. lib. I. cap XV.
.

It may be observed, that the Lacedaemonians, as in most other Things their
Customs were different from the rest of their Countrymen, so likewise in their
Choice of Ambassadors had this peculiar, that for the most part they deputed
Men, between whom there was no very good Correspondence; supposing it most
improbable, that such Persons should so far trust one another, as to con^pire
together against the Commonwealth: for the same reason, it was thought a piece
of Policy in that State to raise Dissentions between their Kings Aristoteles
Politic. lib. II.
.

Their Leagues were of three sorts: 1. A bare (...), or Peace, whereby both
Parties were obliged to cease from all Acts of Hostility, and neither to molest
one another, nor the Confederates of either.

2. (...), whereby they obliged themselves to assist one another in case they
should be invaded.

3. (...), whereby they covenanted to assist one another as well when they made
Invasions upon others', as when themselves were invaded, and to have the same
Friends and Enemies Sa^das.
.

All these Covenants were solemnly confirmed by mutual Oaths, the manner of
which I have already described in a former Book Lib II. cap. VI.
: To the end, they might lie under a greater Obligation to preserve them
inviolate, we find it customary to engrave them upon Tables, which they fixed
up at Places of general Concourse, that all the World might be Witnesses of
their Justice and Fidelity: Thus we find the Articles of Treaty between Athens
and Sparta not only published in those Cities, but at the Places where the
Olympian, Pythian, and Isthmian Games were celebrated Th^erli^e^ de Bello
Peloponnes.
. Farther, to continue the Remembrance of mutual Agreements fresh in their
Minds, it was not uncommon for States thus united, interchangeably to send
Ambassadors, who, on some appointed Day, when the People assembled in great
Numbers, should openly repeat, and by mutual Consent confirm their former
Treaty: This we find practiced by the Athenians and Spartans after their
forementioned League, the Spartan Ambassadors presenting themselves at Athens
upon the Festival of Bacchus, and the Athenians at Sparta on the Festival of
Hyacinthus.

Their manner of declaring War was to send an Herald, who bid the Persons that
had injured them to prepare for an Invasion, and sometimes in token of Defiance
cast a Spear toward them. The Athenians frequently let loose a Lamb into their
Enemies Territories; signifying thereby, that what was then an Habitation for
Men, should be laid wast and desolate, and become a Pasture for Sheep Di^genian
Collect. Prove. Suidas, etc.
.

This was rarely done without the Advice and Encouragement of the Gods; the
Soothsayers, and all sorts of Diviners were consulted, the Oracles enriched
with Presents, and no Charge, or Labor spared to engage* Heaven (so they
imagined) to their Party: Instances of this kind are almost as common as the
Declarations of War, which was never undertaken before the Gods had been
consulted about the Issue: Nor was the Verdict of a single Deity thought
sufficient, for in Wars of great Moment and Consequence, whereon the Safety of
their Country and Liberties depended, they had Recourse to the whole Train of
prophetical Divinities, soliciting all with earnest Prayers lifted up to Heaven
on the Wings of costly Offerings and magnificent Presents, to favor them with
wholesome Counsel. A remarkable Example whereof we have in Craesus before he
declared War against the Persians, when not content with the Answers of his own
Gods, and all the celebrated Oracles in Greece, in consulting which he had
lavishly profus'd vast Quantities of Treasure, he dispatched Ambassadors as far
as Libya laden with Wealth, to ask Advice of Jupiter Hammon Herodotus lib. I.
.

When they were resolved to begin the War, it was customary to offer Sacrifices
and make large Vows to be paid upon the Success of their Enterprise. Thus when
Darius invaded Attica, Callimachus made a Vow to Minerva, that, if she would
vouchafe the Athenians Victory, he would sacrifice upon her Altars as many
He-goats, as should equal the Number of the slain among their Enemies: Nor was
this Custom peculiar to Greece, but frequently practiced in most other
Countries: Many Instances occurr in the Histories of Rome, Persia, etc. The
Jews likewise were acquainted therewith, as may appear from Iephthah's Vow,
when he undertook to be Captain over Israel against the Ammonites Iudicum cap
XI. v. 30.
.

After all these Preparations, though the Posture of Affairs appeared never so
inviting, it was held no less impious than dangerous to march against their
Enemies, 'till the Season favored their Enterprise: For being extremely
superstitious in the Observation of Omens, and Days, 'till those became
fortunate, they durst not make any Attempts upon their Enemies: An Eclipse of
the Moon, or any other of those they esteemed unlucky Accidents, was enough to
deterr them from Marching: And if all other Things promised Success, yet they
deferred their Expedition 'till one of the Days, they looked on as fortunate,
invited them to it. The Athenians could not be persuaded to march (...) before
the seventh Aristophanis Scholiastes Equit. Hesychius.
; which gave Occasion to the Proverb, whereby Persons, that undertook any
Business unseasonably and before the proper Time, were said to do it (...)
Zenolius.
. But the Lacedaemonians were of all others the most nice and scrupulous in
these Observations; their Lawgiver having commanded them to pay a critical and
inviolate Obedience to the Celestial Predictions, and to regulate all their
Proceedings as well in Civil, as Military Affairs by the Constitution of the
Heavenly Bodies: Amongst the rest they were obliged by a particular Precept
never to march before the full Moon Lucianus Astrolog.
; For that Planet was believed to have a supernatural and extraordinary
Influence upon their Affairs, to bless them with Success, when it self was in
the Height of it is Splendor, but, 'till it was arrived there, to neglect, or
suffer them to be blasted for want of Power to send Assistance: So constant a
Belief of this had they entertained, that the greatest Necessity could not
prevail upon them to alter their Measures; For when the Athenians were like to
fall into the Hands of Darius, and sent to implore their Assistance, they
agreed indeed to send them a Supply of Men, but, rather then march before full
Moon, forced them to run the hazard of a decisive Battle, and with a small and
appearingly inconsiderable Handful of Soldiers to encounter an
hundred-thousand Medians Herodetus lib. VI.
.

CHAPTER VIII. Of their Camps, Guards, Watches, and Military course of Life.
OF the Form of the Grecian Camps nothing exact and constant can be delivered,
that being not always the same, but varied, as the Custom, or Humor of
different States, or the Conveniences of Place and Time required. The
Lacedaemonians, indeed, are said to have been prescribed a constant Method of
building Towns, and encamping by their Lawgiver, who thought a Spherical
Figure the best fitted for Defense Xenophon De Rep. Laced.
; which was contrary to the Custom of the Romans, whose Camps were
Quadrangular; but all Forms of that sort were rejected by Lycurgus, the Angles
being neither fit for Service, nor defensible, unless guarded by a River,
Mountain, Wall, or some such Fortification. It is farther observable of the
Lacedaemonians, that they frequently moved their Camps, being accustomed
vigorously to prosecute all their Enterprises, impatient of Delays and tedious
Procrastinations, and utterly averse from passing their Time without Action:
Wherefore the reason of this being demanded of Lycurgus, he replied that It Was
that they might do greater Damage to their Enemies Plutarci^s Apophthegmat.
Laconie.
: To which Xenophon adds a second, That they might give more early Relief to
their Friends Loco citato.
.

Of the rest of the Grecian Camps it may be observed, that the valiantest of
the Soldiers were placed at the Extremities, the rest in the Middle; that the
stronger might be a Guard to the weaker, and sustain the first Onsets, if the
Enemy should endeavor to force their Entrenchments. Thus we find Achilles and
Ajax posted at the Ends of the Grecian Camp before Troy, as Bulwarks on each
Side the rest of the Princes, who had their Tents in the Middle, as we learn
from Homer Iliad ^. v. 222. Item Sophoelu Ajax, ejusque Scholeastes Triclinius
v. 4.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Atrides stood in the Midst of the Fleet, hard by
Where the Odyssean high-built Ship did lie,
That all his Orders equally might hear,
As far as Ajax's on one Side, as far
As Peleus Son's of the other, for they were
At each Extremity like Fortresses.


When they designed to continue long in their Encampments, they contrived a
Place, where Altars were erected to the Gods, and all Parts of Divine Service
solemnly performed; In the same Place public Assemblies were called together,
when the General had any Thing to communicate to his Soldiers; and Courts of
Justice were held, wherein all Controversies among the Soldiers were decided,
and Criminals sentenced to Punishment: Which Custom was as ancient as the
Trojan War, and is mentioned by Homer Iliad. ^. v. 806.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Sweating to the Ulyssean Ships he came,
Where their Assemblies, and their Courts were held,
And the Gods worshipped. --


When they were in Danger of having their Camp attacked, it was usual to
fortify it with a Trench and Rampire, or Wall, on the Sides whereof they
erected Turrets not unlike those upon the Walls of Cities, out of which they
annoyed their Enemies with missive Weapons. Thus the Grecians in Homer were
forced to defend themselves in the ninth Year of the Trojan War, when Achilles
refused to assist them, whereas 'till that Time they had wanted no
Fortifications, but immured the Trojans within their own Walls: The Poet has
thus described their Works Iliad. ^. v. 436.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
A thick, substantial Wall of vast Extent
They raised with Turrets, as a Muniment
To them and the Fleet, and that there might a Way
Be for their Cavalry upon Survey,
They framed great Gates, the Wall too they entrenched
With Stakes infix'd. --


The manner of living in Camps depended upon the Disposition of their Generals,
some of which allowed their Soldiers in all sorts of Excess and Debauchery;
others obliged them to the strictest Rules of Temperance and Sobriety; a
remarkable Instance whereof we have in Philip of Macedon, who (as Polyaenus
reports) condemned two of his Soldiers to Banishment for no other Offense,
than because he had found them with a Singing-woman in his Camp. But the
Grecian Discipline was not always so severe and rigid, as may appear from
Plutarch ^^eomens p. 810. Edit. Paris and Lycurge.
, who tells us, that the Lacedaemonians alone of all the Grecians had no
Stage Players, no Juglers, no dancing or Singing-women attending them, but were
free from all sorts of Debauchery and Looseness, of gaudy Pomp and Foppery; The
young Men, when commanded nothing by their General, were always employed in
some Exercise, or manly Study, the old were busied in giving Instructions, or
receiving them from Persons more skillfull than themselves, and their looser
Hours were diverted with their usual Drollery, and rallying one another
facetiously after the Lacomck Fashion: Yet their Lawgiver allowed them greater
Liberty in the Camp, than at other Times, to invite them to serve with Delight
in the Wars; For, whilst they were in the Field, their Exercises were more
moderate than at Home, their Fare not so hard, nor so strict a Hand kept over
them by their Governors; so that they were the only People in the World, to
whom War gave Repose. They were likewise allowed to have costly Arms, and fine
Clothes, and frequently persum'd themselves, and curled their Hair; Whence we
read that Xerxes was struck with Admiration, when his Scouts brought him Word,
the Lacedemonian Guards were at Gymnical Sports, and curling their Hair
He^alotus lib. VII. cap CCVIII and C^IX.
.

Their Guards may be distinguished into (...) and (...): the first were upon
Duty by Day, the other by Night. At several Hours in the Night certain Officers
called (...) did (...), or walk round the Camp, and visit the Watch; to try
whether any of them were asleep, they had a little Bell, termed (...), at the
Sound of which the Soldiers were to answer Surda^.
: Whence to go this Circuit was called (...), and (...), -- (...)
(...). --
Hence also (...) is used for (...), to try, or prove Arist^thanes (...).
; and (...) for (...), untried, or unprov'd Idem Lysistrate.
. This Custom furnished Brasidas with an Advantage against Potidaea in the
Peloponnesian War; For, having observed the Sounding of the Bell to be over, he
took his Opportunity before the Bell's Return to set up Ladders in an unguarded
Place of the Wall, and so entered the City Thacyds es lib. IV.
.

The Lacedemonian Watch were not permitted to have their Bucklers, that, being
unable to defend themselves, they might be more cautious how they fell asleep.
To which Custom Tzetzes alludes in one of his Historical Chiliads Chiliad. IX.
Hist. CCLXXVI.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
One of the Generals once more eminent
In Strateg^ms and warlike Policy
Gave out, that all the Guards should march unarmed
With Bucklers, to secure them vigilant,
Lest they supinely negligent should sleep.
The rest of the Spartan Soldiers were obliged to take their Rest armed, that
they might be prepared for Battle upon any Alarm Xenophon.
.

It may be farther observed of the Spartans, that they kept a double Watch; One
within their Camp, to observe their Allies, lest they should make a sudden
Defection; The other upon some Eminence, or other Place, whence there was a
good Prospect, to watch the Motions of their Enemies Idem.
.

How often the Guards were relieved does not appear; as neither whether it was
done at set and constant Times, or according to the Commander's Pleasure. (...)
indeed, which signifies a Watch, is frequently taken for the fourth Part of the
Night, answering to the Roman Vigiliae; as appears from several Places of the
New Testament, as well as other Authors; But it seems to have this
Signification rather from the Roman, than Grecian Watches, those being changed
four Times every Night, that is, every third Hour, (computing the Night from
six to six, or rather from Sun to Sun) for the Time between the two Suns was
divided into twelve equal Parts, which were not always the same, like our
Hours, but greater, or less, according to the Season of the Year; and are
therefore by Astronomers termed unequal and planetary Hours.

CHAPTER IX. Of their Battles, the General's Harangues, the Sacrifices, Music,
Signals, Ensigns, the Word, and Way of ending Wars by single Combat, etc.
BEFORE they joined Battle, the Soldiers always refreshed themselves with
Victuals, eating and drinking plentifully: Which Custom with it is Reasons we
have largely accounted for in Ulysses's elegant Oration to Achilles Iliad. ^.v.
155.
, where he advises the young General by no means to lead out the Army fasting:
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Noble Achilles, though with martial Rage
Thy generous Mind is sir'd thy Foes to engage,
Let not thy valiant Troops to Troy repair,
There to sustain the great Fatigues of War,
Before brisk Wines and Viands animate
Their Souls with Vigor to repel their Fate,
That Troy to their embattel'd Force may yield,
And with amazing Terror quit the Field;
For such is the Energy of sparkling Juice
With such Heroic Zeal it warms, such Prowess does insuse:
No Man has Pu'ssance the whole Day to sight,
'Till the Phebean Carr brings on the Night,
Unless rich Wine and wholesome Food prepare
His Courage for the Dust and Din of War;
His strenuous Limbs then Marches undergo,
And he with dauntless Rage assails the Foe;
Inflaming Wine incites his Fury on,
And thus he will venture 'till the Battle's won.
Mr. Abell. We are told also by Livy, that the Romans thought this a
Preparative absolutely necessary, and never omitted it before Engagements Lib.
IX.
.

This done, the Commanders marshalled the Army in order to an Engagement: In
which Art the Grecians were far inferior to the Romans; for drawing up their
whole Army, as it were, into one Front, they trusted the Success of the Day to
a single Force; whereas the Romans, ranging their Hastati, Principes, and
Triarii in distinct Body* behind one another, were able after the Defeat of
their first Body twice to renew the Battle, and could not be entirely routed,
'till they had lost three several Victories. Yet something not unlike this we
find practiced as long since as the Trojan War, where old Nest^r is said to
have placed a Body of Horse in the Front, behind these the most infirm of the
Foot, and, last of all, such of them as surpassed the rest in Strength and
Valor Iliad. ^. v. 297.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Nestor the Horse placed first in all the Host,
In The Rear the Infantry maintained their Post,
Such as he had detached from all the rest,
For Courage, Hardship, and for Strength the best:
And to prevent that none should run away
In The Midst of all were ordered in Array
The rude, the infirm, the inexpert. --
Mr. Abell. Where though some interpret (...), and (...) of the right and left
Wings, and others several other Ways, yet the most natural and genuine Sense of
the Poet seems to be, that they were drawn up behind one another Pl^t^ra^ u^
lib de tiomer^.
.

At this Time the General made an Oration to his Soldiers, wherein with all
the Motives suitable on such Occasions he exhorted them to exert their utmost
Force and Vigor against the Enemy: And so wonderful was the Success, that
attended these Performances, that many times, when Affairs were in a declining,
and almost desperate Condition, the Soldiers, animated with fresh Life and
Courage, have instantly retrieved them, and repulsed those very Enemies, by
whom themselves had before been defeated: Several of these Instances may be
found in the Grecian and Roman Histories, few of which are more remarkable than
that of Tyrtaeus the lame Athenian Poet, to whom the Command of the Spartan
Army, was given by the Advice of an Oracle in one of the Messenian Wars; The
Spartans had at that Time suffered great Losses in many Encounters, and all
their Strategems proved ineffectual, so that they began to despair almost of
Success, when the Poet by his Lectures of Honor and Courage, delivered in
moving Verse to the Army, ravished them to such a Degree with the Thoughts of
dying for their Country, that, ru^hing on with a furious Transport to meet
their Enemies, they gave them an entire Overthrow, and by one decisive Battle
put an happy Conclusion to the War (...) M^sie ^^, (...) lib. XV. Iust^^. lib.
III.
.

Before they adventured to join their Enemies, they endeavored by Prayers,
S^crifices, and Vows to engage Heaven to their Assistance, and sung an Hymn to
Mars, called (...), as that sung to Ap^llo after a prosperous Battle, was
termed (...) Thu^yd. (...) lib 1. etc.
. The Lacedaemonians had a peculiar Custom of sacrificing to the Muses, which
was either designed to soften and mollify their passionate Transports, it being
their Custom to enter the Battle calm and sedate (...).
; or to animate them to perform noble and H^r^ical Exploits, d^s^rving to be
transmitted by those Goddesses to Posterity Idem ^ycurgo.
. The Soothsayers inspected all the Sacrifices to presage the Success of the
Battle; And 'till the Omens proved favorable, they rather chose t^mely to
resign their Lives to the Enemy, than to defend themselves. The Spartans
especially were above Measure addicted to this Superstition; For in the famous
Battle at Pla^^^^, when Mardonius the Persian General had fallen upon the
Grecians, Pausanias the Spartan, who at that Time commanded the Grecian Army,
offering Sacrifice, found it not acceptable to the Gods, and thereupon
commanded his Lacedaemonians, laying down their Bucklers at their Feet,
patiently to abide his Commands; The Priests offered one Sacrifice after
another, but all without Success, the Barbarians all the Time charging upon
them, and wounding and slaying them in their Ranks, 'till at length Pausanias
turning himself toward the Temple, with Hands lifted up to Heaven, and Tears
in his Eyes, besought Juno of Cithaeron, and the rest of the Tutelar Deities of
the Plataeans, that if the Fates would not favor the Grecians with Victory,
they would grant at least, that by some remarkable Exploit they might
demonstrate to their Enemies, that they waged War with Men of true Courage and
Bravery: These Prayers were no sooner finished, when the Sacrifices appearing
propition, the Signal was given, and they fell with Resolution upon the
^ersians, and in a short Time entirely defeated their whole Army Idem Aristi^^.
.

Their Signals are commonly divided into (...), and (...), which Words
sometimes indeed are used promiscuously, but in Propriety of Speech are
distinguished.

(...) were of two kinds, either (...), or (...), i.e. pronounced by the Mouth,
or visible to the Eye: The first are termed (...), the later (...).

(...), in Latin Tes^era, or the Word, communicated by the General to the
subordinate Officers, by them to the whole Army, as a Mark of Distinction to
know Friends from Enemies Glossogra^hi.
. It commonly contained some good Omen, or the Nam^ of some Deity worshipped by
their Country, or General, and from whom they expected Success in their
Enterprises. Cyrus, for example, used (...), or (...) (...). lib VII
; Caesar, Venus geri^^^ (...) Bell C^v^^. lib. II.
; Augustus, Apollo Valerius (...) lib. I. cap. V.
: But this Custom often proved of fatal and pernicious Consequence; for by
frequently questioning one another they bred Confusion among themselves, and
(which was no less dangerous) discovered their Word to the Enemies; As we find
happening in the Fight between the Athenians and Syracusians, spoken of by
Thu^^dides Lib. VII.
: It became likewise the Occasion of several mischievous S^rategems, one of
which we find practis'^ by an Ar^adi^n Captain in a War with Laedem^n; when
engaging in the Night, all the T^ssera he gave his Soldiers was, that they
should forthwith lull whoever demanded the Word; whereby they easily
distinguished, and slew the Spartans, themselves being undiscovered, and
therefore secure Po^ya^^ lib. I.
.

(...) was a visible Character of Distinction, as nodding their Heads, waving
their Hands, clashing their Weapons, or such like s. cap XXVI.
.

(...) were Ensigns, or Flags, the Elevation whereof was a Signal to join
Battle, the Depression to desist (...). lib. I.
. Of these there were different sorts, several of which were adorned with
Images of Animals, or other Things bearing peculiar Relations to the Cities
they belonged to; The Athenians, for instance, bore an Owl in their Ensigus
(...).
, as being sacred to Minerva, the Protectress of their City: The Thebans a
Sphinx Idem (...), Cornelias Nepas Epami^^^^.
, in memory of the famous Monster overcome by Oedipus: The Persians paid Divine
Honors to the Sun, and therefore represented him in their Ensigns (...) lib.
III.
.

The (...) was frequently a Purple Coat upon the Top of a Spear, as appears of
Conon's in Polyaenus, and (...)'s in Plutarch: Nor was it uncommon to use other
Colors; Polybius speaking of the Fight between Antigonus and Cleomenes (...)
lib. II.
tells us; That the Illyrians, having Orders to begin the Battle, were to
receive a Signal by a white Flag, that should be spread from the nearest Post
to Olympus; But the Signal to be given to the Megelopolitans and the Cavalry,
was a Purple Coat, which was to be advanced in the Air, where Antigonus himself
was posted.

The ancient Grecian Signals were lighted Torches thrown from both Armies by
Men called (...), or (...), who were Pri^sts of Mars, and therefore held
inviolable; and, having cast their Torches, had safe Regress (...), Lycophron^^
(...) v. 2^^, (...).
: Whence of Battles sought with Transport of Fury, wherein no Quarter was
given, it was usual to say, (...), i.c. Not so much as a Torch-bearer escaped.
To this Custom there are frequent Allusions in Greek and Lat^n Poets:
Lycophron, speaking of the Ph^ni^ians, who by stealing (...) b^gan the Quarrel
between Europe and Asia, says, (...) (...) v. 1295.
.
They raised envenomed Discord, who then s^ook
Her balefull Torch within two Continents.
Hence also Sta^ius Theba^d. IV. v. 5.
; Prima manu rutilam de vertice Larissaeo
Ostendit B. ^ona facem. --
Bellona first from the Larissaean Tow'^
Shakes the dire Torch. --
(...) likewise, with others, whom I shall forbear to mention, (...) notice of
this Custom (...) lib. I.
, Tisiphone quations infesto humine pinum,
Armatos ad castra vocat pallentia manes,
Tisiphone summons the Ghosts to appear,
Shaking a livid Flame as Signal of the War.


Th^se being laid aside, Shells of Fishes succeeded, which they found^d in the
manner of Trumpets, which in those Days were not invented Tzetzes in ^ycophron.
v. 250.
. Hence Theognis's Riddle may easily be interpreted, (...)
(...)
A Sea-inhabitant with living Mouth
Spoke to me to go Home, though dead it was.
T^^ton's Shell-trumpet is famous in Poetical Story; Whence Ovid speaking of
Neptune Metam lib. I.
, -- supraque profundum
Exstant^m, atque h^^er^s i^nato murice tectum
Caerulcum Tritona vocat, c^^haeque sona^i
Laspirare jubet, fluct^^que and flumina signo
Iam revocare dato, ca^a buccina sumitur illi
Tortilis, in lauson quae turbine crescit ab into.
Already Triton at his Call appears
Above the Waves, a Tyrian Robe he wears,
And in his Hand a crooked Trumpet bears.
The Sovereign bids him peaceful Sounds inspire,
And give the Waves the Signal to retire:
His Writhen Shell he takes, whose narrow Vent
Grows by degrees into a large Extent.
Mr. Dryden. And most of the Poets mention this Cust^m in their Description of
the primitive Wars: Whence Theocritus in his Poem about the Exploits of Castor
and Pollux Idyll. ^^. v. 75.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
This said, Amycus did his Trumpet sound,
The Valleys rung, and echoed all around,
Through every distant Field the Noise was heard,
And Crowds of stout Bebrycians soon appeared.
Mr. Creech. Lycophron also, speaking of the Trojan War Cassandra v. 249.
, (...)
(...)
Great Mars, that nimble God of War,
Invigorates the Youth by Sound of Shell
Twining and circling into various Rounds,
Thus was the Land laid wast, thus raged the fi'ry God.
Where though the Scholiast falls soul upon the Poet for introducing Shells at a
Time when Trumpets were in use, which he tells us may be made appear from
Homer, yet herein he seems to be too audacious, it being observable Eustathius
Iliad. ^.
, that, though Homer mentions Trumpets, yet they never make any Part of the
Description of his Heroical Battles, but only furnish him with a Simile, or
Allusion; As happens in the Place cited by Tzetzes Iliad. ^. v. 219.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
When Foes encamped around a City lie,
And wait surrender from the Enemy,
Great Fear runs thrilling through their Breast within
The Wall^, when echoing Trumpets do begin;
Such was Achilles's Voice, such Dread appeared*
In all the Dardan Host, 'twas so distinctly heard.
Mr. Abell. Whence it may be presumed, that Trumpets were indeed used in
Homer's Time, being then only a late Invention, and not so ancient as the
Trojan War, as the old Scholiast has also observed Iliad. ^. v. 219. Iliad ^.
v. 388.
. Virgil indeed appears to give some Countenance to Tzetzes's Opinion, when he
speaks of Mis^nus, whom he makes to have served Hector in the Trojan War, and
afterward Aeneas, in the Office of a Trumpeter Aeneid. VI. v. 163.
; -- illi Misenum in littore sicco,
Ut venere, vident indigna morte peremium,
Misenum Aeoliden, quo non praestantior alter
Aere ci^re viros, Martemque accendere cantu:
Hectoris hic magni fuerat ^omes; Hectora circum
Et lituo pugnas insignis obibat and hasta.
Postquam illum victor vita spoliavit Achilles,
Dardanio Aeneae sese fortissimus heroes
Addiderat socium, non inferiora secutus.
As soon as they approached, they spied their Friend
Misenus dead by some untimely End,
The brave Misenus, above all renowned
To make with swelling Notes the cheerful Trumpet sound;
New Vigor would encourage on the War,
When ever his Trumpet echoed from afar.
He was the illustrious Hector's Intimate,
The Ranks he would traverse in Heroic State,
With 's Spear he would exercise, with 's Trumpet animate;
But when Achilles Hector overcame,
And slew him in the Field, as great a Name
H' achieved by cleaving to Aeneas's Side,
A Prince for 's Prowess no less dignified.
Mr. Abell. But here the Brazen Trumpet and lit^^^s are taken from the Practice
of the Poet's own Age by a Figure familiar to Men of his Pro^ession; for
Misenus was never acquainted with so rare a Contrivance, and though we find him
so proud of his Art, as to challenge the Gods of the Sea, yet 'twas not to a
Contention on the Trumpet, but on a Shell, the Instrument used by these
Deities: Whence the same Poet, who may be supposed to be the best Interpreter
of his own Words, adds in the Verses immediately following, Sed tum forte, cava
dum personat aequera concha
Demens, and cantu vocat in certamina Devos,
Aemulus exceptum Triton, si credere dignum est,
Inter saxa virum spumosa immerserat unda.
But, whilst the Sea-Gods proudly he defied
Sounding a Writhen Shell by the Ocean's Side,
As his due Fate for his Ambitious Sound,
Him, if Report deceive not, Triton drowned.


There were six several sorts of Trumpets Eus^a^hius Iliad ^. p. 118^. Ed t.
Basil.
, which have occasioned the Disagreement in ancient Writers concerning the
first Author of the Invention; it being common for them to ascribe to the
Inventor of any one sort the Honor of the first Contrivance.

1. The first Trumpet was contrived by Minerva, the common Mother and Patroness
of almost all Arts and useful Inventions; Whence she was honored with' the
Title of (...), mentioned in Lycophron Cassandra ^. 915.
, (...)
(...). --
Under this Name she was worshipped in a Temple dedicated to her at Argos
He^^bius, Phavorinus, (...) loc. (...).
: But Pausanias is rather of opinion, that this Trumpet was the Invention of
one of Hercules's Sons called Tyrrhenus, whose Son Hegelaus (having
communicated it to a Party of Doriant, the Subjects of Temenus) in Memory of
the Invention, and out of Gratitude to the Goddess for Assistance therein, gave
her this Surname P^usanias Corintheacit. Vide Commentarium nostrum in Lycophren
v. 915.
. 2. The second was the Egyptian Trumpet, called (...), Osirit's Contrivance:
It was round, and used at Sacrifices to call the Congregation together
E^stathius loc. cit Idem deinceps videndus.
3. The third was invented in Gallia Celtica, where it was termed (...): It
gave a very shrill Sound, but was not very large: It was cast in a Mould, and
had it is Mouth adorned with the Figure of some Animal. They had a Pi^e of Lead,
through which they blew into the Trumpet, when they sounded. 4. The fourth was
first used in Paphlagonia, and called (...), from (...), or the Figure of an Ox
upon it is upper Orisice; It had a deep base Sound. 5. The fifth was invented in
Media, had also a deep Note, and was sounded by the Help of a Pipe composed of
Reeds. 6. The sixth was called (...), because invented by Tyrrhenians, from
whom it was communicated to the Grecians by one Archondas, who came to assist
the Heraclidae, or Posterity of Hercules Sophocis^ Sci^^liastes Ajace v. 17.
Sunlas, Deodorus Siculus lib. V.
. Others attribute the first Contrivance of it to Tyrrhenus, Hercules's Son
Hyganus Fab. 274
. It Is Orisice was cleft, and sent forth an exceeding loud and shrill Sound,
not unlike the Phrygian Flute; Whence it became of all the rest the most proper
for Engagements: Ulysses in Sophocles compares to it the Goddess Minerva's
Voice Ajace v. 16.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
How clear, Minerva, and distinct thy Voice,
Thou, whom I reverence above the rest
Of Deities, who crowd the Aetherial Court,
Thy Voice I know, and perfectly retain,
Although thou art unseen, as if I Would heard
The Tyrrhene Trumpet, whose continuing Sound
Leaves an Impression of it is echoing Notes.
Mr. Abell. Where the Scholiast observes, that Minerva's Voice is resembled to
the Tyrrhenian Trumpet, because it was easily known by reason of it is Loudness,
as that Trumpet excelled all others, and was at the first hearing easy to be
distinguished from them.
These were the most common and remarkable sorts of Trumpets; others may
perhaps now and then occurr in Authors, such as the Libyan mentioned by Suidas,
and one of Sophocles's Scholiasts Loco citato.
, but seem to be of less Note, and not so frequently used.

Several other Instruments were used in sounding Alarms; the (...), or Pipe, in
Arcadia; the (...), sometimes termed (...), in Sicily Clemen^ Paedag. lib. II.
cap IV.
. The Cretans were called to Battle by the Sound of (...), or Flutes Pol^^ius
lib IV.
; as others, of Citharae, Lutes, or Viols A. Gelitus lib. 1 cap XI Martianus
Capella lib IX.
; but, as most of the ancient Writers affirm, of Lyrae, or Harps Clemens loc
cit. Athe^^aus lib XII and XIV Eustathius ad Iliad ^.
, which, Plutarch tells us, were not laid aside for many Ages Lib. de Musica.
: The Person that sounded the Alarm the Cretans called (...), and others termed
him (...) Hesr^h^^^.
from a sort of Trumpet called (...).

The Lacedaemonians are particularly remarkable for beginning their Engagements
with a Concent of Flutes Iidem Aucto^es, guide Crete^sibus citantur, item
Xen^phan, Maximus ^^rtus Dissert XII and XXI. Quin^^ianus lib. I. cap XVI.
Theeadides lib. V V^lerius Maximus lib. II. cap. VI. Lucianus de Saltatione,
and alii passim.
; The reason of which Practice being demanded of Agesilaus, he replied, That it
was to distinguish Cowards; such being unable by reason of their Consternation
to keep Time with their Feet to the Music, as was their Custom. This Answer is
indeed facetious, and not wholly without Truth, yet seems not fully to
comprehend the Design of this Custom. Valerius Maximus is yet farther from the
Truth, and stands in direct Opposition to it, when he supposes it intended to
raise the Courage of the Soldiers, that they might begin the Onset with
greater Violence and Fury; for Thucydides, with whom the rest of ancient
Historians agree, assures us, that the Design of it was rather to render them
cool and sedate, Trumpets and other Instruments being more proper to inspire
with Heat and Rage; but these Passions they thought rather apt to beget
Disorder and Confusion, than to produce any noble and memorable Actions, Valor
being not the Effect of any sudden and vanishing Transport, but proceeding from
a settled and habitual Firmness and Constancy of Mind: Wherefore they
endeavored not with Noise and Have, but with composed Minds, and settled
Countenances* to advance in a majestic and deliberate Pace toward their
Enemies. The manner of it is described by Plutarch Lycur^o.
, who tells us, That the Army being drawn up in Battle-aray, and the Enemy
near, the King sacrificed a She-goat, and at the same Time commanded the
Soldiers to adorn their Heads with Garlands, and the Fluters to play (...),
the Tune of Castor's Hymn; and himself, advancing forwards, begun the (...), or
Alarm: So that it was at once a delightful and terrible Sight to see them
march on keeping Pace to the Tune of their Flutes, without ever troubling their
Order, or confounding their Ranks, their Music leading them into Danger
cheerful and unconcerned: For (proceeds my Author) Men thus disposed were not
likely to be possessed with Fear, or transported with Fury; but they proceeded
with a deliberate Valor full of Hope and good Assurance, as if some D^vinity
had sensibly assisted them. Maximus the Tyrlan attributes to this Method those
great Successes, and numerous Victories, that have rendered the Spartan Name
famous in all succeeding Ages; but it seems peculiarly calculated and adapted
to the Discipline and Temper of that State; and scarce to be imitated, 'till
the old Lacedemonian Resolution, and unparalled Firmness of Mind can be
recalled.

The rest of the Grecians advanced with eager Have and Fury, and in the
Beginning of their Onset gave a general Shout to encourage and animate
themselves, and strike Terror into their Enemies: This was called (...), from
the Soldiers repeating (...), Suidas makes them to have cried also (...): The
first Author of it was Pan, Bacchus's Lieutenant General in his Indian
Expedition; where, being encompassed in a Valley with an Army of Enemies far
superior to them in Number, he advised the God to order his Men in the Night
to give a general Shout, which so surpised the opposite Army, that they
immediately fled from their Camp: Whence it came to pass, that all sudden
Fears, impressed upon Men's Spirits without any just Reason, were called, by
the Greeks and Romans, Panick Terrors Polyanous Strateg. lib. I.
.

This Custom seems to have been used by almost all Nations, Barbarous as well
as Civil; and is mentioned by all Writers, that treat of Martial Affairs: Homer
has obliged us with several elegant Descriptions of it, too numerous to be
inserted in this Place: I shall however give you one out of the fourth Iliad V.
452.
, where he resembles the Military Noise to Torrents rolling with impetuous
Force from Mountains into the subjacent Valleys; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
As with impetuous Torrent Rivers flow
Down a steep Hill, when swollen by Winter's Snow,
Into the Vales with mighty Floods they pour,
Fraught with Destruction and an hideous Roar:
Thus fled, thus posted all the Trojan Rout
In eager Flight with dismal Noise and Shout.
Mr. Abell. Some may infer from the Beginning of Homer's third Iliad, that
this Noise was only a Barbarous Custom, practiced indeed by the Trojans, but
laughed at by the more civilized Grecians V. 1.
: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
As, when the nipping winter Season's past,
To a Pygmean Combat Cranes make have,
In cheerful Flights they blacken from afar
The Clouds, and gladly meditate a War,
With Noise and Clangor eagerly they fly,
Such were the clamorous Shouts of the Trojan Enemy.
Silent and Wise the Argian Legions move
Fixed and united by a mutual Love,
Auxiliary Aid resolved to show,
If an impending Loss came threatening from the Foe.
Mr. Abell. But this is only to be understood of their March, as appears
likewise from another Passage in the fourth Iliad, where the Poet has admirably
represented the Order and regular March of the Grecians, with the Confusion and
disorderly Motion of the Barbarians V. 427.
: -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
With stern and awful Visage Chiefs bear Sway,
While all their Forces silently obey;
In thick Battalions they march along,
(But who would think that such a numerous Throng
Should fill the Plains, and scarce ever use a Tongue)
Such powerful Chiefs the Grecian Hero's were,
Thus did their Conduct gracefully appear;
As thus they march, their burnished Arms afar
Display the Luster of a future War.
Not in such State advanced the Trojan Rout,
With thundering Peals of Noise, and pompous Shout
A Tumult they did raise, and the Air did rend;
Thus, when a Swain large Flocks of Ewes has penned
To milk their burdened Duggs, they doleful bleat
Hearing their Lambkins bleating for the Tear.
Mr. Abell. Where it is manifest he only speaks of their March, because a few
Ver^es after, where he comes to describe the Engagement of the two Armies, he
does it in the Words before cited; and in all other Places he mentions the
great Noise and Clamor of both Parties in their Encounters. Thus in the
sixteenth Iliad he speaks of Achilles's Myrmidons V. 276.
, (...)
(...)
The Grecians press of the Trojans with a Noise,
The Ships reflect the Echo of their Voice.
And a little before V. 267.
; (...)
They throng out of their Ships with joyful Shout.
Nay so necessary, and almost essential was this Shout to a Battle, that (...),
and (...) are used by the Poet as equivalent Terms for (...): And, when he
commends his Hero's for being (...), he often means no more than (...),
excellent Warriors. 'Twas also one Part of a good Soldier's and Commander's
Character to have a strong Voice, not only because it was the Custom to signify
their Orders by Word of Mouth before Trumpets were invented, but for the
Terror wherewith it surpised and astonished their Enemies Eustathius Iliad.
(...). p. 187. Il. (...). ^p. 309. Il. (...). p. 799. etc. Ed. Basil.
: Instances of this Nature are very frequent in Homer, where Hector, Achilles,
and several others strike a Cons^ernation into the adverse Party with a Shout:
And later Authors give this good Quality it is peculiar Commendation; Plutarch
in particular, in his Character of Marcius Coriolanus the Roman General,
observes that he was not only dreadful to meet in the Field by reason of his
Hand and Stroke, but (what he tells us Cato required in an accomplished
Warrior) insupportable to an Enemy for the very Tone and Accent of his Voice,
and the sole Terror of his Aspect.

In the Heroical Wars the Generals sought at the Head of their Armies, as
appears in all Homer's Battles: Whence they are frequently termed (...), and
(...), because they did (...), fight before their Armies: Thus when he lead up
the Trojans Iliad. (...). v. 16.
, (...)
At the Head of the Trojans Godlike Paris fought.
And when Achilles sends out his Soldiers to defend the Grecian Ships, having
allotted to the rest of his Officers their several Posts, he places Patroclus
and Automedon, as chief Commanders, before the Front Iliad. (...). 218.
, (...)
(...)
(...) --
Before the rest two well-arm'd Chiefs appeared,
Patroclus, and Automedon, prepared
With equal Courage to begin the Fight
At the Head of the Myrmidons. --
To heap up more Instances in a Thing so well known would be to no purpose. In
wiser Ages this Practice was laid aside, and Generals, considering how much the
Event of the Battle depended upon the Preservation of their Persons, usually
chose safer Posts, and were more cautious how they adventured themselves into
Danger.

The Retreat, and other Commands seem usually to have been sounded upon the
same Instrument, wherewith the Alarm was given: Yet in those Places, where the
Alarm was sounded by soft and gentle Music, the Retreat and other Orders we
find sometimes signified upon louder Instruments: Which may be observed of the
Lacedaemonians, who seem to have used Trumpets in signifying the General's
Orders, as appears from Polybius Lib. II. prope sinem.
, who reports that Cleomenes commanded a Party of his Army to change their
Posts by Sound of Trumpet.

The Lacedaemonians, when their Enemies fled out of the Field, were not allowed
to prosecute their Victory, or make long and eager Pursuits after them
Thucydides lib. V. Polyanus lib I.
: While they made Opposition, and were able to fight for Mastery, they
contended with invincible Courage and Resolution to bear, them down; but, when
they ceased to make Resistance, and yielded the Day, they gave them Liberty to
provide for their Safety by Flight, pursuing them only a very short Space, and
that by flow and easy Paces: The reason of which Custom Pausanias Messenicis.
accounts for from their strict and inviolate Observance of Order and
Discipline, which made them rather choose to let their Enemies escape, than by
breaking their Ranks to overtake them: Plutarch's Relation seems also rational,
and well suited to the old Spartan Temper; That the Spartans, having routed an
Enemy, pursued him 'till they had completed their Victory, and then sounded a
Retreat; thinking it base, and unworthy of true Grecians, to cut Men in Pieces,
that had ceased from resisting them, and left them the Field: Which manner of
Dealing with those they had conquered, did not only show their Magnanimity and
Greatness of Soul, but had a politic End in it too; For their Enemies, knowing
that they killed only those who made Resistance, and gave Quarter to the rest,
generally thought it their best Way to consult their Safety by an early Flight
Plutarchus Lycurgo, Apophthegmat. Laconicis, (...).
.

One Thing farther remains before the Conclusion of this Chapter, viz. That it
was frequent amongst the ancient Grecians to put their Cause upon the Issue of
a single Combat, and to decide their Quarrels by two, or more Champions on each
Side: And their Kings and great Commanders were so eager in their Pursuit after
Glory, so tender of the Lives of their Subjects, that they frequently sent
Challenges to their Rival Princes, to end their Quarrel by a single Encounter,
that by the Death of one of them they might prevent the Effusion of more Blood:
Remarkable Instances hereof we have in Xanthus King of B^eotia, who,
challenging the King of Att^ca, was slain by him, and so ended a dangerous War
between those States Vide Archaeolog. nostr. Vol. I p. 332.
; and in Pittacus the famous Mitylenian, who slew Phryno the Athenian General
in single Combat: Ancient Histories are full of such Examples, as likewise of
Wars happily concluded by a small Number commissioned by mutual Agreement to
decide the Controversy: The Lacedaemonians furnish us with one memorable
Instance in their Wars with Argos about the Title to Thyrea, which was
determined by three-hundred on each Side: Nor was the Conclusion of the War
between the Tegeans and Pheneans, two petty States in Arcadia, less remarkable,
being effected by a Combat of three Brothers on each Side Pluta^chus Par^lleli^.
, all the Circumstances of whose Story run exactly parallel to that of the
Horatii and Curiatii so famous in Roman Histories: The Eastern Countries were
acquainted with the same Custom, as may appear from Goliath's challenging the
Israelitish Host to give him a Man to fight with him, and the Flight of the
Philistines upon David's Victory over their Champion.

CHAPTER X. Of their Sieges, with the most remarkable of their Inventions, and
Engines used therein.
THERE are no Footsteps of any Siege amongst the primitive Grecians; their
Cities were not fortified with Walls, but lay open to all Invaders, and, their
Inhabitants once vanquished in open Field, became an easy Prey to the
Conquerors* Wherefore it is not to be wondered, that the People of those Times
enjoyed no fixed and settled Habitations, but frequently removed from one Part
of the Country to another, being forced to quit their Seats, whenever they were
coveted by a Power superior to their own Thucydides initio lib. I.
.

This moving and unsettled Condition, wh^rein they continued for some Ages,
caused them to attempt several Methods to secure themselves: Some built their
Cities upon the Tops of unaccessible Rocks, and Mountains, whence they could
easily r^pell a greater Force of Enemies: Others, whose Situation was not so
d^fensible, were driven to seek other Ways for their Safety, 'till at length
some Heads of no vulgar Understanding brought forth an amazing Contrivance to
enclose their Houses and Possessions within Walls; this at first was looked on
as a Work so wonderful, so far above Human Capacity, that the Gods were
frequently called from their blessed Mansions to undertake it: The Walls of
Troy (to mention no more) were of Divine Workmanship, and raised by no meaner
Persons than Neptune and Apollo: But if Mortals had the Happiness to project,
and finish so great a Design; they seldom sailed of being translated to Heaven,
and having their Names enrolled among those exalted Beings, to whom they were
thought to make neat Approaches, whilst on Earth.

And, since it was their Custom to immortalize the first Authors of every
little Contrivance, it is no Wonder if they conferred the same Honors on those
great Benefactours, to whom they were obliged for the Security and quiet
Possession of whatever the rest of their Deities had gratified them with. Once,
indeed, enclosed within Walls, they looked upon themselves safe from all
Assaults; and, had not a weak Opposition within been sufficient to repel much
greater Forces of Invaders, such a Town as Troy could never have held out ten
Years against an hundred-thousand Besiegers.

Nor were the Grecians of later Ages, however renowned for Knowledge in
Military Affairs, very willing to undertake, or expert in managing Sieges; But
rather chose to end their Quarrels, if possible, by one decisive Battle, than
to undergo the Fatigue, and other Incommodities of so tedious, so d^ngerous,
and expensive a Method.

Of all the Grecians the most averse from undertaking Leaguers, the most
unskilful in carrying them on to Advantage, were the Lacedaemonians; insomuch
that after Mardonius's Defeat at Plataeae, when a Body of Persians had taken
Refuge in some Wooden Fortifications, they could find no Means to drive them
thence, but must have been forced to retire, had not the Athenians, and some
other Grecians advanced to their Assistance Herodotus lib IX. cap. LXIX.
. For we are told by Plutarch, That their Lawgiver obliged them by a special
Injunction not easily to engage in Besieging Towns; and to loose their Lives in
such Undertakings was accounted inglorious, and unworthy a Spartan, as we learn
from the same Author Plutarch. Sylla.
, who, speaking of Lysander's being slain before the Gates of a little Baeotian
Town called Halia^tu^, tells us, That like some common Soldier, or one of the
forlorn Hope, he cast away his Life ingloriously, giving Testimony to the
ancient Spartans, that they did well to avoid Storming of Walls, where the
stoutest Man may chance to fall by the Hand not only of an abject Fellow, but
of a Boy, or Woman; as they say Achilles was slain by Paris at the Scaean Gates
of Troy Homer. Iliad. (...), v. 360.
; Pyrrhus also the great King of Epirus fell by the Hand of a Woman at Argos
Plutarchus Pyrrho.
.

When they endeavored to possess themselves of a Town, or Castle, it was usual
first to attempt it by Storm, surrounding it with their whole Army, and
attacking it in all Quarters at once, which the Greeks called (...), the Romans
corona cingere. When this Method proved ineffectual, they frequently desisted
from their Enterprise: But if resolved to prosecute it, they prepared for a
longer Siege; in carrying on which they seem not to have proceeded in any
constant and settled Method, but to have varied it according to the Direction
of their Generals, as well as the Difference of Time, Place, and other
Circumstances.

When they designed to lay close Siege to a Place, the first Thing they went
about was (...), or (...), the Works of Circumvallation, which we find
sometimes to have consisted of a double Wall, or Rampire, raised up of Turss
called in Greek (...), and (...), in Latin cespites. The interior
Fortification was designed to prevent sudden and unexspected Sallies from the
Town, and to deprive it of all possibility of Succor from without; the
exterior to secure them from foreign Enemies, that might come to the Relief of
the Besieged: Thus, when the Pelo^^^ncsians invested Plataeae, Thucydides
reports, they raised a double Wall, one toward the City, the other toward
Athens, to prevent all Danger on that Side; the middle Space, which was sixteen
Feet, was taken up with Lodges for Guards and Sentinels, built at due Distances
from one another, yet so close, that at a distant View the whole Pile appeared
to be one broad Wall, with Turrets on both Sides, after every tenth of which
was a larger Tower extended from Wall to Wall.

Engines were called by the ancient Grecians (...), and afterward (...)* The
first Invention of them the Grecians claim to themselves, b^ing not easily
induced to allow the Contrivance of any Art to other Nations; for it was their
Custom to travel into Egypt, India, and other Eastern Countries, to furnish
themselves with Sciences, and Inventions, which afterward they made public in
Europe, and vented as Productions of their own: Hence was derived most of the
Grecian Philosophy; and as for Engines used in Sieges, it appears they were
invented in the E^^tern Nations many Ages before Greece had the least Knowledge
of, or Occasion for them: Moses's Times seem not to have been unacquainted with
them De^teronum. cap. XX 2^.
, several of the Jewish Kings likewise app^ar to have known the Use of them;
whereas the Grecians 'till Homer's Time are not found to have had the least
Hint of any such Thing: Statius indeed carries them as high as the Trojan War,
and, speaking of the various Presents sent to Achilles by the Grecians in order
to carry on the War, reports that Pylos and Messene furnished him with Engines
to batter the Walls; Murorum tormenta Pylos Messenaque tralunt.
Large bat^'ring Engines are from Pylos sent,
And from Me^^ene --
But the Poet seems to have forgotten the rude and unskilful Age of this Hero,
and to have formed his Description from the Practices of his own Times; ^ince
Authors of better Credit have no mention of any such Thing: Homer indeed speaks
of (...), which some ancient Interpreters take for (...), scaling Ladders
Iliad. ^. v. 444
, -- (...)
(...)
Bearing well-pointed Spears these straight ascend
The scaling Ladders. --
But it may with no less Propriety be taken for the Pinnacles of Towers, as we
find it used in the following Verse Ibid. v. 258.
; (...)
The Tower's losty Pinnacles they razed,
Demolished all their Bulwarks. --
Others again will have them to have been as ancient as the Theban War, and to
have been the Contrivance of Capaneus, one of the seven Champions; the Story of
whose being knocked down with Thunderbolts was grounded on no better a
Foundation, than that, attempting to scale the Walls of Thebes with Ladders, he
was beaten down and slain with Stones: And since the Contrivance is so easy and
obvious, it may not be wholly improbable, that even those Ages were acquainted
with it, however the different sorts of Ladders were invented afterward, when
some of them were (...) Appian.
, p^^catiles, folded, others (...), (...), to b^ taken in Pieces Plutarchu^
(...)
, for the Convenience of Car^iage. The Matter they were composed of, was
likewise very different, being not only Wood, but Ropes, Leather, etc.

The rest of their Engines seem however to have been later: The Ram indeed is
said by Pliny to have been invented in the Trojan War, and to have given
occasion to the Fable of the Wooden Horse built by Epeus, it being the constant
Practice of those Times to wrap up the Original of every Invention in Fables:
But this is only Conjecture, and may with the same Ease be denied, as asserted;
Athenaeus indeed speaks of this Engine as very ancient Fine lib. VI.
, but does not fix it is Invention to any determinate Time, only observes that
the Romans were obliged for it to the Grecians; and since Vitruvius gives the
Honor of it is Contrivance to the Carthaginians in their Si^ge of Gades, and
neither Homer, nor any Greek Writer for many Ages after has the least mention
thereof, there seems little reason to credit Pliny's Report. It Is probable
however, that those Ages might have some small Helps in taking Towns,
contrived, as by several others, so particularly by E^cus, who is famous in
Poetical Story for b^ing an Artificer, and (as Lycophron reports) was very
serviceable on that Account to the Grecian Army, (...)
(...) Cassandr. v 945.
,
Dauntless in Boxing, but dismayed at the Sound
Of clashing Arms, yet by his famous Art
He was most useful to the Grecian Fleet.
But these Devices seem to have been exceeding contemptible, and unartificial;
and therefore were wholly laid (...) wiser Ages, and, it may be, never
practiced but at their first Invention. The only constant Instruments used by
the ancient Grecians in demolishing Walls, were (for ought appears to the
contrary) those they called (...), in Latin terebrae, which were long Irons
with sharp Ends: Wherefore it is reasonable to conclude that most of their
famous Engines were invented about the Time of the Peloponnesian War, wherein
it is plain from Thucydides they were used; Diodorus Lib. XII.
and Plutarch (...).
will have Peri^^es to have contrived several of them by the Assistance of
Artemon an Artificer of Ciazomenae, as Rams, Tortoises, etc. yet Cornelius
Nevo^ r^ports, that some of them were used in the Age before by Mil^iades, when
he besieged Paros; Plutarch also himself, when he reports out of Ephorus, that
battering Engines were first employed in the Samian War by Pericles, and
composed at that Time by Artemon, being then a strange and surprising Sight,
presently after add^, that Heraclides of Portus will have that Engineer to have
flouri^h'd several Ages before the Samian War; so that nothing of certainty can
be expected in this Matter. The Principal of the Grecian Inventions were these
which follow:

(...), testudo, a Tortoise, a defensive Invention, so called from it is
Strength, because it covered and sheltered the Soldiers under it, as a
Tortoise is covered by it is Shell: Several sorts we find of them, as, 1. (...),
testudo militaris, termed sometimes (...), when the Soldiers, drawn up close
to one another, and the hindermost Ranks bowing themselves, placed their
Targets above their Heads; as if we suppose the first Rank to stand erect, the
rest to stoop lower and lower by Degrees, 'till the last Rank kneeled upon the
Ground; the Men in the Front and on the Sides holding their Targets before
their Bodies, the rest covering the Heads of those that were placed before
them; so that the whole Body resembled a Pent-house, or Roof covered with
Tiles, down which the Enemy's missive Weapons easily glided without Prejudice
to the Soldiers underneath: This Invention was used in Field-battles, but more
frequently in surprising Cities before the Besieged were prepared for Defense;
and served to protect the Besiegers in their Approach to the Walls. 2. (...)
was apiece; the chief Design thereof was (as the Name imports) to guard
the Soldiers in filling Ditches, and casting up Mounts. 3. (...), was
triangular with it is Front shelving downwards for the Protection of Pioneers,
who undermined Walls. 4. To these may be added Testudo arietaria, wherewith
those that battered the Walls were protected; of which afterward.


(...), Wicker Hurdles, resembling the Roman vineae, which the Soldiers held
over their Heads. The Word came at length to signify Trifles, from the Siege of
Syracuse, where the Athenians calling continually for Hurdles to shelter them,
the Besiegers in Derision used to cry (...).

Another Engine composed of Boards, and, like the Roman pluteus, was used by
Alexander's Soldiers, as we read in Curtius.

(...), agger, a Mount, which was raised so high as to equal, if not exceed the
Top of the besieged Walls: The Sides were walled in with Bricks or Stones, or
secured with strong Rafters to hinder it from falling; the Forepart only,
being by Degrees to be advanced nearer the Walls, remained bare. The Pile it
self consisted of all sorts of Materials, as Earth, Timber, Boughs, Stones,
etc. as Thucydides reports in the Siege of Plataeae: Into the Middle were cast
also Wickers, and Twigs of Trees to fasten, and, as it were, cement the other
Parts. The whole Fabric is thus described by Lucan Lib. III.
; -- tunc omnia late
Procumbunt nemora, and spoliantur robore silvae;
Ut, cum terra levis mediam virgultaque molem
Suspendant, structa laterum compage ligatam
Arctet humum, pressus ne cedat turribus agger.
The Groves are felled, and strongest Timber sought,
From thickest Forests largest Oaks are brought,
To make strong Rafters to support the Pile,
Left the Earth break in and frustrate all their Toil,
Unable to sustain the Tower's Weight.
Mr. Hutchin.

(...), turres, mov^ (...) Tow^^^ of Wood, usually placed upon the Mount: They
were driven upon Wheels, which were fixed within the Bottom-planks to s^cu^e
them from the Enemies. Their Size was not always the same, but proportioned to
the Towers of the City they besieged; the Front was usually covered with Tiles,
and in later Times the Sides were likewise guarded with the same Materials;
their Tops were covered with raw Hides, and other Shrowds, to preserve them
from Fireballs and missive Weapons: They were formed into several Stories,
which were able to carry not Soldiers only, but all sorts of portable Engines;
whence Silius Lib. XIV.
; Turris multiplici surgens ad sidera tecto
Exibat, tabulata december cui crescere Grajus
Fecerat, and multas nemorum consumserat umbras.
Thin were the Groves, and scarce could boast a Shade,
When the Grajan with ten Rooms a Tower made,
Whose va^ious Turrets seemed the Stars to invade.
The first Contrivance is attributed to some Artificers of Sicily about the
Time of Dionysius the Tyrant; by some to Polyidus a Thessalian, Philip of
Macedon's Engineer Athenaus Mechanicit apud Turneb. Vitruvius lib. X. cap. XIX.
; by others to Diades and Chaereas Heron cap. XIII.
, who were Polyidus's Scholars, and entertained by Alexander in his Eastern
Expedition: The last of these seem rather to have been Improvers of the former
Invention, for we find mention of Wooden Towers in the elder Dionysius's Reign
Diodorus Seculus.
: It may be the Device of making (...), portable Turrets to be taken in Pieces
and carried along with the Army, may be owing to them.

(...), aries, the Ram, was an Engine with an Iron Head called in Greek (...),
or (...), resembling a Ram's Head, wherewith they battered the Enemies Walls:
Of these there were three kinds: 1. The first was plain and unartificial, being
nothing but a long Beam with an Iron Head, which the Soldiers drove with main
Force against the Wall. 2. The second was hung with Ropes to another Beam, by
the Help of which they thrust it forwards with much greater Force. 3. The third
differed only from the former, as being covered with a (...), or Shroud to
guard the Soldiers, whence it is called testudo arietaria.


The Beam was sometimes no less than an hundred and twenty Feet in length, and
covered with Iron Plates, left those who defended the Walls should set it on
Fire; the Head was armed with as many Horns as they pleased; Josephus reports
that one of Ve^pasian's Rams, the Length whereof was only fifty Cubits, which
came not up to to the Size of several of the Grecian Rams, had an Head as thick
as ten Men, and twenty-five Horns, each of which was as thick as one Man, and
placed a Cubit's Distance from the rest; the Weight hung (as was customary)
upon the Hinder-part, weighed no less than one thousand and five hundred
Talents; when it was removed from one Place to another, if it was not taken in
Pieces, an hundred and fifty Yoke of Oxen, or three hundred Pair of Horses and
Mules labored in drawing it; And no less than fifteen-hundred Men employed
their utmost Strength in forcing it against the Walls; at other Times we find
these Rams driven upon Wheels.

(...) was first invented by Demetrius, Son to Antigonus, who, having taken
Rhodos, with several other Towns by the Help of this Engine, was honored with
the Surname of (...). We have several Descriptions of it left us by Vitruvius
Lib. X.
, Plutarch Demetrio.
, and Diodorus Lib. XX.
, who, though differing in other Points, are thus far agreed, That it was a
Machine of prodigious Bulk, not unlike the Ram covered with a Shroud, but
vastly bigger, and of far greater Force; that it was driven both with Ropes and
Wheels, and contained several other smaller Engines, out of which Stones, and
other missive Weapons were cast.

(...) are used in different Senses, sometimes for Arrows, sometimes for
Engines, out of which Arrows were cast; in the later of which Significations
they are termed (...), and (...). They are likewise, though not very properly,
taken for Engines to cast Stones; and we find them sometimes used to throw
great Pieces of Timber: The Invention of them is ascribed to the Syrians by
Pliny; but Diodorus Lib. XIV.
, and Plutarch report, they were first contrived in Sicily, about the Time that
the elder Dionysius engaged in the War with Carthage.

Engines to cast Stones were of several sorts; some only for smaller Stones,
such as (...), Slings; others for those also of a a larger Size, called
sometimes only by the general Names of (...), and (...), or (...), the former
of which seem to signify all sorts of Engines, the later all those designed to
cast missive Weapons; sometimes by more peculiar Titles, as (...), which Names
are yet so general, as to comprehend all Engines that cast Stones: Nor is there
any proper Term, that I know of, for that famous Engine, out of which Stones of
a Size not less than Millstones were thrown with so great Violence, as to dash
whole Houses in Pieces at a Blow: 'Twas called indeed by the Romans Ballista,
but this Name, though of Grecian Original, appears not to have been used in
Greece; this Engine however was known there, and was the same with that used by
the Romans, the Force of which is thus expressed by Lucan Lib. III.
; At saxum quoties ingenti verberis ictu
Excutitur, qualis rupes, quam vertice montis
Abscidit impulsu ventorum adjuta vetustas;
Frangit cuncta ruens, nec tantum corpora pressat
Exanimat, totos cum sanguine, dissipat artus.
Such is the Force, when massy Stones are thrown,
As when from some Mount's Top a Rock falls down,
Which now worn out with Age cannot longer bear
The Shock of Winds, and Fury of the Year;
They break through all that in their Passage lie,
And do through Walls and Houses force their Way,
No only kill the Man, but spread all over
The Ground his scattered Limbs and reeking Gore.
Mr. Hutchin. These were the most remarkable Engines the Grecians used in
taking Towns. It will be expected in the next Place, that some Account be given
of the Methods, by which the Besieged defend themselves.

Upon the Enemy's Approach they gave notice to their Confederates (if they had
any) to hasten their Assistance: In the Day this was done by raising a great
Smoke; in the Night by Fires, or lighted Torches called (...), and (...),
whence to signify the coming of Enemies was called (...) Theog^^du Scholiastes.
Homeri S^holiastes Iliad ^.
: These were termed (...), to distinguish them from those they called (...),
which were lighted upon the Approach of Friends: They differed in this, that
the later were held firm and unmoved, the former tossed and waved to and fro in
the Air.

They seem not to have had any constant Method of defending themselves; but
thus much may be observed in general, that the Walls were guarded with
Soldiers, who, with Stones, and all sorts of missive Weapons assaulted the
Invaders; and the (...) with other Engines of that Nature were planted within
the Town, and played upon them. Several other Methods were practiced against
them, as, when the Tyrians heating brass Bucklers red hot, and filling them
with Sand and Lime, poured it upon Alexander's Soldiers, which getting between
their Armor and Flesh, burned vehemently, and caused them to fling off their
Armor, so that the Besiegers wounded them at pleasure, without receiving any
Hurt. Several Ways they had to elude the Force of their Engines, and defeat
their Strategems: Their Mines they rendered ineffectual by Countermines; their
Mounts they let fall to the Ground by Undermining their Foundations: Their
Towers and all their Engines they burned with Fireballs; themselves they
defended with Skins, Wooll-packs, and other Things proper to ward off Stones,
and other missive Weapons: The Heads of Battering Rams they broke off with
Stones of a prodigious Size from the Walls; or (as we read of the T^rians)
^ender'd them useless by cutting the Ropes, whereby they were governed, with
long Seythes: And if there remained no Hope of defending their Walls, they
sometimes raised new ones with Forts within. Many other Contrivances were used,
as the Posture of Affairs required, and as the Besieged were ingenious in
finding out Methods for their own Preservation.

Their manner of treating Cities they had taken, was not always the same,
depending upon the Temper of the General, who sometimes put all, at least all
that were in Arms, to the Sword, demolished the Walls and Buildings, and made
the rest Slaves; sometimes graciously received them into Favor, requiring only
some Tributary Acknowlegement. The Athenians had a Custom of sending Colonies
to inhabit the Places they had depopulated, which they divided by Lots among
some of the Commonalty, when met together in a public Assembly Aristophanu
Scholiastes (...) p. 134.
.

When they demolished a City, it was frequent to pronounce direful Curses upon
whoever should endeavor to rebuild it; which some imagine was the reason that
Troy could never be raised out of it is Ashes, though there wanted not who
attempted it, being devoted to eternal and irreparable Ruin by Agamemnon
E^tathius Iliad. ^. p. 350.
: This seems to have been a very ancient Custom, and derived from the Eastern
Nations; for (to omit other Instances) we find Joshua at the Destruction of
Jericho to have six'd an Imprecation upon the Person that should rebuild it
Joshua cap. VI. 26.
, which was accomplished in Hiel the Bethelite many Ages after in the Reign of
Ahab I. Reg. cap. XVI. 34.
.

CHAPTER XI. Of the Slain, and their Funerals.
THE ancient Grecians seem to have treated the Bodies of their dead Enemies in
a very undecent and inhuman manner, basely revenging the Injuries they had
received from them whilst living, by disfiguring, and stabbing their Carcases,
and exposing them to Scorn and Ignominy: Which cruel and barbarous Practice was
not thoroughly reformed in the Trojan War, as appears from diverse Instances in
the Iliads, where dead Enemies are dismembered by insulting Conquerours; none
of which is more remarkable than that of Hector, who lay unbury'd many Days,
was dragged round Troy's Walls, and Patroclus's Sepulcher, and suffered all
sorts of Indignities: This indeed might be imputed to Achilles's extravagant
Rage for the loss of Patroclus, or (as the Scholiast Iliad. ^. v. 398.
affirms) to a peculiar Custom of Thessaly his native Country, where it was
their constant Practice to drag at their Chariots the Murderers of their near
Friends, did it not appear that the rest of the Gre ians used him in a manner
no less brutish and barbarous, by cowardly insulting over him, and stabbing his
dead Body Ibid. v. 367.
: (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Thus having said, with unrelenting Force
He rends his vengefull Spear from Hector's Corse;
Too small the Recompense one Death could give,
But, Hector Dead, his Manes still must grieve:
He then the bloody, lifeless Corpse despoyl'd;
And Soldiers, with avenging Fury filled,
With eager Haste about his Body press,
Admire his Stature, and his Comeliness;
Each vents his Rage upon the already slain,
As though they meant to kill him over again:
Then thus one pointing to his Neighbor said,
With vaunting Words insulting over the Dead,
"Is this the Hector, whose tremendous Name
"Brought Fear and Terror wheresoe'er it came?
"Gods! how he is changed since when he threw his Fire
"Amidst our Ships, and made whole Greece retire.
Mr. Hutchin. Tydeus has no better Treatment in Statius (...) IX. v. 180.
; Ducitur hostili (proh dura potentia Fati!)
Tydeus ille solo, modo cui Thebana sequenti
Agmina, sive gradum, seu frena effunderet, ingens
Limes utrinque datus: Nusquam arma, manusque quiescunt,
Nulla viri feritas; juvat ora rigentia leto,
Et formidatos impune lacessere vultus;
Hic amor, hoc una timidi, fortesque sequuntur
Nobilitare manus, infectaque sanguine tela
Conjugibus servant, parvisque ostendere natis.
At God-like Tydeus (wretched Turn of Fate!)
Avenging Tyrians level all their Hate;
At God-like Tydeus, whose commanding Sway
Through Theban Troops did propagate Dismay;
Whether he mounted on his Horse appeared,
Or for destructive War on Foot prepared,
The opposing Squadrons dared not long to stay,
But, where he lead, submissively gave way;
Yet he brave Chief is dragged along the Field,
And bears what Foes with Power and Fury filled
Could ever inflict; his dreadful Arms they seize,
All stab his Corpse, and tear his manly Face;
The most opposing Minds in this conspire,
The timorous and the brave alike desire
To stab the Body of their Foe when slain,
And with his Blood their glutted Blades to stain,
These they as Marks of highest Honor prize,
And keep to show their Wives, and blooming Boys.
Mr. Hutchin. Whence it appears to have been their constant Practice, and
looked on as very consistent with Virtue, and Honor; as Servius has likewise
observed, when Virgil's Mezentius was used in the same manner; the Poet indeed
does not expressly affirm any such Thing, which notwithstanding plainly appears;
for whereas he only received two Wounds from Aeneas Fine Aen. X.
, we find his Breast Plate afterward pierced through in twelve, i.e. a great
many Places, a determinate Number being put for one indefinite Aeneid. XI v. 9.
; -- bis sex thoraca petitum
Perfossumque locis.
Through twice six Places was his Breast Plate pierced.
The barbarous Nations rarely failed of committing this Crime; Leonidas King of
Sparta, having valiantly lost his Life in fighting against Xerxes, had his Head
six'd upon a Pole, and his Body gibbeted Herodotus Calliope.
: But the Grecians were long before convinced of the Villainy, and Baseness of
such Actions; and therefore, when Pausanias the Spartan was urged to retaliate
Leonidas's Injury upon Mardonius, Xerxes's General overcome at Plataeae, he
refused to be concerned in, or permit a Revenge so barbarous, and unworthy a
Grecian: Even in the Times of the Trojan War the Grecians were much reformed
from the Inhumanity as well of their own Ancestors, as other Nations; it had
formerly been customary for the Conquerours to hinder their Enemies from
interring their Dead, 'till they had paid large Sums for their Ransom; and some
Footsteps of this Practice are found in Homer; Hector's Body was redeemed from
Achilles Iliad. ^.
, Achilles's was again redeemed from the Trojan^ for the same Price he had
received for Hector Lycophronii Cassandra v. 269.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
A Ransom large as that which Priam gave,
That Royal Hector's mangled Corpse might have
The happy Priv'lege of a decent Grave,
By Argian Chiefs shall be repaid to Troy,
And then the slain Achilles shall enjoy
That honorable Urn the grateful God
Upon his Mother Thetis had bestowed.
Mr. Hutchin. Nisus is introduced by Virgil, dissuading his Friend Euryalus
from accompanying him into Danger, left, if he were slain, there should be no
Person that would recover by Fight, or redeem his Body Aeneid. IX. v. 213
, Sit, qui me raptum pugna, pretiove redem^m
M^ndet humo s^lita. --
Let there be one, who moved with pitying Care
Would me redeem made Prisoner of the War,
Or ransomed decently my Corpse interr.
Whence it appears, that Redemption of the Dead was practiced in those Days,
and, if neglected, they were frequently suffered to lie unbury'd; which
Misfortune happened to many of Homer's Heroes, as we learn from the very
Entrance of the first Iliad, where he thus speaks of Achilles's Anger, (...)
(...)
(...) --
And numerous Crowds of valiant Hero's Ghosts
Sent mournful down unto the Stygian Coasts,
Whilst uninterr'd on Earth their Bodies lay,
Exposed to Dogs, and ravenous Birds a Prey.
But this was not so common as in more early Ages, for we find Achilles himself
celebrating the Funeral of Eetion King of Thebes in Cilicia, and Father of
Andromache, whom the Poet introduces speaking thus Iliad. ^. v. 414
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Then when the Walls of Thebes he overthrew,
His fatal Hand my Royal Father slew,
He slew E^ti^n, but despoiled him not,
Nor in his Hate the Funeral Rites forgot;
Armed as he was he sent him whole below,
And rev'renc'd thus the Manes of his Foe;
A Tomb he raised. --
Mr. Dryden. And Agame^^on granted the Trojans free Leave to perform the
Funeral Rites of all their Slain, promising upon Oath to give them no
Disturbance Iliad ^. v. 408.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I envy not the Priv'lege of the Dead,
I grant, that they upon the Pile be laid,
Let Jove be Witness to the Vows I make,
Nor will I ever the binding Covenant break.
Mr. Hutchin. Not long before, the Grecians were perfect Strangers to this
Piece of Humanity, for we are told that Hercules was the first that ever gave
leave to his Enemies to carry off their Dead Aelianus Var. Hist. lib. XII. cap
XXVII.
; and others report, that the first Treaty made for the recovering and burying
the Bodies of the Slain, was that of Theseus with the Thebans to interr the
Heroes that lost their Lives in the Theban War Plutarches Theseo.
. In all succeeding Ages, it was looked on as the greatest Impiety to deny what
they thought a Debt to Nature, and was rarely, or never done to lawful
Enemies, except upon extraordinary and unusual Provocations; for it was
thought below a generous Temper, and unworthy Grecians to vent their Malice,
when their Enemies were deprived of all Power to defend themselves.

The Grecians seem to have been careful to Excess and Superstition in
procuring an honorable Interment for the Bodies of their own Soldiers, that
had valiantly lost their Lives; insomuch that the ten Admirals, that gained
that famous Victory over the Lacedaemonians in the Sea fight at Arginusae, were
put to death on no other Pretense, but that they were said not to have taken
due Care in gathering the Bodies that floated on the Waves; when yet they
alleged, that they were hindered by a Tempest that might have been dangerous to
the whole Fleet, had they not provided for their Safety by a timely Retreat
Xenophan Grae. Hist lib. 1.
: This, no doubt, was one Cause why, after a battle upon the Corinthian
Territory, Nicias the Athenian General, finding that two of his Men were left
by an Oversight, when they carried off the Dead, made an Halt, and sent an
Herald to the Enemy for Leave to carry them off, hereby renouncing all Title to
the Victory, which belonged to him before, and loosing the Honor of erecting a
Trophy; for it was presumed that he, who asked Leave to carry off his Dead,
could not be Master of the Field Plutarchus Nicia.
. After that, Chabrias, having put to flight the Lacedaemonians at Naxus, rather
than leave any of his Soldiers, or their Bodies to the Mercy of the Waves,
chose to desist from prosecuting his Victory, when he was in a fair Way to have
destroyed the Enemy's whole Fleet Diodorus Siculus lib. XV.
.

When they carried their Arms into distant Countries, they reduced the Bodies
of their Dead to Ashes, that those at least might be conveyed to their
Relations, and reposited in the Tombs of their Ancestors: The first Author of
which Custom (they say) was Hercules, who having sworn to Licymnius to bring
back his Son Argius, if he would give him Leave to accompany him in his
Expedition against Troy, the young Man dying, he had no other Expedient to make
good his Oath, but by delivering his Ashes to his Father Homeri Scholiastes
Iliad. ^. v. 52.
: However we find it practiced in the Trojan War, where Nestor advised the
Grecians to burn all their Dead, and preserve them there 'till their Return
into Greece Iliad. ^. v. 332.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Oxen, and Mules, in solemn Order led,
To us assembled here shall bring our Dead,
That we their Bodies near our Ships may burn,
And save their snowy Bones 'till we to Greece return.
Mr. Hutchin.

The Lacedaemonians thought this an unprofitable Labor, and therefore buried
their Dead in the Country, where they died; only their Kings they embalmed
with Honey, and conveyed them Home, as we learn from Plutarch Agesilao.
, who reports that when Agesilaus resigned his Life at the Haven of Menelaus, a
desert Shore in Africa, the Spartans, having no Honey to embalm his Body,
wrapped it in Wax, and so carried it to Lacedemon.

The Soldiers all attended at the Funeral Solemnities with their Arms turned
upside down, it being customary for Mourners in most of their Actions to behave
themselves in a manner contrary to what was usual at other Times; in those
Places where it was the Fashion to wear long Hair, Mourners were shaved; and
where others shaved, Mourners wore long Hair: Their Conjecture therefore is
frivolous, that imagine, the Soldiers turned the Heads of their Shields
downwards, lest the Gods, whose Images were engraven upon them, should be
polluted with the Sight of a Corpse Servius in Aeneid. XI. 92.
; since not the Gods only, but any other Figures were frequently represented
there; nor some few only, but the whole Company held them in the same Posture:
Besides, not the Shields alone, but their other Arms were pointed downwards:
Thus Evander's Arcadians, with the rest of Aeneas's Soldiers in Virgil Loc.
cit.
follow Pallas's Hearse, -- Tum maesta phalanx, Teucrique sequuntur,
Tyrrhenique duces, and versis Arcades armis.
Next went the mournful Troop, Captains from Troy,
Tyrrhenia, and from pleasant Arcady,
With Arms turned downward. --
The Grecian Princes in Statius Thebard. VI.
observe the same Custom; -- versis ducunt insignibus ipsi
Grajugenae reges. --
The Grecian Chiefs the sad Procession led
With Ensigns downwards turned. --


Their Tombs were adorned with Inscriptions showing their Names, and sometimes
their Parentage, and Exploits, which Honor the Spartan Lawgiver granted to
none beside Women who died in Childbed, and Soldiers Plutarchus Lycurge.
that lost their Lives in Battle: These were buried with green Boughs, and
honored with an Oration in their Praise: Such of them as had excelled the
rest, and were judged complete and perfect Warriors, had a farther Honor of
being interred in their Red Coats, which were the Soldier's Habit at Sparta
Aelianus Var. Hist. lib VI cap. VI.
: Their Arms were likewise fixed upon their Tombs; whence Leonidas the Spartan
King is introduced in the Epigram refusing Xerxes's purple Robe, and desiring
no other Ornament to beautify his Tomb, than his Buckler; (...)
(...)
(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
Whilst Xerxes moved with pitying Care beheld
The unhappy Spartan, who himself had killed*
The Royal Persian with officious Haste
His purple Robe about the Body cast;
'Till dying Leonidas Silence broke,
And thus that generous Spartan Hero spoke;
"Forbear, fond Prince, this unbecoming Pride,
"No Persian Pomp shall ever these Relics hide,
"Soft purple Palls are only used by those,
"Who have betrayed their Country to their Foes;
"My Buckler's all the Ornament I Will have,
"'It Is that which better shall adorn my Grave
"Than 'Scutcheon, or a formal Epitaph;
"My Tomb thus honored, I Will triumphant go
"Like some brave Spartan to the Shades below.
Mr. Hutchin This Custom was not peculiar to Sparta, but practiced all over
Greece; where, beside their Arms, it was usual to add the Badge of whatever
other Profession they had born. Espenor, appearing in the Shades below to
Ulviles, entreats him to fix the Oar he used to row with, upon his Tomb, and to
cast his Arms into the Funeral Pile Odyss. ^. v. 74.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Whatever Arms remain to me when dead,
Shall with my Corpse upon the Pile be laid;
Then over my Grave a lasting Mon'ment rear,
Which to Posterity my Name shall bear;
This do, then fix the Oar upon my Tomb,
With which I used to cut the Silver Foam.
Mr. Hutchin. Alisenus, Aeneas's Trumpeter, has both his Arms, Oar, and Trumpet
fixed upon his Grave Virgil. Aeneid. VI. v. 232
; At pius Aeneas ingenti mole sepulcrum
Imponit, suaque arma viro, remumque, tubamque.
A Tomb of vast extent Aeneas reared,
Where the dead Corpse was decently interred,
And on it his Arms, his Oar, and Trumpet fixed.


It was customary for the Spartan Matrons, when there had been a Fight near
Home, to examine the Bodies of their dead Sons, and such, as had received more
Wounds behind than before, they conveyed away privately, or left them in the
common Heap; but those, who had a greater Number of Wounds in their Breasts,
they carried away with Joy and Triumph, to be reposited amongst their Ancestors
Aelianus Var Hist lib. XII. cap XXI.
: They were carried Home upon their Bucklers; whence that famous Command of the
Mother to her Son related in Plutarch Apophthegmat.
, (...), i. e. either bring this (meaning his Buckler) home with you, or be
brought upon it. To which Custom Ausonius alludes Epigram. XXIV.
; Arma superveheris quid, Thrasybule, tua?
Why are you thus upon your Buckler born,
Brave Thrasybulus ^ --


The Athenians used to place the Bodies of their Dead in Tents three Days
before the Funeral, that all Persons might have Opportunity to find out their
Relations, and pay their last Respects to them: Upon the fourth Day a Coffin of
Cypress was sent from every Tribe, to convey the Bones of their own Relations,
after which went a covered Hearse in memory of those, whose Bodies could not be
found: All these, accompanied with the whole Body of the People, were carried
to the public Burying place called Ceramicus, and there interred: One Harangue
was spoken in Commendation of them all, and their Monuments adorned with
Pillars, Inscriptions, and all other Ornaments usual about Tombs of the most
honorable Persons. This was their ordinary Practice at Athens Thacylides lib.
III.
, but those valiant Souls, that were slain in the Battle at Marathon, had their
Bodies interred in the Place where they fell, to perpetuate the Memory of that
wonderful Victory:

It may be observed farther, that in their Lists the Names of the Soldiers
deceased were marked with the Letter (...), being the Initial of (...), i. e.
Dead; those of the living with (...), because it is the first in (...), i. e.
Preserved: Which Custom was afterward taken up by the Romans R^t^mus in (...)
v, ' Paulas Diace^u^ De notis literatum, Isidorus Hisp. l. lib 1. cap XXIII.
.

CHAPTER XII. Of their Booty taken in War, their Gratitude to the Gods after
Victory, their Trophies, etc.
THEIR Booty consisted of Prisoners, and Spoils. The Prisoners, that could not
ransom themselves, were made Slaves, and employed in the Service of their
Conquerours, or sold.

The Spoils were distinguished by two Names, being either taken from the Dead,
and termed (...), or from the Living, which they called (...): They consisted
of whatever Movables belonged to the Conquered, whose whole Right and Title by
the Law of Arms passed to the Conquerours Plato De Legib. lib. 1.
.

Homer's Heroes have no sooner gained a Victory over any of their Rivals, but
without farther Delay they seize their Armor; Instances of this are as
numerous as their Combats. But however this Practice might be usual among the
great Commanders, who rode in Chariots to the Battle, fought by themselves, and
encountered Men of their own Quality in i^^gle Combat; yet inferior Soldiers
were not ordinarily permitted such Liberty, but gathered the Spoils of the
Dead, after the Fight was ended: If they attempted it before, they were even
then looked upon to want Discipline; Nestor gives the Grecians a particular
Caution in this Matter Iliad. ^. v. 66.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Then Nestor thus began his sage Advice;
My Friends, and valiant Greeks, be timely wise,
Auspicious Sons of Mars, let no Delay,
No Hopes of fordid Booty cause your Stay;
But with united Force rush on the Foe,
Add certain Death to each becoming Blow;
'Twill then be time enough for to prepare
To seize the Booty of the horrid War,
To drag your mangled Foes along the Plain,
When weltring in their Blood they lie all slain.
Mr. Hutchin.

This Method was taken in succeeding Ages; for no sooner were their Battles
ended, but they fell to stripping and risling the dead Carcases of their
Enemies: Only the Lacedemoni^n were forbidden to meddle with the Spoils of
those they had conquered Ae^^^us lib. VI. cap. VI.
; the reason of which Prohibition being demanded of Cleomenes, he replied, That
it was improper to offer the Spoils of Cowards to the Gods, and unworthy a
Lacedemonian to be enriched by them Plutarchus Apophthegm. Laconicu.
: But this seems only a Pretense, since there are several Instances of their
dedicating Part of their Booty to the Gods; The true Reason perhaps may be
collected from the Constitution of their State, whereby an Equality was
maintained amongst them, and nothing more severely prohibited, or more
repugnant to the very Foundation of their Government than to acquire, or
possess large Estates: Wherefore, to prevent their Soldiers from seizing upon
the Spoils, they had always three hundred Men appointed to observe their
Actions, and put the Law in execution against Delinquents Eulatinus Iliad. ^.
v. 66.
.

The whole Booty was brought to the General, who had the first Choice, divided
the Remainder amongst such as had signalized themselves according to their
Quality and Merits, and allotted the rest equal Portions: Thus in the Trojan
War, when the captive Ladies were to be chosen, Agamemnon in the first Place
took Astynome Ch^yses's Daughter, next Achilles had Hippodamia Daughter to
Bri^es, then Ajax those Teemessa, and so on Isaac. Tzerzes in Lycophronis
Cassandram v. 299.
; whence Achilles complains of Agamemnon, that he had always the best Part of
the Booty, himself, who sustained the Burden of the War, being content with a
small Pittance Iliad. ^. v. 163.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Yet when the Greeks some Trojan Town invade,
And Distribution of the Spoils is made,
How small a Part compared to thine I bear,
I who have born the Burden of the War,
Nor do you envy me in this the largest Share.
But when the so much wished for Time arrives,
That to each Greek the allotted Portion gives,
Laden with Spoils you haste into your Tent,
Whilst I, with fighting quite fatigued and spent,
Come to the Navy with a grateful Heart
For that small Pittance they to me impart.
Mr. Hutchin. And whenever any Booty of extraordinary Value was taken, we find
the Soldiers reserving it for a Present to their General, or the Commander of
their Party: Instances of this sort are frequent, as in other Writers, so
especially in Homer; Ulysses's Company always honored him with the best and
choicest Part of what they took. Hered^^s Calliope.
reports that after the Victory over Mardonius Xerxes's Lieutenant, Pausanias
the Spartan, being at that Time General of all the Grecian Forces, was
presented with a great Booty of Women, Money, Horses, Camels, etc. over and
above what was given to any other: This Practice indeed was so universal, that
to be a Commander, and to have the first Share of the Booty are used by the
Poets as equivalent Expressions: Whence Lycophron Cassandra. v. 293.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Thy Hands shall mighty Potentates subdue,
And brave Commanders that the Prize first share,
Chiefs too, that so much boast their Pedigree.


But before the Spoils were distributed, they looked on themselves obliged to
make an Offering out of them to the Gods, to whose Assistance they were
indebted for them all; those separated to this Use, were termed (...), either
q. (...), (...), because the War, wherein they were collected, had destroyed
many Eustathius Odyss. ^.
; or, (...), because after Sea-engagements they were exposed upon the Shore
Bulengerus Lib. de spoliis.
; or rather, from their being taken (...), from the Top of the Heap; because
all the Spoils being collected into one Heap, the First Fruits were offered to
the Gods Sophoclu Scholeastes Trachen.
: In allusion to which Custom, Megara in Euripides, telling what Choice of
Wives she had made for her Sons out of Athens, Sparta, and Thebes, thus
expresses it, (...)


The Gods, to whom this Honor was paid, were not only those, whom they looked
on as having a peculiar Concern in all Affairs of War, such as Mars, Minerva,
etc. but several others, as Jupiter Juno, and any to whom they thought
themselves obliged for Success, those especially that were Protectours of their
City, or Country, etc.

They had several Methods of consecrating Spoils: Sometimes they collected them
into an Heap, and consumed them with Fire; sometimes they made Presents, which
were dedicated and hung up in Temples: So Pausanias the Spartan is reported to
have consecrated out of the Persian Spoils a Tripod to Delphian Apollo, and a
Statue of Brass seven Cubits long to Olympian Jupiter Herodotus lib. IX.
.

It was very frequent to dedicate their Enemy's Armor, and hang it in Temples;
but the Lacedaemonians were forbidden this Custom; which perhaps may be the
meaning of Cieomenes's forementioned Reply; for that they were allowed to
offer their other Spoils appears as from that of Pausanias, so from several
other Instances. This Custom was very ancient Eustathius Iliad. ^. v. 81.
, and universally received not in Greece alone, but most other Countries: Hence
Hector promises to dedicate his Enemy's Armor in Apollo's Temple, if he would
vouchsafe him Victory Iliad. lo. cit.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
If kinder Phoebus my Proceedings bless,
And crown my bold Attempt with good Success,
Make Hector conquer, whilst his Foe shall bleed,
And give me the Honor of so brave a Deed,
When I Have despoyl'd my Foe, his Arms I Will bring,
And there devote them in his Temple. --
Mr. Hutchin* Virgil alludes to this Custom in his Description of the Temple,
where Latinus gave Audience to Aeneas's Ambassadors Aeneid VII. v. 183.
; Multaque praeterea sacris in postibus arma,
Captivi pendent currus, curvaeque secures,
Et cristae capitum, and portarum ingentia claustra,
Spi^^^^aque, clyp^ique, creptaque rostra carinis.
Axes, and Arms did sacred Posts adorn,
And Chariot, from the conquered Nations born,
Crests too, and massy Bars of Gates, and Spears,
And Beaks of Ships, and Bucklers. --
Many other Instances to the same purpose occurr in Authors. This Custom seems
to have been derived into Greece from the Eastern Nations, where no doubt it
was practiced; what else can be the meaning of Goliath's Sword being reposi^ed
in the Jewish Place of Worship I. Sam. XXI. 9.
?

Nor was it customary only to dedicate to the Gods Weapons taken from Enemies,
but their own likewise, when they retired from the Noise of War to a private
Life; which seems to have been done, as a grateful Acknowlegement to the Gods,
by whose Protection they had been delivered from Dangers. Horace alludes to
this Custom Lib. I. Epist. I. v. 4.
; -- Vejanius, armis
Herculis ad postem fixis, latet abditus agro.
Vejanius now consults his private Ease,
Desists from War, and seeks retired Peace,
Having hung up his Arms to He^cules.
Ovid also speaks to the same purpose Trist. lib. IV.
; Miles ut emeritis non est satis milis a^^is,
P^ni^ ad antiques, quae tuli^, arma Lares.
The battered Soldier harrass'd out with Age,
Not able longer in the War to engage,
Devotes the Arms, which formerly he bore,
To's Household Gods for their assisting Power.
But lest these Arms should furnish Malcontents in sudden Tumult^ and
Insurrections, they seem to have been usually some Way or other rendered unfit
for present Service: The Bucklers, for instance, were hung up without Handles;
whence a Person in on^ of the Poets seeing them otherwise, cries out in a
Fright, (...)
Unhappy Wretch! the Bucklers Handles have.
The reason may be collected from the foregoing Verses, where another says,
(...)
(...)
If you sincerely wish the public Good,
You should not suffer any to devote
Bucklers with Handles. --


As a farther Expression of their Gratitude to the Gods, it was customary to
offer solemn Sacrifices, and return public Thanks to them: Here it may be
observed, that the Laced^monians for their greatest Successes by Force of Arms
offered no more than a Cock to the God of War, but, when they obtained a
Victory by Strategem, and without Blood, they sacrificed an Ox Plutarelius
Institut. Laconic.
; whereby they gave their Generals to understand, that Policy as well as Valor
was required in a complete Warrior, and that those Victories were to be
preferred, whereby they suffered the least Damage, surpassing herein the Roman
Constitution, which rewarded with greater Honors the Victors in open Field,
than those who gained a Conquest by Policy, as esteeming the former Method more
noble and becoming Romans; wheresore those were permitted to enter the City in
Triumph, but the later were only honored with an Ovation Idem Mar^ello.
. It may not be improper in this Place to add, that the Grecians had a Cust^m
something resembling the Roman Triumph, for the Conquerours used to man a
Procession through the Middle of their City, crowned with Garlands, repeating
Hymns and Songs, and brandishing their Spears; the Captives were also l^d by
them, and all their Spoils exposed to public View, to do which they called
(...) Phav^rinus.
.

Trophies were called by the ancient Athenians (...), by succeeding Ages (...)
Aristophanu Schol^astes ^l^t^.
: They were dedicated to some of the Gods, especially Jupiter sirnam'd (...),
and (...) Pausanias Lac^ni^u, Plut^rchus Parallel^^, Phur^^tus.
, and Juno, who shared in her Husband's Title, being called (...) Phavo^i^us.
; whence Lycophron Cassandra v. 1^28.
, -- (...)
The manner of adorning Trophies was hanging up all sorts of Arms taken from
the Enemy, according to Euripides H^raclid. v. 786.
; -- (...)
(...)
All sorts of Arms, that from the Foe he took,
He hung about the Trophy which he raised.
Hence also Iuvenal Satir. X. v. 133.
speaking of the Roman Triumphal Arches, Bellorum exuviae, truncis astixa
tropaeis
Lorica, and fracta de cas^ide buccula pendens,
Et curtum temone jugum, vic^eque triremis
Aplustre. --
The Spoils of War brought to Feretrian Jove,
An empty Coat of Armor hung above
The Conqu'rour's Chariot, and in Triumph born
A Streamer from a boarded Gally torn,
A chap-fall'n Beaver loosely hanging by
The cloven Helm. --
Mr. Dryden. To these they usually added the Names of the God they were
dedicated to, of the Conquerours also, and of those overcome by them, with an
Account of all the Spoils, and other remarkable Occurrences in the War; this
Inscription was called (...), or (...), and was frequently engraved, whence
Lucian says (...); sometimes written with Ink, whence O^hryades the
Lacedemonian, just surviving his Victory over the Argians, caused a Trophy to
be erected, upon which, being supported by his Spear, he inscribed with his own
Blood, instead of Ink, (...) Plutarchus Parallelis, Sto^aus Tit. De Fortuna.
.

The Spoils were hung upon the Trunk of a Tree; the Olive was frequently put to
this Use, being the Emblem of Peace, which is one of the Consequents of
Victory: Several other Trees also had the same Honor, especially the Oak, as
being consecrated to Jupiter, who had a peculiar Right to these Respects; there
is frequent mention of this in the Poets: Sidonius Panegyric.
, -- quercusque tropaeis
C^n va gemit. --
The bended Oak beneath the Trophies groans.
Statins describes the same Custom Theba^d.
; Quercus crat tenerae jamdudum oblita juventae,
Huic laeves galeas, perfossaque vulnere crebro
Inferit arma. --
There stood an ancient Oak, whose sprightly Juice
Decayed by Age could not like Life insuse
Through every Part, on this bright Helmets hung,
And battered Arms. --
Virgil also concurrs herein with them in several Places, and adds farther,
that Aeneas's Trophy was upon an Hill; whence it may seem probable, that it was
customary to set them upon eminent Places, to render them more conspicuous: His
Words are these Aeneid. XI. v. 4.
; Vota Deum primo victor solvebat Eoo;
Ingentem quercum, decisis undique ramis,
Constituit t^mulo, sulgentiaque induit arma,
Mezent^ ^^cis exuvias, tibi, magne, trophae^m,
Bellipotens; aptat rorantes sanguine cristas,
Telaque trunca viri, and bis sex thoraca petitum
Persossumque locis, clypeumque ex aere sinistrae
Subligat, a^que ensem collo suspendit eb^^num.
Soon as the Morn her weaker Beams displayed,
His Vows to Heaven the pious Victor paid:
A stately Oak, whose Branches all around
Were first ^opt off, he placed on rising Ground,
With glitt^ring Arms the hallowed Trunk he graced,
The Spoils of King Mezentius deceased,
Which Trophie, mighty Arbiter of War,
The grateful Prince did to thy Honor rear,
He hung his nodding Plume besmeared with Blood,
And broken Spears upon the leaf-less Wood,
Then round the Stock his much-pierc'd Corslet bound,
The sad Remembrance of each ghastly Wound,
And on the left Side fix^d the brazen Shield,
With which Mezentius (...) the fatal Field,
Then round his Neck the leathern Belt he cast,
And in it his iv'ry-hilted Sword he placed.
Mr. Hutchin. In the same manner Pompey, having subdued the Spaniards, erected
a Trophy upon the Top of the Pyrenean Mountains.

Instead of Trees, succeeding Ages erected Pillars of Stone, or Brass, to
continue the Memory of their Victories; to raise these they ^erm'd (...), which
Expression was likewise applied to the Erection of Trees; for if the Place they
pitched on was void of Trees fit for their purpose, it was usual to supply that
Defect by fixing one there, as appears from the forementioned Passage of
Virgil.

To demolish a Trophy was looked on as unlawful, and a kind of Sacrilege,
because they were all consecrated to some Deity: Nor was it less a Crime to pay
Divine Adoration before them, or to repair them, when decayed, as may be
likewise observed of the Roman Triumphal Arches; This being a means to revive
the Memory of forgotten Quarrels, and engage Posterity to revenge the Disgrace
of their Ancestors: For the same reason, the Grecians, that first introduced
the Custom of erecting Pillars for Trophies, incurred a severe Censure from the
Ages they lived in Pl^ta^chus Roma^^s Quaestionibus.
.

The Macedonians never erected Trophies, obliged hereto by a Prescription,
observed from the Reign of Caranus, one of whose Trophies was demolished by
Wolves Pausanias p. 315.
; which was the reason, that Alexander the Great, however vainglorious in
other Instances, never raised a Trophy: As for those erected by the Macedonians
of succeeding Ages in their Wars with the Romans, they were inconsistent with
the ancient Custom of their Country. In some Ages after this, they seem to have
been wholly laid aside.

Yet, they were not wanting to raise Monuments to preserve the Memory of their
Victories, and to testify their Gratitude to the Gods; some of which are
likewise mentioned in Authors before the Disuse of Trophies. Sometimes Statues
were erected to the Gods, especially to Jupiter, as appears from that which
Pausanias dedicated out of the Persian Spoils Her^dotus lib. IX.
, and several others; There is frequent mention of this Custom in Euripides
P^^^^ss.
, -- (...)
Again, -- (...)
Several other Instances may be produced: Sometimes the same God was honored
with a Temple on such accounts, as appears from the Story of the Dorians, who,
having overcome the Achaeans, raised a Temple to Jupiter (...) P^^ani^^
Laconicu.
.

Sometimes they erected Towers, which they adorned with the Spoils of their
Enemies; which was likewise a Roman Custom, and practiced by Fabius Maximus,
and Domitius Aenobarbus after the Victory over the Allobroges Lucius Florus
lib. III. cap. II.
.

It was also customary to raise Altars to the Gods; an Instance whereof we have
in Alexander, who, returning from his Indian Expedition, erected Altars in
Height ^carce inferior to the most lofty Towers, and in Breadth exceeding them
Arrian^s Exped. Alex. lib. V.
.

CHAPTER XIII. Of their Military Punishments, and Rewards, with their manner of
conveying Intelligence.
THE Grecians had no constant method of correcting their Soldiers, but left
that to the Discretion of their Commanders; only in some few Cases the Laws
made provision. (...), Runagates, suffered Death.

(...), such as refused to serve in the Wars, and such as quitted their Ranks,
by one of Charondas's Laws were obliged to ^it three Days in the public Forum
in Woman's Apparel Diodorus Siculus.
. The Athenians delivered such, with the (...), i. e. those who lost their
Bucklers, to certain Judges called Heliastae, who punished them at Discretion;
nor were they permitted to enter the Temples, 'till they had satisfied Justice
Aeschines in Ctes^p^ontem.
. But of all others the Lacedaemonians inflicted the heaviest Punishments on all
such Offenders; for their Laws obliged them either to conquer, or to die upon
the Place; and such as quitted their Bucklers, laid under as great Disgrace, as
if they had forsaken their Ranks: Runagates were not only deprived of all
Honors, but it was likewise a Disgrace to intermarry with them; whoever met
them in the Streets, had Liberty to beat them, nor was it permitted them to
resist in their own Defense; and to make them more remarkable, whenever they
went abroad, they were obliged to wear a nasty Habit, their Gowns were patched
with diverse Colors, and their Beards half shaved, half unshav'd Plu^a^chus
Agesila^
; the Scandal was likewise extended to their whole Family, and therefore their
Mothers frequently at^n'd for their Crime, by stabbing them at their first
meeting; which was a common Practice, and frequently alluded to in the Greek
Epigrams, in one of which^a Spartan Matron, having run her Son through, thus
insults over him, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Be gone, degenerate Offspring, quitt this Light,
E^rotas is concerned at thy loathed Sight,
For see he stops his Course, ashamed to glide
By that polluted Coast, where you abide;
Hence then, unprofitable Wretch, speed to the Dead,
And hide in Hell thy ignominious Head;
Base dastard Soul, unworthy to appear
On Spartan Ground; I never did thee bear.
Mr. Hutchin. Several others may be produced to the same purpose; and where the
same Fate be^^ll those that lost their Bucklers: Now the reason being demanded
of Dem^ratus, why they punished so severely those who quitted their Bucklers,
when the Loss of their Helmet, or Coat of Mail, was not looked on to be so
scandalous, he replied, That these were only designed for the Defense of single
Persons, whereas Bucklers were serviceable to the whole Battalia.

Beside the Rewards of Valor already mentioned in the foregoing Chapters,
there were several others: The private Soldiers were put into Office, and the
subordinate Officers were honored with greater Commands. It was likewise
customary for the General to reward those that signalized themselves, with
large Presents; Whence Telamon, being the first that gained the Top of Troy's
Walls, when it was besieged by Hercules, had the Honor to have Hesione the
King's Daughter for his Captive: Theseus was presented by the same Hero with
Antiope the Amazonian Queen, for his Service in the Expedition against the
Amazons. The Poets frequently introduce Commanders encouraging their Soldiers
with Promises of this nature: Thus Agamemnon animates Teucer to behave himself
courageously, by assuring him of a considerable Reward, when the City should be
taken I^iad. ^. v. 2^^.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
Next after mine, yours is the best Reward,
A Tripod, or a Chariot stands prepared.
For your Acceptance; else some captive Maid
Shall big with charms ascend your joyous Bed.
Mr. Hutchin. Ascanius in Virgil makes no less Promises to Nisus Aeneid. IX.
253.
; Bina dabo arge^^o perfecta, atque aspera signis
Pocula, devicta Genitor quae cepit Arisba,
Et tripodas geminos; auri d^o magna talema;
Cratera antiquum, quem dat Sidonia Dido:
Si vero capere Italia^n, sceptrisque potiri
Contigerit victori, and praedae ducere sortem;
Vidisli quo Turnus equo, quibus ibat in armis
Aureus, ipsum illum c^peum, c^i^^asque rubentes
Excipiam sorti, jam nun^ ^^a praemia, Nise:
Praeterea bis sex genitor lectis^ima ma^rum
Corpora, captivosque dabit, suaque omnibus arma;
Insu^er id campi quod ^ex habet ipse Latinus.
Your common Gi^t shall two large Goblets be
Of Silver wrought with curious Imagery,
And high embossed, which, when old Priam reigned,
My conquering Sire at sacked Arisba gained;
And more, two Tripods cast in Antic Mold,
With two great Talents of the finest* Gold,
Beside, a costly Bowl engraved with Art,
Which Dido gave, when first she gave her Heart:
But if in conquered Italy we reign,
When Spoils by Lot the Victor shall obtain,
Thou saw the Courser by proud Turnus pressed,
That, Nisus, and his Arms, and nodding Crest,
And Shield from chance exempt shall be thy Share;
Twelve laboring Slaves, twelve Handmaids young, and fair,
All clad with rich Attire, and trained with Care,
And last, a Latian Field with fruitful Plains,
And a large Portion of the King's Domains.
Mr. Dryden. Several other Promises they encouraged them with, according to
every Man's Temper, or Condition: Wherefore Ascanius thus proceeds to Euryalus
Nisus's Companion in Danger; Te vero, mea quem spatiis propioribus aetas
Insequitur, vencrande puer, jam pectore toto
Accipio, and comitem casus complector in omnes;
Nulla meis sine te quaeretur gloria rebus,
Seu pacem, scu bella geram, tibi maxima rerum,
Verborumque fides. --
But thou, whose Years are more to mine allied,
No Fate my vowed Affection shall divide
From thee, Heroic Youth; be wholly mine,
Take full Possession, all my Soul is thine;
One Faith, one Fame, one Fate shall both attend
My Life's Companion, and my Bosom Friend,
My Peace shall be committed to thy Care,
And to thy Conduct my Concerns in War.
Mr. Dryden.

Sometimes Crowns were presented, and inscribed with the Person's Name, and
Actions, that had merited them, as appears from the Inscription upon the Crown
presented by the Athenians to Conon, (...).

Others were honored with Leave to raise Pillars, or erect Statues to the
Gods, with Inscriptions declaring their Victories; which Plutarch supposes to
have been a Grant rarely yielded to the greatest Commanders: Cimon indeed was
favored therewith, but Miltiades, and Themisto^^es could never obtain the
like; nay, when Miltiades only desired a Crown of Olive, one Sochares stood up
in the Midst of the Assembly, and replied, when thou shall conquer alone,
Miltiades, thou shall triumph so too; which Words were so agreeable to the
Populace, that his Suit was rejected: The reason why Cimon was more respected
than the rest, our Author Plutarchus Cimone.
thinks, was because under other Commanders they stood upon the Defensive; but
by his Conduct they not only repulsed their Enemies, but invaded them in their
own Country: But perhaps a more true and real Account may be taken from the
Change of Times, for the primitive Ages seem not to have been so liberal in the
distribution of Rewards, as those that succeeded; for when later Generations
degenerated from their Ancestors, and produced fewer Instances of Magnanimity
and true Valor, the Way to Honor became easier, and Men of common
Performances without Difficulty obtained Rewards, which before were only paid
to Persons of the first Rank for Virtue, and Courage Aeschines in Ctesiphontem.
.

Another Honor conferred at Athens upon the Valiant, was to have their Arms
placed in the Citadel, and to be called Cecropidae, Citizens of the true old
Blood; to which Custom the Poet alludes, (...)


Some were presented with a (...), or complete Suit of Armor; as we find of
Alcibiades, when he was very young, and went in the Expedition against Potidaea
Plutarchus Al^ibiad^.
.

Others were complemented with Songs of Triumph, the first of which were
composed in Honor of Lysander the Spartan General Pi^ta^chu^ Lysandro.
.

Many other Honors were paid to such as deserved well of their Country; but I
shall only mention one more, which consisted in the Care of the Children of
such as valiantly sacrificed their Lives for the Glory, and Preservation of the
Athenian Commonwealth Aeschines in Ctesiphonte^.
: They were carefully educated at the public Charge, 'till they came to
Maturity, and then presented with a complete Suit of Armor, and brought forth
before the People, one of the public Ministers proclaiming before them; That
hitherto in Remembrance of their Fathers Merits the Commonwealth had educated
these young Men, but now difiniss'd them so armed, to go forth, and thank their
Country by imitating their Fathers Examples. For their farther Encouragement,
they had the Honor of (...), or having the first Seats at Shows, and all
public Meetings.

It may not be improper to add something concerning their way of sending
Intelligence: This was done several ways, and by several sorts of Messengers,
one remarkable were their (...), who were lightly armed with Darts,
Hand-granadoes, or Bows and Arrows S^^das.
; one of these was Phidippides famous in the Story of Miltiades for his Vision
of Pan Cornelius Ne^^ ^^lti^de.
.

But the Contrivance of all others the most celebrated for close Conveyance of
Intelligence, was the Lacedemonian (...), which was a white Roll of Parchment,
wrapped about a black Stick; it was about four Cubits in length Pi^l^ri
Sch^liastes Ol^mp. Od VI.
, and so called from (...), i. e. Skin: The Manner and Use of it was thus; when
the Magistrates gave Commission to any General, or Admiral, they took round
Pieces of Wood exactly equal to one another; one of these they kept, the other
was delivered to the Commander, to whom when they had any Thing of Moment to
communicate, they cut a long narrow Scrowl of Parchment, and rolling it about
their own Staff, one Fold close upon another, they wrote their Business upon
it; then, taking it off, dispatched it away to the Commander, who applying it
to his own Staff, the Folds exactly fell in one with another, as at the
Writing, and the Characters, which, before 'twas wrapped up, were confusedly
disjoined, and unintelligible, appeared very plain Plutarchus (...) in Avibus,
A. Gellius, and.
.

CHAPTER XIV. Of the Invention, and different sorts of Ships.
MOST of those useful Arts, and admirable Inventions, which are the very
Support of Mankind, and supply them with all the Necessaries, and Conveniences
of Life, have at first been the Productions of some lucky Chance, or from
slight and contemptible Beginnings have been by long Experience, curious
Observations, and various Improvements matur'd, and brought to perfection:
Instances of this kind are every where frequent, and obvious, but none can be
produced more remarkable than in the Art of Navigation, which, though now arrived
to a Pitch of Perfection beyond most other Arts by those successful Additions
it has received from almost every Age of the World, was in the Beginning so
mean and imperfect, that the Pleasure, or Advantage of those, who first applied
themselves to it, was very small and inconsiderable.

Those, who adventured to commit themselves to the liquid Element, made their
first Essays in shallow Waters, and trusted not themselves too far from the
Shore; but, being emboldened by frequent Trials, proceeded farther by degrees,
'till at length they took Courage, and launched forth into the main Ocean: To
this purpose Claudian Praesat. in Rapt. Proserpina.
; Inventa secuit primus qui nave profundum,
Et rudibus remis solicitavit aquas,
Tranquillis primum trepidus se credidit undis,
Littora securo tramite summa legens;
Mox longos tentare sinus, and linquere terras,
Et leni caepit pandere vela Noto:
Ast ubi paullatim prae eps audacia crevit,
Cordaque languentem dedidicere metum,
Iam vagus irrupit pelago, caelumque secutus,
Aegaeas hyemes, Ionias que domat.
Whoever first with Vessels cleav'd the Deep,
And did with uncouth Oars the Water sweep,
His first Attempt on gentle Streams he made,
And near the Shore affrighted always stayed;
He launched out farther next, and left the Land,
And then erected Sails began to stand,
'Till by degrees, when Man undaunted grew,
Forgetting all those Fears before he knew,
He rushed into the Main, and harmless bore,
Guided by Stars, the Storms that loudly roar
In the Aegaean, and Ionian Seas. --
Mr. Dechair.

To whom the World is obliged for the Invention of Ships, is, like all Things
of such Antiquity, uncertain; there are diverse Persons, who seem to make equal
Pretensions to this Honor; such are Prometheus, Neptune, Ianus, Atlas,
Hercules, Jason, Danaus, Erythraeus, etc. but by common Fame it is given to
Minerva, the happy Mother of all Arts, and Sciences: Some, who, leaving these
antiquated Fables of the Poets, pretend to something more of certainty in what
they deliver, ascribe it to the Inhabitants of some of those Places, that lie
upon the Seacoasts, and are by Nature designed, as it were, for harboring
Ships, such as the Aeginensians, Phoenicians Plin. l. V. c. XII. Str^bo l. XVI.
Mela l. I. c. XII.
etc. The reason of this Disagreement seems to have proceeded partly from the
different Places, where Navigation was first practiced, (for it was never
peculiar to any one People, and from them communicated to the rest of the
World, but found out in Countries far distant from one another) and in part
from the various sorts of Ships, some of which, being first built by the
Persons abovementioned, have entitled them to the whole Invention.

The first Ships were built without Art, or Contrivance, and had neither
Strength nor Durableness, Beauty nor Ornament; but consisted only of Planks
laid together, and just so compacted as to keep out the Water Ma^^^^s Tyr.
Dissert. XI. Isidorus.
: In some Places they were nothing else, but Hulks of Trees made hollow, which
were called (...), as consisting only of one Piece of Timber; of these we find
mention in Virgil (...) lib. I v. 136.
, Tunc alno^ fluvii primum sensere cavatas,
Navita tum stellis numeros, and nomina fecit.
Then hollowed Alders first on Rivers swam,
Then to the Stars both Names, and Numbers came
Imposed by Mariners. --
In later Ages also they were made use of at some Places, being the same with
those called (...), in the strict, and most proper Acceptance of that Word
(...) lib. V.
, from (...), as made by hollowing, and, as it were, digging in a Tree. Nor was
Wood alone applied to this Use, but any other Materials that float upon the
Water without sinking, such as the Egyptian Reed papyrus, or (to mention no
more) Leather, of which the primitive Ships were frequently composed, and
called (...), or (...), these were sometimes begirt with Wickers, and
frequently used in that manner upon the Rivers of Aethiopia, Egypt, and
Sabaean Arabia even in later Times; but in the first of them we find no mention
of any Thing but Leather, or Hides sewed together: In a Ship of this sort
Dardanus secured his Flight to the Country afterward called Troas, when by a
terrible Deluge he was forced to leave Samothrace, his former Place of
Residence Lycophronu Cassandr. ejusque Sch^lia^te^ v. 75.
. Charon's infernal Boat was of the same Composition, according to Virgil
Aeveid. VI. 414.
, -- Gemuit sub pondere cymba
Sut^lis, and muleam accepit ^im^sa pa^^^em.
Under the Weight the Boat of Leather gro^n'd,
And leaky grown, the impetuous Wa^^^ found
An easy Passage through. --


When Ships were brought to a little more Perfection, and increased in Bigness,
the Sight of them struck the poor, ignorant People with Terror and Amazement;
for it was no small Surprise to behold great floating Castles of unusual Forms,
full of living Men, and with Wings (as it were) expanded flying upon the Sea
Ap^llo^^^, ejusque Scholiastes.
: What else could have given Occasion to the Fiction of Pers^^^s's Flight to
the Gorgous, ^ho, as Aristophanes Scholiastes.
expressly tells us, was carried in a Ship, (...)
What other Original could there be for the famous Story of Triptolemus, who
was feigned to ride upon a winged Dragon, only because in a Time of D^arth at
Athens he sailed to more fruitful Countries to supply the Nece^sities of his
People, or to the Fable of the winged Horse Pegasus, who, ^as several
Mythologists Th^smophor.
report, was nothing but a Ship of (...) Name with Sails, and for that reason
feigned to be the Offspring of Neptune the Emperor of the Sea (...).
Vossius Idol lib III. cap XLIX.
: Nor was there any other Ground for the Stories of Grysson^, or of ships
transformed into Birds, and Fishes, which we frequently meet with in the
ancient Poets.

So acceptable to the first Ages of the World were Inventions of this Nature,
that whoever made any improvements in the Art of Navigation, built new Ships of
Forms better (...) for Strength, or Swiftness than those before used, rendered
the old more commodio^^^ by any additional Contrivance, or discovered Countries
untrac'd by former Travelers, were thought w^r^hy of the greatest Honors, and
(like other common Benefactors to Mankind) ascribed into the Number of the
de^fy'd Heroes, they had their Inventions also consecrated, and six'd in the
Heavens. Hence we have the Signs of Aries, and Taurus, which were nothing, but
two Ships, the former transported Phryxus from Greece to C^^chos, the later
Europa out of Phaenicia into C^ote; Argo likewise, Pegasus, and Perseus's Whale
were new sorts of Ships, which, being had in great Admiration by the rude and
ignorant Mortals of those Times, were in Memory of their Inventors translated
amongst the Stars, and metamorphos'd into Constellations by the Poets of those,
or the succeeding Ages. Thus much concerning the Invention of Ships.

At their first Appearance in the World, all Ships, for whatever Use designed,
were of the same Form; but the various Ends of Navigation, some of which were
better answered by one Form, some by another, soon gave occasion to sit out
Ships, not in Bigness only, but in the manner of their Construction, and
Equipment, differing from one another. Not to trouble you with a distinct
Enumeration of every little Alteration, which would be endless, they were
chiefly of three sorts, Ships of Burden, of War, and of Passage. Ships of
Passage were distinguished by several Names taken usually from their Carriages;
those that served for the Transportation of Men, being called by the general
Names of (...), and (...), or, when filled with armed Men, by the particular
Titles of (...), and (...); those, in which Horses were transported, were named
(...), and hippagines, to mention no more.

Ships of Burden were called (...), and (...), to distinguish them from Men of
War, which were properly termed (...): They were usually of an orbicular Form,
having large and capacious Bellies, to contain the greater Quantity of
Victuals, Provisions, and other Necessaries, with which they were laden; whence
they are sometimes called (...), as, on the contrary, Ships of War we find
named (...) Ulpianus in Demosth. Orat adv. Lepti^^m
, being extended to a greater Length than the former, wherein they agreed in
part with the Transport-vessels, which were of a Form betwixt the Ships of War,
and Burden, being exceeded by the later in Capaciousness, by the former in
Length. There was likewise another Difference amongst these Ships, for Men of
War, though not wholly destitute of Sails, were chiefly rowed with Oars, that
they might be the more able to tack about upon any Advantage, and approach the
Enemy on his weakest Side, whereas Vessels governed by Sails, being left to the
Mercy of the Winds, could not be managed by so steady a Conduct; hence the
Ships of War are usually styled (...), and (...). Ships of Burden were commonly
governed with Sails, and those of Transport often towed with Cords, not but
that in both these all the three Ways of Government, viz. by Sail, Oar, and
Cords, were upon occasion made use of.

Men of War are said to have been first rigged out by Parhalus, or Samyres, as
others by Semiramis, but according to some (...). Not. Hist. lib. VII. cap ult.
by Aegaeon: They were farther distinguished from other sorts of Ships by
va^ious Engines, and Accessions of Building, some to defend their own
Soldiers, others to annoy Enemies, an Account of which shall be inserted in
the following Chapters; and from one another in later Ages by several Orders,
or Ranks of Oars, which were not, as some vainly imagine, placed upon the same
Level in different Parts of the Ship; nor yet, according to others, directly,
and perpendicularly above one another's Heads; but their Seats being fixed one
at the Back of another ascended gradually in the manner of Stairs. The most
usual Number of these Banks was three, four, and five; whence there is so
frequent mention of (...), and (...), i.e. trireme, quadrireme, and quinquireme
Galleys, which exceeded one another by a Bank of Oars, and consequently were
built more high, and rowed with greater Strength. In the primitive Times, the
long Ships had only one Bank of Oars, whence they are sometimes termed (...),
and (...) from the Name of a single Horse, and therefore, when we find them
called (...), and upwards as far as (...), we are not to suppose they were
rowed with fifty, or an hundred Banks, but only with so many Oars: such as
these was the Ship Argo, which we find was rowed with fifty Oars, being the
first of the long Ships, and invented by Jason, whereas 'till that Time all
sorts of Vessels had been of a Form more enclining to Oval; Others Apollodorus
Biblioth. lib. II.
carry the Invention of long Ships something higher, referring it to Danaus,
who, they tell us, sailed from Egypt into Greece in a Ship of fifty Oars; and
however Jason should be allowed to have introduced them into Greece, yet he
cannot be thought their first Contriver, but rather imitated the Egyptian, or
African Model, the later of which was some Time before composed by Atlas, and
much used in those Parts. The first, that used a double Bank of Oars, were the
Erythraeans Plinias.
; which was farther enlarged by Aminocles of Corinth with the Accession of a
third, as Herodotus, Thucydides, and Diodorus the Sicilian report; but Clemens
of Alexandria S^romat. lib I.
will have this Invention to belong to the Sidonians: To these Aristotle a
Carthaginian added a fourth, Nesicthon of Salamis (according to Pliny) or
Dionysius the Si^ilian (according to Diodorus) a fi^th, Xenagoras the
Syracusian a sixth; Nesigiton increased the Number to ten, Alexander the Great
to twelve, Ptolemy Soter to fifteen, Philip Father to Perseus had a Ship of
sixteen Banks Polysius in Fragment and Livius.
, then (it being easy to make Additions, the Method of erecting one Bank above
another once found out) Demetrius the Son of Antigonus built a Ship of thirty
Banks, and Ptolemy Philopator, out of a vainglorious Humor of outdoing all the
World besides, farther enlarged the Number to forty Plutarchus Demetrio,
Athenaus: lib. V.
, which (all other Parts bearing a just Proportion) raised the Ship to that
prodigious Bigness, that it appeared at a Distance like a floating Mountain, or
Island, and upon a near View seemed like an huge Castle upon the Floods; it
contained four-thousand Rowers, four hundred Mariners employed in other
Services, and almost three thousand Soldiers. But this, and such like Fabrics
served only for Show, and Ostentation, being by their great Bulk rendered
unwieldly, and unfit for Use; Athenaus tells us the common Names, they were
known by, were Cyclades, or Ae^nae, i.e. Islands, or Mountains, to which they
seemed almost equal in Bigness, consisting, as some report, of as many
Materials, as would have been sufficient for the Construction of at least fifty
Triremes.

Beside those already mentioned, there were other Ships with half Banks of
Oars; such as (...), or (...), which seems to have been betwixt an Vnireme, and
Bireme, consisting of a Bank, and an half: likewise (...), betwixt a Bireme,
and Trireme, having two Banks and an half: These, though perhaps built in other
Respect after the Model of the long Ships, or Men of War, are seldom
comprehended under that Name, and sometimes found in Opposition to them.
Several other Ships are mentioned by Authors, which differed from those already
enumerated, being sitted for particular Uses, or certain Seas, employed upon
urgent Necessities in naval Fights, but more commonly, as (...), Tenders, and
victualling Ships, to supply the main Fleet with Provisions, and sometimes
built for Expedition, to carry Expresses, and observe the Enemy's Motions,
without Danger of being seized by the heavier, and armed Vessels: These were
distinguished from the former by the manner of their Construction, and
Equipment, being in part like the Men of War, partly resembling the Ships of
Burden, and in some Things differing from both, as the various Exigences they
served in, seemed to require.

CHAPTER XV. Of the Parts, Ornaments, etc. of Ships.
HAVING treated of the different sorts of Ships used amongst the ancient
Grecians, I shall in the next Place endeavor to describe the principal Parts,
whereof they consisted, the Ignorance of which has occasioned a great many
Mistakes, and much Confusion in those that have conversed with Authors of
Antiquity. Herein I shall chiefly follow the Account of Scheffer, who has so
copiously treated on this Subject, and with such Industry, and Learning
collected whatever is necessary to it is Illustration, that very little Room is
left for farther Enlargement.

Now the principal Parts, of which Ships consisted, were three, viz. the Belly,
the Prow, and the Stern: These were again composed of other smaller Parts,
which shall briefly be described in their Order.

1. In the Belly, or middle Part, of the Ship there was (...), carina, or the
Keel, which was composed of Wood, and therefore from it is Strength and Firmness
called (...): It was placed at the Bottom of the Ship, being designed to cut,
and glide through the Waves Homeri Sch^^^^st. Odyss. (...)
, and therefore was not broad, but narrow, and sharp; whence it may be
perceived that not all Ships, but only the (...), whose Bellies were strait,
and of a small Circumference, were provided with Keels, the rest having usually
flat Bottoms Isidor. lib. XIX. cap. I.
. Round the Keel were placed Pieces of Wood to save it from receiving Damage,
when the Ship was first launched into the Water, or bulg'd against Rocks; these
were called (...), in Latin cunei according to Ovid Metam. XI. v. 516.
, Iamque labant cunci, spoliataque tegmine cerae
Rima patet. --
The Wedges break, and, loosing all it is Wax,
A Hole lets in the Water. --


Next to the Keel was (...) Pollux.
, within which was contained the (...), or Pump, through which Water was conveyed
out of the Ship Aristoph. Schol. Equit.
.

After this was (...), or second Keel, being placed beneath the Pump, and
called (...), Pollux.
: By some it is falsely supposed to be the same with (...).

Above the Pump was an hollow Place, called by Herodotus (...), by Pollux
(...), and (...), (because large, and capacious, after the Form of a Vessel, or
Belly) by the Latins tesludo. This was surrounded with Ribs, which were Pieces
of Wood rising from the Keel upwards, and called by Hesychius (...), by others
(...) (the Belly of the Ship being contained within them) in Latin costae: Upon
these were placed certain Planks, which Aristophanes calls (...), or (...).

Hence proceed we to the (...), latera, or Sides of the Ship, which encompassed
all the former Parts on both Hands: These were composed of large Rafters
extended from Prove to Stern, and called (...) Plato De Repub. l X.
, (...) Heliodorus Aethiopicis.
, and (...) Aristophaenes Equitibus.
, because by them the whole Fabric was begirt, or surrounded.

In both these Sides the Rowers had their Places, called (...), and (...), in
Latin fori, and transtra, placed above one another: The lowest was called
(...), and those that labored therein (...); The Middle (...), and the Men
(...); the uppermost (...), whence the Rowers were termed (...) Pollux.
. In these were Spaces, through which the Rowers put their Oars; these were
sometimes one continued Vacuity from one End to the other called (...), but
more usually distinct Holes, each of which was designed for a ^^^gle Oar; these
were styled (...), as also (...), because not unlike the Eyes of living
Creatures: All of them were by a more general Name termed (...), from
containing the Oars Athenaeus lib. V.
; but (...) seems to have been another Thing, signifying the Spaces between the
Banks of Oars on each Side, where the Passengers seem to have been placed: On
the Top of all these was a Passage, or Place to walk in, called (...), and
(...), as joining to the (...), or uppermost Bank of Oars.

2. (...), the Prow, or Fore-deck, whence it is sometimes called (...), the
Forehead, and commonly distinguished by other metaphorical Titles taken from
human Faces. In some Ships there is mention of two Prows, as likewise of two
Stems; thus was Danaus's Ship adorned by Minerva, when he fled from Egypt. It
was customary to beautify the Prow with Gold, and various sorts of Paint, and
Colors: In the primitive Times red was most in Use, whence Homer's Ships were
commonly dignified with the Titles of (...), and (...), or red-fac'd: The blew
likewise, or Sky-colour was frequently made use of, as bearing a near
Resemblance to the Color of the Sea, whence we find Ships called by Homer
(...), by Aristophanes (...): Several other Colors were also made use of; nor
were they barely varnished over with them, for they had a curious Art of
Annealing them by Wax melted in the Fire, so as neither the Sun, Winds, or
Water were able to deface them; This Art was called, from the Wax used therein,
(...), from the Fire (...), it is described by Vitruvius Lib. VII. cap. IX.
, and mentioned in Ovid Fastorum lib. IV.
, -- Picia coloribus ustis
Cerrleam matrem concava puppis habee.
The painted Ship with melted Wax anneal'd
Had Tobys for it is Deity. --
In these Colors the various Forms of Gods, Animals, Plants, etc. were usually
described, which were often added as Ornaments to other Parts also of the
Ships, as plainly appears from the ancient Monuments presented to the World by
Baysius.

The Sides of the Prow were termed (...), or Wings, and (...) according ^o
Scheffer, but I rather read (...), for since the Prow is com^only compared to
an human Face, ^ will naturally follow that it is Sides may be called Cheeks.
The Top of these, as likewise of the Stern, was called (...) Thucydidis
Scholiastes.
, because void of Rowers.

3. (...), the Hind-deck, or Stern, sometimes called (...), the Tail, because
the hindmost Part of the Ship: It was of a Figure more enclining to round than
the Prow, the Extremity of which was sharp, that it might cut the Waters; it
was also built higher than the Prow, and was the Place, where the Pilot sat to
steer: The Bow of it was called (...), the Planks, of which that was composed,
(...). There was another Place something below the Top called (...), the
interior Part of which was termed (...).

Some other Things there are in the Prow, and Stern, that deserve our Notice;
as those Ornaments, wherewith the Extremities of the Ship were beautified,
commonly called in general (...) Sus^a^.
, or (...) Homerus.
, in Latin corymbi, which Name is taken from the Greek (...) used in Homer, --
(...)
Though this Word in Greek is not, as in the Latin, applied to the Ornaments of
both Ends, bu^ only of the Prow Etymologic^ Auctor.
: These are likewise called (...), because placed at the Extremity of the
(...), which was a long Pl^nk at the Head of the Prow, and therefore sometimes
termed (...) Tellux.
; the Form of them sometimes resembled Hel^^ets, sometimes living Creatures,
but most frequently was winded into a round Compass, whence they are so
commonly named corymbae, and coronae.

To the (...) in ^he Prow answered the (...) in the Stern, which were often of
an orbicular Figure, or fashioned like Wings, to which a little Shield, called
(...), or (...), was frequently affixed: Sometimes a Piece of Wood was erected,
whereon Ribbands of diverse Colors were hung, and served instead of a Flag
Pollax, (...).
to distinguish the Ship, and of a Weathercock to signify the Quarters of the
Wind.

(...) was so called from (...), a Goose, whose Figure it resembled, because
Geese were looked on as fortunate Omens to Mariners, for that they swim on the
Top of the Waters, and sink not. This Ornament, according to some, was six'd at
the Bottom of the Prow, where it was joined to the foremost Part of the Keel;
and was the Part, to which Anchors were fastened, when cast into the Sea* But
others carry it to the other End of the Ship, and six it upon the Extremity of
the Stern (...) Auctor.
.

(...) was the Flag, whereby Ships were distinguished* from one another: It was
placed in the Prow, just below the (...), b^ing sometimes carved, and
frequently painted, whence it is in (...) termed pictura, representing the Form
of a Mountain, a Tree, a Flower, or any other Things, wherein it was
distinguished from what was called tutela, or the Safeguard, of the Ship, which
always represented some of the Gods, to whose Care and Protection the Ship was
recommended; for which reason it was held sacred, and had the Privilege of
being a Refuge, and Sanctuary to such as ^led to it; Prayers also, and
Sacrifices were off^r'd, and Oaths con^irm'd before it, as the Mansion of the
Tutelar, and presiding Deity of the Ship: Now and then we find it taken for the
(...) Latantias lib I cap II. (...) v^t^t^s.
, and perhaps some few Times the Images of Gods might b^ rep^esented upon the
Flags: By some it is placed also in the Prow Pr^^p^as in E^a^a cap. XII.
^^rilias in catena ad eundem prophetara.
, but by most* Authors of Credit assigned to the Stern: Thus Ovid, (to omit
more Instances) in his Epistle of Paris, Accipit and pictos puppis adunca Deos.
The Stern with painted Deities richly shines.
Farther, the tutela, and (...) are frequently distinguished in express Words,
that being always signified by the Image of a God; this usually of some
Creature, or feigned Representation: Hence the same Author De Tristibus.
, Est mihi, suque, precor, slavae tutela Minervae,
Navis and a picta casside nomen habet.
Minerva is the Goddess I adore,
And may she grant the Blessings I implore;
The Ship its Name a painted Helmet gives.
Whe^^ the Tutelar Deity was Minerva, the (...) an Helmet. In (...) manner, the
Ship, wherein Europa was conveyed from Phanicla into Crete, had a Bull for it is
Flag, and Jupiter for it is Tutelar Deity; which gave Occasion to the Fable of
her being ravi^^^'d by that God in the Shape of a Bull. It was customary for
the Ancients to commit their Ships to the Protection of those Deities, whom
they thought most concerned for their Safety, or to whom they bore any sort of
Relation, or Affection: Thus we (...) from Fa^ip^^es I^hige^ia.
, that Theseus's whole Fleet, consisting of sixty Sail, was under the Care of
Minerva the Protectress of Athens; Achilles's Navy was committed to the
Nereids, or Sea-nymphs, because of the Relation he had to them on the Account
of his Mother Thetis, who was one of their Number; and (to mention no more) the
Boeotian Ships had for their Tutelar God Cadmus represented with a Dragon in
his Hand, because he was the Founder of Thebes, the principal City in Boeotia.
Nor were whole Fleets only, but single Ships recommended to certain Deities,
which the Ancients usually chose out of the Number of those, who were reputed
the Protectors of their Country, or Family, or presided over the Business they
were going about; thus Merchants committed themselves, and their Ships to the
Care of Mercury, Soldiers of Mars, and Lovers of Venus and Cupid; so Paris
tells his Mistress in Ovid, Qua tamen ipse vehor, comitata Cupidine parvo
Sponsor conjugii stat Dea picta sui.
Venus, who has be^roth'd us, painted stands
With little Cupid on my Ship. --


On the Prow of the Ship, about the (...), was placed a round Piece of Wood
called (...), and sometimes (...), the Eye of the Ship, because fixed in it is
Fore-deck Pollux, Eustathius, A^oll^nii Sch^'tas^ ^ A^gou. lib. ^ v. 1^89.
; on this was inscribed the Name of the Ship, which was usually taken from the
Flag, as appears in the forementioned Passage of Ovid, where he tells us his
Ship received it is Name from the Helmet painted upon it; hence comes the
frequent mention of Ships called Pegasi, Scyllae, Bulls, Rams, Tigers, etc.
which the Poets took Liberty to represent as living Creatures, that transported
their Riders from one Country to another; nor was there (according to some) any
other Ground for those known Fictions of Pegasus, the winged Horse of
Bellerophon, or the Ram, that is reported to have carried Phry^us to Colchos,
with several others, that occurr every where in the Poets.

The whole Fabric being completed, it was fortified with Pitch to secure the
Wood from the Waters, whence it comes that Homer's Ships are every where
mentioned with the Epithet of (...), or Black. The first that made use of
Pitch, were the Inhabitants of Phaeacia Saidas v. (...).
, called afterward Corsica. Sometimes Wax was employed in the same Use, whence
Ovid ^pist. Oenon. v. 42.
, Caerula ceratas accipit unda rates.
The azure Sea receives the waxy Ships.
Now and then it was applied with a Mixture of Rosin, or other Materials fit
for the same Purpose; whence the Color of Ships was not always the same, and
the Epithets ascribed to them in the Poets are various.

After all, the Ship being bedecked with Garlands, and Flowers, the Mariners
also adorned with Crowns, she was launched into the Sea with loud Acclamations,
and other Expressions of Mirth, and Joy At^^neus lib. V.
; and, being purified by a Priest with a lighted Torch, an Egg, and Brimstone
Apule^us Asin. lib. XI.
, or after some other manner, was consecrated to the God, whose Image she bore.

CHAPTER XVI. Of the Tackling, and Instruments required in Navigation.
THE Instruments used in Navigation were of diverse sorts, being either
necessary to all sorts of Navigation, or only some Form of it, as that by
Sails, by Oars, etc. The chief of the former sort were as follow:

(...), gubernaculum, the Rudder, placed in the hindmost Deck, whereby the
Pilot directed the Course of the Ship. The smaller sort of Ships had only one
Rudder, but those of greater Bulk, as often as Occasion required, had more,
insomuch that sometimes we read of four Rudders in one Vessel: The Places of
these are uncertain, b^ing perhaps not always the same; but it seems probabl^,
that, when there were only two Rudders, one was fixed to the Fo^^-deck, the
other to the hindmost; whence we read of (...), or Ships with two Sterns; when
there were four Rudde^s, one seems to have been fixed to each Side of the
V^ssel.

(...), an Anchor, the first Invention of which some ascribe to the Tyrrh^nians
^lin. lib. VIII. cap. ul^.
; other^ to Midas, the Son of Gordius, whose Anchor, Pau^an^ias tells us, was
preserved in one of Jupiter's Temples 'till his Days: Since there were diverse
sorts of Anchors, it is not improbable that both the^e may justly lay claim to
Part of the Invention. The most ancient Anchors are said to have been of Stone
A (...) in Periplo Ponti Eu^in^.
, and sometime^ of Wood, to which a great Quantity of Lead was usually fixed:
In some Places Ba^kets full of Stones (...) and (...) v (...).
, and Sack, filled with Sand were employed to the sam^ U^e: All the^^ w^r^ let
down by Cords into the Sea, and by their W^ight s^ay'd ^h^ Course of the Ship.
Afterward Anchors (...) c^mpos'd of Iron, and furnished with Teeth, which,
being fa^^^n'd to the Bottom of the Sea, preserved the V^ss^l immov^abl^;
whence (...), and d^nies are frequently taken for An^h^rs in the Gre^k, and
Latin Poets. At first there was only one Tooth, wh^nc^ Anchors were called
(...) Pollux.
; but in a short Time a second was add^d by Eupalamus Tim. lib. VII. cap. ulc.
, or Anacha^si^ the S^^th^an Philosopher (...) lib. X. ex E^l^oro.
: The (...) upon Apoll^nius Argon. I. v. 1271.
considently affirms, that this sort of Anchors was u^'d by the Arg^nauts, yet
h^r^in h^ seems to deserve no great Credit, for that he runs contrary to the
T^timonies of other Writers, and his own Author A^plio^^^s mak^^ mention of
none but those of Stone. The An^hors with two Teeth were called (...), or
(...), and from ancient Monuments appear ^o have been much what the sam^ with
those used in our Days, only the transverse Pi^ce of Wood upon th^i^ H^ndles is
wanting in all of them. Every Ship had several Anchors, one of which,
surpassing all the ^est in Bign^ss, and Strength, was peculiarly termed (...),
in Latin sacra, and was never used, but in extreme Danger; whence sacram
anch^ram so^^er^ is proverbially applied to such as are forced to their last
Refuge.

(...), saburra, Ballast, wherewith Ships were poised, whence it is called
(...): It was usually of Sand, but sometimes of any other ponderous Matter:
Diomede^, in his Voyage from Troy, is said to have employed the Stones of that
City's Walls to this Use Lycophroni^ Cassan^r. v. 618.
. It is sometimes called (...), and (...) Hesy^hiu^.
.

(...), called by Herodotus (...) Eute^^e.
, by Lucilius catapirates Lib XIX. cap IV.
, was an Instrument, wherewith they sounded the Depth of the Sea, and
discovered whether the Bottom was firm and commodious for anchoring, or
dangerous by reason of Quicksands, or other Obstructions. It was commonly of
Lead, or Brass, or other ponderous Metals, and let down by a Chain into the
Deep Glossa in Act. Apost. cap. XXVII.
.

(...), called by Sophocles (...) Pollux.
, in Latin conti, long Poles, used to sound the Depth of shallower Waters, to
thrust the Ship from Rocks and Shelves, and force her forwards in Fords and
Shallows, where the Waters had not Strength enough to carry her.

(...), or (...) were little Bridges, or Stairs joining the Land to Ships, or
one Ship to another.

(...), in Latin haustrum, t^ll^no, or tollena, etc. a Swipe, or Engine to draw
up Water.

To some of the abovementioned Instruments certain Ropes were required, and
distinguished according to their several Uses; as

(...), ancoralia, or ancorarii, the Cables, wherewith Anchors were cast into
the Sea, called sometimes (...) Aristophanu Schol^astes.
, or (...) Thavorinus.
: whence in the Place of Saint Matthew, where Christ, speaking of the
Difficulty of a rich Man's entering into Heaven, tells his Disciples, it is
harder than for a Camel to pass through the Eye of a Needle, Th^ophylact, and
some others interpret the Word (...), not of the Animal called a Camel, but a
Cable Matthas Evangel. c^p. XIX.
.

(...), or (...), parolcones, remulci, Ropes, by which Ships were towed.

(...), retinacula, Cords, wherewith Ships were tied to the Shore. In most
Harbors Stones were erected for this purpose, being bored through like Rings,
and thence called (...), to these the Cords, cast out of the Stern, were bound:
This Custom was always observed, when Ships came into Port; and therefore, when
they put to Sea, it is usually said they did solvere sunes, loose their Cords;
Instances of this are every where frequent, but I shall only give you one out
of Ovid Metam. lib XV. v. 695.
, who speaks thus of Aencas's Followers, Aeneadae gaudent, caesoque in littore
tauro,
Torta coronatae solvunt retinacula navis.
A Bull the joyful Trojans sacrificed
Upon the Shore, then loosed the Rope that tied
The Ship all crowned with Garlands. --
The End of doing this was, that the Ships might be secured from the Violence
of the Winds, and Waves; for which reason, in those commodious Harbors, that
lay not exposed to them, we find that Ships remained loose, and untied; whence
Homer Od^ss. ^. v. 136. Vide Annotationes nostras in Lycophronis Cassand^. v.
20.
, (...)
So still the Port, there was no need of Ropes.


I proceed to the Instruments, which were only necessary to some sort of
Navigation; where I shall first treat of those required in Rowing, which were
as follow:

(...), remi, Oars, so called from one Copas, by whom it is said they were first
invented. (...), in Latin palmula, or tonsa, was the Blade, or broad Part of
the Oar, which was usually covered with Brass, that it might with greater
Strength, and Force repel the Waves, and endure the longer. There were several
Banks of Oars placed gradually above one another; the Oars of the lowest Bank
were shorter than the rest, and called (...) or (...): Those of the middle
Banks were termed (...): Those of the uppermost (...), and (...), and were the
longest, being at the greatest Distance from the Water; wherefore, that the
Rowers might be the better able to wield, and manage them, it was customary to
put Lead upon their Handles Athenaus lib. V.
, that the Bottom might not out-poise the Top.

(...) were round Pieces of Wood, whereon the Rowers hung their Oars, when they
rested from their Labors: Hence (...), i. e. a Ship with three Rows of Scalmi,
or a Trireme.

(...), strophi, or struppi, were leathern Thongs Etymol^g^^i Auctor, Homeri
Sch^liast. Odyss. ^.
, wherewith the Oars were hung upon the scalmi; those also, with which the
Rudder was bound. Leather, and Skins of Beasts were applied also to several
other Uses; as to cover the scalmi, and the Holes, through which the Oars were
put forth to preserve them from being worn Suidas v. (...).
. There were Skins under the Rowers, called (...), and sometimes (...), or
(...), from saving the Elbows, or Breeches of the Rowers.

(...), etc. in Latin transtra, and juga, were the Seats of the Rowers.

The Instruments used in Sailing were as follow:

(...), vela, Sails, which are by some thought to have been first invented by
Daedalus, and to have given Original to the Fable of his using Wings: Others
referr this Invention to Icarus, making Daedalus the Contriver of Masts and
Sailyards Plin. lib. VII. cap. LVI.
: At first, there was only one Sail in a Ship, but afterward a greater Number
was sound convenient, the Names of which were these:

(...), by some taken for supparum, or the Top-sail, which hung on the Top of
the Mast.

(...), the great Sails Hesy^l^^^.
.

(...), the Trinket, or small Sail in the Fore-deck Suidas v. (...). Isidor^s.
: Others make (...), and (...) the same.

(...), the Misen-sail, which was larger than the former, and hung in the
Hind-deck Hesy^bias, Isido^us.
.

Sails were commonly of Linen, sometimes of any other Materials fit for
receiving, and repelling the Winds: in Dio Lib. XXXIX.
we have mention of leathern Sails; it was likewise usual for want of other
Sails to hang up their Garments; whence came the Fable of Hercules, who is
feigned to have sailed with the Back of a Lion, because he used no other Sail,
but his Garment, which was a Lyon's Skin (...) Aen. VIII.
.

(...), antennae, the Sail-yards, Pieces of Wood fixed upon the Mast, to which
the Sails were tied Hom^ri Scholiastes Iliad. ^.
: The Name signifies an Horn, whence it is Extremities are called (...), it is
Arms inclining to an orbicular Figure are termed (...). The Latin Poet has
used cornua in the same Sense Silius Italicus lib. (...)
. -- Veloque superba capaci
Cum rapidum hauriret Boream, and cornibus (...)
Colligeret flatus. --
Other Parts it had close to the Mast called (...), and (...) being those, by
which it was moved.

(...), malus, the Mast. Every Ship had several Masts, but we are told by
Aristotle, that at first there was only one Mast, which being fixed in the
Middle of the Ship, the Hole, into which the Foot of it was inserted, was named
(...) (...) ^i Scholiastes Od^ss. ^.
, in Latin modius. When they landed, the Mast was taken down, as appears every
where in Homer, and placed on a Thing called (...), which, according to Suidas,
was a Case, wherein the Mast was reposited, but Eustathius will have it to be
nothing, but a Piece of Wood, against which it was reared. The Parts of the
Mast were these: (...), or the Foot. (...), or, according to Athenaeus, (...),
or (...), to which the Sail was fixed. (...), the Pulley, by which the Ropes
were turned round. (...), built in the manner of a Turret, for Soldiers to
stand upon, and cast Darts: Above this was a Piece of Wood called (...), the
Extremity of which was termed (...), on which hung a Ribband called, from it is
continual Motion, (...), turning round with the Wind.

The Names of the Ropes required to the Use of the abovementioned Parts, were
these that follow, as enumerated by Scheffer:

(...) were the Ropes called in Latin anquinae, wherewith the Sail-yards were
bound to the main Mast Suidas.
: Others will have them to be the same with the Latin rudentes, which were
those that governed the Sail-yards, so as one Part of the Sails might be
hois'd, the other lowered Phavorinus.
, according to the Pleasure of the Pilot. Others will have the Cord, wherewith
the Sail-yards were tied to the Mast, to be termed (...), ceruchus, anchonis,
and rudens; that whereby they were contracted, or dilated (...) Suidas.
, in Latin opifera I(...)
.

(...), in Latin pedes, were Cords at the Corners of the Sails Aristophanu
Schol. Equit. Act I. Scen I. Apollonii Scholia^^er. Vide (...) and Meursii
comment in Lycop^ronis Cassandr v. 1015.
, whereby they were managed as Occasion required. (...) were small Cords below
the pedes, which were so contrived, a^ to be loosed, and contracted by them:
The Use of both these was in taking the Winds, for by them the Sails were
contracted, dilated, or changed from one Side to another, as there was Occasion.

(...) were those, whereby the Mast was erected, or let down Apollonii (...).
; others will have them to belong to the Sails.

(...) were Cords, which, passing through a Pulley at the Top of the Mast, were
tied on one Side to the Prow, on the other to the Stern, to keep (...) Mast
fixed and immovable.

The Materials, of which these and other Cords were composed, were at first
seldom (...): but leathern Thongs; afterward they used Hemp, Flax, Broom,
Palm-leaves, Philyry, the Bark of Trees, as the Cherry, Teil-tree, Vine, Maple,
Carpine, etc.

CHA^^^^ ^^^I. Of ^he Instruments of War in Ships.
WHAT I have hitherto delivered concerning the Parts and Construction of Ships,
has been spoken in general without Respect to any par^^cular sort of them; it
remains therefore, that in the next Place I give you a brief Account of what
was farther necessary to equip a Man of War.

(...), rostrum, was a Beak of Wood, fortified with Brass, whence it is called
(...) in Diodorus Lib. XX.
, and S^ips have sometimes the Epithet of (...): One, or more of these was
always fastened to the Prow to annoy the Enemy's Ships, and the whole Prow was
sometimes covered with Brass to guard it from Rocks and Assaults. The Person
that first used these Beaks is said to have been one Piscus an Italian Plin.
lib. VII. cap. LVI.
; for it will not be allowed that the primitive Greeks had any Knowledge of
them, since no such Thing is mentioned in Home^ which could scarce have
happened, had they been invented at the Time of the Trojan Wa^^. Yet Aeschylus
(...)
gives Nestor's Ship the Epithet of (...) or armed with ten Beaks, and
I^higenia^ Euripides speaks of Braze^ Beaks, (...)
(...)
(...) --
O! that these Ships with brazen Beaks
Had never entered Aulis Ports.
But it may justly be questioned, whether these Poets take their Descriptions
from the Practice of their own Times, ^ ^^ing frequent enough with Men of that
Profession. These Beaks were at first long and high, but afterward it was
found more convenient to have them short and firm, and ^ac'd so low as to
pierce the Enemy's Ships under Water; this was an Invention of one Aristo a
Corinthian, who communicated it to (...) Syracusians in their War with the
Athenians, against whom it proved a considerable Advantage, for by these new
Beaks several of the Athenian Men of War were ove^turn'd, or torn in Pieces at
the (...) Shock Diodorus Siculus lib. XIII.
. Above the Beak was another Instrument (...) (...), and it appears from
ancient (...) that (...) were usually adorned with various (...) of (...).

(...) were Pieces of (...) placed on each S^de of the Prow Thueydidis
Scho^^astes lib. VII.
to guard it from the Enemy's Beaks: Because Prows are usually compared to
Faces, these were thought to resemble Ears, whence their Name seems to have
been derived: for those are mistaken that would have them belong to the
Hind-deck Ety^^logici Auctor.
.

(...), or Hatches, sometimes called (...), whence we meet with (...), and
tectae, covered Ships, or Men of War; which are frequently opposed to Ships of
Passage, or Burden, which were (...), and apertae, uncovered, or without
Hatches: This Covering was of Wood, and erected on purpose for the Soldiers,
that they, standing as it were upon an Eminence, might level their missive
Weapons with greater Force and Certainty against their Enemies. In the
primitive Ages, particularly about the Time of the Trojan War, we are told by
Thucydides, that the Soldiers used only to fight upon the foremost, and
hindermost Decks Lib. I.
, and therefore whenever we find Ho^er speak of (...), which his Scholi^sts
interpret Hatches, we are only to understand him of these Parts, which alone
used to be covered in those Days. Thus he tells us of A^^x defending ^he
Grecian Ships against the Attack of the Trojans Ili^d ^.
, -- (...)
He marched upon the Hatches with long Strides.
And of Ulysses preparing himself for the Encounter with Scylla he speaks thus
Odyss. (...).
, -- (...)
(...) --
Upon the Hatches of the foremost Decks
He went. --
The other Parts of the Ship are said to have been first covered by the
Thasians Plin. lib. VII. cap. LVII.
.

Beside the Coverings of Ships already mentioned, and called (...), there were
other Coverings to guard the Soldiers from their Enemies, called (...), in
Latin plurei, and sometimes propugnacula: These were commonly Hides, or such
like Materials, hung on both Sides of the Ship, as well to hinder the Waves
from falling into it, as to receive the Darts cast from the adverse Ships, that
under these, as Walls on both Sides, the Soldiers might without Danger annoy
their Enemies.

(...), a certain Machine, which, being usually a Part of these Ships, cannot
be omitted in this Place: It was a vast and massy Piece of Lead, or Iron, cast
into the Form of a Dolphin, and hung with Cords and Pulleys to the Sail-yards,
or Mast, which, being thrown with great Violence into the adverse Ships, either
penetrated them, and so opened a Passage for the rising Floods, or by it is
Weight and Force sunk them to the Bottom of the Sea Aristophanu Scholiastes,
Suidas.
.

Another Difference betwixt Men of War and other Ships was, that the former
commonly had an Helmet engraven on the Top of their Masts Gyraldus de Navigat.
cap. XII.
.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the Mariners, and Soldiers.
WE are told by Thucydides, that amongst the Ancients there were no different
Ranks of Seamen, but the same Persons were employed in those Duties, which
were in later Ages executed by diverse, to whom they gave the several Names of
Rowers, Mariners, and Soldiers; whereas at first all these were the same Men,
who laid down their Arms to labor at the Oar, and perform what was farther
necessary to the Government of their Ships, but, as often as Occasion required,
resumed them to assault their Enemies: This appears every where in Homer, out
of whom I shall observe this one Instance, -- (...)
(...). --
Each Ship had fifty Rowers, that were skilled
Well in the shooting Art. --
These were termed (...) Suidas, Pollux lib. I. cap. IX. Th^^ydides.
. This was the Practice of those Times, wherein no great Care was taken, no
extraordinary Preparations made for equipping Men of War, but the same Vessels
were thought sufficient for Transportation and Fight: Afterward, when the Art
of naval War began to be improved, it was presently understood, that any one of
the forementioned Occupations was enough to require the whole Time, and
Application of the Persons employed therein; whence it became customary to
furnish their Ships of War with the three following sorts of Men:

(...), called by Polybius Histor. lib X.
(...), and by the same Author Lib I
, with Xenophon Histor. lib. I.
(...), though we are told by the Scholiast upon Thucydides, that this is a Name
of very large extent, comprehending not only those that rowed, but all other
Persons in the Ship, and sometimes applied to any Thing else contained therein.
When Ships had several Banks of Oars, the uppermost Rowers were called (...),
and their Bank (...) P^ll^^, A^^st^ph^^^ Scholiastes, Suidas, Etymologici
Auctor.
: The lowest (...), and (...), and their Bank (...): Those in the Middle (...),
and (...), and all their Banks, how many soever in Number, (...). Every one had
a different Oar, for except in Cases of Necessity one Oar was never managed by
above one Person, as Scheffer has proved at large; Yet their Labor, and Pay
were not the same, for such as were placed in the uppermost Banks, by reason of
their Distance from the Water, and the Length of their Oars, underwent a great
deal of Toil and Labor, which those in the inferior Banks had no Sense of,
and therefore were rewarded with greater Wages. The Rowers in Ships of Burden
were called (...) Pollux lib. VII.
, those in Triremes (...), and the rest seem to have had different Appellations
from the Names of the Ships they labored in. Those, that were foremost in
their respective Banks, and sat nearest the Prow, were called (...); and, on
the other Side, those, who were placed next the Stern, were termed (...), as
being behind their Fellows. Their Work was esteemed one of the worst and most
wretched Drudgeries, and therefore the most notorious Malefactors were
frequently condemned to it; For, beside their incessant Toil in rowing, their
very Rest was uneasy, there being no Place to repose their wearied Bodies,
beside the Seats, whereon they had labored all the Day; therefore, whenever
the Poets speak of their ceasing from Labor, there is mention of their lying
down upon them: Thus Seneca Agamenon. v. 437.
, -- credita est vento ratis,
Fususque transtris miles. --
Unto the Wind the Ship was lest,
The Soldiers lay along the Seats.
To the same purpose Virgil Aen^i^. V. v. 8; ^.
; -- placida laxarant membra quiet
Sub remis fusi per dura sedilia nautae.
And now along their Seats the Rowers laid
Had eased their wearied Limbs with Sleep.
The rest of the Ship's Crew usually took their Rest in the same manner, only
the Masters Theophrastus (...).
, or great Persons were permitted to have Clothes spread under them; so we read
of Ulysses in Homer Odyss. ^. v. 74.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
But Clothes the Men for great Ulysses spread,
And placed an easy Pillow for his Head,
On these he undisturbed securely slept,
Lying upon the Stern. --
Such, as would not be contented with this Provision, were looked upon as soft
and delicate, and unfit to endure the Toil and Hardships of War; which Censure
the Athenians passed upon Alcibiades, because he had a Bed hung on Cords, as we
read in Plutarch Alci^iad^.
.

(...), Mariners, were exempt from drudging at the Oar, but performed all other
Duties in the Ship; to which end, that all Things might be carried on without
Tumult and Confusion, every one had his proper Office, as appears from
Apollonius, and Flaccus's Argonauticks, where one is employed in rearing the
Mast, another in fitting the Sail-yards, a third in hoising the Sails, and the
rest are bestowed up and down the Ship, every one in his proper Place: Hence
they had different Titles, as from (...), Sails, the Persons appointed to
govern them were called (...), those, that climbed up the Ropes to descry
distant Countries, or Ships, were termed (...), and the rest in like manner:
There were a sort of Men inferior to the former, and called (...), who were not
confined to any certain Place, or Duty, but were ready on all Occasions to
attend on the rest of the Seamen, and supply them with whatever they wanted
C^^lius Rhodigin^^ lib. XXV. cap. XL.
. The whole Ship's Crew were usually wicked and profligate Fellows, without any
Sense of Religion or Humanity, and therefore reckoned by Iuvenal Satir. VIII.
amongst the vilest Rogues, Invenies aliquo cum percussore jacentem,
Permixtum nautis, aut suribus, aut fugitivis.
You Will surely find his Company, some Tarrs,
Cutthroats, or roguy Vagabonds. --


The Soldiers that served at Sea, were in Latin termed classiarii, in Greek
(...), either because they did (...), ascend into Ships; or (...), from
ascending the Hatches, where they fought. They were armed after the same manner
with those designed for Land-service, only there seems always to have been a
greater Number of heavy-arm'd Men than was thought necessary by Land; for we
find in Plutarch Themisto^^
, that of eighteen Men employed to fight upon the Hatches in every one of
Themistocles's Ships, only four were light-armed: Indeed it highly imported
them to fortify themselves in the best manner they could, since there was no
Possibility of retiring, or changing Places, but every Man was obliged to fight
hand to hand, and maintain his Ground 'till the Battle was ended; wherefore
their whole Armor, though in Form usually the same with that employed in
Land-service, yet exceeded it in Strength and Firmness: Beside this we find
also some few Instruments of War never used on Land, the principal of which are
these that follow:

(...) Herodotus.
, Spears of an unusual Length, sometimes exceeding twenty Cubits, whence they
are called in Livy Histor. lib. XXVIII. cap. XLV.
, hastae longae, and by Homer (...), and (...) Iliad. ^. v. ^87.
; (...)
(...)
(...). --
With Spears, that in the Vessels ready lay,
These strove to make the Enemy give way,
Long Spears, for Sea Fights only made, composed
Of several Pieces. --
Again in another Place Iliad. ^. v. 6^7.
, (...)
(...)
A Spear with Nails compacted and made strong,
That was full two and twenty Cubits long,
He brandished. --


(...) Pollux
, called by Appian (...), by Diodorus lib. XXII.
(...), was an Engine of Iron, crooked like a Sickte (...) lib. IV. cap. ult.
, and fixed to the Top of a long Pole, wherewith they cut in sunder the Cords
of the Sail-yards, and thereby letting the Sails fall down, disabled the light
Ships. Not unlike this was another Instrument armed at the End with a broad
Iron Head edged on both Sides, wherewith they used to cut the Cords that tied
the Rudder to the Ship.

(...) Diodorus Seculus lib XII Athenaeus
were Engines to cast Stones into the Enemy's Ships.

We find another Engine mentioned by Vegetius, which hung upon the main Mast,
and resembled a Battering Ram, for it consisted of a long Beam, and an Head of
Iron, and was with great Violence pushed against the Sides of adverse Ships.

(...), in Latin manus ferrea, was a Grappling Iron, which they cast out of an
Engine into the Enemy's Ship: It is said to have been first used in Greece by
Pericles the Athenian (...) lib. VII. c LVI.
, at Rome by Duilius Julius Frontinus lib. II. cap. III.
. Different from these were the (...), h^pagines, said to be invented by
Anacharsis Plin. lib. VII cap. LVI.
the Scythian Philosopher; which, as Scheffer collects out of Athenaeus, were
Hooks of Iron hanging on the Top of a Pole, which, being secured with Chains to
the Mast, or some other lofty Part of the Ship, and then cast with great Force
into the Enemy's Vessel, caught it up into the Air. The Means, used to defeat
these Engines, was to cover their Ships with Hides, which cast off, or blunted
the Stroke of the Iron Thucydides lib. VIII. Follux.
.

The Dominion of the Seas was not confined to any one of the Grecian States;
they were continually contending for Empire, and by various Turns of Fortune
sometimes possessed, and again in a few Months, or Years were dispossessed of
it: The Persons that enjoyed it longest, and maintained it with the greatest
Fleet after Greece had arrived to the Height of it is Glory, were the Athenians,
who first began seriously to apply themselves to naval Affairs about the Time
of Xerxes's Invasion: The first that engaged them in this Enterprise was
Themistocles, who, considering their Inability to oppose the Persians by Land,
and the Commodiousness of their Situation for naval Affairs, interpreted the
Oracle that advised to defend themselves within Walls of Wood to this purpose,
and prevailed upon them to convert their whole Time and Treasure to the
building and sitting out a Fleet. The Money employed on this Design was the
Revenue of the Silver-mines at Laurcotis, which had formerly been distributed
amongst the People, who by Themistocles's Persuasion were induced to part with
their Income, that Provision might be made for the public Security: With this
an hundred Triremes were rigged out against Xerxes's numerous Fleet, over which
by the Assistance of their Allies they obtained an entire Victory. Afterward
the Number of their Ships was increased by the Management of Lycurgus the
Orator to four hundred Plutarchus.
; and we are told by Isocrates Pan^gyrica.
, that the Athenian Navy consisted of twice as many Ships, as all the rest of
the Grecians were Masters of: It was made up of two Parts, one being furnished
out by the Athenians themselves, the other by their Confederates.

The Fleet equipped at Athens was maintained after the manner prescribed by
Themistocles 'till the Time of Demosthenes, who, to ingratiate himself with the
Commonalty, restored to them their ancient Revenues, and devised a new Method
to procure Money for the Payment of Seamen, and the Construction of new Men of
War: This he effected by dividing the richer sort of Citizens into (...), or
Companies, which were obliged, according to their several Abilities, to
contribute largely out of their own Substance; and in Times of Necessity it was
frequent for Men of Estates to rigg out Ships at their own Expense over and
above what was required of them, there being a generous Contention between the
leading Men in that Commonwealth, which should outdo the rest in serving his
Country.

The remaining Part of the Fleet was composed of Allies; for the Athenians,
understanding how necessary it was to their Affair^ to maintain their Dominion
of the Seas, would enter into no Leagues, or Confederacies with any of their
Neighbors, but such as engaged themselves to augment their Navy with a
Propotion of Ships; which became a double Advantage to the Athenians, whose
Fleet was strengthened by such Accessions, whilst their Allies were held in
Obedience, as it were, by so many Hostages, all which upon any Revolt must
needs fall into the Hands of the Athenians: Those States that were remote from
Sea, or unable to fit out Vessels of War, were obliged to send their Proportion
in Money Xenothon Histor. Grae lib. VI.
. These Customs were first brought up after the second Persian War, when it was
agreed by the common Consent of all the Grecians, that they should retaliate
the Injuries received from the Barbarians, by carrying the War into their own
Country, and invading them with the whole Strength of Greece, under the
Conduct of the Athenians, who had at that Time raised themselves a very high
Reputation by their mighty naval Preparations, and the singular Courage,
Wisdom, and Humanity of their two Generals Themistocles and Aristides.
Afterward, being grown great in Power, and aiming at nothing less than the
Sovereignty of all Greece, they won some by Favors, and specious Pretenses,
others by Force of Arms to comply with their Desires; for their manner of
treating the Cities they conquered, was to oblige them either to furnish Money,
paying what Tribute they exacted, or to supply them with Vessels of War, as
Thucydides reports of the Chians, when subdued by the Athenians Lib. VII.
; Xenophon also Histor. lib. I.
, and Diodorus Lib. XIII. and aliis in locis.
mention the same Custom; Thus by one means or other, the greatest Part of the
Grecian Cities were draw n in to augment the Athenian Greatness.

CHAPTER XIX. Of Naval Officers.
THERE were two sorts of Officers in all Fleets, one governed the Ships, and
Mariners; the other were entrusted with the Command of the Soldiers, but had
likewise Power over the Ship-masters, and their Crew; these were,

(...), (...) or (...), praefectus classis, the Admiral, whose Commission was
different according to the Exigency of Times and Circumstances, being sometimes
to be executed by one alone, sometimes in Conjunction with other Persons, as
happened to Alcibiades, Nicias, and Lamachus, who were sent with equal Power to
command the Athenian Fleet in Sicily: Their Time of Continuance in Command was
likewise limited by the People, and, as they pleased, prolonged, or shortened.
We read of (...) Cornelius Netos in Epaeminonda.
, that finding his Country like to be brought into great Danger upon the
Resignation of his Office, he held it four Months longer than he was
commissioned to do, in which Time he put a new Face upon the Theban Affairs,
and by his wife Management dispelled the Fears they lay under; which done, he
voluntarily laid down his Power, but was no sooner divested thereof, when he
was called to account for holding it so long, and narrowly escaped being
condemned to Death; for it was feared that such a President might some Time or
other be a Pretense to ambitious Spirits, having so great Power entrusted in
their Hands, to enslave the Commonwealth. The same reason seems to have been
the Cause of the Lacedemonian Law, whereby it was forbidden, that any Person
should be Admiral above once Plutarchus Lysandro, Xenophon Histor. lib. II.
, which nevertheless stood them in no good st^ad, it thereby often happening
that they were forced to commit their Fleet to raw and unexperienced Commanders.

(...) Xenophon Histor. lib. II and V. Tollux lib. I. cap. IX.
, sometimes called (...), was Vice Admiral, or Commander in chief under the
Admiral.

(...), Captain of a Trireme, who commanded all the other Soldiers therein.
The Captains of other Men of War were dignified with Titles taken from the
Vessels they commanded, as (...), etc.

The Officers, that had Care of the Ships, were the following:

(...), those, who were entrusted with the Care and Management of all marine
Affairs, to provide commodious Harbors, to direct the Course of the Fleet, and
order all other Things concerning it, except those which related to War.

(...), the Master, or Pilot had the Care of the Ship, and Government of the
Seamen therein, and sat at the Stern to steer: All Things were managed
according to his Direction, 'twas therefore necessary that he should have
obtained an exact Knowledge of the Art of Navigation, which was called (...),
and chiefly consisted in these three Things: 1. In the right Management of the
Rudder, Sails, and all the Engines used in Navigation. 2. In the Knowledge of
the Winds and celestial Bodies, their Motions and Influences. 3. In the
Knowledge of commodious Harbors, of Rocks, Quicklands, and other Occurrences
on the Sea: All these Acoetes in Ovid tells us he furnished himself with in
order to become an accomplished Pilot Metamorphos. lib. III in Fab. Bacchi.
, Mox ego, ne scopulis haerem semper in iisdem,
Addidici regimen, dextra moderante carinam
Flectere; and Oleniae sidus pluviale capellae,
Taygetemque, Hyadasque oculis, Arctumque notavi,
Ventorumque demo^, and portus puppibus aptos.
Left struck against a Rock, I there should stay,
Of steering well I learnt the useful Way,
Observed the Arctos, and the Hyais too,
The Stars that round Tayg'tes glittering Show,
Have marked the Olenian Goat that Rain portends,
And how a noisy Wind each Quarter sends,
I learned the safest Ports, and best Retreats
For tattered Vessels. --
Mr. Dechair. As to the heavenly Bodies, they were observed by Sailors upon a
twofold Account, being of use to them in prognosticating the Seasons, and
Guides which way to shape their Course. The principal of those used in
foretelling were Arcturus, the Dog Star, Arae, Orion, Hyades, Hoedi, Castor and
Pollux, Helena, etc. It was likewise customary to take notice of various Omens
offered by Seafowl, Fishes, and diverse other Things, as the Murmuring of the
Floods, the shaking, and buzzing Noise of Trees in the neighboring Woods, the
dashing of the Billows against the Shore, and many more, in all which good
Pilots were nicely skilled. As to the Direction in their Voyage, the first
Practitioners in the Art of Navigation, being unacquainted with the rest of the
celestial Motions, steered all the Day by the Course of the Sun, at Night
betaking themselves to some safe Harbor, or resting on the Shore, and not
daring to adventure to Sea 'till their Guide was risen to discover their Way:
That this was their constant Custom may be observed from the ancient
Descriptions of those Times, whereof I shall only observe this Instance Virgil.
Aeneid. III. v. ^08.
, Sol ruit interca, and montes umbrantur opaci,
Sternimur optatae gremi^o telluris ad undam,
Sortiti remos, passimque in littore sicco
Corpora curamus, fessos sopor irrigat artus.
The hastening Sun had reached his watery Bed,
And Night the gloomy Mountains had overspread,
When, Lots resolving who should Rowers be,
Upon the Shore we lie just by the Sea,
With Sleep our drooping Eyes we quickly close,
And give our wearied Bodies sweet Repose.
Mr. Dechair. Afterward, the Phanicians, whom some will have to be the first
Inventors of Navigation, discovered the Motions of some other Stars, as may be
observed in Pliny Lib. VII.
, and Propertius Lib. II. v. 990.
, Quaeritis and coelo Phoenicum inventa sereno,
Quae sit stella homini commoda, quaeque mala.
-- led by the Art,
The wise Phoenicians found, and did impart,
You mind what Stars are Signs of Good, or Harm.
The Phoenicians we find to have been directed by Cynosura, or the lesser
Bear-star (...) Iliad ^ A^^ianus Exped. lib VI.
, which was first observed (as some are of opinion) by Thales the Milesian, who
was originally a Phoenician Hyginus lib. II Poet. Astron. Eustathius II ^
Theon. in A^atum.
; whereas the Mariners of Greece, as well as other Nations, steered by the
greater Bear, called Helice; whence Aratus, -- (...)
(...)
Helice always is the Grecians Guide, When ever they take a Voyage. --
For the first Observation of this they were obliged to Nauplius, if you will
believe Theon, or, according to the Report of Flaccus Argon^ 1.
, to Tiphys, the Pilot of the famous Ship Argo. But of these, we are told by
Theon, the former was the securer Guide, and therefore was followed by the
Phoenicians, who for Skill in marine Affairs outstrip'd not only all the rest
of the World, but even the Grecians themselves.

(...), or (...), was next under the Master, and had his Place in the Head of
the Ships, as his Name imports; To his Care was committed the Tackling of the
Ship Xenophon Admin. dom. lib. V.
, and the Rowers, who had their Places assigned by him, as appears of Phaeax,
who performed this Office in Theseus's Ships Athena^^s lib. XV.
: We find him every where assisting the Master at Consultations concerning the
Seasons, Places, and other Things Suidas, Plutarchus Agi^e, Xenephon Administ.
dom. lib. V. Pollux.
.

(...), portisculus, ageator, or hortator remigum, is by some interpreted the
Boat-swain; his Office was to signify the Word of Command to the Rowers (...)
Exped. Alex. lib. VI.
, and to distribute to all the Crew their daily Portion of Food Suidas.
.

(...) was a Musician, who by the Harmony of his Voice, and Instrument raised
the Spirits of the Rowers, when weary with Labor Censorinus cap. XII.
, and ready to saint, as we read in Statius Theb^^d. V. v. 343.
; Acclivis malo mediis intersona^ Orpheus
Remigiis, ta^*tosque jubet neseire labores.
Against the Mast the tunefull Orpheus stands,
Plays to the wearied Rowers, and commands
The Thought of Toil away. --
Another, it may be the chief, Use of this Music was to direct the Rowers,
that they, keeping Time therewith, might proceed in a regular and constant
Motion, left by an uncertain Impulse of their Oars the Course of the Ship
should be retarded Maximus Tyrius Dissert. XXIII.
: Hence Flaceus in his Argonautics; -- carmine tonsas
Ire docet, summo passim ne gurgite pugnent.
His Notes direct how every Oar should strike,
How they should Order keep. --


^ilius also speaks to the same purpose Lib. VI. v. 361.
; -- mediae stat margin puppis,
Qui voce alternos nautarum temperet ictus,
Et remis dictet sonitum, pariterque relatis
Ad numerion plaudat resonantia caerula tonsis.
One ready stands to sing a charming Song
Unto the Seamen as they row along,
Whose lively Strains a constant Movement keep,
And show when every Oar should brush the Deep,
Who, as the beaten Water still resounds,
Applauds their Labor with his Voice. --
Mr. Dechair. This Music was called (...) Aristophanes, ejusque Scholis Ran.
Act. II. sc. V. Pollux.
, or (...) Aristophanes, ejusque Scholis Ran. Act. II. sc. V. Pollux.
.

(...), custodes navis, were obliged to take care that the Ship received no
Damage by bulging upon Rocks, or other ways Ulpian. lib. LIII. cap. VI and VII
Pollux lib. VII. cap. XXXI Eustathius Iliad. (...).
; whence, in the Night especially, we find them employed in sounding, and
directing the Ship with long Poles; (...)
(...) Sophocles (...).
.
As those who in the Nightime mind the Ship,
Direct and guide it with long Poles. --


(...) were either those that had the charge of the (...), or Sides of the
Ship, according to Turnebus Advers. lib. XXVIII. c. XLIII
; or of the (...), or (...), i. e. the Banks of Rowers.

Several other Names of Officers occurr in Authors; as (...) who distributed to
every Man his Share of Victuals, being usually the same with the (...), but
sometimes, it may be, distinct from him. Homer mentions this Officer Iliad. ^.
; (...)
And Officers embarked, whose Care it was
To give each Man his Victuals. --


(...) Pollux.
was a Person, whose Business lay (...), about the Fire, and therefore is by
some thought to have been the Cook; by others the Priest, who offered
Sacrifices.

(...), or (...), was the Bursar, who kept the Accounts, and registered all the
Receipts and Expenses of the Ship.

CHAPTER XX. Of their Voyages, Harbors, etc.
WHEN it was designed the Fleet should put to Sea, the Signal being given by
the Admiral, the Mariners haled the Ships into the Water, for it was customary,
when they came into Harbor, to draw the Sterns to dry Land to prevent their
being tossed and dissipated by the Waves; whence Virgil; -- start littore
puppes.
The Sterns stand on the Shore.
It was frequent also for the Seamen, underproping their Ship; with their
Shoulders, to thrust them forwards into the Sea; so we read of the Argonauts in
Valerius Fla^cus Argon. I.
, At du^is imperiis Minyae monituque frequentes
Puppem sumeris sub^^unt, and t^nto poplite proni
Decurrunt. --
The Prince commands that they no longer stay,
His Orders strait the Minyae obey,
And kneeling down, their Shoulders heave the Ship
Into the Main. --
This was sometimes performed by Leavers and Spars of Wood, over which Ships
were rolled into the Deep; these were called (...), Hes^chius, Pollux.
, and according to Homer (...) Ody^^. ^
; (...).
The heavy Ship into the Sea they thrust
With Leavers. --
But, to remedy the great Trouble and Difficulty of these Methods, Archimedes
the S^racusian obliged his Countrymen with the ingemo^s Contrivance of an
Engine called helix, whereby the Ships were with great Facility removed from
the Shore Plutarchus Marce^o, Athenaus.
; to do this they called (...).

Before they embarked the Ships were adorned with Flowers, and Garlands, which
were Tokens of Joy and Mirth A^stophan^^ ^^ (...) Ach^. Act. II. Sc. V.
, and Omens of future Prosperity: Hence Virgil, -- vocat jam carbasus auras,
Puppibus and laeti nau^ae imposuere coronas.
Now Is a fair Wind, and all the Seamen crown
The Ship with Garlands. --
Because no Success could be expected in any Enterprise without the Divine
Blessing and Assistance, they never forgot to invoke the Protection of the Gods
by solemn Prayers and Sacrifices, which as they offered to other Deities, so
more especially to those, who had any Concern, or Command in the Sea, to the
Winds and Tempests, to the whole Train of marine Gods and Goddesses, but above
all to Neptune, the great Emperor of the Sea: Thus Anchises in Virgil Aeneid.
III. v. 118.
dares not adventure himself to Sea, 'till he has first addressed himself to
Neptune, and Apollo; -- meritos aris mactavit honores,
Taurum Neptuno, taurum tibi, pulcher Apollo.
A Pull to Neptune, and a Bull to you
He sacrificed, Apollo, as your due.
A great Number of Instances to the same purpose may be met with in all ancient
Writers: Nor was it enough for themselves alone to petition the Gods for Safety
and Success; but all the Multitudes that thronged on such Occasions to the
Shore, earnestly recommended them to the Divine Protection, and joined their
servent Prayers for their Deliverance from all the Dangers, they were going to
encounter Diodo^us Siculus lib. XIII.
.

This done, we are told by the Scholiast upon Apollonius, that it was usual to
let fly a Dove; which no doubt was looked on as an Omen of safe Return, because
that Bird is not easily forced to relinquish it is Habitation, but, when driven
away, delights to return: Then they put to Sea, the Signal being given by a
Shout, by Sound of Trumpet, and several other ways; in the Night it was usually
given by Torches lighted in the Admiral Galley, an Instance whereof, we have in
Seneca's Agamemnon V. 427.
; Signum recursus regia ut fulfit rate,
Et clara lentum remigem emovit tuba,
Aurata primas prora secavit vias.
The Torches being lighted, which, to guide
Us home more safely, in the King's Ship stood,
And summoned by the Trumpet's noisy Sound,
When every Man his proper Oar had took,
The Admiral marched first, and cut the Waves.
Mr. Dechair.

The Ships were usually ranged in this Order: In the Front went the lighter
Vessels, after these followed the Men of War led on by the Admiral, which was
commonly distinguished from the rest by the Richness of her Ornaments; thus we
find Agamemnon's Ship in the fore mentioned Place of Seneca, going before the
rest; Aurasa primas prora secavit vias,
Aperitque cursus, mill quos puppes secent.
The Admiral went first, and cut the Waves,
Prepared the yielding Deep, which afterward
A thousand Vessels cleared. --
Last of all the Vessels of Burden came up. If the Winds were high, or Seas
dangerous, they were extended out at length, sailing one by one; but at other
Times they went three, or more in a breast.

When they arrived at any Port, where they designed to land, the first Thing
they did was to run their Ships backwards upon their Hind-decks in order to
tack about, this they called (...), or (...) Aristoph. Schol. Vesp. p 457.
, which Phrase is by Thucydides elegantly applied to those that retreat
fighting, and still facing their Enemies: Then they tacked about, which they
termed (...) (...).
, turning the Heads of their Ships to the Sea, according to Virgil; Obvertunt
pelago provas. --
To the Sea they turned their Pro^
Now the Rowers ceased from their Labor and rested their Oars, which the
Greeks called (...), the Latins inhibere remos, these they hung upon Pins, as
we find in Statius Thebaid. V. 3^4.
; Quinquaginta illi trabibus de more revinctis
Eminus abrupto qu^tiunt nova littora salin.
Their fifty Oars hung up, they rudely leapt
Upon the newfound Shore. --


For fear their Oars should be in Danger of being broken by the Floods, they
hung them not so as to reach the Water, but upon the Sides of their Ships;
whence Ovid Metamorph. XI. 25.
; Obvertit lateri pendentes navita remos.
To the Ship's Sides the Seamen hung their Oars.


Being safely landed, they discharged whatever Vows they had made to the Gods,
beside which they usually offered a Sacrifice called (...) to Jupiter, sirnam'd
(...) from enabling them (...), to quit their Ships, and recover the Land.
Their Devotions were sometimes paid to other Deities, especially to Neptune,
who was thought to have a peculiar Care of all that traveled within the
Compass of his Dominions: Thus the Heroes in Homer (...)
; (...)
(...)
(...)
Landed at Pylus, where King Neleus reigned,
With blackest Bulls they several Altars Stained,
A Sacrifice to Neptune. --


Harbors were Places rendered either by Nature, or Art commodious for the
Entertainment of Ships, and to defend them against the Insults of Winds and
Waves: The former sort were usually at the Mouth of a River, or in a Creek of
the Sea under the Covert of some lofty Promontory: The latter were vast Piles,
or Heaps of Earth, and other Materials, cast up in the Form of a Semicircle,
with Arms of a vast Length extended into the Sea; These were called (...) (...)
XII. (...)
from their Resemblance to Crabs Claws; or (...) (...) V.
; or (...), as in Homer, who speaks thus of the Phorcynian Harbor (...)
; -- (...)
(...)
-- There two great Piles stood out,
Which made an Haven. --
Cicero terms them cornua (...) lib. IX ^p. XIX.
: For the Security of the Ships enclosed therein, we find it usual to fix to
the two Ends vast Chains, or Booms, as appears of the Syracusian Harbor
mentioned in Frontinus (...)
: Nor was it unfrequent to guard them with great Pales fortified against the
Water with Pitch: Hence Havens are sometimes termed in Latin claustra, in Greek
(...) (...).
. On both Sides of the Mole were strong Towers erected (...) lib. V cap. II.
, which were defended, in the Night, and all Times of Danger by Garrisons of
Soldiers (...).
: Not far distant hence was a Watchtower with Lights to direct Mariners; this
was called Pharos, which Name originally belonged to a little Island in the
Mouth of the River Nile, where the first of these Towers was built, but
afterward was naturalized both in Greece, and at Rome.

The second Part of the Harbor was termed (...), in Latin ostium, and jauces,
being the Mouth, or Entry between the Arms of the Semicircle.

M^^^s, was the inmost Part of the Harbor, nearest to the Shore, and most
secure from the Waves, insomuch that there Ships were often suffered to lie
loose, whereas in other Parts of the Harbor they were usually either chained
to the Land, or lay at Anchor: It was distinguished into several Partitions by
Walls, erected for the most part of Stone, under the Covert of which the
Vessels had Protection; these Places were called (...) (...).
, whence Homer (...).
, -- (...)
(...)
The Ships that far within the Harbor lodge,
Without a Chain are safe. --
They were also termed (...), and all together composed what was called (...):
Here were likewise the Docks, in which Ships were built, or careen'd, and
dragged to Land; these were named (...) Diotorus S^^ulus lib. XIV. S^^das.
, (...) Home^, Od^^s. (...).
, (...) D^^^es^^en. Sc^^l. Orat. de corona, Sa^^^, Homers Sc^^l.
, etc.

The adjacent Places were usually filled with Inns, and Stews Pollax lib. IX.
cap. V.
well stocked with Females that prostituted themselves to the Mariners,
Merchants, and Artificers of all sorts, who flocked thither in great Numbers:
Most Harbors were adorned with Temples, or Altars, where Sacrifices were
offered to the Tutelar Deities of the Place, and Presidents of the Sea; mention
of which we find as in other Places, to particularly in Homer (...) V. v 1^3.
, who speaks of a Cave in the Haven of Ithaca dedicated to the Naiades.

Scheffer will have stationes narvium to differ from the former in this, that
here Ships were not laid up for any considerable Time, but remained only 'till
they were supplied with Water, or other Necessaries, or on some other short
Occasions: They had several Names, being called (...) Hes^^^^s.
, (...) (...) lib VIII.
, (...) (...) lib. V.
, (...) P^^^b. lib. I.
, (...) (...). lib IV. esusque (...).
; and were frequently at some distance from the Shore, whence (...) in Plutarch
P^ope^o
is termed (...), which imports their being among the Waves; and by Thucydides
(...), which answers in some measure to the Latin Phrase in Livy in anchoris
stare, to ride at Anchor.

In Times of War they defended themselves with Fortifications on both Sides,
but which were made after a different manner; toward the Land they fortified
themselves with a Ditch and Parapet, or Wall, built in the Form of a
Semicircle, and extended from one Point of the Sea to another: This was
sometimes defended with Towers, and beautified with Gates, through which they
issued forth to attack their Enemies: Homer has left us a remarkable
Description of the Grecian Fortifications in the Trojan War Iliad. ^. v. 4; 6
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
A bulky Wall, and losty Towers to shield
Their Navy and themselves, the Trojans build,
On these great Gates for Passages they make,
Convenient Ways that all their Horse should take,
And all around they dug a spacious Ditch,
Fixing great Pales of Wood. --
Mr. Dechair. Toward the Sea, or within it, they fixed great Pales Wood like
those in Harbors; before these the Vessels of Burden were placed in such
Order, as they might be instead of a Wall, and give Protection to those within;
in which manner Nicias is reported by Thucydides to have encamped himself: But
this seems only to have been practiced, when the Enemy was thought superior in
Strength, and raised in them great Apprehensions of Danger: At other Times all
they used to do, was to appoint a few of their Ships to observe their Enemy's
Motions; these were termed (...) Th^cy^. lib. I.
, and the Soldiers (...), or (...), from (...), a Torch, wherewith they
signified the Approach of their Enemies P^^a^^us lib. III
. When their Fortifications were thought strong enough to secure them from the
Assault of Enemies, it was frequent to drag their Ships to Shore, which the
Greeks called (...), the Romans subducere Li^tar lib. XXII. cap. XXVIII. Cice^o
de Offi^. lib. III.
. Around the Ships the^ Soldiers placed their Tents, as appears every where in
Homer, Thucydides Lib. VI.
, and others; but this seems only to have been practiced in Winter, when their
Enemy's Fleet was laid up, and could not assault them; or in long Sieges, and
when they lay in no Danger from their Enemies by Sea, as in the Trojan War,
where the Defenders of Troy never once attempted to encounter the Grecians in a
Sea Fight; at other Times the Ships only lay at Anchor, or were tied to the
Shore, that upon any Alarm they might be ready to receive the Enemy.

CHAPTER XXI. Of their Engagements, etc. by Sea.
IN preparing for an Engagement at Sea, the first Business was to disburthen
their Ships of War of all Provisions, and other Lumber not necessary in the
Action, lest by too heavy a Lead they should be rendered unwieldly, and unfit
for Service, being neither able with Force and Vigor to assail their Enemies,
nor by lightly tacking about to avoid their Onsets: This done, and the Enemy
appearing in View, they took down their Sails, lowered their Masts, and secured
whatever might expose them to the Winds, choosing rather to be governed by
Oars, which they could manage at their Pleasure: On this account we read that
Hanno the Carthaginian, being pursued by a Fleet of Dionysius the Sicilian, to
which he was much inferior in Strength and Number, and having no Way to make
his Escape, took down his Sails as preparing to fight; whereby decoying the
Sicilians to do the like, whilst they were busy and observed him not, he
unexpectedly hois'd again his Sails, and made away Polyanus lib* V.
.

As to their* Order of Battle, that was varied as Time, Place, and other
Circumstances required; being sometimes formed like an Half Moon, and called
(...), the Horns jutting out toward the Enemy, and containing the ablest Men
and Ships; sometimes, on the contrary, having it is Belly nearest the Enemy, and
it is Horns turned backwards, when it was termed (...): Nor was it unusual to
range them in the Form of a Circle, which they called (...); or (to mention no
more) in the Figure of the Letter V Vegetius.
, with the Horns extended in a direct Line, and meeting at the End; which Order
was named (...), in Latin forceps, and was usually encountered by the Enemies
ranged into the same Order inver^^d, whereby they resembled the Figure of a
Wedge, or Beak, whence it was called cuneus, or rostrum; this enabled them to
pe^^^a^^ into the Body of the adverse Battle.

Before they joined Battle, both Parties invoked the Gods to their Assistance
by Prayers, and Sacrifices; and the Admirals, going from Ship to Ship in some
of the lighter Vessels, exhorted they Soldiers in a set Oration to behave
themselves like Men: Then, all Things being in Readiness, the Signal was given
by hanging out of the Admiral's Galley a gilded Shield, as we read in Pluta^^h;
or a red Garment, or Banner Pro^^rus (...) lib. XIII. Polyanus lib. I.
; which was termed (...): During the Elevation of this the Fight continued, and
by it is Depression, or Inclination toward the right or left, the rest of the
Ships were directed in what manner to attack their Enemies, or retreat from
them Leo Tact.
. To this was added the Sound of Trumpets, which was begun in the Admiral's
Galley Plu^^^chus (...)
, and continued round the whole Navy (...) lib XI II.
; it was likewise usual for the Soldiers before the Fight to sing a Paean, or
Hymn, to Mars S^t^^r.
; and after it, to Apollo.

The Fight was usually begun by the Admiral-galley, as we find done at the
Battle of Salamis Deodorus lib. III.
, and another Time by Attalus's Ship Poly^eus lib XVI.
: It was carried on in two different manners, for not only the Ships engaged
one another, and by their Beaks and Prows, and sometimes their Sterns
endeavored to dash in Pieces, or overset and sink their Opposers; but the
Soldiers also annoyed their Enemies with Darts and Slings, and upon their
nearer Approach with Swords and Spears: Thus Lucan Lib III.
; Ut primum restris crepucrunt obvia restra;
In puppim redicre rates, emissaque tela
Era texerunt, vacuumque cadentia pontum.
The Ships first meeting show their fiercest Rage,
And furiously with clashing Beaks engage;
These turn about, and then the Javelins fly,
And Showers of Arrows darken all the Sky,
The Sea is covered over. --
Mr. Dechair. Afterward he goes on in this manner, Iam non excussis torquentur
tela lacertis,
Nec longinqua ^^^lum ^a^ulato vulnera serro;
Miscenturque m^^^^; navali plurima bello
Ensis agit; stat quisque sue de robore puppis
Pronus in adversos ictus. --
They throw no longer Darts, no longer try
With missive Arms to kill the Enemy,
Both close together come, their Swords they draw,
Each stoutly keeps his Post. --
Nor can it be wondered how they approached so near one another, when we find
it usual to link their Vessels together with Chains, or Grappling-irons, of
which I have spoken in one of the foregoing Chapters; whence Silius Lib. XIV.
, -- Injecta ligant hinc vincula ferri
Atque illin^ naves, steteruntque ad praelia nexae;
Nec jaculo, aut long certatur arundine fusa,
Cominus and gladio terrestria praelia miscent.
Chained fast with Irons both the Navies stand,
No Blood the Darts and flying Weapons spill,
With Swords they closely joined begin to kill.
Sometimes, for want of Irons, they so fixed their Oars, as thereby to hinder
their Enemies from retreating: So we read in Lucan Lib. III.
; Seque tenent remis, toto stetit aequore bellum.
The Ships they hold with Oars, and all around
The Face of horrid War appears. --
This sort of Combat was not unlike a Siege, where the stronger Party
prevailing over their Enemies, entered their Vessels by laying Bridges between
them, and, having killed, or taken Prisoners all they found in Arms, seized and
dragged away their Ships.

When a Town was besieged by Sea, they used to environ it is Walls and Harbor
with Ships ranged in Order from one Side of the Shore to the other, and so
closely joined together by Chains and Bridges on which armed Men were placed,
that without breaking their Order, there could be no Passage from the Town to
the Sea; this Leaguer Diodorus calls (...) Lib. XIII.
. The better to prevent any Attempts of the Besieged, Demetrius is said to have
invented a sort of Boom armed with Spikes of Iron, which swam upon the Waters;
this he placed at the Mouth of the Harbor of Rhodos, when he besieged that
City Di^dorus lib. XX.
: Sometimes they blocked up the Harbor, or made a Passage to the Town by
railing a vast Mole before it, as we read of Alexander in the Siege of Tire
Curtius lib. IV.
; or by sinking Ships filled with Stones and Sand, as we find practiced by the
Romans.

The Attacks were usually carried on by Men standing upon Bridges between the
Ships, and thence with Darts and Stone, forcing the Belieg'd from their Walls:
Thus Alexander in the Siege of Tire so ordered his Galleys, that, two of them
being joined at the Heads, and the Sterns som^what distant, Boards and Planks
were laid over in the Fashion of Bridges, for Soldiers to stand upon, who were
in this manner rowed close to the Wall, where without any Danger they threw
Darts at their Enemies, being sheltred behind the Fore-decks of their own
Galleys Idem ibidera.
. Here also, that they might throw their missive Weapons with greater
Advantage, and batter the Walls with their Rams, and other ^ngines, they
erected Towers so high as to command the City-walls, from which having repelled
the Defenders, they by this means had Opportunity to descend by Ladders.

The Besieged were not at a loss for ways of defeating these Strategems; the
Ships linked together they pulled asunder with Ironhooks, the Passage to the
Town they blocked up in the same manner the Enemies had done that of the
Harbor, or other ways Thucydides lib. VII.
; if they could not hinder their Approach, they failed not to gall them with
Darts, Stones, Fireballs, melted Pitch, or Metals, and many other Things; and
lastly, to trouble you no farther, it was frequent for those in the Town to
destroy the Vessels and Works of the Besiegers by Fireships, as we find done
by the Tyrians Curtiu^ lib. IV.
; for, taking a large Vessel, they put a great Quantity of Ballast into the
Stern, covered the Head with Pitch, Tar, and Brimstone, then by the Help of
Sails and Oars brought her close to the Macedonian Fortress, where having set
the combustible Matter on Fire, they retreated into Boats prepared for that
Purpose; the Fire immediately seized the Towers of the Fortification, and, by
the Help of Torches and Firebrarnds cast by those in the Boats, the Work it
self took Fire, and that vast Pile, on which so much Time and Labor had been
bestowed, was in a few Moments quite demolished: The Use of Fireships we
likewise meet with amongst the Rhodians in Diodorus the Sicilian Lib. XX.
.

CHAPTER XXII. Of the Spoils, Military Rewards, Punishments, etc.
VICTORY being obtained, the Conquerours rode Home triumphant, laden with the
Spoils of their Enemies, and dragging after them the captive Ships, as appears
from the Instances of Alcibiades in Plutarch, and Lysander in Xenophon Histor.
lib. II.
: the later of them we find to have had Crowns, or Garlands presented him by
all the consederate Cities of Sparta, as he passed by them, which Custom was
constantly practiced by the Grecians, from whom it seems to have been derived
to Rome: Nor was the Admiral, or the Soldiers, and Mariners Polyanus lib IV.
only adorned with Garlands, but their Ships were likewise bedecked with them
Diodorus lib. XIII.
; whereby the Rhodians were once reduced to extreme Danger, for their Enemies
having made themselves Masters of their Ships, crowned them with Laurel, and
entering them, were received with great Joy into Rhodes Vitravius lib. II. cap.
VIII.
; which Strategem we find to have been commonly practiced in Greece Polyanus.
. Nor were they beautified with Garlands only, but hung likewise about with
Wrecks and broken Pieces of the Ships destroyed in Battle, especially the
(...), and other ornamental Parts, which the Conquerours were very industrious
in procuring to grace their Triumphs; whence of Hector threatening the Grecian
Fleet with Destruction Homer says, (...)
These they called (...), and to deprive a Ship of them (...) Xenophon Hist.
lib. VI.
. In this manner the Victors returned Home, filling the Sea with their Shouts,
Acclamations, and Hymns, which were sweetened by the Harmony of Musical
Instruments, as appears from the Example of Lysander in Plutarch.

Being received into the City, they went straightway to the Temples of the
Gods, where they dedicated the choicest of their Spoils: Thus we read, that the
Syracusians having defeated the Athenians, and the Rhodians after a Victory
over Demetrius, filled the Temples of their Gods with Wrecks of Ships. Nor was
it unusual to present entire Vessels to them; for we find that Phormio, having
overcome the Lacedaemonians, consecrated a Ship to Neptune Diodorus lib. XII.
and the Grecians after their great Victory over the Persians at Salamis are
reported to have dedicated three Phanician Tritemes (...) lib. VIII.


Having paid their Compliment to the Gods, the Remainder of their Spoils they
bestowed in the Porti^os, and other public Places of their City, to preserve
the Memory of their Victory: To which End they were likewise honored with
Statues, Inscriptions, and Trophies, the last of which were sometimes erected
in their own Country, but more frequently near the Place where they had
overthrown their Enemies, and were adorned with Arms, and broken Wrecks of
Ships, which for that reason were looked on as a Sign and Testimony of Victory;
thus we are told by Thucydides Lib. VII.
, that in a Fight between the Athenians and Corinthians, where both Parties
made Pretentions to Victory, the former were by most esteemed to have the
justest Title to it, as having possessed themselves of their Enemy's Wrecks;
and King Philip, tho? worsted by Att^lus, yet, because he made a shift to keep
his Fleet amongst the adverse Party's Wrecks, would have persuaded the World
that the Day was his own Polybius Hist. lib XVI. cap. VII.


These were the principal of the Rewards peculiar to those who had ^erv'd their
Country by Sea; others they seem also to have been frequently honored with,
which being such as were common to them with those, who had been useful in
other Stations, may be more properly referred to other Places, where I have
already treated of them. The chief of their Punishments was Whipping with
Cords; which was sometimes inflicted on Criminals having their lower Parts
within the Ship, and their Heads thrust out at Port-holes, and hanging into the
Sea: Thus we find one Scylax, Master of a Myndian Vessel, to have been treated
by Megab^^es, for not being careful to keep watch and ward Hero^^tus (...).
.

There seems to have been a Punishment, by which Offenders were tied with Cords
to a Ship, and dragged in the Waters 'till they were drowned; in which manner
Scylla was treated by Mino^, after she had betrayed to him her Father and
Kingdom.

Others were thrown alive into the Sea, as we read of Jonas the Prophet.

(...), or such as refused to serve at Sea after a lawful Summons, were at
Athens themselves and their Posterity condemned to (...), Ignominy, or
Dissranchisment Suidas.
, of which Punishment I have spoken in one of the former Books.

(...), Desertors, were not only bound with Cords, and whipped, as Demosthenes
reports; but had their Hands likewise cut off, as we are informed by Suidas.

Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE. BOOK IV.
CHAPTER I. Of the Care the Grecians had of Funerals, and of Persons destitute
thereof.
PLUTO was the first who instructed the Grecians Diodorus Siculus lib V. cap.
XV.
in the manner of performing their last Offices to the Deceased, which gave
occasion to the Inventors of Fables to assign him a vast and unbounded Empire
in the Shades below, and constitute him supreme Monarch of all the Dead: And,
since there is scarce any useful Art, the Inventor whereof was not reckoned
amongst the Gods, and believed to patronize and preside over those Artificers
he had at first instructed, no Wonder if He, who? taught the rude and
unciviliz'd Ages, what Respect, what Ceremonies were due to the Dead, had the
Honor to be numbered amongst the Deities of first Quality, since the Duties
belonging to the Dead were thought of far greater Importance, and the Neglect
of them a Crime of a black^r Character than of those required by the Living:
For the Dead were ever held sacred and inviolable even amongst the most
barbarous Nations; to defraud them of any due Respect was a greater and more
unpardonable Sacrilege, than to spoil the Temples of the Gods; their Memories
were preserved with a religious Care and Reverence, and all their Remains
hono^^^ with Worship and Adoration; Hatred and Envy themselves were ^^^ to
silence, for it was thought a Sign of a cruel and inhuman ^^^ ^fition to speak
evil of the Dead, and prosecute Revenge beyond the Grave; no Provocation was
thought sufficient to warrant to soul an Action, the highest Affronts from
themselves whilst alive, or afterward from their Children, were esteemed weak
Pretenses to disturb their Peace, and such Offenders were not only branded with
Disgrace and Infamy, but by Solon's Laws incurred a severe Penalty Demosthen.
orat. in Le^tin Plutarchus So^one.
.

But of all the Honors paid to the Dead, the Care of their Funeral Rites was
the greatest and most necessary; for these were looked upon as a Debt so
sacred, that such as neglected to discharge it, were thought accursed; hence
the Romans called them justa, the Grecians (...), etc. all which Words imply
the inviolable Obligations, which Nature has laid upon the Living to take care
of the Obequies of the Dead: And no Wonder if they were thus solicitous about
the Interment of the Dead, since they were strongly possessed with an Opinion,
that their Souls could not be admitted into the Elysian Shades, but were forced
to wander desolate and without Company 'till their Bodies were committed to the
Earth H^merus Iliad. (...).
; and if they had never the good Fortune to obtain human Burial, the Time of
their Exclu^ion from the common Receptacle of the Ghosts was no less than an
hundred Years; whence in most of the Poets we meet with passionate Requests of
dying Men, or their Ghosts after Death for this Favor; I will only give you
one out of Homer Odyss. (...). v. 66, 72.
, who introduces the Soul of Elpenor earnestly beseeching Ulysses to perform
his Funeral Rites; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When homewards bound the infernal Shades you quit,
Don't me unhappy Wretch, my Friend, forget,
If ought of dear Concern you have left behind,
With Zeal towered me let that affect your Mind,
If aged Sire, your Wife, or hopeful Heir can bind,
Let Dirge and Burial solemnize my Fate,
Lest I should prove to the Gods a Reprobate;
This, this I beg, This earnestly implore,
Thus will my Soul to Bliss be wasted over.
Mr. Abell.

This was the reason, why of all Imprecations the greatest was to wish that a
Person might (...), i.e. die destitute of Burial; and of all the Forms of Death
the most terrible and affrighting was that by Shipwreck, as wherein the Body
was swallowed up by the Deep; whence Ovid, though willing to resign his miserable
Life, yet prays against this Death; Demite naufragium, mors mihi munus eris.
Death would my Soul from anxious Troubles ease,
But that I fear to perish by the Seas.


Wherefore, when they were in Danger of being cast away, it was customary to
fasten to some Part of their Body the most precious of all their Stores, with a
Direction to the first that found their dead Corpses, if the Waves chanced to
roll them to the Shore, entreating of him the Favor of an human Burial, and
profering what they carried about them as a Reward, or desiring him to expend
some Part of it upon their Funeral Synesius Epist. Interpretes Historiz
Apollonii Tyrii, Mearsius in Lycopliro^is Cassandram v. 367.
Rites, and accept the rest himself: But though the Carcass brought no Reward
along with it, yet was it not therefore lawful to pass it by neglected, and to
deny it what was looked on as a Debt to all Mankind; for not only the Athenian
Laws forbad so great a Piece of Inhumanity Aelianus Var. Hist. lib. V. c. XIV.
, but in all Parts of Greece it was looked upon as a great Provocation to the
Infernal Gods, and a Crime that would call up certain Vengeance from the
Regions below Sophoclis Sch^liasles Antig^n^.
; nor could the guilty Person be freed from the Punishment of his Offense, or
admitted to converse with Men, or worship the Gods, but was looked upon as
profane and polluted, 'till he had undergone the accustomed Purifications, and
appeased the incensed Deities. Yet it was not always required tha^ all the
Funeral Solemnities should be nicely performn'd, which the Have of Travelers,
that should light upon the Carcass, might oftentimes not permit, but it was
sufficient to cast Dust, or soft Earth upon it three Times together, according
to Horace Lib. I. Od. XXVIII. v. 36. Quintilianus Declam. V. VI. Caelius
Rhodiginus lib. XVIII. cap. XX.
; Quamquam sestinas, non est mora longa, liccbit
Injecto ter pulvere curras.
-- Over the Corpse thrice sprinkle Sand,
The officious Deed will not retard your Have.
Of these three Handfulls one at least was thrown upon the Head.

This indeed in Cases of Necessity was looked upon as enough to gain the Ghosts
Admission into Pluto's Dominions, and to free such as happened upon their
Bodies from the Fear of being haunted, yet was far from affording them entire
Satisfaction; wherefore such as had been interred clandestinely, or in have and
without the customary Solemnities, if afterward good Fortune discovered them
to any of their Friends, were honored with a second Funeral, as appears from
the Story of Polydorus in Virgil, who being murdered and interred by
Polymnestor, does yet make his complaint to Aeneas at his Arrival in Thrace,
that his Soul could not rest, 'till his Obsequies were celebrated according to
Custom, wherefore the pious Hero -- Instaurat sunus, animamque sepulcro
Condit Aineid. III. v. 62, and 67.
. --
Attends the Rites, and gives the Soul Repose
Within a wished for Tomb. --


Nor was it sufficient to be honored with the solemn Performance of their
Funeral Rites, except their Bodies were prepared for Burial by their Relations,
and interred in the Sepulcres of their Fathers; the Want of which was looked
upon by themselves, and their surviving Friends, as a very great Misfortune,
and not much inferior to Death it self, as appears from innumerable
Testimonies, of which I shall only trouble you with the following; the first
taken from the Epitaph of Leonidas the Tarentine, which runs thus Antholog.
Epigram. lib. III. cap. XXV. ep. LXXV.
; (...)
(...)
I from Tarentum far remote do lie,
My native Soil, than Death oh! worse Anxiety.
And Electra in Sophocles, having preserved Orestes from the Fury of
C^ytemnestra by sending him into a foreign Country, and a great many Years
after hearing he had ended his Days there, wishes he had rather perished at
first, than after so many Years Continuance of Life to have died from Home, and
been destitute of the last Offices of his Friends; her Words are these V. 1134.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) etc.
Oh! could I wish thou had, unhappy Youth,
Been slain, before I sent thee thus away,
Then thou had never these doleful Mis'ries felt,
But died in the Innocence of Infancy;
Then thou had had one common Sepulture
With thy dear Father, then thy Sister's Love
And Pity never would thus have heaped up Woe:
Now thou art in a foreign Land deprived
Of those blessed Rites thy Friends could once bestow,
And as thy Life unhappy was, so is alike thy Death.
Mr. Abell.

For this reason, such as died in foreign Countries, had usually their Ashes
brought Home, and interred in the Sepulcres of their Ancestors, or, at least,
in some Part of their native Country; it being thought that the same Mother,
which gave them Life and Birth, was only fit to receive their Remains, and
afford them a peaceful Habitation after Death: Whence it is, that all ancient
Authors afford us innumerable Instances of Bodies conveyed sometimes by the
Command of Oracles, sometimes out of the good Will of their Friends, from
foreign Countries to the Sepulcres of their Fathers, and with great Solemnity
deposited there: Thus Theseus was removed from Scyrus to Athens, Orestes from
Tegea, and his Son Tisamenus from Helice to Sparta, and Aristomenes (to mention
no more) from Rhodes to Messene. How far this Custom extended to Soldiers, and
by whom it was first introduced into Greece has been discoursed in the
precedent Book.

Nor was this pious Care limited to Persons of free Condition, but Slaves also
had some Share therein; for we find the Athenian Lawgiver commanding the
Magistrates called Demarchi under a severe Penalty to solemnize the Funerals
not so much of Citizens, whose Friends seldom failed of paying the last
Honors; but of Slaves, who frequently were destitute of decent Burial
Demosthen. Orat. in Macart.
.

But if any Person was backward in paying his dead Friends due Respect, or but
sparing in his Expenses about their Obsequies and Monuments, the Government
looked upon him as void of Humanity and natural Affection, and thereupon
excluded him from bearing any Office of Trust and Honor; for one special
Enquiry concerning the Lives and Behavior of such as appeared Candidates for
the Magistracy at Athens was, whether they had taken due care in celebrating
the Funerals, and adorning the Monuments of their Relations Xenophon de dictis
Socratis lib. II.
: Farther, to appear gay and pleasant before the ordinary Time of Mourning
expired, was Matter of no small Scandal; for we find it objected by Aeschines
to Demosthenes as a Crime of a very heinous Nature, that after the Death of his
only Daughter he sacrificed to the Gods in white Apparel, and adorned with
Garlands, before due Respect was paid to the Memory of such a Relation.

The great Concern they had about Funerals may farther appear from the Respect
paid to Persons officiating therein: For we find the Cretan (...), who had the
Care of Funerals, to have been reverenced equally with their Priests; and when
their Laws permitted to steal from others, as was likewise customary at Sparta,
those Men were exempted from the common Calamity, to convey away any Part of
their Goods being looked on as a kind of Sacrilege Plutarchus Grac. Quaest. XXI.
.

Notwithstanding all this, there were some so unhappy, as by their Actions
whilst alive, or the aggravating Circumstances of their Death, to be unworthy
of all Title to the common Funeral Rites, and some to any Funeral at all: Such
were these that follow; 1. Public, or private Enemies; for though it was looked
upon as inhuman to deny an Enemy the common Privilege of Nature; yet upon
extraordinary Provocations we find it frequently practiced by the ancient
Grecians: Homer has introduced Ulysses threatening Socus therewith Iliad. (...).
; Hector likewise promising the same Treatment to Patroclus Iliad. (...).
, and Achilles revenging his Cruelty by the like Usage of him Iliad (...).
: The same Poet has furnished us with several Instances of Heroes made (...),
and (...), a Prey to Birds and Beasts: No better Treatment had the Bones of
Pyrrhus, Achilles's Son, treacherously murdered by Orestes Ovid. in Ibin v. 3^4.
, Sparsa per Ambracias quae jacuere vias.
Which lay dispersed about the Ambracian Roads.
And however this may be thought the Practice of those primitive and
unciviliz'd Mortals, yet there want not Instances hereof in more refined and
polished Ages; For Lysander the Spartan Admiral, having routed the Athenian
Fleet, caused Philocles one of their Commanders, and to the Number of four
thousand Athenian Prisoners to be put to death, and refused to give them human
Burial Pausanias (...) p. 59^. Edit. Hanov.
2. Such as betrayed, or conspired against their Country Deodo^us Siculu^ lib.
XVI. cap. VI.
: Wherefore Aristocrates, being convicted of Treason against the Arcadians, was
stoned to Death, and cast out of the Bounds of their Country unbury'd P^^^^^^as
Messenicis.
; for it was thought but reasonable, that Villains conspiring the Ruin of their
Country, should be deptiv'd of all Privilege in it: Pausanias likewise, after
he had delivered Greece from the Persians, being found upon some Discontent to
maintain a Correspondence with them, was pined to Death, and denied Burial
Plutarchus Pausania.
; and the famous Phocion, being unjustly condemned by the Athenians, as
conspiring to deliver the Piraeeus into their Enemy's Hands, had his Body cast
out of Attica, and a severe Penalty was decreed against any that should honor
it with Interrment Plutarchus, Cornesius Nepo^ P^n^ione, Valerius Maxim^ lib.
V. cap. III.
: So punctual were they in the Observation of this Custom, that when the
Pestilence raged at Athens, and the Oracle gave out, that the only Remedy was
to fetch Themistocles's Bones from Magnesia, they refused to do it publicly,
but, conveying them privately and as it were by stealth, hid them in the
Ground. Amongst the Betrayers of their Country we may reckon those who were not
active in defending it, for they were likewise frequently denied human Burial;
whence Hector is introduced by the Poet, threatening this Punishment to all that
would not help him in destroying the Grecian Fleet Iliad. (...) v. ^4^.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
He, that for Spoil and Plunder of the War
Dares lagg behind, and not in have repair
To the Argive Fleet, as soon as known, shall die;
His Carcass denied Funeral Rites shall lie
A Prey for ravenous Currs, a Mark of Infamy.
Mr. Abell. Some Schol^asts would have this the first Example of the Practice I
am speaking of; but Homer sufficiently refutes this Opinion by making Agamemnon
threaten the same Punishment to his Grecians in the second Iliad V. 391.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
When to the Fight brisk Cornets sound Alarms,
That sneaking Soul, who then lays down his Arms,
And sculks about the Navy out of Fear
Of any Danger from the impending War,
Shall be an Outcast for the Birds of Prey,
And hungry Dogs as merciless as they.
Mr. Abell. Before this Instance, Palamedes, being condemned as a Traitor by
the Treachery of Ulysses, had wanted Burial, had not Achilles and Ajax
adventured to pay him that Office in Opposition to Agamemnon's Commands: Nor
was the Custom begun here, for in the former Age we find Antigone buried alive
by Creon for interring her Brother Polynices, by whose means the famous War
against Thebes was carried on, which is the Subject of Sophocles's Antigone. 3.
To these we may subjoyn Tyrants, who were always looked on as Enemies of their
Country, and used in the same manner with those that endeavored to betray it
to foreign Powers, there being no great Difference between a Domestic and
foreign Slavery: So the Pheraeans, having 'slain Alexander, who had cruelly
oppressed them, threw his Carcass to the Dogs; and Plutarch observes that this
was not a late and modern Custom, but practiced in the most early Ages,
speaking of the Passage of Homer Lib. de Homero.
, where Nestor tells Telemachus, that had Menelaus found Aegisthus alive after
his Murder of Agamemnon, and Tyranny over the Myceneans, he would not have
vouchsafed him Burial Odyss. (...). v. 256.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
If the bold Murderer had his Fate survived,
When Menelaus from Troy's Siege arrived,
What Ills would then attend his Ghost and Name,
When Menelaus swollen with Vengeance came?
None ever his Fall should mourn, his Fate lament;
But, left his Body should the City taint,
Remote on some wide Plain it should be cast
For Dogs and Vulturs to regale and feast.
Mr. Abell. The Myceneans were also sensible of the Wrongs they had suffered by
him, and, thinking him unworthy of an honorable Funeral, cast him with the
Adulteress Clytemnestra out of the City, and there interred them Pausanias
Corinthiacis.
. 4. On the same account, such as were guilty of Self-murder forfeited their
Right to decent Burial, and were clancularly deposited in the Ground without
the accustomed Solemnities; for they were looked on as Enemies to their
Country, whose Service they cowardly deserted Aristoteles Ethic. Nic^mach. lib
V. cap. II.
: For which reason Ajax the Son of Telamon was not reduced to Ashes, as the
Custom was, but privately interred; it being declared by Calchas to be a
Profanation of the holy Element to consume in it the Bodies of such as had
occasioned their own Death Philostratus Hercicu.
; and after the Battle of Plataeae, when the Bodies of the Slain were honored
with the accustomed Solemnities, Aristodemus alone, who was generally confessed
to have acquitted himself in the Fight with the greatest Valor of any Man in
the Army, lay unregarded, because he seemed resolved to sacrifice his Life, as
an Atonement for the Disgrace he had contracted by surviving his
Fellow Soldiers at Thermopylae Heredotus Calliop cap. LXX.
. Yet, to put a Period to their Lives on just Occasions seems rather to have
been reputed the Effect of a necessary and laudable Courage than any way
criminal, or blameworthy; Demosthenes and Hannibal are said to have been
constantly provided of an effectual Poison, to dispatch themselves with before
they should fall into their Enemies Hands; Cato, Cleopatra, Brutus, Otho, and
several others have not at all lessened their Esteem and Character in the
Heathen World by becoming their own Executioners: Plato himself, when he
commands those only, who out of Cowardice and unmanly Fear butchered
themselves, to be interred in lonesome and desolate Places without the
ordidinary Solemnities, seems to excuse those he thought compelled to it by
great and unsufferable Disgrace, or any unavoidable and incurable Misfortune De
Legib. lib. IX.
; and it is no Wonder if Epicureans, who expected no future State, and Stoics,
who thought all Things to lie under an irresistible Necessity, pursuant to
their Principles, abandoned themselves over to such fatal Courses. Many other
Instances may be produced not only from the Grecians and Romans, but the Indian
Philosophers, and almost the whole Heathen World. 5. To these we may add
Villains guilty of Sacrilege Dial^^^ S^^^lus Biblioth. lib. XVI. cap. VI.
, to inte^^ whom was an Affront to the Deities they had robbed. The Gods were
sometimes thought to inflict this Punishment on such Malefactors; wh^refore
Archidamus the Spartan King being slain in Italy, and deprived of Burial,
Pausanias Laconicis p. 178. Edit. H^n.
concludes, it was a Judgment upon him for assisting the Phocians in pillaging
the City and Temple of the Delphians. 6. Persons killed with Lightning, or
Thunder; who, being thought hateful to the Gods, were buried apart by
themselves, lest the rest of the Ashes should receive Pollution from them;
therefore Adrastus in Euripides, speaking of Capaneus, says, (...)
Shall he apart be buried, as accursed?
Some will have them to be interred in the Place, where they died Artemidorus
lib. II. cap. VIII.
; others collect out of Plutarch's Symposiacks, that they had no Interment, but
were suffered to rot in the Place, where they fell, to which it was unlawful
for any Man to approach; whence Persius Sat. II. v. 27.
, Triste jaces lucis, evitandumque bidental,
A direful Instance of Jove's Wrath you lie,
And whom, being thunderstruck, none dare come nigh.
For this reason the Ground was hedged in, lest any Person should unawares
contract Pollution from it. It may be observed in general, that all Places
struck with Thunder were avoided Plutarchus Py^ri^^.
, and fenced round, out of a Phansy, that Jupiter, having taken some Offense,
fixed upon them a Mark of his Displeasure. 7. Those, that wasted their
Patrimony, forfeited their Right of being buried in the Sepulcres of their
Fathers; and therefore we find Democritus to have been in Danger of wanting a
Burial-place for spending his paternal Inheritance in Travel to foreign
Countries, and searching after the Mysteries of Nature Diogenes Laertius.
Democrito.
. 8. To these we may subjoyn such as died in Debt, whose Bodies belonged at
Athens to their Creditors, and could not claim any Right to human Burial, 'till
Satisfaction was made to them: Whence it is reported, that Cimon had no other
Method to redeem his Father Miltiades's Body, but by taking his Debt and
Fetters upon himself. 9. Some Offenders, who suffered capital Punishment, were
likewise deprived of Burial; those especially that died upon the Cross, or were
impaled, whom they frequently permitted to be devoured by the Beasts and Birds
of Prey: To which Custom there is an Allusion in Horace Lib. I. epist. XVI.
, Non hominem occidi; non pasees in cruce corvos.
With impious Hands I never slew the innocent,
Therefore to feed the Crows is not your Punishment.
Iuvenal also mentions the same Custom Sat. XIV. 77.
, Vultur jumento, and canibus, crucibusque relictis,
Ad satus properat, partemque cadaveris assert.
Where Crosses and contagious Murrain are
Vultures in Flocks most greedily repair,
And to their craving Young thence Food they bear.
The Interpreters of Fables will have Prometheus's Punishment to be an Emblem
of this: If the Carcass was spared by the Beasts, it commonly remained upon the
Cross, or Pale, 'till the Weather consumed and putrified it: Thus Silius
reports of the Scythians Lib. XIII.
, At gente in Scythica sussixa cadavera truncis
Lenta dies sepelit, putri liquentia tabo.
Delinquents Carcases in Scythia were
Impaled, until corrupted by the Air
The putrid Flesh did drop and shrink away,
And the Bones moulder'd by a long Decay.
Mr. Abell. Nor was this inhuman Custom practiced in that barbarous Nation
only, but by those who made greater Pretensions to Civility and good Manners;
as may appear from the Dream of Polycrates's Daughter, who phansy'd she saw her
Father's Face washed by Jupiter, and anointed by the Sun; which was
accomplished not long after, when he was hung upon the Cross, and exposed to
the Rain, and Sunbeams Herodot. Thalia.
: Hither also may be referred the Answer of Theodorus the Philosopher, who,
being threatened Crucifixion by King Lysimachus, replied, that it was all one
to him to putrify above, or beneath the Ground Cicero Tusc. Quaest. lib. I.
. 10. At some Places it was customary to interr the Bodies of Infants that had
no Teeth, without consuming them to Ashes Phoins Not. Hist. lib. VII.
: To which Custom Iuvenal has this Allusion Satir. XV. v. 139.
, Naturae imperio gemimus, cum funus adultae
Virginis occurrit, vel terra clauditur infans,
Et minor ign^ rogi. --
When a young Lady brisk and gay is dead
As soon as ripe she seems for the nuptial Bed,
And when an Infant not yet fit to burn,
Is buried, who relents not, who forbears to mourn?
Mr. Abell.


If Persons that incurred public Hatred, had the good Fortune to obtain human
Burial, it was customary to leap upon their Tombs, and cast Stones at them, in
token of Detestation and Abhorrence: Which Practice is mentioned by Euripides
Electra.
; (...)
(...)
-- He leaps upon his Parent's Tomb,
And in Derision batters it with Stones.


Nor was it unfrequent to punish notorious Offenders by dragging their Remains
out of their Retirements, and depriving them of the Graves, to which they had
no just Pretension, as may appear from several Instances:

Sacrilegious Persons were commonly thus treated; a remarkable Instance hereof
we find at Athens, where Cylo, an ambitious Nobleman, having seized the
Citadel, and being there straightly besieged, found means to escape with his
Brother, leaving his Accomplices to the Mercy of the Besiegers; they fled
therefore for Protection to the Altars, whence there was no Method to draw
them, but by promising them Pardon: But no sooner had they left their
Sanctuaries, when the Magistrates, contrary to their Covenant, put them to
death; upon which Fact themselves were afterward arraigned, and banished, the
Deities so commanding; Nor was this alone satisfactory to Divine Vengeance,
'till their Graves were rifted, and their Remains, which had been conveyed into
Attica, cast out of the Country Plutarchus de sera Numinis vindicta.


Traitors were condemned to the same Punishment; which appears as from several
other Instances, so from Phrynicus the Athenian, who being arraigned, and
condemned for Treason some Time after his Funeral, his Tomb was opened, and his
Relics thrown out of Attica Locargus orat. in Leocralem.
.

The same was sometimes practiced upon Enemies, when their Malice and Fury were
extended beyond the ordinary Bounds of Martial Law, and hurried them on to
despoil the sacred Temples, and commit unsufferable Villainies; otherwise, thus
to treat a lawful and honorable Enemy was always censured as barbarous and
inhuman.

But above all it seems to have been the Fate of Tyrants, who were esteemed of
all other savage Beasts the most hurtful and pernicious to Mankind: Wherefore
we are told by Plutarch Dione.
, that Dio was extremely censured for hindering the Syracusians from breaking
up the Tomb of the elder Dionysius, and scattering his Bones: Periander the
Corinthian Tyrant (by some reckoned amongst the seven Wise Men) to prevent his
incensed Subjects from venting their Fury upon his Relics, contrived this
Method; he commanded two young Men to walk in the Depth of the Night in a
certain Path, and killing the first Man they met, to bury him privately; to
dispatch and interr these he commissioned four, after whom he sent others, and
after these a greater Force to treat the former in the same manner; whereby it
came to pass, that the Tyrant himself, meeting the first Pair, was interred in
a Place unknown to any Man Diogenes Laertius Pertandro.
.

Other Methods were likewise used to secure Peace to their Ashes; the
Disturbance whereof was looked on as the highest Affront, and the greatest
Misfortune in the World: To instance, we find Medea in Euripides resolving to
bury her Sons in Juno Acraea's Temple, hoping that the Holiness of the Place
would protect them from the Malice of her Enemies Mediae ^. 1378.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Affronts and Contumelies to prevent,
And that their Sepulcres may not be defaced,
I will my self give Burial to my Sons
In Juno's Temple at the Acropolis
She presides over. --
Mr. Abell.

CHAPTER II. Of the Ceremonies in Sickness, and Death.
WHEN any Person was seized with a dangerous Distemper, it was usual to fix
over their Doors a Branch of Rhamn, and Lawrel-trees: Which Custom is mentioned
by Laertius in his Life of Bion the Boristhenise; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Bion the Post of's Door does grace
With Rhamn and Daphne's Plant;
For Fear of Death in his sad Case
He nothing now will want.
Mr. Abell. The former of these Plants seems designed to keep off evil Spirits,
against which it was reputed a sovereign Amulet; and on that account sometimes
joined with the Epithet (...); as in this Fragment of Euphorio, -- (...)
Produced the Rhamn, against mischievous Ills
An Antidote. --
The Laurel was joined to it to render the God of Physic propitious, who, they
thought, could design no Harm to any Place, where he found the Monument of his
beloved Daphne; these Boughs they termed (...) E^ymclogici Auctor.
.

It may not be improper to observe in this Place, that all sudden Deaths of Men
were imputed to Apollo; wherefore, Hector having lain unbury'd twelve Days, and
being by the especial Favor of Heaven preserved fresh and free from
Corruption, Hecuba resembles him to one dead not of a lingering and wearing
Distemper, but by a sudden Death; the former being thin and consumed away, the
latter fat and fleshy Iliad. (...). v. 757.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
Now fresh and glowing even in Death thou art,
And fair as he, who falls by Phoebus Dart.
The sudden Death of Women was attributed to Diana; whence Glaucus in the same
Poet, speaking of Hippodamia Iliad (...) v 225.
, (...)
Incensed Diana her deprived of Life.
Again, Achilles wishes that Briseis had been snatched away by a sudden Death,
rather than have been the occasion of Dissension between him and Agamemnon
Iliad. (...). v. 59
; (...)
(...)
Oh! that Diana her had killed, on Board
When first I carried her, Lyrnessus overthrow'd.
The Poet has explained his own Meaning in another Place Odyss. (...). v 406.
; where Eumaeus reports, that in the Isle of Syria the Inhabitants never die of
lingering Distempers, but, being arrived to a good old Age, drop into their
Graves without any previous Torment; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
No Plague, no Famine does their Lives impair,
No poisonous Ills those happy Mortals fear,
Healthy and strong they see the Verge of Age,
Then venerably old they quit the Stage;
Apollo and Diana stop their Breath,
Shooting unerring Shafts well fraught with Death.
Mr. Abell. Again, Ulysses enquires of his Mother in the Regions below, whether
she resigned her Life under a tedious Disease, or Diana's Hand Odyss. (...). v.
170.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
This I desire, dear Mother, you would relate,
By what unhappy Destiny, what Fate
You posted hither to this gloomy Coast,
And all the Endearments of the World have lost;
Whether Diana with relentless Dart,
(That sportfull Deity) transfixed your Heart,
Or if you did your vital Breath expire
By lingering Pain, or pestilential Fire?
Mr. Abell. Other Instances may be produced to the same purpose: The Ground of
this Opinion was Apollo's being usually taken for the Sun, and Diana for the
Moon; which Planets were believed to have a great Influence upon human Life
Heraclides (vel potius Herachtus) Ponticus de Allegor. Homer, Eustathius Il.
(...). v. 205. and Il. (...). v. 59. etc.
.

All dead Persons were thought to be under the Jurisdiction of the Infernal
Deities, and therefore no Man could resign his Life, 'till some of his Hairs
were cut to consecrate him to them: Hence Euripides introduces Death with a
Sword, going to cut off some of the Hair of Alcestis, whom the Fates had
adjudg'd to die instead of her Husband Admetus A^cestid. v. 74.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I Am come to loose the brittle Tie of Life,
And send her to the Infernal Mansions hence;
This Sword is to initiate the Rites
By cutting off the fatal Lock, on which
Lies the last Struggle of her panting Breath.
Mr. Abell. Which Passage is imitated by Virgi^ Macrobius Saturnal. lib. V.
cap. XIX
, where he tells, us that Dido, ridding her self out of the World before her
Time, had not her Hair cut off by Proserpine, and therefore struggled some
Time, as unable to resign her Life, 'till Iris was commissioned from Juno to do
her that kind Office Aeneid. IV. v. 694.
; Tum Juno ommipotens, longum miserata dolorem,
Difficilesque obitus, Irin demisit Olympo,
Quae luctantem animum, nexosque resolveret artus;
Nam, quia nec fato, merita nee morte peribat,
Sed misera ante diem, subitoque accensa jurore,
Nondum illi starvum Proserpina vertice crinem
Abstulerat, Stygioque caput damnaverat Orco:
Ergb Iris croceis per caelum roscida pennis,
Mill trahens varios adverso sole colores,
Devolat, and supra caput astitit; " Hunc ego Diti
"Sacrum jussa fero, teque isto corpore solvo:"
Sic ait, and dextra crinem secat; omnis and und
Dilapsus calor, atque in ventos vita recessit.
Then Juno, grieving that she should sustain
A Death so lingering, and so full of Pain,
Sent Iris down to free her from the Strife
Of laboring Nature, and dissolve her Life;
For, since she died, not doomed by Heaven's Decree,
Or her own Crime, but human Casualty,
And Rage of Love, that plunged her in Despair,
The Sisters had not cut the topmost Hair,
(Which Proserpine and they can only know)
Nor made her sacred to the Shades below;
Downward the various Goddess took her flight,
And drew a thousand Colors from the Light,
Then stood above the dying Lover's Head,
And said, "I thus devote thee to the Dead;
"This Offering to the Infernal Gods I bear,"
Thus while she spoke, she cut the fatal Hair,
The struggling Soul was loosed, and Life dissolved in Air.
Mr. Dryden. What was the Ground of this Opinion cannot be certainly defined;
but it seems not improbable that it proceeded from a Ceremony at Sacrifices,
wherein they cut some of the Hairs from the Victim's Forehead, and offered
them to the Gods as First Fruits of the Sacrifice; whence some imagine the same
was thought to be done by Death upon Men sent as Victims to the Infernal Gods.

When they perceived the Pangs of Death coming upon them, they made
supplication to Mercury, whose Office it was to convey the Ghosts to the
Regions below: An Instance hereof we have in a Cean Matron, who being about to
ridd her self of Life by a Draught of Poison, first called upon Mercury to
grant her a pleasant Journey, and convey her to a commodious Habitation in
Pluto's Dominions Valerius Maximus lib. II. cap. VI.
.

Their Friends and Relations, perceiving them at the Point of resigning their
Lives, came close to the Bed where they lay, to bid them Farewell, and catch
their dying Words, which they never repeated without Reverence: The want of
Opportunity to pay this Compliment to Hector furnishes Andromache with Matter
of Lamentation, which she thus expresses Iliad. (...). v. 743.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
I saw him not when in the Pangs of Death,
Nor did my Lips receive his latest Breath,
Why held he not to me his dying Hand?
And why received not I his last Command?
Something he would have said had I been there,
Which I should still in sad Remembrance bear;
For I could never, never Words forget,
Which Night and Day I would with Tears repeat.
Mr. Congreve.

They kissed and embraced the dying Person, so taking their last Farewell;
which Custom was very ancient, being derived from the Eastern Nations; for we
find in the Holy Writings, that Joseph fell upon his Father Jacob's Neck, when
he lay upon his Deathbed, and kissed him Genes cap. L.
. They endeavored likewise to receive in their Mouth his last Breath, as
phansying his Soul to expire with it, and enter into their Bodies: And at the
Time of his Departure, it was customary to beat brazen Kettles, which was
thought an excellent Method to drive away evil Spirits, and Phantasms, whose
aerie Forms were not able to endure so harsh a Noise Theocriti Schaisastes.
; thus they imagined the dead Man's Ghost secured from Furies, and quietly
conveyed to a peaceful Habitation in the Elysian Fields: For 'twas an old
Opinion, that, there being two Mansions in the Infernal Regions, one on the
Right Hand pleasant and delightful, the other on the Left appointed for the
Souls of wicked Wretches, the Furies were always ready to hurry departed Souls
to the Place of Torment: Virgil has an Allusion to this Phansy Aen. VLv. 540.
, Hic locus est, parts ubi se via sindit in ambas,
Dextera, quae Ditis magni sub mania tendit,
Hac iter Elysium nobis; at loeva malorum
Exercet paenas, and ad impia Tartara mittit.
It Is here in different Paths the Way divides,
The Right to Pluto's golden Palace guides,
The Left to that unhappy Region tends,
Which to the Depth of Tartarus descends,
The Seat of Night profound, and punished Fiends.
Mr. Dryden.

Death and all Things concerning it were ominous and ill-boding, and are
therefore frequently expressed in softening Terms: To di^ is commonly termed
(...), to which the Latin denasci answers: Sometimes it is called (...), to
depart; and the Dead, (...): So also Chio in an Epistle to Plato says, (...),
I will depart out of the World: In the same Sense we find the Latin Word
abitio, which is a synonymous Term for Death Festus.
; and abiit; as when Pliny writes, that Virginius Rufus plenus annis abiit,
plenus honoribus Lib. II Epist I.
, departed full of Years, and Honors: Thus also the Greeks use (...), i.e. he
once lived; and the Romans vixit, and fuit; thus Virgil, -- Fuit Ilium, and
ingens
Gloria Teucrorum. --
Glory did once attend the Dardan State,
It Is Spires then glittered, and it is Chiefs were great.
Tibullus, with several others, has used the same Expression Lib. III Eleg. V.
; Vivite falices, memores and vivite nostri,
Sive erimus, seu not fata suisse velint.
In a blessed Series may your Lives glide on,
If while I live, or when I Am dead and gone,
One tranhent Glance you will on my Memory cast,
And in soft Accents say, He Is gone and past.
Mr. Abell. Sometimes they use (...), and (...): Thus Homer Iliad. (...).
, -- (...)
(...)
Ye dire Avengers of all perjured Slaves,
When once they are dead, and covered in their Graves.
Again Odyss. (...).
, -- (...)
-- The Ghosts of the Dead.
But the most frequent are Names taken from Sleep, to which Death bears a near
Resemblance; whence the Poets seign them to be Brothers, and (...), or (...)
are commonly used for dying; thus Callimachus Epigram. XV.
; (...)
(...) --
Saon the Acanthian, Dicon's Son, hard by
In everlasting Sleep wrapped up does lie.
In another Place Epigram. XXII.
; -- (...)
(...)
The common Debt of all Mankind she sleeps.
Orpheus has used the same Metaphor in his Argonauticks, (...)
Agniades, thou art in soft Repose
Locked up. --
Many other like Passages occurr both in profane and inspired Writers; and so
common was this Way of speaking with the primitive Christians, that their
Burying-places were called (...), which is a Term of the same Sense with
Lycophron's (...) Cassandr. v. 583.
; (...)
To the sleeping Place of Sithon's Daughter.


CHAPTER III. Of the Ceremonies before the Funeral.
NO sooner had any Person expired, when they closed his Eyes, which they termed
(...), or (...), etc. Which Custom was so universally practiced, that no
Person, who has the least Acquaintance with ancient Writers, can be ignorant of
it: Hence it came, that (...) was used for (...).

This done, his Face was covered: Whence Hippolytus in Euripides, being at the
Point to expire, calls upon his Father Theseus to do him that Office Euripid.
Hippolyt. v. 1458.
, (...)
Veil my Face over quickly with a Sheet.
Indeed almost all the Offices about the Dead were performed by their nearest
Relations; nor could a greater Misfortune befall any Person, than to want these
last Respects; Electra in Sophocles seems to prefer Death it self before it;
in^inite Numbers of Instances might be produced to the same purpose, were it
not too commonly known to need any farther Confirmation. All the Charges
expended on Funerals, and the whole Care and Management of them belonged also
to Relations; saving that Persons of extraordinary Worth were frequently
honored with public Funerals, the Expenses whereof were defrayed out of the
Exchequer; thus we find Democritus at Abdera, Zeno and Aristides at Athens,
Epaminondas at Thebes, Gryllus Xenophon's Son at Mantinea, with many others, to
have had their Funerals celebrated at the public Expense.

To return, before the Body was cold, they composed all the Members, stretching
them out to their due Length; this they termed (...), or (...): Whence the Maid
in Euripides's Hippolytus, as soon as Phaedra had expired her last, cries out
to some of her own Sex to perform this Office V. 786.
; (...)
(...)
Though it is a Service that will bitter prove,
And grieve the Souls of my most wretched Masters,
Yet lay the Corpse of the dead Lady out.
Not long after the Chorus says, (...)
As it is usual, they lay her out.


After this the dead Body was washed; hence Alcestis in Euripides V. 156.
upon the Approach of the fatal Day, wherein she was to lay down her Life for
her Husband Admetus, washed her self in the River, (...)
(...)
(...) --
The pious Dame did in the River wash
Her beauteous Body, when the fatal Day
Of her own Exit did approach. --
Plato tells us, that Socrates washed himself before his Execution, to save the
Women a Trouble Phae^one
; for this Office was commonly performed by Women related to the Party
deceased; only in Cases of Necessity others were employed therein; so we find
that poor Theagenes, having neither Wife, nor Child, nor any near Relation of
his own, was washed by the Cynicks Galenus de methodo medendi lib. XIII cap. XV.
. At some Places there were Vessels in the Temples designed for this Use; these
were called in Latin labra, whence some derive the Word delubrum Ascontus de
divinatione.
.

This done, the Body was anointed; Pliny reports, that the Grecians never used
Ointment 'till the Time of Alexander the Great, when they had it conveyed out
of Persia Not. Hist. lib. XIII. cap. I.
; and Homer, though frequently mentioning the Custom of anointing the Dead, yet
uses no other Material beside Oil: Thus they anointed Patroclus Iliad. (...).
v. 350.
; (...)
As soon as washed, they 'nointed him with Oil.
But Athenaeus will by no means allow Homer's Oil to have been distinguished
from (...), or Ointment properly so called (...). lib. XV.
; and we find that Solon allowed his Citizens the Use of Ointments, forbidding
only Slaves to perfume themselves therewith Plutarchus Solone.
: Whence it seems probable, that however the Grecians might not have any
Knowledge of those costly Ointments the Persians furnished them with, yet they
were not unacquainted with the Use of another sort.

After the Body was washed and anointed, they wrapped it in a Garment, which
seems to have been no other than the common pallium, or Cloak, they wore at
other Times A^^alcius Florid I.
, as we find the Romans made use of their toga: Thus Misenus in Virgil, being
first washed and anointed, then (as the Custom was) laid upon a Bed, was
wrapped in the Garments he had usually worn Aeneid VI. v. 218.
; Pars calidos Luices, and ahena undantia flammis
Expediunt, corpusque lavant srigentis, and ungunt:
Fit gemitus: Tum membra toro defleta reponunt,
Purpure asque super vestes, velamina nota,
Conjiciunt. --
Some, being moved with Pity toward their Friend,
Water to boil in Caldrons do attend,
Then wash his cold and stiffen'd Limbs all over
To try if quickening Heat they can restore:
With Essences and Oils they scent the dead,
And then repose him on his funeral Bed;
Their glowing Passion in deep Sighs they vent,
And full of Sorrow dolefully lament;
On him the Robes they cast he used to wear,
Which having done, they heave him on the Bier.
Mr. Abell. After this, the Body was adorned with a rich and splendid Garment;
hence we find that before Socrates took the fatal Draught, Apollodorus brought
him a Cloak, with a Garment of great Value Laertius Socrate, Ae^^^^^ Var. Hist.
lib. I cap. XVI.
, it being the Philosopher's Desire to prepare himself for his Funeral before
he died: It Is reported also, that Philocles the Athenian Admiral, being
overcome, and sentenced to Death by Lysander the Spartan, washed himself, and
put on his best Apparel, before he was executed Plutarchus ^^sandro.
; the same we read of Alcestis in Euripides, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The pious Dame, before the fatal Day
Of her own Exit, bathed her beauteous Limbs
In gentle Rivulets, then she put on
A splendid Vest, and decent Ornaments
Of rich Attire. --
Mr. Abell. The whole Body was covered with this Garment; it is Color was
commonly white, as we find in Homer speaking of Patroclus Iliad. (...). v. 352.
, (...)
(...)
In a white linen Shroud from Head to Foot
They put the Corpse, when on a Bed laid out.
Whence Artemidorus reckons it an unlucky Omen, and presaging Death, for a sick
Person to have white Apparel O^e^^os^it. lib. II cap III.
: This Color seems to have been used to denote the Simplicity and Harmlesness
of the Dead Plutarchus Quaest. (...).
. So concerned were they about this Garment, that, as some think, they
frequently prepared it for themselves, and Friends during Life: Thus Penelope
is introduced by Homer speaking to her Courtiers Odyss (...) v 9^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Since my Ulysses, as it is said, is slain,
And clotted Gore will not circulate again,
Gentlemen, you that vigorous Rivals are
In courting me, your hot Pursuit forbear,
'Till I have spun this Web against grim Death
With his cold Hands shall stop Laertes's Breath.
Mr. Abell. Thus likewise Euryalus being slain, his Mother is brought in
complaining Virgil Aeneid IX v 486.
, -- Nec te tua funera matter
Produxi, pressive ceulos, aut vulnera lavi,
Vest tegens, tibi quam noctes festina diesque
Urgebam, and tela curas solabar aniles.
What Pangs of Grief my throbbing Breast invade
To think thy mangled Carcass was not laid
Forth on it is Pile by me; oh! sad Surprise,
That I wa'n't by to close thy beauteous Eyes,
Just as the expiring Soul did take her flight
Into the Regions of Infernal Night;
Oh! had I washed each Wound, each severed Vein,
When thou scarce cold laidst welt'ring on the Plain,
And had the Vest spread over thee, Day and Night
Which I have spun my Dotage to Delight.
Mr. Abell. But it may be disputed whether these were made on purpose for
Funeral-garments, or only designed to be worn, and applied to the former Use in
case the Person should dye; it being usual (as has been already observed) to
wrap dead Bodies in the Garments, they had used when alive: The later Opinion
seems more probable from the Words which Penelope adds, (...)
(...)
Lest, if my Sire without a Coat should lie,
Shame and Reproach I might incurr thereby
From Grecian Ladies, since this Duty he,
Having such large Revenues, claims of me.
Mr. Abell. And it bears no great Show of Reason, that a Mother should comfort
her self by weaving a Winding Sheet for her young Son, who at that Time was
likely to have lived many Years: However that be, it is observable that the
Lacedaemonians, as in most other Things, so here also ran counter to the rest of
the Grecians; For whereas in other Places the Dead were clothed with costly
Apparel, which none, except the poorer sort, ever wanted, the Spartan Lawgiver
ordered, that Persons of the greatest Valor and Merit should be buried in
nothing but a red Coat, which was the common Habit of Soldiers; to the rest
even this was denied Aelianus Var. Hist. lib V cap VI.
; for he thought it wholly absurd and unreasonable, that those, who through the
whole Course of their Lives had been accustomed to contemn Riches, and
superfluous Ornaments, should be decked therewith when dead: Nor were any
Ointments, or costly Perfumes used there, being looked on as conducing nothing
to the Felicity of the Dead, and unworthy of the Lacedemonian Gravity.

The next Ceremony was the bedecking the dead Body with Chaplets of Flowers,
and green Boughs: Thus Talthybius puts (...) Hecuba to adorn her Grandson
Aslyanax Euripid (...) v. 1143.
, -- (...)
(...)
That you adorn the Corpse with costly'st Robes,
With Chaplets, and what other Pomp you can.
When Persons of Worth and Character died in foreign Countries, their Remains,
being brought Home in Urns, were honored with the Ceremonies customary at
other Funerals, but more especially with this I am speaking of; Plutarch
reports, that all the Cities, through which Demetrius's Ashes were conveyed, sent
Mourners to meet the sacred Urn, with others to perform the Rites usual on such
Occasions, or at least they crowned it with Garlands ^^em^^^^.
: The same Author reports, that Philopamen's Relics were attended by Captives
in Chains, and his Urn so covered with Ribbands and Chaplets, that scarce any
Part of it was to be seen Ph^^^^me^e.
: This Ceremony was either taken from the Games, wherein the Conquerors were
rewarded with Crowns of Leaves, as signifying that the Dead had finished their
Course (...).
; or was designed to express the unmixed and everlasting Pleasures the Dead
were to enjoy upon their removal out of this painful and troublesome World
(...) (...) lib II. cap. VIII.
; for Garlands were an Emblem of Mirth and Joyfulness, and therefore usually
worn at Banquets and Festivals: The same may be observed of Ointments and
Perfumes, the constant Attendants of Gaiety and Pleasantness: To both these
Ceremonies we have an ingenious Allusion of an old Poet in Stobaeus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Not that we less compassionate are grown,
Do we at Funerals our Temples crown,
Or with sweet Essences adorn our Hair,
And all the Marks of pleasing Transport wear;
But 'cause we are sure of that more happy State,
To which kind Death does every Soul translate,
Which here by drinking we anticipate;
For soon as Death his fatal Shaft has hurled,
And us transmitted to the other World,
We drinking sign the immortal Beverage,
And in sweet Joys Eternity engage;
Hence they by every one are only said
To be right happy, that are truly dead.
Mr. Hutchin.

This done they proceeded (...), collocare, to lay out the dead Body; sometimes
they placed it upon the Ground, sometimes upon a Bier, called (...), or (...),
which they bedecked with various sorts of Flowers: Some are of opinion the
Corpse was first laid out upon the Ground, afterward lifted upon a Bier. This
Office, as most of the former, was performed by the nearest Relations; whence
Lysias Orat. De caede Eratost^^^is.
amongst other aggravating Circumstances, that attended the Death of
Eratosthenes, who was condemned by the Thirty Tyrants of Athens, reckons this
as none of the least, that they laid him out, assuming thereby an Office
belonging of right only to the nearest and most tender Relations: Tiberius
Caesar is likewise censured by Dio, not only as neglecting to visit Livia when
sick, but because he laid her not out with his own Hands, when she was dead
Lib. LVIII.
The Place, where the Bodies were laid out, was near the Entrance of the House;
which being sometimes termed (...), it came to pass that dead Men were called
(...); whence Euripides Alcestide.
, (...)
The reason of this Ceremony was, that all Persons might have Opportunity to
search, whether the Party deceased had any Wounds, or other Marks of an
untimely and violent Death Pollux lib. VIII. cap. VII.
. It may be farther observed, that the Feet were always turned toward the Gate:
Hence Persius S^t. III. v. 103.
, -- Tandemque bea^^lus alto
Compositus lecto, crassilque lutatus amomis,
In portam rigidos calces extendis. --
Our dear departed Brother lies in State;
His Heels stretched out and pointing to the Gate.
Achilles in Homer speaks of Patroclus as laid out in the same manner Iliad.
(...). v. 211.
, -- (...)
(...) --
Slain at the Entrance of the Tent he lies.
Where we are told by the Scholiast, that by this Ceremony they signified, that
they were never to return after their being carried out. Whilst the Body lay in
this Place, 'twas customary to give it constant Attendance, to defend it from
any Violence, or Affront, that might be offered: Whence Achilles adds in the
forecited Place, -- (...)
(...) --
Round the dead Corpse his sad Companions mourn.
And a little before we find him so passionately concerned left Flies and
Vermin should pollute the Corpse, that he could not be drawn from it to the
Battle, 'till Thetis had promised to guard it Ibid. v. 23.
. When any Person died in Debt at Athens, there was something more to be
feared, for the Laws of that City gave leave to Creditors to seize the dead
Body, and deprive it of Burial 'till Payment was made; wherefore the Corpse of
Miltiades, who deceased in Prison, being like to want the Honor of Burial, his
Son Cimon had no other means to release it, but by taking upon himself his
Father's Debt and Fetters.

Some Time before Interment, a Piece of Money was put into the Corps's Mouth,
which was thought to be Charon's Fare for wasting the departed Soul over the
Infernal River: This was by some termed (...) Suidas.
, by others (...) Hesychius.
, (...), or (...), from (...), a Price; or because it was given (...), to dead
Men so called from (...), or dry Sticks Etymologici Auctor.
: It was only a single (...); Aristophanes indeed introduces Hercules telling
Bacchus he must pay two oboli Ranu p. 217. Edit. Aurel. Allo^.
, (...)
(...)
The old Ferry-man of Hell will wast you over
In his small Skiff for poor two oboli.
But the Comedian seems to speak this only by way of jeer to the Judges in some
of the Athenian Courts, who were presented with two oboli at the End of their
Session; whence Bacchus presently subjoyns, (...)
I find two oboli can much prevail
In either World. --
Meursius therefore, interpreting this Place of the common Custom toward the
Dead, and adding out of the Scholiast that the Price was afterward raised to
three oboli, seems not to have dived into the Author's Meaning; for nothing can
be more plain, than that the Scholiast is to be understood of the (...), or
Reward allowed the Judges, which was two oboli, and afterward increased to
three. This Ceremony was not used in those Places, which they phansy'd situate
in the Vicinity of the Infernal Regions, and to lead thither by a ready and
direct Road Etymologici Auctor v. (...)
; Strabo particularly mentions that the Hermionians pleaded Exemption Geogr
lib. VIII.
.

Beside this, the Corps's Mouth was furnished with a certain Cake, composed of
Flower, Honey, etc. and therefore called (...) Suidas. etc.
. This was designed to appease the Fury of Cerberus the Infernal Doorkeeper,
and to procure of him a safe and quiet Entrance; we have an Allusion to this in
the Comedian Lysistrate.
, -- (...)
(...)
A Coffin he shall buy, and I Will prepare
A Cake for Cerberus. --
Virgil has obliged us with a larger Account of this Custom, when he describes
the Sibyl and Aeneas's Journey to the Infernal Shades Ae^eid VI. v. 417.
; Cerberus haec ingens latratu regna trisauci
Personat, adverso recubans immanis in antro:
Cui vates, horrere videns jam colla colubris,
Melle soporatam and medicatis frugibus ossam
Objicit; ille, same rabida tria guttura pandens,
Corripit objectam, atque immania terga resolvit
Fusus humi, totoque ingens extenditur antro:
Occupat Aeneas aeditum, custode sepulto,
Evaditque celer ripam irremeabilis undae.
-- In his Den they found
The triple Porter of the Stygian Sound,
Grim Cerberus, who soon began to rear
His crested Snakes, and armed his bristling Hair;
The prudent Sibyl had before prepared
A Sop in Honey steeped to charm the Guard,
Which, mixed with powerful Drugs, she cast before
His greedy grinning Jaws, just opened to roar;
With three enormous Mouths he gapes; and strait,
With Hunger pressed, devours the pleasing Bait;
Long Draughts of Sleep his monstrous Limbs enslave,
He reels, and falling fills the spacious Cave:
The Keeper charmed, the Chief without Delay
Passed on, and took the irremeable Way.
Mr. Dryden.

Before we conclude this Chapter, it may be observed that the whole Ceremony of
laying out, and clothing the Dead, and sometimes the Interment it self, was
called (...) Aeschyli Scholiastes.
: In the same Sense ancient Writers use (...), with it is Derivatives; thus
Sophocles Ajac. v. 1067.
, (...)
(...)
Do not presume the accursed Corpse to interr,
But let it lie exposed to open View.


It may farther be observed, that during this Time the Hair of the deceased
Person was hung upon the Door, to signify the Family was in Mourning: And,
'till the House was delivered of the Corpse, there stood before the Door a
Vessel of Water called (...) Suidas, Pollux lib. VIII. cap VII.
, (...) Hesychius.
, and, from the Matter it was frequently made of, (...), as in Aristophanes
(...).
, (...)
An earthen Vessel full of Water place
Before the Door. --
Part of a Chorus in Euripides, seeing neither of these Signs, could scarce be
induced to believe Alcestis dead Alcestid. 99.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I see no purifying Water placed
Before the Doors, a Custom used of old;
Nor Lock of Hair is in the Entrance fixed
To show the House in Mourning. --
Mr. Hutchin. The Design of this was, that such as had been concerned about the
Corpse, might purify themselves by washing, which was called (...): For not the
Jew: only Numer. cap XIX. 11. Ecclut cap. XXXIV, 25.
, but the greatest Part of the Heathen World thought themselves polluted by the
Contact of a dead Body, Death being contrary to Nature, and therefore abhorred
by every Thing endu'd with Life. Hence the Celestial Gods, those especially who
were thought to give, or preserve Light or Life, would not endure the Sight of
a Corpse, Diana in Euripides professes it unlawful for her to see Hippolytus
her Favorite when dead; (...)
(...)
Farewell, for 'twere in me a sinful Act
To view the Dead, or to defile mine Eyes
With the sad Sight of an expiring Soul.
Nor was the House, where the Corpse lay, free from Pollution, as appears from
the Words of Helena in Euripides Helena v. 1446.
, (...)
(...) --
For sacred are our Houses, not defiled
By the Death of Menelaus. --
Whence 'twas customary to have it purified, as soon as the Funeral Solemnities
were over; of which Ceremony I shall have occasion to discourse in one of the
following Chapters.

CHAPTER IV. Of their Funeral Processions.
THE next Thing to be observed is their Carrying the Corpse forth, which is in
Greek termed (...), and (...), in Latin elatio, or exportatio; whence the Latin
e^erre, exportare, and the Greek (...), and (...) are Words appropriated to
Funerals: Kirchman would have (...) to be used in the same Sense; but the Place
he produces out of Eunapius (...).
to that purpose, seems rather to denote the Praetervection of the Body by some
Place, than it is Elation from the House wherein it was prepared for Burial; for
(...) is usually spoken with respect to a Place in the middle Way of any
Motion; (...) belongs to the End, or Place where the Motion ceases; but (...),
or (...) are only proper, when we speak of the Place, whence the Motion begins,
being the same with (...), carrying forth, which Words are taken by Theocritus
in the Sense I have been speaking of Idyll. XV. 137.
; (...)
(...)
In The Morn, when pearly Dew has overspread
The bending Grass, we will bring forth our Dead
Down to the River's Side. --
Plautus likewise for effere has for as far (...).
, Quae ^ras veniat perendie for as feratur soror.
To morrow's Sun shall see my Sister carried forth.


The Time of Burial seems not to have been limited: The Author of the Geniales
d^es Lib. III. cap. VII.
tell us, that Bodies were usually kept seventeen Days, and seventeen Nights
before they were interred; which he seems to have out of Homer, who reports
that Achilles's Body after seventeen Days and as many Nights of Mourning was
committed to the Flames (...) v. 63.
, (...)
(...)
(...) --
Seventeen long Days were in sad Mourning spent
As many Nights did Gods and Men lament,
But on the eighteenth laid you on the Pile.
Ser^ius was of opinion that the Time of burning Bodies was the eighth Day
after Death, the Time of burying the ninth Ae^eil. V.
; but this must only be understood of the Funerals of great Persons, which
could not be duly solemnized without extraordinary Preparations; Men of
inferior Rank were committed to the Ground without so much Noise and Pomp: The
ancient Burials seem to have been upon the third, or fourth Day after Death;
thus the Author of the Arg^nauticks Lib. II.
; At vero ornantes supremo funus honor,
Tres totos condun^ lugubri murmr soles,
Magnifice tumulant quarto. --
With three Days Mourning they the Funeral gra^'d,
(The last good Office due to the Deceased)
But on the fourth, they over his Body reared
A stately Tomb. --
Mr. Hutchin. Nor was it unusual to perform the Solemnities, especially of poor
Persons, upon the Day after their Death; which appears from an Epigram of
Callimachus; (...)
(...)
(...) --
Who knows what Fortunes on to morrow wait,
Since Charmis one Day well to us appeared,
And on the next was mournfully interred?
Pherecydes alludes to this Custom in his Epistle to Thales preserved by
Laertius Vita Pherecydu^ sub fin.
, telling him he expected every Minute to breath his last, and had invited his
Friends to his Funeral the Day following.

The Ceremony was performed in the Day; for Night was looked on as a very
improper Time; because then Furies and evil Spirits, which could not endure the
Light, ventured abroad: Hence Cassandra in a Quarrel with Talthybius foretells,
as one of the greatest Mischiefs that could befall him, that it should be his
Fortune to be buried in the Night Ex^i^id. Tread. v 446.
; (...)
An evil Fate attends thy Obsequies,
Thy Funeral Rites shall be performed at Night.
Young Men only, that died in the Flower of their Age, were buried in the
morning Twilight; for so dreadful a Calamity was this accounted, that they
thought it undecent, if not impious, to reveal it in the Face of the Sun:
Whence (as the Expounders of Fables tell us) came the Stories of Youths stolen
into Aurora's Embraces; for when beauteous and hopeful young Men suffered an
untimely Death, it was customary to alleviate the Disaster by giving it a more
pleasant and agreeable Name; hence instead of calling their Departure Death,
they termed it (...) Heraclides Po^ti^us de Allegor. H^n^ri^. sub. fin.
Eustathius.
. Because these Funerals were celebrated by Torch-light, it became customary to
carry Torches at all other Burials, though performed in the Day; whence came that
proverbial Speech, whereby old Men are said to approach (...), to the Torch of
their Life Plu^archus lib An seni capess. sit Resp.
. The Athenians went counter to the rest of the Grecians, for their Laws
enjoined them to celebrate their Funerals before Sunrise: Which Command Cicero
De. Leg. lib II.
will have to be no ancien^^^ than Demetrius the Phalerean: but Demosthenes
makes Solon the Author thereof Orat. in Macar^a^um.
; it is not improbable, that it might be first instituted by Solon, and
afterward revived by Demetrius: The Design seems to have been to moderate the
expensive Extravagance in Funerals, which a more open and public Celebration
seemed to require.

The Bearers usually mounted the Corpse upon their Shoulders, which Euripides
calls (...), speaking of Alcestis A^^est. v. 607.
, -- (...)
(...)
The Servants to the Grave the Corpse do bear
Upon their Shoulders. --
The Body was sometimes placed upon a Bier, instead of which the Lacedaemonians
commonly used their Bucklers; whence that remarkable Command of one of their
Matrons to her Son, (...), i.e. either bring this (pointing to his Buckler)
back, or be brought upon it. Nor was this Custom unknown in other Places;
Virgil has mentioned it in his tenth Aeneid V. 506.
; -- Socii multo gemitu lacrymisque
Impostum scuto referunt Pallanta frequentes.
In doleful Plaints his dear Companions mourn
Their dead Friend Pallas on his Target born.
But the most ancient Grecians seem to have conveyed their dead Bodies to their
Funerals without any Support; whence (as Eustathius observes) Patroclus being
carried forth by the Myrmidons, Achilles went behind to support his Head Iliad.
^.
; -- (...)
Behind Achilles did bear up his Head.
This seems to be the Meaning of Euripides's (...), when, speaking of Rhesus's
Funeral, he introduces the Chorus uttering these Words Rheso v 896.
, (...)
(...)
(...); --
What God, O King, moved with becoming Care,
Shall with his Hand behind support thy Head.


The Persons present at Funerals were the dead Man's Friends and Relations, who
thought themselves under an Obligation to pay this last Respect to their
Deceased Friend. Beside these, others were frequently invited to increase the
Solemnity, where the Laws restrained them not from it; which they did at some
Places, either to prevent the Disorders which often happened at such
promiscuous Meetings, or to mitigate the excessive Charges of Funerals: Thus we
find, that Pittacus established a Law at Mitylene, that none but Relations of
the Deceased should appear at Funerals; Solon alio laid some restraint upon
his Athenians, wholly excluding all Women under threescore Years of Age from
these Solemnities; yet Relations were admitted whilst under that Age, as
appears from L^sias's Oration in defense of Eratosthenes, who had murdered his
Wife's Gallant, whose first Acquaintance with her, he tells us, proceeded from
seeing her at a Funeral; yet they seem not to have gone promiscuously among the
Men, but in a Body by themselves; as may be collected from these Words in
Terence's Andria; ^ssertur, imus: interea inter mulieres,
Qu^e ibi aderant, forte unam adspicio adolescentulam.
The Corpse is carried forward, and we follow,
But amongst the Women 'twas my chance to see
A beautiful young Creature. --


The Habit of these Persons was not always the same; for, though they might
sometimes, put on Mourning, and in common Funerals as frequently retained their
ordinary Apparel; yet the Exequies of great Men were commonly celebrated with
Expressions of Joy for their Reception into Heaven. Thus Timolcon's Hearse was
followed by many thousands of Men and Women in white Garments, and bedecked
with Garlands, as in festival Solemnities (...).
; Aratus's Funeral was likewise celebrated with Paeans, or Songs of Triumph,
and Dances Idem A^^to.
.

When the Body was conveyed out of the House, they took their last farewell,
^aluting it in a certain Form of Words; as appears from Ad^^tus's Speech to the
Pheraeans present at the Funeral of his Wife (...). v. 6^8.
; (...)
(...)
Do you, since ancient Custom so requires,
Salute the Corpse, and take your last farewell.


The Procession was commonly made on Horseback, or in Coaches; but at the
Funerals of Persons, to whom a more than ordinary Reverence was thought due,
all went on foot: Which Respect the Athenians paid to the Memory of
Theophrastus, as an Acknowledgment of his excellent Virtues (...).
. The Relations went next the Corpse, the rest walked some distance off:
Sometimes the Men went before it with their Heads uncovered, the Women
following it. Patroclus was carried to his Funeral, surrounded by the Grecian
Soldiers, (...)
(...) Homer Iliad. ^
.
The sad Processio^ was by Hors^men l^^,
The thronging Foot-m^n in the (...),
And in the M^^^t his Friends (...) b^^r.
But the ordinary way was for the Body to (...) rest to follow; which appears
as from many oth^^ (...) ^o from that of Tere^e (...).
, -- (...) interim
Procedit, sequimur. --
The Funeral marches first, we follow it.
Whereby the Survivors were put in mind of their Mortality, and bid to remember
they were all following in the Way the dead Person was gone before (...) in
lo^um (...). Alexand. ab Alex. lib. III. cap. VIII.
. At the Funerals of Soldiers, their Fellow Soldiers attended with their
Sp^ars (...) toward the Ground, and the uppermost Part of their Bucklers
turned downwards, as has been formerly observed Lib. III. cap. XI.
. This was not done to much (as some phan^y) because the Gods were ca^^'d upon
their Bucklers, whose Faces would have been polluted by the Sight of a dead
Body, as that they might recede from their common Custom; the Method of
Mourning being to act quite contrary to what was usual at other Times:
wherefore not only their Bucklers were inverted, but their Spears, and the rest
of their Weapons. Nor was this only a Martial Custom, but practiced likewise in
Peace; for at the Funerals of Magistrates, their En^^gns of Honor were
inverted, as appears from the Poet ^edo Alb^n^van. Eleg. ad Li^^am.
; Quos primum vidi falces, in funere vidi,
Et vidi versos, indiciumque mali.
The Fa^ces first I at a Funeral saw
With Heads turned downwards, the sad Badge of Woe.
To perform this Ceremony they termed (...), and (...); the first with respect
to the House, out of which the Body was carried forth; the second with respect
to the Places, by which it passed; and the last to the Place, whither it was
conveyed.

CHAPTER V. Of their Mourning for the Dead.
THE Ceremonies, by which they used to express their Sorrow upon the Death of
Friends, and on other occasions, were various and uncertain: But it seems to
have been a constant Rule amongst them, to recede as much as possible in Habit,
and all their Behavior, from their ordinary Customs; whereby they thought it
appeared, that some extraordinary Calamity had befallen them, nothing else
being able to effect so great a Change. Hence it is, that Mourners in some
Cities demeaned themselves in the very same manner with Persons that in other
Places designed to express Joy: For, the Customs of one City being contrary to
those of another, it sometimes happened that what in one Place passed for an
Expression of Mirth, was in others a Token of Sorrow. The most ordinary ways of
expressing Sorrow were these that follow.

1. They abstained from Banquets and Entertainments, and banished from their
Houses all musical Instruments, and whatever was proper to excite Pleasure, or
bore an Air of Mirth and Gayety. Thus Admetus in Euripides upon the Death of
Alcestis Al^est. v. 343.
; (...)
(...)
No more to pleasing Banquets will I run,
All Conversation with my Friends I Will shun;
No more my Brow shall fragrant Chaplets wear,
But all the Marks of Joy shall disappear;
No more I Will Music hear too weak to save
My dear Alcestis from the conquering Grave.
Mr. Hutchin. They frequented no public Solemnities, nor appeared in Places of
Concourse; but sequestered themselves from Company, and refrained even from the
Comforts and Conveniences of Life. Wine was too great a Friend to Cheerfulness
to gain Admission into so melancholy Society; the Light it self was odious, and
nothing courted but dark Shades, and lonesome Retirements, which they thought
bore some resemblance to their Misfortunes Glo^^, vett. Plutarcous Consolat. ad
uxorem.
: Whence Artemidorus lays it down as a certain Forerunner of Death, for any
one to dream of a Fire's being extinguished, during the Sickness of any in the
same Family Lib II. cap. IX.
.

2. They divested themselves of all Ornaments, and laid aside their Jewels,
Gold, and whatever was rich and precious in their Apparel. Thus Lycophron
describes the Women that mourned for Achilles's Death Cassandr. v. 859.
nostrumque ibi Commenta^ium consule.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
This to the Women shall a Custom be
To mourn Achilles third from Aeacus,
Grandchild to Doris, and of largest Size;
To mourn Achilles frightfull in the War,
Not clothed with rich Attire of Gems and Gold,
With glittering Silks or Purple. --
This Custom is frequently mentioned in the Poets, but was not peculiar to
Mourners for the Dead; being likewise, with several other Ceremonies noted in
this Chapter, practiced by all that lamented for any great Calamity: Whence
H^^uba had no sooner heard the Fortune assigned to her self and Cassandra, when
she cried out, -- (...)
(...)
(...) Eur^pid. Tr^ad, v. 256.
.
Throw off these rich, these consecrated Robes,
And hallowed Crowns. --
Their mourning Garments were always black, whence Progne, having notice of
Philome^ae's Death, is thus described by Ovid Met^m. VI F^b. VIII.
; -- velamina Progne
Diripit ex humeris auro fulgentia ^uo,
Induiturque atras vestes. --
From off her back the embroidered Robe^ she tears,
And (...) now in mournful Blacks appears.
Thus like (...) (...), when her Brethren were slun by Meleager Metam. VIII fab
IV.
, -- ^
^.
She fills with (...) to the spacious Town,
And '^^ad of glitt'ri^g Robes p^ts Sable on.
To which (...) (...) had respect, when he boasted* That (...) given my Citizen
came to put on Black Pl^t^rchus (...)
Hence (...) ^ill (...) to be a Pr^^g^ of Recovery for a (...) of black
Clo^ths, since not (...) that dye, (...) who (...), were apparelled in Black
(...) l^b III cap. III.
. The (...) are reported by Servius to have introd^^'d thi^ Custom, wh^^ they
mourned for the Death of Liber, otherwise called Osiris, who was ^r^^cherously
circumvented and murdered by his B^other T^pho. Farther, Mourning Garments
^it^r'd not from their ordinary Appar^l in Color only, but likewi^^ in Value,
as being of ch^ap and course Stuff which may be observed from this Example of
T^^ence Hea^tontimor. Act. II. Sc. III.
, amongst many others; Te^entem ^elam studi^se ipsam offendimus,
Med^o^riter V^stitam vestitam vest lugubri,
(...) causa, opin^r, quae erat mortua.
We found her busy at the Loom, a^^^'d
In a ch^^p Mourning Habit, which she wore
For the old Woman's Death, as I suppose.


3. They tore, cut off, and sometimes shaved their Hair; nor was it sufficient
to deprive themselves of a Part only, for we find Euctra in Euripides fin^ing
(...) with Hei^na for sparing her Lo^ks, and thereby (...) the Dead Orest. 128.
: This Custom is too well known to need any Confirmation by Examples. They had
several ways of disposing of their H^ir: It was sometimes thrown upon ^he dead
Body; as we learn from Patrochis's Funeral, where the Grecians, to show their
Affection and Respect to him, covered his Body with their H^ir (...). ^. v. 135.
; (...)
(...) --
They shaved their Heads, and covered with their Hair
The Body. --
Statius has likewise observed the same Practice Thebaid. VI.
; -- ^ergoque and pectore fulam
Cesariem ^erro minuit, ^ecti^que ^acentis
Obnubu tenuia ora comis. --
He cut off all the Hair that from the Head
Down to the Back and Breast was comely spread,
And covered with it the dead Face. --
It was likewise frequent to cast it into the Funeral Pile, to be consumed with
the Body of their Friend; as Achilles appears to have done at Patroclus's
Funeral Iliad. ^.
; (...)
(...)
Standing hard by the Pile the comely Hair,
Which for Sperchius was before preserved,
He now cut off, and cast into the Flames.
Sometimes it was laid upon the Grave; as we find in Aeschylus (...).
; (...)
I see this Hair upon the Grave.
Canace in Ovid bewails her Misfortune, because she was debarred from
performing this Ceremony to her beloved Macareus, Non mihi te licuit lacrymis
perfundere justis,
In tua non tonsas far sepulcra comas.
'Twas not permitted me with briny Tears
To bath thy lifeless Corpse, or bring my Hairs
Unto thy Sepulcre. --
Some restrain this Practice to Sons, or very near Relations; but it appears by
many Instances to have been common to all that thought themselves obliged to
express their Respect, or Love to the Dead; insomuch that upon the Death of
great Men, whole Cities and Countries were commonly shaved.

This Practice may be accounted for two ways; for the Scholiast upon Sophocles
observes, that it was used, partly to render the Ghost of the deceased Person
propitious, which seems to be the Reason why they threw Hair into the Fire to
burn with him, or laid it on his Body; partly, that they might appear
disfigured, and careless of their Beauty; for long Hair was looked on as very
becoming, and the Greeks prided themselves in it, whence they are so frequently
honored by Homer with the Epithet of (...).

It may be farther observed that in solemn and public Mournings* it was common
to extend this Practice to their Beasts, that all Things might appear as
deformed and ugly as might be. Thus Admetus upon the Death of Alcestis commands
his Chariot-horses to be shorn Euripides, Alcestide v. 428.
; (...)
(...)
My Chariot-horses too my Grief shall share,
Let them be shorn, cut off their comely Mains.
Thus likewise the Thessalians cut off their own Hair, and their Horses Mains
at the Death of Pelopidas Plutarchus Pelopida.
; when Masistius was slain in a Skirmish with the Athenians, the Persians
shaved themselves, their Horses, and their Mules Idem Aristide.
: But Alexander, as in the rest of his Actions, so herein went beyond the rest
of Mankind; for at the Death of Hephaestion, he did not only cut off the Mains
of his Horses and Mules, but took down the Battlements from the Citywalls, that
even Towns might seem Mourners, and instead of their former beauteous
Appearance look bald at the Funeral Idem Pelopida.
.

It may be objected indeed to what I have been speaking, that Shaving was a
Sign of Joy; whereas to let their Hair grow long was the Practice of Persons in
Affliction: Hence Joseph is said to have been shaved, when he was delivered out
of Prison; and Mephibosheth, during the Time King David was banished from
Jerusalem, let his Hair grow, but on his Return shaved himself: Thus likewise
Mariners upon their Deliverance from Shipwreck used to shave themselves: To
which Practice Iuvenal has this Allusion Sat XII. v. 82.
; -- gaudent ibi vertice raso
Garrula securi narrare pericula nautae.
And there shorn Saylors boast what they endured.
Whence Artemidorus will have Mariners, that dream of having their whole Heads
shaved, to be forewarned by the Gods, they are to undergo very great Hazards,
but to escape with Life Lib. I. cap. XXIII.
; Pliny also in one of his Epistles interprets his Dream of cutting off his
Hair, to be a Token of his Deliverance from some eminent Danger; and the Poets
furnish us with several Examples to our purpose: Lycophron for instance thus
describes a general Lamentation Cassandr. v. 973.
; -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
In mournful Blacks shall every Soul appear,
Each shall with loathsome Dirt his Face besmeat;
Neglected Hair shall now luxuriant grow,
And by it is Length their bitter Passion show;
Incessantly they shall their Loss complain,
And all their Life be one sad, mournful Scene;
Thus* they the never-dying Names shall save
Of ancient Patriots from the conquered Grave.
Mr. Hutchin.

Plutarch, undertaking to resolve this Difficulty, reports that the Men let
their Hair grow, but the Women were shaved; it being the Fashion for Men to
wear their Hair short at other Times, and for Women to suffer theirs to grow
Romania Quaest.
: But on the contrary it plainly appears from the Instances already produced,
and many others, that the Men frequently wore long Hair, which they cut off
upon any great Calamity; nor can it be doubted that the Women frequently wore
long Hair in Sorrow, since it is remarked as a Badge of a Woman in Mourning,
that she has her Hair dishevelled, and carelessly flowing about: Thus Ariadne
bespeaks Theseus; Aspice deinissos bugentis more capillos,
Et tunicas lacrymis suut ab imbre graves.
See, like a Mourner's, my dishevelled Hair,
Wet, as with Rain, with Tears my Robes appear.
Terence likewise, the Scene of whose Fable is laid in Greece, has thus
described a Woman in Mourning Hean^ent. Act. II. Sc. III.
; Teventem telam studiose ipsam offendimus,
Mediocriter ve^litam vest lugubri,
E^us anus causa, opinur, quae erat mortua,
S^ne auro tum ornatam, i^a uti quae ornantur sibi,
Nulla mala re e^le expolitam muliebri,
Capillus passus, proli^us, circum caput
Re^ectus ^egligenter. --
We found her at the painful Loom employed,
Dressed in a Mourning Habit, which the wore
For the old Woman's Death, as I suppose:
She was not tricked up in a gaudy Suit,
Nor dressed in Robes of Velvet, or of Gold,
Nor patched or painted to attract the Eyes
Of her Gallants, but with dishevelled Hair
Carelessly over her Shoulders thrown. --


Wherefore two Things may be observed for the solution of this Difficulty:

First, the manner of being shaved: For though to be shaved, or trimmed by
Barbers, was a Token of Cheerfulness; yet those that cut off their own Hair,
and that in a negligent and careless manner, were looked on as Mourners:
Whence, though Artemidorus reports, that no Man under the Pressure of Misfortunes
was ever shaved Lib I cap. XXIII.
; yet he adds in the same Chapter, that for a Man to dream of shaving himself
was a Prelage of some great Calamity; because Men in such Circumstances were
wont to be shaved.

Secondly, the different Fashions of several Nations are to be considered: For
where it was customary to wear short Hair, there the Length of Hair was a Token
of Mourning; but where long Hair was in Fashion, there Mourners shaved
themselves. It Is reported by Herodotus Lib. I cap. LXXXII.
and others Plutarchus Lysandre, Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier. lib. V. etc.
, that the Argian^, having lost Thyrea to the Spartans, made a Decree that
their whole City should cut their Hair, and never permit it to grow again to
it is accustomed Length, 'till they recovered that Place; the Spartans, on the
contrary, using to wear their Hair short, put forth a Decree, that from that
Time they should nourish their Hair, in reproach to their Enemies. Now in these
Cities, when the Fashion was to wear short Hair, then Mourners were
distinguished by long Hair; but long Hair coming into Fashion, Mourners were
shaved.

4. 'Twas frequent for Persons overwhelmed with Grief, and unable to bear up
under it, to throw themselves upon the Earth, and roll in the Dust; and the
more dirty the Ground was, the better it served to defile them, and to express
their Sorrow and Dejection. Thus Oen^us behaves himself upon the Death of his
Son Meleager Ovid Metam. lib. VIII. v. ^28.
; Pulvere canitiem genitor, vultusque seniles
Foedat humi susos, spatiosumque increpat aevum.
His hoary Head, and furrowed Cheeks besmears
With noisome Dirt, and chides the tedious Years.
Priam in Homer represents his lamenting of Hector in the same Postur^ (...) v.
637.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Soft Sleep has never closed these watchful Eyes
Since my dear Son became your fatal Prize;
But Day and Night I mourn my wretched Fate,
And on my countless Sufferings ruminate,
Welt'ring in every filthy Place. --
Mr. Hutchin.

5. They covered their Heads with Ashes. Thus Achilles upon the News of
Patroclus's Death Iliad. e'. v. 23.
, (...)
(...) --
Then taking Ashes up with both his Hands
He threw them on his Head. --
These Customs were likewise practiced ^n the Eastern Countries, whence we find
so frequent mention of Penitents lying upon the Ground, and putting on
Sackcloth and Ashes.

6. When any Occasion required their Attendance abroad, their Heads were
muffled up; as appears from these Verses in the Epigram Antholog. lib. V. c.
XXXIII.
; -- (...)
(...). --
Her Face wrapped in a Veil declared her Woes.
Whence Orestes, when he persuades Electra to leave off Mourning, bids her be
unveiled, -- (...)
(...). --
Pull off your Veil, dear Sister, and forbear
This Grief. --
Nor was this the Fashion of Women only; for Adrastus came to Thaseus after his
Loss at Thebes (...), wherefore Theseus speaks thus to him Euripid. Supplic.
110.
; (...)
Speak out, unfold your Head, refrain from Tears.
Thus likewise Haman, upon the Defeat of his Plot against Mordecai, is said to
have hasted to his House mourning, and having his Head covered Esther, cap. VI,
12.
; and the Jews are represented by Jeremy as being ashamed, and confounded, and
covering their Heads, in the Time of a grievous Famine Cap. XIV, 3.4.
.

7. Another Token of Dejection was to lean their Heads upon their Hands. Whence
Helen speaks thus of the calamitous Trojans Euripid. Helen. 377.
, (...)
They with their Hands support their drooping Head.


8. They went softly, to express their Faintness, and Loss of Strength and
Spirits. Thus Ahab King of Israel, being terrified by the Judgment Elias
denounced against him, fasted, and lay in Sackcloth, and went softly I. Reg.
XXI, 27.
; and Hezekiah King of Judah, being told by the Prophet, that he was never to
recover of a Distemper he then lay under, amongst other Expressions of Sorrow
has this, I shall go softly all my Years in the Bitterness of my Soul Isaia
cap. XXXVIII, 15.
.

9. They beat their Breasts and Thighs, and tore their Flesh, making Furrows in
their Faces with their Nails; which Actions, though practiced sometimes by Men,
were more frequent among Women, whose Passions are more violent and
ungovernable. Thus Nonnus represents them Dionys. lib. IX, 18.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
Women with Nails their Breasts and Faces tear,
And thus their boundless headstrong Grief declare.
In the same Manner Anna, bewails her Sister Dido's unexpected Death Virgil.
Aei^. IV, 672.
, Audiit exanimis, trepidoque exterrita cursu,
Unguibus ora soror faedans and pectora pa^mis.
Her Sister hearing, speeds with frightfull Have,
Tears her soft Cheeks, and beats her panting Breast.
Many Instances of this nature occurr in both Languages, the Custom being
generally practiced both in Greece and at Rome. Solon thought fit amongst other
Extravagancies at Funerals to forbid this Plutarchus Solone, Cicero de Legib.
. The Lacedaemonians bore the Death of their private Relations with great
Constancy and Moderation; but when their Kings died, had a barbarous Custom of
meeting in vast Numbers, where Men, Women, and Slaves all mixed together, tore
the Flesh from their Foreheads with Pins, and Needles.

10. They accused and cursed their Gods: Hence Statius Sylv. lib. V.
, -- injustos rabidis pulsare querelis
Coelicolas solamen erit. --
TO inveigh against the Gods with justest Rage,
And call them envious, may our Grief assuage.
Nor was this the Effect of extravagant Passion, or practiced only by Persons
of weaker Understandings in the Extremity of their Sorrow; but frequently done
by Men of all Qualities, and that in the most grave and solemn manner that
could be, as appears from the same Poet Theb III.
; -- primaevique senes, and longo examine matres
Invidiam pl^nxere Deis. --
The aged Sires, and Dames in numerous Crowds
Bewail, and curse the Envy of the Gods.
For the Gods being thought subject to human Passions, 'twas very easy and
natural for Men under Misfortunes to impeach them of Cruelty, or Envy. Thus,
when Hylas, Hercules's Darling, perished in the Waters, the Deities residing
there were said to have been enamored with him, and to have stolen him; and,
when any great and public Blessing was taken away, the immortal Beings were
said to envy Mankind so great Felicity. Many Instances might be produced to
this purpose, whereof I will only set down that remarkable one of Marcellus in
Virgil (...) VI, 869.
, Ostendem terris hunc tantum Fata, neque ultra
Es^e sinent: Nimium vobis Romana propago
Visa potens, superi, propria haec si dona suissent.
This Wonder of the World the Gods but show,
Heaven were improv'rish'd should he stay below:
Blessed to excess had been the Roman State,
Had Heaven these Gifts as lasting made as great.
Mr. Hutchin. Sometimes their impious Rage against the Gods proceeded to the
pulling down their Altars, and sacking their Temples; an Example whereof we
have in Neoptolemus, who, being informed that Apollo was accessory to his
Father's Death, took up a Resolution to demolish the Delphian Temple, and
perished in the Attempt (...).
.

11. Another Custom they had of drawling out their Words, and with Tears
repeating the Interjection (...). Hence (if we may credit the Scholiast (...).
upon Aristophanes) Funeral Lamentations were called (...), El^gies.

12. When public Magistrates, or Persons of Note died, or any public Calamity
happened, all public Meetings were intermitted, the Schools of Exercise,
Baths, Shops, Temples, and all Places of Concourse were shut up, and the whole
City put on a Face of Sorrow: Thus we find the Athenians bewailing their Loss
of Socrates, not long after they had sentenced him to Death Di^genes (...)
Socrate.
.

13. They had Mourners and Musicians to increase the Solemnity: Which Custom
seems to have been practiced in most Parts of the World. The Roman praeficae
are remarkable, enough; and the Eastern Countries appear to have observed the
same Practice; whence we find mention of Mourners going about the Streets, and
Mourning Women in several Places of the sacred Writings. Jeremy, having
foretold the Calamity of the Jews, advises to consider, and call for the
mourning Women, that they may make have, and take up a ma^^ing for us, that our
Eyes may run down with Tears, and our Eyelids gush out with Waters (...).
. There Homer calls (...), because they endeavored to excite Sorrow in all the
Company by beating their Breasts, and counterfeiting all the Actions of the
most real and passionate Grief. They are likewise termed (...), etc. from the
Songs they sung at Funerals; of these there seem to have been three, one in the
Procession, another at the Funeral Pile, a third at the Grave; these were
commonly termed (...), though the two last seem not peculiar to Funeral-Songs,
but applicable to any others: We find them sometimes called (...) from Ialemus,
one of Clio's Sons, and the first Author of these Compositions; for the same
reason Songs at Marriages were termed (...) from his Brother Hymenaeus: Funeral
Dirges were also called (...), whence (...) is expounded in Hesychius by (...),
to mourn; and (...) is another Name for mourning Women: Hence (...) signify
empty and worthless Things, and (...) is proverbially applied to inlipid and
senceless Compositions Suidas, Zenodotus.
; for the Songs used on these Occasions were usually very mean and trifting;
whence that Saying of Plautus Asin^ria.
, Hae non sunt nugae, non enim mortuaria.
These are no Trifles, since they are not composed
For the hideous Chanting of a Funeral.


What the Design of their Musical Instruments was, is not agreed; some will
have them intended to affright the Ghosts and Furies from the Soul of the
deceased Person; others, agreeably to Plato and Pythagoras's Notions, would
have them to signify the Soul's Departure into Heaven, where they phansy'd the
Motion of the Spheres made a divine and eternal Harmony; others say they were
designed to divert the Sorrow of the dead Man's surviving Relations; lastly,
the most probable Opinion seems to be, that they were intended to excite
Sorrow; which was the reason that the Lyra was never used at such Solemnities,
as being consecrated to Apollo, and fit only for Paeans, and cheerful Songs.
Admetus indeed commands the Flute likewise to be banished out of his City upon
the Death of Alcestis Euri^id. Alcost v. 430.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...). --
Let not the pleasing Flute, nor sprightly Lyre,
'Till Phoebe twelve Times has repaired her Horns,
Be in the mournful City heard, for I
A Corpse more dear than this shall never interr.
Mr. Hutchin. But hence we are only to collect, that the Ancients had different
sorts of Flutes, some of which were proper in Times of Mirth, others in Times
of Mourning; for it appears by many Examples, that some of their (...), or
tibiae, were of all other Instruments the most common at Funerals. Hence
Statius in his Description of young Archemorus's Funeral Theb lib. VI. v. 120.
, Tum signum luctus cornu grave mugit adunco
Tibia, cui teneros suetum traducere manes
Lege Phrygum moesta: Pelopem monstrasse ferebant
Exequiale sacrum, carmenque minoribus umbris
Utile. --
In doleful Notes the Phrygian Flute complains,
And moves our Pity with it is mournful Strains,
The Phrygian Flute of old used to convey
The Infant-souls on their unerring Way,
Which Custom into the World first Pelops brought,
And the unknown Use of Funeral Dirges taught,
Dirges, whose powerful Sounds were thought to speed
And smooth the Passage of the younger Dead.
Mr. Hutchin. Some indeed will have the Lydian Flutes more suitable to
Funerals, the Phrygian, of which Statius speaks, to agree better with Mirth and
Cheerfulness, and to be used only at Funerals of Infants, or Youths, which were
ordinarily solemnized in a manner quite different from those of grown Persons,
which they think confirmed by Statius's Words; but, as these may bear a quite
different Sense, not the Instrument, but the Song whereof he there speaks,
being proper for the Funerals of Persons under Age; so it appears farther that
the most common Flutes used at these Solemnities were of the Phrygian Fashion,
though perhaps neither the Lydian, nor some others might be wholly excluded;
Hence naenia, which is the Latin Word for Funeral Dirges, seems to have been
derived from the Greek (...), which is used by Hipponax, and (however Scaliger
deduces it from the Hebrew) affirmed by Pollux to be of Phrygian Original;
(...) is of the same Descent, and expounded by (...). The Carian Flute was
likewise used on these Occasions, whence the Musicians and Mourners were termed
(...) Hesychius.
, and (...) is a Funeral Song; now this was the very same with that used by the
Phrygians, from whom, Pollux tells us, it was first conveyed into Caria Lib.
III.
. I shall only mention two more; the first is the Mysian Flute, an Instrument
likewise fit for Sorrow: Hence Aeschylus Persis, ejusque Scholiaster ibid.
; (...)
He beats his Breast, and sounds the Mysian Flute.
The last is the Lydian Flute, which, as Plutarch reports out of Aristoxenus,
was first applied to this Use by Olympus at Python's Death De Musica.
.

CHAPTER VI. Of their manner of Interring and Burning the Dead.
IT would be needless to prove that both Interring and Burning were practiced
by the Grecians; yet whether of these Customs has the best Claim to Antiquity,
may perhaps admit of a Dispute. But it seems probable, that however the later
Grecians were better affected to the way of Burning, yet the Custom of the most
primitive Ages was to interr their Dead. It Is plain the Athenians, however
afterward addicted to Burning, used Interment in Cecrop's Reign, if any Credit
may be allowed to Cicero De Legib. lib. II.
; and the Scholiast upon Homer Iliad.^.
positively affirms, that Interring was more ancient than Burning, which he
reports to have been first introduced by Hercules. However, it appears that the
Custom of Burning was received in the Trojan War, and both then and afterward
generally practiced by the Grecians; insomuch that when Lucian enumerates the
various Methods used by different Nations in disposing of their Dead, he
expressly assigns Burning to Greece, and Interment to the Persians De Iuctu.
. But this is not so to be understood, as if the Grecians in the Ages he speaks
of, never interred their Dead, or thought it unlawful so to do; but only that
the other Custom was more generally received by them. Socrates in Plato's
Phaedon speaks expressly of both Customs; and it appears that some of them
looked on the Custom of Burning as cruel and inhuman; whence a Poet cited by
Eustathius Iliad.^. p. 32.
introduces a Person exclaiming against it, and calling out upon Prometheus to
have to his Assistance, and steal, if possible, from Mortals the Fire he had
given them. The Philosophers were divided in their Opinions about it; those,
who thought human Bodies were compounded of Water, Earth, or the four Elements,
inclined to have them committed to the Earth: but Heraclitus with his
Followers, imagining Fire to be the first Principle of all Things, affected
Burning. For every one thought it the most reasonable Method, and most
agreeable to Nature, so to dispose of Bodies, as they might soonest be reduced
to their first Principles.

Eustathius Loco citato
assigns two Reasons why Burning came to be of so general Use in Greece: The
first is, because Bodies were thought to be unclean after the Soul's Departure,
and therefore were purified by Fire; whence Euripides speaks of Clytaemnestra,
-- (...).
The body's purified by Fire --.


The second reason is, that the Soul, being separated from the gross and
unactive Matter, might be at Liberty to take it is Flight to the Heavenly
Mansions Qui^tilianus Declam. X.
. Wherefore the Indian Philosophers, out of Impatience to expect the Time
appointed by Nature, used to consume themselves in a Pile erected for that
purpose, and so loose their Souls from their Confinements: A remarkable Example
hereof we have in Calanus, who followed Alexander out of India, and, finding
himself indisposed, obtained that King's Leave to prevent the Growth of his
Distemper by committing himself to the Flames Q. Cu^ti^s.
. Hercules was purified from the Dregs of Earth by the same means before his
Reception into Heaven. And it seems to have been the common Opinion, that Fire
was an admirable Expedient to refine the Celestial Part of Man by separating
from it all gross and corruptible Matter, with the impure Qualities that
attended it. Thus Scylla, being slain by Hercules, was raised from the Dead,
and rendered immortal by her Father Phorcys L^^^phron Cass^^^. v 44.
; -- (...)
(...),
(...).
-- into whose stiffen'd Limbs
Phorcys by quickening Flames new Life inspired,
And raised her high above the Fears of Death.


The Piles, whereon they burned dead Bodies, were called (...). They seem not
to have been erected in any constant Form, or to have consisted of the same
Materials; these being varied as Time and Place, and other Circumstances
required.

The Body was placed upon the Top of the Pile; but was rarely burned without
Company, for, besides the various Animals they threw upon the Pile, we seldom
find a Man of Quality consumed without a Number of Slaves, or Captives: Besides
these, all sorts of precious Ointments and Perfumes were poured into the
Flames. Many Instances of this nature might be produced out of the ancient
Poets, but I shall only set down the following out of Homer's Description of
Patroclus's Funeral Iliad ^. v. 166.
; (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...). --
A spacious Pile the mournful Grecians made,
And on the Top his comely Body laid;
Next stripped the Sheep and Oxen, there that stood
In solemn Ranks before the flaming Wood.
But brave Achill^s, as above the rest
Concerned, more Signs of Care and Love expressed:
Straight off the Victims all the Fat he flayed,
And over all the much loved Corpse it spread;
Then placed their Carcases around the Pile,
And Vessels filled with Honey, and with Oil;
Next deeply groaning, with becoming Have
Four sprightly Coursers on the Pile he cast;
Nine lovely Dogs he at his Table fed,
And two of these upon the Pile he laid;
Twelve valiant Trojan Captives next he slew,
And on the Pile their mangled Bodies threw.
Mr. Hutchin. The reason why the Body was covered with the Fat of Beasts was,
that it might consume the sooner Eustathius.
; for it was looked on as a singular Blessing to be quickly reduced to Ashes:
Wherefore in Funerals, where Numbers of Bodies were burned on the same Pile,
they were so disposed, that those of moist Constitutions and easy to be
enflamed, being proportioned to Bodies of contrary Tempers, might increase the
Vehemence of the Fire; whence Plutarch Sympos. lib. III. Quaest IV.
and Macrobius Saturn. lib VII. cap VII.
have observed, that for ten Men it was the the Custom to put in one Woman.

Soldiers usually had their Arms burned with them: Wherefore Elpenor in Homer
begs this Favor of Ulysses Odyss. ^ v. ^^.
; (...).
Let all the Arms I have be with me burned.
It seems likewise to have been the Custom for the Garments they had worn in
the Time of their Lives, to be thrown into the Pile; Some were so solicitous
about this, that they gave orders in their last Wills to have it done: And the
Athenians were, as in all other Observances that related any way to Religion,
so in this the most profuse of all the Grecians, insomuch that some of their
Lawgivers were forced to restrain them by severe Penalties from defrauding the
Living by their Liberality to the Dead. Lycurgus would have nothing buried with
Bodies beside one red Garment, or, at the most, a few Branches of Olive
P^^ta^^hus ^^^^go
; nor these neither, except the Person had been eminent for Virtue and
Fortitude. Solon allowed three Garments and one Ox Idem (...)
. At Chaeronea those that were convicted of Extravagance at Funerals, were
punished as soft and effeminate by the Censors of Women Idem ibidem.
.

The Pile was lighted by some of the dead Person's nearest Relations, or
Friends; who made Prayers and Vows to the Winds to assist the Flames, that the
Body might quickly be reduced to Ashes. Thus Achilles, having fired Patroclus's
Pile, intercedes with Boreas and Zephyrus to fly to his Assistance with their
Joynt-forces Iliad ^ v. 194.
, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...). --
When he perceived the Flames to abate their Force,
Unable to consume the unhappy Corse,
Some Distance from the Pile the Hero stands,
The golden Calice fills his royal Hands,
And there to Boreas, and to Zeph'rus prayed,
And with each Deity solemn Cov'nants made,
That grateful Victims should their Altars stain
And choicest Offerings load the joyful Fane,
If with their kinder Blasts they would fan the Fire,
And with new Force the languid Flames inspire,
That they to Earth the Corpse might soon reduce.
Mr. Hutchin.

At the Funerals of Generals and great Officers, the Soldiers, with the rest
of the Company, made a solemn Procession three Times round the Pile, to express
their Respect to the Dead. Thus Homer's Grecians Iliad. ^.
, (...)
(...). --
They drive their Horses thrice about the Dead
Lamenting. --
This Action was called in Greek (...), in Latin de^^rsio; we find frequent
mention of it in the Poets. Statius has elegantly described it in his Poem on
the Theban War Lib. VI v 213.
, Tunc septem numero turbas (centenus ubique
Surgit eques) versis ducunt insignibus ipsi
Grajugenae reges, lustrantque ex more sinistro
Orb rogum, and stantes inclinant pulvere flammas:
Ter curvos ^gere sinus, illisaque telis
Tela sonant; quater horrendum pepulere fragorem
Arma, quater mollem samularum brachia planctum.
Seven goodly Troops the sad Decursion made,
In each of which a hundred Horse appeared,
And these (a Posture fitting those that mourned)
The Captains led with Ensigns downwards turned:
Toward the left they march; on'th' Pile they gaze,
Whilst Clouds of Dust the thronging Horses raise,
Whose much-prevailing Force depress the rising Blaze:
Three Times they all the burning Pile surround,
Whilst Darts strike Darts, and make a frightfull Sound;
Four Times the Din of clashing Arms invades
The suffering Air; four Times the mournful Maids
Loudly lament, each strikes her panting Breast,
And Pity in us moves for the Deceased.
Mr. Hutchin. Where it may be observed, that in this Decursion the Motion was
toward the Left Hand, for by this they expressed Sorrow; as, on the contrary,
Motion to the Right was a Sign of Joy, thus the same Author Ibid. v. 221.
, -- Hic luctus abolere, novique
Funeris auspicium vates, quamquam omina sentit
Vera, jubet, dextro gyro, and vibrantibus hastis
Huc redeunt. --
The Priest, though by the boding Signs he knew
Some dire Calamity would sure ensue,
Bids them their anxious Thoughts a while forbear,
Their pompous Grief, and bitter Passion spare,
And moving toward the Right with brandished Arms,
Back to return. --
Mr. Hutchin. These Motions were accompanied with Shouts and Sound of Trumpet,
as we learn from Valerius Flaccus Argos. lib. III.
; Inde ter armatos Minyis referentibus orbs
Cone^ssi tremuere rogi, ter inhorruit ether
Luctificum clangente tuba, jecere supremo
Tum clamore faces. --
Three Marches round the Pile the Minyae make,
Their weighty Strides the well-pil'd Structure shake,
Thrice doleful Sounds from hollow Tubes are sent,
The Clangor wounds the troubled Firmament;
With Torches next accompanied with Shouts
They light the Pile. --
Mr. Hutchin. Which last Words seem to intimate the Decursion's being made
before the Pile was lighted, whereas it appears from other Authors to have been
made whilst the Pile was burning: Thus Virgil tells us in express Words Aeneid.
XI. v. 1^^.
, Ter circum accensos cincti fulgentibus armis
Decurrere rogos, ter maestum fwneris ignem
Lustravere in equis, ululatusque ore dedere.
Well-arm'd thrice round the Pile they marched on foot,
Thrice round it rode, and with a dismal Shout
Surveyed the rolling Flames. --


During the Time the Pile was burning, the dead Person's Friends stood by it
pouring forth Libations of Wine, and calling upon the Deceased. Thus Achilles
attended all Night at Patroclus's Funeral Iliad. (...).
, -- (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
All Night divine Achilles does attend
At the sad Funeral of his much-loved Friend:
A golden Cup he bore, that Wine contained,
Which pouring out the glutted Pavement stained;
His pious Offering thus the Hero paid,
Calling upon the Manes of the Dead.
Mr. Hutchin.

When the Pile was burned down, and the Flames had ceased, they extinguished
the Remains of the Fire with Wine, then collected the Bones and Ashes. Thus
Homer relates of the Trojans at Hector's Funeral Iliad. ^ v. 791.
, (...)
(...)
(...).
About the Pile the thronging People came,
And with black Wine quenched the remaining Flame,
His Brothers then, and Friends searched every where,
And gathered up hi^ snowy Bones with Care.
Mr. Congreve. From which Words it appears, that this Office was performed by
near Relations. To which Practice Tibullus likewise alludes; -- Non hic mihi
matter
Quae legate in mastos ossa perusta sinus.
Nor was my dear indulgent Mother by,
Who to her Breast my mold'ring Bones would lay.
The Bones were sometimes washed with Wine, and (which commonly followed
Washing) anointed with Oil. Agamemnon ^ introduced by Homer informing Achilles
how this Ceremony had been performed to him O^yss ^ v. 71.
; (...),
(...),
(...). --
But when the Flame your Body had consumed
With Oils, and Odors we your Bones perfumed,
And washed with unmixed Wine. --
Patroclus's Remains were enclosed in Fat Iliad ^ v. 252.
; (...)
(...).
His mournful Friends in Fat his Bones enclosed,
Then in a golden Urn they them reposed.
It may here be demanded, how the Relics were distinguished from those of the
Beasts and Men burned with him; in answer to this Enquiry (omitting those
groundless Stories of the Stone Amiantus, and Indian Hemp, which could not be
consumed by Fire) I shall produce two Instances, whereby it appears the Method
they took to effect this, was by placing the Body in the Middle of the Pile,
whereas the Men and Beasts burned with it lay on the Sides. Thus Achilles tells
the Grecians, it would be easy to discover the Remains of Patroclus Loc. cit.
; (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
First with black Wine extinguish all the Flames,
Quench every glowing Cinder that remains,
Then let us gather up, it is easily done,
The unmixed Bones of brave Menatius Son,
Your nicer Care needs not be here expressed,
You Will soon distinguish his from all the rest;
For in the Midst of the Pile his Corpse was placed,
Whilst Men and Beasts promi^cuously cast,
Lay frying on the outward Parts. --
Mr. Hutchin. Achilles's Bones are said to have been distinguished the same way
Quintus Smyrnaeus lib. III. v. 720.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
When the remaining Flames they would quenched with Wine,
Which were the Hero's Bones was plainly seen;
Not like the rest, that fell his Sacrifice,
But of a larger and gigantick Size;
Nor could his Bones be with the vulgar mixed,
Since his rich Corpse remote from them was fixed;
The captive Trojans, Beasts, and Horses slain
Upon the Outworks of the Pile were lain,
There burned some distance from the nobler Dead,
Who in the Midst of the Pile alone was laid.
Mr. Hutchin. The Bones thus discovered, they seem to have gathered the Ashes
that lay close to them; nor does it appear, there was any way to distinguish
the Remains of the Men from common Ashes.

The Bones and Ashes thus collected were reposited in Urns, called (...), etc.
The Matter they consisted of was different, either Wood, Stone, Earth, Silver,
or Gold, according to the Quality of the Deceased. When Persons of eminent
Virtue died, their Urns were frequently adorned with Flowers, and Garlands;
otherwise the general Custom seems to have been, to cover them with Cloths
'till they were deposited in the Earth, that the Light might not approach them.
This is particularly remarked in Homer's Funerals; as when he speaks of
Hector's Bones Iliad. ^ fine.
; (...),
(...).
-- An Urn of Gold was brought,
Wrapped in soft purpl^ Palls, and richly wrought,
In this the sacred Ashes were interred.
The same Ceremony was performed toward Patroclus's Urn in the precedent
Iliad, (...).
Within the Tent his costly Urn was laid,
And over it a Linen Cloth was spread.


Concerning their Interment it may be observed, that the Bodies lay in their
Coffins with Faces upwards; it being thought more proper, and perhaps more
conducive to the Welfare of the Deceased, to have their Faces toward Heaven,
the Abode of Celestial Gods, and Fountain of Light, than the dark Mansions of
the Infernal Deities: Whence Diogenes the Cynick, being asked in what Posture
he would be interred, answered, (...), with my Face downwards; the reason of
which being demanded of him; he replied, that in a short Time the World would
be turned upside down Lae^tiu^ Di^ge^e.
; which Answer seems designed to ridicule the Grecian Superstition in this
Point.

It may be observed farther, that the Heads of deceased Persons were so placed
in the Grave, that they might look toward the rising Sun Th^^ydidis Sch^^^^^^.
. Plutarch informs us indeed, that the Megarensians placed their Dead toward
the East, and the Athenians, whose Custom seems herein to be the same with the
rest of the Greeks, toward the West Solone.
; and Aelian, as far as concerns the Athenians, agrees with him Var. Hist. lib.
VII. cap. XIX.
: But it must be considered, that to situate the Face so as it should look
toward the rising Sun, 'twas necessary the Head should lie toward the West;
whence also the Head, or uppermost Part of the Sepulcre, being to face the
rising Sun, was likewise placed at the West End.

Before I conclude this Chapter, it will not be improper to add, that the
Megarensians commonly put two, three, or four Carcases into the same Sepulcre;
but at Athens one Sepulcre, much less one Coffin, or Urn, seldom contained
above one Carcass Plutarchus So^one
; which seems to have been commonly observed by the rest of the Greeks; only
those that were joined by near Relation, or Affection were usually buried
together; it being thought inhuman to part those in Death, whom no Accidents of
Life could separate. Many Examples of this nature occurr in ancient Writers;
hence Agathias's Epigram concerning two Twins; (...)
(...).
Two Brothers lie interred within this Urn,
Both died together, as together born.
Lovers thought this no small Accession to their Happiness: Thi^^e's last
Request was, that she might be interred with Pyramus Ovid. Met^m. IV. v. 154.
; Hoc tamen amborum verbis estote rogati,
O mulium mis^ri meus illiusque parents;
Ut, quos certus amor, quos hora novissima jun^it,
Componi tumulo non invid^atis codem.
At length, our thrice unhappy Parents, hear,
And grant us this our last most earnest Prayer;
That we, whom Love and Death together joined,
As both one Fate, one common Tomb may find.
Mr. Hutchin. Admetus in Euripides declares his Resolution to lie in the same
Coffin with his Wife Alcestis Alcestid. v. 365.
; (...)
(...). --
Close by thy Side I Will in thy Urn be laid.
(...), appearing after Death to Achilles, begs of him, that he would reposite
his Bones in the same Urn he designed for his own Iliad. ^
: And when Achilles was dead, we find the Grecians put the Ashes of his Friend
Antilochus into the same Urn with his, but those of Patroclus they not only
reposited in the same Vessel, but mingled them together: Thus the Ghost of
Agamemnon tells him at their Meeting in the Shades below Od^ss ^ v. 76.
; (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Within this Urn your sad Remains are laid
Mixed with the Bones of your Patroclus dead:
In the same Urn Antilochus does lie,
His Bones not mixed with yours, but placed hand by;
For much you did that worthy Chief esteem,
Only Patroclus was preferred to him.
Mr. Hutchin. Halcyone's Love carry's her farther yet, for, her Husband Cey^
having perished in a Tempest at Sea, she comforts her self in this, that, though
his Body could not be found, yet their Names should be inscribed upon the same
Monument, and, as it were, embrace each other Ovides Met. lib. XI. v. 7^.
; -- Crudelior ipso
Sit mihi men's pelago, si vitam ducere nitar
Longius, and tanto pugnem superesse dolori.
Sed neque pugnabo, nec te, miserande, relinquam;
En tibi nunc saltem veniam comes, inque sepulcro
Si non urna, tamen junget nos litera, si non
Ossibus ossa meis, at nomen nomine tangam.
But I more cruel than the Sea should be,
Could I have Thoughts to live deprived of thee,
Could I but dare to struggle with my Pain,
And fondly hope behind thee to remain:
Ah! no, dear Ceyx, I Will not leave thee so,
I Will not contend with my too pressing Woe,
Where ever you lead Halcyone will go:
And now at length, my dearest Lord, I come,
And, though we are denied one common Tomb,
Though in one Urn our Ashes be not laid,
On the same Marble shall our Names be read;
In amorous Folds the circling Words shall join,
And show how much I loved, how you was only mine.
Mr. Hutchin.

CHAPTER VII. Of their Sepulcres, Monuments, Cenotaphia, etc.
THE primitive Grecians were buried in Places prepared for that purpose in
their own Houses Pl^to Min^c
; the Thebans had once a Law, that no Person should build a House without
providing a Repository for his Dead. It seems to have been very frequent even
in later Ages to bury within their Cities; the most public and frequented
Places whereof seem to have been best stored with Monuments: But this was a
Favor not ordinarily granted, except to Men of great Worth, and public
Benefactors; to such a^ had raised themselves above the common Level, and were
Examples of Virtue to succeeding Ages, or had deserved by some eminent Service
to have their Memories honored by Posterity. The Magnesians raised a Sepulcre
for Themisto^les in the Midst of their F^ct^m Plutarchus Theo^^cie
; Eupl^on had the same Honor at Corinth Xenophon (...) lib. VII
; and it appears to have been common for Colonies to bury their Leaders, under
whose Conduct they possessed themselves of new Habitations, in the Midst of
their Cities ^^ndars ^ci^^^as^es.
.

Temples were sometimes made Repositories for the Dead; whereof the primitive
Ages afford us many Instances; insomuch that some have been of opinion, that
the Honors paid to the Dead were the first Cause of erecting Temples Vide
Arch^eolog. ^ostr. lib II. cap. II.
Nor are later Times wholly void of such Examples, for the Plataeans are said
to have buried Euclides in the Temple of Diana Euclea, for his pious Labor in
going a thousand Stadia in one Day to fetch some of the hallowed Fire from
Delphi Plutarchus A^is^^de.
: From which, with many other Instances, it appears, that this was looked on as
a very great Favor, and granted as a Reward to public Services. Sometimes it
was desired for Protection, as we learn from Medea's Case, who interred her two
Sons in Juno Acraea's Temple to secure them from the Malice of her Enemies
E^ripi^ M^^ v 1^78.
, as has been already observed.

But the Custom of most of the Grecians, in later Ages especially, was to bury
their Dead out of their Cities, and chiefly by the Highways: Which seems to be
done, either to preserve themselves from the noisome Smells, wherewith Graves
might infect their Cities; or to prevent the Danger their Houses were exposed
to, when Funeral Piles were set on Fire: Or, it may be, to fill the Minds of
Travelers with Thoughts of Mortality; or to excite themselves to encounter any
Dangers, rather than permit an Enemy to approach their Walls, and despoil the
Monuments, or disturb the Peace of the Dead; Lastly, (to trouble you with no
more different Opinions) others think it most probable, that this Custom was
first introduced by a Fear of contracting Pollution from the Dead, of which I
have already treated in a foregoing Chapter.

But Lycurgus, as in most of his Institutions, so herein too differed from the
rest of the Grecian Lawgivers; for, to cut off the Superstition of
Burying-places, he allowed his Lacedaemonians to bury their Dead within their
City, and even round about their Temples; to the end, their Youth by being used
to such Spectacles might not be afraid to see a dead Body; and withal to rid
them of the Conceit, that to touch a Corpse, or to tread upon a Grave, would
defile a Man Plutarchus Lycurgo.
.

Every Family was wont to have their proper Burying-place, to be deprived
whereof was reputed one of the greatest Calamities that could befall them:
Wherefore when the Lacedaemonians were resolved to conquer the Messenians, or
lose all their Lives in the Attempt, we read that they bound Tickets to their
right Arms containing their own and their Father's Names; that, if all should
perish in the Battle, and their Bodies be so mangled, as not to be
distinguished, those Notes might certify what Family they belonged to, that so
they might be carried to the Sepulcres of their Ancestors Justinius lib III.
. The rest of the Grecians had the same Custom; whence (to trouble you with
only one Instance more) there being a Law, that such as preserved not their
Inheritance, should be deprived of the Sepulcre of their Fathers, Democritus,
having spent his Estate in the Study of Philosophy, was in Danger of incurring
that Penalty I^^tius Democrito.
.

The common Graves of primitive Greece were nothing but Caverns dug in the
Earth Etymologies Auctor v. (...).
, and called (...): But those of later Ages were more curiously wrought, they
were commonly paved with Stone, had Arches built over them, and were adorned
with no less Art and Care than the Houses of the Living; insomuch that Mourners
commonly retired themselves into the Vaults of the Dead, and there lamented
over their Relations for many Days and Nights together, as appears from
Petronius's Story of the Ephesian Matron.

Kings and great Men were anciently buried in Mountains, or at the Feet of them
Servius Ae^. XI.
. Thus Aventinus Sylvius was interred in the Hill, that received it is Name from
him A^^^pus de orig. Gent. Roman.
. Virgil reports the same of King Dercennus Loc. cit.
; -- Fuit ingens monte sub alto
Regis Dercenni terreno ex aggere bustum.
A Tomb beneath a mighty Mount they reared
For King Dercennus. --
Whence likewise appears the Custom of raising a Mount upon the Graves of great
Persons, which Lucan has thus expressed, speaking of the Egyptians Lib. VIII.
, Et regum cineres exstructo monte quiescunt.
Beneath a Mount their Monarchs Ashes rest.
This consisted sometimes of Stone; whence Theseus in Euripides tells Hercules,
the Athenians would honor his Corpse -- (...).
With high-built Monuments of Stone. --
But the common Materials were nothing but Earth, whence it is usually called
(...). Thus Euripides Hecuba.
, -- (...).
The Mount, which over Achilles's Tomb was raised.
To cast it up Homer call's (...), speaking of Hector's Tomb Iliad. ^. fine.
; (...). --
Having a Tomb of Earth raised over his Grave
They all departed. --
The same Words he had used before in the Description of Patroclus's Funeral
Iliad. ^.
: Antipater terms it (...); (...)
(...) Antholog Epigr. lib. IV. tit. (...).
.
Under this fordid Tomb does Priam rest,
Not that his Worth did not deserve the best,
But 'cause his Enemies it raised. --
It Is sometimes expressed by the more general Names of (...), etc. Thus
Euripides, -- (...).
Over my dead Mother's Corpse a Tomb I raised.
The Author of the following Epigram has such another Expression Antholog. lib.
III tit. (...).
; (...)
(...),
(...). --
What Care and Love the Nymphs to Hesiod showed,
At their own Fountains in the Locrian Wood
They bathed his life-less Corpse, and o'er't a Tomb they reared.
Whence the Latin tumulus, which in it is proper Sense imports no more than a
Hillock, came to signify a Grave.

Whatever the Materials were, they were usually laid together with Care and
Art: Thus Homer witnesses of Patroclus's Tomb Iliad. ^.
, (...)
(...).
They enclosed the Ground wherein the Grave was made,
And cast in Earth upon it. --
Where by (...) some understand the lorica, or enclosed Ground round the Grave,
sometimes termed by the metaphorical Names of (...), etc. and called by
Pausanias (...) and (...), by others (...), etc. For the ancient (...) were
composed of two Parts, one was the Grave, or Tomb, which was likewise termed
(...) in a strict Sense of the Word, and is known by several other Names,
mostly taken from it is Form, as (...), etc. The second Part was the Ground
surrounding the Grave, and fenced about with Pales, or Walls, but usually open
at the Top, and therefore sometimes called (...). Tombs of Stone were polished
and adorned with greater Art; whence there is so frequent mention of (...);
(...) Euripid Alces^. v 8^6.
. --
And see the polished Tomb. --
And again Idem He^e^. v 9^2.
; -- (...).
-- Upon the polished Tomb.


The Ornaments, wherewith Sepulcres were beautified, were numerous. Pillars of
Stone were very ancient, as appears from the Story of Idas's striking Pollux
with a Pillar broken from his Grandfather Amyclas's Monument ^^^^hron Cassan^^.
v. 557.
; -- (...)
(...),
(...).
Next with a Pillar Idas him shall strike,
A Pillar plucked from the hallowed Sepulcre
Of Amycias. --
Pindar calls it (...) Neruon. Od X.
, and Theocritus takes notice of the same Accident Disec^rn.
.

These Pillars were termed (...), and frequently contained Inscriptions
declaring the Family, Virtues, and whatever was remarkable in the Deceased,
which were commonly described in Verses. The Sicyonians had no such
Inscriptions Pausani^^ Cart^^^tacit.
; Lycurgus also would by no means allow of Talkotive Grave-stones, nor suffer
so much as the Names to be inscribed, but only of such Men who died in the
Wars, or Women in Childbed Pluta^chus Lycurgo
. Nor was it unusual at other Places to omit the Names of the Deceased, writing
instead of them some moral Aphorism, or short Exhortation to the Living, such
as this, (...)
The Virtuous and the Dead ought to be respected.


Beside this, especially where there was no Inscription, they commonly added
the dead Man's Essigies, or some other Resemblance pertinent to the Occasion,
and signifying his Temper, Studies, Employment, or Condition. Virgins had
commonly the Image of a Maid with a Vessel of Water upon their Tombs Pollux
lib. VIII. cap. VII.
; the former to represent the Deceased, the later to denote a Custom the young
Men had of carrying Water to the Sepulcres of unmarry'd Maids. A careful
Housekeeper was represented by such Figures, as are mentioned in the following
Epigram of Antipater upon Lysidice, (...),
(...);
"(...)
"(...)
"(...),
"(...).
I Have often sought, tell me, Lysidice,
What is the meaning of this Imag'ry,
What mean these curious Figures round thy Tomb,
What are they all designed for, and by whom?
"I Will tell you, Sir, and first that Bird of Night
"Shows how I used to spin by Candlelight;
"That well-carv'd Bridle on the Side is meant
"My well-rul'd Family to represent;
"My peaceful Temper next the Muzzle shows,
"That I no Scold, or busy Tatler was.
Mr. Hutchin. Diogenes the Cynick had a Dog engraven upon his Monument to
denote the Temper of his Sect, or his own. Isocrates's Tomb was adorned with
the Image of a Siren, Archimedes's with a Sphere, and Cylinder; whereby the
charming Eloquence of the former, the Mathematical Studies of the later were
signified. Nor was it unusual to fix upon Graves the Instruments which the
Deceased had used: The Graves of Soldiers were distinguished by their Weapons,
of Mariners by their Oars; and, in short, the Tools of every Art and Profession
accompanied their Masters, and remained as Monuments to preserve their Memory.
Hence Elpenor is introduced by Homer Odyss ^. v. 75.
begging of Ulysses to fix the Oar he used to row with, upon his Tomb, as ha^
been already observed Lib. III. c. XI p. 114.
: Aeneas in Virgil performs the like Office to his Trumpeter Misenus Aeneid. VI.
.

These, with many other Ceremonies, were designed to perpetuate the Memory of
the Deceased; whence their Graves were termed (...), etc. Agamemnon reckons it
a great Happiness to Achilles, that he was honored with a Monument, that would
continue his Name to Posterity Odyss. ^. v. 35.
; (...),
(...), etc. --
You are thrice happy, God-like Peleus's Son,
Who did at Troy resign your Breath. --
And afterward, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
To thy great Name did warlike Grecians rear
A large and never-fading Sepulcre,
And this they placed upon a rising Mount
Impending over the spacious Hellespont,
That so both Ages present and to come
From distant Shores might see thy sacred Tomb.
Mr. Hutchin.

But later Ages grew so extravagant in these Structures, that their Lawgivers
were forced to keep them within Bounds, by inflicting severe Penalties upon
such as exceeded their Prescriptions: Solon in particular is reported to have
ordered that no Statues of Mercury (as had been customary, because Mercury was
an Internal God) or arched Roofs should be made in the Athenian Monuments, and
that they should never be greater than ten Men were able to erect in three
Days; and Demetrius the Phalerean enacted a Law, that not above one Pillar, and
that not exceeding three Cubits in Height, should be placed upon any Monument.

It may not be improper to mention their Custom of praying for their Friends,
and Men of Piety and Virtue, that the Earth might lie light upon them; for
their Enemies, and all wicked Men, that it might press heavy upon them; for
they thought the Ghosts, that still haunted their Shrowds, and were in love
with their former Habitations, had a very acute Sense of all the Accidents that
befell their Bodies. Hence the Chorus prays for Alcestis Euripid. Alcest. v.
462.
, -- (...)
(...).
I wish the Earth may fall upon you light.
Menelaus is introduced by the same Poet Helen v. 857.
arming himself against Death by this Consideration, that the Gods took care
that such who died with Honor should have no Sense of any Pressure from the
Earth, whereas Cowards should be crushed under it; -- (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
For if the Gods (and sure they all Things know)
Have due regard for Mortals here below,
They will not, cannot suffer those that die
By the too powerful Force of the Enemy,
If they with Courage have maintained their Post,
And for the public Good their Lives have lost,
To be o'erburthen'd with the heavy Weight
Of Earth; but such as stand aghast at Fate,
Base dastard Souls that shrink at every Blow,
Nor dare to look on a prevailing Foe,
These shall (nor is the Punishment unjust)
Be crushed and tortured by avenging Dust.
Mr. Hutchin. Theseus prays this Punishment may be inflicted upon wicked
Phaedra Senec. Hippolyt. fine.
; -- Istam terra defossam premat
Gravisque tellus impio capiti incubet.
And may the Earth that is upon her laid,
Lie heavy on her Corpse, and crush her cursed Head.
Ammianus has ingeniously inverted this Order in this Epigram Antholog. lib.
II. tit. (...).
; (...),
(...).
Which Martial translates thus Lib. IX. Epitaph. Philaen.
; Sit tibi terra levis, mollique tegaris arena,
Ne tua non possint cruere ossa canes.
Let there be one, who lighter Dust, or Sand
Shall sprinkle over your Corpse with sparing Hand,
So to the Dogs you will be an easier Prey.


Pass we now to the Monuments erected in honor of the Dead, but not containing
any of their Remains, and thence called (...).

Of these there were two sorts: One was erected to such Persons, as had been
honored with Funeral Rites in another Place; of which we find frequent mention
in Pausanias Articis, Messentcis, Eliac. (...). Baeoticit.
, who speaks of such honorary Tombs dedicated to Euripides, Aristomenes,
Achilles, Dameon, Tiresias, etc.

The second sort was erected for those that had never obtained a ^ust Funeral*
for the Ancients were possessed with an Opinion, that the Ghosts of Men
unbury'd could have no Admittance into the blessed Regions, but were forced to
wander in Misery an hundred Years: Now when any Man had perished in the Sea, or
any other Place where his Carcass could not be found, the only Method of giving
him Repose was to erect a Sepulcre, and by repeating three Times with a loud
Voice the Name of the Deceased ^call his Ghost to the Habitation prepared for
it, which Action was termed (...).

This Practice seems to be very ancient: Pelias is introduced in Pindar
Pythionic. Od. IV.
telling Jason he must recall the Soul of Phryx^^, who died in Colchis, into
his native Country; Aeneas in Virgil performs the same Office to Deiphobus
Aeneid. VI v. 505.
, Tunc egomet tumulum Rhoeteo in litore inanem
Constitui, and magna manes ter voce vocavi.
Thy Tomb I reared on the Rhoetean Coast,
And thrice aloud called back thy wandering Ghost.
Ausonius has elegantly described, and assigned the reason of this Custom
Praesat. Parentalium.
; Hoc satis and tumulis, satis and telluris egenis;
Voce ciere animas funeris instar habet:
Gaudent compositi cineres sua nomina dici;
Frontibu^ hoc scriptis and monumenta jubent:
Ille etiam moesti cui defuit urna sepulcri,
Nomine ter dicto pene sepulius crit.
Small is the Priv'lege that the unbury'd crave,
No Grave, or decent Burial they have,
We only 'stead of pompous Funeral
Aloud upon their wandering Manes call;
This they command, with this they most are pleased
And empty Mon'ments with Inscriptions raised:
For he, whose Manes have been so recalled,
Though his dead Corpse of fit Interment failed,
Is nigh as happy, and as fully blessed
As he, whose Bones beneath a Tombstone rest.
Mr. Hutchin.

Many Instances of this nature may be met with in all the Poets. The Sign,
whereby Honorary Sepulcres were distinguished from others, was commonly (...),
or a Wreck of a Ship Th^^c^it. Idyll (...). v 207.
, to signify the Decease of that Person in some foreign Country.

It may be expected, that I should add something concerning the Sacredness of
Sepulcres. These, with all other Things belonging to the Dead, were had in so
great Esteem, that to deface, or any way violate them, was a Crime no less than
Sacrilege, and thought to entail certain Ruin upon all Person^ guilty of it.
Examples of this nature are too common to be enu^^rated in this Place;
wherefore I shall only set down that of Idas, who upon breaking one of the
Pillars in Aphareus's Sepulcre was immediately thunderstruck by Jupiter
Th^^c^it. Idyll (...). v 207.
; (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
For, to revenge fallen ^ynceus's hasty Doom,
He tore a Pillar from the sacred Tomb,
To dart at Castor, dreadfully he stood,
The fierce Revenger of his Brother's Blood;
Jove interposed, and by his strickt Command
Swift Lightning struck the Marble from his Hand;
He strove to reach it, but his Soul was fired,
He fell, and in no common Destiny expired.
Mr. Creech

It has been a Question, whether the Cenotaphia had the same religious Regard,
that was paid to Sepulcres where the Remains of the Deceased were reposited:
For the Resolution hereof it may be observed, that such of them, as were only
erected for the Honor of the Dead, were not held so sacred as to call for any
Judgment upon such as profaned them; but the rest, wherein Ghosts were thought
to reside, seem to have been in the same Condition with Sepulcres, the Want
whereof they were designed to supply.

CHAPTER VIII. Of their Funeral Orations, Games, Lustrations, Entertainments,
Consecrations, and other Honors of the Dead, etc.
BEFORE the Company departed from the Sepulcre, they were sometimes entertained
with a Panegyric upon the dead Person. Such of the Athenians as died in War,
had an Oration solemnly pronounced by a Person appointed by the public
Magistrate: Nor was this thought a Recompense equal to their Deserts, except it
was repeated constantly upon an anniversary Day Cicero de Orat.
. These Customs were not very ancient, being first introduced by Solon, or (as
some say) by Pericles; but were generally received not in Greece only, but at
Rome; and it was thought no small Accession to the Happiness of the Deceased to
be eloquently commended; for we find Pliny completing his Account of Virginius
Rufus's Felicity in this, that his Funeral Oration was pronounced by one of the
most eloquent Tongues of that Age Lib. II. Ep. I.
.

It was farther customary for Persons of Quality to institute Games with all
sorts of Exercises, to render the Death of their Friends more remarkable. This
Practice was generally received, and is frequently mentioned by ancient
Writers; Miltiades's Funeral in Herodotus, Brasulas's in Thucydides, Timoleon's
in Plutarch, with many others, afford Examples hereof: Nor was it a Custom of
later Ages, but very common in the primitive Times; Pa^rodus's Funeral Games
take up the greatest Part of one of Homer's Iliads Iliad. ^.
, and Agamemnon's Ghost is introduced by the same Poet telling the Ghost of
Achilles that he had been a Spectator at great Numbers of such Solemnities
Odyss. ^. v 85.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...). --
Your Mother full of Piety and Love
Craves first a Blessing from the Powers above,
Then she does rich Rewards and Prizes state,
While sprightly Youths the Games do celebrate;
I Have been at many Games, great Piles surveyed,
Which eternize heroic Chiefs when dead,
But none can equal Wonders seem to be,
As those the pious Thetis made for thee.
Mr. Abe^ In the Age before, we find Oedipus's Funeral solemnized with Sports,
and Hercules is said to have celebrated Games at the Death of Pelops Dionysius
Halicarnass. lib. V.
. The first that had this Honor was Azan the Son of Arcas the Father of the
Arcadians, whose Funeral, as Pausani^s reports Arcadi^is.
, was celebrated with Horse-races. The Prizes were of different sorts and
Value, according to the Quality and Magnificence of the Person that instituted
them. The Garlands given to Victors were usually of Parsley, which was thought
to have some particular Relation to the Dead, as being feigned to spring out of
Archemorus's Blood, whence it became the Crown of Conquerors in the Nemean
Games, which were first instituted at his Funeral Vide Archaeolog. nostr lib
II. cap. penult. and ult.
.

'Twas a general Opinion that dead Bodies polluted all Things about them; this
occasioned Purifying after Funerals, which Virgil has thus described Aeneid.
lib. VI. v. 229.
; Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,
Spargens rore levi, and ramo felicis olivae,
Lustravitque viros. --
Then, carry'ng Water thrice about his Mates,
And sprinkling with an Olive-twig, their Fates
Good Chorinaeus wisely expiates.
Several other ways of Purification may be met with, but these, containing
nothing peculiar to Funerals, and being described in one of the precedent
Books, have no claim to any Mention in this Place. 'Till this Purification was
accomplished, the polluted Person could not enter into the Temples, or
communicate at the Worship of the Gods; whence Iphigenia speaks the following
Words concerning Diana (...). Iphigen. Tauric. ^80.
; (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
The superstitious Tricks and Niceties
Of strict Diana's Worship I dislike,
Since of departed Friends the farewell Touch,
All Murder done in Passion, or elsewise,
And Acts of Venery she does reject,
As great Pollutions of her sacred Rites,
Actors herein proscribing from her Gifts.
Mr. Abell. Nor was it Diana alone, of whom the Poet speaks, that had such an
Aversion to these Pollutions; but the rest of the Gods and Goddesses were of
the same Temper. Lucian, in hi^ Treatise concerning the Syrian Goddess, tells
us, that, when any Person had seen a Corpse, he was not admitted into her
Temple 'till the Day following, and not then except he had first purified
himself; and the general U^e of this Custom Suid^^, v. (...). A^istophan.
S^holi^st. Nubt^us.
shows, that the rest of the Celestial Beings were equally afraid of
Defilement. This may farther appear from it is being unlawful for those Persons
to enter into the Temples, who were called (...), or (...). Hes^chius in
utraque voce.
, i. e. such as were thought Dead, but after the Performance of their Funeral
Rites recovered; or such who were reported to be Dead in some foreign Country,
and unexpectedly returned: These Men were prohibited from worshipping any of the
Gods; Hesychius mentions only the Eumenides, but others speak of the Gods in
general: Whence Aristinus was forced to send Messengers to consult the Delphian
Oracle what Method he should use to be freed from Pollution, where he received
this Answer; (...),
(...).
All Forms and Customs which Childbirth attend,
The same must you to the angry Gods commend.
Whereupon he was washed, swadled, and treated in all other respects as
newborn Infants, and then received into Communion. But, as my Author
Plutarchus Q^^est. R^man. haud long ab initio.
proceeds, others make this Custom much ancienter than Aristinus, carrying it
up as high as the primitive Ages.

The House too was purified; an Instance whereof we have in Homer Odyss. (...)
481.
, where Ulysses, having slain Penelope's Courtiers, and carried them out of his
House, thus bespeaks his old Nurse; (...),
(...). --
Fetch Brimstone hither, Nurse, and Fire, that I
My tainted Dwelling House may purify.
Afterward the Poet adds V. 492.
; -- (...),
(...)
(...).
Straight trusty Eurycle performed his Will,
Then he with sulfurous Smoke the House does fill,
And chased the Infection from polluted Rooms.


But the Lacedaemonians were taught by their Lawgiver to contemn these
superstitious Follies, and think it unreasonable to phansy, that such as lived
a virtuous Life, and conformably to their Discipline, should contract any
Pollution by Death: On the contrary, they were more inclined to esteem their
Remains worthy of all Respect and Honor, and therefore no Places so fit to
reposit them in, as those adjoining to the T^mples of their Gods Plutarchus
Lycurgo.
.

After the Funeral was over, the Company met together at the House of the
deceased Person's nearest Relations, to divert them from Sorrow. Here there was
an Entertainment provided Dem^sthenes Orat. de Corona, Lu^ia^^s Dialog. de
luctu.
, which was termed (...) etc. Thus (to omit other Instances) the Trojans,
having celebrated Hector's Funeral, were splendidly entertained at King Priam's
Palace I^iad. (...). fine.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
A Tomb being raised, they orderly resort
In pensive Crowds unto King Priam's Court,
Where a rich Banquet cheerful Mirth invites,
And sparkling Wine whets their palled Appetites.
Mr. Abell. The same Custom may be observed in the G^ecian Camp with this
Difference, that Achilles entertained them before Patroclus's Funeral I^iad.
(...). v. 28.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
While great Achilles does prepare the Meat
For the Funeral Banquet, thronging Grecians sit
About the Hero's Ship; whole Herds he kills
Of huge, fat Oxen roaring while he spills
Their Lives, that issue from their reeking Wounds;
Whole Flocks of Sheep he kills; the Air resounds,
While Goats and fatted Swine make hideous roar,
When purple Streams from their gash'd Throats do pour,
These having killed he roasts: the while the Blood.
Around the Corpse in a great Current flowed.
Mr. Abell. By which last Words it appears, the dead Person had some Interest
in these Entertainments; and as the Blood of the Beasts was designed for
Patroclus's Ghost, so, even in later Ages, we are told the broken Mors^ls that
fell from the Tables were looked on as s^cred to the departed Souls, and not
lawful to be eaten Athenai (...) lib. X.
. To this Phansy Pythagoras's Aphorism, though perhaps containing a more mystical
Sense, was an undoubted Allusion ^actius ^^t^ag^ra
, (...), i. e. Take not up Things fallen down; or, as others express it, (...),
i. e. Do not ^o much as taste Things fallen under the Table: These Fragments
were ^^rry'd to the Tomb, and there left for the Ghost to feast upon; whence to
denote extreme Poverty, it was usual to say that a Person stole his Meat from
the Grav^s: To this T^bullus's Curse alludes, ^psa same stimularte surens,
es^asque sepulcro
Quaerat, and a savis ossa relicta lupis.
May she want Bread so much as even to crave
The Scraps and musty Morsels of a Grave;
May she be glad to pick a Carcass Bone,
Which Wolves and Vultures once have sed upon.
Mr. Abell. The Entertainments of later Ages consisted not, like Homer's, (...)
Flesh only, but all sorts of Pulse Plutarchus Problemat.
, Beans, Pease, with Lettices, Parsley, Eggs, and many other Things. The chief
Subject of Discourse at these Meetings were the Praises of the Dead, especially
if they had been eminent for any Virtue, or commendable Quality: Otherwise, so
great was the Simplicity of primitive Ages that they looked upon it most
expedient to say nothing; when by speaking they must unavoidably offend the
dead Man, or transgress the Rules of Truth, both which were thought equally
criminal. But afterward they grew more lavish of their Commendations,
distributing to all Persons without Distinction; whence came the Proverb (...),
which was only applied to Villains of the first Rate, and such as had not the
least Shadow of a good Quality to recommend them.

There was a Custom at Argos obliging those that had lo^^ any of their Kindred,
or Acquaintance, to sacrifice to (...) presently after Mourning, and thirty
Days after to Mercury o^ of an opinion that, as the Earth received their
Bodies, so their Soul^ fell into Mercury's Hands: The Barley of the Sacrifice
they gave to Apollo's Minister; the Flesh they took themselves, and having
extinguished the sacrificial Fire, which they accounted polluted, kindled
another, whereon they boiled the Flesh, calling it (...) (...) Q^^st. C^^^ p.
2^6, 297. ed^^ Paris.
, from the Fumes ascending from the burned Sacrifice, and termed i^ Greek (...).

The Honors paid to the Sepulcres and Memories of the Deceased were of diverse
sorts: It was frequent to place Lamps in the subterraneous Vaults of the Dead;
whither such, as would express an extraordinary Affection for their Relations,
retired, and cloistered themselves up; an Example whereof we have in
Petronius's Ephesian Matron.

They had a Custom of bedecking Tombs with Herbs and Flowers, amongst which
Parsley was chiefly in use, as appears from Plutarch's Story of Timol^on, who,
marching up an Ascent from the Top of which he might take a View of the Army,
and Strength of the Carthaginians, was met by a Company of Mules laden with
Parsley; which (says my Author) his Soldiers conceived to be a very ill-boding
and fatal Occurrence, that being the very Herb, wherewith we adorn the
Sepulcres of the Dead; this Custom gave Birth to that despairing Proverb, when
we pronounce (...) one dangerously sick (...), that he has need of nothing but
Parsley; which is in effect to say, He Is a dead Man and ready for his Grave. All
sorts of purple and white Flowers were acceptable to the Dead, as amaranthus,
which was first used by the Thessalians to adorn Achilles's Grave Phil str^^s
Heroicis.
; (...) (...) lib VI (...) Athen^u^ lib. XIV.
, which some will have to be the Jasmin, with Lilies, and several others: Hence
Virgil Ae^eid V. v. ^^.
, Purpurcosque jacit flores, ac talia fatur.
He, having purple Flowers straw'd, thus spoke.
In the subsequent Book he alludes to the same Custom A^^^l. VI. v. 88^.
; Heu, miserande puer, siqua fata aspera rumpas,
Tu Marcelius cris, manibus date lilia plenis,
Purpurcos spargam flores, animamque ne^^tis
His saltem accumulem donis. --
Ah! could thou break through Fate's severe Decree,
A new Marcellus shall arise in thee:
Full Canisters of fragrant Lilies bring
And all the curious Drap'ry of the Spring;
Let me with purple Flowers his Body strew,
This Gift, which Parents to their Children owe,
This un^vailing Gift at least I may bestow.
The Rose too was very grateful; whence Anacreon has these Verses in his Ode
upon that Flower; (...),
(...).
When Age and Vigor do decay,
The Rose their Strength repairs,
It drives ^ll Maladies away,
And can prolong our Years;
The Dead too in their Graves do lie
With peaceful Slumbers blessed,
This is the Amulet, hereby
No Ills their Tombs molest.
Mr. Abell. Nor was the Use of Myr^le less common; whence Furipides introduces
Electra complaining that Agamemnon's Tomb had never been adorned with Boughs of
that Plant, (...)
(...)
(...) --
Never with Libations and Myrtle-boughs
Were my dear Father's Manes gratified.
In short, Graves were bedecked with Garlands of all sorts of Flowers, as
appears from Agamemnon's Daughter in Sophocles (...) v 286.
; (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
No sooner came I to my Father's Tomb,
But Milk fresh poured in copious Streams did flow,
And Flowers of every sort around were straw'd.
These were commonly called (...) (...), Auctor.
, either from their Design to express Love and Respect to the deceased Person;
or from (...), because they were usually composed of a Collection of several
sorts of Flowers; or from (...), as being laid upon the Earth; though neither of
these last Reasons are constant, for the Garlands were sometimes composed of
only one sort of Flowers, and frequently hung upon the Pillars, and not laid
upon the Gravestone. Several other Things were frequently placed upon Graves;
as Ribbands, whence it is said that Epaminondas's Soldiers being disanimated at
seeing the Ribband that hung upon his Spear carried by the Wind to a certain
Lacedemonian Sepulcre, he bid them take courage, for that it portended
Destruction to the Lacedaemonians, it being customary to deck the Sepulcres of
their Dead with Ribbands ^ro^tinus, lib I. cap ^II.
. Another Thing dedicated to the Dead, was their Hair; Electra in Sophocles
says that Agamemnon had commanded her and Chrysothemis to pay him this Honor,
(...),
(...)
(...). --
With Drink-off^rings, and Locks of Hair we must,
According to his Will, his Tomb adorn.
Canace in Ovid (...) Ca^as. ad Maca^.
bewails her Calamity in that she was not permitted to adorn her Lover's Tomb
with her Locks, as has been already observed.

It was likewise customary to persume the Grave-stones with sweet Ointments; to
which Practice Anacreon has this Allusion, (...);
(...);
(...),
(...)
(...). --
Why do we precious Ointments shower,
Nobler Wines why do we pour,
Beauteou^ Flowers why do we spread
Upon the Mon'ments of the Dead?
Nothing they but Dust can show,
Or Bones that hasten to be so,
Crown me with Roses while I live.
Mr. Cowley. Whence Leonidas seems to have borrowed the Sense of this Epigram,
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
When cold and lifeless in my Grave I Am laid,
No fragrant Oil then pour, no Chaplets spread:
All explatory Fires, all Rites are vain,
Wine only can my fruitless Ashes stain:
Come, let us carouse, let us revel while we live,
'Twill elevate our Souls, 'twill Ease to Troubles give.
Mr. Abell.

To these Practices we find another added, viz. running naked about Sepulcres;
for Plutarch Alexandro.
tells us, that Alexander, arriving at Troy, honored the Memories of the
Heroes buried there with solemn Libations, anointed Achilles's Gravestone, and
(according to ancient Custom) together with his Friends ran naked about his
Sepulcre, and crowned it with Garlands.

Beside the forementioned Ceremonies, there remain several others, especially
their Sacrifices, and Libations to the Dead: The Victims were black and barren
Heifers, or black Sheep, as being of the same sort with those offered to the
Infernal Gods to denote the Contrariety of those Regions to Light and
Fruitfulness; Whence Homer introduces Ulysses making a vow to the Ghosts after
this manner Odyss ^ v 29.
; (...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
A barren Cow to all the Powers below
I did with solemn Protestation vow,
If ever I should again my Lordship see
After the perilous Wand'rings on the Sea,
Their Altars then I likewise swore to load
With Fruits and other Offerings as were good
But the best of our black Rams I could choose
Tiresias I promised with chaste Vows.
Mr. Abell. Beside their offering these Sacrifices in Ditches, and some other
Customs spoken of in one of the former Books Lib. II. cap IV
, it may be observed farther, that the first Thing they offered was the Hair
upon the Victim's Forehead, which for that reason was termed (...), and to
offer it (...): But however these Terms are sometimes used for the Sacrifices
of the Ghosts, yet the Custom of offering these First Fruits was common to the
Sacrifices of the Celestial and other Deities, as appears from several
Instances: Homer mentions it at one of Minerva's Sacrifices Odyss. (...).
; -- (...)
(...).
Having invoked Minerva with his Prayers,
He on the Altar threw the Forehead Hairs.
In another Place he speaks of it as acceptable to all the Gods (...).
; (...)
(...).
Of a Sow's Forehead having burned the Hairs,
To all the Gods He offers fervent Prayers.


But their ordinary Offerings were nothing but Libations of Blood, Honey, Wine,
Milk, Water, etc. Upon which they commonly sprinkled Barly-flower. Some of
these are mentioned in Homer Odyss. (...). v. 26.
, -- (...)
(...),
(...).
We did with Reverence the Shades adore,
We first did Honey mixed with Water pour,
Then Wine, then simple Water, and next Barly-Flow'r.
They were designed to render the Ghosts kind and propitious, and therefore
termed (...), or (...). Iphigenia in Euripides thus describes them Iphigen
Tauric. v 159
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...). --
To whom I in this sacred Chalice bear
These solemn Liquids as an Offering,
This Blood in crimson Streams shall stain the Ground,
With Wine, and the Product of the sed'lous Be
The common Peace-atonement for the Dead.
Mr. Abell. These were sometimes offered upon Altars, which were commonly
placed near the ancient Sepulcres, with Tables for the sacrificial Feasts;
sometimes they were poured forth upon the Ground, or Gravestone, and, together
with a certain Form of Words, offered to the Deceased. Thus Helena desires
Hermione to address Clytaemnestra in her Name (...) v. 112.
; (...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
"(...).
Daughter Hermione, come forth and take
These Offerings to thy dear Aunt's Sepulcre,
These Looks of my Hair, and this Honey mixed
With Milk, and this Wine to pour over her Grave,
Which having done, stand on it is Top, and say,
"Thy Sister Helen to declare her Love
"Offers these Rites to thy dear Memory.
Mr. Abell. The Water thus employed was termed (...), and at Athens(...)
Eustathius Odyss. (...).
. When Persons died that had been married, there was a Custom for certain Women
to carry Water to their Graves, who from pouring it forth were termed (...)
Etymolo^ici Auctor.
. When a young Man, or Maid died, the Water was carried by a Boy Idem.
, or (which to some may appear more probable) by a Boy to the Sepulcres of
young Men, by a Maid to the Sepulcres of Maids, whence came the Custom of
erecting Images representing Maids with Vessels of Water upon the Sepulcres of
such as died in their Virginity, as was observed in the foregoing Chapter,
though I have there interpreted this Custom so as to agree with the former
Opinion. As for those that died in their Infancy, they were honored with no
Libations, nor had any right to the rest of the Funeral Solemnities Plutarchus
liber consola^. ad uxorem.
.

These Honors were paid the Dead the ninth and thirtieth Days after Burial
P^ll^x lib. III. cap. X.
, and repeated when any of their Friends arrived, that had been absent at the
Solemnity, and upon all other Occasions that required their surviving Relations
to have them in memory. But some Part of the Month Anthesterion seems to have
been especially set apart for these Ceremonies in several of the Grecian
Cities. Athen^us reports in particular of the Apolloni^^ae (...). lib. VIII.
, that they paid the Dead the customary Honors in this Month: Hesychius Voce
(...).
likewise reports, that the same Custom was observed at Athens, and that they
termed the Days appointed for these Solemnities (...), which were by others
called (...) Suidas.
, as being polluted by their Dedication to the Dead, whose Ghosts were thought
to ascend from their subterraneous Habitations, to enjoy the kind Entertainment
of their Friends Luctanus (...).
; the want hereof was thought a great Calamity, and therefore is reckoned by
Cassandra amongst the manifold Misfortunes of the Trojans, that they should
have no surviving Friends to offer Sacrifices at their Tombs, -- (...)
(...).
-- Nor shall one Friend remain
To stain their desert Sepulcres with Blood.


Upon these public Days they called over the Names of all their dead Relations
one by one, excepting such as died under Age, or forfeited their Title to these
Honors by dissipating their paternal Inheritances, or other Crimes. There was
likewise another Time, when they called over the Names of the Dead, which,
being omitted in the foregoing Chapters, I shall speak of in this Place: It
was when they lost their Friends in foreign Countries, whence before they
departed they called the Names of all that were missing out of their Company
three times: Thus Ulysses in Homer declares he did, when he lost some of his
Men in a Battle with the Coones Odyss (...) v 64.
; (...),
(...),
(...).
My high-built Ships I launched not from the Shore,
A better Fate and Voyage to explore,
'Till I had singly thrice called over my Friends,
Who by Ciconians came to untimely Ends.
Mr. Abell. Hercules in Theocritus calls Hylas three times Idyll (...). v 58
; (...).
His much loved Hylas perished in the Flood
He called on thrice as loud as ever he could.
The Reasons of this Custom were, according to John Tzetzes Chiliad V. H^st XIV
, partly, that such as were left behind might upon hearing the Noise repair to
their Ships; and partly to testify their Unwillingness to depart without their
Companions; (...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
It was a Custom amongst all ancient Greeks,
That He, who, trav'ling into foreign Parts,
Did die, should by surviving Friends be called
Thrice, as a Token of their mutual Love,
Hence all that were alive then joined their Voice,
As Homer in his Odyssey attests.
Mr. Abell.

To return, they had anniversary Days, on which they paid their Devotions to
the Dead: These were sometimes termed (...), as being celebrated upon the
Festival of Nemesis, who was thought to have especial Care for the Honors of
the Dead Mosch^pula^, Sa^las
; sometimes (...) Hesychius, (...).
, as also (...) Su^^^, etc.
, the reason of which Name seems to be, that it signifies the anniversary Day
of a Man's Nativity, which after his Death was solemnized with the same
Ceremonies, that were used upon the Anniversary of his Death ^uda^, Hesychius,
Thav^^^u^, (...), etc.
, which was properly termed (...): Hence it is, that these two Words are
commonly thought to signify the same Solemnity.

The Honors of the Dead were distinguished according to the Quality and Worth
of the Person, they were conferred on. Such as by their Virtues, and public
Services had raised themselves above the common Level, had (...), the Honors
of Heroes; the Participation hereof was termed (...), or (...) or (...).
Others, that had distinguished themselves from the former, were raised a Degree
higher, and reckoned among the Gods, which Consecration was termed (...), and
was very different from the former; to worship the former Persons being only
termed (...), but the later (...). The later Honor was very rare in the
Heroic Times* but in subsequent Ages, when great Examples of Virtue were not
so frequent, and Men more addicted to Flattery, it became more cheap; insomuch
that those Persons, whom former Ages had only worshipped as Heroes, were
afterward accounted Gods; an Instance whereof we have (to omit several others)
in Lampsace, one of Plutarch's Her oines Lib. de Mul^erem claris fact^
. The Athenians are especially remarkable for immoderate and profuse
Distributions of these Honors, and it is generally observed that that Nation
exceeded all the rest of the Grecians in the Arts of Flattery and Superstition,
as appears from several Instances in the precedent Books.

I shall observe in the last Place, that these and the rest of the Honors of
the Dead were thought most acceptable, when offered by their nearest Friends;
when by their Enemies, were rejected with Indignation: Whence Sophocles
introduces Electra advising her Sister Chrysothemis, that she should by no
means offer Clytaemnestra's Gifts to Agamemnon Elect^a v 432.
, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
Dear Sister, don't attempt his Tomb to approach
With a Design of offering those Gifts;
Since the Infernal Manes do detest,
As heinous, Rites paid by an Enemy.
Mr. Abell. For Men were thought to retain the same Affections after Death,
which they had entertained when alive. This appears farther from the Story of
Ete^^les and Polynices, Oedipus's Sons; who having killed each other in single
Combat, and being burned in the same Pile, the Flames of their Bodies would not
unite, but by parting from each other demonstrated the irreconcilable and
immortal Hatred of the Brethren, as we are informed by Bianor's following
Epigram; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Within thy Walls, O Thebes, two Brothers lie,
Who, though deceased, cease not their Enmity;
For from their Bodies on the Pile do fly,
Enraged Corpuscles justling in the Sky,
With pointed Fury eagerly they meet,
Then in Aversion scornfully retreat,
Unhappy Youths, by the Fates denied to have
The peaceful Slumbers of a quiet Grave.
Mr. Abell. Lycophron has furnished us with the parallel Example of Mopsus and
Amphilochus, who, having slain each other, were buried in the opposite Sides of
an Hill, left their Ghosts should be disturbed by having their Sepulcres within
sight of one another Cassandr. v. 443.
; (...)
(...),
(...);
(...).
An high and craggy Mount Megarsus named
Shall stand amidst the sacred Monuments,
Left the grieved Manes should offended be
To see each other's Tomb by Slaughter stained.
Mr. Abell.

CHAPTER IX. Of their Love of Boys.
WHO it was that first introduced the Custom of loving Boys into Greece, is
uncertain: However (to omit the infamous Amors of Jupiter, Orpheus, Lajus of
Thebes, and others) we find it generally practiced by the ancient Grecians, and
that not only in private, but by the public Allowance and Encouragement of
their Laws: For they thought there could be no means more effectual to excite
their Youth to noble Undertakings, nor any greater Security to their
Commonwealths, than this generous Passion. This the Invaders of their
Liberties so often experienced, that it became a received Maxim in the
Politics of Tyrants, to use all their Endeavors to ex^irpate it out of their
Dominions; some Instances whereof we have in Athenaeus Lib. XIII
. On the contrary, free Commonwealths, and all those States, that consulted
the Advancement of their own Honor, seem to have been unanimous in
establishing Laws to encourage and reward it. Let us take a view of some few of
them.

First we shall find it to have been so generally practiced, so highly esteemed
in Crete, that such of their well-born and beautiful Youths as never had any
Lovers, incurred the public Censure, as Persons some way or other faulty in
their Morals; as if nothing else could hinder, but that some one's Affections
would be placed upon them. But those that were more happy in being admired,
were honored with the first Seats at public Exercises, and wore, for a
distinguishing Badge of Honor, a sort of Garment richly adorned; this they
still retained after they had arrived to Man's estate, in memory they had once
been (...), eminent Strabo lib. X.
, for that was the Name the Cretans gave to Youths that had Lovers, the Lovers
themselves were called (...). One Thing was remarkable in this Place, that the
Lovers always took their Boys by force; for having placed their Affections upon
any one, they gave notice of it to his Relations, and withal certify'd them
what Day they designed to take him: If the Lover was unworthy of the Boy, they
refused to yield him up; but if his Quality and Virtues were answerable, they
made some slight Opposition to satisfy the Law, and pursued him to his
Lodgings, but then gave their consent: After this the Lover carried the Boy
whither he pleased, the Persons that were present at the Rape, bearing him
company; he entertained him some time, two Months at the farthest, with
Hunting, and such Diversions, then returned him home: At his Departure, 'twas
ordered by Law, that the Boy should receive a Suit of Armor, an Ox and a Cup,
to which the Lover usually added out of his own Bounty several other Presents
of value. The Boy, being returned home, sacrificed the Ox to Jupiter, made an
Entertainment for those that had accompanied him in his Flight, and gave an
account of the Usage he had from his Lover, for in case he was rudely treated,
the Law allowed him Satisfaction Idem.
. It Is farther affirmed by Maximus the Tyrian, that during all the Time of
their Converse together, nothing unseemly, nothing repugnant to the strictest
Laws of Virtue passed between them Dissert. X.
; and however some Authors are inclined to have hard Thoughts of this Custom,
yet the Testimonies of many others, with the high Characters given by the
Ancients of the old Cretan Constitutions, by which it was approved, are
sufficient to vindicate it from all false Imputations: The same is put beyond
Dispute by what Strabo tells us Loc. cit.
, that 'twas not so much the external Beauty of a Boy, as his virtuous
Disposition, his Modesty, and Courage, that recommended him.

From the Cretans pass we to the Lacedaemonians, several of whose Constitutions
were derived from Crete. Their Love of Boys was remarkable all over Greece, and
for the whole Conduct and excellent Consequences of it every where admired.
There was no such Thing as Presents passed between the Lovers, no foul Arts
were used to insinuate themselves into one another's Affections* their Love was
generous and worthy the Spartan Education; ^^ was first entertained from a
mutual Esteem of one another's Virtue, and the same Cause, that first inspired
the Flame, did alon^ serve to nourish and continue it. It was not tainted with
so much as a Suspicion of Immodesty; Agesilaus is said to have refused so much
as to kiss the Boy he loved Plutarchus Apophthegm.
, for fear of Censure: And if a Person attempted any Thing upon a Youth beside
what consisted with the strictest Rules of Modesty, the Laws (however
encouraging a virtuous Love) condemned him to Disgrace Xenoph^^ de Rep. Laced.
Plutarchus Institut. ^^te^^^.
, whereby he was deprived of almost all the Privileges of free Denizons. The
same Practice was allowed the Women toward their own Sex, and was so much in
Fashion among them, that the most stayed and virtuous Matrons would publicly
own their Passion for a modest and beautiful Virgin Plutarchus ^^curgo.
, which is a farther Confirmation of the Innocence of this Custom. Maximus the
Tyrian Dissert. X.
assures us the Spartans loved their Boys no otherwise than a Man may be
enamored with a beautiful Statue, which he proves from what Plutarch L^curgo.
likewise reports, that though several Men's Fancy* met in one Person, yet did
not that cause any Strangeness, ^^ Jealousy among them, but was rather the
Beginning of a very intimate Friendship, whilst they all jointly conspired to
render the beloved Boy the most accomplished in the World: For the End of this
Love was, that the young Men might be improved in all virtuous and commendable
Qualities, by conversing with Men of Probity and Experience; whence the Lover
and the Beloved shared the Honor and Disgrace of each oath r; the Lover
especially was blamed if the Boy offended, and suffered what Punishment was due
to his Fault Ae^^^ Var. Hist. lib. XIII.
; Plutarch has a Story of a Spartan fined by the Magistrates, because the Lad,
whom he loved, cried out esteminately, whilst he was fighting Lycurgo.
. The same Love continued, when the Boy was come to Man's estate; he still
preserved his former Intimacy with his Lover, imparted to him all his Design^,
and was directed by his Counsels, as appears from another of Plutarch's
Relations concerning Cleomenes, who, before his Advancement to the Kingdom, was
beloved by one Xenares, with whom he ever after maintained a most intimate
Friendship, 'till he went about his Project of new modelling the Commonwealth,
which Xenares not approving departed from him, but still remained faithful to
him, and concealed his Designs Plutarchus ^wor d^.
.

If we pass from Sparta to Athens we shall find that there Solon forbad Slaves
to love Boys, making that an honorable Action, and as it were inviting (these
are Plutarch's Solone.
Words) the worthy to practice, what he commanded the unworthy to forbear. That
Lawgiver himself is said to have loved Pisistratus Idem loc. cit
, and the most eminent Men in that Commonwealth submitted to the same Passion.
Socrates, who died a Martyr for disowning the Pagan Idolatry, is very
remarkable for such Amors, yet seems not whilst alive to have incurred the
least Suspicion of Dishonesty; for what else could be the Cause, that, when
Callias, Thrasymachus, Aristophanes, Anytus and Melitus, with the rest of his
Enemies, accused him for teaching Critias to tyrannize, for Sophistry, for
contempt of the Gods, and other Crimes, yet never so much as upbraided him with
impure Love, or for writing, or discoursing upon that Subject. And though some
Persons, especially in later Ages, and perhaps unacquainted with the Practice
of the old Grecians, have called in question the Philosopher's Virtue in this
Point, yet both he, and his Scholar Plato are sufficiently vindicated from that
Imputation by Maximus the Tyrian Dissert. VIII, IX. X, XI.
, to whom I refer the Reader. The Innocence of this Love may farther appear
from their severe Laws enacted against immodest Love, whereby the Youths, that
entertained such Lovers, were declared infamous, and rendered inca^^pable of
public Employments, and the Persons that prostituted them condemned to die;
several other Penalties were likewise ordered to deter all Men from so heinous
and detestable a Crime, as app^^rs from the Laws of Athens described in one of
the foregoing Books Lib. I. p. 161, 162.
.

Many other Examples of this nature might be produced, but I shall only
instance in one more: It shall be taken from the Thebans, whose Lawgivers,
Plutarch tells us Pe^opida.
, encouraged this excellent Passion to temper the Manners of their Youth. Nor
were they disappointed of their Expectation, a pregnant Evidence whereof (to
omit others) we have in the (...) or sacred Band; it was a Party of three
hundred chosen Men, composed of Lovers and their Beloved, and therefore called
sacred; it gained many important Victories, was the first that ever overcame
the Spartans (whose Courage 'till then seemed irresistible) upon equal Terms,
and was never beaten 'till the Battle at Chaeronea; after which King Philip
taking a view of the Slain, and coming to the Place, where these three hundred,
who had fought his whole Phalanx, lay dead together, he was struck with Wonder,
and understanding that 'twas the Band of Lovers, he said weeping, Let them
perish, who suspect that these Men either did, or suffered any Thing base.

Before I conclude this Chapter, it may be necessary to observe, that the Lover
was called by the Spartans (...), or, as others write it, (...); the Beloved
was termed by the Thessalians (...). Thus Theocritus Idyll. (...). v. 12.
; (...)
(...)
(...).
The Greek Scholiast derives both the Names (...), from the Lover's being
inspired with Affection by his Beloved, and other ancient Grammarians agree
with him herein.

CHAPTER X. Of their Customs in expressing their Love, their Love-potions,
Incantations, etc.
LOVERS had several ways of discovering their Passion, and expressing the
Respect they had for their Beloved. Every Tree in the Walks they frequented,
every Wall of their Houses, every Book they used, had inscribed upon it the
beloved Name with the Epither of (...), or (...). Whence Lucian Amator
, relating a Story of one desperately in Love with Venus Cnidia, after other
Expressions of his Passion, adds that there was never a Wall, or Tree, but what
proclaimed (...), VENUS FAIR. Callimachus's Lover has the same Phansy, only
that he wishes his Mistress's Name written on Leaves, if we may credit the
Scholiast upon Aristophanes Acba^u^
, (...)
(...).
May the kind Trees on Leaves such Letters bear
As shall proclaim my dear Cydippe FAIR.
'Twas in Allusion to this Practice, that one in Euripides declared he should
never entertain a good Opinion of the Female-sex, though the Pines in Mount Ida
were filled with their Names Eustath^^^ Iliad. ^ p 490. Edit. Basil.
. Aristophanes had an Eye to the same Custom, when, jesting upon an old
Athenian, that was mightily in love with deciding Causes, he says that upon
every Place he writ (...), which Word signifies the Cover of the judiciary Urn
Ves^i^.
, -- (...)
(...),
(...).


Lovers usually decked the Doors of their Beloved with ^^o^er^ and Garlands;
for thinking the Persons their A^^^ctions were placed on, to be the very Image
of the Deity of Love, their House could be no less than Cupid's Temple Athen^us
lib. XV.
, which was accustomed to r^ceive those Honors. From the same Original they
seem to have derived that other Custom of making Libations before their
Mistresses Doors, and sprinkling them with Wine; of which we have mention in
the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Plut^ Act. I. Sc. I.
, where he reports that many of the Thessalian Gentlemen were in love with the
beautiful Nais, and publicly owned their Passion by sprinkling the Doors of
her House with Wine.

When a Person's Garland was ^nty'd, it was taken for a Sign of being in love
At^en^us lib. cit.
; and for a Woman to compose a Garland was another Indication of her Passion
Aristophanes Thesm^^^
, -- (...)
(...).
The wreathing Garlands in a Woman is
The usual Symptom of a Lovesick Mind.


They had several Methods of discovering whether their Love would prove
successful, that of the (...) was very frequent at Entertainments, and may
perhaps be described in a following Book. Two other ways we have in The^critus
Idyll. III. v. 2^.
, (...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
All this I knew, when I designed to prove,
Whether I should be happy in my Love;
I pressed the Long-live, but in vain did press,
It gave no lucky Sound of good Success:
To Agrio too I made the same demand,
A cunning Woman she, I crossed her Hand;
She turned the Sieve and Sheers, and told me true,
That I should love, but not be loved by you.
Mr. Creech. Both these Customs I have already described in one of the
precedent Books Lib. II. cap. XVIII. p. 319.
, which the Reader may consult.

When their Love was without Success, they had several Arts to procure the
Affections of their Beloved. The Thessalian Women were famous for their Skill
in this as well as other Magical Practices. The means, whereby it was effected,
were of diverse sorts: It was sometimes done by Potions called (...), which are
frequently mentioned in Authors of both Languages. Iuvenal speaks thus Satir.
VI v ^^9
, Hic magicos assert cantus, hic Thessala vendit
Philtra, quibus valiant mentem vexare mariti.
This Pedlar offers Magic Charms, the next
Philtre^, by which the Husband's Mind's perplexed.
Their Operations were violent and dangerous, and commonly deprived such as
drunk them of their Reason. Plutarch and Cornelius Nepos report, that Lucullus
the Roman General first lost his Reason, and afterward his Life by one of
them; Lucretius the Po^t ended his Life the same way, and Caius Caligula (as
Suetonius reports) was driven into a Fit of Madness by a Philtre given him by
his Wife Caesonia; which Story is mentioned by the same Poet Loc. cit.
, -- Tamen hoc tolerabile, si non
Et furere incipias, ut aevunculus ille Neronis,
Cui totam tremuli frontem Caesonia pulli
Infudit. --
Some nimbler Juice would make him foam and rave,
Like that Caesonia to her Ca^^s gave,
Who, plucking from the Forehead of the Fool
His Mother's Love, infused it in the Bowl.
Mr. Dryden. Ovid likewise assures us, that this was the usual Effect of these
Potions, Nec data profuerint pallentia philtra puellis,
Philtra nocent animis, vimque furoris habent.
All poisonous Drugs, and Necromantick Arts
Never move the scornful Maids relentless Hearts,
They but distract the Senses, seize the Brain,
And Venus Rites and Mysteries prosane.
Mr. Abell.

The Ingredients they were made up of were of several sorts, diverse of which
applied by themselves were thought effectual. Some of the most remarkable were
these that follow:

Hippomanes, a Piece of Flesh upon the Forehead of Colts newsoal'd, of a black
or brown Color, in Bigness and Shape like a Fig, which the Mares bite off as
soon as they have foal'd, but, if they be prevented, forsake their Offspring:
Whence it was thought a prevalent Medicine to conciliate Love, especially when
reduced to Powder, and swallowed with some Drops of the Lover's Blood. It Is
frequently mentioned by the Writers of Natural History; Aristotle, Pli^y,
Solinus, Columella, with many others have thought it worth their Notice: The
Poets are full of it is Effects; whence Di^^ in Virgil (to omit other Instances)
has recourse to it, when pretending to recall Aeneas to her Affection Aeneid.
IV. v. 515.
, Quaeritur and nascentis equi de front revulsus
Et matri praereptus amor. --
She from the Forehead of a new-foal'd Colt
The excrescent Lump does seek. --
The same Word is frequently taken in another Sense, and is described by Pliny
to be virus distillans ab inguine equae coitu^ maris appetentis, and in furorem
agens. This was no less powerful than the former, as appears from Pausanias's
Story of a Horse's Statue dedicated by one Phormis an Arcadian, which, being
infected by a Magician with the Hippomanes I am speaking of, so enraged all the
Stone-horses that passed that Way, that they would break their Bridles in
Pieces, and throw their Riders, to come at it (...) pro^e finem.
, and could not without great Difficulty and many Stripes be forced from it.
Several of the Poets speak of it is Effects; Ovid Lib. I. Eleg. VIII.
, S^it been quid gramen, quid torto concita rhombo
Licia, quid valeat virus amantis equae.
She knows the Virtue of each Herb to move
The latent Seeds of a coy Lady's Love,
She knows the Rhomb, what Feats in Magic are
From the poisonous Issue of a lustful Mare.
Mr. Abell. Virgil will have it to proceed from Lusitanian Mares impregnated by
the Wind G^orgi^. III. 271.
, Continuoque avidis ubi subdita flamma medullis
Vere magis (quia vere calor redit ossibus, illae,
Ore omnes versae in Zephyrum, ^^ant ^^pibus altis,
Exceptamque lev^^ auras; and saepe si^e ull^^
Conjugiis, vento gravidae (mirabile dictu)
Sa^a pe^, and scopulos, and depre^las convalles
Diffugiunt; non, Fure, tuo^, neque solis ad ortus,
In Borcam, Caurumque, aut unde rigerrimus Auster
Nascitur, and pluvio contr^stat frigore coelum.
Hin^ demum, Hippomanes vero quod nomine dicunt
Pastores, lentum distillat ab inguine virus,
Hippomanes, quo^ saepe malae legere novercae,
Asiscueruntque herbas, and non innoxia verba.
When at the Spring's approach their Marrow burns,
(For with the Spring their genial Heat returns)
The Mares to Clifts of rugged Rocks repair,
And with wide Nostrils snuff the western Air:
When (wondrous to relate) the parent Wind
Without the Stallion propagates the Kind:
Then fired with amorous Rage they take their flight
Through Plains, and mount the Hills unequal Height;
Nor to the North, nor to the rising Sun,
Nor Southward to the rainy Regions run,
But boring to the West, and hovering there,
With gaping Mouths they draw prolifick Air,
With which Impregnate from their Groins they shed
A slimy Juice by false Conception bred;
The Shepherds know it well, and called by Name
Hippomanes, to note the Mother's Flame:
This, gathered in the planetary Hour
With noxious Weeds, and spelled with Words of Power
Dire Stepdames in the magic Bowl infuse,
And mix for deadly Draughts the poisonous Juice.
Mr. Dryden. The same Story is attested by Aristotle. Others make Hippomanes ^o
be a Plant in Arcadia, but very powerful in producing the forementioned
Effects Idyll. C. v 48.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
Hippomanes, a Plant Arcadia bears,
This m^kes Steeds mad, and this excites the Mares;
And oh! that I could see my D^lphid come
From the oily Fencing-house so raving home.
Mr. Creech

(...), is the Name of a small Bird, the Latin of which is not agreed on; some
translate it passer^ulus, others will have it the same with torquilla,
frutilla, or with regulus. This Bird the Writers of Fables tell us Suidas,
Isacius Tzetzes in Lyco^^ronem v 310. ubi Commentarius noster ^d^undus.
was once the Daughter of Pan and Pitho, or Echo, and, having inveigled Jupiter
into Io's Love, was transformed by Juno; Upon this she became the Darling of
Venus, and, retaining the same Inclinations she had formerly, still served to
promote the Affairs of Love: The first Time the Goddess made use of her was in
the Argonautick Expedition, when she invented Love-magick, with Charms, and
Potions, a chief Ingredient whereof was this Bird, which she communicated to
Jason to gain him Access to Medea's Affections: Hence Pindar Pythion. Od IV
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). --
The Goddess Venus first disclosed the Use,
To Jason first the magic Charm displayed,
Told how the Bird would fire the Maid,
And glowing Love into her Breast infuse;
Nor Duty, nor parentall Love should bind,
Too weak and seeble is that Force;
When Iynx steers the Lover's Course,
A safe Admittance he is sure to find.
Mr. Hutchin. The Part most valued by Enchanters, was the Tongue, which they
looked on as having a sovereign Virtue in Love-potions: Sometimes they fastened
the whole Bird to a Wheel of Wax, which they turned over the Fire 'till both
were consumed, thus inflaming the Party, in whom they had a mind to create
Love. Others there are, that will have (...) to signify nothing but a musical
Instrument, and some take it for all sorts of Allurements.

To these may be added several Herbs, and Infects bred out ^^ putrid Matter,
with other Animals, such as the Fish called (...), or remora; the Lizard, with
another not much unlike it called stellio and stincus, the Brains of a Calf,
the Hair upon the Extremity of a Wolf's Tail, with some of his secret Parts,
the Bones of the left Side of a Toad eaten by Ants, for these were thought to
generate Love, whereas those on the right Side caused Hatred. Others took the
same Bones, when the Flesh was devoured by Ants, and cast them into a Vessel of
Water, wherein those that sunk, being wound up in a white linen Cloth, and
hung about any Person, inflamed him with Love, the others with Hatred. Other
Parts of the Toad were used in poisonous Compositions; whence Iuvenal Sat. VI.
v. 65^.
, At nunc res agitur tenui pulmone rubetae.
But now with poisonous Entrails of a Toad
They urge their Husbands Fate.
To these others add the Blood of Doves, the Bones of Snakes, Scritch-owls
Feathers, Bands of Wool twisted upon a Wheel (which were very much used on
these Occasions, for their Resemblance to the soft Ties of Love) especially
such as had been bound about one that hanged himself; some of these are
mentioned by Propertius Lib. III. Eleg. V.
, Improba non vicit me moribus illa, sed herbis,
Stamine and a rhombi ducitur ille rota;
Illum turgentis r^ne portenta rubetae,
Et lecia e sectis anguibus ossa trabunt,
Et strigis inventae per busta jacentia plumae,
Cinctaque funesto lanea vitta viro.
Were there to Merits but a due Regard,
I should not fear my Rival's being preferred;
But she, too conscious of my powerful Charms,
By Spells, and Magic tears him from my Arms:
The poisonous Bones of swelling Toads she takes,
And mingles them with those of crested Snakes;
Then strait where Owls frequent she does repair,
And picks their scattered Feathers up with Care;
Next she procures some fatal woollen Band,
That late bound him that died by his own Hand:
Thus, what her Merits cannot, her magic Charms
His frozen Breast with amorous Fire warms.
Mr. Hutchin. Several other of the Ingredients of Love-potions are mentioned in
Laelius's Verses cited by Apulcius Apolog.
, Philtra omnia undique eruunt,
Antipathes illud quaeritur,
Trochisci, ^ynges, taeniae,
Radiculae, herbae, surculi,
Aureae i^^ces, bichordilae,
Hinnientium dulcedines.
From every Part they magic Draughts procure,
For that much-fam'd A^tiphates they seek,
Pills, Fillets, and those love-enforcing Birds,
Roots too, and banefull Herbs, and sappy Sprigs,
With scarlet Oaks, and the Hippomanes.


Other sorts of Ingredients were Rags, Torches, and, in short, all Relics, and
whatever had any relation to dead Corpses, or Funerals. Sometimes a Nest of
young Swallows was placed in a convenient Vessel, and buried in the Earth,
'till they were sa^^i^h'd; then they opened the Grave, and such of them, as
were sound with Mouths shut, were thought conducive to allay the Passion of
Love, but the rest, which perished with Mouths gaping for Food, were thought to
excite it. To the same end they used ^ones snatched from hungry and ravenous
Bitches, which were believed to derive some Part of the eager Desire of those
Animals into the Potion^: Hence Horace gives us this elegant Description of an
Enchantress's Practices Epod. V. v. 14.
, Canidia brevibus implicata viperis
Crines and incomtum capus,
Iubet sepulcris caprificos erutas,
Iubet cupressos funebres,
Et uncta turpis ova ranae sanguine,
Plumamque nocturnae strigis,
Herbasque, quas and Iolchos, atque Iberia
Mittit ven^norum ferax,
Et ossa ab ore rapta jejunae canis,
Flammis aduri Colchicis.
Canidia then does for the Charm prepare,
And binds with Snakes her uncomb'd Hair:
Maid, speed she cries, and pillage every Tomb,
Bring Cypress, and wild Fig Tree home;
Let Eggs first steeped in Blood of Toads be sought;
And Feathers from the Scritch-owl brought;
Bring ven'mous Drugs such as Iol^hos yields,
And Poison from Iberian Fields;
Bring Bones from Jaws of hungry Bitches torn,
And those I Will sees, and those I Will burn,
As first Medea did inform.
Mr. Hutchin. To these they added another Ingredient more powerful than any of
the rest, which the Poet has thus described in the same Ode V. 29.
, Abacta nulla Veja conscientia,
Ligonibus duris humum
Exhauriebat ingemens laboribus;
Quo posset infossus puer
Longo die bis terve mutatae dapis
Inemori spectaculo,
Cum promineret ore, quantum exstant aquae
Suspensa mento corpora;
Exsucta uti medulla, and aridum jecur
Amoris esset poculum,
Interminato cum semel fixae cibo
Intabuissent pupulae.
Veja, who never Remorse of Conscience felt,
Nor blushed at her own horrid Guilt,
Toils at the Spade, and digs the fatal Pit,
In which the unhappy Lad she set;
Where choicest Dainties long as Life should last
Often feast his Eyes, denied his Taste,
Just over the B^im appears his sickly Head,
As their's, who in the Rivers wade:
That there his Marrow drained and Liver dry
Might with Love-potions her supply;
As soon as ever his fainting Eye Balls showed
Approaching Fate for want of Food.
Mr. Hutchin

Let us pass now to some other Arts they had of exciting Love Some thought the
Udder of an Hyaena tied about their left Arm a good Expedient to entice to
their Affections (...) Woman they fixed their Eyes on: Others took (...), a
sort of small and hard Olives, or (as others interpret it) Barley-bran, which
either by it self, or made up in Past, they cast into the Fire, hoping thereby
to inspire the Flames of Love: Hence Simaetha in Theocritus V. 33.
, (...) --
Now I strew the Barley-bran.
Sometimes they used (...), or Flower, which the Scholiast upon Theocritus will
have termed (...). That Poet has described this Custom, when he introduces his
Enchantress thus calling out to her Maid Ibid. v. 18.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
First burn the Flower, then strew the other on,
Strew it; how? where is your Sense and Duty gone?
Base Thestylis, and am I so forlorn,
And grown so low, that I Am become your Scorn?
But strew the Salt, and say in angry Tones
I scatter Delphid's, perjured Delphid's Bones.
Mr. Creech. Instead of Bran, or Flower, 'twas usual to burn Laurel, as we
learn from the same Enchantress, who proceeds thus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
First Delphid injured me, he raised my Flame,
And now I burn this Bough in Delphid's Name;
As this does blaze, and break away in Fume,
How soon it takes! let Delphid's Flesh consume.
Mr. Creech. 'Twas likewise frequent to melt Wax, thereby to mollify the
Person's Heart, whom they desired: Hence she goes on, (...)
(...)
As this devoted Wax melts over the Fire,
Let Myndian Delphis melt with soft Desire.
Sometimes they placed Clay before the Fire together with Wax, that, as one
melted whilst the other hardened, so the Person that then rejected them might
have his Heart mollify'd with Affection, and enflamed with Desire, whilst their
own became hard and unrelenting; or that his Heart might be rendered incapable
of any Impression from other Beauties, but easy of Access to themselves: This
seems to be Virgil's meaning in the first of the following Verses, the later
two contain some of the Customs before described out of Theocritus, Limus ut
hic durescit, and haec ut cera liquescit,
Uno eodemque igni; sic nostro Daphnis amore:
Sparge molam, and fragiles incende bitumine lauros;
Daphnis me malus urit, ego hanc in Daphnide laurum Eclog. VIII. 80.

As Fire this Figure hardens made of Clay,
And this of Wax with Fire consumes away,
Such let the Soul of cruel Daphnis be
Hard to the rest of Women, soft to me.
Crumble the sacred Mole of Salt and Corn,
Next in the Fire the Bays with Brimstone burn,
And, whilst it crackles in the Sulphur, say,
This I for Daphnis burn, thus Daphnis burn away.
Mr. Dryde^

It was customary to imitate all those Actions, they had a min^ the Person they
loved should perform: They turned a Wheel roun^ praying he might fall down
before their Doors, and roll himself on the Ground. Thus Theocritus's
Enchantress, (...)
(...)
And, Venus, as I whirl this brazen Wheel,
Before my Doors let perjured Delphid roll.
We are told that it has been usual to compose an Image of Wa^, and, calling it
by the Name of the Person to be inflamed with Love, to place it near the Fire,
the Heat whereof affected the Image, and the Person represented by it at the
same Time Wierus lib. V. c. XI.
. Virgil's Enchantress speaks of drawing it three Times round the Altar, --
Terque haec altaria circum
Efligiem duco. --
Thrice round this Altar I the Image draw.
She had before taken care to have it bound, thereby to intimate the tying his
Affections, Terna tibi haec primum triplici diversa color
Licia circumdo. --
Three Threads I of three different Colors bound
About your Image. --


It was not unfrequent to sprinkle enchanted Medicaments upon some Part of the
House where the Person resided: Thus Th^ocritus's Enchantress commands, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Now take these Poisons I procure you more,
And strew them at the Threshold of his Door,
That Door where vi'lent Love has fixed thy Mind,
Though he regards not, cruel and unkind!
Strew them, and spitting say in angry Tones,
I scatter Delphid's, perjured Delphid's Bones.
Mr. Creech. If they could get into their Hands any Thing that belonged to the
Person, whose Love they desired, it was of singular Use: The same Enchantress
burns the Border of Delphis's Garment, that the Owner might be tortured with
the same Flame, (...)
(...)
This Piece from dear false Delphid's Garment torn
I tear again, and am resolved to burn.
Virgil's Enchantress deposites her Lover's Pledges in the Ground underneath
her Threshold, Has olim exuvias mihi perfidus ille reliquit,
Pignora cara sui; quae nunc ego limine in ipso,
Terra, tibi mando; debent haec pignora Daphnin.
These Garments once were his, and left to me,
The Pledges of his promised Loyalty;
Which underneath my Threshold I bestow,
These Pawns, O sacred Earth, to me my Daphnis owe.
Mr. Dryden. The Design of which Action seems to be the retaining her Lover,
and securing his Affection from wandering.

Virgil has thus described another Method in the Nymph's Command to her Woman,
Fer cineres, Amarylli, for as, rivoque fluenti,
Transque caput jace; ne respexeris: His ego Daphnin
Aggrediar, nihil ille Deos, nil carmina curat.
Bear out these Ashes, cast them in the Brook;
Cast backwards over your Head, nor turn your look;
Since neither Gods, nor God-like Verse can move,
Break out, ye smothered Fires, and kindle smothered Love.
Mr. Dryden.

I shall only trouble you with one expedient more, which was their tying
Venereal Knots to unite the beloved Persons Affection with their own, Necte
tribus nodis ternos, Amarylli, colores;
Necte, Amarylli, modo; and Veneris, dic, vincula necto.
Knit with three Knots the Fillets, knit them straight;
And say, These Knots to Love I consecrate.
Her Caution about the Number of Knots is observable, for most of their Actions
in these Rites were confined to the Number three; Theocritus's Enchantress is
no less exact in this Circumstance, (...)
Thrice, thrice I pour, and thrice repeat my Charms.
Virgil has assigned the Reason hereof to be the Pleasure the Gods were thought
to take in that Number, -- Numero Deus impare gaudet.
Unequal Numbers please the Gods.
Whether this Fancy owe it is Original to the supposed Perfection of the Number
three, because, containing a Beginning, Middle, and End, it seems natural to
signify all Things in the World; whether to the Esteem the Pythagoreans, and
some other Philosophers had for it, on the account of their Trinity; or, lastly
(to mention no more Opinions) to it is Aptness to signify the Power of all the
Gods, who were divided into three Classes, Celestial, Terrestrial, and
Infernal, I shall leave to be determined by others: Thus much is certain, that
the Ancients thought there was no small Force and Efficacy in unequal Numbers;
whence we find Vegetius advising, that the Ditches round Encampments should be
at the least nine Feet in breadth, at the most seventeen, but always of an
unequal Number Lib. III. cap. VIII.
; Shepherds are likewise advised to take care that the Number of their Sheep be
not even Geoponic. lib. XVIII.
; but the Number three was acceptable to the Gods above all others, whence we
find three Fatal Sisters, three Furies, three Names and Appearances of Diana
according to the Poet, -- Tria virginis ora Dianae.
Three different Forms does chaste Diana bear.
The Sons of Sa^^^n, among whom the Empire of the World was divided, were
three; and for the same reason we read of Jupiter's fulmen trifidum, Neptune's
Trident, with several other Tokens of the Veneration they had for this Number.

Many of their other Practices were the same with those used at common
Incantations: The Charm, or Form of Verses, had little Difference beside the
proper Application to the present Occasion; Virgil's Nymph speaks of her Verses
as of the same sort, and endowed with the same Efficacy as Circe's; -- Nihil
hic nisi carmina des^^^:
Ducite ab urbe domum, mea carmina, ducite Daphnin;
Carmina vel caelo possunt deducere Lunam,
Carminibus Circe socios mutavit Ulyssei,
Frigidus in pratis cantando rumpitur anguis.
-- We want but Verse, restore, my Charms,
My lingering Daphmis to my longing Arms;
Pale Phoebe drawn by Verse from Heaven descends,
And Circe changed with Charms Ulysses's Friends,
Verse breaks the Ground, and penetrates the Brake,
And in the winding Cavern splits the Snake.
Mr. Dryden. And the Herbs and Minerals used in other magical Operations, were
no less sought for in this, there being in them (as 'twas thought) some
wonderful Powers, which were equally prevalent in all supernatural and
miraculous Effects: Whence we find Virgil's Nymph alluring Daphnis to her Love
by the very same Medicaments, which Maris had found effectual in performing
other magical Feats, Has l^r^as, atque haec Ponto mihi lecta venena
Ipse dedit Moeris; nascuntur plurima Ponto;
His ego (...) lupum fieri, and se condere silvis
Moeri^ (...) animas imis excire sepulcris,
Atque satas alio vidi traducere messes.
These poisonous Plants for magic Use designed
(The noblest, and the best of all the banefull Kind)
Old Moeris brought me from the Pomick Strand,
And culled the Mischief of a bounteous Land:
Smeared with the powerful Juices on the Plain
He howls a Wolf among the hungry Train;
And often the mighty Necromancer boasts,
With these to call from Tombs the stalking Ghosts:
And from the Roots to tear the standing Corn,
Which, whirled aloft, to distant Fields is born.
Mr. Dryden. The Gods likewise (to mention no more Instances of their
Agreement) were the same that superintended all magical Arts, as we learn from
Theocritus's Sim^^tha, who is introduced invoking the Moon and Hecate to her
Assistance, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
-- Moon, shine bright and clear,
To thee I will direct my secret Prayer;
To thee and Hecate, whom Dogs do dread
When stained with Gore she stalks amidst the Dead:
Hail, frightfull Hecate, assist me still,
Make mine as great as famed Medea's Skill.
Mr. Creech.

Thus far concerning their Arts in exciting Love. It may be inquired in the
next place, whether they had any means to allay the Passion, when once raised:
Now it appears, that it was common to set the Patient at liberty by the Help of
more powerful Medicaments, or Demons superior to those that had bound him;
whence we find Canidia in Horace complaining, that all her Enchantments were
rendered ineffectual by Art superior to her own, Quid accidit? cur di^a
ba^barae minus
Venena Medeae valent,
Quibus superba fugit ulta pellicem,
Magni Creontis filiam,
Cum palla, tabo munus imbutum, novan:
Incendio nuptam abslulit?
Atqui nec herba, nec latens in asperis
Radix sefellit me locis.
Indormis unctis omnium cubiiibus
Oblivione pellicum:
Ah, ah, solutus ambulat veneficae
Scientioris carmine.
Am I so served? my base degrading Charms,
Shall Colchos softer greater Harms?
What! shall the Present spelled with magic Rage,
Med^a's vengefull Breast assuage;
Since the fallacious Gift to Flames is turned,
And her unhappy Rival burned?
Then what am I? there is not an Herb does grow,
Nor Root, but I their Virtues know
And can the craggy Places show:
Yet Varus slights my Love, above my Power,
And sleeps on Rosy Beds secure;
Ah! much I fear some Rival's greater Skill
Defends him from my weaker Spell.
Mr. Hutchin.

But Love inspired without the Assistance of Magic scarce yielded to any Cure:
Apollo himself could find no Remedy against it, but is introduced lamenting in
these Words Ovid. Metam. I. v. 521.
, Inventum medicina meum est, opiferque per orbem
Dicor, and herbarum est subjecta potentia nobis;
Hei mihi! quod nullis amor est medicabilis herbis,
Nec prosunt domino, quae prosunt omnibus, arts.
Medicine is mine, what Herbs, and Simples grow
In Fields and Forests, all their Powers I know,
And am the great Physician called below;
Alas! that Fields and Forests can afford
No Remedies to heal their lovesick Lord!
To cure the Pains of Love no Plant avails,
And his own Physic the Physician fails.
Mr. Dryden The same Poet professes in another Place, that no Art was ever able
to set a Lover at Liberty De remedio amoris.
; Nulla recantatas deponeni pectora curas
Nec fugiet vivo sulphur victus amor.
Quid te Phasiacae juverunt gramina terrae,
Cum cuperes patria, Colchi, manner domo?
Quid tibi profuerunt, Circe, Perseides herbae,
Cum tibi Neritias abstulit aura rates.
Not all the Power of Verse with Magic joined
Can heal the Torture of a lovesick Mind;
Altars may smoke with expiatory Fire,
Too weak to make a well-fix'd Love retire,
Love by Repulse still works the Passion higher.
What help, Medea, did thy Potions yield?
Not all the Drugs that stocked the Colchian Field,
Could Ease to your distracted Breast afford,
When forced from home you loved the foreign Lord:
Nor greater the Relief that Circe found,
When left by her Ulysses homewards bound,
Nor Herbs, nor Poisons could her Grief allay,
When envious Blasts had stolen her Dear away.
Mr. Hutchin

But notwithstanding the Difficulty of of this Cure, there is not wanting
Variety of Prescriptions adapted to the several Causes and Occasions of the
Malady; as appears from the old Nurse's Words to Myrrha desperately in Love
Metam. X. v. 397.
, Seu furor est, habeo quae carmine sanet, and herbis:
Sive aliquis nocuit, magico lustrabere ritu:
Ira Deum sive est, sacris placabilis ira.
Madness by sacred Numbers is expelled,
And Magic will to stronger Magic yield:
If the dire Wrath of Heaven this Fury raised,
Heaven is with Sacrifice, and Prayer appeased.
Mr. Hopkins. The Antidotes may be reduced to two sorts; they were either such
as had some natural Virtue to produce the designed Effect; such are agnus
castus, and all the Herbs reputed Enemies to Generation Vide Archaeolog. hujus
lib II. cap. III.
: Or, secondly, such as wrought the Cure by some occult and mystical Power, and
the Assistance of Demons; such are the sprinkling of Dust wherein a Mule had
rolled her self (...) Not Hist. lib XXX. cap. XVI
, the tying Toads in the Hide of a Beast lately slain Idem lib. XXXII cap X.
, with several others mentioned by Pliny; amongst which we may reckon all the
Minerals and Herbs, that were looked on as Amulets against other Feats of
Magic, for those were likewise proper on such Occasions: Whence the Poets
usually mention Caucasus, Colchis, and other Places famous for Magical Plants,
as those which alone could furnish Remedies and Antidotes against Love: I shall
only set down one Instance, wherein the Poet, enquiring what should be the
Cause his Mistress had forsaken him, puts this Question among others (...) lib
I Eleg ^II
, -- An quae
Lecta Prometheis dividit herba jugis.
What! do those odious Herbs, the Lover's Bane,
Growing on Caucasus produce this Pain?
By Prometheus's Mountain he means Caucasus, which was remarkable for Herbs of
sovereign Power, that sprung out of Prometheus's Blood.

The Infernal Gods were called upon for Assistance, as may be learned from
Virgil's Dido, who signifies her pretended Design to dispell the Remains of her
Love for Aeneas in these Word, Aeneid. IV. v. 638.
, Sacra Jovi Stygio, quae rite incepta paravi,
Perficere esi animus, finemque imponere curis,
Dardaniique regum capitis permi^ere flammae.
Thus will I pay my Vows to Stygian Jove,
And end the Cares of my disast'rous Love,
Then cast the Trojan Image on the Fire,
And, as that burns, my Passion shall expire.
Mr. Dryden Silius introduces Anna, Dido's Sister, telling how she had
endeavored to render the same Gods propitious Lib. VIII.
, Nigro forte Jovi, cui tertia regna laborant,
Atque atri sociae thalami nova sacra parabam,
Queis aegram mentem, and trepidantia corda levaret
Infelix germana tori. --
To grisly Jove of Hell I Offerings paid,
And to the swarthy Consort of his Bed,
In pity of my lovesick Sister's Grief,
And in Assurance of a blessed Relief,
To charm her Cares to sleep, her Fears to rest,
And still the Tumults of her troubled Breast.
Mr. Abell. Not long before the same Person, relating how the Diviners assayed
to restore Dido to her right Mind, says, they invoked the God^ of Night
(whereby she means the Shades below) to aid them, Heu! sacri vatum errores, dum
numina Noctis
Eliciunt, spondentque novis medicamina curis.
O soothing Priestcraft! O the close Disguise
Of Cheat, Imposture, and well-varnish'd Lies!
With a pretended Zeal the Shades they implore,
The Gods of Night demurely they adore,
With promised Cures they gull our easy Minds,
A solemn Vow their holy Knav'ry binds.
Mr. Abell.

I shall only mention one Expedient more, whereby they cured themselves of
Love: It Is the Water of Selemnus, a River that falls into the Sea near Argyra
in Achaia: The Story is thus; Selenmus, a beautiful young Shepherd in those
Parts, was beloved by Argyra, the Nymph, from whom the Town and Fountain of
that Name were called; but, the Flower of his Age being over, the Nymph
deserted him, upon which he pined away, and was transformed into a River by
Venus; after this he still retained his former Passion, and (as the Patrensians
report) for some time conveyed his Waters through a subterraneous Passage to
Argyra's Fountain, in the same manner that Alpheus was said to join himself
with Arethusa, 'till by Venus's Favor the Remembrance of her was caused to
vanish quite out of his Mind: Hence it came to pass, that as many as washed
themselves in this River, were made to forget their Passion: Thus Pausanias
Achaic^^ p. 442. and 445. Edit Hanov.
.

Thus much concerning their Love. I am not ignorant, that Enlargements might be
made in every Part of this Chapter; but what has been said will (I hope) be
sufficient to satisfy the Reader's Curiosity without trespassing too far upon
his Patience.

CHAPTER XI. Of their Marriages.
THE first Inhabitants of Greece lived without Laws and Government, no Bounds
were prescribed to their Passions, their Love (like the test of their Desires)
was unconfined, and promiscuous Mixtures, because forbidden by no human
Authority, were publicly allowed. The first that restrained this Liberty was
Cecrops, who, having raised himself to be King over the People afterward
called Athenians, amongst many other useful Constitutions, introduced that of
Marriage Vide Archaelog. hujus lib. I. cap. II.
. Others refer the Honor of this Institution, together with the Invention of
Dancing, to Erato one of the Muses; but some rather understand that Story of
the Marriage-solemnity, the regular Conduct whereof, they say, was first
ordered by Erato. However that be, it was in some time received by all the
Grecians, for no sooner did they begin to reform their salvage and barbarous
Course of Life, and join themselves in Towns and Societies, but they found it
necessary to confine the unruly Lusts of Men by establishing lawful Marriage,
with other Rules of good Manners.

Marriage was very honorable in several of the Grecian Commonwealths, being
very much encouraged by their Laws, as tho abstaining from it was
discountenanced, and in some Places punished: For the Strength of States
consisting in their Number of People, those that refused to contribute to their
Increase, were thought very cold in their Affections to their Country. The
Lacedaemonians are very remarkable for their Severity against those that
differr'd Marrying, as well as those who wholly abstained from it Sto^^^ LXV.
de laud Nuptiarum.
: No Man among them could live without a Wife beyond the Time limited by their
Lawgiver without incurring several Penalties; as first, the Magistrates
commanded such once every Winter to run round the public Forum naked; and to
increase their Shame they sung a certain Song, the Words whereof aggravated
their Crime, and exposed them to Ridicule. Another of their Punishments was to
be excluded from the Exercises, wherein (according to the Spartan Custom) young
Virgins contended naked Plutarchus L^curgo.
. A third Penalty was inflicted upon a certain Solemnity, wherein the Women
dragged them round an Altar, beating them all the Time with their Fists
Athe^^us lib. XIII.
. Lastly, they were deprived of that Respect and Observance, which the younger
sort were obliged to pay to their Elders; and therefore, says Plutarch Loc.
citat.
, no Man found fault with whatwas said to Dercyllidas, a great Captain, and one
that had commanded Armies, who coming into the Place of Assembly, a young Man,
instead of rising and making room, told him, Sir, you must not expect that
Honor from me being young, which cannot be returned to me by a Child of yours
when I am old. To these we may add the Athenian Law Di^a^cu^^ in Demesthenem.
, whereby all that were Commanders, Orators, or entrusted with any public
Affair, were to be married, and have Children, and Estates in Land; for these
were looked on as so many Pledges for their good Behavior, without which they
thought it dangerous to commit to them the Management of public Trusts.

Polygamy was not commonly tolerated in Greece, for Marriage was thought to be
a Conjunction of one Man with one Woman, whence some will have (...) derived
(...), from two's becoming one. When Herodotus reports that Anaxandridas the
Spartan had two Wives, he remarks that it was contrary to the Custom of Sparta
Lib. V.
: The rest of the Gre^cian Cities did, for the most part, agree herein with the
Lacedaemonians; only upon some emergent Occasions, when their Men had been
destroyed by War, or other Calamities, Toleration was granted for Marrying more
Wives; an Instance whereof we have at Athens in Euripides's Time, who, as some
say, conceived an hatred against the whole Sex, for which he is famous in
Story, by being harassed with two Wives at once Gellius Noct. Attic. lib. XV
cap. XX.
; Socrates is said to have been married to Xantippe and Myrto at the same time
Di^genes La^rtius Socrate.
, and Atheneus concludes it was then reputed no Scandal, because we never find
any of his Enemies casting it in his Teeth Lib. XIII.
; but some think the Matter of Fact may be justly called in question.

The Time of Marriage was not the same in all Places, the Spartans were not
permitted to marry 'till arrived at their full Strength Xenophon de Repub.
Lacedem.
; and though I do not find what was the exact Number of Years they were confined
to, yet it appears from one of Lycurgus's Sayings, that both Men and Women were
limited in this Affair, which that Lawgiver being asked the reason of it, said
his Design was that the Spartan Children might be strong and vigorous. The
Athenian Laws are said once to have required that Men should not marry before
thirty-five Years of Age. But this depended upon the Humor of every Lawgiver,
nothing being generally agreed to in the Matter; Aristotle thought
thirty-seven a good Age, Plato thirty, and Hesiod was much-what of the same
Judgment, for thus he advises his Friend, (...)
(...)
(...) (...) 313.
.
The Time to enter on a married Life
Is about Thirty, then bring home your Wife;
But don't delay too late, or wed too young,
Since Strength and Prudence to this State belong.
Mr. Abell. Women married sooner than Men; some of the old Athenian Laws
permitted them to marry at twenty-six, Aristotle at eighteen, Hesiod at
fifteen, (...) Ibid. 316.
.
A Wife when fifteen choose, then let her wed
In The Prime for Hymen's Rites, for the Joys of the marriage Bed.
Where the Poet advises that Women be permitted to grow to Maturity in four
Years, i. e. four after ten, and marry in the fifth, i. e. the fifteenth:
Others think he means they must continue unmarry'd four Years after their
Arrival at Woman's estate, i. e. at fourteen Years, and marry in the fifth, i.
e. the nineteenth. But as the Women were sooner marriageable than Men, so their
Time was far shorter, it being common for Men to marry much older than Women
could expect to do, as Lysistrate complains in Aristophanes L^^strate.
, LY. (...)

PP. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

LY. It Is some Concern to me, when I reflect
On the poor Girls, that must despair of Man,
And keep a stale and loathed Coelibacy.

PR. What? have not the Men the same hard Measures then?

LY. Oh! no, they have a more propitious Fate,
Since they at sixty, when their Vigor's past,
Can wed a young and tender Spouse to warm
Their aged Limbs, and to repair their Years:
But Women's Joys are short and transient,
For, if we once the golden Minutes miss,
There Is no recalling, so severe's our Doom;
We must then long in vain, in vain expect,
And by our Ills forewarn Posterity.

Mr. Abell.

The Times or Seasons of the Year most proper of Marriage were, according to
the Athenians, some of the Winter-months, especially January, which for that
reason is called (...) Olympiodorus in Meteora A^istotelu, Eustath^us in Iliad.
(...).
. Hence the Person in Terence, the Scene of whose Fable is laid in Greece,
affirms the Soothsayers had forbidden to enter upon Matrimony 'till Winter
^i^^mione.
, Aruspex vetuit ante brumam a^em quid novi
Negotii incipere. --
Until the seasonable Time of Year,
When frosty Weather binds all Things, the Priest
Counseled us by all means to put off Marriage.
The most convenient Season was when there happened a Conjunction of the Sun
and Moon, then they celebrated their Festival called (...), or Marriage of the
Gods Hesiodi (...) H^ip.
. Clytaemnestra in Euripides, having asked Agamemnon when he designed to give
Iphigenia in Marriage to Achilles, he answers, that the full Moon was the
fittest Time, (...) Ipingen. in A^lid v. 717.
.
When the full Moon darts forth her lucky Rays.
Themis in Pindar advises that Thesis be marty'd to Peleus in the same Season
Isth^. Od. ^. p. 751 Edit. Benedict
, for by (...) he means the full Moon, which happens in the Middle of Lunar
Months, which were used in the old Grecian Computations: The Poet's Words run
thus, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When crescent Phoebe is about to shine
In a full Orb with radiant Light,
Then may he marry, then may she invite
The Hero both their Loves to join,
Then let them blend, and tie, their Joys, their all combine.
Mr. Abell. This Custom seems to have proceeded from an Opinion they had of the
Moon's Power in Generation. Some prescribe other Days; Hesiod thinks the fourth
most convenient, because (as one of the Sch^liasts observ^^) it was dedicated
to Venus and Mercury (...) v. 36.
, (...)
(...)
On the fourth Day of the Moon's Age your Wife
Bring home to enter on the Cares of Life,
But first take heed your self to certify
In the respective Signs of Augury.
Mr. Abell. The sixteenth, or, as some, the eighteenth, is mentioned as most
unfit of all others V. 18.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
What ever Trees you plant the sixteenth Day,
They Will never thrive, but wither and decay,
But if your Wife's delivered of a Son,
His Life with lucky Prospects is begun;
But Girls, if born, or married now, will see
Their Years annoyed with Woe and Misery.
Mr. Abell.

Several other Days were looked on as favorable, or otherwise, in this and all
other Affairs, which it would be too tedious to enumerate in this Place.

Most of the Greeks looked on it as scandalous to contract within certain
Degrees of Con^anguinity: Hermione in Euripides speaks of the Custom of
Brethren's marrying their Sisters with no less Detestation than of Sons
marrying their Mothers, or Fathers their Daughters A^dromach. v. 173.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Such Things Barbarians act, such Villainies
Are the Result of Lust, or perverse Will,
Where no Laws cement, and no Right confines,
Fathers their Daughters, Sons their Mothers force
To an incestuous Bed, and hurried on
By boiling Lust Brothers with Sisters join;
All Things are free, the most exalted Love
Cannot against incentive Lust secure your Life.
Mr. Abell. Several of the barbarous Nations seem to have overlooked the Rules
of Decency, and allowed unnatural and incestuous Mixtures; the Persians are
especially remarkable for such Practices, for their Magi, the most sacred
Persons among them, were the Offspring of Mothers and their Sons: Hence
Catullus Epigr^m XCI.
, Nascatur Magus ex Gelli marrisque nefando
Conjugio, and discat Persicum aruspicium:
Nam Magus ex matre and gnato gignatur oportet,
Si vera est Persarum impia religio.
Gellius has Issue by his Mother got,
Nor is it in his Heraldry a Blot;
The Boy must strait be made profoundly wise
In all the magic Trumpery and Lies,
What must the Persian Religion be,
Where such an Act is no Impiety?
Mr. Abell. The Lacedaemonians were forbidden to marry any of their Kindred,
whether in the direct Degrees of Ascent, or Descent, but a collateral Relation
hindered them not, for Nephews married their Aunts, and Uncles their Nieces, an
Instance whereof Herodotus gives us in An^xandridas, who married his Sister's
Daughter Lib. V.
. The Marriages of Brothers and Sisters were utterly unlawful, though
countenanced by several Examples of their Gods: An ample Account hereof may be
seen in Byblis's Words, when in love with her Brother Caunus, where,
notwithstanding the Greatness of her Passion, she confesses that no Examples
were sufficient to license her incestuous Desires Ovid. Metam. lib. IX. 4^8.
, Dii melius! Dii nempe suas habuere sorores:
Sic Saturnus Opim junctam sibi sanguine duxit,
Oceanus Tethyn, Junonem Rector Olympi,
Sunt superis sua jura: Quid ad coelestia ritus
Exigere humanos, diversaque foedera tento?
Aut nostro vetitus de cord fugabitur ardor;
Aut, hoc si nequeo, peream precor ante, toroqu^
Mortua componar, positaeque det oscula frater:
Et tamen arbitrium quaerit res ista duorum,
Finge placere mihi, scelus esse videbitur illi;
At non Aeolidae thalamos timuere sororum:
Unde sed hos novi? Cur haec exempla paravi?
Quo feror? obsc^nae procul hin^ discedite flammae.
The Gods forbid; yet those, whom I invoke,
Have loved like me, have their own Sisters took,
Great Sa^urn and his greater Offspring Jove,
Both stocked their Heaven with incestuous Love:
Gods have their Privilege; why do I strive
To strain my Hopes to their Prerogative?
No, let me banish this forbidden Fire,
Or quench it with my Blood, or with 't expire,
Unstained in Honor, and unhurt in Fame,
Let the Grave bury both my Love and Shame;
But, when at my last Hour I gasping lie,
Let only my kind Murderer be by,
Let him, while I breath out my Soul in Sighs,
Or gaze't away, look on with pitying Eyes,
Let him (for sure he ca'n't deny me this)
Seal my cold Lips with one kind parting Kiss:
Besides 'twere vain should I alone agree
To what another's Will must ratify;
Could I be so abandoned to consent,
What I have past for good and innocent,
He may perhaps as worst of Crimes resent:
Yet we amongst our Race Examples find
Of Brothers, who have been to Sisters kind;
Famed Canace could thus successful prove,
Could crown her Wishes in a Brother's Love.
But whence could I these Instances produce?
How came I witty to my Ruin thus?
Whither will this mad Phrenzy hurry on?
Hence, hence, you naughty Flames, far hence be gone,
Nor let me ever the shameful Passion own.
Mr. Oldham. Yet 'twas not reputed unlawful in several Places for Brothers to
marry their Half-sisters; and sometimes their Relation by the Father, sometimes
by the Mother was within the Law: The Lacedaemonian Lawgiver allowed Marriages
between those that had only the same Mother, and different Fathers Phil^ Iudaus
lib. de specialibus legibus ad prae^eptum VII. contra moechos.
: The Athenians were forbidden to ma^ry Sisters by the same Mother, but not
those by the same Father; an Instance whereof we have in Archepto^^
Themistocles's Son, who married his Sister Mnesiptolema Plutar^hus Themistocle.
; as likewise in Cimon, who, being unable through his extreme Poverty to provide
a suitable Match for his Sister Elpinice, married her himself: Nor was this
contrary to the Laws, or Customs of Athens, as Athenaeus Lib. XII.
is of opinion, for, according to Plutarch's Limo^e.
Account, it was done publicly, and without any Fear of the Laws; Cornelius
Nepos likewise Cimone.
assures us, it was nothing but what the Custom of their Country allowed; we
find indeed that Cimon is sometimes taxed for his Familiarity with Elpinice,
but this is only to be understood of his taking her after she had been married
to Callias; for it appears from the forecited Authors, that Cimon first
married her himself, then gave her to Callias a rich Athenian, after which he
again became familiar with her, which indeed was looked on as Adultery, she
being then another Man's Wife.

Most of the Grecian States, especially those that made any Figure, required
their Citizens should match with none but Citizens; for they looked upon the
Freedom of their Citie^ as too great a Privilege to be granted upon easy terms
to Foreigners, or their Children: And therefore we find the Athenian Laws
sentencing the Children of such Matches to perpetual Slavery, an Account
whereof has been given in one of the foregoing Books Lib. I. cap IX.
: This was not all, for they had a Law, that if a Foreigner married a
Freewoman of Athens, it should be lawful for any Person to call him to
account before the Magistrates called Thesmo^hetae, where if he was convicted,
they sold him for a Slave, and all his Goods were confiscated, and one third
Part of them given to his Accuser: The same Penalty was inflicted upon such
Citizens as gave foreign Women in Marriage to Men of Athens pretending they
were their own Daughters, save that the Sentence of Slavery was changed into
Ignominy, whereby they were deprived of their Voices in all public Assemblies,
and most other Privileges belonging to them as Citizens. Lastly, if any Man of
Athens married a Woman that was not free of that City, he was fined a thousand
Drachms Demosthe^e^ Orat. in N^^ram.
.

Virgins were not allowed to marry without the Consent of their Parents; whence
Hero in Musaeus V. 179.
tells Leander, they could not be honorably joined in Marriage, because her
Parents were against it, (...)
(...) --
My Parents to the Match will not consent,
Therefore desist, it is not pertinent.
Hermione in Euripides Andromache.
professes she had no Concern about her Marriage, but left that wholly to her
Father, (...)
(...)
I Am not concerned, my Father will take care
Of all Things that respect my Nuptials.
The Mother's Consent was necessary as well as the Father's, and therefore
Iphigenia in Euripides was not to be given in Marriage to Achilles 'till
Clytaemnestra approved the Match Iph^g^^. in Au^de.
. Nor were Men permitted to marry without consulting their Parents; for the
most early and ignorant Ages were too well acquainted with the Right which
Parents have by Nature over their Children, to think these had Power to dispose
of themselves without their Parents Consent. Achilles in Homer refuses
Agamemnon's Daughter, and leaves it to his Father Peleus to choose him a Wife
(...) v. 393.
, (...)
(...)
If by Heaven's Blessing I return, a Bride
My careful Father will for me provide.
When Virgins had no Fathers, their Brothers disposed of them: Thus we find
Creon promising his Sister Iocasta to any Person that should destroy the
Sphinx, that insested Thebes; and Orestes gave his Sister Electra to his Friend
Pylades. When they had neither Parents, nor Brethren, they were disposed of by
these Grandfathers, those especially by the Father's Side; when these failed,
they were committed to the Care of Guardians called (...), or (...). It was
likewise frequent for Husbands to betroth their Wives to other Persons upon
their Deathbeds; as appears from the Story of Demosthenes's Father, who gave
his Wife Cleobule to one Aphobus with a considerable Portion; when he was dead,
Aphobus took the Portion, but refused to marry the Woman, whereupon Demosthenes
made his complaint to the Magistrates, and accused him in an elegant Oration
Orat. in Aphobum.
: And that this Custom was very usual, appears from the same Orator's Defense
of Phormio, who being a Slave, and faithful in his Business, his Master gave
him both his Liberty, and his Wife.

They had several Forms of betrothing, such as this cited by Clemens the
Alexandrian Stromat. lib. II.
out of Menander, (...). i. e. I give you this my Daughter to make you Father
of Children lawfully begotten. The Dowry was sometimes mentioned, as we find in
Xenophon (...) lib. VIII.
, where Cyaxares betrothes his Daughter to Cyrus, (...) i. e. I give you,
Cyrus, this Woman, who is my Daughter, with all Media for her Dowry. The
Persons to be married plighted their Faith to one another, or to their
Relations; Thus Clitophon and Leucippe swear to each other Achill. Tat. lib. V.
, the former to be constant and sincere in his Love, the later to marry him,
and make him Master of all she had: Ovid makes the next Ceremony after
betrothing to be the Virgin's Oath to her Lover, Promisit pater hanc, haec and
juravit amanti.
Her Father promised, she an Oath did take
Her faithful Lover never to forsake.
The Ceremony in promising Fidelity was kissing each other, or giving their
right Hands, which was the usual Form of ratifying all Agreements: Hence
Clytaemnestra in Euripides calls for Achilles's right Hand to assure her of his
sincere Intention to marry her Daughter I^higen. in A^lid v 8^1.
, -- (...)
(...)
Join your right Hand to mine, a sacred Tie
Of this our Compact. --
The Thebans had a Custom ^or Lovers to plight their Faith at the Monument of
Iolaus, who was a Lover of Hercules, and assisted him in his Labors Plutarchus
Pe^opida.
, and was therefore believed to take care of Love-affairs, when advanced into
Heaven.

In the primitive Ages Women were married without Portions from their
Relations, being purchased by their Husbands, whose Presents to the Woman's
Relations were called her Dowry: Thus we find Shechem bargaining with Jacob and
his Sons for Dinah; Let me find grace in your Eyes, (says he) and what ye
shall say unto me I will give: Ask me never so much Dowry and Gift, and I will
give according as ye shall say unto me; but give me the Damsel to Wife Genes.
XXXIV. 2.
. Several Instances may be produced to the same purpose, were not this Custom
too well known to need farther Confirmation; only thus much would be observed,
that when Civility and good Manners came to be established in any Place, it was
usually laid aside, for Aristotle makes it one Argument to prove that the
ancient Grecians were an unciviliz'd People, because they used to buy their
Wives Politic. lib. II. cap. VIII.
. No sooner therefore do we find them beginning to lay aside their barbarous
Manners, but this Practice was left off, insomuch that Medea in Euripides
complains that Women were the most miserable of all Creatures endowed with
Understanding, because lying under a Necessity of purchasing their own Masters
at a dear Rate Euripides Med. 230.
. So frequent became the Custom for Women to bring Portions to their Husbands,
that some make the most essential Difference between (...) and (...), i. e.
Wife and Concubine, to consist in this, that Wives had Dowries, whereas
Concubines were usually without: Whence one in Plautus, the Scene of whose
Action is laid in Greece, speaks thus Trinummo.
, -- Sed ut inops
Infamis ne sim, ne mihi hanc famam differant, ne
Germanam meam sororem in concubinatum tibi
Sic sine dote dedisse magis, quam in matrimonium.
Though I am low in the World, and am but mean,
I Will offer some small Matter for her Dowry,
Lest this Aspersion should be thrown abroad,
That she as Mistress, not as Wife, is to you.
The rest of their Distinction was chiefly founded upon this, for she, that had
a Dowry, thought it a just Title to a greater Freedom with her Husband, and
more Respect from him than such as owed their Maintenance to him: Hence
Hermione in Euripides is enraged that the Captive Andromache should pretend to
be her Rival in Pyrrhus's Affections, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) Euripid. Andromach. 147.
; --
This rich Attire, these costly Ornaments,
My various Change of Clothes, and all my Jewels
Never did Achilles, or old Peleus give;
No, they are only kind, indulgent Tokens
Of my dear Father's Blessing; these I brought
From Sparta with a Fortune great and noble
To show my Quality, and that I might
Speak freely without any slavish Awe;
And do thou think, thou dirty, servile Woman,
To paramount, to cast me out, and gain
The Ascendant over my Lord's Affections?
Mr. Abell. So sensible was Lycurgus of this, and some other Inconveniences
attending this Custom, that, what for fear Wives should domineer over their
Husbands, what out of a Desire that Men should choose Wives more for the sake
of their Persons than their Money, and that no Woman's Poverty should hinder
her of an Husband, he quite banished it out of Sparta Justin. lib. III.
Plutarch Apophthegm. La^oni^. Ae^tan. Var. Hist. lib. VI. cap. VI.
. Solon agreed herein with Lycurgus, for all the Dowry he permitted the
Athenian Wives to have, was a little inconsiderable Household Stuff, and three
Suits of Clothes: For (says Plutarch) he would not have Marriages for Gain, or
an Estate, but for pure Love, kind Affection, and to get Children Plutarchus
Solone.
. But this was not without it is Exceptions, for Men that had no Sons were
allowed to entail their Estates upon Daughters; and every Heiress (the
Athenians called them (...)) was obliged to marry her nearest Relation, left
her Estate should go out of the Family; but in Consideration of her Dowry she
had the Privilege, when her Husband was impotent, to lie with his nearest
Kinsman; which Law was contrived against those, who, conscious of their own
Inability, would match with Heiresses for the Portion's sake, and make use of
Law to put a Violence upon Nature; yet (says my Author) 'twas wisely done to
confine her to her Husband's nearest Kinsman, that the Children might be of the
same Family: A farther Privilege Heiresses had above other Women was, that
their Husbands were obliged to lie with them thrice a Mouth Idem loc. citato.
. Another Exception from the Law against Dowries was that which concerned
Orphans; he, that was next in Blood to an orphan Virgin that had no
Inheritance, was obliged to marry her himself, or settle a Portion: on her
according to his Quality; if he was (...), one of the first Rank, five minae,
or five hundred Drachms; if (...), of the second Rank, three hundred; if (...),
of the third Rank, one hundred and fifty: But if she had many Relations equally
allied, all of them contributed their Proportions to make up the Sum: If there
were more than one Virgin, their nearest Kinsman was only obliged to marry, or
give a Portion to one of them; and, upon his Refusal to do this, any Person was
allowed to indict him before the Archon, who was obliged to compel him to his
Duty, and, if he refused to put the Law in Execution, was fined a thousand
Drachms, which were consecrated to Juno the Goddess of Marriage Demosthen^^
Orat. ad Macar^atum de Hagniana h^redi^ate.
. Terence has several Hints at these Customs, for his Scenes being laid in
Athens, he frequently describes the Usages of that City; thus in Phormio Act.
I. Sc. II.
, Lex est, ut orbae, qui sint genere proximi,
Eis n^bant, and illos ducere eadem haec lex jubet.
It Is an established Form in Attick Laws,
That the next male Kinsman without Demurr
Must be to an Orphan Girl in Wedlock joined.
In the same Comedy Act. II. Sc. III.
he expressly mentions the five Minae given by Men of the first Quality, Etsi
mihi facta injuria est, verumtamen
Potius quam li^e^ secter, aut quam te audiam
Itidem ut cognata si si^, id quod lex ^ubet
Dotem dare, abduce hanc, minas quinque accipe.
Though I Have been herein bubbled, here is the Sum,
Five minae, as the Law enjoins, and take her
As my Kinswoman; this I Will rather do
Than sacrifice my Patience to your Talk,
Or enter once the Clutches of the Law.
Mr. Abell. It may be observed farther, that afterward, when Money became more
plentiful, the Relations of these Virgins increased their Dowries, for we are
told by Eustathius Iliad. ^.
, that the (...) gave ^en minae, and Men of inferior Quality without doubt
raised their Contributions proportionably. When Virgins had no Relations to
provide for them, and were descended from Men that had been serviceable to
their Country, it was common for the State to take care of them: A remarkable
Instance hereof we have in Aristides's two Daughters, to each of which the City
gave three hundred Drachms for her Portion Plutarchus Aristide.
: Nor is it to be wondered (says my Author) that the Athenians should make
Provision for those that lived in their City, when hearing that the
Granddaughter of Aristogiton (a famous Patriot that opposed Pisistratus's
Sons) was in a low Condition in the Isle of Lemnos, and like to want an
Husband, because without a Portion, they sent for her to Athens, married her to
a Person of great Quality, and gave her a Farm belonging to the City for a
Dowry. Indeed however generous the Love of the more ancient Athenians was,
their Successors commonly made Money the chief Tie of their Affections; and the
later Spartans were of the same Humor even whilst the Laws of Lycurgus were
still in being; for we find that, whilst Lysander was in a flourishing
Condition, and passed for a wealthy Man, several Persons engaged themselves to
his Daughters, who, seeing afterward how poor and honest he died, broke off
their Contract: It Is true the Spartans punished them severely for their
Persidiousness, but that seems done rather out of respect to Lysander's Memory
Plutarchus L^jandro
, than to their ancient Constitution, which, as soon as Riches began to be
possessed and admired at Sparta, seems to have been laid asleep. The Grecians
indeed, notwithstanding the Prohibition of some of their Laws, were generally
Lovers of Money, and seem to have matched rather for the sake of that, than
other more commendable Qualifications: Nor was this a late Corruption, but
entertained even in the primitive Times; for we find Andromache called by Homer
Iliad ^
(...), i. e. according to Eustathius, (...), possessed of a large Dowry; and
before the Use of Money was common, Virgins increased their Husband's Estates
by adding Sheep and Oxen to their Flocks add Herds, wherein the Riches of those
Ages chiefly consisted, whence (as the same Author observes) they are sometimes
honored with the Epithe^ of (...): And from the Expenses Fathers were at on
this account came the Proverb, (...)
Which is nothing but a Father's Wish, that his Children might rather be Boys
than Girls. As to the Quantity of Dowries nothing can be determined, the Humors
of Persons, and their particular Exigences being the Laws they were usually
directed by in such Cases; only it may be observed, that i^ Crete Sisters were
put off with half the Share of their Brothers Alexander ab Alex. Ge^. D^^^.
lib. IV. cap. VIII.
. The Dowry was named (...), sometimes (...), or (...), q. (...), as designed
to procure the Favor and good Will of the Person they were given to, sometimes
(...) from (...), because brought by the Wife to her Husband: Some of the same
Names are used for the Man's Dowry, or Portion, as Eustathius has observed.
When the Wife had a Dowry, it was commonly expected her Husband should make her
a Settlement to be a Maintenance for her, in case he should happen to be parted
from her by Death, or Divorce. This was usually an House, or Land, and was
anciently called (...) Hes^^^^, Hatpoc^at^^n* Suidas, Pollux.
, being a Return equivalent to the Dowry; afterward it was frequently termed
(...), i. e. a Recompense for her Dowry, or (...) from (...), because it was
(...), given instead of her Dowry: But where no such Security was given,
Husbands that divorced their Wives were obliged to return their Dowry: The same
Obligation reached their Heirs upon refusal to maintain the Wives of those,
whose Estates they inherited: Hence Telemachus in Homer, having suffered many
Affronts, and sustained great Losses by his Mother Penelope's Gallants, yet
thinks it not prudent to dismiss her to her Father Icarius, because that could
not be done without returning her Portion Odyss. ^. v. 132.
, -- (...)
(...)
I could not now repay so great a Sum
To the old Man, should I dismiss her Home
Against her Will. --
Which Words seem to intimate farther, that if the Woman departed of her own
accord, the forementioned Obligation became void. What other Things Wives
brought to their Husbands above their Portions, were called (...), and by later
Greeks (...).

Before Men married, 'twas customary to provide themselves an House to settle
in; to which Practice Hesiod's Advice is an Allusion, (...), Ep^. ^. 23. vide
Turne^. Adv. lib. XXI.
. --
First see you have a Settlement, and Wife.
The Woman in Theocritus asks her Lover, whether he was making an House ready
for her, (...)
What? are you furnishing an House! have you
Provided Beds? --
To which he replies, (...) --
Beds I procure, don't fear. --
Protesilaus in Homer, being called to the Trojan War soon after his Marriage,
is said to have left (...), his House halffinish'd Iliad. ^. v. 700.
, (...)
(...). --
At Phylace he left behind his Spouse
There to lament in an half-finish'd House.
Some, indeed, will have (...) to be meant of his Family, which is called
(...), because he left it before he had any Children Scholiastes vetus in loc
cit.
: The same Ambiguity is found in Valerius Flaccus, who has thus imitated Homer
Lib. VI.
, -- Conju^ miseranda Cai^o
Linquitur, and primo domus imperfecta cubili.
Nigh where Caicus in clear Streams does glide
His solitary House and Wife abide,
Unblest with the Offspring of the bridal Night,
Who might solaco the Thoughts, the pensive Mind delight.
Mr. Abell. Catullus has expressed the same Thought thus Epigram. ad Mallium.
, Conjugis ut quondam flagrans adveni^ amore
Prote^ilaeam Laodamia domum
Inceptam frustra, nondum cum sanguine sacro
Hostia c^lestes pacificasset heroes.
As fair Laodamia once did come,
Inflamed with Passion, to the unfinished Home
Of her dear Lord, before the Sacrifice
Had ever appeased the heavenly Deities.
Mr. Abell.

The Athenian Virgins were presented to Diana before it was lawful for them to
marry: This Ceremony was performed at Brauron an Athenian Borough; it was
called (...), the Virgins themselves (...), and the Action (...), the Custom
being instituted to appease the Goddess, who had been incensed against some of
the Athenians for killing a Bear, the Story whereof is described at large in
one of the precedent Books Vol. I. p. 338, 339.
. Another Custom there was for Virgins, when they became marriageable, to
present certain Baskets full of little Curiosities to Diana, to gain Leave to
depart out of her Train (Virgins being looked on as that Goddess's Peculiar)
and change their State of Life: To which Custom Theoc^^tus has this Allusion
^dyll. ^. v. 66.
, (...)
(...). --
Anaxo Eubul's Daughter full of Love
Came to me with a Basket for Diana's Grove.
The Action was (...), and the Virgins (...), from the Baskets they carried.
The Baeotians and Locrians had a Custom for Persons of both Sexes before their
Nuptials to offer Sacrifice to Euclia, who had an Image and Altar in their
Marketplaces: This Euclia some will have to be the Daughter of Menaetius, and
Sister of Patroclus; others rather think her the same with Diana Plutarchus
A^istede.
; it is not improbable that Diana received this Surname from Patroclus's Sister,
or that she was worshipped by the Name of Diana Euclia; for, Diana being the
Goddess of Virginity, it is not to be wondered, that one honored for the
Preservation of her Virginity, should be worshipped under her Name; since 'twas
common to attribute to those, that were first eminent for any sort of Virtue,
or excellent Quality, the Actions of all that afterward imitated them; hence
we have several Iupiter^, Minerva's, Bacchus's, Hercules's, etc. the famous
Exploits of many Persons distant as well in Time, as Place, being ascribed to
one Hero. To return, we find Diana concerned in the preparatory Solemnities
before all Marriages, for a married Life being her Aversion, 'twas thought
requisite for all that entered upon it to ask her Pardon for dissenting from
her; this was done by Prayers, and several sorts of Sacrifices, whence
Agamemnon in Euripides, pretending he was going to match Iphigenia with
Achilles, speaks thus to Clytaemnestra Iphigen. in Aulid. 1110.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Send Iphigenia quickly forth with me,
Hymen is now propitious, all things wait
To grace the solemn Gladness of this Day,
The Holy-water's ready, with the Cakes
To cast upon the Fire, the Calves are brought,
Whose Blood in grateful Vapors must arise
TO atone the Breach of chaste Diana's Rites.
Mr. Abell. These were called (...), or (...), for (...) and (...) are Terms of
the same Signification, the former denoting Marriage either as a general Name
for all sorts of Rites and Ceremonies; or (as some say) because the longing
Expectations of married Persons are there by consummated, and brought to an
End; or because Persons, that are married, become complete and perfect Men, and
renounce all the Customs and Desires of Childhood, whence they are called (...)
Gisetus in Aristoph. Thesmophor.
, and are said to be (...): The same Epithet is commonly given to the Gods that
had the Care of Marriage, whence we read of Jupiter (...), Juno (...) Suidas,
aliique complures.
, etc. These Gods were likewise rendered propitious before the Nuptials, and
the Sacrifices with other Devotions offered to them were all known by the same
Names with those offered to Diana; Juno's were called (beside their general
Name) (...) from her own Name, which in Greek is (...): Several other Deities
had their Share in these Honors, Minerva sirnam'd (...), the Virgin, had a
peculiar Title to them at Athens upon the same account they were paid to Diana,
and 'twas not permitted a Virgin to marry, 'till she had paid her Devotion to
this Goddess's Temple in the Citadel Suid^^, etc.
. Venus likewise, and all the rest of the (...), Gods superintending Marriage,
were invoked Etym^logici Auctor, etc
; the Lacedaemonians had a very ancient Statue of (...), i. e. Venus Juno, to
which all Mothers sacrificed, when their Daughters were married Paus^n^
Lac^^^^u.
. The most ancient Athenians paid the same Honor to Heaven and Earth, which
were believed to have a particular Concern in Marriages, the later of these
being rendered fruitful by the benign Influences of the former, and therefore a
fit Emblem of Marriage Pr^^les in ^^maum Plato^^ Comment V.
. The Fates, and Graces, being thought first to join, and then preserve the Tie
of Love, were Partakers of the like Respect Pollux lib III. cap. III.
Etymol^gici Auctor v (...)
; and it is probable that several other Deities at different Places, and for
different Reasons claimed a Share therein. The Day, wherein this Ceremony was
performed, was usually that which immediately went before the Marriage
He^ychius.
; it is commonly called (...), sometimes (...) E^^ol^gici Auctor.
from the Custom they had of shaving themselves on this Occasion Poll^x loc.
cit etc
, and presenting their Hair to some of the forementioned Deities, or other
Gods, to whom they had particular Obligations: The Megarensian Virgins offered
their Hair with Libations at the Monument of Iphinoe, Daughter of Alcathous,
who died a Virgin; the Delians to Hecaerge and Opis Paus^nias Atticis.
; the Argians and Athenians (to trouble you with no more Instances) to Minerva:
Statius has mentioned this Ceremony Thebaid. II.
, speaking of that Goddess's Temple, -- Hic more parentum
Iasides, thalamis ubi casta adolesceret aetas,
Virgineas libare comas, primosque solebant
Excusare toros. --
When maiden Blushes could claim no Pretense,
And vigorous Age had fully'd Innocence,
As anciently, the Argives hither came
To vent their Passion, and their Love proclaim,
They paid Diana then their Virgin Hair
TO excuse the first Embraces of their Dear.
Mr. Abell. But these Names ((...) and (...)) were at Athens peculiar to one
Day of the Solemnity called Apaturia, wherein Fathers had their Children
entered into the public Register, at which Time they offered Sacrifices for
their Prosperity, with a particular Respect to their Marriages, and commonly
shaved off some of their Hair to be dedicated to some of the Deities,
especially her to whose Honor that Festival was celebrated. But though the Time
of presenting their Hair might not be constantly the same, yet the Custom it
self seems to have been universally observed not only by Women, but M^n, who
rarely failed of performing this Ceremony upon their Arrival to Years of
Maturity: Some of their Locks were carefully preserved for this Use, and
therefore when Pentheus in Euripides threatens Bacchus to shave his Hair, the
young God tells him it would be an impious Action, because he designed it for
an Offering to some Deity Bacch. v. 594.
, (...)
This Lock is sacred, this I do preserve
As some choice votive Offering for the God.
The Hair was called (...), because presented to a God, as an Acknowlegement of
his Care in their Education. The Deity thus honored was commonly Apollo, as
Plutarch reports, when he tells us, that Theseus, according to the Custom of
the Grecian Youths, took a Journey to Delphi to offer the Firstfruits of his
Hair to the God of that Place Theseo.
. But this could not concern the poorer sort, to whom such Journies would have
been too expensive, nor were those of better Quality under any strict
Obligation to pay this Honor to Apollo, it being not un^sual to do it to other
Gods, such especially as were thought to have protected their Infancy from
Danger, and preserved them to Manhood: Instances are needless in a Thing so
well known, only it may be necessary to observe, that the Deities of Rivers
were commonly thought to have Title to this Respect, which Conceit seems to
have proceeded from the Opinion of some Philosophers, who thought all Things
were first produced out of Water, and still nourished, and rendered fruitful
by it, whence the Poets took Occasion to give the Epithet (...) to watery
Deities, as well as Apollo, those being no les^ instrumental in the Growth and
Increase of living Creatures than the Sun, whose Influences without Moisture
can contribute nothing to the Production, or Preservation of Life: Hence both
were looked on as deserving their Returns of Gratitude for the first Gift, as
well as Continuance of Life Eustath^us I^iad ^ ubi hanc rem fosius e^^rrat.
. I shall only trouble you with the following Example of Hair presented to
Rivers, whereby what I have said concerning the Reason of this Custom will be
confirmed; for Achilles's preserving his Hair as a Present to Sperchius on
Condition he should return home in safety, and afterward shaving it when he
found the Fates had decreed that he should be slain before Troy, plainly show
that they used to preserve their Hair to the Gods, as a grateful
Acknowlegement of their Care in preserving them: Homer's Words run thus, when
he speaks of Patroclus's Funeral Iliad. ^. v. 140.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
"(...)
Then did Achilles, that brave Prince, prepare
For other Rites, he Shaved his golden Hair,
While at a distance from the Pile he stood,
That Hair, he would nourished, Sperchius, for thy Flood;
Then, as he looked upon the Stream, he said,
(While Grief and Anguish did his Soul invade)
"My loving Father made a vow (in vain)
"That, when I see my native Soil again,
"I should my Hair in pious Duty shave
"To thee, and thou an Hecatomb should have;
"That fifty Rams I to thy Source should bring,
"And pay them at thy Shrine a thankful Offering:
"Thus, thus old Peleus vowed, but since I cannot
"Return, and you will his Wish by no means grant,
"My dear Patroclus I Am resolved shall have
"These Locks, it is for him I do 'em I..
Mr. Abell.

To return: Before the Marriage could be solemnized, the other Gods were
consulted, and their Assistance implored by Prayers and Sacrifices, which were
usually offered to some of the Deities that superintended these Affairs by the
Parents, or other Relations of the Persons to be married: Nor can these
Offerings be thought the same with those already mentioned, and called (...),
since we find them plainly distinguished by Euripides in a Dialogue between
Agamemnon, and Clytaemnestra concerning the Marriage of their Daughter
Iphigenia, KLY. (...)

AGA. (...)

KLY. (...)

AGA. (...) E^ri^id. ^^higen* in Aulid. v. 718
.

CLY. Well, have you killed the Victims for the Goddess,
My Daughter's Wedding to initiat^?

AGA. I Will see that done, for that is my Design.

CLY. And then the Wedding-dinner?

AGA. That we'll have, When to the Gods the Victims offered are.

Mr. Abell. When the Victim was opened, the Gall was taken out, and thrown
behind the Altar Calius Rhodiginus lib XXVIII. cap. XXI.
, as being the Seat of Anger and Malice, and therefore the Aversion of all the
Deities that had the Care of Love, as well as those who became their Votaries:
The Entrails were carefully inspected by Soothsayers, and if any unlucky Omen
presented it self, the former Contract was dissolved as displeasing to the
Gods, and the Nup^ials prevented: The same happened upon the appearing of any
ill-boding Omen without the Victim; thus we find in Achil^es Tatius that
Cli^ophon's designed Marriage with Calligone was hindered by, an Eagle, that
snatched a Piece of the Sacrifice from the Altar Lib. II.
. The most fortunate Omen that could appear was a Pair of Turtles, because of
the inviolable Affection those Birds are said to have for each other: The same
may be observed o^* (...), which were thought to promise long Life, or
Happiness, by reason of the Length of their Lives, which is proverbially
remarkable, and the Perpetuity of their Love, for, when one of the Mates is
dead, the other remains solitary ever after Alexand. ^b. Alex.
; for which reason, the Appearance of those Birds single boded Separation, or
Sorrow to the married Couple, whence (as we are told by Horapollo) it was
customary at Nuptials to sing (...), whereby the Maids were put in mind to
watch that none of these Birds coming single should disturb the Solemnity; o^,
perhaps, it might be done to avert the pernicious Influences of so unlucky an
Omen, if it happened to appear. Another Remedy against evil Omens was this,
they wrote over their House-doors, (...), KAKON, LET NO EVIL ENTER, which
Sentence was thought a prevailing Amulet against Ill-boding Appearances, and
was sometimes joined with the Master of the House's Name, as appears from a
new-marry'd Person, who wrote thus upon his House, (...)
(...)
I. e. Here dwells Hercules, the victorious Son of Jupiter, Let no evil enter.
This gave occasion to Diogenes's Jest, for seeing upon the Door of a vicious
Fellow the forementioned Prayer, Then (said he) les not the Master of the
House enter Dioge^e^ La^^tius in Diogene
.

The Bride-groom's Garments were all died, as Suidas V. (...).
has observed out of Aristophanes. However that be, both the married Persons,
and all their Attendants were richly adorned, according to their Quality; (...)
(...)
The ^ime was nigh completed, when a Bride
You was to be, and richly dre^t in Clothes,
With your Attendants on that solemn Time.
They were likewise decked with Garlands of various Herbs and Flowers; whence
Clytaemnestra in Euripides speaks thus to Achilles about her Daughter Iphigenia
Iphigen. in Aulid. v. 903
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Thou darling Offspring of a Goddess, help,
Pity, redress, avenge my woeful Loss
In my dear Child, thy Wife, but oh! in vain,
Though I had cro^n'd her to be wedded to thee.
Mr. Abell. The Herbs were usually such as some way or other signified the
Affairs of Marriage, as those sacred to Venus, or (which are mentioned by the
Scholiast P^ce.
upon Aristopha^^s), (...), etc. Cakes made of Sesame were likewise given at
Marriages, that Herb being (...), remarkable for it is Fruitfulness, according
to the same Author. The Boeotians used Garlands of wild Asparagus, which is
full of Prickles, but bears excellent Fruit, and therefore was thought to
resemble the Bride, who had given her Lover some trouble in courting her, and
gaining her Affections, which she recompensed afterward by the Pleasantness of
her Conversation. The House, where the Nuptials were celebrated, was likewise
decked with Garlands: A Pestil was tied upon the Door, and a Maid carried a
Sieve Pollux lib. III. cap. III.
, the Bride her self bearing (...), or (...) Idem lib. I cap. XII.
an earthen Vessel, wherein Barley was parched, to signify her Obligation to
attend the Business of her Family.

The Bride was usually conducted in a Chariot from her Father's House to her
Husband's about Evening Suid^^ v (...). Eustathius Ili^d. ^. p. 765. Ed. Bas.
: She was placed in the Middle, her Husband sitting on one Side, and one of his
most intimate Friends on the other, whom we therefore find called (...); this
Custom was so frequent, that, when the Bride went to her Husband's House on
foot, the Person, who accompanied her, retained the same Name: The same was
called (...), and (...) Hesychius v. (...).
, though this is more commonly used in the feminine Gender, and signifies the
Woman that waited upon the Bride, sometimes called (...). When the Bridegroom
had been married before, he was not permitted to fetch the Bride from her
Father's House, but that Care was committed to one of his Friends, who was
termed (...) Hes^^hius, vide Tolluci^ Onomast. lib III. it^m Suidam,
Phavorinum, caeterosque Lexicographos.
, or (...), which Words are likewise taken for the Persons that assisted in
making up the Match, and managing all Concerns about the Marriage, who (if
Women) were called (...), etc. One Thing may be observed in the Bride's Passage
to her Husband's House, viz. that Torches were carried before her, as appears
from the Messenger in Euripides, who says he called to mind the Time when he
bore Torches before Menelaus and Helena; his Words are thus addressed to Helena
Helen, v. 728.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I call to mind as yesterday the Pomp
Of your Procession on the wedding Day;
How you was carried in a Coach and Four,
While I with Torches blazing in the Air
Drove sore-most on from your dear Parent's Horse,
That happy Nurs'ry of your tender Years.
Mr. Abell. For these Torches were usually carried by Servants, as appears from
the following Words of Hesiod Scut. Hercul. v 275.
, (...)
(...) --
The Servants then did flaming Torches bear,
Which darted forth a quivering Light from f^^.
They were sometimes attended with Singers and Dancers, as Homer acquaints us
in his Description of Achilles's Shield Il^ad. ^. ^. 49^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
With nice and curious Touches next appear
Two stately Cities; in one Nuptials are,
Here polished Art with Nature does agree
In framing Figures of Festivity,
Feasts, Revels, Balls the Sculpture represents
With various sorts of Musick-instruments,
Lamps shine with Brightness on the solemn State,
While the brisk Bridegroom leads his charming Ma^e,
Measures young Men observe with active Feet,
While the Pomp does advance along the Street,
The Music plays, Hymen, Hymen, they cry,
While aged Matrons stand admiring by.
Mr. Abel^. The Song they were entertained with in their Passage, was called
(...), from (...), or the Coach they rode in, the Axle-tree whereof they
burned, when arrived at their Journey's End, thereby signifying, that the Bride
was never to return to her Father's House. The Rhodians had a peculiar Custom
of sending for the Bride by a public Crier. When the Bridegroom entered the
House with his Bride, it was customary to pour upon their Heads Figgs, and
diverse other sorts of Fruits, as an Omen of the Plenty they were to enjoy (...)
Scholiastes in P^atum p. 78.
. The Day of the Bride's Departure from her Father was celebrated in the Manner
of a Festival, and called (...) H^^^^^^ (...)
: It seems to have been observed at her Father's House before she departed, it
being distinct from the nuptial Solemnity, which was kept at the Bride-groom's
House, and began at Evening, the usual Time of the Bride's Arrival there.

The Bride, being come to the Bridegroom's House, was entertained with a
sumptuous Banquet, called by the same Name with the Marriage, viz. (...), as
Pollux has observed from the following Verse in Homer, (...)
A shot-free Banquet, or a Marriage Feast,
Not such as is by Contribution made.
Whence (...) is to make a nuptial Entertainment, as in Homer Iliad. ^.
, -- (...)
To make a Marriage Feast for the Myrmidons.
The same Poet has this Expression in other Places Odyss. ^.
, (...)
Making a nuptial Banquet for his Friends.
What was the design of this Entertainment we learn from Athenaeus, who (to
pass by the Joy and Mirth it was intended to promote) tells us, there were two
Reasons for it; the first was the Respect due to the Gods of Marriage, who were
invoked before the Feast, and had no small Share in it, and it is thought by
some that most of the Grecian Festivals were first observed on this Ground: The
second End of this Entertainment was, that the Marriage might be made public
Athenaus lib. V. cap. 1. initio.
, for all the Relations of the married Couple were invited as Witnesses of
their Marriage, and to rejoice with them: Whence the young Man in Terence
concludes, the Marriage he there speaks of could not be presently consummated,
because Time was required to invite Friends, and make necessary Preparations
Phorm. Act. IV. Sc. IV.
, Ducenda est uxor, ut ais; concedo tibi:
Spatium quid^m apparandis nuptiis,
Vocandi, sacrificandi dabitur pautulum.
That he is obliged to marry her I grant,
But then some Time before must be allowed
For the procuring of all Requisites;
His Friends must be invited to the Wedding,
And he address the Gods with Sacrifice.
Mr. Hutchin.

During the Solemnity, the Company diverted themselves, and honored the Gods
of Marriage with Music and Dances; we seldom read of a Marriage without them:
All the Songs were call'^ (...), or (...); thus both Homer and Hefiod, -- (...)
Many Hymen's sung. --
The Romans used the same Term T^rentius Adelph.
, Hymenaeum, turbas, lampadas, tibicines.
Your Hymen's, Hubbubs, Flambeaus, and Scrapers.
The reason of this Name was from the frequent Invocations of Hymen, or
Hymenaeus, the God of Marriage, always made in these Songs; as in this Verse of
Catullus, Io Hymen, Hymenaee Hymen ade^, o Hymenaee.
This Hymenaeus, we are told, was an Argian, whom H^m^ri Scholia^tes Iliad. ^.
v. 593.
they received into the Number of their Gods, and thus remembered for a
generous Action in delivering certain Athenian Virgins from the Lust and
Cruelty of some Pelasgians: Others derive the Word (...) from the married
Couple's inhabiting together; others, lastly, from (...), which signifies the
membrana virginalis.

About the Time of their Entertainment there were several significant
Ceremonies relating some way, or other to the State of Marriage; one at Athens
was this, there came in a Boy covered with Thorn-boughs and Acorns, carrying a
Basket full of Bread, and singing (...), i. e. I have left the worse, and found
the better: Which Saying was used at one of their Festivals, when they
commemorated their Change of Diet from Acorns to Corn, but seems at this time
to have signified also the Happiness the married Persons were entering upon,
and that Marriage was preferable to a single Life. The Lacedaemonians had a
Custom of carrying about a sort of Cakes made in various Figures, and called
(...), whilst they danced, and commended the Bride in their Songs Athenaus lib.
X.
,

When the Dances were at an end, the married Couple were conducted to the
Marriage Bed, which was called in Latin lectus genialis, in Greek (...), or
(...), or (when the Persons were first married, and in their youth) (...): It
was rich^y adorned as the Quality of the Person would bear; the Covering was
usually of Purple, whence the Poet De nuptiis Pele^ and Thetid^ v. 1402
, Purpureu^^e (...) consternens vest cubile.
Spreading a Garment over thy purple Bed.
Apollonius speaks of the same Color, and of Flowers wherewith they used to
straw it Arg^^. IV. v. 1141.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Then richly they adorned the Marriage Bed,
A costly purple Skin they over it spread,
And that the Nuptials they might celebrate
With more magnificent and pompous State,
The beauteous Nymphs brought in their snowy Breasts
Flowers of various Colors. --
Mr. Hutchin. in the same Room there was commonly placed a Side-bed called
(...) Hesychius.
, (...), as Pollux accounts for the Custom Lib. III. cap. III.
. But, before they went to Bed, the Bride bathed her Feet, whence Trygeus in
Aristophanes Pace.
, intending to marry Opora, no sooner brings her to his House, but commands his
Servants to provide a Vessel of Water, then to make ready the Bed, (...)
(...)
(...)
Bring home my Bride as soon as possible,
Then wash the Vessel, and the Water warm,
And next prepare for us the nuptial Bed.
This Water the Athenians always fetched from the Fountain Calli^hoe,
afterward called (...) from nine Cisterns supplied by it with Water; the
Person that brought it was a Boy nearly allied to one of the married Couple,
whom they termed (...) from his Office Suidas, Pollux loc. cit.
: This being done, the Bride was lighted to Be^ with several Torches, for a
single Torch was not enough, as may be observed from the Miser in Libanius
Declamat. XXXVII.
, that complains he could not light the Bride to Bed with one Torch: Round one
of the Torches the married Person's Mother tied her Hair-lace, which she took
off for this Use, and made up her Hair with another, S^neca alludes to this
Custom Theb. v. 505.
, -- Non te duxit in thelamos parens
Comitata primos, nec sua sestas manu
Ornavit ^des, nec sua laetas faces
Vitta revinxit. --
Your Mother did not at the Wedding wait,
Nor you into your Chamber introduce,
Nor with her Hand the bridal House adorned,
Nor with her Hair-lace tied the joyful Torch.
Mr. Hutchin The Relations of the married Persons assisted in the Solemnity,
and it was looked on as no small Misfortune to be absent; the Mothers
especially were assiduous in lighting Torches, when their Son's Wives entered
the House: Iocasta in Euripides severely chid^^ Polynices for marrying in a
foreign Country, because she, with the rest of his Relations and Friends, were
deprived of their Offices at his Nuptials Ph^^i^. v. 339. in quem locum vide
Scholiast^m
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But, you, my Son, not without Grief I hear,
Are joined in Wedlock in a foreign Land,
There taste the Pleasures of the genial Bed,
And on a Stranger propagate your Kind;
This, this is Matter of most killing Grief
To me, and your good Grandsire Laius,
When we reflect upon those coming Ills,
That must undoubtedly attend the Match:
For neither I, as well becomes the Care
Of happy Mothers, lighted up the Torch,
And blessed the Nuptials by that pious Act;
Nor old Ismenus, rich in rolling. Streams,
Furnished out Water for your nuptial Washings,
Nor was the Entrance of your Bride proclaimed
Through Theban Streets, but all as unconcerned,
As when no Native does bring home his Bride.
Mr. Hutchin. The Bride's Mother had no less a Right to this Office, for we
find Clytaemnestra, though prosessing all due Submission to Agam^^non, when
desired by him to absent her self from Iphigenia's Marriage, steadfastly
refusing it as a Thing against all Justice, notwithstanding his Promise to
perform her Part of the Ceremony Iphigen, in A^lid. v. 731.
, KL (...)

AG (...)

KL (...)

AG (...)

KL (...)

CL. Whither, mean time, shall wretched I repair?

AG. To Arg^^, let those Maids employ your Care.

CL. And leave my Child? who then the Torch will light?

AG. That be my Care, I will perform that Rite.

CL. And is that fit, let Aganemnon judge.

Mr. Hutchin. After a little disputing, they proceed thus, AG (...)
(...)
(...)

AG. Without more Reas'nings my Demands obey.

CL. By Juno, that over Argos bears the Sway,
Sooner would wretched Clytaemnestra bleed
Than give consent to so unjust a Deed;
Affairs abroad better my Lord become,
It Is fit that I should manage Things at home.

Mr. Hutchin

The married Couple being shut together in the Chamber, the Laws of Athens
obliged them to eat a Quince, whereby was intimated that their first Discourse
ought to be pleasing and agreeable Plutarchus Solone, and in Conjugal. praecept.
. The Husband then loosed his Wife's Girdle, whence (...) is to deflowr, and
(...), a Woman who has lost her Virginity: This Girdle was not (as some seem to
phansy) worn by Maids only, but used as well after Marriage as before, being
designed to secure the weaker Sex from the sudden Attempts of Men enflamed with
Lust, whence Nonnus calls it (...), and, when he introduces the Satyrs
endeavoring to embrace certain Virgins, we find their Honor secured by it
Lib. XII. circa finem.
: The same appears farther from the Mention Authors make of untying Women's
Girdles in Childbirth, and from calling such Girls only (...), i. e. not
having a Girdle, as were not arrived to Maturity.

At this Time-the young Men and Maids stood without the Door, dancing and
singing Songs called (...) from (...) the Bride-chamber, and making a great
Noise by shouting and stamping with their Feet, which was termed (...), or
(...) H^sychius.
, and designed to drown the Maid's Cries; lest the Women should go to her
Assistance, one of the Bridegrooms Friends stood Sentinel at the Chamber Door,
and from his Office was called (...) Pollux lib. III. cap. III.
. This Song, as likewise all the rest was termed (...), and consisted of the
Praises of the Bridegroom and Bride, with Wishes for their Happiness, as may
appear (to pass by other Instances) from Theocritus's Epithalamium of Helena,
which begins thus, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
At Sparta's Palace twenty beauteous Maids,
The Pride of Greece, fresh Garlands crowned their Heads
With Hyacinth and twining Parsley dressed,
Graced joyful Menelaus's Marriage Feast,
When lovely Helen, great in conquering Charms,
Resigned her willing Beauty to his Arms:
They danced around, Joy flowed from every Tongue,
And the vast Palace sounded with the Song.
Mr. Creech. They returned again in the Morning, saluted the married Couple,
and sung (...), for that was the Name of the morning Songs, which were designed
to awake and raise the Bridegroom and Bride; as those sung the Night before
were intended to dispose them to sleep, and are on that account termed (...):
This Custom appears from Theocritus's Chorus of Virgins, who conclude the
forecited Epithalamium with a Promise to return early in the Morning, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Sleep in each other's Arms, and raise Desire,
Let ardent Breathings fan your mutual Fire,
But rise betimes, forget not, we'll return
When first the crowing Cock shall wake the Morn,
When through his feathered Throat he sends his Voice:
O Hymen, Hymen, at this Feast rejoice.
Mr. Creech.

The Solemnity lasted several Days; the Day before the Marriage was termed
(...), as preceding that whereon the Bride did (...), lodge with the
Bridegroom: The Marriage Day was called (...); the Day following, according to
Pindar, (...), which Word signifies a Day added to any Solemnity; Hesychius
(...).
calls it (...), which may, perhaps, be derived from (...), because the former
Day's Mirth was, as it were, repeated, whence the Romans called it repotia;
unless for (...) we might be allowed to read (...), and then it would be the
same with Athenaeus's (...) Lib. III. cap. XV.
, for (...) denotes any Thing that has ceased to be new, whence Tully calls a
Book (...), when Men's first and eager Enquiry after it is cooled, and
Athenaeus in another Place has opposed (...) to the (...) Lib. IV.
; others call the second Day (...), or (...) The third Day was termed (...), or
rather (...), because the Bride, returning to her Father's House, did (...),
lodge apart from the Bridegroom, though some place this upon the seventh Day
after Marriage; others will have it so called, because the Bridegroom lodged
apart from his Bride at his Father in Law's House; it is possible both may be in
the right, and that both Bridegroom and Bride might lie at her Father's House,
but in different Beds: Others make (...) to be the same with (...), whence a
seeming Difficulty arises, since those two Words import Contraries, one seeming
to denote the Bride's Lodging apart from the Bridegroom, the other with him;
but this may be easily solved by applying (...) to her lodging with her
Husband, and (...) to her Departure from her Father's House Vide Pollucem lib.
III. cap. III. Hesychiam, Sutdam, Etymologiti Auctorem, Phavorinum, etc. in
(...)
. On the Day called (...) (whenever that was) the Bride presented her
Bridegroom with a Garment called (...): Gifts were likewise made to the Bride
from her Husband, Relations, and Friends, called sometimes (...), sometimes
(...): These consisted of golden Vessels, Beds, Couches, Plates,
Ointment-boxes, Combs, Sandals, and all sorts of Necessaries for housekeeping,
which were carried in great State to the House by Women, who followed a Person
called (...) from carrying a Basket in the manner usual at Processions before
whom went a Boy in white Apparel with a Torch in his Hand: These Presents were
likewise called (...) Suidas.
, and Hesychius will have the third Day to be called (...), as if the Bride
then first appeared in public: Suidas tells us the Gifts were so called,
because she was then first shown to her Bridegroom: For the same reason they
are sometimes called (...), and (...), because the Bridegroom had then Leave
to converse freely with her; for Virgins before Marriage were under strait
Confinement, being rarely permitted to appear in public, or converse with Men;
and, when allowed that Liberty, wore a Veil over their Faces; this was termed
(...), or (...), and was not left off in the Presence of Men 'till this Time,
whence some think the Bride was called (...), i. e. (...), that being the first
Time she appeared in a public Company unveiled Pharnutus de Natura Deorum in
Neptuno.
: Hence the Poets speak of Pluto's Gifts to Proserpina, when she unveiled her
self, as in those Verses of Euphorion cited by the Scholiast upon Euripides
Thoenissis.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Pluto to Proserpine a Present gave
When first she laid aside her maiden Veil,
And at the Marriage showed her self uncovered.
There is a Story of the Sophister Hermocrates relating to this Custom that,
having a Woman not very agreeable imposed upon him by Severus the Roman
Emperor, and being asked his (...) when she took off her Veil, he replied
(...), It would be more proper to make her a Present to keep her Veil on,
unless her Face was more acceptable.

The Ceremonies of the Spartan Marriages being different from all others, I
have reserved them for this Place, and shall set them down in Plutarch's own
Words Lycurgo p. 48. Edit. Paris.
, When the Spartans had a mind to marry, their Courtship was a sort of Rape
upon the Persons they had a Phansy for, and those they chose not tender and
half Children, but in the Flower of their Age, and full ripe for an Husband:
Matters being agreed between them, the (...), or Woman that contrived and
managed the Plot, shaved off the Bride's Hair close to her Skin, dressed her up
in Man's Clothes, and left her upon a Mattress: This done, in comes the
Bridegroom in his every-day Clothes, sober and composed, as having supped at
his Ordinary in the common Hall, and steals as privately as he can into the
Room where the Bride lay, unties her Virgin Girdle, and takes her into his
Embraces; thus having stayed a short time with her, he returns to the rest of
his Comrades, with whom he continues to spend his Life, remaining with them as
well by Night as by Day, unless he steals a short Visit to his Bride, and that
could not be done without a great deal of Circumspection and Fear of being
discovered: Nor was she wanting (as may be supposed) on her Part, to use her
Woman's Wit in watching the most favorable Opportunities for their meeting,
and making Appointments when Company was out of the way. In this Manner they
lived a long time, insomuch that they frequently had Children by their Wives
before they saw their Faces by Daylight: The Interview, being thus difficult
and rare, served not only for a continual Exercise of their Temperance, and
furthered very much the Ends and Intentions of Marriage, but was a means to
keep their Passion still alive, which flaggs, and decays, and dies at last by
two easy Access and long Continuance with the beloved Object.

CHAPTER XII. Of their Divorces, Adulteries, Concubines, and Harlots.
THE Grecian Laws concerning Divorces were different; some permitted Men to put
away their Wives on slight Occasions; the Cretans allowed it any Man that was
afraid of having too great a Number of Children; the Athenians likewise did it
upon very small Grounds, but not without giving a Bill, wherein was contained
the Reason of their Divorce, to be approved (if the Party divorced made an
Appeal) by the chief Magistrate Genial. Diet. lib IV. cap. VIII.
. The Spartans, though marrying without much Nicety in Choice, seldom divorced
their Wives, for we read that Lysander was fined by the Magistrates called
Ephori on that account; and though Aristo, one of their Kings, put away his Wife
with the Approbation of the City, yet that seems to have been done rather out
of an earnest Desire to have a Son to succeed in his Kingdom, which he could
not expect by that Woman, than according to the Custom of his Country Herodotus
lib. VI. cap. LXIII.
. But, whatever Liberty the Men took, their Wives were under a greater
Restraint, for it was extremely scandalous for a Woman to depart from her
Husband, whence we find Medea in Eur^pides complaining of the hard Fate of her
Sex, who had no Remedy against the Men's Unkindness, but were first under a
Necessity of buying their Husbands with large Portions, and then to submit to
their ill Usage without Hopes of Redress Medea v. 230.
, (...)
(...)
As (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Of all those Creatures, to whom kinder Heaven
Has Life and more exalted Reason given,
We Women the most wretched Fate endure;
First Husbands we at highest Rates procure,
Then yield our selves submissive to their Power:
But oh! the Curse, the Hazard lies in this,
If he is unkind I choose there is no Redress,
But good, or bad, I am for ever his;
Divorces are too scandalous to name,
And no Law suffers us to throw off them.
Mr. Hutchin. The Athenians were somewhat more favorable to Women, allowing
them to leave their Husbands upon just Occasions; only they could not do it
without making Appeal to the Arch^^ and presenting him a Bill of their
Grievances with their own Hand^: Plutarch Alci^iad^.
has a Story of Hipp^rete Alcibiades's Wife, who (he tells us) was a virtuous
Lady, and sond of her Husband* but at last, growing impatient of the Injuries
done to her Bed by his continual entertaining of Curtezans, as well Strangers
as Athenians, she departed from him, and retired to her Brother Callias's
House* Alcibiades seemed not at all concerned a^ it, living on still in his
former lewd Course of Life; but the Law requiring that she should deliver to
the Arch^n in Person, and not by a Pro^y, the Instr^^ whereby she su'd for a
Divorce, when in Obedience to it she presented her self before him, Alcibiades
came in, took her away by Force, and carried her home through the F^r^m, no Man
dating to oppose him, or take her from him, and she continued with him 'till
her Death: Nor was this Violence to be thought a Crime, for the Law, in making
her, who desires a Divorce, appear in public, seems to design her Husband
should have an Opportunity of discoursing with her, and endeavoring to retain
her. Persons that divorced their Wives were obliged to return their Portions,
as has been observed in the foregoing Chapter; if they failed to do that, the
Athenian Laws obliged them to pay her nine obo^ a Month for Alimony, which the
Woman's Guardian was empowered to sue for at the Court kept in the Odeum
Demosti^nes Orat. in Ne^r^m.
. It may be observed, lastly, that the Terms expressing Men and Women's
Separation from each other were different; Men were said (...), dimittere, to
dismiss their Wives, or loose them from their Obligation; but Wives, (...),
divortere, discedere, to leave, or depart from their Husbands.

It was not unusual to dissolve the Marriage-tye by Consent of both Parties,
and, that done, they were at liberty to dispose of themselves how they pleased
in a second Ma^ch: An Instance hereof we have in Plutarch, who reports that,
when ^ericles and his Wife could not agree, and became weary of one another's
Company, he parted with her, willing and consenting to it, to another Man
Pericle.
. There is somewhat more remarkable in the Story of Antiochus the Son of
Seleucus, who falling desperately in love with Stratonice his Mother in Law,
married her with his Father's Consent Plutarchus Demetrio, Valerius Maximus
lib. V. cap. VII.
. The Romans had the same Custom, as appears from Cato's parting with his Wife
Martia to Hortensius, which, as Strabo assures us, was a Thing not unusual, but
agreeable to the Practice of the old Romans Geograph. lib. VII.
, and some other Countries.

What may appear more strange, is, that it was frequent in some Parts of Greece
to borrow one (...)'s Wife^: We need not go to Athens for the Example of
Socrates, who, we are told, lent his Wife Xantippe to Alcibiades Tertullia^u^
Apolog. cap. XXXIX.
, or for their Law which permitted Heiresses to make use of their Husband's
nearest Relation, when they found him deficient; since we have so frequent
Instances in Sparta, which was the least addicted to Debauchery, or Looseness of
any of the Grecian Commonwealths, as being governed by the severest Laws, and
kept under the most rigid Discipline: We have the following Account of their
Practice in this Affair from Plutarch Lycurgo.
, Lycurgus the Spartan Lawgiver (he tells us) thought the best Expedient
against Jealousy was to allow Men the Freedom of imparting the Use of their
Wives to whom they should think fit, that so they might have Children by them;
this he made a very commendable Piece of Liberality, laughing at those, who
thought the Violation of their Bed such an insupportable Affront as to revenge
it by Murders, and cruel Wars: He had a good opinion of that Man, who, being
grown old, and having a young Wife, should recommend some virtuous, handsome
young Man, that she might have a Child by him to inherit the good Qualities of
such a Father, and should love this Child as tenderly, as if begotten by
himself: On the other Side, an honest Man, who had love for a married Woman
upon the account of her Modesty, and the Well-favour'dness of her Children,
might with good Grace beg of her Husband his Wife's Conversation, that he might
have a Cyon of so goodly a Tree to transplant into his own Garden; for Lycurgus
was persuaded that Children were not so much the Property of their Parents, as
of the whole Commonwealth, and therefore, would not have them begotten by the
first Comers, but by the best Men that could be ^ound: Thus much (proceeds my
Author) is certain, that, so long as these Ordinances were observed, the Women
were so far from that scandalous Liberty, which has since been objected to
them, that they knew not what the Name of Adultery meant. We are farther told
by others, that Strangers, as well as Citizens of Sparta, were allowed the same
Freedom with their Wives, provided they were handsome Men, and likely to beget
lusty and vigorous Children Nicolaus de moribus apud (...)
; yet we find their Kings were exempt from this Law, that the Royal Blood might
be preserved unmixed, and the Government remain in the same lineal Descent.

Notwithstanding this Liberty, which was founded upon mutual Consent, they
accounted all other Adulteries the most heinous Crimes in the World, and,
whilst they kept to their ancient Laws, were wholly Strangers to them; for we
are told by Plutarch Loco citat^
, That Geradas, a primitive Spartan, being asked by a Stranger, What Punishment
their Law had appointed for Adulterers? replied; There were no Adulterers in
his Country: But, returned the Stranger, suppose there were one, and the Crime
were proved against him, how would you punish him? He answered, That the
Offender must pay to the Plaintiff a Bull with a Neck so long as that he might
reach over the Mountain Taygetus, and drink of the River Eurotas that runs on
the other Side: The Man, surpised at this, said, Why, it is impossible to find
such a Bull: Geradas smilingly replied, It Is just as possible to find an
Adulterer in Sparta.

The Punishments inflicted upon Adulterers in Greece were of diverse sorts, some
of which are these that follow.

To begin with the Heroic Ages: If the Rapes of Women may be allowed Room in
this Place, we shall find they were revenged by many cruel and bloody Wars:
Herodotus makes them to have given the first Occasion to that constant Enmity
that was kept up for many Ages between Greece and Asia, and never allayed 'till
the later was conquered, and become subject to the former Lib I. initio.
; Lycophron agrees with Herodotus, and makes the Rape of Io by the Phoenicians
to have incensed the Grecians against the Inhabitants of Asia, and after
frequent Injuries committed, and War, waged on both Sides, to have reduced the
Asian Empire under the Dominion of the Europeans under Alexander of Maccaon;
the Poof Words run thus Cassand^a v. 1291.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
May those Phoenician Saylors be accursed,
That Io did convey from Lerna first,
Those savage Mariners, that forced the Maid
To be the Part'ner of Osiris's Bed,
And the two Empires thus embroiled in War.
Mr. Hutchin. He goes on to enumerate the continual Quarrels between the (...)
Continents 'till Alexander's Time. But however the Truth of this may be
questioned, there being in those early Ages no Distincti^n of the World into
Gree^ and Barbarians, nor any common Association of those amongst themselves,
or against the others; yet we have a remarkable Instance (to omit several
others) of a long and bloody War occasioned by Paris's Rape of Helen. But to
bring some Instances, which may seem more pertinent to our present D^^sign;
what Sentence the Heroic Ages passed upon Adultery may appear, as from the
Revenge of Atreus upon his Brother Thyestes, who was entertained at a Banquet
with the Flesh of his own Son for defiling Aerope Atreus's Wife, and other
Examples of the Cruelty of the Men of those Times against such as committed
Adultery with their Wives, or other near Relations; so more clearly from the
Punishments inflicted by Laws, or Magistrates upon such Offenders, who were
usually stoned to Death; whence Hector in Homer tells Paris his Crime in
stealing another Man's Wife deserved no less a Punishment than (...), a stone
Coat, which, if he had received his Demerits, he should have put on; meaning
that nothing but this Death could expiate so black an Action* (...) Iliad.
(...).
.
For these your Crimes you had been stoned to Death.
The same Punishment seems to have been frequent in more Eastern Countries, the
Jews were particularly obliged to inflict it both on Men and Women, as appears
from the express Words of their Law Deuteronom cap XXII.
. Rich Adulterers were sometimes allowed to redeem themselves with Money, which
was called (...), and paid to the Adulteress's Husband; whence, Mars being
taken with Venus, Homer's Gods all agree that he must pay his Fine to Vulcan
Odyss. ^ v. 329. ubi Gracu^ Scholiastes consulendus.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
An ill Event does still on Ills attend,
Not Mars's Swiftness could the God defend
From limping Vulcan's most unerring Snare,
But in it he surpised the adult'rous Pair,
Therefore a greater Fine Mars ought to pay.
Mr. Hutchin. Nor could Vulcan consent to set his Prisoner at liberty, 'till
Neptune engaged for the Payment of it Ibid. v. 354.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Then Neptune, who the well-fix'd Earth does shake
In answer to distrusting Vulcan spoke;
"If you're afraid that Mars will play the Cheat,
"That he will abscond and never pay the Debt,
"I Will it discharge. --
Mr. Hutchin. It appears from the same Place to have been customary for the
Woman's Father to return all the Dowry he had received of her Husband, for
Vulcan is introduced threatening to secure both Mars and Venus in Chains 'till
that was done V. 317.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I Will not rel^ase them from the binding Chain
'Till I that Dowry have received again,
Which I for Venus to her Father paid
'Cause she was handsome, though a Jilt. --
Mr. Hutchin. Some think this Sum was refunded by the Adulterer, because 'twas
reasonable he should bear the Woman's Father harmless; since it appears not
that Mars's Mulct was a distinct Sum, for upon Neptune's becoming Surety for
it, Vulcan loosed him from his Bonds without farther Scruple.

Another Punishment was putting out the Eyes of Adulterer^, which seems to have
been no less ancient than the former, and may be thought just and reasonable,
as depriving the Offendo^ of that Member, which first admits the Incentives of
Lust. Fabulous Writers tell us, that Orion, having defiled Candiope, or Me^ope,
had his Eyes put out by Oenopion, whom some will have to be the Lady's Husband,
others her Father Na^alu Comes M^tholog. Servius in Aenei^.
: Phoenix Achilles's Guardian suffered the same Punishment for defiling Cl^tia
his Father's Concubine Apollod^rus lib. III.
, which is thus expressed by Lycophron ^assand^a v. 421.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
The Object of Amyntor's greatest Hate,
And whom, since he his Clytia had defiled,
He most inhumanly deprived of Sight.
Homer indeed has no mention of this Punishment, but only informs us, that his
Father, having discovered him, prayed that he might never have any Children
^liad. ^. v. 455.
, which Tzetzes In Lycophr^n. loc. citat.
thinks is meant by loosing his Eyes, because Children are dearer to Parents,
and afford them greater Comfort than their most necessary Members; but this
Interpretation is forced, and contrary to the Sense of Mythologists ancient as
well as modern, who relate the Story agreeably to the literal Meaning of
Lycophron's Words. The Locrians observed this Custom in later Ages, being
obliged thereto by Zaleucus their Lawgiver, whose Rigor in executing this Law
is very remarkable; for having caught his Son in Adultery, he resolved to
deprive him of Sight, and remained a long time inexorable, notwithstanding the
whole City was willing to remit the Punishment, and requested him to spare the
Youth; at length, unable to resist the People's Importunity, he mitigated the
Sentence, and redeemed one of his Son's Eyes by another of his own Valerius
Ma^imus lib. VI. cap. V.
; ^o at once becoming a memorable Example of Justice and Mercy.

At Gortyn in C^^te there was another Method of punishing Adulterers: They were
covered with Wool, an Emblem of the Softness and Effeminacy of their Tempers,
and in that Dress carried through the City to the Magistrate's House, who
sentenced them ^o Ignominy, whereby they were deprived in a manner of all their
Privileges, and their Share in managing public Business C^^^tus Rho^i^^nus lib
XXI. c^p. XLV.
.

It would be endles^ to enumerate all the Penalties ordered for these
Offenders, I shall therefore pass to the Athenian Laws, when I have first
acquainted you, that, if credit may be given to Pausanias B^^^t^^^ p. 597* 598.
Ed. Ha^^^.
* the first, who made a Law, and constituted Punishments against Adulterers,
was Hy^ttus an Inhabitant of Argos; who having caught Molurus, the Son of
Arisbas, too familiar with his Wife, slew him, and fled to Orchomenus the Son
of Minyas, then King of that City of B^^otia, which bore his Name; the King
received him kindly, and gave him Part of his Territories, where he called a
Village Hye^tus after his own Name, and established severe Laws against
Adultery.

The Athen^an Punishments seem to have been arbitrary, and left to their
supreme Magistrate's Discretion; whence we find Hippomenes, one of Codrus's
Posterity, and Archon of Athens, pronouncing a very odd Sentence upon his own
Daughter Limone, and the Man caught in Adultery with her; he yoked them to a
Chariot, 'till the Man died; and afterward shut up his Daughter with an Horse,
and so star^'d her to Death Hera^^ides de Polit. Athen.
. Some time after, Draco, being invested with Power to enact Laws, left
Adulterers at the Mercy of any Man that caught them in the Act, who had free
License to dismember, murder, or treat them in what other manner he pleased
without being called to account for it; which Punishment was the same that had
been before appointed for this Crime by Hyettus P^usan^as lo^. cit. Demosthenes
in Arist^^cratem.
, and was continued afterward by Solon Plutar^^^s Solone, Lysias Orat.
. Several other Punishments were ordered by Solon against the same Crime when
proved by Evidence in lawful Judicature: A Man that ravished a free Woman was
fined an hundred Drachms; one that enticed her, twenty Pl^t^rchu^ loc. cit.
, or (as some say) two hundred; it being a greater Crime to violate a Woman's
Mind, than her Body: But he that forced a free Virgin was to pay a thousand;
and whoever deflower'd one, was obliged to marry her; whence Plautus introduces
one, who had corrupted a Man's Daughter, speaking to her Father thus Au^^^a^ia.
, Siquid ego erga te imprudens peccavi, aut gnatam tuam,
Ut mihi ignos^as, eamque uxorem des, ut leges jubent.
If, Sir, I Have injured you I crave your Pardon,
And if I Have wronged your Daughter's Chastity,
The Laws command it, and I Will marry her.
But if the Virgin, or her Mother had accepted any Present from her Gallant, he
was not obliged to make her his Wife, but she was looked on as a common
Strumpet; whence Sostrata in Tere^^e has these Words after her Daughter had
been defiled Ade^ph. Act III. Sc. II.
, Pejore res loco non potis est esse, quam in hoc, quo nunc sua est;
Primum indotata est; tum praeterea, quae secunda ei dos erat,
Periit, pro virgin dari nuptum non potest: Hoc relliquom est,
Si inficias ibit, testis mecum est annulus, quem amiserat:
Postremo, quando ego conscia mi sum, a me culpam esse hanc procul,
Neque pretium, neque rem ullam intercessisse illa, aut me indignam; Geta,
Experiar. --
Matters were never worse than now they are;
For first she has no Portion; and for That,
Which might have been instead of one, she is lost;
So that she cannot pass for a Virgin now:
I have but this one Thing that gives me Hopes,
If he deny't, the Ring he lost will prove it:
And Geta, since I know my Conscience clear,
Since I no By-ends had in this Mishap,
Nor took a Bribe, that I might blush to own,
I Will stand a Trial with him at the Law.
Mr. Hutchin. The Athenians had another Law, which seems enacted afterward,
obliging Persons that committed Rapes to pay a Mulct twice as great as was
required for Adultery acted with the Woman's Consent. When a Man was clapped up
on Suspicion of Adultery, he was allowed to prefer his Appeal to the
Magistrates called Thesmothetae, who acquitted him, if he was able to purge
himself; but if the Crime was proved against him, they had Power to lay on him,
Death only excepted, what Punishment they pleased; nor could he be discharged
'till he had given Bail for his good Behavior for the future. There was
another remarkable Punishment for Adulterers, called (...), or (...), the part
being put for the whole; for, having plucked off the Hair from their Privities,
^^^y threw hot As^es upon the Place, and thrust up a Radish, Mul^^^, or some
such Thing into their Fundament, whence they were (...) after termed (...):
Iuvenal mentions this Usage Sat. X. 317.
, -- Qu^^sdam machos and mugilis intrat.
And some Adulterers a Mullet bores.
(...) poor Men only were thus dealt with, the Rich being allowed (...) bring
themselves off with paying their Fine A^ist^^h^r ^is (...) N^bibus
.

Women were treated with no l^ss Seve^ity than Men, for Plutarch tells u^,
that, if any Person di^cove^'d his Sister, or Daughter, whilst unmarry'd, in
this Crime, he was allowed by Solon's Laws to ^^ll her for a Slave:
Adulteresses were never after permitted to adorn themselves with fine Clothes;
and, in case they appeared to do so, were liable to have them torn off by any
that met them, and likewise to be beaten, though not so as to be killed, or
disabled; the same Liberty was permitted any that found them in the T^mples,
which were thought polluted by the Admission of Per^^ns so infamous and
detestable: Lastly, their Husbands, though ^illing to do it, were forbidden to
cohabit any longer with them upon pain of Ignominy, or Disfranchisment
Demosthe^e^ Orat. ^word.
; But Persons that prostituted Women, were adjudg'd to dye Vide Leges Atticas
fine lib ^ ^ 161, 162
.

We have seen what the Greeks thought of Adultery, but they appear to have had
a more favorable Opinion of Concubinag^, it being permitted every where, and
that without Scandal, to keep as many Concubines as they pleased; these they
styled (...), they were usually Women taken Captives, or bought with Money, and
always inferior to lawful Wives, whole Dowry, or noble Parentage, or some
other Excellency gave them Preeminence: There is continual Mention of them in
Homer* Achilles had his Brise^s, and in her absence Diomede, Patroclus his
Iphis, Menelaus and Agamemnon, and (to mention no more) the wisest, gravest and
eldest of them all, such as Phoenix and Nestor, had their Women: N^r is it to
be wondered that Heathens should run out into such Excesses, when the Jews, and
those the most renowned for Piety, such as Abraham and David, allowed
themselves the same Liberty. Yet the Grecian Wives always envied their Husbands
this Freedom, looking on it as an Encroachment upon their Privileges; whence we
find in Homer, that Laertes, though having a great Respect for his Slave
Euryclea, never took her to his Bed for fear of his Wife's Displeasure
Od^ss^^^. v 433.
, (...)
(...)
Not his own Wife he loved above the Maid,
Yet never her admitted to his Bed,
The better to prevent domestic Strife.
Phoenix's Mother persuaded him to defile his Father's Concubin^ to free her of
so troublesome a Rival, as himself relates the Story Iliad. ^. v. 447.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Hellas I left to shun my Father's Hate,
Who for his violated Miss contrived my Fate:
For I moved with my Mother's earnest Prayer,
(Who grieved to see a Jilt preferred to her)
Debauched, to make him loath, his Clytia.
Mr. Hut^^^^ More Instances may be collected, but it will suffice to add that
of Clytaemnestra, who, having slain her Husband Agamemnon, wreak'd her Malice
upon Cassandra his Concubine; whence Seneca has introduced her speaking these
Words Agamem^. v 995*
, At ista panas capite persolvat suo
Captiva conjux, regii pellex tori;
Trahite, ut sequatur conjugem ereptum mihi.
My Rival too, his Concubine, shall share,
The sad Effects of Rage for injured Love;
Drag out the captive Harlot, she that dared
Lewdly to violate the Royal Bed,
That she may follow him to the Shades below.
Mr. Hutchi^.

Harlots were no less common than Concubines, being tolerated in most of the
Grecian, and other Commonwealths: nor was the Use of them thought repugnant to
good Manners; whence the Latin Comedian, speaking of Athens, says Non es^e
flagitium scortari hominem adolescentulum.
For Youth to wench and whore is not a Sin.
The wisest of the Heathen Sages were of the same Mind, for Sol^n allowed
common Whores to go publi^kly to those that hired them Plutarchus S^lon^.
, and encouraged the Athenian Youth to empty their Lust upon those, to hinder
them from making Attempts upon the Wives and Daughters of his Citizens;
Philemon has elegantly expressed that Law-giver's Design in the following
Fragment D^l^hi^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
((...))
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Cato the Roman Censor was of the same Opinion, as appears from the known
Story, that, meeting a young Nobleman of Rome coming out of a common Stews, he
commended him for diverting himself in that Place, as we read in Horace ^ Lib.
I. Sa^. II. v. 31.
, Quidam notus homo, cum e^iret fornice, mact^
Virtute esto, inquit, sententia dia Catonis,
Na^ simul ac venas inflavit tetra libido,
Huc ^^venes aequum est descendere. --
When from the Stews a certain Noble came,
This, says he, was the Heavenly Cato's Theme,
"Go on brave Youth, and may you ever succeed,
"And never be abashed to own the Deed;
"When Lust and burning Love ^well every Vein
"'It Is lawful to come here, and quench the generous Flame.
Mr. Hutchin. I forbear to mention other Instances, the Testimony of Cicero
being sufficient to consum what I have said, when he challenges all Persons to
name any Time, wherein Men were either reproved for this Practice, or not
countenanced in it Orat. pro M. Coelio.
: Nor can it be wondered, that Heathens allowed themselves this Liberty, when
the Jews looked on it as lawful; they were indeed forbidden to commit Adultery,
and Fornication also was prohibited under severe Penalties, but these (as
Grotius In Matth^i cap. V. 27.
observes) were thought to concern only Wom^n of their own Nation, their Law
not extending to Foreigners; and we find accordingly that public Stews were
openly tolerated amongst them, and Women residing there taken into the
Protection of the Government, as appears from the two Harlots, that contended
about a Child, and were heard in open Court by King Solomon I Reg. III. 16
: But the Jewish Women were not permitted to prostitute their Bodies, and
therefore strange, or foreign, Women, are sometimes taken for Harlots, as when
Solomon advises his Son to embrace Wisdom and Understanding, that they may keep
him from the STRANGE Woman, from the STRANGER, which flattereth with her Words
Proverb. VII. 4, 5.
; and to arm him against the Allurements of Harlots, He tells him, The Lips of
a STRANGE Woman drop as an Honeycomb, and her Mouth is smoother than O^l, but
her End is bitter as Wormwood, sharp as a two-edged Sword Pro^erb. V, 3* 4.
. The Athenians, as in many other Things, so here had the same Custom with the
Jews; for though severe Penalties were laid on such as defiled Women that were
Citizens of Athens, yet Foreigners had the Liberty of keeping public Stews,
and their Harlots were for that Reason, like those amongst the Jews, called
(...), strange Women.

The Harlots of primitive Ages were not so wholly divested of all Modesty as
afterward; for they never went abroad barefaced, but, as was the Custom of
other Women, covered themselves with Veils, or Masks: Nor were they allowed (as
some think) to prostitute themselves within the Cities Chrysippus cit^nte Gr^^^
in Matthai cap. V* 27.
; which Custom seems to have been derived from the Eastern Nations, for we find
Tamar in Genesis Cap XXXVIII* 15.
, when she had a mind to appear like an Harlot, covering her self with a Veil,
and sitting in an open Place by the Way ^ Timnath: But, it may be, her Design
in placing her self there was only that she might meet with Judah, or his Son,
whom she desired to entice to her Embraces: We find however, that in
After-ages, when Harlots were certainly permitted to reside in Cities, they
used to post th^mselves in the Highways, as Places of Resort; in Solomon's
Reign they frequented the Cities, for, speaking of an Harlot, he says, She is
loud and stubborn, her Feet abide not in her House; now is she without, now in
the STREETS, and lies in wait at every Corner Proverb. VII, 11.
; yet some Ages after, when it is certain they were no more restrained from
abiding in Cities than in Solomon's Days, they resorted to Places of general
Concourse out of them, such as Highways, especially where several Ways met,
and had Tents erected to wait in for Custom; hence (to omit other Instances)
those Words of Ezechiel, Thou have built thy high Place at every Head of the
Way, and have made thy Beauty to be abhorred, and have opened thy Feet to every
one that passed by, and multiplied thy Whoredoms Cap. XVI, 25.
. Again, Thou buildest thine eminent Place in the Head of every Way, and make
thy high Place in every Street Ibid. com. 31.
.

In some Place^ Harlots were distinguished from other Women by their Apparel;
whence those Words of Solomon Prov^^^. VII* 10.
, There me^ him a Woman with the Attire of an Harlot, and subtle of Heart. What
sort of Habit this was, is not certain; but if the Athenian Custom was in this,
as in many other Things, taken from the Jews, we may conclude that their Whores
wore flowered Garments; for the Athenian Lawgiver, thinking it necessary to
distinguish Women of innocent Conversation from Harlots by some open and
visible Mark, ordered that those should never appear abroad but in grave and
modest Apparel, and the rest should always wear flowered Garments.

Corinth is remarkable for being a Nursery of Harlots; there being in that City
a Temple of Venus, where the readyest Method of gaining the Goddess's Favor
was to present her with beautiful Damsels, who from that Time were maintained
in the Temple, and prostituted themselves for Hire; we are told by Scrabo Lib.
VIII.
, that there were no less than a thousand there at a Time: These were a
gentiler sort of Harlots, and admitted none to their Embraces, but such as were
able to deposite a considerable Sum, as we learn from Aristophanes Plut. Act.
I. Sc. II.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
This gave occasion to the proverb, (...)
Which Horace has thus translated, Non cuivis hominum contingit adire Corinthum.
To Corinth every Person cannot sail.
Some rather refer it to the famous Corinthian Strumpet Lais, and others assign
other Reasons. Their Occupation indeed was very gainful, insomuch that those,
whom Beauty and Parts recommended, frequently raised great Estates; a
remarkable Instance hereof we have in Phryne, who offered the Thebans to
rebuild the Walls of their City, when demolished by Alexander, on condition
they would engrave on them this Inscription, (...)
I. e. These Walls were demolished by Alexander, but raised by Phryne the
Harlot.
To render their Conversation more acceptable to Men of Parts and Quality they
frequently employed their vacant Hours in the Study of Mathematics and other
Sciences, frequenting the Schools and Company of Philosophers; Aspasia,
Pericles's beloved Mistress, used to converse with Socrates, and arrived to
such a Pitch in Learning, that many of the Athenians resorted to her on account
of her Rhetoric and Abilities of Discourse; the most grave and serious amongst
them frequently went to visit her, and carried their Wives with them, as it
were, to Lecture, to be instructed by her Conversation; Pericles himself used
her Advice in the Management of public Affairs; and after his Death one
Lysicles, a silly and obscure Clown, by keeping her Company came to be a chi^f
Man at Athens Pl^tarchus Pe^icle.
: Several other Examples of this sort occur in Authors, as of Archianassa the
Colophonian, who was Plato's Mistress; Herpyllis, who conversed with Aristotle
'till his Death, and bore him a Son called Nicomachus; lastly (to mention no
more) Leontium, who frequented Epicurus's Gardens, there prostituting her self
to the Philosophers, especially Epicurus Athen^us lib. XIII.
.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Confinement, and Employments of their Women.
THE barbarous Nations, and amongst them the Persians especially (says
Themistocl^.
Plutarch) were naturally jealous, clownish and morose toward their Women, not
only their Wives, but their Slaves and Concubines; whom they kept so strictly
that never any one saw them beside their own Family: When at home, they were
cloistered up; when they took a Journey, they were carried in Coaches, or
Wagons, close covered at the Top and on all Sides: Such a Carriage, my Author
tells us, was prepared for Themistocles, when he fled into Persia, to keep him
secret; so that the Men who conveyed him, told all they met and discoursed with
upon the Road, that they were carrying a young Grecian Lady out of Ionia to a
Nobleman at Court.

By the manner of Plutarch's relating this Story it may be perceived that
neither he, nor his Countrymen the Greeks approved of the Severity used by
barbarous Nations toward their Women; yet themselves, though remitting something
of the Persian Rigor, kept their Women under strict Discipline, and were no
less excelled by the Romans in their Behavior to them, than themselves
surpassed the Barbarians; for whereas the Roman Women were allowed to be
present at public Entertainments, and to converse with the Guests, and were
complemented by their Husbands with the best Rooms in their Houses; those of
Greece rarely, or never appeared in strange Company, but were confined to the
most remote Parts of the House Cornelius Nepo^. Praefat. in vitas excellent.
Imperatorum.
.

To this end the Grecian Houses were usually divided into two Parts, in which
the Men and Women had distinct Mansions assigned: The Part, wherein the Men
lodged, was toward the Gate, and called (...), or (...); the Part assigned for
the Women was termed (...), or (...), it was the farthest Part of the House,
and behind the (...), before which there were also other Parts called (...) and
(...): The Sons of Priam in Homer are all placed by themselves and separate
from his Daughters, who were in more remote Places Iliad. ^. v. 242.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
At Priam's Royal Palace he arrived,
In which were fifty beauteous Rooms contrived
Of polished Stones, by one another joined,
And these were for his married Sons designed;
Twelve gaudy Rooms were built with equal Art
Of The other Side, but these were set apart
For Priam's Daughters.
Mr. Hutchin. Where it may be observed, that the Women's Chambers are called
(...), as being placed at the Top of the House; for the Women's Lodgings were
usually in the uppermost Rooms, as Eustathius remarks upon this Passage P. 40^
Ed. B^sil.
, which was another Means to keep them from Company: Hence Helen is said to
have had her Chamber in the loftiest Part of the House Ili^d. ^. v. 423.
, (...)
Into the upper Chamber Helen went.
Penelope appears to have lodged in such another Place, to which she ascended
by a (...), whence the same Poet, (...)
By a long Ladder came down from her Room.
This signifies a Staircase, but in this Place may as well denote a Ladder,
which seems to have been used in those Days, when Architecture was not much
understood; whence Antigone in Euripides calls out to her Guardian to help her
up Phoe^iss. v. 103.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Reach out your Hand, and help me up the Ladder.
These upper Rooms were sometimes, especially at Lacedemon, called (...), or
(...), which Words being distinguished only by Accent (the Use whereof seems
not to have been known by the ancient Grecians) from (...), Eggs, are thought
by some to have ministered occasion to the Inventors of Fables to feign that
Castor, Pollux, He^^ra, and Clytaemnestra were hatched out of Eggs, when they
were born in one of these Lofts, or upper Chambers.

The Women were straightly confined within their Lodgings, such especially as had
no Husbands, whether Virgins, or Widows Ha^pocration.
, whereof the former were most severely looked to, as having less Experience in
the World; their Apartment, which was called (...), was usually well guarded
with Locks and Bolts, whence Agamenmon in Euripides desiring Clytaemnestra to
go home, and look after the Virgins, which, he tells her, were by no means to
be left in the House alone, receives this Answer Iphigen in Aulid v. 738.
, (...)
They Are close kept up in their well-guarded Lodgings.
Sometimes they were so straightly confined, that they could not pass from one
Part of the House to another without Leave; whence Antigone in Euripides
obtains her Mother's Leave to go to the Top of the House to view the Argian
Army that besieged Thebes; notwithstanding which her Guardian searches the
Passage, for fear any Person should have a sight of her, which, he says, would
be a Reflection upon her Honor, and his own Fidelity; the old Man's Words are
thus addressed to the young Princess Euripid. P^^nis^. v. 8^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
But you, Antigone, my royal Charge,
The blooming Glory of your Father's House,
Stir not, though suffered by your Mother's Leave
Some time from your Apartment to withdraw,
And to ascend the House's lofty Top,
From thence the Argian Forces to survey,
But stay 'till first I see the Way be clear,
That by a Citizen you be not seen;
For that would much reflect upon my Care,
And from your royal Honor derogate.
New-marry'd Women were almost under as strict a Confinement as Virgins:
Hermione is severely reproved by the old Woman that waited on her, for
appearing out of Doors, which was a Freedom (she tells her) like to endanger
her Reputation Andromache v. 876.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Go in, nor stand thus gazing at the Doors,
Lest you lament the Scandal you will procure,
Should you be seen before the Hall to appear.
Menander, as cited by Stobaeus Sermon. LXXII.
, says expressly that the Door of the (...) was the farthest a married Woman
ought to go, and reproves one for exceeding those Limits, (...)
(...)
(...)
You go beyond the married Women's Bounds,
And stand before the Hall, which is unfit;
The Laws do not permit a freeborn Bride
Farther than to the Doors of the House to go.
But when they had once brought a Child into the World, they were no longer
under so strict Confinement, whence (...), a Mother, is by some derived (...),
from her being no longer under Keepers Etymologici Auctor.
: Yet what Freedom they then enjoyed, was owing wholly to the Kindness of their
Husbands, for such as were jealous kept their Wives in perpetual Imprisonment;
whence a Woman in Aristophanes makes this complaint of the severe Treatment the
Athenian Wives met with Thesm^p^or. p. 774. Ed. Ams^el^^.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But strictly us poor Women they confine
Within our Chambers under Lock and Key,
Make use of Mastiffs, Goblins, any Thing,
That may Adulterers affright. --
Mr. Hutchin. However Husbands might be of a better Temper, yet it was looked
on as very undecent for Women to gad abroad; whence we find several proverbial
Speeches and Allusions, intimating the Duty of Wives to stay at home: such is
that cited by Eustathius out of Euripides Iliad. p. 429. Ed. Bas.
, (...)
Women should keep within Doors, and there talk.
To the same purpose was Phidias's Emblem representing Venus treading upon a
Tortoise (...) de praecept. Co^^ub
, which carrys it is House upon it is Back.

When they went abroad, or appeared in public, they covered their Faces with
Veils; as we find of Penelope, when she descended from her Apartment to
converse with the young Gentlemen that courted her Od^ss ^ v. 20^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Then from her Lodging went the beauteous Dame,
And to her much expecting Courtiers came,
There veiled before the Door she stood.
The Veil was so thin, as that they might see through it; which appears from
these Words of Iphigenia Euripid. I^^^gen. Taur. v. 372.
, (...)
(...)
(...) --
Seeing my Brother through my thinnest Veil,
I took him by the Hand, who now is dead.
The Athenians had a Law, that Women should not go abroad in the Night, except
in a Chariot, and with a Lamp, or Torch carried before them: This was designed
as a Remedy against private Assignations.

It was likewise customary for them to have Attendants; whence Penelope has two
Maids with her Odyss. loc. cit
, (...)
(...)
She said, and from her Chamber strait descends,
Two Maids upon her Person wait. --
These seem to have been Women of some Age and Gravity, whence Homer presently
subjoyns, (...)
A Maid whose Years a riper Judgment showed
On either Side to attend the Lady stood.
Nor did these Women attend their Ladies when they went abroad only, but kept
them company at home, had the care of their Education, when young, and are
therefore called (...). Nor were Women only appointed to this Charge, for
Antigone in the forecited Tragedy of Euripides has an old Man for her
Governour^ It was likewise frequent to commit Women to Eunuchs, who performed
all the Offices of Maids, and were usually entertained by Persons of Quality;
whence Phaedria speaks thus to his Mistress Te^e^^^ (...) Act I. S^ II.
^ -- Eunuchum porro dixti velle te,
Quia solae utuntur his reginae.
An Eunuch Boy was your peculiar Choice,
Since on great Ladies they do chiefly wait.
The first that made Eunuchs, was Semiramis Ammianu^ Mar^e^^inus Hist. lib. XIV.
: The barbarous Nations were ordinarily much fonder of them than Greeks
Philo^tratus Vit. Apollonii Tyanei lib. 1. cap. XXI.
, who looked on it as an inhuman Piece of Cruelty to use Men after that Manner;
Phocylides has left a particular Caution against it V. 175.
, (...)
Nor ever castrate a brisk, vigorous Youth.


The primitive Ages used their Women agreeably to the Simplicity of their
Manners, they accustomed them to draw Water, to keep Sheep, and feed Cows, or
Horses: The rich and noble were taken up with such Employments as well as those
of inferior Quality; Rebecca the Daughter of Bethuel, Abraham's Brother,
carried a Pitcher, and drew Water Genes. XXIV, 15.
; Rachel, the Daughter of Laban, kept her Father's Sheep Ibid. XXIX, 6.
; Zipporah likewise with her six Sisters had the care of their Father Iethro's
Flocks, who was a Prince, or (which in those Times was an Honor scarce
inferior) Priest of Midian Exodus 11. 16.
: The like may be observed of Andromache, Hector's Lady, in Homer I^iad ^. v.
185.
, where that Hero thus bespeaks his Horses, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) Vide Commentarium nostrum in Lycophro^. ^* 91.
.
My mettled Steeds, Xanthus with yellow Main,
Podargus, you, who fleetly beat the Plain,
Aethon, who furiously sustain'st the Fight,
And Lampus, thou, whose Flanks are slick and bright,
Now see my Corn you carefully repay,
With Courage bear the Labor of the Day,
Since my dear Wife, when you inclined to eat,
Has mingled strengthening Liquor with your Meat.
Mr. Abell.

The most common Employments of Women were spinning, weaving, and making all
sorts of Embroidery, or Needle Work; Instances of this nature are too numerous
to be recited in this Place, for so constantly were they taken up in these
Businesses, that most Houses, where there was any Number of Women, had Rooms
set apart for these Uses, which seem to have been near the Women's Apartments,
if not the same; for Pollux enumerating the different Rooms in Houses, after he
has mentioned (...), presently adds, (...), etc.

Women had likewise several other Employments, the Provision of all Necessaries
within Doors being usually committed to them: I shall not insist on
Particulars, only shall observe in the last Place, that their Usage was very
different according to the Temper of their Husbands or Guardians, the Value of
their Fortunes, and the Humor of the Place, or Age they lived in.

The Lacedemonian Women observed Fashions quite differing from all their
Neighbors; their Virgins went abroad barefaced, the married Women were
covered with Veils; the former designing (as Charilus replied to one that
inquired the Reason of that Custom) to get themselves Husbands, whereas the
later aimed at nothing more than keeping those they already had Plutarchus
Apo^^^^^gmat. Lacon^^^.
. We have a large Account of the Spartan Women's Behavior in the following
Words of Plutarch (...)
, In order to the good Education of their Youth (which is the most important
Work of a Lawgiver) Lycurgus went so far back as to take into consideration
their very Conception and Birth, by regulating their Marriages: For Aristotle
wrongs the Memory of this excellent Person, by bearing us in hand, that, after
he had tried all manner of Ways to reduce the Women to more Modesty, and
Subjection to their Husbands, he was at last forced to leave them as they were;
because that in the Absence of their Husbands, who spent a great Part of their
Lives in the Wars, their Wives made themselves absolute Mistresses at home, and
would be treated with as much Respect as if they had been so many Queens: But
by his good Leave it is a Mistake; for Lycurgus took for that Sex all the care
that was possible: For an Instance of it, he ordered the Maidens to exercise
themselves with Running, Wrestling, throwing Quoits, and casting Darts, to the
end that the Fruit they conceived might take deeper Root, grow strong, and
spread it self in healthy and vigorous Bodies, and withal that they might be
more able to undergo the Pains of Childbearing: And to the end he might take
away their overgreat Tenderness and Nicety, he ordered they should appear
naked as well as the Men, and dance too in that Condition at their solemn
Feasts and Sacrifices, singing certain Songs, whilst the young Men stood in a
Ring about them, seeing and hearing them: In these Songs they now and then gave
a Satirical Glance upon those who had misbehav'd themselves in the Wars;
sometimes sung Encomiums upon those who had done any gallant Action, and by
these means inflamed young Men with an Emulation of their Glory: For those that
were thus commended went away brave and well satisfied with themselves; and
those that were rallied, were as sensibly touched with it, as if they had been
formally and severely reprimanded; and so much the more because the Kings, and
whole Senate saw and heard all that passed. Now though it may seem strange that
Women should appear thus naked in public, yet was true Modesty observed, and
Wantonness excluded; and it tended to render their Conversation free and
unreserv'd, and to beget in them a Desire of being vigorous and active, and
filled them with Courage and generous Thoughts, as being allowed their Share in
the Rewards of Virtue as well as Men: Hence came that Sense of Honor and
Nobleness of Spirit, of which we have an Instance in Gorgo, the Wife of King
Leonidas, who, being told in Discourse with some foreign Ladies, That the Women
of Lacedemon were They only of the World, who had an Empire over the Men,
briskly repartee'd, that there was good Reason, For they were the only Women
that brought forth Men. Lastly, these public Processions of the Maidens, and
their appearing naked in their Exercises and Dancings, were Provocations and
Baits to stir up and allure the young Men to Marriage, and that not upon
Geometrical Reasons, as Plato calls them (such are Interest, and Equality of
Fortune) but from the Engagements of true Love and Affection.

Afterward, when Lycurgus's Laws were neglected, and the Spartans had
degenerated from the strict Virtue of their Forefathers, their Women also were
ill spoken of, and made use of the Freedom, which their Lawgiver allowed them,
to no good Purposes; insomuch that they are censured by ancient Writers for
their Wantonness, and excessive Desire of unlawful Pleasures, and branded by
Euripides, as cited by Plutarch Numa.
, with the Epithet of (...), i. e. possessed with furious Love of, and, as it
were, running mad after Men.

CHAPTER XIV. Of their Customs in Childbearing, and managing Infants.
THOSE, who desired to have Children, were usually very liberal in making
Presents and Offerings to the Gods, especially to such as were thought to have
the care of Generation: I shall not trouble the Reader with a particular
Account of the Names of these Deities, and the Manner they were worshipped in;
but it may be requisite to observe, that the Athenians invoked on this account
certain Gods called (...), or (...). Who these were, or what the Origination of
their Name, is not easy to determine; Orpheus, as cited by Phanodemus in
Suidas, makes their proper Names to be Amaclides, Protocles, and Protocleon,
and will have them to preside over the Winds; Demo make^ them to be Wind^
themselves; but what Business the Winds, or their Governors have in
Generation, is difficult to imagine: Another Author in the same Lexicographer
tells us, their Names were Cottus, Briarcus, and Gyges, and that they were the
Sons of (...) and (...), i. e. Heaven and Earth; Philochorus likewise makes
Earth their Mother, but, instead of Heaven, substitutes the Sun, or Apollo, for
their Father; whence he seems to account as well for their being looked on as
Superintendents of Generation, as for the Name of (...), for being immediately
descended from two immortal Gods, themselves (says he) were thought (...), the
third Fathers, and therefore might well b^ esteemed the common Parents of
Mankind, and from that Opinion derive those Honors, which the Athenians paid
them a^ the Authors and Presidents of human Generation Vide Suid^m, Etym^^^ici
Auctorem. Phavorinum, Hesych^um, etc.
.

The Goddess, who had the care of Women in Childbed, was called (...), or
(...), sometimes (...), as in the Epigram -- (...)
(...) --
You're past the Pang^, over which E^eut^^ reign^.
She is called in Latin Lucina: Both have the same Respects paid by Women, and
the same Titles and Epithets: Elithyia is called by Nonnus Dionysiaci^.
, -- (...)
The succouring Deity in Childbirth.
Ovid speaks in the same manner of the Latin Goddess Fast. lib. II.
, -- Gravidis facilis Lucina puellis.
Lucina kind to teeming Ladies.
The Woman in Theocritus invokes Elithyia Idyll ^.
, (...)
For there thy Mother to Elithyia prays
To ease her Throws. --
The Roman Women called for Lucina's Assistance; whence Ovid, -- Tu v^io
parturientis ades.
You kindly Women in their Travail hear.
Several other Things are common to both, for as Elithyia is styled (...), etc.
so likewise Lucina was graced with various Appellations denoting her Care of
Women. Their Names indeed appear to have distinct Originals, yet both have
Relation to the same Action; for (...) is derived (...), from coming; either
because she came to assist Women in Labor, or rather from her being invoked to
help the Infant (...), to come into the Light, or the World; Lucina is taken
from lux, Light, for the same Reason, according to Ovid, -- Tu nobis lucem,
Lucina, dedisti.
Lucina, you first brought us into Light.
The Greek Name (...), sometimes attributed to this Goddess, is of the same
Import with the Latin Lucina; being derived (...), from bringing Light, because
'twas by her Assistance, that Infants were safely delivered out of their dark
Mansions, to enjoy the Light of this World: In Allusion to this, the Greek and
Latin Goddesses were both represented with lighted Torches in their Hands;
which Reason seems far more natural than that which some assign, viz. (...),
that the Pain of bearing Children is no less exquisite than of Burning
Pausan^as A^cad^^, p. 443. Edit Ha^ov.
.

Who this Elithyia is, Authors are not well agreed; some will have her to be
an Hyperborean, who came from her own Country to Delos, and there assisted
Latona in her Labor; they add, that this Name was first used at Delos, and
thence derived to other Parts of the World Idem At^^ p. 31.
. Olen, the first Writer of Divine Hymns in Greece, makes her the Mother of
Cupid; whence it might be inferred, she was the same with Venus, were not
Pausanias, who cites this Passage of Olen, against it, when he brings this as a
different Account of Cupid's Descent from that received one of his being
Venus's Son ^aeoticis p. 581.
: The same Poet, cited by the same Author Arcadicis p. 487.
, will have her to be more ancient than Sation, and the self-same with (...),
which is the Grecian Name for Fate: Others make her the same with Juno, Diana,
the Moon, etc. What appears most probable, is, That all the (...), i.e. those
Deities that were thought to have any Concern for Women in Childbed, were
called Elithyiae, and Lucinae; for these are general Names, and sometimes given
to one Deity, sometimes to another.

Juno was one of these Goddesses; whence the Woman thus in vokes her, Juno
Lucina, for opem. --
Juno Lucina, help, assist the Labor.
There are several remarkable Stories concerning Juno's Power in this Affair,
whereof I shall only mention that about Alcmena, who having incurred this
Goddess's Displeasure by being Jupiter's Mistress, and being with Child by him,
Sihenclus's Wise being likewise with Child at the same time, but not so forward
as the other; Juno first obtained that he, who should be first born, should
rule over the other, then altered the Course of Nature, caused Eurysiheus to be
born of Sihenelus's Wise, and afterward Hercules of Alcmena; whence it was
that Hercules was always subject to Eurystheus, and undertook his famous
Labors in Obedience to his Commands.

The Daughters of this Goddess were employed in the same Office, and dignified
with the same Title, as we find in Homer Iliad. ^ v. 269.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Such racking Smart Atrides felt, such Pain,
As pregnant Wives in Labor do sustain,
Which Juno's Daughters the Elithyiae give,
As both to Child and Mother a Relief.


The Moon was another of these Deities, insomuch that Cicero will have Luna,
the Moon's Name in Latin, to be the same with Lucina: Nor was it without
Reason, that the Moon was thought one of the Deities, that had the care of
Childbearing, since, as several Philosophers are of opinion, her Influences
were very efficacious in carrying on the Work of Generation Cicero de Not.
D^or. lib. II.
.

Diana, being commonly reputed the same with the Moon, was likewise thought to
bear the same Office, as we find in Horace, who, having before invoked
celestial Diana, proceeds thus Carmine seculari.
, Rite maturos aperire partus
Lenis Ilithyia, tuere matres,
Sive tu Lucina probas vocari,
Seu Genitalis:
Diva, Producas sobolem; patrumque
Prosperes decreta super jugandis
Faminis, prolisque novae feraci
Lege marita.
Propitious Ilithyia, thou, whose Care
Presides over Childbirth, lend a pitying Ear,
Prolific Wombs defend and bless,
May they conceive, and in their Issue have Success;
Let Laws and Statutes of the Wife
Promote, enjoin, encourage Marriage-tyes,
And may our Senators agree
T'enact good, wholesome Rules for bridal Sympathy:
Whether we thee Lucina name,
Or whether Luna, still the same
W'invoke, we humbly crave thy Influence and Aid
With blooming Joys to crown the Rites of the nuptial Bed.
Mr. Abell. The same Poet in another Place has attributed the same Care to this
Goddess, not in her celestial Capacity, and as bearing the same Character with
the Moon, but as frequenting these lower Regions, and traversing the Woods Lib.
III. Od. XXII.
, Montium custos nemorumque Virgo,
Quae laborantes utero puellas
Ter vocata audis, adimisque letho,
Diva triformis.
Goddess, to whom belongs each Hill, each Brake,
Where frighted Deer their Covert make,
Triple Diana, who do hear,
And help Childbearing Women after the third Prayer.
Hence she is called in Theocritus (...), the common Epither of Elithyia, (...)
Orph^us gives her diverse other Titles relating to this Affair Hymno in Dianam
, (...)
(...)
(...) etc.


The Epithets (...), etc. which denote the giving of Life and Light, being
likewise attributed to Proserpina, m^^^ it seem that she was also thought to be
concerned for Wom^n in Labor; which cannot appear strange, if we consider her
a^ the same Goddess with Diana, who, being in three different C^pacities as
conversant in Heaven, Earth and Hell, has three distin^ Names; in Heaven she is
(...), the Moon; upon Earth (...) Diana; in Hell (...), Proserpina; whence are
those vario^^ Epithets, whereby the Poets denote her threefold Character, ^
(...), triformis, tergemina, with several others.

One End of invoking these Goddesses was, that the Women might be delivered
without Pain, which was thought an infallible Token of the Divine Favor; whence
Theocritus, in his Encomium of Ptolemy, reckons it as an extraordinary
Blessing, that his Mother Berenice brought him into the World without Pain
Idyll ^ v. 56.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
But Berenice has these Births outdone,
She brought great Ptolemy as great a Son;
First Coos danced thee, thee, Mankind's Delight,
She took thee at thy first Approach to Light;
For there thy Mother to Lucina prayed
To ease her Throws, and found a speedy Aid,
She came, stood by, and gently loosed her Pain,
Thy very Birth was easy as thy Reign.
Mr. Creech. Nay, so great an Opinion had they of this Favor, that the Gods
were believed to vouchsafe it to none but the Chaste and Virtuous; whence it
came to be looked on as a convincing Proof of a Woman's Honesty: Thus we find
in Plautus Amphit^one Act. V. Sc. 1
, that, when Amphitryon expresses his jealous Thoughts concerning Alcmena, this
Argument is offered to allay his Passion, BR. -- Uxorem tuam
Neque gementem, neque plorantem nostrum quisquam audivimus,
Ita profecto sin dolor peperit. --
Your Wise is brought to Bed with Ease, since none
Has heard so much as Groan or Sigh come from her.



Another Token of Divine Favor was thought to be conferred, when they brought
forth Twins; which, happening to Alcmena, was urged as another Proof of her
Innocence Ibidem.
, BR. -- Ego saciam, tu idem ut ali^er praedices,
Amphitruo, piam and pudicam esse tuam uxorem ut scias;
De et re signa atque argumenta paucis verbis eloquar:
Omnium primum, Alcumena geminos peperit filios.

AM. A^n tugemunov?

BR. Geminos.

AM. D^me servent!

BR. Sine me dicere,
Ut (...) tibi, tuaeque uxori Deos esse omnes propitios.

BR. I Will wipe away Aspersions, and declare
By a sure Token, Sir, my Lady's chaste,
You Will not then fal^ly in the least suspect,
That she has injured, or defiled your Bed:
Sir, she has brought forth Twins.

AM. Twins say you?

BR. Yes.

AM. Bles^ me?

BR. I Will this protest to show that You
And my good Mistress are the Care of Heaven.

Mr. Abell.

They had likewise other Means to procure an easy Delivery; one of which was to
hold in their Hands Palm-branches, Tokens of Joy and Conquest, and used as
Emblems of Persons raised from great Afflictions to Prosperity; it being
observed of that Tree, that the hanging of heavy Weights upon it is a means to
cause it to branch out to a greater Height: Latona, when brought to Bed of
Apollo, made use of this Expedient to ease her Pain; whence Theognis thus
bespeaks that God Gnem. v. 5.
, -- (...)
(...)
When handling Palm Latona brought you forth.
Homer likewise mentions Latona's traveling near a Palm Tree Hymn. in Apollin.
v. 14.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
What Tides of Bliss do sport about thy Throne
What Joys do in eternal Circles run,
Latona, who have such a Daughter, such a Son?
Diana, Queen of Woods, she there bears Sway,
Apollo's Reign great Empires do obey:
Her Birth Ortygia boasts, the God was born
Under a Palm Tree Delos to adorn,
Inopus nigh peeped up with swelling Tide,
And in curled Surges smilingly did glide.
Mr. Abell.

It is observable that the ancient Athenians used none but Menmidwives; it
being forbidden by one of their Laws, that Women, or Slaves should have any
Concern in the Study, or Practice of Physic: This proving very fatal to many
Women, whose Modesty suffered them not to entrust themselves in the Hands of
Men, one Agnodice disguised her self in Man's Clothes and studied Physic under
a certain Professor called Herophilus; where having attained to a competent
Skill in that Art, she revealed her self to her own Sex, who agreed with one
Consent to employ none beside her: Hereupon the rest of the Physicians, enraged
at their want of Business, indicted her before the Court of Areopagus, as one
that corrupted Men's Wives; to obviate this Accusation she discovered what Sex
she was of; upon this the Physicians prosecuted her with greater Eagerness, as
violating the Laws, and encroaching upon the Men's Prerogative; when, to
prevent her Ruin, the principal Matrons of the City came into Court and
addressed themselves to the Judges, telling them, That they were not Husbands,
but Enemies, who were going to condemn the Person, to whom they owed their
Lives: Upon this the Athenians repealed the old Law, and permitted free Women
to undertake this Employ Hyginu^ Fab CCLXXIV.
.

No sooner was the Child brought into the World, when they washed it in Water;
whence Callimachus, speaking of Jupiter's Nativity, has these Words Hymno in
Iovem. v. 14.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
As soon as you was born, and saw the Light,
Your Mother's grateful Burden and Delight,
She sought for some clear Brook to purify
The Body of so dear a Progeny.
Lycophron also, designing to express the Murder of Cilla and her Son Munitus,
which was effected as soon as the Child was born, says they died before the Boy
was washed, or suckl'd Cassandra v. 319. ubi consulendus ^earsi^ Commentarius.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
A stolen Embrace sent Cilla to the Fates
With her Munitus, the young Bastard-brat,
Who both were killed nigh unto Ilus's Tomb,
Her Grandfather, before the Child had been
Cleans'd from the Issue of the spurious Birth.
The Lacedaemonians bathed their newborn Infants, not in Water, as was the
Custom in all other Countries (says Plutarch in his Life of Lycurgus) but
Wine, to prove the Temper and Complexion of their Bodies; for they had a
Conceit, that weakly Children would fall into Convulsions, or immediately saint
upon their being thus bathed; on the contrary, those, who were of a strong and
vigorous Constitution, would acquire a greater Degree of Firmness by it, and
get a Temper in Proportion like Steel in the quenching.

The next Action observable is cutting the Child's Navil, which was done by the
Nurses, and called (...) Suidas in (...) voce.
, whence arose the proverbial Saying, (...), i.e. Thy Navil is not cut, which
is as much as if we say, You are an Infant, and scarce separated from your
Mother. There was a Place in C^^te called Ompha^ium from (...), a Navil,
because Jupiter's Navil-seeing was cut there; whence Callimachus speaks to him
thus Hymno in Iovem. v. 44.
, (...)
(...)


Then the Nurse wrapped the Child in Swaddling bands, lest it is Limbs, being
then tender and flexible, should happen to be distorted: only the Spartan
Nurses were so careful and experienced, that, without using Swadling-band,
their Children were all straight and well proportioned: Their Management of
Children differed likewise from all the rest of the Grecians in several other
Instances, for they used them to any sort of Meat, and sometimes to bear the
Want of it, not to be afraid in the Dark, or to be alone, nor to be froward,
peevish, and crying, as they are generally in other Countries through the
impertinent Care and Fondness of those, who look to them: Upon this account
Spartan Nurses were frequently hired by People of other Countries; and it is
reported, that she, who suckl'd Alcibiades, was a Spartan Plutarchus Ly^^tg.
.

To return, newborn Infants were at Athens commonly wrapped in a Cloth,
wherein was represented the Gorgon's Head, because that was described in the
Shield of Minerva, the Protectress of that City; whereby, it may be, Infants
were committed to the Goddess's Care; another End of it might be, to put them
in mind, when arrived at Men's Estate, that they were to imitate such noble and
generous Examples as were there represented; or to be an happy Omen of their
future Valor; for which reasons it was likewise customary to lay them upon
Bucklers; thus Hercules and his Brother Iphiclus were placed by Alcmena (...)
Idyll. ^. initio.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
A^cides ten Months old, a vigorous Child,
Alcmena ^ed, and laid him on a Shield,
(The Shield from Pterilus Amphitryo won,
A great, auspicious Cradle for his Son)
With younger Iphiclus of human Race,
No Part of him was drawn from Jove's Embrace.
Mr. Creech. The Lacedaemonians religiously observed this Ceremony; whence (...)
Dionysiacu lib. XLI.
, -- (...)
(...)
On a round Buckler the Laconian Dames
Lay down their Burden of Childbirth. --
In other Place, they placed their Infants in a Thing bearing some Resemblance
to whatever sort of Life they designed them for Nothing was more common than to
put them in Vans, or Conveniences to winnow Corn, in Greck (...), which were
designed as Omens of their future Riches and Affluence (...) Auctor (...) in
versum sequentem.
: This was not always a real Van, but commonly an Instrument bearing the ^igute
of it, but composed of Gold, or other Materials; for th^^, Callimachus tells
us, Nemesis placed young Jupiter in a golden Van Hymno in Io^^.
, (...)
(...) --
In a gold Van Nemesis laid you to sleep.
One Thing more is to be observed concerning the Athenians before we dismiss
this Head, viz That it was a common Practice among them, especially in Families
of Quality, to place their Infants on Dragons of Gold; which Custom was
instituted by Minerva in Memory of Eri^thonius, one of their Kings, who had
Feet like those of Serpents, and, being exposed to the wide World when an
Infant, was committed by that God^ess to the Custody of two vigilant Dragons:
Eu^ipid^s has largely accounted for this Ceremony, when he speaks of Cr^usa's
Son, whom she bore to Apollo Ion. v. 15.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
The Time, she reckoned, being out, a Boy
She was delivered of, the which sh' exposed
In the same close, convenient Recess,
Where the brisk God her Maiden-fruits had cropped;
In a round Box here she the Infant lest
To perish; as the ancient Custom was,
Experienced by old Ericthonius:
Since him Minerva to Aglauros gave,
That she might with her Sisters bring him up,
Two Dragons being Guards; the Custom hence
Is by Erectheus's Daughters thus observed
To nurse up carefully and Children tend
Entwined within the Folds of golden Serpents.
Mr. Abell. The Poet has likewise given us the same Account of this Custom
toward the later End of this Tragedy V. 1427.
.

On the fifth Day after the Birth the Midwives, having first purified
themselves by washing their Hands, ran round the Fire-hearth with the Infant in
their Arms; thereby, as it were, entering it into the Family, and putting it
under the Protection of the Household Gods, to whom the Hearth served instead of
an Altar; hence the Day was called (...), or (which was the more usual Name)
(...): It was celebrated as a Festival with a great many Expressions of Joy;
they received Gifts from their Friends; if the Child was a Male, their Doors
were decked with an Olivegarland; if a Female, with Wool, in token of the Work
Women were to be employed about: The Cheer consisted of diverse sorts of Things,
among which (...), Colewort, always was one, which the Athenian Midwives used
to administer to Women in Childbed as conducing to create Milk: The whole
Ceremony is described in the following Verses of Ephippus cited by Athenaeus
Lib. IX. cap. II. p. 370. Edit. Casa^b.
, most of which, some Varieties in the Reading excepted, the same Author cites
in another Place out of Eubulus Lib. II. cap. XXIV. p. 65.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
But what is the Reason that no Crown is placed
Before the Doors, nor grateful Victim slain,
Whose frying Fat delights the smelling Sense;
When the joyful Amphidromia are kept;
In which is tosted Chersonesian Chief,
And Colewort tied in Bundles seeth'd in Oil,
And Linnets, Doves, Thrushes, and Cuttle-fish,
And Calamary dressed, and eat in common,
And Polypus's Claws with Care procured
To drink 'em down amidst their less-mix'd Cups.


The seventh Day was likewise honored with Festival Solemnities, that being
the Time the Child was named: To celebrate this Day was called (...).

Others named their Children upon the tenth Day after their Birth, on which
also they invited their Friends to an Entertainment, and offered Sacrifices to
the Gods; Aristophanes mentions this Custom, (...)
What Mother on the tenth Day named you?
Again, -- (...)
(...)
On the tenth Day I offered Sacrifice,
And, as a Child's, her Name imposed.
Some will have the Tenth to be the same with (...), but (however some Persons
might join the two Solemnities) they were commonly distinct: To celebrate this
Day was called (...), De his diebus videndi P^llux lib. I. cap. I. Aristote^es
Hist. An^m^l lib. VII. cap. XII. Hes^chius, Suidas, Harpocrat^on, Etymologi^^
Auctor, P^^^ ri^^ in Vv.
.

It may be observed, that, when the Child received it is Name, whether upon the
tenth, or any other Day, a considerable Number of Friends were present: This
Custom was not only observed by the Grecians, but at Rome, and most other Parts
of the World; the chief End whereof seems to have been to prevent
Controversies, that might afterward arise, when the Child came into Business,
and was under several civil Relations, if his Name were not certainly known.

The Child's Father usually imposed the Name, in which there was no constant
Rule observed; yet it was common to choose some of their most eminent
Ancestors, whose Name they desired should be continued to Posterity, as an
Honor to themselves and their Family, and a perpetual Remembrancer to stir up
their Children to the Imitation of great Examples: Thus we find the Nam^s of
Pyrrhus, Philip, Ptolen^y, etc. preserved in several of their Successors;
Ulpian speaks of Proxenus descended from one Harmodiu^, and the Father of
another S^hol. in Demosthenis Orat. de male obita legation^
; Plutarch says, Thucydides was the Son of Olorus, who derived his Name from
one of his Ancestors Cimone.
; Aristophanes makes Callias both the Father and Son of Hipponicus Avibus.
, (...)
Lastly (to trouble you with no more Instances) we are assured by Eustathius,
that this was a Custom of very great Antiquity ^^ad. ^ p. 441. Edit. B^sil.
: The same seems to have been frequent in most other Nations; few of the Roman
Families but what afford continual Instances of this nature, Hannibal the
Carthaginian bore his Grandfather's Name, and we find Zachary's Friends in St.
Luke's Gospel strangely surpised, when his Son the Baptist was called John,
because none of his Relations were known by that Name.

The Actions of Parents were frequently declared by the Name; of their
Children, as Eust^hius observes Iliad. ^ p. 51^
: So Cleopatra, or rather Marpissa (for Eustathius and the old Scholiast are of
different Opinions herein) was called Halcyone, because, when she was ravished
by Apollo, her Mother was no less afflicted than the Halcyon is wont to be for
the Loss of her Young Iliad. ^. 557.
; (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Halcyone the Maid her Parents called,
'Cause Halcyon like her Mother much bewailed
Her wretched Fate, when by Apollo ravished.
Hector's Son Scamandrius was named by the Trojans Astyanax, because his Father
was (...), the Defender of the City Troy; for the original Signification of
(...) is no more than a Savior, or Defender, whence the Gods are commonly
called (...): The Story is in Homer Iliad. ^. 39^
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The royal Babe upon her Breast was laid;
Who like the Morning Star his Beams displayed;
Scamandrius was his Name, which Hector gave
From that fair Flood, which Ilion's Wall did lave;
But him Astyanax the Trojans call,
From his great Father, who defends the Wall.
Mr. Dryden. Ulysses was called (...), from the Anger of his Grandfather
Autolycus, as Homer reports, when he introduces Autolycus thus speaking to
Ulysses's Parents Odyss. ^. v. 406.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Son, it is my Pleasure that my Grandchild be,
(And, Daughter, you observe too what I say)
Ulysses called, it is that I Would have his Name,
Because when much enraged I hither came.


Men's own Actions, Complexions, or Condition frequently gave occasion to their
Names: Thus Oedipus was named (...); whence S^n^ca introduces an old Man thus
speaking to him Oedi^. v. 812.
, Forata ferro gesseras vestigia,
Tumore nactus nomen ac vitio pedum.
Your Feet were bored with Iron, from which Sore
And swelling Tumor you received your Name.
Achilles's Son was first called (...), from his ruddy Complexion, or the
Color of his Hair; afterward (...), from undertaking the Management of the
Trojan War when very young: To mention other Instances is needless; wherefore I
shall conclude this Head with Plutarch's Words, wherein we have an Account of
the Roman, as well as Grecian Method in imposing Names M^^cio C^ri^la^o.
: Hence ( i. e. from the taking of Corioii the chief City of the Volscians)
Caius Marcius had his third Name of Coriolanus: Whence it is manifest, that
Caius was a personal proper Name; that the second, or Surname of Marcius, was a
Name in common to his Family; and that the third Roman Appellative was a
peculiar Note of Distinction drawn afterward and imposed for some particular
Action, Fortune, Shape, Feature, or Virtue of him that bore it: For thus also
the Grecians in old Time were wont to fix an additional Character on their
great Men for any famous Achievement, such as (...), i. e. Savior; and (...),
Renowned for Victory; or to express something remarkable in their Shape, or
Features, as (...), Gorge-belly; and (...), Eagle-nos'd; as likewise upon
account of their Virtue and Kindness, as (...), a B^nefactor; and (...), a
Lover of his Brethren; or from their unusual Felicity and good Fortune, as
(...), Happy, a Name given to the second Prince of Battus's Family: Several
Kings had Names appropriated to them in Reproach and Mockery, as Antigonus that
of (...), i. e. one liberal only in the future, since he was always promising*
but never came to Performance; and Ptolemy, who was styled (...), for the fond
Opinion he had of his own Wit and Pleasantness: This later kind of Denomination
by way of Raillery the Romans did very much delight in; for one of the Metelli
was sirnam'd by them (...), because he had for a long time together walked
about with his Head bound up by reason of an Ulcer in his Forehead: There are
some, who even at this Day derive Names from certain casual Incidents at their
Nativity; One, for instance, who happens to be born when his Father is abroad
in a foreign Country, they term Proculus; another born after his Father's
Decease they style Posthumus; and when Twins come into the World, whereof one
dies at the Birth, the Surviver is called Vopiscus: Nay they use to denominate
not only their Syllas and Nigers, i. e. Men of a pimpled Visage, or swarthy
Complexion, but their Coeci and Claudii, i. e. the Blind and Lame, from such
corporal Blemishes and Defects; thus wisely accustoming their People not to
reckon the Loss of Sight, or any other bodily Misfortune, as a Matter of
Ignominy and Disgrace, but that they should answer to such Names without Shame,
or Confusion, no otherwise than to the most familiar Compellations.

Sometimes they took a more compendious Way of disposing of their Children,
either killing them outright, or exposing them in some desert Place, or
elsewhere, to the Mercy of Fortune, or Providence: The later of these they
termed (...), or (...), nor was it accounted a criminal, or blameworthy
Action, but permitted by some Lawgivers, and expressly encouraged and commanded
by others: The Lacedaemonians are remarkable for their Behavior in this Matter,
for they allowed not Fathers; to nourish their Children when disposed to do it,
b^t obliged them to carry all their newborn Infants to certain Tryers, who
were some of the gravest Men in their own Tribe, and kept their Court at a
Place called (...), where they carefully viewed such as were brought to them;
if they found them lusty and well-favour'd, they gave order for their
Education, and allotted a certain Proportion of Land for their Maintenance; but
if weakly, or deformed, they ordered them to be cast into a deep Cavern in the
Earth near the Mountain Taygetus, as thinking it neither for the Good of the
Children themselves, nor for the public Interest, that they should be brought
up, since Nature had both denied them the Means of Happiness in their own
Particular, and of being serviceable to the Public, by not enduing them with a
sufficient Measure of Health and Strength: On this account it was, that
newborn Infants were bathed in Wine Plutarchus Lycurgo.
, as has been already observed. The Place, into which the Lacedaemonians cast
their Infants was called (...), whence (...) is usually taken for exposing with
a Design to destroy, whereas (...) commonly bears a milder Sense, for many
Persons exposed their Children, when they were not willing they should perish,
only because they were unable to maintain them; Daughters especially were thus
treated, at requiring more Charges to educate and settle them in the World than
Sons; whence the Saying cited out of Posidippus, (...)
(...)
A Man though poor will not expose his Son,
But if he is rich will scarce preserve his Daughter.
The Thebans disliked this barbarous Custom, having a Law, whereby the Practice
of it was made capital; such as were not of ability to provide for their
Children, were ordered to carry them as soon as born to the Magistrates, who
were obliged to take care for their Maintenance, and when they were grown up,
used them as Slaves, taking their Service as a Recompense for the Charges and
Trouble they had been put to Aelian. Var. Hist. lib. II. cap. VII
..

Children were usually exposed in their Swadling-cloaths, and laid in a Vessel;
thus Ion was exposed by Creusa Euripides Ione v. 16
., (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
The Infant first she in a Vessel put,
Then in that Den, where with the God before
Her self had laid, she it exposed to die.
Aristophanes calls it (...), speaking of Oedipus Ranu
., -- (...)
(...) --
It Is sometimes termed (...), whence (...) is the same with (...), and (...)
with (...) Hesychius.
.

The Parents frequently tied Jewels and Rings to the Children they exposed, or
any other Thing whereby they might afterward discover them, if Providence took
care for their Safety: Another Design in thus adorning these Infants was,
either to encourage such as found them, to nourish and educate them, if alive;
or to give them human Burial, if dead; the last of these Reasons seems assigned
by Euripides speaking of Creusa Loc. cit. v. 26.
, -- (...)
(...)
Her costly Robe she over the Infant cast,
And left it to expire. --
Terence introduces Sostrata assigning another Reason for this Practice, when
she relates how she had caused her Daughter to be exposed to save her from her
Husband Chremes, who had straightly charged to put her to Death Heauton. Act IV.
Sc. I.
, -- Ut stult^^ and miserae omnes sumus
Religiosae, cum exponendam do illi, de digito annulum
Detraho, and eum dico ut una cum puella exponeret,
Si moreretur, ne expers partis esset de nostris bonis.
We all are tender, superstitious Fools,
So when I first delivered up my Child
To be exposed, I strait pulled off my Ring,
And bad the Man to leave it with the Girl,
So had she there deceased, she still had kept
Some Pledge that would denote my former Love.


Before the Conclusion of this Chapter, it will be necessary to add something
concerning the Purification of Women coming out of Childbed, for during their
lying there they were looked on as polluted; whence the Athenians enacted a Law
that no Woman should bring forth in Delos, an Island consecrated to Apollo,
because the Gods were believed to have an Aversion to all sorts of Pollution:
Iphigenia in Euripides tells us, that no Person, who was guilty of Murder, or
had touched a Woman in Childbed, or a dead Corpse could be admitted to Diana's
Altar I^higen. Taur. v. 280.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
They, who by these Pollutions are defiled
By Murder, Childbed, or but touched the Dead,
Let them as Things unhallowed, be denied
TO approach Diana's Altar. --


When the fortyeth Day came, the Danger of Childbirth being then over, they
kept a Festival, called from the Number of the Day (...): At this Time the
Woman, having been before purified by Washing, entered into some of the
Temples, most commonly Diana's, which from her Labor 'till that Time she was
not allowed to do Censorinus de Natal. cap. XI.
; Here she returned Thanks for her safe Delivery, and offered Sacrifices; it
was likewise the Custom to present her Garments to Diana, who acquired hence
the Surname of (...) Callimachi Scholiast^^ Hymn. I.
; and Women after their first Child did farther offer their Zonae to the same
Goddess, on that Account called (...), and had a Temple at Athens dedicated to
her under that Title Apollonii Scholiaster.
.

CHAPTER XV. Of their different sorts of Children, Wills, Inheritances, the
Duties of Children to their Parents etc.
THE Scholiast on Homer makes four different sorts of Children: 1. (...), or
(...), Children born in lawful Marriage. 2. (...), those born of Concubines, or
Harlots. 3. (...), whose Fathers were not known, wherein they were
distinguished from the former. 4. (...), such as were born of Women, who, though
vitiated before Marriage, were still taken for Virgins. This and other
Divisions of Children I shall pass by, only taking notice of three sorts: 1.
(...), lawfully begotten. 2. (...), born of Harlots, which Word in a large
Sense may comprehend the three later sorts of Children beforementioned. 3.
(...), adopted.


It will be necessary to add something more concerning every one of these.
First, those were reputed lawfully begotten, who were begotten in lawful
Marriage, which was measured by different Rules, as the Affairs of every State
required: In some Places, whoever had a Citizen for his Father, though his Mother
was a Foreigner; in others, those also, who were born of free Women, when their
Fathers were Foreigners, passed for Legitimate, and inherited the Freedom of
the City they were born in, and all Privileges consequent thereto: Most
Commonwealths at their first Constitution, and after great Losses of
Inhabitants by War, Plagues, or other Ways, seem to have taken this Course to
replenish and strengthen their Country with People; but, when that Exigence
ceased, and it became necessary to restrain the too great Increase of free
Citizens, they commonly enacted, that none should be esteemed legitimate, but
such as were descended from Parents both Citizens Aristoteles Politic. lib.
III. cap. V.
; which Order was dispensed with, or abrogated as often as fresh Occasions
required: This may be observed at Athens in Pericles's Time, for when Pericles
was in a flourishing Condition, and had Sons lawfully begotten, he proposed,
that Solon's old Law should be revived, whereby 'twas ordered that they only
should be reputed true Citizens of Athens, whose Parents were both Athenians;
hereupon almost five thousand lost their Freedom, and were sold for Slaves; but
Pericles himself afterward, having lost all his legitimate Sons, so far
prevailed with the Athenians, that they cancelled the Law, and yielded that he
might enroll his natural Son in the Register of his own Ward by his paternal
Name; which was a Thing the (...), natural Children, were incapable of, as
having nothing to do with the Name, Family Aristophanis Scholiastes A^ibus.
, or Estate of their Father; as neither were they allowed to intermeddle in
sacred, or civil Affairs. For fear any Person should insinuate such Children
into the Cityregister, wherein all the Citizen's Names were kept, they made
severe Scrutinies in every Borough, which were termed (...) Harpocration.
, whereby all Persons not duly qualified were ejected the City; there was
likewise a Court of Justice in the Cynosarges, a Place in the Suburbs of
Athens, where Examination was made concerning such Persons. Nor were such as
had only one Parent an Athenian, though allowed the Freedom of Athens, reputed
equal to such as were Athenians of the whole Blood; for, we find in Plutarch
The^tstocle.
, that when these performed their Exercises at the Schools within the City,
those of the half Blood, wi^h the Foreigners, were only allowed to exercise at
Cynosarges, where was a Gymnasium dedicated to Hercules, who himself was
illegitimate, as not being descended from two immortal Gods, but having a
mortal Woman for his Mother; Themistocles, my Author tells us, offended at this
Reproach, persuaded diverse of the young Noblemen to accompany him to anoint and
exercise themselves at Cynosarges, whereby he seemed (says he) with some
Ingenuity to take away the Distinction between the truly Noble and the
Stranger, and between those of the whole and those of the half Blood of Athens.

There was never any Time that I know of (whatever some may pretend to the
contrary) when Illegitimacy was not reputed a Disgrace; unless in those Ages,
wherein Men lived without Laws and Government, allowing promiscuous Mixtures,
and all other sorts of Uncleanness. Eustathius will have Concubines and their
Sons to have been as honorable as Wives and Sons begotten in lawful Marriage
about the Time of the Trojan War Iliad ^. p. 599. Edit. Basil.
; but the whole Course of Antiquity seems to be clearly against him, for I do
not find a single Instance in any ancient Author, which can countenance so
unreasonable an Opinion: It Is possible indeed, that Concubines might sometimes
have greater Respect than lawful Wives, Bastards than legitimate Children; but
that was owing to the partial Affection of Husbands, which Women by their
superior Beauty and Arts of Insinuation might gain, but can by no means be
attributed to the Practice of those Times: The chief reason Eustathius alleges,
is, that Agamemnon calls Teucer (...) when encouraging him to fight, at which
Time it would have been very improper to have given him opprobrious Languag^
The Hero's Words run thus Iliad. ^. v. 281.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Teucer, you much-loved Grecian Chief, advance
If you would your Sire's, or Country's Fame enhance;
Without Delay let some Exploit be done
Worthy your Country, worthy Telamon,
Who in your Nonage showed his generous Care,
For, though of spurious Birth, he held you dear,
At his own Table brought you up. --
Mr. Hutchin. In which Words Agamemnon excites Teucer, the natural Son of
Telamon, to behave himself with Courage by two Reasons; First, That so doing he
would be instrumental in delivering the Grecians from their Enemies, who daily
got Ground of them: The other, That such an Action would be a Credit to his
Father, whose Honor he ought to have a more tender Concern for, since he had
received such extraordinary Benefits from him; as having, notwithstanding his
Illegitimacy, been carefully educated, and that not in any remote Place, where
he might have been neglected, but under Telamon's own Eye, and in his own
House: This is so far from establishing an Equality between legitimate Children
and Bastards, that it evidently shows the contrary, the Particle (...) after
(...) plainly implying that such Care of Bastards was something more than
common in those Days: Nor can the Poet be blamed for making Agamemnon call him
by such a Name, since the Thing was no secret, but known to all the Grecians,
and which (no doubt) appeared every Day from Teucer's submissive Behavior to
Ajax, his half Brother and lawful Son of Telamon: As a Confirmation of what I
have said, I shall add the Words of Agamemnon in Sophocles spoken likewise to
Teucer, whence it will appear what Difference there was between the Sons of
lawful Wives and those of Concubines; and in particular concerning Teucer, how
great a Disgrace it was to him to be the Son of a Captive, and Concubine, though
his Mother was of the Race of Kings Ajace v. 1250.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
I am informed that with opprobrious Speech
You, Vassal, you born of a Slave of War,
Have dared bespatter Agamemnon's Fame,
And yet thy heinous Crime is unrevenged:
How had thou swelled, if come of nobler Birth,
Who arrogantly now defends the Cause
Of one that is no more, a life-less Corpse;
Dares to deny our dread Authority.
Whilst Ajax truly must be owned a Chief,
Gods! do such Words become a servile Mouth?
Mr. Hutchin. Some will have only the natural Children of Kings and Persons of
Quality to have been equal to those, who were lawfully begotten: It may be
true, that such Children were above the legitimate ones of private Persons;
but, that they were of the same Dignity with the legitimate Issue of Princes,
does not appear; nay, the contrary is manifest from the forementioned Example
of Teucer, both whose Parents were Princes: The same might be proved by other
Instances, whereof I shall only mention one: It Is that of Ion, who had Apollo
for his Father, and Creusa, the Wife of an Athenian King, for his Mother, and
yet is introduced by Euripides complaining of his hard Fortune in being
illegitimate Ione v. 589.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
It Is rumor'd that the famous Athen's Sons
Were there produced, and there have ever lived;
Then where shall wretched I intrude my self,
Who am on two Accounts most desperate,
A Bastard-son and of a Stranger too;
And to complete my most opprobrious Fate,
Am most infirm, on these Accounts shall I
Be there despised, and made a public Scorn.
Mr. Hutchin. It may indeed be objected, that (as Servius observes) natural
Children sometimes succeeded in their Father's Kingdoms; but that only happened
(as the same Author tells us) for want of legitimate Issue; nor was it always
allowed in such Cases: In some Places the Bastards of private Persons likewise
inherited the Estates of their Fathers having no lawful Children or Relations,
as appears from an Athenian Law cited by Demosthenes Orat. in Macartatum.
: But where there were Relations, Bastards had no Share, as is plain from a
Dialogue between Pisthetaerus and Hercules in Aristophanes; where Hercules,
having been persuaded by Neptune that he was Heir apparent to Jupiter, is
undeceived by Pisthetaerus, who tells him, that, being illegitimate, he had no
Right of Inheritance, and to confirm what he said repeats Solon's Law
concerning this Affair; the Passage is long, but, being pertinent to this
Place, and containing a true Account of the Athenian Practice, must not be
omitted Avibus haud long a fine.
, PE (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)

P. (...)

PE. (...)
(...)
(...)

P. (...)
(...)

PE. (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
" (...)
" (...)
" (...)
" (...)
" (...)
" (...)

PI. Alas! how strangely he comes over you?
But hark you in your Ear; thus much I Will say,
Your Uncle, though you know it not, would trick you;
And, truly if the Tenor of the Laws
Were now consulted, you would not have an Ace
Of that Estate your Father leaves behind;
For you're a B^stard, not Legitimate.

HER. How Is this you say? am I a Bastard then?

PI. Jove of a Stranger by a stolen* Embrace
Begot you; but why do you suspect it,
Since if but any of his Sons were born
Of lawful Birth, Pallas were not an Heiress.

HER. What if he leave all to his Bastard-son?

PI. The Law will not suffer that; but Neptune first,
Who now so much extols you, all will seize,
Being his lawful Brother; but the Law
Which Solon made I Will willingly recite:
"Bastards shall not be numbered in the Roll
"Of Kindred, whilst the lawful Children live,
"And for defect of such, the next a Kin
"Shall then enjoy the Goods of the Deceased.

(Mr. Hutchin.) Where, though Pisthetaerus tells Hercules, that the Law would not
permit him to have (...), yet that must be interpreted of an equal Portion of
the Inheritance, which he could not have whilst his Father had Relations, who
were Heirs by Law; for even Bastards were allowed some Share in their Father's
Estate: Abraham is said to have given Portions to the Sons of his Concubines,
reserving the Inheritance for his legitimate Son Isaac Genes. cap XXV* ^.
; and the Athenian Lawgiver allowed them a thousand Drachms, or five Attick
Pounds, which were termed (...), a Bastard's Portion A^ist^phan^^ Scholiastes
in locum citat. (...) v. (...).
: This was varied in different Times and Places; we are told that sometimes,
even in Commonwealths, where a settled Platform of Laws was established, the
Fortune of Bastards depended on their Father's Pleasure, who had Liberty to
take them into their own Family, and make them equal Sharers with their
legitimate Children, the Privilege of dividing the^ Estate only reserved to the
later; an Example whereof we have in two Sons, one of which being begotten in
lawful Marriage, the other of a Slave, the Division of their common Inheritance
belonged to the former, who placed on one side the whole Estate, on the other
his Half-brother's Mother, so reducing him to a Necessity of letting his Mother
continue in Slavery, or depriving himself of his whole Portion Sop^ter.
.

Those, who had no legitimate Sons, were obliged by the Athenian Laws to leave
their Estates to their Daughters, who were confined to marry their nearest
Relations, otherwise to forfeit their Inheritance, as we find to have been
practiced likewise by the Jews, many of whose Laws seem to have been
transcribed by Solon: These Virgins, whether sole Heiresses, or only
Coheiresses, were called by Solon himself (...), by others (...), or (which is
the most common Name of all) (...), and sometimes, as Eusta^hius reports Iliad.
(...) p. 545. Ed. Basil.
, (...): These and their nearest Relations were empowered to claim Marriage
from one another, which if either Party refused, the other preferred an Action
against him, which was termed (...), which Word was applied to all sorts of
Lawsuits, whence Inheritances, about which they went to Law, were termed
(...); those, which they had a quiet Possession of, (...): Others report, that,
whether there was any Dispute or not* the nearest Relation was obliged to claim
his Wife with her Inheriritance in the Archon's Court, if he were a Citizen; in
the Polemarchus's, if only a Sojo^^er, and that this was termed (...), and
might be done any Month in the Year, except Scirrophorion, the Magistrates
being then busy in making up and returning their Accounts ^etitus in Leges
Att^^^, qui and alibi consulendus.
. The forementioned Law concerning the Marriages of Heiresses gave occasion to
one of Apollodorus's Comedies entitled (...), or (...) as Donatus reads,
understanding it of the Virgin's suing for an Husband: This was translated into
Latin by Terence, and called Ph^rmio, wherein we have these Verses mentioning
the Law I have been speaking of, Lex est, ut orbae, qui sint genere proximi,
^is nubant, and illos ducere ^adem haec lex jubet.
The Law commands that Orphans marry those,
That nearest are allied, and that the Men
Consent to join with these. --
Farther, we find it ordered, that when Men had given a Daughter in Marriage,
and after that died without Sons to heir their Estates, their nearest Relation
had Power to claim the Inheritance, and take the Woman from her Husband, which
Isaeus Orat. de Pyr^h^ haered.
reports to have been a common Practice.

Persons, who had no lawful Issue, were allowed to adopt whom they pleased,
whether their own natural Sons, or (by Consent of their Parents) the Sons of
other Men: Whoever was thus adopted, was at Athens first made free of the City,
and then had his Name enrolled in the Tribe and Ward of his new Father; this
was not done at the same Time their own Children were registered, but on the
Festival called (...) in the Month Thargelion. The Lacedaemonians were very
cautious and wary in this Affair, and, for the Prevention of rash and
inconsiderate Adoptions, had a Law that they should all be confirmed in the
Presence of their Kings. Children thus adopted were called (...), or (...), and
were invested in all the Privileges and Rights of, and obliged to perform all
the Duties belonging to such as were begotten by their Fathers: If they desired
to return into their own Family, the Athenian Laws allowed them not to do it,
except they had first begotten Children to bear the Name of the Person who had
adopted them; if they refused to do this, their Adoption became void, and their
Claim, to inherit the Estate consequent thereto, perished Odyss. (...) v. 2^^.
: If they died without Children, the Inheritance could not be alienated from
the Family, into which they were adopted, but returned to the Relations of the
Person that adopted them. When it happened that any Person, after Adoption
made, begot legitimate Children, hi^ Estate was equally shared between those
begotten and adopted: It may be observed in this Place, tha^ it was an ancient
Custom for legitimate Sons to divide their Father's Estate by Lots, all having
equal Shares without Respect to Priority of Birth, but allowing a small
Pittance to such as were unlawfully begotten: Thus Ulysses in Homer tells
Eumaeus, that the Sons of Castor the Cretan, of whom he feigns himself one,
divided what he left Odyss. (...). v. 200.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Crete claims my Birth is readily confessed,
My wealthy Father vast Estates possessed;
Many his Sons, and they legitimate,
But I his Bastard fared never worse for that;
Castor Hylacides was his worthy Name,
And for his Children by his lawful Dame,
And Wealth in Crete he had obtained great Fame:
But, when impartial Fate dispatched his Doom,
And sent him down to his eternal Home,
The Lots were by my haughty Brothers thrown,
All they divide, supposing all their own,
And some small Legacy to me bequeath.
Mr. Hutchin.

Such as had neither legitimate nor adopted Children were succeeded by their
nearest Relations, as appears from the forecited Dialogue between Hercules and
Pisthetaerus: This Custom was as ancient as the Trojan War, being mentioned in
Homer, when he relates how Diomedes slew the two only Sons of Phaenops Iliad.
(...). v. 155.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
Then both he slew, then both deprived of Life,
And thus increased their ancient Father's Grief,
Since he not safe received them from the War;
Thus childless his next Friends his Goods did share.
Mr. Hutchin. Where indeed Eustathius with the old Scholiast will have (...)
signify certain Magistrates, who had Right to the Estates of such as died
(...), without lawful Heirs; but it may as well be interpreted of Relations;
for that these, succeeding to the Estates of Persons without Children, were
called (...), is plain from ancient Grammarians Hesychius v. (...), Pollux
: Hesiod has used the same Word, but in which of these Senses is equally
ambiguous Theog^^^.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
Averse to all the Troubles of a Wife,
Wedlock he loathed, and led a single Life,
But now, when bowing Age his Limbs had seized,
Justly he wants, whom he before despised:
He dies at length, and his remoter Friends
Share his Possessions. --
Mr. Hutchin. It Is not worth disputing whether Signification is more pertinent
in these Passages, since it is certain that both are agreeable enough to the
Practice of Antiquity: For as Persons having Relations were usually succeeded
in their Estates by them; so when any died without lawful Heirs, their
Possessions belonged to the Prince, the Commonwealth, or supreme Magistrates,
as the Laws of every State directed.

The Grecian Practice concerning Wills was not the same in all Places; some
States permitted Men to dispose of their Estates, others wholly deprived them
of that Privilege. We are told by Plutarch Solone.
, that Solon is much commended for his Law concerning Wills, for before no Man
was allowed to make any, but all the Wealth of deceased Persons belonged to
their Families: But he permitted them to bestow it on whom they pleased,
esteeming Friendship a stron^^ Tie than Kindred, and Affection than Necessity;
and thus made every Man's Estate in the Disposal of the Possessor: Yet he
allowed not all sorts of Wills, but required the following Conditions in all
Persons that made them: 1. That they must be Citizens of Athens, not Slaves, or
Foreigners; for then their Estates were confiscated to the public Use. 2. That
they must not be adopted; for, when adopted Persons died without Issue, the
Estates, they received by Adoption, returned to the Relations of the Man, who
adopted them. 3. That they should have no male Children of their own, for then
their Estates belonged to these: If they had only Daughters, the Persons, to
whom the Inheritance was bequeathed, were obliged to marry them Isaus Orat. de
Pyrr^^ haered
. 4. That they should be in their right Minds, because Testaments extorted
through the Phrenzy of a Disease, or Dotage of old Age were not in Reality the
Wills of the Person that made them. 5. That they should not be under
Imprisonment, or other Constraint; their Consent being then only forced, nor in
Justice to be reputed voluntary. 6. That they should not be induced to it by
the Charms and Insinuations of a Wife; for (says Plutarch) the wise Lawgiver
with good Reason thought that no Difference was to be put between Deceit and
Necessity, Flattery and Compulsion, since both are equally powerful to persuade
a Man from Reason.


Wills were usually signed before several Witnesses, who put their Seals to
them for Confirmation; then placed in the Hands of Trustees called (...), who
were obliged to see them performed. There are several Copies of Wills in
Diogenes Laertius, as those of Aristotle, Lycon, and Theophrastus; whence it
appears, they had a common Form, beginning with a Wish for Life and Health;
afterward adding, that, in case it happened otherwise, their Will was, as
followed, in this Manner^ (...).

We have seen how Children enjoyed the Estates of their Parents, let us now
pass to their virtuous and noble Actions, the Rewards of which we find
frequently inherited by their Posterity: These consisted not only in fruitless
Commendations and empty. Titles of Honor, or Expressions of Respect, which yet
were liberally bestowed upon the whole Families of Persons eminent for serving
their Country; but in more substantial Acknowlegements thought due to the
Memory and Relations of such Men. Their Children were in many Places provided
for, and educated suitably to their Birth at the public Expense, when left
destitute of Estates: What Regard the Athenians had of those Men's Children,
who lost their Lives in fighting for their Country, has been showed in a former
Book; how they treated the Posterity of others, who had deserved well of their
Commonwealth, shall now appear from one or two Instances: The first is that of
Aristides, who dying poor, the Athenian People bestowed upon his Son Lysimachus
an hundred Attic Pounds of Silver, with a Plantation of as many Acres of
Ground; and, upon the Motion of Alcibiades, ordered farther that four Drachms a
Day should be paid him; furthermore, Lysimachus leaving a Daughter named
Policrite, the People voted her the same Provision of Corn with those who
obtain Victory in the Olympian Games: The same Aristides's two Daughters had
each of them three hundred Drachms out of the public Treasury for their
Portions: Nor is it to be wondered (proceeds my Author) that the People of
Athens should take care of those, who resided in their City; since hearing the
Granddaughter of Aristogiton was in so low a Condition in the Isle of Lemnos,
that she was like to want a Husband, they sent for her to Athens, married her
to a Person of great Quality, and gave with her a Farm for her Dowry; of which
Bounty and Humanity the City of Athens (says he) in this our Age has given
diverse Demonstrations, for which she is deservedly celebrated and had in
Admiration Plutarchus Aristide.
.

Men's Vices and dishonorable Actions were likewise participated by their
Children; for it was thought no more than reasonable, that those, who share in
the Prosperity and good Fortune of their Parents, should partake likewise of
their Losses and Miscarriages. Agamemnon in Homer could be prevailed on by no
Arguments to spare Antimachus's Sons, their Father having endeavored to
procure Menelaus and Ulysses to be murdered, when they were sent on an Embassy
to Troy Iliad. (...). v. 138.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
If from the Loins of stout Antimachus
Ye are descended, I Will bespeak you thus;
Since, when the Trojans did in Council sit,
He gravely gave advice, He thought it fit
That my dear Brother, as an Enemy,
With sage Ulysses sacrificed should be
To their invet'rate Malice, though they were
Envoies, whose Lives the worst of Nations spare;
I Will on the Sons avenge the Father's Hate,
These Hands shall you dispatch, and Justice vindicate.
Mr. Abell. There are many other Instances to the same purpose, whence it
appears this Practice was not owing to the Passion and Prejudices of particular
Persons, but thought agreeable to Justice and Reason; it may be sufficient in
this Place to mention the famous Macedonian Law, whereby it was ordered, that
Men guilty of conspiring against their King should not only suffer Death with
their Children, but all those, who were near allied to them, should share in
the same Punishment; whence we find in Curtius Lib. VI. haud procul a fine.
, that, when Philotas was found guilty of Treason against Alexander, of the
Noblemen and others related to him some stabbed themselves, others fled into
Wildernesses and Deserts, 'till the King issued out his Pardon for them.

It remains that I add something concerning the Returns of Gratitude due from
Children to their Parents, which appear from their assiduous Attendance on them
in the lowest Offices; whence one in Aristophanes relates how his Daughter
washed and anointed his Feet, -- (...)
(...)
First my dear Child did wash her Father's Feet,
Then she anointed 'em, and bending down
Gave them a sweet endearing Kiss. --
They were zealous in vindicating the Honor, and revenging the Injuries of
their Parents; whence Telemachus in Homer says, Orestes had gained the Applause
of all Greece, and recommended his Name to succeeding Ages by taking revenge of
his Father's Murdere^s Odyss. (...). v. 208.
, (...)
(...)
He a brave noble Soul did then put forth,
A Soul of Prowess and heroic Worth,
When He his Father's bold As^assins killed,
And both his Duty and the Law fulfilled;
This Act for ever shall in Records live,
And to his sacred Name Eternity shall give.
Mr. Abell. Several other Instances might be produced, wherein Children showed
their Gratitude to their Parents, whereof I shall only mention their Care in
providing a comfortable Subsistence for their old Age termed (...), and
performing their Funeral Rites when dead; this Happiness Med^a in Euripides
expresses her earnest Desire of Medea v. 1032.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
Ah! wretched me, ah, my unhappy Fate!
What blooming Comforts did I once presage
In your young tender Years, I thought, ala^s!
What blessed Support I should receive when old,
From you the Prop of my declining Age,
How you would give me decent Obsequies,
When I should leave the World, and be no more.
Mr. Abell. Admetus introduced by the same Poet tells his Father that, he being
delivered over to Death by him, there would be no Man to take care of him
whilst alive, or pay him due Respect after Death Alc^sti^^. v. 662.
, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...) --
You with more Offspring never will be blessed
To give Refreshment to your aged Limbs,
To keep you when disabled, and when dead
To mourn your Loss, and give you decent Burial;
For I, alas! am doomed to loose my Life
As much as in you lies; I never will see
Your Body carried to the Grave, or be
A sad Attendant at the Funeral.
Mr. Abell. So concerned were they about these Things, that when they undertook
any hazardous Enterprise, it was customary to engage some of their Friends to
maintain and protect their aged Parents: Thus when the Thebans living in Exile
at Athens conspired to free their native Country from the Tyrants, which the
Lacedaemonians had imposed on it, they divided themselves into two Companies,
and agreed that one should endeavor to get into the City, and surprise their
Enemies, whilst the other, remaining behind in Attica, should expect the Issue,
and provide for the Parents, and Children of their Associates, if they perished
in the Attempt Plutarchus Pelopida.
: Euryalus in Virgil, when going to expose his Life to Danger, passionately
entreats Ascanius in an elegant Oration to comfort and make Provision for his
Mother Aeneid. IX. v. 283.
, -- Sed te super omnia dona
Unum oro: Genitrix Priami de gente vetusta
Est mihi, quam miseram tenuit non Ilia tellus
Mecum excedentem, non moenia regis Acestae;
Hanc ego nunc ignaram hujus quodcunque pericli est,
Inque salutatam linquo; nox and tua testis
Dextera, quod nequeam lacrymas perferre parentis;
At tu, oro, solare inopem, and succurre re^ctae;
Hanc sine me spem far tui; audentior ibo
In casus omnes. --
This chiefly from your Goodness let me gain
(For this ungranted all Rewards are vain)
Of Priam's royal Race my Mother came,
And sure the best that ever bore the Name;
Whom neither Troy, nor Sicily could hold
From me departing, but o'erspent and old
My Fate she followed; ignorant of this
Whatever Danger, neither parting Kiss,
Nor pious Blessing taken, Her I leave,
And in this only Act of all my Life deceive;
By this Right Hand and conscious Night I swear,
My Soul so sad a Farewell could not bear:
Be you her Comfort, fill my vacant Place,
(Permit me to presume so great a Grace)
Support her Age forsaken and distressed,
That Hope alone will fortify my Breast
Against the worst of Fortunes and of Fears.
Mr. Dryden. The Provision made by Children for their Parents was termed (...),
by the Poets (...), or (...), and sometimes (...), as we find in Homer Iliad.
(...). v. 478.
. To be negligent in this Matter was accounted one of the greatest Impieties,
and most worthy of Divine Vengeance; whence Hesiod, enumerating the Evils of
the last and iron Age, mentions the Disobedience and disrespectful Behavior of
Children to their Parents, as one of the greatest, and which called to Heaven
for Vengeance Oper. and Dier. lib. I. v. 183.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
When drooping Parents in a painful State
Have toiled* oppressed with Miseries and Fate,
Then their young Debauchees shall them despise,
Taunt at their Years, and give them base Replies,
Call them the Dregs of Life, and not allow,
Not one poor Cross to keep them will bestow.
Mr. Abell. No Crime was thought to be followed with more certain and
inevitable Judgments than this; for the Furies and other infernal Deities were
believed always ready to execute the Curses of Parents injured by their
Children; Telemachus in Homer refuses to force his Mother Penelope from his
House for Fear of being haunted by the Furies, and reproached by Men Odyss.
(...). v. 134.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...). --
The Gods this Act with Vengeance will repay,
Furies will haunt this House, and I no Day
Shall live at ease, but scouted and forlorn
To all my Neighbors a Byword and Scorn.
Phoenix was remarkably punished, when his Father invoked the Furies Assistance
against him Iliad. l. v. 454.
, -- (...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
My Father, having me discovered, prayed
To all the infernal Furies for their Aid,
He wished I never might beget a Boy
To dandle on my Knee, and give me Joy;
My Father's Prayers are heard, mine are denied,
Both Pluto and his Queen are in the Curse allied.
Mr. Abell. Many other Instances occurr in Authors, as those of Oedipus,
Theseus, and others produced by Plato De legibus lib. XI.
, where he endeavors to make out, that the Gods were always prepared to hear
the Prayers, and revenge the Injuries of Parents. Nor was the Punishment of
this Crime only left to be executed by the Gods, but frequently inflicted by
human Appointment; Solon's Laws were very severe against it, for they ordered
all Persons, who refused to make due Provision for their Parents, to be
disfranchis'd; and when Persons admitted to appear for the Office of Archon
were examined concerning their Life and Behavior, one of the first Questions
inquired was, Whether they had honored their Parents, wherein if they were
found faulty, their Suit was rejected.

Yet there were some Cases, wherein that Lawgiver excused Children from
maintaining their Parents, as when they had been bred up to no Calling, or
Profession, whereby they might be enabled to subsist in the World; for the Care
and Trouble of Parents in educating their Children being the main Foundation of
those Duties they were to expect from them, their Default herein was thought to
absolve the Children from their Allegiance: In like manner such as were
prostituted by their Parents, were not compelled to maintain them Aeschines
Orat. in Tim^rch.
: The Sons of Harlots were also declared to lie under no Obligation of
relieving their Fathers, because they, who keep company with Harlots, are not
supposed to design the Procreation of Children, but their own Pleasure; and
therefore have no Pretense to upbraid them with Ingratitude, whose very Birth
they made a Scandal and Reproach to them Plutarchus Solone.
.

As the Unkindness of Parents was made a sufficient Excuse for Children to deny
them Relief in their old Age, so the Disobedience, or Extravagance of Children
frequently deprived them of the Care and Estate of their Parents: Yet the
Athenian Lawgiver allowed not Fathers to disinherit their Children out of
Passion, or slight Prejudices, but required their Appearance before certain
Judges appointed to have Cognizance of such Matters, where if the Children were
found to deserve so severe a Sentence, the public Crier was ordered to
proclaim, That such a Person rejected the Criminal, whose Name was then
repeated, from being his Son; whence to disinherit a Son is called (...), and
the Person so disinherited (...); to be disinherited was likewise called (...),
to be received again (...): It may be here observed, that Parents were allowed
to be reconciled to their Children, but after that could never abdicate them
again.

INDEX.
A.
ABdication of Children Page 378. Achaian Slings 53. Admiral 155, 156. of the
Lacedemonian Fleet 59, 60. adopted Children 369. Adultery, how reputed of, and
punished 323, 324, etc. Aegeon invented Ships of war 133. Aeginensians invented
Ships 131. Egyptian Trumpet 90. Aetolians used not to declare War 72. looked
on as Robbers ibid. Agnus cactus an Antidote against Love 283, etc. Alarums
sounded on various Instruments 91, 92. Altars, instead of Trophies 124. placed
near Graves 257. Anchors 142. anointing of the Dead 196. Antidotes against Love
283, etc. Apollo, invented Bows 44. honored at Argos with Sacrifices after
mourning 252. with Offerings of Hair 303. reputed the Cause of sudden Death
189. Apparel of Mourners 213, 214. of Soldiers 55, 56. Archers 18. Arches of
Triumph 124. Argian Bucklers 37. Argians sacrificed to Apollo after mourning
252. Aries the Constellation whence called 132. Armies how divided 61, etc. how
marshalled 83. Arms, by whom invented 20, 21. composed of Brass, etc. 21, 22,
23. how adorned 23. always worn by the primitive Greeks, and barbarous Nations
23, 24. of what sorts ^5, 26, 27, etc. 152, 153, etc. turned down at Funerals
112, 113. dedicated in Temples 119, 120. burned with Soldiers 228. Armor of
Horsemen and Horses 19. Arrows 47, 48, 49. Ashes cast on the Heads of Mourners
219. Ashes of the Dead carried home 177, etc. Athenians, Sovereigns of Greece
5. most successful at Sea 6. their Cavalry 18. Archers ibid. Commanders 57, 58,
59. Heralds 74. Marches 77. Ensigns 85. Treatment of the Slain in Battle 115.
Punishment of Deserters 125. Provision for the Children of Soldiers slain in
War 128, 129. for those of other Patriots 373. Sovereignty of the Seas 154.
their Fleet 154, 155. Marriages 285. Love of Boys 264, 265. Divorces 318, etc.
Punishments for Adultery 327. Midwives 350. Custom in abdicating Children 378.
Atlas invented Ships 130.
B.
Balearian Slingers 52, 53. Ballast of Ships 143. Banks of Oars in Ships 134.
Banquets not frequented by Mourners 212. Barley-bran used to excite Love 275.
Bastards how treated 363, 364. not obliged to maintain Parents 378. Battalias
of several Forms 61, etc. Battering-rams 100, 103, 104. how defeated 106.
Battles 81, 82, etc. at Sea 167, etc. Beaks of Ships 147* 148. Bear-star, the
Guide of Mariners 158. Belly of Ships 136. Belts 30, 31, 42. Betrayers of their
Country how treated after Death 179, 187. Black worn by Mourners 213.214. Blood
offered to the Dead 257. Blood of Doves used in Philtres 272. Boat-swain 159.
Baeotian Helmets 29. Bones of Bodies consumed to Ashes how distinguished 232.
washed and anointed ibid. reposited in Urns etc. 233. Bones of Snakes and Toads
used to excite Love 272. Bones snatched from hungry Bitches used in Philtres
273. Booty in War 116, 117. Bosses of Bucklers 35. Bows 44, 45, etc. Boys how
loved 262, 263, etc. Brains of Calves used to excite Love 272. Bran used to
excite Love 275. Brass used instead in Iron 21, 22, etc. Breast-plates 31, 32,
33, 34. Brick, a Form of Battle 65. Brides how conducted to their Bridegrooms
309. Bridges 143. Bridles by whom invented 12. Brigandines 31, 32, etc.
Bucklers 34, 35, etc. carefully preserved 126. used to place slain Soldiers on
ibid. to lay Infants on 352, 353. Burial, earnestly desired 174, 175, etc.
denied to some Persons 178, 179, etc. it is Time 206, 207, etc. Place 237, 238,
etc. burning dead Bodies why and when used 225, 226, etc. how performed ibid.
Bursars of Ships 160.
C.
Cables of Ships 1^^. Cakes put into Corpses Mouth^ 203. Calve's Brains excited
Love 27^. Camels 20. Camps 77, 78, etc. Carians, the first Mercenaries 8.
invented Crests for Helmets 26. invented Handles of Bucklers 36. their Flutes
used at Funerals 224, 225. Carthaginians entertained Greek Soldiers 3. Castor
why said to be hatched out of an Egg 337. Cavalry, how esteemed 11. how
numerous 17, 18. their Probation 18. different sorts 19. Armor 19, 20. Cecrops
first instituted Marriage 285. Cenotaphia 245, 246. Centaurs whence so called
14. Cerberus how appeased 203, 204. Cha^iots whether used before single Horses
14. how composed ibid. how managed 15, 16. made with Scyths 17. laid aside
ibid. Charms 279, 280. Charon's Wages 202, 203. Childbirth, with what
Ceremonies attended 343. a Pollution 361, 362. Children of Soldiers slain how
provided for 128, 129. those of other Patriots 373. Children, how buried 184.
of what Gods procured 343. how managed 351, 352, etc. exposed 359, 360, etc. of
different sorts 362, etc. partook of their Parents good and bad Actions 372,
373, etc. concerned to vindicate their Parents 374. to provide for them 375,
376, etc. when excused from maintaining Parents 378. how abdicated ibid.
Chorean Countermarch 70. Cities, anciently without Fortifications 97, 98. how
besieged 97, 98, etc. how defended 106. how treated when taken ibid. Citadel
of Athens graced with Arms of the Valiant 128. Clubs used instead of Arms 39.
Clytaemnestra why hatched out of an Egg 337. Coats of Mail 31, 32, etc. Coffins
234, 235. Colophonian Horsemen 17. Combats of a few Persons used to decide Wars
56, 96, 97. Commanders in the Athenian and Spartan Armies 56, 57, etc.
Concubines, how differenced from Wives 295, 296. how reputed 329, 330. Conduct
of the ancient Greeks 2. Consecration of dead Men 260. Cords which tied Ships
to the Shore 143. Corinth a Nursery of Harlots 333, 334. Corpses, polluted
Things about them 205, 206. how carried forth 208, 209. how burned 225, 226.
interred 234. Countermarches 69, 70. Countermines 106. Creditors had the Bodies
of Debtors 183. Crests of Helmets 26, 2^, 28. Cretan Countermarch 70. they
sounded Alarums on Flutes 91. Crowns presented to the Valiant 128. crucified
Persons not buried 183. Cryers of Armies 62. Curassiers 19. Curses on the
Rebuilders of demolished Cities 106, 107. of Parents very fatal 377, 378.
Cynosarges 363.
D.
Daedalus's Fable interpreted 145. Daggers 43. Danaus invented Ships 130. Darts
50. Daughters, expensive 299. exposed 360. shared their Parents Estates 368.
dead Enemies how treated 107, 108, etc. 178, 179, 187. dead Men, how reverenced
174. when admitted into the Elysian Fields ibid. under the Power of infernal
Gods 190. first consecrated to Proserpinae 191. had their Eyes closed 195.
their Limbs composed 195, 196. their Bodies washed 196. anointed 196, 197.
wrapped in Garments 197, 198. laid out 201. attended 202. their Mouths filled
with Money 202, 203. with Cakes 203, 204. their Hair hung on the Housedoors
204. commended 252. honored with Sacrifices 255, 256, etc. and other ways 259,
260, etc. retained the Affections they had when alive 261. Death, when sudden
caused by Apollo or Diana 189. expressed by softening Terms 193, 194. Debtors
Bodies delivered to Creditors 183. Declaration of War necessary 71, 72. it is
Form 76. defensive Arms 25. more prized than offensive ibid. defensive
Strategems against Besiegers 106. Deserters punished 125, 172. Diana, worshipped
before Marriage 301, 302. the Cause of sudden Death 189. concerned in
Childbirth 347, etc. Dirges at Funerals 223. Discourse at Entertainments after
Funerals 252. Divorces 320, 321, etc. Dominion of the Seas by whom possessed
154. Doves Blood used in Philtres 272. Dowries 294, 295. Dragoons 19. dying
Men, how treated by their Friends 193. prayed to Mercury ibid.
E.
Elephants, when first used in Battles 20. when laid aside ibid. Elithyia 344,
345, etc. Elysian Fields when open to departed Souls 174. Ambassadors 71. their
Sacredness 73, 74. their Injuries punished 73. Enemies, their Approach
signified by Torches 105. how treated after Death 107, 108, 109, 110, 178, 179,
187. Engagement at Sea 167, 168, etc. Engines, in Sieges 99, 100, etc. to cast
Stones 105, 153. how eluded 106. Ensign, an Officer 62. Ensigns 85.
Entertainments after Funerals 250, 251, 252. Epicureans allowed Self-murder
182. Epithalamium 316, 317. Erato instituted Marriage-ceremonies 285.
Erythraeus invented Ships 130, 131. Euclia worshipped before Marriage 302.
Execrations against Rebuilders of Cities 106, 107. of Parents fatal 377, 378.
Exposition of Infants 359, 360, etc. Eyes of dead Men closed 195.
F.
Fables of Triptolemus, Perseus, Pegasus, Europa's Bull, etc. explained 132,
141. of Daedalus 145. of Castor, Pollux, etc. 337. Fauchions 43. Feathers of
Scritch-owls used in Philtres 272. Fights 81, 82, etc. at Sea 167, 168, etc.
Fire used in Purification 226. Fireballs 54, 55. Flags in Battles 85. in Ships
139. Flowers laid on Tombs 252, 253, etc. Flower of Meal used to excite Love
275. Flutes, used in sounding Alarums 91. at Funerals 223, 224, 225. Fore-deck
137. Fortifications by Sea 166. Fragments of Meat laid on Tombs 251. Friends
approaching signified by Torches 105. Funeral Rites, invented by Pluto 173.
their Manner 195, etc. Processions 206, 207, etc. Piles 227, 228, etc. Orations
247. Games 247, 248. Lustrations 248, 249, 250. Entertainments 250, 251, 252.
Funerals, necessary to the Happiness of the Dead 174, 175, etc. solemnized by
Relations 176. denied to some Persons 178, 179, etc. who invited to them 209,
210. Full-moon, favorable to Sparta 77. the Time of Marriage 289.
G.
Games at Funerals 247, 248. Garments of Mourners 213, 214. at Marriages 307,
308. Gauls invented Trumpets 90. Generals of the Athenian Army 57, 58. of the
Spartan Army 59, 60. harangu'd their Soldiers before Battle 83. fought at the
Head of their Armies 95. disposed of the Booty 117, 118. Ghosts propitiated by
Libations 257. Gods, had Part of the Spoils taken in War 118, 119, 171, etc.
invoked before Voyages 161. before Battles 84. cursed by Men in Affliction 221,
222. of Childbirth 344, 345, etc. of Marriage 302, etc. of Heralds 73.
Granados 54, 55. grappling Irons 153. Graves 237, 238. Greaves 33, 34. Guards
80, 81.
H.
Hair, of dying Men cut off by Proserpine 191, 192. of dead Men hung on the
Housedoors 204. laid on Tombs 254. of Mourners how disposed 214, 215, 216, etc.
offered before Marriage 313, 314. cut off the Victims Heads 256. Harbors 164,
165, 166. Harlots 330, 331, etc. Harness for Horses, by whom invented 12. how
composed 13. Harps used in sounding Alarums 91. Hatches of Ships 148. Heirs and
Heiresses 366, 367, etc. Helena why said to be hatched out of an Egg 337. Hell
divided into two Mansions 193. Helmets 25, 26, etc. Helots 3. Heralds 73, 74.
of Athens 74. of Sparta 74. sacred 73. Hercules invented Ships 130. his
Gymnasium 363. Heroes how honored 260. Hind-deck 138. Hippocentaurs whence
called 14. Hippomanes used in Love-potions 269, 270, etc. Honey offered to the
Dead 257. Horsemen, how esteemed 11. their Number 11, 17. how tried 18. of how
many sorts 19. Horsemanship by whom invented 11. Horses, how managed 12. their
Harness etc. 12, 13, 14. when first backed 14. how used in Chariots 15, 16. how
tried 18. how armed 19, 20. Houses, polluted by dead Bodies 205. purified 206,
249, 250. how divided into Rooms 335, 336. Hurdles used in Sieges 102. Hymen
312.
I.
Ianus invented Ships 130. Iasmin laid on Tombs 253. Jason invented Ships 130.
Iavelins 50. Ignorance of the ancient Greeks 1, 2. Images used in Incantations
276. Impaled Persons not buried 183. Incantations 275, 276, etc. Incest 290,
291, etc. Infants, how managed 351, 352, etc. exposed 359, 360, etc. infernal
Gods invoked in Love-magick 283, 284. Inscriptions on Monuments 241.
Intelligence how conveyed 129. Interment used in Greece 225. Juno, honored
with Spoils of War 119. worshipped before Marriage 303. concerned in Childbirth
346. Jupiter, honored with Spoils of War 119. with Trophies 121. with Statues
after Victory 124. worshipped by Sailors 163, 164. before Marriage 303. Iynx
used to excite Love 271, 272.
K.
Keels of Ships 136. Kings, Generals of Armies 56, 59, 60. their Concern for
their People 56. Kings of Athens deposed 56.
L.
Lacedemonian Valor and Conduct 3, 4, 5, 6, 55. they were averse from Trades
3. Commanders of the Grecian Armies 4, 5, 6. more successful at Land than Sea
6. degenerate from their Ancestors 6. forbidden to meddle with naval Affairs
ibid. their Cavalry 17. how apparelled in Battles 55, 56. how affected with
Victory 56. their Commanders 59, 60. Division of Armies 66, 67. Countermarch
69. Heralds 74, 75. never marched 'till full Moon 77. their Camps 77, 78.
manner of Life in Camps 80. Watch 80, 81. they began Battles with Sound of
Flutes 91, 92. pursued not flying Enemies 96. unskilful in managing Sieges 98.
how buried their Slain 113, 114. meddled not with Spoils 117. maintained
Equality ibid. what they consecrated to the Gods ibid. what Sacrifices offered
after Victory 121. how punished Runagates 125, 126. their manner of conveying
Intelligence 129. of honoring the Dead 250. of loving Boys 263, 264. their Law
against old Batchelors 285, 286. against Dowries 296, 297. Ceremonies in
Marriage 319, 320. Divorces 320. Wives ^ent 322, 323. they had no Adulterers
323. their Women how educated and employed 342, 343. Infants how managed 351.
Infants exposed 359, 360. Nurses 352. Lacedemonian Matron's Command to her Son
115. Ladders to scale Walls 100. Laurel, six'd on sick Men's Doors 188. used to
excite Love 275. Leagues, how made 75, 76. of how many sorts ibid. Lemnians
invented A^ms 21. Levies of Soldiers 6, 7. Libations to the Dead 255, 256, etc.
Libyan Trumpet 91. Lieutenant 62. Lightning 182. Lilies laid on Tombs 253.
Lizard used to excite Love 272. Love, how expressed 266, 267. discovered 267,
268. excited 268, 269, etc. allayed 281, 282, etc. of Boys 262, 263, etc.
Love-potions 268, 269, etc. Lovers inte^r'd together 235. Lucina 344, 345, etc.
Lustrations at Funerals 248, 249, 250. Lydian Flutes used at Funerals 224, 225.
M.
Macedonians, erected no Trophies 124. their Helmet 29. Phalanx 63. military
Apparel 55, 56. Countermarch 69. Law against Treason 374. Magi of Persia how
begotten 290. Marches, when made 76, 77. made with Silence 93, 94. with Tumult
by Barbarians 93. Mariners 149, 151, 152. Marriage, instituted by Ce^^^ps 285.
strictly enjoined 285, 286. at what time made^ 288, etc. not mad^ w^^h lations
290, 291, etc. (...) consent of Friends 293. Ceremonies 293. Songs 316, 317.
Mars, invented Arms 20, 21. honored with Spoils 119. Mast 145. Master of a
Ship 156, 157. Men at what Age allowed to marry 287. Mercenary Troops how
esteemed 7, 8. Mercury, God of Heralds 73. why invoked by dying Persons 192.
honored with Sacrifices after mourning ended 252. Messenian Cavalry 17.
Midwives 350. Military, Glory of the Greeks 2, 3, 4. Rewards and Punishments
125, 126, 127, 128, 171, 172. Milk offered to the Dead 257. Minerva, invented
Trumpets 8^. honored with Spoils taken in War 119. invented Ships 131.
Mi^en-sail 145 Money put into Corpses Mouths 202. Monuments of the Dead 237,
238, etc. Moon, when full, favorable to Sparta 77. Guide to Mariners 157. kind
to married Persons 289. concerned in Childbirth 347. moveable Towers 103. how
defeated 106. Mounts in Sieges 102. how defeated 106. Mourning, with what
Ceremonies performed 212, 213, 214, etc. for dead Soldiers 112, 113. (...) in
sailing 159, 160. in (...) ^22, 223, etc. (...) Tombs 253.
N.
Names when, and on what Accounts imposed 255, 256, etc. Naval, Officers 155,
156, etc. Fights 167, 168, etc. Navigation how, and by whom invented 129, 130,
etc. Instruments used therein 141, 142, etc. Neptune, concerned in Horsemanship
11. invented Ships 131.
O.
Oars, in different Banks 134, 144. how disposed when out of use 163. offensive
Arms most prized by barbarous Nations 25. Officers in the Athenian and Spartan
Armies 56, 57, 58, etc. in Ships 155, 156, etc. Ointments, whether used by
ancient Grecians 196* 197. laid on Tombs 255. Ornaments laid aside by Mourners
213. Ovation 121. Owls in the Athenian Ensigns 85.
P.
Palm-branches used by Women in Labor 349, 350. Pan the Author of shouting
before Battles 92. Panick Fears 92. Paphlagonian Trumpet 90. Parents Consent
necessary before Marriage 293, etc. their Curses fatal 377, 378. Parsley laid on
Tombs 252. Passengers where placed in Ships ^37. Pay of Soldiers 6, 7, 8, 9.
Peace how made 71, 75, 76. Pegasus's story interpreted 132, 141. Perseus,
invented Bows 45. his Story interpreted 132. Persian, defeat 3. Countermarch
70. Magi begotten of Incest 299. Women how treated 335. Phalanx 63. Philtres
268, 269, etc. Phoenicians, invented Ships 131. steered by the lesser Bear 158.
Phrygian Flutes at Funerals 224, 225. Phryxus's Story interpreted 132. Piles at
Funerals 227. Pillars, erected by Victors 128. erected upon Graves 241. Pilot
156, 157. plenipotentiary Ambassadors 75. Pluto invented funeral Rites 173.
Polax 43. Pollux's Story interpreted 337. Pollution contracted from Corpses
205, 206. from Childbirth 361. Polygamy how esteemed 286. Portions in Marriage
294, 295, etc. primitive Simplicity 1, 2, 252. Prisoners of War how treated
106, 116. Procession at Funerals 206, 207, etc. Prodigals wanted Burial 128.
Prometheus invented Ships 130. Proserpina, cut off a Lock of dying Persons Hair
191, 192. concerned in Childbirth 348. Prows of Ships 137. Purification after
Funerals 248, 249, etc.
R.
Rags used in Philtres 273. Ra^ to batter Walls 100, 103, 104. how defeated
106. Relics used in Philtres 273. Remora used to excite Love 272. Retreat how
sounded 96. Rewards of Valor 126, 127, 128, 171, 172. Rhamn fixed on sick
Persons Doors 188. Ribbands to adorn Tombs 254. Ribs of Ships 136. Rivers
honored with Offerings of Hair 305. Romans erected Towers after Victory 124.
their triumphal Arches ibid. Ropes of Ships 143, 146, 147. Roses laid on Tombs
253. Rowers, how placed 137, 149, 150, 151. directed by Music 159, 160.
Rudders 141, 142. Runagates how punished 125, 172.
S.
Sacred Band of Lovers 265. Sacrifices, before Battles 84. after Victory 121.
to the Dead 255, 256. Sacrilegious Persons how treated after Death 182, 184,
187. Saddles not used 13. Sails 145. Sail-yards 145. Samyres invented Ships of
War 133. Scaling Ladders 100. Scimeters 43. Scritch-owls Feathers used in
Philtres 272. Scylla's Story interpreted 141. Scythians, their Bows 45, 46.
instructed the Greeks in the Use of Bows 45. Sea Fights 167, 168, etc. Seas in
whose Dominion 154. Seats of Rowers 145* Selemnus's Waters cured Love 284, 285.
Self-murder how esteemed of 181, 182. Semiramis invented Ships of War 133.
Sepulcres 237, 238, etc. how honored 253, 254, etc. Shields 34, 35, etc.
turned downwards at Funerals 112, 113. Shell-trumpets 86, 87, etc. Ships, how
and by whom invented 129, 130, etc. how first built 131. of several sorts 133,
134. their Parts 135, 136, etc. Names 140. consecrated to the Gods 141. their
Instruments of War 147, 148, 149. Officers 155, 156, etc. adorned with Garlands
161. pulled to Shore 160, 161. Shipwreck why feared 175. Shouting before
Engagements 92. Sides of Ships 137. Sieges how managed 97, etc. at Sea 169,
etc. Signals 84, 85, 86, etc. at Sea Fights 168. Simplicity of primitive Times
1, 2, 252. Skins of wild Beasts worn by ancient Heroes 29, 30. Slain in War how
treated 107, 108, 109, etc. Slaves carefully interred 178. Sleep an Emblem of
Death 194. Slings 52, 53, 54, 105. Smoke to signify approaching Enemies 105.
Snakes Bones used to excite Love 272. Solemnity of Marriage ordered by Erato
285. Songs, of Triumph 128. of Marriage 316, 317. Sorrow with what Ceremonies
expressed 212, 213, 214, etc. Soldiers, of Greece how esteemed 3, 4. paid and
levied 6, 7, 8. when admitted to War 6. when discharged 7. their different
sorts 10, 11. Apparel 55, 56. Treatment after Death 107, 108, 109, etc.
Punishments and Rewards 125, 126, 127, 171, etc. Children how provided for 128.
Soldiers in Ships 152. Souls purified by Fire 226. Spears 39, 40, 41. at Sea
152. turned down at Funerals 112. Sphinx in Theban Ensigns 85. Spoils how taken
and disposed 116, 117, etc. 171. Statues, dedicated to Gods after Victory 124.
to Victors 128. Sterns 138. pulled to Shore 160, 161. Stews, tolerated 331,
etc. numerous in Harbors 165. Stirrops when first used 13. Stoics allowed
Self-murder 182. Stones anciently used for Weapons 50, 51, 52. cast out of
Engines 105. Strange Women for Harlots 332. sudden Death caused by Apollo or
Diana 189. Sun guided the first Sailors 157, 158. Swallows used in Philtres
273. Swipes 143. Swords 41.
T.
Tackling of Ships 141. Tarentine Horsemen 67. Taurus the Constellation whence
called 132. Temples, adorned with Arms 119. made burying Places 185, 237.
Tenders 135. Thebans Sovereigns of Greece 5. their Ensigns 85. Lovers 268. Care
of Infants 366. Thessalian Cavalry 17. Three a Number in all magical Actions
278, 279. Thunderstruck Persons and Places how treated 182. Thymaetes King of
Athens deposed 56. Toads used in Philtres 272. Tombs, how honored and adorned
252, 253, etc. those of Soldiers how beautified 113, 114. Tomb-stones filled
with Fragments of Meat 251. Top-sail 145. Torches, instead of Signals 86.
signified the Approach of Enemies 105. of Friends ibid. used in Philtres 273.
at Marriages 308, 309, 314, etc. Tortoises in Sieges 102. Towers in Sieges 103.
instead of Trophies 124. Traitors how used after Death 179, 187. Treason how
punished in Macedonia 374. Trinket 145. Triptolemus's Story interpreted 132.
Triumphs 121. triumphal Arches 124. Trophies 121, 122, etc. Trumpets 86* 87,
etc. Trumpeter 62. Twins a Token of Chastity 349. Tyle a Form of Battle 65.
Tyrants how treated after Death 180, 181, etc. Tyrrhenian Trumpet 90. Tyrrhenus
invented Trumpets 89, 90. Tyrtaeus's Story 83, 84.
U.
Vans used to lay Infants on 353. Veils used by Women 319, 339, 340. Venus's
Temple a Nursery of Harlots 333. Vice Admiral 156. Voice very strong required
in Warriors 95. Vows before Battles 76, 84. Voyages how begun 160, 161, 162.
Vulcan invented Arms 21.
W.
Walls not anciently used 97, 98. War, by what occasioned 1, 2. how maintained
9. ended by single Combat 56, 96, 97. how declared 71, 72, 76. warlike Conduct
of the ancient Greeks 2. washing the Dead 186. Watches how ordered 80, 81.
Water placed before Houses where Corpses lay 204, 205. offered to the Dead 257.
Wax used to excite Love 275, 276. Weapons, see Arms. white Garments* used to
wrap the Dead 198. Wills how and by whom made 371, 372. Wine offered to the
Dead 257. Winter seasonable for Marriage 287. Wives, how distinguished from
Concubines, 295, 296. when allowed to divorce Husbands 320, 321, etc. lent to
Friends 322, 323. Women when present at Funerals 210. when ripe for Marriage
287. how confined and employed 335, 336, etc. 343 344, etc. not allowed to
study Physic 350. polluted in Childbirth 361, 362. Wool used to excite Love
272. Word in Battles 85.
INDEX Dictionum, Locutionum and Proverbiorum Latinorum, quae in hac
Archaeologia explicantur.
Prior numerus Paginam, posterior Lineam indicat.

A.
Abiie 193, 23. abitio ib. 22. acies recta 64, 10* acies obliqua ib. 15. Aetnae
dictae naves 135, 10. ageator remigum 159, 2. agger 102, 32. agis 59, 17. agnus
castus 283, 10. amarantus 252, 43. amentum jaculi 50, 17. anchonis 146, 26. in
ancoris stare 166, 3. ancoralia, vel ancoraril 143, 24. anquinae 146, 20.
antennae 145, 28. Anthesteria 8, 16. Apati^ia 304, 10. apertae naves 148, 19.
Arae 157, 19. Arcturus ib. ib arcus aurei 46, 18. Argo 134, 20. aries 103, 36.
arictaria testudo 102, 23. asparagus 308, 24.
B.
Ballista 105, 12. Caeci and Claudii cur dicti 359, 18.
C.
Caius Coriolanus cur dictus Marcius 358, 22. carina 136, 11. castus agnus 283,
10. catapirates 143, 7. catapulta 32, 19. Caucasus and Colchis venenorum
feraces 283, 18. Cecropidae 128, 27. celeres 60, 32. cenotaphia 246, 29.
Ceramicus 115, 23. ceruchus, anchonis, and rudens 146, 26. Ceryx 73, 26.
cespites 99, 15. chori 70, 7. citharae 91, 11. classiarii 152, 18. classis
praesectus 155, 33. claustra 164, 31. clypei orbis 37, 29. cohertes, manipuli,
ordines 67, 30. Colchis venenorum ferax 283, 18. Colophonem imponere 17, 27.
collocare cadaver 201, 12. conti 143, 13. conus 27, 4. cornua 145, 32. corona
cingere urbem 99, 4. coronae naevium 139, 3. corymbae navium ib. ib. corymbi
138, 29. costae naevium 136, 37. cuneus 65, 16. 136, 20. vel rostrum 168, 3.
currus falcatus 17, 6. custodes navis 160, 1. Cyclades, vel Aetnae dictae naves
135, 9. Cynosura 158, 13.
D.
Decursio 229, 24. denasci 193, 18. dentes pro ancora 142, 23. dimittere uxorem
22, 9. divortere, discedere ib. 11.
E.
Efferre, exportare cadaver 206, 6. ensis falcatus 43, 16. Ephori 60, 10.
epithalamium 316, 32. Equites Romani 11, 22. exportatio 206, 6.
F.
falcati currus 17, 6. falcatus ensis 42, 16. fauces 165, 5. ferrea manus 153,
27. forceps 167, 35. forfex 65, 20. fori and transtra 137, 7. fraena lupata 12,
12. frutilla 271, 9. fuit 193, 26. fulmen trifidum 279, 23. funes solvere 143,
39.
G.
Genialis lectus 312, 36. gubernaculum 141, 32.
H.
Hastae longae 152, 36. hastati Principes and Triarii 83, 5. haustrum 143, 20.
Heliasta 125, 9. Helice 158, 17. helix 161, 23. hippagines 133, 17. hippomanes
269, 8. Hoedi 157, 20. hortator remigum 159, 2.
I.
In ancoris stare 166, 3. inductio 68, 14. inhibere remos 163, 20. juga 145, 5.
justa 174, 23. iynx 271, 7.
L.
Labra 196, 24. latera 137, 1. laterculus 65, 23. lectus genialis 312, 35.
legiones 67, 27. litnus 89, 8. longae hastae 152, 36. lorica 31, 19. 240, 21.
unde dicta 32, 27. Lucina 344, 28. lupata fraena 12, 12. lupi fraenorum ib. 13.
lyra 91, 12. 223, 31.
M.
Magi 290, 26. malus 145, 38. manipuli 67, 30. manus ferrea 153, 27. modius
146, 3.
N.
Naenia 224, 34. naves apertae and tectae 148, 17. naucrariae 18, 5.
O.
Obliqua acies 64, 15. obolus pretium militare 9, 1. ocrcae 33, 4. Oedipus unde
dictus 358, 8. opifera 146, 28. orbis clypei 37, 29. ordines 67, 30. ostium
165, 4.
P.
Paliium 197, 9. palmula, vel tonsa 144, 18. papyrus 131, 31. parolcones 143,
31. passerculus 271, 8. pedancus subex 13, 18. pedes 146, 29. phalanges 39, 23.
phalanx 63, 21. phalerae 20, 4. Pharos 164, 35. Phormio, Terentii fabula 169,
4. pictura navis 139, 19. plutei 149, 6. portisculus 159, 2. Posthumus unde
359, 13. praefectus clasiis 155, 33. praeficae 222, 32. principes 83, 5.
Proculus unde dictus 359, 13. propugnacula 149, 7.
R.
Regulus avis 271, 9. remi 144, 17. remora 272, 5. remulci 143, 31. repotia
318, 4. retinacula 143, 33. rostrum vel cuneus 65, 16. 147, 11. 168, 3.
rudentes 146, 22.
S.
Saburra 143, 1. sacra ancora 142, 38. sacram ancoram solvere, proverb. 142,
39. Scamandrius cur vocatus Astyanax 357, 12. solvere funes. 143, 39. solutiles
scalae 105, 2. stapia 113, 18. stationes navium 165, 30. stellio and stincus
272, 6. strophi, vel struppi 144, 33. subducere naves 166, 37. supparum 45, 15.
T.
Tectae naves 148, 17. terebrae ^01, 26. tergemina Proserpinae epitheton 348,
17. tessera 85, 6. testudo 102, 21. 136, 33. militaris 102, 4. arietaria 102,
9. Thesmothetae, magistratus Athenienses 328, 33. thoraces 31, 32. bilices,
trilices 31, 35. tibiae 2^4. 8. toga 197, 10. tolleno, vel ^ollena 143, 20.
tonsa 144, 18. torquilla 271, 9. transtra 145, 5. 137, 7. triarii 83, 5.
trifidum fulmen Jovis 279, 24. tumulus 240, 13. turres 103, 9. 65, 26. tutela
139, 24.
V.
Vela 145, 8. Venus genitrix 85, 12. Venus Juno 303, 12. vineae 102, 25. vixit
and fuit 193, 26. vmbo 35, 20. Vopiscus unde dictus 359, 16.
INDEX Vocum, Locutionum and Proverbiorum Graecorum, quae in hac Archaeologia
explicantur.
A.
(...) 95, 2. (...) ib. 4. (...) 166, 2. (...) 145, 31. (...) 50, 17. (...) ib.
18. (...) 142, 10. (...) 319, 2. (...) 50, 15. (...) 223, 7. (...) 168, 12.
(...) 266, 2, (...) 40, 2. (...) 145, 17. (...) 43, 14. (...) 164, 20. (...)
19, 2. (...) 118, 31. (...) 145, 17. (...), vel (...), corymbi 138, 29. (...)
ib. 34. (...) 171, 23. (...) ib. 26. (...) 164, 20. (...) pro (...) 18, 35.
(...) pro (...) 80, 30. (...) 92, 21. (...), and (...) 38, 33. (...) 188, 20.
(...) 32, 32. (...) virgins dictae 299, 9. (...) 275, 8. dicta (...) ib. 9.
(...) 25, 22. (...) vel (...) 145, 36. (...) virgins quae 316, 20. (...) 49,
16. (...) vel (...) 142, 32. (...) 354, 32. (...), per errorem vocati (...) 19,
7. interdum (...) ib. 9. (...) 64, 18. (...) ib. 24. (...) 142, 32. (...) 28,
11. (...) 14, 7. (...) 318, 34. (...) 378, 37. (...) 69, 8. (...) 172, 36.
(...) mulieres dictae 343, 33. (...) 37, 28. (...), vel (...) 335, 28. (...)
368, 34. (...), vel (...), vel (...) 260, 25. (...) 188, 28. (...) 64, 21.
(...) ib. 27. (...) 399, 55. (...) 136, 27. (...), Lat. haustrum, tolleno, vel
rollena 143, 20. (...) 35, 18. (...) 43, 32. (...) 223, 3. (...) 256. (...) ib.
20. (...) 318, 25. (...), vel (...) 318, 11. (...) ib. 12. (...), vel (...)
143, 2. (...) 164, 1. (...) 163, 33. (...) Jupiter ib. ib. (...), retinacula
143, 33. (...), denafci 193, 18. (...) 69, 14. (...) 360, 2. (...) 356, 6.
(...) 69, 14. (...) 378, 36. (...) ib. 35. (...) 322, 11. (...) 322, 9. (...)
258, 12. (...) 322, 9. (...) 359, 27. (...) 299, 33. postea (...), vel (...)
ib. 35. (...) 258, 35. (...) 64, 33. (...) Apollo 44, 33. (...) 204, 30 (...)
ib. 31. (...) 208, 36. (...) 301, 26. (...) dictae virgins ib. 27. (...) 15,
11. (...) 310, 23. (...) 145, 8. 152, 3. (...) 152, 4. (...) 153, 30. (...)
208, 31. (...) 156, 28. (...) 138, 24. (...), vel (...) 139, 6. (...) 34, 28.
(...) 37, 30. (...) 34, 18. (...) 38, 4. (...) 172, 38. (...) 18, 24. (...)
338, 24. (...) 317, 35. (...) 224, 8. 91, 11. (...) 150, 3. (...) 95, 2. (...)
57, 32. (...) 75, 8. (...) 105, 4. (...) 171, 18. (...) 148. 18. (...) 266, 2.
(...) 303, 25. (...) 53, 23.
.
(...) 59, 22. (...), aut (...), interdum (...) 63, 39. (...) 193, 25. Lat.
vixit, and fuit ib. 26. (...) 41, 15. (...) 48, 8. (...) 53, 23. (...) 104, 37.
(...) proverb. 9, 9. (...) 47, 16. (...) 34, 28. (...) 95, 2. (...) ib. 3.
(...) ib. 4. (...) 90, 13. (...) dicta (...), and catapirates 143, 7.
G.
(...) 303, 36. dicta (...) ib. 37. (...) 303, 23. (...) vel (...) ib. 3, and
4. (...) 288, 19. (...) 312, 36. (...) 311, 1. (...) ib. ib. 317, 36. 286, 28.
(...) 204, 30. (...) aut (...) 38, 1. Romany vineis simile 102, 25. (...) 26,
26. 240, 23. (...) 346, 9. (...) 375, 2. (...), vel (...) 362, 17. (...) 160,
22. (...) 50, 14. apud Homerum (...) 50, 15. (...) 358, 32. (...) 31, 17. (...)
56, 12. (...) ib. 11. (...) 342, 4. (...) vel (...) 335, 29. (...) and (...)
295, 32. (...) 316, 11.
D.
(...) 143, 36. (...) 202, 28. (...) proverb. 252, 40 (...) 61, 12.59, 1. (...)
61, 16. (...) ib. 12. (...) 356, 6. (...) 149, 12. (...) 68, 21. (...) 131, 33.
(...) 136. 28. (...) 249, 19. (...) 63, 38. (...), epitheton Nestoriae navis
147, 21. (...), cujusdam Metellorum cognomen 359, 8. (...), solutiles scalae
100, 30. (...) 363, 10. (...) dicatum trophaeum 122, 23. (...) 174, 24. (...)
203, 12. (...) 19, 17. (...) 61, 17. (...) ib. ib. (...) 160, 1. (...) 70, 33.
(...) ib. 40. (...) vel (...) ib. 41. (...) vel (...) ib. 45. (...) vel (...)
71, 3^ (...) vel (...) ib. 7. (...) 68, 25, (...) 33.17. (...) 63, 9. (...) 64,
24. (...) ib. 2^. (...) ib. 34. (...) ib. 3^. (...) vel (...) 131, 33. (...)
16, 12. (...) 289, 2. (...) 64, 21. (...) 145, 18. (...) 300, 31. (...) 152,
35. (...) 19, 3. (...) 19, 4. (...) 39, 25. (...) 41, 2. (...) 40, 21. (...),
dictum (...) 153, 14. (...) ib. 15. (...), falcati curus 17, 6. (...) 354, 31.
feu (...) ib. 32. (...), Antigoni nomen 359, 2.
E.
(...) 355, 2^. (...) 317, 15. (...) 138, 1. (...), costae navis 136, 36. (...)
137, 17. (...) ib. ib. (...) 252, 22. (...) 43, 2. (...) 39, 25. (...) 258, 14.
(...) 299, 25. (...), transtra, and juga 145, 5. (...) 174, 24. (...), vel
(...), interdum (...) 344, 24. Lat. Lucina ib. 28. (...) 74, 31. (...) 75, 20.
(...) 206, 13. (...), vel (...) 69, 6. (...) 266, 2. (...) 265, 42. (...) 369,
26. (...) 61, 27. (...) 59, 1. (...) 134, 17. (...), Apollin^s epitheta 44, 32,
33. (...) and (...) 206, 5. ib. 6. (...) 211, 33. (...) 69, 13. (...) 378, 36.
(...) 62, 3. (...), vel (...) 195, 28. (...), vel (...) 359, 27^ (...) 20^^^.
(...) 222, ^3. (...) 104, ^5. (...) 84, 1^. (...) 103, 97. (...) ^ostrum 65,
16.147, 11. dictum (...) ib. (...) 260, 29. (...) 138, 25. (...) 313, 33. (...)
165, 34. (...), vel (...) 68, 6. (...), vel (...) 136, 38. (...) 77, 7. (...),
Lat. subducere 166, 37. (...) 60, 41. (...) vel (...) 67, 17* (...) 67, 13.
(...) 69, 16. (...) ib. 19.70, 14. (...) 69, 33. (...) ib. 21. (...) and (...)
70^^^. (...) 28, 31. (...) 68, 11. (...) ib. 24. (...) ib. 25. (...) ib. 26.
(...), Lucina 345, 31. (...) 68, 31. (...), vel (...) 318, 10. (...) 163, 20.
(...) 133, 14. (...) 143, 18. (...) 152, 19. (...) 318, 1. (...) 143, 33 (...),
vel (...) 122, 17. (...) 368, 34. (...), vel (...), Apollonii fabula 369, 2.
(...) 168, 34. (...) 145, 20. (...) 316, 23. (...) 317, 15. (...) 317, 18.
(...) 65, 1. (...) 167, 35. (...) 297, 11.368, 29. (...) 150, 35.133, 35. and
(...) 133, 35. (...) 66, 14, (...) proverb. 208, 25. (...) 75, 23. (...) 37^,
28. (...) 84, 13. (...) 63, 1. (...) ib. 3. (...) 300, 15. (...) 163, 12. (...)
146, 15.138, 22. (...) 61, 7. (...) 165, 21. (...) 156, 21. (...) 156, 21.
(...) 163, 15. (...) 69, 6. (...) 66, 33.63, 9. (...) 67, 37. (...) 146, 20.
(...) 294.9. (...) 35, 22. (...) 148, 10. (...), dicti (...) and (...) 150, 13.
(...) ib. 14. (...) 143, 1. (...), saburra 143, 1. (...) 254, 12. (...) 65, 6.
(...) 160, 39. (...) 61, 27. (...) 64, 10. (...) 64, 37. (...) 358, 35. (...)
194, 11. (...), Ptolemaei cognomen 358, 33. (...) 37, 30. (...) dicta sepuler.
194, 28. (...) 329, 5. (...) 303, 3. (...) ib. ib. (...) 68, 20. (...) 13, 1.
(...) 312, 24. (...), remora 272, 4. (...) 318, 6. (...) ib. 7.
.
(...) 169, 32. (...), and (...) 85, 12. (...) 122, 23. (...) 69, 19.137,
9.145, 5. (...) 144, 24. (...) 137, 9. (...) 150, 21. (...) 297, 27. (...) 63,
41. (...) 61, 2. (...) ib. 7. (...) 63, 38. (...) ib. ib. (...) 30, 27. (...)
137, 4. (...) 31, 8. (...) 31, 13.316, 11. (...) 31, 1. (...) 30, 27. (...)
137, 4.
.
(...) 85, 12. (...) 257, 12. (...) 146, 14. (...) 354, 31. (...) 258, 35.
(...) 208, 21. (...) 80, 20. (...) 129, 13. (...) 31, 24. (...) 61, 17. (...)
ib. 18. (...) 135, 15. (...) 300, 31. (...) 17, 40. (...) 16, 15. (...) 303,
17. (...) 37, 23.115* 9.209, 5.
TH
(...) 150, 20. (...), vel (...) 144, 24. (...) 137, 9.150, 20. (...) and (...)
150, 20. (...) 150, 21.137, 8. (...) 342, 5. (...) 369, 22. (...) 121, 26.
(...) 257, 12. (...) 240, 21. (...), and (...) 23, 24. (...) 143, 1. (...) 288,
30. (...) 303, 23. (...) 346, 9. (...) 260, 28. (...) 362, 27.369, 22. (...)
319, 1. (...), Lucina 345, 9. (...) 195, 6. (...), vel (...) 144, 25. (...)
137, 8. 150.19. (...) 137, 10. (...) 150, 20. (...) 304.36. (...) 223.13.
(...), praeticae 222, 39. (...) 260, 30. (...) 356, 5. (...) 38, 3. (...) 19,
4. (...) 316, 29 (...) 321, 32. (...) 1b. (...) ib. (...) 146, 11. (...) 31,
15. (...) aut (...) 32, 24.
I.
(...) 223, 9. (...) 91, 14. (...) ib. 15. (...) ib. (...) 142, 38. (...) 26^,
30. (...) 362, 17. (...) 148, 26. (...) 246, 5. (...) 66, 9. (...) 49, 11.
(...) ib. 12. (...) 133, 17. (...) 66, 18. (...) ib. 27. (...) 58, 33. (...)
47, 10. (...) 11, 19. (...) 297, 20 (...) 133, 17. (...) 60, 30. (...), Neptuni
epitheta 11, 36. (...) 27, 25. (...) ib. (...) 19, 4. (...) 27, 26. (...) 123,
37. (...), vela 145, 8. (...) 146, 5. (...), malus 145, 38. (...) 342, 5. (...)
dictus ib. (...) 34, 23. (...) 35, 18. (...) 271, 7.
K.
(...), vel (...) 195, 2. (...), and (...), amasiorum epitheta 266, 14. (...)
358, 30. (...), urnae 233, 32. (...), vel (...) 319, 6. (...), ceruchus,
anchonis, and rudens 146, 26. (...), vel (...) 143, 25. (...) 194, 1. (...)
302, 7. (...) ib. ib. (...) 36, 5. (...) 8, 15. (...) 216, 12. (...) vel (...)
202, 28. (...) 225, 2. (...) and (...) 8, 13. (...) 225, 1. (...) 90, 9. (...)
146, 10. (...) 92, 2. (...) 7, 20. (...) 28, 23. (...) 178, 28. (...), vel
(...) 7, 21. (...) pro (...) 195, 6. (...) 104,37. catapirates ib. (...) 104,
35. (...) and (...) 104, 37. (...) 165, 35. (...) 9, 12. (...), seu (...) 148,
15. (...) 148, 16. and (...) 19, 24. (...) 29, 7. (...) and (...) 194, 1.
(...), portisculus, ageator, hortator remigum 159, 2. (...), minorum navium
genus 134, 16. (...) 244, 34. (...) ib. ib. (...) 145, 28.153, 22. (...) 153,
15. (...) 63, 11. (...) 28, 21.47, 8. (...), and (...) 64, 4 (...) etc 64, 5.
(...) 61, 4. (...) 63, 4. (...), vel (...) 103, 37. 64, 5. (...) 143, 6. (...)
ib. 5. (...) 267, 1. (...) 138, 1. (...) 73, 23.74, 35. (...) 74, 29. (...)
amati dicti 263, 8. (...) 136, 29. (...) 368, 33. (...) ib. 34. (...) 143, 18.
(...) 336, 25. (...) vel (...) 112, 36. (...) 313, 20. (...) 68, 29. (...) ib.
30. (...) ib. 32. (...), ocreae 33, 21. (...) 43, 20. (...), forfex 65, 20.
(...) 65, 4. (...) 136, 31. dicta (...) and (...) 136, 32. Latin testudo ib.
33. (...) pro (...) 194, 11. (...), sepulcra 194, 27. (...) 194, 28. (...) 317,
19. (...) 42, 20. (...), Colophonem imponere, proverbium 17, 27. (...) 49, 12.
(...) vocantur (...) 143, 11. (...) 19, 4. (...), ensis falcatus 43, 16. (...)
307, 20. (...) 44, 13. (...) ib. 15. (...) 25, 14. (...) 307, 14. (...) 47, 21.
(...) 138, 29. (...) 303, 37. (...) 313, 1. (...) 305, 15. (...) 354, 37. (...)
25, 14. (...) 240, 24 (...), aries 103, 36. (...) 100, 9. quas alii volunt esse
(...) ib. 10. (...) 233, 32. (...), vel (...) 316, 25. (...) and (...) 137, 34.
(...) 156, 32. (...) 156, 36. (...) 167, 31. (...) 35, 18. (...) 25, 23. (...)
294, 10. (...) 65, 4. (...) 167, 31. (...) 136, 32. (...) 25, 24. (...) 80, 25.
(...) pro (...) 18, 34.80, 29. and (...) 80, 26. (...) 18, 33. (...) 144, 17.
(...) 150, 13.
L.
(...) 324, 35. (...) 38, 6. (...) 233, 32. (...) 116, 7. (...) 172, 40. (...)
25, 22. (...) 32, 32. (...) 64, 8. (...) 136, 29. (...) 359, 35. (...) 253, 1.
(...) 313, 1. (...) 21, 24. (...) ib. 25. (...) ib. 26. (...) 105, 7. (...) 54,
31. (...) 353, 16. (...), vel (...) 146, 9. (...), Ajacis epith. 32.5. (...)
223, 6. (...) vel (...) 160, 22. (...), obliqua acies 64, 15. (...) 205, 44.
(...) 258, 11. (...) 314, 2. (...) 26, 28, (...) ib. 29. (...) 27.25. (...) and
(...) ib. 9. (...) 59, 1. (...) ib. 2. (...) 61, 13. (...) 60, 41. (...) 67,
3.61, 13. dic^us (...) ib. 15. (...) ib. 16. (...) 31, 13.316, 11, (...), lupi
fraenorum 12, 13. (...) 316, 11. (...) 31, 20.
.
(...) 105, 4.99, 28. (...), vel (...) 105, 4. (...) 45, 26. (...) 133, 25.
(...) 368, 30. (...) 43, 2. (...) 95, 4. (...) 299, 24. (...) 141, 12. (...)
39, 27. (...) 203, 20. (...) 92, 2. (...) 110, 23. (...), interdum (...), vel
(...) 63, 3. (...) a quibusdam (...), ab aliis (...) dicta 63, 1. (...) 63, 4.
(...) 50, 20. (...), modius 146, 3. (...) 150, 22. (...) 35, 20. (...) 203, 20.
(...) 146, 35. (...) 68, 35. (...) 68, 38. (...) 69, 1. (...), vel (...) 69, 3.
(...) 137, 24. (...), etc. dictum 61, 2. (...) 307, 25. (...) 19, 24. (...) 63,
34. idem quod (...) ib. ^6. (...) ib. 37. (...) 30^.20. (...) 338, 32.339, 1.
(...) 99, 28. (...) and (...) 137, 31. (...) 30, 9. (...) 242, 32. (...) 242,
32.240, 24. (...) 240, 26. (...) Diana 348, 1. (...) 325, 5. (...), aut (...)
54, 13. (...), and (...), naves minores 134, 15. (...) 131, 18. (...), vel
(...) 68, 24. (...) 66, 36. (...) 225, 2. (...) 161, 17. (...) 196, 33. (...)
165, 7.
N.
(...), praefectus classis 155, 33. (...) 165, 18. (...) 152, 35. hastae longae
dictae Livio ib. 36. (...) ib. 37. (...) 163, 20. (...) 144, 31. (...) 147, 21.
(...), vel(...) 135, 15. (...) ib. 17. vide (...) (...) 165, 19. (...) 151, 31.
(...) 160, 1. (...) 250, 22. (...) 260, 18. (...) 260, 11. aliq. (...), and
(...) ib. 14. (...) unde dictus 358.16 (...) 138, 29. (...) etc. 165, 21. (...)
161, 25. (...) 133, 25. (...), and (...) 134, 11. (...) 142, 8. (...) 147, 13.
(...) 148, 16. tectae ib. 17. (...) ib. 18. apertae ib. 19. (...) 134, 17.
(...) 135, 24. (...) and (...) 137, 31. (...) ib. 34. (...) 148, 26. (...) 224,
36. (...) 224, 38. (...), vel (...) 159, 34. (...) 368, 9. (...) ib. 2. (...)
362.18. (...), costae navis 136, 35. (...) 174, 24. (...) 80, 21. (...), vel
(...) 309, 11. (...) 309, 5. (...) ib 6. (...) 309, 9. (...), lectus genialis.
312, 36.
X.
(...) 62, 32, 35. (...) 62, 34. (...) dictae (...) 332, 33. (...) 240, 32.
(...) 241, 14. (...) 43, 1. (...) 65, 37. (...) 42, 7. (...) 43, 19. (...) and
(...) ib. 20. (...), and (...) 152, 37. (...) 19, 4.
O.
(...) 202, 31. (...), vel (...) 240, 1. (...), dentes ancorae 142, 23. (...)
301, 5. (...) 342, 5. (...) 49, 11. (...) 193, 19. (...) ib. ib. (...) 133, 19.
(...) 143, 31. (...), and (...), seu (...) 223, 6. (...) 352, 4. (...) 64, 25.
(...), and (...), umbo. 35, 20. (...) prove. ib. 5. (...), dictae (...) 104, 37.
(...) 10, 11. (...) 133, 16. (...) 319, 1. (...) 85, 3. (...) 105, 4. (...) ib.
7. (...) 41, 12. (...), aut (...) (...), acies recta 64, 10. (...) 195, 28.
(...) idem quod (...) 165, 36. (...) 165, 34. (...) ib. 35. (...) 102, 21.
(...) 174, 24. (...) 233, 32, (...) 204, 31.360, 30. (...) prove. 252, 12. (...)
61, 7. (...) 64, 25. (...), vel (...) 61, 8. (...) 137, 15. (...) 26, 24.
(...), vel (...) 36, 13. (...) 26, 17.
P
(...) 84, 11. (...) ib. 12. (...), vel (...) 369, 26. (...), prove. 299, 17.
(...) 318, 2. (...) 295, 32, (...) 329, 26. (...) 41, 14. (...) ib. 15. (...)
128, 31. (...) 149, 6. (...) 313, 1. (...) 68, 17. (...) ib. 20. (...) ib. 21.
(...) 137, 1. (...) 16, 15. (...) 206, 8. (...) 9, 8. (...) 64, 39. (...) 42,
30. dictum (...), vel (...) 43, 1. (...), vel (...) ib. 2. (...) 309, 6. (...)
211, 33. (...) 149, 5. (...), and (...) 15, 24. (...) 139, 19. (...) 85, 25.
(...) 63, 36. (...) 167, 31. (...) ib. 35. (...), vel (...) 329, 1. (...) 300,
15. a recentioribus(...) ib. 16 (...) 149, 5. (...), Lat. platei ib. 6.
interdum propugnacula 7. (...) 138, 12. (...) 68, 9. (...) 68, 6. (...) 138,
15. (...) 15, 25. (...) 15, 24. (...) 362, 20. (...), Minervae cognomen 303,
19. (...) 337, 15. (...) ib. 11. (...) 137, 21. (...) 309, 3. (...) 368, 28.
(...) 63, 39. (...) 80, 22. (...), ancoralia, ancorarii, (...), vel (...) ib.
25. (...) 44* 4. (...) 11, 11. (...) 38, 12. (...) 59, 2. (...) 61, 11. (...)
ib. ib. (...) 62, 32. (...), vel (...) 62, 23. (...) 297, 25. (...) 61, 22.
dicta (...) ib. 25. (...) and (...) ib 24. (...), vel (...) 67, 10. (...) 134,
17. (...) 60, 41. (...) 67, 8. (...) 134, 11. (...) 64, 39. (...) 148, 16.
(...) Elithyia dicta 346, 7. (...), etc. 250, 22. (...), decursio 229, 24.
(...) 25, 13. 138, 36. dicta (...) 25, 21. (...) ib. 22. (...) ib. 23. (...), a
nonnullis (...) 368, 28. vulgo (...) ib. 29. aliquando (...) ib. 30. (...) 249,
23. (...), and a quibusdam (...) 240, 24. (...) 80, 22. (...) 69, 10. (...) 99,
12. (...), Proserpina 348, 15. dicta (...), triformis, tergemma ib. 17. tria
illius nomina ib. 14. (...) 241, 14. (...) 105, 7. (...), gubernaculum 141, 32.
(...), plicatiles sealae 100, 29. (...) 91, 9. interdum dicta (...) ib. 10.
(...) 275, 2. (...) 64, 12. (...), Lat. palmula, vel tonsa 144, 18. (...),
latera navis 137, 1. (...) 143, 13. (...) 150, 14. (...), and (...), Lat.
cespites 99, 15. (...) 131, 18. (...), vel (...) ib. 33. (...) 143, 2. (...)
304, 36. (...) 45, 26. (...), pedes 146, 29. (...) 37, 27. (...), vel (...) 7,
12. (...) 253, 1. (...) 66, 41. 57, 3. 60, 38. (...) 105, 39. (...), Demetrii
cognomen 104, 27. (...) 308, 22. (...) Andromache quare 299, 9. (...) and (...)
133, 14. (...) and (...) ib. 16. (...), and hippagines ib. 17. (...) 7, 10.
(...) 317, 34. (...) 38, 33. (...), vel (...) 335, 31. (...) 129, 8. (...) 148,
7. (...), dicta (...) 299, 24. (...) ib. 25. interdum (...) ib. 26. (...) 150,
34. (...) 309, 14. (...) 201, 27. (...) ib. ib. (...) 211, 34. (...) 146, 30.
(...) 67, 39. (...) 319, 1. (...) 310, 32. (...) 223, 3. (...) 63, 36. (...)
67, 33. (...) ib. 34. (...), vel (...) 303, 3. (...), collocare 201, 12. (...)
146, 30. (...) 166, 32. (...) 161, 25. (...) 163, 13. (...), interdum dicta
(...) 138, 17. (...), retinacula 143, 33. (...) 137, 23. interdum (...) ib. 24.
(...), vel (...) 158, 29. (...) 63, 37. (...) 61, 2. 63, 37. (...) 63, 37.
(...) and (...) 138, 11. (...) ib. 12. (...) 146. 8. (...) 140, 36. (...) 66,
1. (...) 227, 1. (...), turres 103, 9. (...) 103, 33. (...) unde dictus 358,
15. (...), vel (...) 166, 33.
P.
(...) 329, 1. (...) 125, 8. (...), vel (...) 65, 10. (...), vel (...),
parolcones, remulci 143, 31.
S.
(...), corona cingere urbem 99, 4. (...) 165, 34. (...) 62, 20. (...) Minerva
69, 31. (...) 90, 18. (...) 148, 15. (...) 316, 16. (...) 42, 5. (...) 40, 2.
(...) 15, 24. (...), proverb. 252, 40. (...) 145, 5. (...) 242, 32. (...) 85,
28. (...) 168, 12. (...) 85, 37. (...) 62, 16. (...) 308, 21. (...) 153, 27.
(...) Lemnos 21, 19. (...) Lemnii dicti 21, 15. (...) 308, 20. (...) 144, 30.
(...) 131, 27. (...) 38, 33. (...) 240, 24. (...) 36^, 19. (...) 116, 6 (...)
129, 17. (...), aut (...) 54, 30. (...) 32, 32. (...) 143, 31. (...) 240, 28.
(...) 75, 19, 20. (...) 40, 3, (...) 136, 12. (...) 28, 30. (...) 241, 16.
(...) 8, 5. (...) 63, 4. (...), vel (...) 64, 1. (...), vel (...) 61, 15, 16.
(...), praefectus classis 155, 33. (...) 138, 34. dicta (...) ib. 16. (...)
167, 27. (...), ostium, fauces 165, 48, 5. (...) 63, 5. (...) 57, 37. (...) 63,
8. (...) 61, 2. (...) 102, 4. (...) 62, 16. (...) 7, 20. (...) 133, 24. (...)
150, 31. (...), and (...) 13, 1. (...), vel (...) 195, 2. (...) 204, 19. (...)
ib. 20. (...) 61, 19. dictus (...) ib. 20. (...) 145, 36. (...), vel (...) 85,
3. (...) 75, 25. (...) 85, 12. (...) 154, 36. (...) 67, 1. (...), vel (...)
195, 2. (...) 66, 4. (...), Lat. tessera 85. 6. (...), 62, 29. aliquibus (...)
ib. 29. (...) 62, 31. (...) 91, 9. (...) 61, 20. (...) 62, 35. (...), vel (...)
54, 13. (...) 105, 2. (...) 52, 31. (...) 65, 10. (...) 154, 36. (...) Elithyia
145, 9. (...) 358, 30. (...) 85, 12.
T.
(...) 71, 13. (...) 342, 5. (...), proverb. 223, 15. (...) 224, 14. (...) ib.
12. (...) 160, 12. dictus (...) ib. 14. (...) 58, 25. (...) 62, 1. (...) 61,
27. (...) 251, 24. (...) 16^, 32. (...) 66, 16. (...), vel (...) ib. 18. (...)
25, 21. (...) 240, 32. (...) 250, 22. (...) 336, 17. (...) 35, 29. (...) 63, 3.
(...) Juno 303, 13. (...) 303, 11. (...) Jupiter ib. 13. (...) ib. 11. (...)
63, 1. 66, 31. 303, 4. (...) 7, 10. (...) 65, 33. (...) 362, ^. (...) 48, 8.
(...) 61, 25. (...) ib. ib. (...) 63, 14. (...) ib. 12. (...) 28, 11. (...)
134, 11. (...) 9, 10. (...) prove. 9, 9. (...) 156, 36. (...) 223, 12. ab
Hesychio exponitur (...) ib. 13. (...) ib. 14. (...), and (...), Lat. fori, and
transtra 137, 6. 7. (...) ib. 9. (...) ib. 11. (...) 63, 39. (...) 4^, 16.
(...) 44, 30. (...) Apollo 44, 32. (...) 137, 13. (...) 146, 9. (...) 137, 14.
(...) ib. 15. (...) 156, 23. (...) 159, 6. (...) 134, 11. (...) 150, 31. (...)
135, 17. (...), triformis, tergemina (...) 348, 1^. (...), vel (...) 68, 25.
(...) 144, 32. (...) 344, 19. (...), vel (...) 344, 4. (...) 63, 38. (...), vel
(...) 28, 21. (...) 16, 38. (...) 121, 27. recentioribus (...) ib. 28. (...),
Iunonis cognomen ib. 30. (...) 123, 37. (...), vel (...), Iovis cognomen 121,
29. (...) 122, 23. (...) 122, 17. (...), carina 136, 10. (...) ib. 12. (...)
ib. 28. (...), strophi, vel struppi 144, 33. (...), a poetis (...), vel (...)
376, 33. (...) 340, 25. (...), terebrae 101, 26. (...) 18, 30. (...) 28, 19.
(...) 240, 28. (...) 90, 18.
Y.
(...) 223, 11. (...) 316, 30. (...) 312, 4. (...) 145, 3. (...) 240, 30. (...)
19, 14. (...) 150, 13. (...) 146, 27. Lat. opifera ib. 28. (...) 65, 9. (...)
65, 8. (...) 337, 6. (...), interdum (...), vel (...) 145, 4. (...) 62, 24.
(...) 135, 24. (...) 299, 35. (...) 238, 31. (...) 137, 4. (...) 68, 3. (...)
50, 15. (...), vel (...) 249, 19. (...) 165, 34
PH.
(...), etc. Proserpina, vel Elithyia 348, 8. (...) dicta (...) 63, 4. a
veteribus (...) ibid. 5. (...) and (...) 63, 7, 8. (...) 39, 21. Homero (...)
161, 17. (...) 63, 34. (...), and (...) 63, 39. (...) 64, 8. (...) ib. 2. (...)
ib. 6. (...) 66, 1. (...) 63, 15. (...) 265, 30. (...) 64, 12. (...) ib. 18.
(...) ib. 21. (...) ib. 39. (...) ib. 10. (...), vel obliqua acies ib. 15.
(...) 65, 6. (...) ib. 1. (...) and (...) ib. 10. (...) 65, 37. (...), vel
(...) 64, 10. (...), phalerae 20, 4. (...) 136, 26. (...) and (...) 26, 28.
(...) 208, 36. (...) 299, 26. (...), vel (...) 201, 14. (...) 233, 32. (...),
Ptolemaei cognomen 358, 34. (...) 263, 10. (...) 268, 13. (...) 137, 31. (...)
32, 32. (...) 209, 19. (...) 133, 19. (...) 308, 31. (...), and (...) 105, 37.
(...) ib. 39. (...) ib. 40. (...) ib. 38. (...), and (...) 80, 20. (...) 81,
19. (...) 38, 33. (...) 58, 35. (...) 95, 2. (...) 358, 32. (...) 85, 3, (...)
145, 8.
.
(...) 147, 13. (...) 22, 16. (...) 136, 29. (...) 147, 13. (...) 239, 18.
(...), manus ferrea 153, 27. (...) 34, 15. (...), Lat. cunei 136, 20. (...),
testudo 102, 1. (...), testudo militaris, interdum (...) ib. 4. (...) ib. 18.
(...) ib. 21. (...) 164, 19. (...), vel (...) ibid. 20. (...) 139, 11. (...)
371, 7. (...) ib. 5. (...) 258, 11. (...), vel (...) 62, 35. (...) 59, 1.
(...), vel (...) 62, 37. (...) 324, 35. (...), Dianae cognomen 362, 13. (...)
220, 8. (...) 90, 5. (...), vel (...) 257, 12. (...) 70, 6. (...) 368, 2. (...)
47, 26. (...) Apollo 44, 33. (...) 360, 30. (...) idem quod (...) ib. 31. (...)
idem quod (...) ib. ib. (...), agger 102, 32. 239, 15. (...) 239, 23. (...)
102, 18.
PS.
(...) 10, 14. (...) 6^, 34 (...) 18, 33. (...) 245, 15. (...), proverb. 223,
15.
O.
(...) 337, 8. (...) 337, 6. (...) Elithyia dicta 345, 9.
ERRATA.
P.43. l. 12. read Posidomius. p. 61. l. 5. ^. (...). p. 251. l. 27. r. (...).


