Common Prayer Book NO Divine Service: OR, XXVIII REASONS AGAINST Forming and
Imposing any Humane LITURGIES or COMMON-PRAYER-BOOKS; AND The main Objections
to the contrary, answered; ALSO, The English Common Prayer Book anatomized.

LIKEWISE Twelve Arguments against Diocesan and Lord-Bishops; with the main
Objections answered.

AND The Great Disparity between them, and Timothy and Titus, showed.

By VAVASOR POWELL.

The Third Edition: Corrected and Enlarged.

Why do you also transgress the Commandment of God by your Traditions?

Mat. 15.3. (...). Not as though ye were Lords of (or over) the Heritages,

1 Pet. 5.3. London, Printed for Livewell Chapman, and are to be sold at his
shop at the Sign of the Crown in Popes-head-Alley. 1661.

TO The Composers, of Imposers, of Readers, of Hearers, of Disputers and
Writers for
Common Prayer.
I Would desire you all in the Name and Fear of the All-seeing, Almighty, and
All-judging GOD, to set these following, and the like Considerations to your
hearts, and your hearts to them.

Consider 1. How jealous the Lord of Heaven and Earth is of his own Worship,
and of all the Parts and Circumstances thereunto belonging, Deuteronomy. 5.9. Hos.
5.11. Mat. 15 3. Col. 2.21, 22. Rev. 22.14, 20. 2. How abominable and
unacceptable to this holy just God have been and are all Idolatrous,
Superstitious and False Services, and all that do serve him in any Way or Thing
which he has not himself commanded and appointed, Deuteronomy. 7.25, 26. Isa. 30.22.
and 66.3, 4. Jer. 9.13, 14, Ezekiel. 20.4. 3. How sorely and severely he has
punished those Kings, Priests, Prophets, and People that have been false
Worshippers, and swerved from His Holy Commandments, 1 Kin. 11.6. Number. 11.3,
4. 4. Whether God does call upon any of you all, to offer him any such Service
as this is. And whether he may not say to you, as he did once to Judah, Who
has required this at your hand? Isa. 1.12. 2. How inconsistent with the Day
and Light of the Gospel is this Service, God having sent his Word more fully
and plainly to direct his Ministers and People, and given his Spirit in a more
abundant measure to help and enable them to call upon him. 6. How little good
(if any at all) has been done by the long use of the Service Book, though men
have prayed long by it, That the rest of their Lives might be holy, and
righteous, and yet they still continue profane and unrighteous. 7. How much
hurt it has done in shouldring and thrusting out many godly, painful,
soul-saving Preachers; and in bringing in, and maintaining so many ignorant,
scandalous, lazy and formal Priests and Curates, to the deceiving and utter
undoing of precious Souls. 8. Whether the imposing of the Scottish Liturgy
(which in some things was better, though in some others worse than the English)
was not the beginning, and first Cause of the late grievous Wars; and if so,
whether men should not be more cautious to do the like for the future? 9.
Whether if the Truth were thoroughly and truly weighed and examined, the first
end of composing the Common Prayer Book (which does so much symbolize with the
Mass) was not, to bring Papists to Church: but it effected so little therein
(not because they so much dislike it, as because it was not in Latin, and
commanded by the Pope) that it did rather confirm them in their Mass-Service.
10. Whether some now may not intend by the re-establishing of this Book, to
oppose and pull down that excellent and gracious Spirit of Prayer and
Preaching, which God has poured out upon his Ministers; and to make this a
Snare and Net against all Preachers and People, that out of Conscience cannot
conform thereto. 11. Whether any Persons can produce any such Liturgy, or such
Form of Prayer from the beginning of the World, either among the Jews or
Gentiles, till above three hundred years after Christ, when Antichrist began to
exercise Papal Power? 12. Whether if there were no other Reason but that this
Book has been so much idolized by the generality of men, and offensive to so
many Christians, it should not be done with as the Brazen Serpent was by
Hezekiah? 1 King. 18.4. 13. Whether one end of Christ's coming into, and one
part of his work in the world, was not to redeem men from the Rudiments and
Traditions of men? of which this is one. And whether it be not a Sin against
the Blood, Spirit, and Gospel of Christ, to impose, maintain and continue still
to use the same? 1 Pet. 1.18, 19. Heb. 9.10, 11. 14. They that worship God in a
false way, are said in Scripture to worship Devils, Lev. 17.7. Deuteronomy. 32.17. 2 Chronicles. 11.17. 1 Cor. 10.20. 15. Whether at the great and terrible Day of
judgment, any Magistrates, Ministers or People can justify before Christ the
making, imposing, reading or hearing of this or the like Service? (And whether
good men as far as they build with this Material, will not then suffer loss?)
And whether those can then stand in the Judgment without fear, shame and
sorrow, that have cast out, persecuted, imprisoned, or otherwise afflicted the
true Preachers and Servants of God, who did choose to obey GOD rather than men,
and to observe His Divine Will, rather than Men's Traditions?

Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee (you) understanding in all things,
2 Timothy 2.7.

I esteem all thy Precepts concerning all things to be right, and I hate every
false way, Psalm. 119.128.

Against Imposing the Common Prayer Book: COLLECTIONS OUT OF SM. EC. TY. MN.
VVS. Dedicated and presented to the Lords and Commons in Parliament.
IN Page 5. that the first and purer times knew no stinted Liturgy, as it
appears from Tertullian (in Apol. 9. cap. 30. Epist. 121.) who says, The
Christians of those times prayed, Sine monitore quia de pectore; That is,
without any Prompter, but their own hearts. Austin also tells us, Liberum
est, it is free for us to ask the same things in the Lords Prayer, aliis atque
aliis verbis -- sometimes one way, and sometimes another: and Justin Martyr
tells us, He who instructed the people, prayed according to his ability, p. 7.
yet have some Bishops blasphemed the Spirit of Prayer, and many able, learned,
conscientious Preachers have been molested, and suspended, for letting the
constant flames of their fixed conceptions mount up from the Altar of their
zealous heart, unto the Throne of grace -- p. 8. their tongues also have raged
against this way of Prayer, have sealed up the mouths of Ministers for praying
thus in public, and imposed Penances on private Christians for praying thus in
their Families, and compelled to abjure this practice, endeavoring with raging
violence to banish this Divine Ordinance from our Churches and Dwellings,
professing in open Court, it was fitter for Amsterdam, than for our Churches --
as did Doctor Corbet, Mr. Nevil; and all this in behalf of that Book of
Common Prayer, the Original whereof is published in that Proclamation of King
Edward the Sixth, p. 9. which they so rigorously pressed, to the casting out of
all that scruple it, or any thing in it, to the (almost) justling out the
preaching of the Word, and conceived Prayer, together; -- which yet was taken
out of Models from Rome, and has since the first compiling of it, suffered
alteration, to the worse; and so symbolizeth with the Popish Mass, as that the
Pope himself was willing to have it used, if he might but confirm it -- for the
end of it was on purpose to bring the Papists to our Churches; but rather it
has brought many of us to them, not any of them to us; the clogging it with
Ceremonies, the often and impertinent reiterating of the Lords Prayer, the ill
translation of the Psalms, and of the Scriptures; the many phrases in the
Prayers that are liable to just exception. And whereas the Minister by the
Scripture is the peoples mouth to God, this Book prescribes Responsaries to be
said by the people, some of which are unsuitable to what the Minister
pronounces; some of them savor of Tautologies, some are made to be so
effectual to the Prayer, as that all which the Minister says, is no prayer
without them, as in the Letany -- p. 10. Again, it is so much idolized, as that
it is accounted the only worship of God, and is made the upholder of an
unpreaching Ministry, and is cried up to the height, so that some are not
ashamed to say, That the wit of Men and Angels cannot mend it, and that it is a
sufficient discharge of the Ministers Duty to read this Book. --

Abbots Church-forsakers.
The end of its first use was, not to tie godly men from exercising their gifts
in Prayer; but the eld Popish Priests, that by a seeming to return to our
Religion, did through indulgence retain their places, from returning to the old
Mass, which yet did hinder Ministers (that had the gift of Prayer in an
abundant measure, as well as of preaching) p. 10. In Bishop Wren's days, who
forbid all use of conceived Prayer in the Church.

Thus much from that Book, called Smectymnuus.

That Book for its worth, and present use, is newly reprinted, Anno 1660. for
Jo. Rothwel.

Republished by Mr. Manton, who prefixed his Epistle.

In the Common Prayer Book unmasked, is showed its unlawfulness.

I. Page 4. By its Name Liturgy, or Service, so the Papists call their Mass,
etc.

II. Page 7. By its original, taken from the Mass Book.

1. The Common Prayers, from the Popish Breviary. 2. The Administration of the
Sacraments, Burial, Visitation of the sick, and Matrimony, from their Ritual.
3. The Consecration of the Lords Supper, the Collects, Epistles and Gospels,
from the Mass Book. 4. The Ordination of Bishops, Priests and Deacons (which at
first was joined to the Service Book) from the Roman Pontifical.
Common Prayer Book NO Divine Service, etc.
Quest. WHether is it lawful for Magistrates, Ministers, or any other Persons,
to form, or make a stinted Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book, and to impose the
same?

Answ. It is not lawful.

Reas. 1. Because no Magistrate, Minister, nor any other persons under Heaven,
can produce any authority for so doing; if such power can be produced from God,
let Commands, or any Instances or Examples thereof be shown out of the
Scriptures: if not, let any presume upon their uttermost peril to introduce the
same. And whereas some say it is not forbidden in the Scriptures, that is
answered more fully afterward, under the first Objection. But,

Reas. 2. Because it is forbidden, both in the second Commandment, and in
other Scriptures, which I prove thus: The Ordinances, Traditions, and Rudiments
of men in the Worship of God, are forbidden in the second Commandment, as
Expositors generally affirm [see Bishop Andrews, Dod, Byfield, and others on
the second Commandement] and in other Scriptures, Deuteronomy. 4.2. and 12.32. Mat.
15.9. Col. 2.20.

But stinted Liturgies, or Common-Prayer-Books, are the Ordinances, Traditions,
and Rudiments of men, [and not as the Doctrine and Baptism of John, from
Heaven.] Therefore Liturgies, or Common-Prayer-Books are forbidden in the
second Commandment, and in other Scriptures.

But whereas it is objected, that the Modes and Circumstances of Worship are
left to the determination of men; see the Answer to the second Objection.

Reas. 3. Because this teaches vain Worship, or to Worship God in a vain way;
it being like the Traditions of the Elders, Mat. 15.9, 10. Mark 7.7, 8.

Obj. But the Jewish Elders rejected the Commandments of God, which we do not.

Ans. So do all those that do not worship God in the spirit and truth,
according to his Word, Isa. 29.33. John 4.20, 24.

Reas. 4. That only which is needful, in the Worship of God, is to be made,
and imposed; but a Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book is not needful in the worship
of God: therefore a Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book is unlawful to be made or
imposed. The Major, or first Proposition is clearly proved, Act. 15.28. the
Minor or latter I prove thus, 1. The Scriptures themselves are a sufficient
Directory and Rubric to the Church of God, and to make the man of God perfect,
2 Timothy 3.15, 16. 2. If it had been needful, then doubtless Moses who was
faithful in his House, Heb. 3 5, 6.
as a Servant, or Christ who was more faithful as a Son, would have enjoined
the same: but neither of them did so. 3. It is not necessary, because the
Churches of God did thrive and grow best of all, when (as in the Primitive
times) and where there was none. 4. Because the Ministers of Christ, and his
Gospel, ought to be so gifted, as not to need it, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 12.6,
7, 8, 9, 10. compared with 1 Cor. 14.13, 14, 15. James 5.14.


Object. But some Ministers may be without the gift of Prayer.

Ans. 1 King. 12.31. Levit. 21. Isa. 56.
Yes, some accounted Ministers; but such are liker Jeroboam's Simpletons, the
blemished Priests under the Law, and the Dumb Dogs which the Prophet reproves,
than Gospel Ministers.

Reas. 5. Because none of the godly Magistrates in the Old Testament (though
those times did more require them, than the days of the Gospel) did form or
enjoin any such Liturgy.

If it be objected, and said, That there were Liturgies in the Jewish Church,
and in the days of the Old Testament.

Answ. Though that can hardly be proved, yet admit there were: so there were
Idols, Altars, Groves, and many such things, which they idolatrously and
superstitiously set up, without any authority from God.

Reas. 6. Because the Churches of Christ are not edified thereby; and what is
not to edification, ought not to be in the Churches, 1 Cor. 14.26. Ephesians. 4.12,
16.

Obj. But diverse have gotten benefit by such Liturgies.

Ans. So have many by the Writings of diverse of the Papists (yea, Heathens) nay
some have gotten good by the Sins of others, and by the Judgments that befell
their sinful Companions; as Waldus was converted by seeing his companion fall
down dead, by the immediate stroke and hand of God: and one was converted by
seeing a true Christian hanged wrongfully: it does not therefore follow that
evil may be done, that good may come thereby, Romans 3.8.

Reas. 7. Because that which is to be a form, and rule, ought to be a form and
rule for all the Churches of Christ, Act. 15.28. and 16.4. 1 Cor. 4.17. and
14.33. and 16.1. and 7.17. But such a Form or Liturgy cannot possibly (at least
probably) be formed by mere men, because neither the Magistrates, nor Ministers
of all Nations where Churches are, can possibly be brought, either (...), or
(...), either into one place to debate, or into one Judgment to determine it:
an experience of this we had in the two Nations of England and Scotland (though
under the same King) yet the Liturgy formed for and intended to be imposed upon
the Scots, was different in diverse things from that established in England.

Reas. 8. Because the setting up of such a form, is equal to the setting up of
men's Thresholds by Gods Threshold, and Posts by his Posts, by which they
defiled the Name of God, Ezekiel. 43.8.

Reas. 9. No man, or men in these days, can pretend to have such an
infallibility of spirit, as either to compose, or enjoin a perfect Rule for
others; and if it be not perfect, they cannot tie any Saint, much less the
Churches of Christ thereto: for the Rule of faith and obedience ought to be
perfect, Psalm. 119.128. Isa. 8.20.

Reas. 10. Because all Prayers are to be made in the Spirit, as well public as
private, Ephesians. 6.18. Jude 19, 20.

Obj. But may not men pray in the Spirit, and use a Form too?

A. It is not denied, but that good men may pray by a form, and yet in some
sense pray in the Spirit too; but since that it is the proper work of the
Spirit, to help the infirmities of the Saints as well in matter, and
expressions, as sighs and groans, Romans 8.26. what need they use stinted forms?
or how can they tie up themselves strictly to those forms, without limiting,
stinting, and quenching the Spirit?

Reas. 11. Because the forming and imposing of such a Book, is to exercise
dominion over the Faith of Gods people contrary to what the Apostles did, 2
Cor. 1.24.

Reas. 12. Because if it be allowed that Rulers have such a power in one
Country, or Nation, it must be granted (A pariratione) that the Rulers of all
Nations and Countries, (at least that profess Christianity) have power to do
the same: for their power from God is the same (though their Principles to
exercise their power be not) especially since the dissolution of the Jewish
Government. Thence it will necessarily follow, That where there are Arrian
Rulers (who deny the Divinity of Christ) they may put up a Liturgy suitable to
their Judgments, Popish Rulers may form and impose a Liturgy according to
their Popish Principles, and so consequently all other Rulers, be they
Heathemsh, Turkish, etc. may do the like.

Reas. 13. It will also follow, that as often as the Governors, or chief
Magistrates of the same Nation, or Nations, do alter in their Opinions, the
Liturgy must also be altered: an instance of which we have on Record in the
Brother and two Sisters, King Edward the Sixth, Queen Mary, and Queen
Elizabeth, who ruled by immediate succession in the same Nation, and yet their
three Liturgies did differ, as they are yet to be seen.

Reas. 14. That which does unavoidably expose many Christians to sin against
their Consciences, or to suffer for not so sinning, is unlawful; but formed,
and imposed Liturgies, do unavoidably do either, therefore they are unlawful.
The Major none will deny, the Minor is proved thus: In all, or most Nations,
where such Liturgies are (and true Christians too) some, if not most of them do
conscientiously scruple either the whole Liturgy, or some part thereof, and
cannot with faith (and therefore not without sin, Romans 14.23.) conform
thereunto; and if they conform not, they suffer: multitudes of Instances (both
of godly Preachers and Professors) might be given, as in Q. E. K. J. and K. C.
reign, where some were hanged (as Barrow, Penry, and Greenwood) and many
imprisoned and cast out of their places, and necessitated to fly to strange
Countries, because they could not conform to the Rubric; and Rules in the
public Liturgies, etc.

Reas. 15. Because the making and imposing of such a form does maintain
National Churches in the days of the New Testament, which doubtless is
contrary to the Gospel, which says, Act. 10.35.
That in every Nation he that fears God, and works Righteousness, is
accepted of him. And the Apostle speaks of the Churches of Judea, Galatia, 1
Cor. 16.1. 1 Cor. 16.19. Revel. 1.4.
Macedonia, Asia, but never of any National Church since the partition wall
(between Jews and Gentiles) was pulled down.

Obj. But does not the Lord promise he will sprinkle many Nations? Isa. 52.15.

Ans. Paul expounds that of the Gentile Believers, Romans 15.21. Romans 4.17. Gal.
3.29.
who were sprinkled with the blood and Spirit of Christ, as Abraham is called
the Father of many Nations; that is, of the Believers in many or every Nation.

Obj. But it is said, that a Nation shall be born in one day, which is a
Gospel-Prophecy, Isa. 66.6, and in the 1 of Pet. 2.9. Ye are a holy Nation.

Ans. Some (as the Dutch Translators) translate the word Nation in Esaias,
People, and expound it of those that are converted among the Gentiles, 1 Pet.
5.1. Romans 11.26.
and not any whole Nation; others understand it of the Nation of the Jews, and
that this place relates to the last and general calling and conversion of them;
1 Pet. 1.1.
and for that in Peter, it cannot be understood of any particular Nation, for
he writes to people of several Nations or Provinces (in some of which, if not
in all, were many Churches, as in Galatia, and Asia) and it is evident he
means there the believers, 1 Cor. 16. Rev. 1.4.
or godly, and he calls them a holy Nation, with relation to the Nation of the
Jews, which was formerly a Nation separated by God from all other Nations.

Reas. 16. That which: tends to make the seed of the Woman, and the seed of the
Serpent one, and to yonk believers and unbeleevers together in
Church Communion, and Worship, is contrary to the Scriptures, Genesis 3.15. 2 Cor.
6.14. and therefore unlawful: But the forming and making of such stinted
Liturgies, or Common-Prayer-Books does so, for it is the main end of making
them, viz. to bring all the people in a Nation to be of one form and way of
worship.

Reas. 17. That which the wickedest people do earnestly desire, and willingly
observe, is commonly unlawful, Jer. 44.15, 16. Act. 19.28, 29. but the
wickedest people do earnestly desire and obey such Liturgies, and
Common-Prayer-Books, Ergo. The Major is proved, Exodus 32.1, etc. Hos. 5.11. and
in many other places; the Minor is sufficiently proved by general and daily
experience among us, for we find most of the wicked (who care not for the pure
Ordinances of God) as mad for this as the people were formerly upon their
Idols. Jer. 50.38.


Reas. 18. Because the best Rulers and Reformers in Judah, when they did
reform, did no such thing, but rather searched the Word of God, and brought
back the people to Gods Institution, and did not fet up any invention of their
own. See Josh. 1.8. with 12.13. 2 Chronicles: 17.9. and 34.15. to the 21. Nehem.
8.1, 3, 8. Ezra. 6.18.

Reas. 19. To put a burden or yoke upon the neck of Christ's Disciples, which he
has not put, is unlawful, Act. 15. But to form and impose any such Liturgies,
is to put a yoke upon the neck of Christ's Disciples: for many of them (that are
best able to judge thereof) have complained of them, as Burdens and Yokes.

Reas. 20. Because there can be no blessing expected upon such Liturgies and
Forms, because they are not commanded of God: for the blessings are promised to
the observers and keepers of his commandments only, Exodus 23.25. Deuteronomy. 7.9.
and 28.2.

Reas. 21. Either such Liturgies or Common Prayers are indifferent, or not
indifferent; if indifferent, then they are not to be imposed upon Christians,
but they are to be left to their liberty (as Christians were left by the
Apostles) but if it is not indifferent, Act. 15.29.
then unless a Prescript can be showed from God (it being in his Service) it is
no less than Will Worship, forbidden, Col. 2.23.

Reas. 22. To join an imperfect thing with a perfect, for to be a Rule, is to
debase the perfect, but to form and impose Liturgies, or Common-Prayer-Books,
is to do so, Ergo, etc. The Major is an Axiom among the learned, as Bishop
Andrews shows: the Minor is proved thus, See Doctor And ews upon the second
Commandment.
The best Liturgies are imperfect (particularly the English Liturgy, as will
abundantly appear, in answer to the next Question) and the Scripture is
perfect, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. And to use these at the same Time, and for the
same End (which is done as a Rule) is to join them together. Tertul. Apol.
chap. 39. The Christians, says he, prayed, Sine monitore quia de pecto e,
without a Prompter, but their own hearts.


Reas. 23. That which was not among the Churches of Christ, either in the
Apostles days, or for two hundred years after, is unlawful, but a stinted
Liturgy, or Common Prayer Book was neither in the Apostles days, nor for two
hundred years after, Ergo, etc. The Major cannot be denied; for proof of the
Minor, Tortullian, Just. Mart. Apol. 2. He who instracted the people, prayed
according to his ability.
Justin Martyr, etc. clearly show, that in their days there were no such,
neither in Constantines time, for he made forms himself for his soldiers to
use upon Lords Days, which doubtless he would not have done, if there had been
a public Liturgy.

Reas. 24. Because the Elements and Rudiments of the world (as these are) tend
to lead men from Christ, and into bondage again, which is absolutely condemned,
Col. 2.8. Gal. 4.3.

Reas. 25. Because if in matters of Religion the word of God only must, and
does prevail with, and bind men's consciences, then to impose any Traditions of
men (which these Liturgies are) is to no purpose; but the former is true, Deuteronomy.
12.32. Mot. 15.19. And to set up a thing to no purpose, what wise or good men
will endeavor?

Reas. 26. Because the forming and setting up such Liturgies, does derogate
from Christ, as he is both Prophet and King, Heb. 3.6. James 4.12.
as if he had not lest sufficient means and Laws for his Churches to be guided
and ruled by.

Reas. 27. But God may (doubtless) say of this, as he said of another piece of
unrequired service; Jer. 19.5.
They have built, etc. which I commanded not, nor spoke it, neither came it
into my mind.

Reas. 28. That which God does not require is unlawful; but the forming of such
Liturgies, and imposing of them God does not require, therefore the making and
imposing of a Liturgy is not lawful: if he does require, show when, where, and
by whom, and the controversy is ended.

The main Arguments for stinted Liturgies (or Common-Prayer-Books) stated in
Objections, and briefly answered.
Object. 1.

THat which is not directly, or consequentially for bidden by God, is lawful;
but Liturgies are not forbidden directly or consequentially, therefore lawful.

Ans. 1. In Civil and mere Indifferent things, the Major or first Proposition
may hold; but in spiritual things, and matters relating to the worship of God,
it will not: for men are not to practice therein upon Negatives, but upon
Positive and plain Commands or Examples. For, 1. Consider, that under the Old
Testament all things relating to the Worship of God, were to be done according
to the pattern given by God to Moses, as concerning the Tabernacle,
Candlestick, Altar: Exodus 25.9, 40. and 26.30. and 27.15. Numb. 8.4. Heb. 8.5.
1 Chronicles. 28.11, 19. 1 King. 6 38. Ezekiel. 43.10, 11, 12, 13, etc. Exo. 34.27, 33.
Isa. 8. Ezekiel. 3.4. Hag. 1.3, 4, 13. John 7.16. and 17.6, 7.
so like wise David had the Pattern of all that he had (or did) by the spirit,
of the Courts of the house of the Lord, and of all the chambers round about:
and as he says, The Lord made me understand in writing by his hand upon me,
even all the works of this Pattern. 2. The second and third Temple, have clear
and full directions and prescriptions given by God, for every part of them, and
in every particular. 3. The Prophets directed the people in all things to
observe the Word of God, and the People of God obeyed that Word only. 4. In
the days of the New Testament, John the Baptist, and our Savior Christ,
taught the People to observe nothing, but either what was written in the
Scriptures, or what they had received from God. 5. Paul also observes, and
teaches all the Churches to whom he wrote, 1 Cor. 1.25. 1 Cor. 16.1.
to observe (in their Worshipping of God) the same manner that was prescribed,
and appointed by the Lord himself.


Secondly, If there be such a latitude granted in things relating to the
Worship of God, that any thing that is not forbidden may be introduced, what
can hinder the Papists to bring in their five new Sacraments, Organs, and a
hundred such things, nay the Pope himself? and is it not upon that very ground
that they, and the Bishops ushered in all their Popish Innovations, and
Superstitions? But the Minor is denied, Liturgies are forbidden
(consequentially) I prove thus,

1. That which is not commanded in matters of Gods Worship, is forbidden; but
stinted imposed Liturgies are not commanded, therefore forbidden; the Major is
fully granted in the Assemblies Catechism, in the second Question, on the
second Commandment: But imposed, stinted Liturgies cannot be proved by
Scriptures, being an Innovetion, and born out of due time, to have the word of
God father or own it.

2. That which is a Tradition and Invention of men (in the Worship of God) is
forbidden in the Scriptures, but this is a Tradition and Invention of men,
Deuteronomy. 5.32, 33. Mark 7. 8, 9. Tit. 1.14.
in the Worship of God: for who can or dare say, That any of these Liturgies
are Oracles from God? If it be said, That there is no Law against it, and
therefore it is no sin; There is Law from the mouth of the Lawgiver himself,
who said (to the Jews) Why do you transgress the Commandment of God by your
Traditions? Mat. 15.3.


Obj. 2. The prudential determination of such Modes and Circumstances as God
has left to Humane determination, is lawful. But a stinted form is such,
therefore lawful.

Ans. I grant that God has left some Modes and Circumstances to Humane
determination; yet consider that these are either,

1. Merely Civil and Natural, as matters relating to the outward man, as Civil
and politic Laws and Government. Or,

2. If there be any such things left to the determination of men (as to
consider of the fittest day or hour to meet, or the convenientest place, etc.)
yet this is left to the determination of the Churches, and Societies of
Christians in their several places, and as occasions fall out, and not to
Magistrates or Ministers only.

3. If there were authority left in the hand of the Magistrate, or any other
sort of men (which cannot be proved by Scripture) to appoint such
Circumstances, yet how does it appear that they may enjoin and impose this
under personal, or pecuniary punishment?

4. Liturgies do determine more than Modes and Circumstances; for they appoint
how all, or most of the parts of Gods Worship (as Prayer, administering the
Sacrament, etc.) shall be done. But lastly,

5. If the Word of God does direct in all the Circumstances of Gods worship,
either by command, or example, then is there no need of such Liturgies. But the
Word of God does direct in those Circumstances, as for place, Joh. 4.23. 1 Timothy
2.8. in Synagogues, in Houses, and on Mountains. For time, 2 Timothy 4.2. 2 These.
5.17. For gesture, etc. Luke 22.14. Aob. 20.36. all which, with other
Circumstances, may easily be proved.

Obj. 3. There are many express Examples in Scripture for forms of Gods
service, therefore they are unquestionably lawful, as Psalms, Songs, Praises,
Blessings, and Prayers, as Psalm. 92. and 102. Exodus 15. Numb. 6. Mat. 6
particularly the Lords Prayer.

Ans. That there were Psalms, Songs, Praises, Prayers, and Blessings, composed
by the Praphats and Servants or God heretofore upon occasions, is acknowledged.
But yet,

1. That those holy men of God spoke (and wrote) as they were moved by the Holy
Ghost; 2 Pet. 1.21.
and had such a spirit of infallibility in such things; which no men since the
Apostles days can pretend to.

2. What they then wrote ( viz. their Prayers, Psalms, Romans 15.4. 2 Timothy 3.16.
and Songs, etc.) are now become Scripture, and are written for our learning.

3. To argue from an extraordinary, Ab extraordinario ad ordinarium non est
consequentia.
to an ordinary practice, is not right, you may as well say, because Moses
commanded every one to slay his Brother, therefore other ordinary persons may
do so; or because David divided the Priests into four and twenty Courses, other
Kings or Rulers may do the like with Gospel Ministers; or because Moses and
David wrote Canonical Scripture, therefore other persons may do the like.

4. For the Lords Prayer (so called) though it be not denied, It may be called
the Lerds Prayer, as that Sermon he made on the Mount (with other Sermons) may
be called his, because he taught it; though it does not appear that he
himself ever used it.
but that it may be used by any godly men (though not in the way it is by most,
at the end of their own) yet it will be hard to prove it to be a form. Because,

1. It was delivered by our Savior at first as part of his Sermon on the Mount
(which seems to be one of his first Sermons) and as a Direction to pray; as he
gives in the same place, Mat. 6.
and at the same time, direction to fast, and give alms.

2. The two Evangelists do differ, in relating the Prayer, in several
particulars, and Luke has not the conclusion, Luke 11.
or the words, For thine is the Kingdom, and the power, and the glory for
ever. Amen. If it must be used as a form, which of the two Evangelists must be
imitated, seeing they thus differ?

3. If it was given as a Form, and enjoined and imposed, then it was a sin in
the Apostles and Primitive Christians, and others since, not to use it
constantly: But it does not appear that the Apostles did use it at all
afterward, Act. 4.25. Ephesians. 1. 17, etc. Col. 1. 9, etc.
though we read of the Apostles joynt-prayers, and of many of Panls Prayers,
yet therein is no mention thereof.

Obj. But does not Christ, Luke 11.2. command his Disciples to say, Our Father?
etc.

Ans. The meaning seems to be this, that when one of Christ's Disciples did
desire Christ to teach them to pray, as John also taught his Disciples, Christ
did send them to the direction which he had given before in his preaching upon
the Mount.

Obj. 4. It is lawful to pray to God in set words that we find in Scripture:
but so to pray, is to pray in a form. Therefore a Form is lawful.

Ans. For to use the same words in prayer, out of earnestness, vehemence, and
Agony (and that by the Spirit) as Christ, and some of the Prophets did, at the
same time, is no ground at all for men to form a whole Book of prayer, without
any such eminent impulsions of the Spirit.

2. The Repetition of the same words was by the same Persons, and peculiar to
them that spoke them, and chiefly for that time, and therefore is no ground at
all either to form prayers for others, or to impose them upon others.

3. From those instances you may better infer, Ex particulari, non est
Syllogizari.
that no form is to be used till a man is in such an Agony, or Energy of
spirit, as Christ and those men were in; but as I said before, to argue from an
Extraordinary to an Ordinary is not good, nor from a particular to a general.

Obj. 5. If it be lawful for the people to use a form as they do when they join
with the Pastor, then it is lawful for the Pastor.

Ans. How can the extemporary, immediate, unconceived prayer of the Pastor be a
form to the People, since they know nothing of it before? but if that be a
form, such a form we will yield to, viz. an unwritten, unprinted, unheard of,
and Non-imposed form.

Obj. 6. Christ has left his approbation of such forms, proved, Luke 20.42.
and 24.4.

Answ. There is nothing to that purpose in either of those Scriptures, unless
you make the citing of Scripture a proof. But put the case that Christ had left
his approbation of Scriptural forms which are Divine, that therefore he gave
his approbation of mere humane forms. This is like the Papists pleading from
written Truths to unwritten Verities. But further, suppose all that the
Objection supposes, that Christ did approve of such Forms, yet where do you
find that Christ did impose such, or give authority to any sort of men to
impose such.

Object. 7. But Christ used the same words thrice in Prayer.

Answ. See the Answer to the fourth Objection.

Obj. 8. But Christ did use a Hymn.

Ans. If by a Hymn, be understood one of the Psalms of Scripture, why might not
Christ and his Disciples use it, the Psalms being in Meter, and then in use
among the Jews? but others understand by an Hymn, On Col. 3.16.
an extempore Song, as diverse Interpreters make that distinction between Hymns,
and Psaelms, and Spiritual Songs; others understand by a Hymn no more than
praising God, As the same word is used, Heb. 2.12.
as the word is taken; and that may serve for an answer to the other Objection,
That the Apostles commanded it.

Obj. 9. If it be lawful to use a form in preaching, then in prayer: but the
former is (...). Ergo the latter.

Answ. When it can be proved that it is lawful for any Preacher to write all
his Sermon verbatim, and then preach (or rather read) it so, without addition,
substraction, or alteration, and afterward print it, and impose it upon
others, then I shall grant it to be lawful to make such forms, and read them
instead of preaching.

Obj. 10. Because it was the practice of the Churches in Scripture-times, and
downwards, to have such Liturgies.

Ans. The Bishops said so, and sought to prove it, as Bishop Andrews pursued in
his inquiry, so hard after Lituagies, that he thought he had gotten a Jewish
one, which he sent to Cambridge to translate; but it was there soon discovered
to be one made long after the Jews ceased to be a Church, See Smect.
and so he himself suppressed it, and had there been any such in our Saviors, or
his Apostles time, doubtless we should have found some mention of it in the
Scriptures where mention is made of their reading, and preaching in the
Synagogues of the Jews, Luke 4.17.
and where we read of giving the Book of the Prophet Isaiah, but not
Common Prayer Book.

Obj. 11. But a Liturgy or Common Prayer Book is good to help those that cannot
pray, as Crutches to help a lame man.

Ans. It is rather a Hindrance than Help: for people would, if it were not for
such Forms, seek the Spirit of God, which would be given to help them.

2. Either these are to help those that have no grace, or those that have
grace; not those that have none: for what good will Crutches do to a dead man?
Ephesians. 2. 1, 5. 1 Timothy 5.6.
as every graceless and natural man is.

3. If he has grace, then he wants no Crutches, for he is cured, and should do
with those Crutches, as lame Persons when they are cured in the Bath, hang up
their Crutches on the Cross, and leave them behind them, to show they are
cured.

4. If the lame should use Crutches, yet that is no ground why those that God
has cured of their lameness should be tied to carry Crutches, or walk on them.

Quest. But what Reasons or Objections have you against the English Liturgy, or
Common Prayer Book, in particular?

Ans. In an English Book called Smectym-uus, published by diverse godly and
learned Presbyterian Ministers, (as Mr. Marshal, Mr. Calamy, Mr. Young, Mr.
Newcombe, and Mr. Sp^rstow) about the year one thousand six hundred forty two,
and this year one thousand six hundred and sixty reprinted, there are several
Reasons set down against it, as also against Bishops, some of the former I here
insert. As

1. It symboleth (that is, agrees) so much with the Popish Mass, that the Pope
himself was willing to have it used, if he might but confirm it. I shall add
this out of the Book of Martyrs, vol. 2 page 667. Printed Anno 1631. when there
was a rebellion in Devenshire, in King Edward the sixth his days he writes to
them thus,

As for the Service in the English Tongue, it has manifest Reasons for it,
King James also did (as is credibly reported) commonly call it, An ill said
Mass.
and yet perchance it seems to you a New-Service, and indeed is no other but
the Old, the same words in English which were in Latin, etc. And then
afterward, if the Service in the Church were good in Latin, it is good in
English.

2. It was framed and composed on purpose to bring Papists to Church.

3. Because it is so much Idolized, called Divine Service, as I heard one
lately say, that brought a Bible to a Book-binders shop to be new bound: In
Shrewsbury last May.
when the Book-binder said he could hardly bind it, and that he would sell a
new Bible for a little more money; The owner returned answer. That that Bible
was worth twenty new ones, and the only reason was, because the Book of
Common Prayer was in it.

4. Because many distate it.

5. Because it differs much from Liturgies in other Churches, and yet they are
not enjoined. I may add,

6. Because it has tended to maintain a lazy and scandalous Ministry.

7. Because it (together with other Ceremonies) has been a means to bring many
godly Preachers and Professors under great Persecution and Suffering, some (as
Penry and Barrow, Greenhood) to suffer Death; some Bawshment, and many
Imprisonment, Indictment, and other troubles, either for speaking, and writing
against it, or for not reading and hearing it.

8. Because it has tended to harden many Papists in their false Religion (by
seeing us come so near to them in our way of Worship, as you find in the first
Reason) and ignorant scandalous people among our selves thinking that they are
true Christians by conforming thereto.

9. Because it teaches things that are Heathenish, as to call the Months,
January, February, etc. and the days of the Week, Sunday, Monday, etc. from
the old Saxon Idols, etc. Jewish, as Priests, and as was added in the Scots
Liturgy, Altars, Sacrifice, and Popish, as Christmas, etc.

10. Because it is a very imperfect form, there being many things wanting that
men ought to pray for, as assurance, sending forth Laborers into Gods
vineyard, and many the like, which cannot be found in it.

11. Because there are so many unwarrantable things and (offenfive to good
Christians) therein.

Q. What are those things in the Book of Common Prayer that are unjustifiable
in themselves, and offensive to good Christians?

Answ. 1. Adding to, and diminishing from the Scriptures in the very beginning
of it, in the words, At what time soever a sinner does repent him of his sins,
etc. which in the Rubric and direction before it, is called one of the
Sentences of the Scripture, and they cite Ezekiel. 18. compare these words with
the Scripture there, verse. 21, 22, and you will find both adding and
diminishing, contrary to Deuteronomy. 4.2. Prove. 30.6. Rev. 22.18.

2. Leaving some part of Scripture out, as the Book of Canticles, etc. and not
to be read throughout the whole year, and many, if not most part of the other
Books of Scripture; so that by the Rubric in the Common Prayer Book, a great
part of the Bible should never be read publicly at all, which is contrary to 2 Timothy 3.16.

3. Gross alterations, and differences are between the Psalms in the Bible, and
those appointed to be read in the Book of Common Prayer, as in Psalm. 14. in the
Bible there is but seven verses, but in the Book of Common Prayer there is
eleven; so in Psalm. 106. and 30 it is in the Bible, Phineas executed Judgment
(which is according to the Hebrew and Greek Transsation, and according to Numb.
25.7, and 8.) but in the Book of Common Prayer, he prayed. So in Psalm. 22.31.
in the Bible, and according to the Hebrew, a seed shall serve him; but in the
Book of Common Prayer, My seed. So in Psalm. 40.9. in the Bible, and so in the
Hebrew (and Greek and Latin Translations) it is, I have preached
Righteousness; but in the Book of Common Prayer, thy Righteousness, adding the
word thy. So in Psalm. 105.25. In the Translation of the Bible it is He, i. e.
God, turned their hearts to hate his people: But in the Common Prayer Book,
whose hearts turned.

4. Some Chapters are appointed to be begun in the middle of them (though but
short) destroying the Connection between the words going before, and where they
begin. As upon the day called the Nativity of Christ, the third Chapter of
Titus is appointed to be read for the second Lesson, beginning at the fourth
verse, which depends upon the third verse. So Luke 2.10. which is joined to the
ninth verse.

5. Appointing many Chapters to be read out of Apocrypha, as Wisdom, chap. 1.3,
6, 9, 19, 22. Ecclus. 19.29, 38, 44. Caveat omnia Apocrypha, says Jerome, Take
heed of all the Apocripha, and yet of 172 chapt. (or thereabouts) in the Apoc.
104 chap. (...) thereabouts) are appointed to be read every year.
contrary (as the last Synod observed in their Catechism) to Luke 24. 27, 44.
Romans 3.2. 2 Pet. 1.21. and yet in the preface before the book, it is said, That
there is nothing ordained to be read but the Scriptures, etc.

Obj. But why are not those Apocrypha Books to be read?

Ans. Not only because the Scriptures are sufficient of themselves, 2 Timothy
3.15. but because there are many foolish and fabulous things therein, as in
Tob. chap. 6.7. and 11.14. and 12.15. so Jud. 9.2, 10, 13. Ecclesiasticus 1.15.
and 12.5. and 48.13. with many the like, compared with the Word of God, will
easily appear to be false.

6. In many places to call the Writings of the Prophets, and the Acts of the
Apostles, and Revelations, Epistles, as Isa. 7.17. and 40.1. and 50.5. and
63.1. Jerem. 23.5. Joel. 2. Acts 1.1. and 2.1. and 8.14. and 11.17. and 10.24.
and 13.26. Apec. 7.2. and 12.7. and 14. as the Epistle for the day of Christ's
Nativity, the Epistle for Innocents day. Did any of the Sectaries in citing a
Scripture, call the Prophecy of Isaiah or Jeremiah, an Epistle, he should be
hissed at.

7. Calling the Lords Day, and other the days of the week by the names of the
old Saxon Idols, as Sunday from the Sun, Monday from the Moon, Tuesday from
Tuiseo, Wednesday from Wooden, etc. contrary to Exodus 23.13. Hos. 2.17. and the
way used in Scripture, Genesis 1. 5, 8. 13, 19, 23. Mat. 28.1.

8. Dedicating days to the Angel Michael, and to the Apostles and other
Saints, contrary to Exodus, 31.15. Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.6, 16, 17. and calling those
Holy Days. and yet the Sabbath Sunday, likewise dedicating one day to all
Saints, answerable to what Heathen Rome did to their Idols, and what
Antichristian Rome still does to Saints. But God may say, Who has required
this at your hand? Isa. 1.12.

9. That the Minister is called so often Priest in it.

Obj. But are they not called Gods-Priests, and Gods-Clergie, 1 Pet. 2, 9. and
5. 3?

Ans. Not the Ministers distinct from the People, but the believers are called
a Royal Priesthood, and Gods Clergy, or Heritage, speaking in an Old
Testament-phrase, by way of allusion to the Jews. Gods select people: but it
is not in that sense that the Minister is called a Priest in this Book, but
looking upon him, as one that belongs to a peculiar Tribe, and as they did, and
usually do pray for themselves, as being of the Tribe of Levi; which if they
be, they are Jews, and by the Law of England, if you believe some Lawyers to be
banished.

10. That the people should pray audibly, Turpe est Dectori, cum tuipa
redarguit, ipsam.
or with a loud voice, with the Minister, as in the Confession, and other
prayers; which is confusion, and contrary to good order, 1 Cor. 14.40. which
they blame in other men.

11. That the Lessons, Epistles and Gospels should be sung, as you find in the
Rubric immediately before Te Deum laudamus. No such Command from God, nor such
practice in the Churches of God.

12. That Te Deum Laudamus, and Benedicite omnia, are appointed to be read
throughout the whole year, after the first Lesson. Sure if a good Preacher did
preach one and the same Sermon every Lords day in the year, these men would
distate it. And what is meant by retaining still the Latin Titles (and those
which are commonly used in Popish Nations) but that we seek uniformity with
them? But what concord has Christ with Belial? or what agreement has the
Temple of God with Idols? 2 Cor. 6.15, 16.

13. In that called Te Deum, there is a difference made between Angels,
Cherubims, and Seraphims, making as the Papists do, diverse (to wit, nine)
degrees of Angels, We read but of one Archangel in Scripture, which is
Christ, Dan. 10.12. and 12.1. and not Archangels, as the Com. Prayer Book
says. See Communion.
and likewise in setting days apart for Michael, and all the Angels. Though it
be very probable, that by Michael is understood Christ himself, by comparing
Rev. 12.9. with Zech. 3.2. and Judge. 8.9. but were there such an Angel, who
has appointed a day, or days to be observed to him or them? This is contrary
to Col. 2.18.

14. That in their Canticle, or Benedicite omnia, etc. after the spirits and
souls of the Righteous are called upon to bless the Lord; Ananias, Azarias, and
Misael, are called upon to bless the Lord, As if they were not included in the
spirits and souls of the righteous.

15. After the second Lesson, This implies it is used in Latin, as diverse
other things in the Service Book are, in the Romish Church, which much
incourageth them in their way, as learned Parker, and others show.
Benedictus, in English is to be used. And yet that is part of a Chapter (or
second Lesson) to wit, of Luke 1.68, etc.

16. In the Creed, they make that part of one Article, That Christ descended
into Hell, As if Christ bad descended into the place of the Damned (as the
Papists hold) contrary to Mat. 12.40. Ephesians. 4.8.

17. The Priest, and the People (whilst they are at their Service) salute and
complement one with an other; The Lord be with you (says the Priest) And with
thy spirit, say the people.

18. The Minister standing up in the midst of his Prayers, between one Prayer
and another. The Prayer is not so long, that be should be so soon tired in
kneeling.

19. The chopping and mineing of Prayer between the Priest and the People in
many places, which are liker Charmers than Christians Prayers.

20. In that called Quicunque vult, where the Articles of the Catholic Faith
are set down, one is, that Christ descended into Hell (some other expressions
in it are liable to exception) and yet in the last verse thereof it is said,
This is the Catholic faith, which except a man believe faithfully, he cannot
be saved; and yet many doubtless that never heard, understood, nor could
believe several things therein, may be, and will be saved.

21. The Letany is to be read upon Wednesdays and Fridays, and at other times
when the Ordinary shall command. And why upon Wednesdaies and Fridays, unless
to comply with the Papists? and why at the Ordinaries command? Is not every
Minister of Christ as fit to judge when it is meet to read it, as well as the
Ordinary? An ordinary judgment, may discern this to be extraordinary folly.

22. The Minister propounds the matter of Prayer, but the people pray, Good
Lord deliver us; We beseech thee to hear us good Lord. It Is strange that this
liberty is allowed people in public, and yet denied to others in private: nay,
that the women are suffered to speak (that is, pray) in the Church, and
publicly too, this is contrary to 1 Timothy 2.11, 12.

23. Many Tautolegies therein, the words, Good Lord deliver us used eight
times; and the words, We beseech thee to hear us good Lord, Qui paratus est in
alterum dicere, ipsum oportet carere vitio.
used one and twenty times; and using the Lords Prayer five times, or more, in
one Morning Service. This is vain Repetition, forbidden in Mat. 6.6. and that
which they much condemn in such as pray conceived prayers.

24. From Fornication, and all other deadly Sins. Herein making a difference
(as the Papists do) between Venial and Mortal Sins, though all sins be deadly,
or deserve death, Romans 5.12. and 6.23. yet true it is, that there is an
unpardonable sin, 1 John 5.16.

25. Praying against sudden death. This is no where commanded in the Scripture,
but rather the contrary. Some of the Ancients prayed for sudden death, as you
find in Acts and Monuments.
See Eccles. 9.12. Mar. 13.33, etc. Luke 12.29, 40, 45, 46. And what does this
but confirm ignorant Protestants (as well as Papists) in those corrupted
Principles; That Repentance is in their own power, and that Repentance must be
a man's lost Act, or else he cannot be saved: by which they exclude all those
that dye suddenly (especially violently) from Salvation; which is contrary to
these Scriptures, 1 Samuel 4.18, 19, etc. Job 21.24, 25. Eccles. 9.2.

26. That they desire to be delivered by Christ's Circumcision, Baptism,
Fasting, and Temptation; yea Burial: some also take exception at the word By,
being used as in an Oath, Mat. 5.34, 35, 36.
especially so many times as there it is.

27. There Is a Prayer, That God will bring into the way of truth all such as
have erred; whereas some are not at all to be prayed for, Joh. 17.9. 1 Jo. 5.16.

28. They pray for a sort of people called Curates (a Name and Office not known
in the Bible) distinct from Bishops, and Pastors. Note here the Bishops and
Curates are not looked upon as Pastors (that is, Feeders) and indeed they are
not, for the one is a Starver, the other a Biter and Slayer of the sheep.

29. The taking of Gods Name so many times irreverently in their mouths, in
saying, Lord have mercy upon us, Christ have mercy upon us; contrary to Exodus
20.7. Levit. 19.12. which forbid men to take Gods name in vain.

30. That the Collect for Christmas Day (as they call it) is to be read till
New Years Day; and yet the Collect is thus: Almighty God, which have given us
thy only begotten Son, to take our Nature upon him, and this day to be born of
a pure Virgin. What? could he be born that day, and every day of the six
following too? The like upon Easter and Ascension-days (so called) is to be
read, and six days after. And yet Easter is a moveable Feast, sometimes in
March, and sometimes in April, so called.
But it is more than all the learned Clerks either in England or Italy can
prove, that Christ was born either on that day, or in that Month called
December, but rather in the seventh Month, called September, which might be
figured and held forth by the Feast of Tabernacles, which was upon the
fifteenth day of the Month, Levit. 23.34. and the Jews, and diverse learned
Christians, held, John 1.14. (...).
and still hold, that the first day of that Feast shadowed his birth, as the
last or eighth day, his Circumcision: and John seems to allude to that, in John
1.14.

31. At the purification of Mary, Purification of Mary. Levit. 12.4.
the Collect runs, That as thine only Son this day was presented in the
Temple. Which is as uncertain as the other: for if the three and thirty days
according to the Law, that the woman was to continue in the blood of her
purifying, did begin when Christ was born, then they were ended six or seven
days before that time of Purification; but if those thirty three days begin
after the day of Circumcision, then the day now observed is not probably the
very day. But suppose it were that very day, why should that Jewish Ceremony be
still retained? it is not with an intent to further the conversion of the Jews;
for both Popish, and Prelatical (for the most part) deny that they will at all
be converted.

32. That the Priest is appointed to stand at the North-side of the Table; This
is done (as many other things) in imitation of the Ceremonial Law, Levit. 1.11.

33. That the people are appointed to kneel, at the reading of the ten
Commandments. This is contrary to Neh. 8.2, 3, 5. and yet afterward when the
Minister is to pray, he is appointed to stand up. Unless men were addicted and
resolved to walk contrary to God and his Word, they would not be such Fanatics.

Obj. But the people kneel because of their praying, Lord have mercy upon us.

Answ. But who has appointed them to do that? This is to be wise above what is
written.

34. Offerings are appointed to be paid to the Curate, which is to continue
still that Ceremonial Law that Christ has abrogated, Col. 2.14. Heb. 9.10.

35. There is added in the Administration of the Communion, words of their own,
Public Communion.
to the words of Christ's institution. As, Preserve thy body and soul unto
everlasting life. See Mat. 26.26, 27, 28. Luke 22.19, 20. 1 Cor. 11.24, 25.

36. The Priest is appointed to kneel at one Prayer, and yet to stand at the
very next: and why not kneel or stand at both?

37. In the Rubric before the Communion, it is said, He shall receive the
Sacrament, and other Rites. What are those Rites? would they give more than
what is appointed, as the Papists do less?

38. The people are to receive the Sacrament kneeling, (an unseemly gesture at
Supper.) This is like the Papists, and not like Christ and his Disciples, Mat.
26.21. Mark 14. And what is this but to adore the body of Christ per suum
signum, as a Bishop said? which is the next Door, if not the same Inlet to
Popery. This brat (Ceremony) was begotten at the same time with their Breaden
God, which is (as God called the Idol, Deuteronomy. 32.17. Jud. 5.8.) a new God.

39. The Priest gives it to every one in particular, and says, Take and eat
this in remembrance that Christ dyed for thee: This also is contrary to the way
and words of Christ, who said to the Disciples in general, and not to every
individual and particular man, This is my Body which is given for you, and
divide it among your selves, 1 Cor. 11.24. Luke 22.17, 19.

40. That all the people must partake three times a year at least. Act. 2.42.
and 20. 1 Cor. 11. 25, 26.
And why not every Lords Day, or every Month, as the Primitive Christians did?
and yet in Cathedral, or Collegiate Churches, where be many Priests (too many,
I sear) and Deacons, they shall receive the Communion with the Minister every
Sunday at least, and why should that difference be, unless the Priests would
receive it more for their Bellies sake, than their Souls? Have not the common
people need to remember Christ as often as they? or would they make a Church of
Clerks, distinct from a Church of Christians. Apage!

41. That every one must reckon at Easter with the Parson, It was an usual
thing to deny the Communion to those that could not pay for it; nay, it was
proved against one (at least) of the ejected Ministers of Wales, (Mr. Humphrey,
of Aberhaves in Mountgomery-shire) That he raised a woman off her knees at the
Sacrament, because she had not paid him.
Vicar, or Curate: Where find you that Christ or his Apostles did ever reckon
so? or in what Bible do you find the word Parson, Vicar, Curate, or either of
them? These names are fitter to be joined in the Apocryphal story with Toby and
his Dog.

42. Though they confess, that in the Primitive times Baptism was administered
twice a year ( viz. at Easter; and Whitsuntide) yet it is ordered, that the
Pastors and Curates shall often admonish the people, that they defer not the
Baptism of Infants longer than till the Sunday, or other Holy Day next after
the child be born, etc. Does not this savor strongly that Baptism is looked
upon as necessary to salvation?

43. This is to be done upon Sundaies, or other Holy Days; where note, that
the Lords day is called Sunday, and the other days Holy Days; and who appointed
or consecrated those Holy Days? Not Christ, nor his Apostles, nor the Primitive
or Apostolical Church: they err in observing such days as were introduced by
men; See Brza's notes upon Gal. 4.13
yea, all Holy Days, or Feasts appointed by God himself (except the Christian
Sabbath) are abrogated, Gal. 4.10. Col. 2.16.

44. In one of the Prayers after the Communion, Those things which for our
unworthiniss we dare not ask; which is contrary to John 16.23, 24. Ephesians. 3.12.
1 John 1.14. which show, that the people of God have liberty to ask any thing
according to the will of God. But peradventure the Parsons and their
Parishioners mean ( by those things) liberty to game on the Lords Days, be
drunk, swear, etc. which things, though they dare not ask leave (yet will take
leave without asking) to do.

45. If necessity require, that children may at all times be baptized at home;
Christ and the Apostles mention no such necessity, and Augustine and Ambrose
would not have been without Baptism till they came to be about thirty years of
age, if in those times they had judged such a necessity of Baptism. And how
contrary is this private Baptism, to the Baptism of John, and of Christ; see
Mat. 3. 5, 6. John 3.22, 23.

46. That the Red Sea figured Christ's holy Baptism. It rather signified the
miserable state of Sinners by Nature, out of which Christ leads them.

47. That God did by the Baptism of Christ sanctify the River Jordan, and all
other Waters, for the mystical washing away of all sin. There is no Scripture
for this, but on the contrary, 1 Pet. 3.21. If so, I wonder the Bishops and
their Clergy are not Anabaptists, and baptize in Rivers, since first Rivers are
sanctified.

48. To use Godfathers, and Godmothers, and they answer instead of the
child; and thus the children perform them (that is, Faith and Repentance.) No
such thing practiced in Christ's, or in the Apostles times, Public Baptism.
as sureties, neither do the children perform any such thing by them, any more
than they do perform their promise for the children to bring them to hear
Sermons, when they come to age. See Matthew. 3.6. Mark 1. 8, 9. Luke 7.29, Joh.
1.33. Acts 2.8. and 18.

49. The Cross in Baptism, that has more warrant from the Pope than from
Christ, or his Gospel. And by the English Cross, some of the Papists (as
Martial) justify the Popish Cross: But we in England do not find that virtue
in the Cross, which they of Rome say there is, viz. to sanctify those upon
whom it is set, to drive away the Devil, to expel diseases, etc. It is wonder
that Christ and his Apostles left us without such a Panthamaton, or sovereign
salve.

50. The Minister both in his speaking to the People, and in his Prayer says,
That the Children were regenerated, (meaning by Baptism) whereas they should
be regenerated before they are baptized, Acts 8.37. and 16. 14, 15, 16, 31,
32, 33, Mat. 3. 8, 9. And I certify you, says the Minister, that this Child
which being born in Original sin, and in the Wrath of God, by the laver of
Regeneration in Baptism, is now received into the number of the Children of
God, and Heirs of everlasting life, and doubt not that he has given unto him
the blessing of eternal life, and made him partaker of his everlasting
kingdom: so in the Catechism, And is it certain (as you say) that children
being baptized, have all things for their falvation?
The Child answers, Wherein I was made a member of Christ, a child of God,
and an inheritor of the Kingdom of Heaven: and again, We are thereby made the
children of grace. What clearer proof can be desired to prove that the
Sacrament does confer grace, than this? See the Catech. If every child be made
so in Baptism, then sure every one that is baptized, must be saved, or else
they may fall from a state of grace; but neither of these are true, Act. 8.13,
20, 21. 1 Pet. 3.21. John 4.14. and 10. 27, 28.

51. That the Godfathers and Godmothers give the child his name, whereas the
Parents should do it, Genesis 39.33, 34. Luke 1.60, 63. 1 Samuel 1.20.

52. The child being asked, How many Sacraments? the answer is, Two, as
generally necessary to Salvation; wherein is implied, that two are necessary,
and more than two may be, though two may suffice.

53. In private communion it is said, Private Baptism.
First let the lawful Minister call upon God for his grace, and say the Lords
Prayer, if time will suffer. Mark here how the Minister either is in such
haste, or the child in such danger, that they may not have time to say the
Lords Prayer.

54. After the confirmation, Confirmation.
the Rubric says, None shall be admitted to the Lords Supper, but those that
are confirmed: There is no such prohibition in Scripture; and if it were, what
should the greatest number of people in most Parishes do, who are not visited
nor confirmed by the Bishops at all? Simile.
This is as if a Master should forbid his servants meat till he comes to cut
it; and he comes not perhaps in seven years, if at all.

55. The Bishop says, We have laid our hands, when he himself only has done
it: mark, how ambitious the Bishop is of speaking in a Kingly style.

56. In the Catechism, the Ministers exhortation to the child is called a
Question, and the Lords Prayer an Answer.

57. Matrimony called frequently Holy. Though it be true, that in opposition to
Uncleanness and Whoredom, it may be called Holy, yet it may be suspected, lest
hereby a compliance with the Papists (who make this one of their seven
Sacraments) is intended.

57. It is said further, That as many as be coupled together otherwise than
Gods Word does allow, 1 Cor. 6.7. Mat. 19.9. Cha. 5. 32, etc. Matriages are to
be in the Lord, 1 Cor. 7.39. that is, after the Will of the Lord, Ephesians. 6.1. 1
Cor. 6.17. Mat. 19.9. and 5.32.
are not joined together by God, neither is the Matrimony lawful: In what sense
the Matrimony is unlawful, or to what end those words are mentioned, is very
doubtful. It is true, there may be diverse things in Marriage unwarrantable by
the Word of God; as for a Believer to marry an Unbeleever, or true Christians
to marry Idolaters, or for Children to marry without Parents consent, etc. But
yet Marriages are appointed (as Christ says) by God; and when once made, there
is no ground of divorce, except adultery.

58. Tying Marriage to the Minister, and so making it holy: which in it self is
bat Civil and Natural, and did belong rather to the Civil Magistrate, than to
the Minister to perform; Ruth 4.11, 12.13.

59. The using of the Ring in Marriage; which in it self may be indifferent;
yet making it essential to Marriage it cease to be indifferent.

60. The man in Marriage promises to the woman, that with his body he will
worship her: Luke 14.10.
Though there be civil worship, yet it is due from an Inferior to a Superior
and not from a Superior to an Inferior or Equal, Matrimony.
as the woman is.

61. There is one Prayer to be omitted by the Minister, where the woman is
past childe-bearing. Sure they are very skilful Parsons, Vicars, and Curates,
that can judge what women are past childe-bearing: but no great matter, for
they bear neither less nor more, for their praying or not praying for them.

62. The new married persons the same day of their marriage must receive the
Communion: They that will understand Rule or Reason for this practice, must go
to Rome at least. And how shall those married persons have the Sacrament, that
the Curate marries under a Hedge, or in a Wood, or in a blind Alehouse, as
it is too common in some Countries?

63. It is that the Marriage-Ring is a token and pledge of the Covenant made in
Marriage; and that Marriage does signify the mystical union between Christ and
his Church; for the first, it is needless, and for the other it is utterly
false, if it be understood of all Marriages. It is true, the union between Adam
and Eve did signify the mystical union between Christ and his Church.

64. In the Visitation of the sick, Visit. of the sick
the Minister says, That Christ has left power to his Church to absolve all
sinners which truly repent and believe; 1. Sure if he has given power to his
Church, yet he has not given power to any Parson, no nor Pope, to say what he
does adventure there to say, I absolve thee from all thy sins.

2. The power that Christ has left in his Church to absolve, is to be
exercised in restoring and receiving the Members that were before cast out for
sin, upon their repentance, 2 Cor. 2. 6, 7, 8, 9. Gal. 6.1. Matthew. 18.18. 1
Cor. 5.5.

65. To give the Communion when a man is sick at home, and in the time of
Plague, and upon special request of the diseased person. The Minister only may
communicate with him. Private Communion.
Such a Communion is not warranted by the word of God; and to administer it
thus, cannot but be Popish, both in the end and manner. By this also the
Minister is tied to go to the Houses where the Plague is, and to communicate
alone with him. This is contrary to the Scripture, 1 Cor. 10. and 11. and the
Nature of a Communion, yea, to the Rule given in the end of public Communion.

66. Appointing singing at Burials. At Burials.
Which is contrary to the Rule prescribed by the Apostle, James 5.13.

67. To say of every one buried, This our dear brother here departed: They have
a large Faith that can believe that all they bury are such: I would advise such
to bury none of the Sectaries, or Fanatics, lest at their burial they confess
what in their lifetime they did deny, ( viz.) to account them Brethren.

68. Reading and praying over the dead, without any command or example in
Scripture.

69. Churching of women, Churching of women.
applying Psalm. 121. to the Woman, which is meant of the Church of God.

70. The woman must offer an accustomed offering. Is not this to bring them
back to the Law of Moses? Lev. 12. And are not these such as lead silly women
away? according to that Scripture, 2 Timothy 3.6. For they ( viz. the Parsons,
Vicars, and Curates) creep into houses, yea, into women's chambers often to
Church them, as they call it. Is not this a private Conventicle?

71. That in the Primitive Church there was a godly Disscipline, Commination.
Those Judgments denounced in Deuteronomy. 27. was not part of the public worship to
be performed by the Priests, but only done upon Mount Ebal by six of the
Tribes only; and therefore no example for Gospel-daies.
that at the beginning of Lent such Persons as were notorious sinners were put
to open Penance, etc. Are not these words as Honey and Wine to the Papists, to
grant them at once Lent and Penance, and their Church to be the Primitive
Church? Sed ab Origin non fuit ita.

72. That Discipline is much to be wished. Is not to wish Penance, to wish
Popery? for the Papists in the places where we read repent, they translate do
penance; so after denouncing the Judgment, they say, Let us seek to bring
forth fruits worthy of penance; which is otherwise, The word Penance is in
several other places.
and more truly rendered in Mat. 3.8. Repent, or change your mind, as the word
Metanoeite signifies.

73. In the Prayer appointed to be said at the point of death, (mark, not
prayed) the Common Prayer Book teaches the poor people that are ignorant to
pray in Latin, In manus tuas commendo spiritum meum, and again, Domine Jesu
accipe spiritum meum; this is not to pray with understanding, as the Apostle
speaks: but to assure the Papists, 1. Cor. 14.
that the person deceased died with their faith in his heart, as well as their
language in his mouth?

Many other things might be objected against, as the misapplying of diverse
Scriptures, as Mat. 4. is applied to the Lenten fasts, and Rev. 14.1, 5.
concerning (the 44000 that are sealed) is applied to the children that Herod
caused to be slain, etc. so there are Untruths in it, as in the Calender. That
nothing is ordained to be read but the very pure Word of God, and that all the
Ceremonies pertain to edification, etc. Likewise somewhat that is good in the
Book stablished by King Edward the sixth is left out, viz. From the tyranny of
the Bishop of Rome, and all his detestable Enormities good Lord deliver us. It
is also worthy observation, that above twenty years ago, some godly Preachers
(that did refuse to read, and that did also preach against the present Book of
Common Prayer, both in London, and in diverse Counties) were acquitted from
their Inditements: because the Act that enjoy us the Book of Common Prayer
(under paenalty) commands that very Book, and no other, stablished by Edward
the sixth, with one sentence added in the Administration of the Sacrament, and
a sentence altered in the Letany; but this is not altered, but quite razed out.
And by that very act whoever reads this present Book of Common Prayer, should
for the first fault, forfeit half his yearly Ecclesiastical Revenue, which if
all the Readers of Common Prayer were forced to do, their zeal for that Idol
would soon cool.

Arguments to prove, that Lord-Bishops, or Diocesan-Bishops, etc. and their
Authority, are contrary to the Word of God, and so consequently unlawful. And
the chiefest Objections for Diocesan-Bishops, answered.
Also a Discovery of the great Disparity between Scriptural, Apostolical,
Congregational ( particularly Timothy and Titus) Bishops, and Diocesan-Bishops.
THat which is absolutely forbidden by Christ and his Apostle (viz. Peter) is
unlawful: Argum. 1.


But for any Ministers ( extraordinary or ordinary) to exercise Lorship, or be
Lords over one another, or the Heritage (or Church) of God is absolutely
forbidden both by Christ and his Apostle (viz. Peter.)

Therefore for any to be such, or to exercise such power, is utterly unlawful.

The Major, or first Proposition, none can deny, But that which Christ and his
Apostle do forbid, is utterly unlawful.

The Minor is clearly and strongly proved out of Mat. 20.25. Luke 22.25. 1 Pet.
5.1, 3. The words in Matthew are, (...).
But Jesus called them unto him, and said, Ye know that the Princes of the
Gentiles exercise Dominion (or as it is in the Greek there, and in Luke,
exercise Lordship) over them. But it shall not be so among you: or, as Luke
says, (...).
But ye shall not be so. Observe here, to whom, of whom, and upon what occasion
Christ spoke these words. He spoke these words to the ten Apostles or
Disciples, v. 24. concerning James and John; and the occasion was the
indignation of the other ten against their two Brethren. Where note, 1. That
they were all Christians, Brethren, ( Judas excepted) Preachers and Apostles.
2. That those that were offended were ten to two. 3. The ten had some seeming
ground to exercise Authority over the two; A good Caution to Peter's Successor.
Mark 10.35.
for the two began to seek pre-eminence over them first, (yea, of Peter and
Andrew that were called before them to be Apostles) in desiring that they might
sit the one on Christ's right hand, and the other on his left in his Kingdom:
and yet mark how Christ allays that evil, proud, and Prelatical Spirit that was
beginning to rise in them; he beats it down with both hands, urging three
strong Arguments to dissuade them from this Lordliness. First, says he, The
Princes of the Gentiles do exercise dominion over them (not that Christ does
allow Princes and great men to exercise power over his Ministers and people to
persecute them) and it is as if Christ had said, Princes and not Preachers
should exercise Lordship; and the great ones among the Gentiles, to wit,
sinners, and not the good ones among the Saints, claim and exercise this
Lordly-power: and they and you will have enough, A seasonable Consideration.
The best way to make Preachers good, is to keep them low, and from meddling with
Lordly power.
and too much indignation and persecution from these; and therefore be not of a
high and Lordly spirit over one another Secondly (says he) Whosoever would be
greatest and chiefest among them, should be their Ministers and Servants, v.
26, 27. Thirdly, He gives them his own example of humility toward them; Even
as the Son of man came not to be ministered unto but to minister. Likewise that
place be fore cited in Peter (better known than observed by the Clergy) is most
pat, and like David's stone, (...).
knocking this Goliath Episcopacy in the forehead; Neither, says he, being
Lords over Gods Heritage, or not as though ye were Lords of the Heritages. Thus
much for the first Argument. Argum. 2.


That which is directly contrary to what the Spirit of God has appointed, must
needs be unlawful:

But for one Bishop to be over diverse (or many particular Churches) is directly
contrary to what the Spirit of God has appointed.

Ergo, (...).
for one Bishop to be over diverse particular Churches, is unlawful. The Major
is larior sole, clearer than the Sun, and needs no proof.

The Minor I prove thus: The Holy Ghost has appointed several Bishops in one
particular Church. The words are plain, in Act. 20.28. Take heed therefore to
your selves, and to the whole flock over the which the Holy Ghost has made you
overseers. Or more near the Greek, Take heed therefore to your selves, and
feed the whole flock in which the Holy Ghost has put you Bishops. In that
particular Church of Ephesus there were several Bishops, or as they are called
in the 17 verse. Elders (which are the same; for Peter, though an Apostle, calls
himself an Elder) so in the Church of Philippi, there were several Bishops, as
well as Deacous, 1 Pet. 5.7,
Phil. 1.1. Then to appoint or set up one Bishop over diverse Congregations, as
over three or four hundred, nay some over a hundred Parishes, is to do contrary
to what the Spirit of the Lord has done. Therefore it is unlawful.

That order which is contrary to the order which the Apostles set up in the
Churches of the Gentiles, is unlawful: Argum. 3.


But the order of Lordly or Diocesan-Bishops is contrary to that order which
the Apostles set up in the Churches of the Gentiles. (...) Therefore unlawful.

The Proposition will not be denied; for what the Apostles received from
Christ, they set up in the Churches, 1 Cor. 11.23. and 14.3.7. Act. 15.29. and
16.4.

The Assumption I prove thus: The order that the Apostles set up in the
Churches of the Gentiles, was Bishops or Elders (which were of equal power and
authority, as is showed before, and will more fully be afterward) in every
Church, Act. 14.23. Tit. 1.5, 7. But Diocesan order is to set up one Bishop
over many Churches; which order is contrary to the order set up by the
Apostles, and so consequentially unlawful. They that walk contrary to the Rules
of the Apostles, walk contrary to the Lord himself, 1 Cor. 11.1. Ephesians. 5.1.2
These. 3.9. and they that walk contrary to the Lord, the Lord will walk contrary
to them, Lev. 26.21, 41.

That Office and Authority which makes a man utterly incapable of performing
the duties belonging properly to his Function, is unlawful: Argum. 4.


But Lordly or Diocesan power makes a man utterly incapable of performing the
duties belonging to his Function.

Therefore Lordly or Diocesan Power is unlawful.

The Major none but such as are willing to shun performing their Duties, will
deny.

The Minor is proved by considering what the Duties are which belong to the
Function of Bishops; to wit, to know their stocks, watch over them, feed, and
comfort them; to resolve their doubts, visit them, and administer the Lords
Supper often unto them, etc. Prove. 27.23. 1 These. 5.12, 13. Heb. 13.7, 17. Act.
20.28. 2 Cor. 1.4. James 5.14. 1 Cor. 11.23, 26. and how any Diocesan-Bishops
(whose power extends in some Diocesses over several Counties) can possibly do
this, let any judge.

That which does necessarily introduce the Popes power over the Churches of
Christ, Argum. 5.
is unlawful:

But the office of Lord-Bishops, or Diocesan-Bishops does necessarily introduce
the Popes power over the Churches of Christ.

Therefore the office of Lord-Bishops and Diocesan-Bishops is unlawful.

None but Papists will oppose the first.

The second I prove thus: They that have their Ordination from the Pope (and so
consequently their Ministry, for Ordinatio apud Episcopos, est causa sine qua
non, etc. for a man, though never so well qualified, is not accounted by them a
Minister without it) do introduce the Popes power over the Churches of Christ:
But Diocesan or Lord-Bishops have their Ordination from the Pope. Ergo. I prove
they have their Ordination from the Pope: They that have their Ordination from
the Archbishop, have their Ordination from the Pope, as holy Crunmer confessed
they had (and as one lately made Bishop, Mr. Nichols, formerly Minister in
Carmarthen in South Wales now (as they say) Bishop of Gloucester.
acknowledged before many witnesses, in a conference with me in Carmarthen,
for which some of his own friends blamed him.) For if the Archbishop has not
his Ordination from the Pope, then he has none at all, and so is no Minister
at all; and so has no power to ordain other Bishops, nor they any other
Ministers; for, Nemo dat quod in se non habet. So that it is easy to derive
the Pedigree of our Diocesan-Bishops. And the learned Papists who are well
versed in this Genealogy, know their descent perfectly, that the Bishops and
themselves have but one Grandfather, whoever their Grandmother or Mother is,

Obj. But if it be objected, That one Bishop has power to ordain another, and
so they need not have dependence upon the Pope for their Ordination.

Ans. I answer, If one Bishop ordain another, either he ordains him as another
ordinary Minister (or Priest, as they say) or as a Bishop: If as another
ordinary Minister, then a Bishop is not of another or higher Order than the
ordinary Minister is of; but they are Equal in degree, and then par in parens
non habet imperium. And this will not satisfy the Bishops.

If he ordained him first as a Minister, and afterward as a Bishop, he has
had two Ordinations, for which there is no Rule in Scripture.

Obj. But the Archbishop does but consecrate and confirm the Bishop.

Ans. Suppose that were a distinct thing from Ordination (which cannot be
proved from the Word of God) yet who shall consecrate the Archbishop? either it
must be his Inferior, Equal, or Superior: surely it will not be admitted that
his Inferior should do it, for by that Rule and Reason, ordinary Ministers
(which they call Priests, and account to be of a lower rank than Bishops) may
ordain Bishops. An Equal cannot do it, because that the Archbishop of
Canterbury has no Fellow (unless the Archbishop of York) then of necessity
there must be application to a Superior, and there is no such (that assumes
any Authority to administer Ecclesiastical Ordinances) except the Pope himself.
So that by close pursuit, you may find where these Foxes are, or will be
kennell'd. Let us therefore with the Church pray, Take us (or as it is in the
Hebrew, gnalu for us) the little Foxes that spoil the Vines, for our Vines have
tender Grapes, Cant. 2.15.

That Order and Office which has many unscriptural Inferior Officers
depending thereon, Argum. 6.
and are as branches thereof, is unlawful.

But the Order and Office of Diocesan and Lord-Bishops has many unscriptural
Officers depending thereon, and are branches thereof. Therefore it is unlawful.

The former is proved, 2 Chronicles. 13.9. Ezekiel. 43.3. Act. 23.3. when Paul said to
Ananias the High Priest, Thou whited wall, etc. doubtless he looked upon him to
be irregular in the Office (as the corruption was grown among the Jews to have
a Sagan; answerable thereto, sure are Suffragans) and when he said, I wist not
that he was the High Priest, he spoke it Ironically, and it is as if he had
said, I knew him not to be an High Priest, but I looked upon him as one that
does usurp the place. Surely Paul knew the High Priest, and his power well
enough; but he spoke to him as Diogenes said to Alexander the Great, I do not
know Alexander the King, but I know Alexander the Tyrant.

The Minor or latter, that the Diocesan and Lord-Bishops have many unscriptural
inferior Officers, as Deans, Deans and Chapters, Archdeacons, Commissaries,
Chancellors, Canons, Residents, Prebendaries, Peticanons, etc. such a
rabblerout, that some (who have searched the Nest) affirm, that there are from
the bottom to the top, from the Van to the Rear, thirty eight distinct
Officers, that is, thirty above what Christ has put in his Church. So having
done with these Syllogistical Arguments, I will now lay down a few more plain
Reasons against Diocesan Lord-Bishops, and their Power.

Because there is no difference made in the Scripture between Bishops and other
Gospel Ministers, Argum. 7.
called Elders. See Act. 20.17. and 28. Mat. 6.37. Col. 1.23. Phil. 1.1. Tit.
1.5, 6, 7. Note, that where the Church Officers are mentioned in Scripture, the
Bishops are never named as a distinct Order from the Elders, but only from the
Deacons, Romans 12.6, 7, 8. Ephesians. 4.11, 12.

Obj. Yea there is mention made of Helps and Governments, 1 Cor. 12.28.

Ans. Though he speaks of Helps and Governments, yet it is in the fifth or
sixth place after Apostles, Prophets, Teachers, etc. and not in the first nor
second rank. So that if any can spy out Episcopacy here, I am sure they can
neither in this place, nor elsewhere in Scripture find Lord-Bishop, neither in
name nor power, nor in that Rank and Order they place themselves no though you
thus reckon. First the Pope; secondly, the Cardinal; thirdly, the Archbishop;
fourthly, the Diocesan-Bishop; there you find them in their proper place, but
not in the Scripture.

2. It is said, Aquila and Urbane, (nay, Priscilla a woman) were Helpers (of
Paul) in Christ Jesus, Romans 16.3, 9. and yet they were no Bishops. It were to
be wished that the Bishops were as good Helpers as they were, and as like
Timothy (whom they would have to be a Bishop) be ready to carry a poor
painful persecuted Preachers Cloak, Books, etc. as he did Paul's. And thus they
would obey the commands of Christ, who said, Whosoever will be great among you,
let him be your Minister; and, Whosoever will be chief among you, let him be
your servant, Mat. 20.26, 27. I suppose all know who would be greatest and
chiefest among the Ministers: but do any know which of them will be content to
learn this Lesson of Christ? for such a Bishop would we give our voice: nay, I
am contented that the Bishops should have the chiefest care of so many as they
have converted, or fed. This granted, it is supposed their power will not be
too great.

Because they are created by men, ( viz. by the Kings or Princes, Argum. 8.
in whose Dominions they are) and I may say to them, as the Boy said to the
Doctor, That God made his Fathers Ox a Bull, but his Father made him an Ox: God
made them men, but the King made them Bishops. See Cook, De Jure Regis
Ecclesiastico.

Because they depend upon man, Argum. 9.
which the true Ministers of Christ never did. Episcopacy is a Noune Adrective,
that cannot stand by it self, but it must be supported by the hand of the chief
Magistrate: And they shelter themselves under that Maxim of theirs, No Bishop,
no King. And the Bishops say, No Ceremony, no Bishop, whether this be not to
lay a weak foundation to Regal Authority, let any judge. The Proverb would be
truer, No King, no Bishop; for the King may very well subsist without them,
Simile.
but they like Colewerts close to the Vine, draw the fatness of the earth from
it to themselves: Or like the Ivy to the Oak, Simile.
sheltring it self under its arms and boughs, but in the mean time, keeping
much of the virtue of the Sun from the Tree.

A tenth Reason to prove Diocesan Bishops to be unlawful, Argum. 10.
is, because they do imitate the Priests of the Law so much in respect of their
different degrees, order, etc. as Archbishops answering the High Priests, the
Presbyters, the other Priests, and the Deacons the Levites, and the Chorister
and Cantors the Jewish Singers; so their Organs and other Instrument. They have
also their Paul's answerable to the Temple; their Garments, Girdle, Mytre, etc.
like those which the Priests did use; Exodus 28.4, 5, 6.
also their Tables, Altars, Sacrifices, Oblations, Purifications of Women: and
their Holy Days, Feasts, with many such things, answering to the Jewish Feasts:
Heb. 9.7, 8, 9.
but this is to set up the Legal Priesthood again, that was weak, and those
things which were but shadows, and continued only till the time of
Reformation; And is not this to do altogether as bad as the Jewish Teachers
did, Gal. 3.4.
who endeavored to bring back the Disciples, who had begun in the Spirit, to
end in the flesh?

Obj. But how can they be Jewish, and yet Popish?

Ans. Very well; for the Pope and Papists are in a manner Imitators of the
Jews; only they borrow some Heathenish Customs, and create some of their own
for outward advantage. And doubtless it was the aim and endeavor of some of
the late Bishops, as might easily be seen by their Writings and works, that
they intended to unite England to Rome: and what some of the present ones may
do (being Birds of the same feather) when their wings grow longer; Time (which
is the discoverer of things) will show.

Because Lordly and Diocesan power is more than the Apostles of Christ did
exercise either jointly or apart. Argum. 13.
For they imposed no Canons or Decrees (except the pure Scriptures, the true
Rule and Standard) upon any of the Churches (no, though a whole Synod of them
were gathered together to make such) but delivered, and left them to the
Churches with this Recommendation, If you keep your selves, ye shall do well,
Act. 15.29. Likewise Paul an Apostle, and Timothy a Bishop (if you will have
him so) would not exercise Dominion over the Faith of the Christians, (...),
Lordship.
2 Cor. 1.1. compared with 24.

Lastly, It will evidently appear that the Lordly Diocesan-Bishops, and their
power are unwarrantable and unscriptural, if we compare them with the Bishops
mentioned in Scripture; and particularly with Timothy and Titus, who are urged
by them for Authority and Example.

Timothy and Titus were
1. Begotten again, and converted by the Gospel, 1 Timothy 1.1. Titus 1.4. 2. True
Disciples and Servants of Jesus Christ, Act. 16. Phil. 1.1. 3. Men of good
report, Act. 16.2. 2 Cor. 8.6. 4. Inwardly and really affected to the people of
God, 2 Cor. 7.15. Titus 1.8. as Brethren, Col. 1.1. 5. Well acquainted with the
Scriptures, and the Word of God, and having a gift to prophecy, 2 Timothy 3.15.
and 1 Timothy 4.14. 6. Doubtless chosen by the suffrages or voices of
Church Members, as the manner was in choosing Officers, Acts. 6.3. and 14.22. 7.
Ordained solemnly by fasting and prayer, either by the Apostles, Presbyters, or
Elders of the same Church or Churches they were of, Act. 6.6. and 13.3. 1 Timothy
4.14. 8. Itinerant Preachers, going from Country to Country to preach the
Gospel, Act. 17.14. 1 These. 1.3. 9. Diligent Laborers in the Work of Christ
and his Gospel, called, Paul's work-fellows, Romans 6.21. 1 Cor. 16.10. 10.
Naturally careful of the things of Christ, and of the welfare of Christians,
Phil. 1.19. 2 Cor. 8.16. 11. Attendants and Ministers to the Apostles, Act.
18.5. and 19.22. Gal. 2.1. 2 Timothy 4.10. but not their Chaplains. 12. Messengers
of the Churches of Christ, going from one Church to another, and carrying
contribution to the poor Saints, 2 Cor. 8.23. and 2 Cor. 8.6. 13. Much
refreshed in and among the Saints and Churches of Christ, 2 Cor. 7.14. 14.
Persecuted, imprisoned, and in bondage, for professing, preaching, and
practicing the Doctrine of the Gospel of Christ, Heb. 13.17. Col. 4.10. 15.
Such as did ordain Bishops or Elders in the Churches of Christ according to the
appointment of the Apostles, Tit. 1.5. 16. Doubtless blameless, vigilant,
sober, of good behavior, etc. 1 Timothy 3.23. Tit. 1.2. 1 Timothy 3.2.
Timothy and Titus (as appears in Scripture)
1. Were not chosen to their Office by Dean and Chapter. 2. Were not created by
any earthly Kings or Princes. 3. Were not consecrated and confirmed by any
Archbishop or Pope. 4. Did not call themselves, neither were they called
Lords. Though these men call themselves so, as Dr. Godwyn, etc. whereas Christ
forbids his Apostles to be called Masters, Mat. 23.8, 10. See James 3.1. 5. Did
not swear Canonical Obedience to any Archbishop. 6. Did not require any that
they did ordain, to swear Canonical obedience to them. 7. Did not ask the
Ministers they ordained at their Ordination, Will you reverently obey the
Ordinary and other chief Ministers unto whom the Government and Charge is
committed over you? etc. 8. When they did ordain other Ministers, they did not
say to them, Recipe Sanctum Spiritum, Receive the Holy Ghost, and, Take thou
Authority to preach the Word of God. 9. Tendered no Book of Articles, Canons, or
Common-Prayer-Books to these they ordained, nor required any to swear to such
things. 10. Did not lay hands upon any to ordain them before they were elected;
much less ordain, or license any to be mere Readers. 11. Did not intermeddle
with Civil and Secular Affairs: they were neither honorable in Parliaments,
nor Councils: nor Worshipful Justices in the Countries. 12. Had no Stately
Palaces, Bishops Lands, or thousands to maintain them yearly. 13. Had no
High-Commission-Courts, Court of Audience, Prerogative-Court, Court of
Faculties, etc. nor power to convene people at their pleasures before them. 14.
Had no such Officers under them as Deans, Archdeacons, Prebends, Chancellours,
Commissaries, Advocates, Proctors, Pursevants, Apparitors, etc. 15. Used no
such Oaths, as the Oath ex Officio (to examine a man against himself) or the
Etcaetera Oath, to swear to what should, be added and put in afterward by
them. 16. Did not impose penance, fines, imprisonment, etc. upon people at
their pleasure. 17. Did not wear Scarlet Gowns, Mytres, Launsleeves, etc. 18.
Did not sell Livings for money, nor give them as Dowries or Portions with their
Daughters or Kinswomen to Ministers. 19. Did not silence any of the Ministers
of the Gospel under the notion of Puritans and Factious persons, but if they
silenced any, it was by Scriptures, and sound Arguments, as Titus was
commanded, Tit. 1. 20. They did not present Ministers (as the Bishops used to
do) for preaching without license, or in a Coat, or Cloak, or godly people for
going out of their own Parishes to hear Sermons; or for meeting in private to
read the Scriptures, repeat Sermons, pray, etc. or for not standing at the
Creed, not bowing at the Name of Jesus, for wearing ones hat at Sermon-time,
for not observing Popish-Holy-days, etc. 21. Did not cause any of the Believers
to be fined, imprisoned, stigmatized, and to have their ears cut off, etc. or
banished under the notion of Sectaries, or Schismatical persons. 22. Did not
require the sole power of Ordination and Jurisdiction, like Demetrius. 23. Did
not neglect to preach the Gospel, or think it enough to appoint others under,
or for them to do it. Did not make Preachers, Physicians, Schoolmasters,
Clerks, Midwives, etc. buy and often renew their licenses, etc. 24. Were not
given to Wine, or greedy of filthy lucre: not soon angry, brawlers,
self-willed, proud, contentious, and ill Examples in their Families or Country.
25. Did not remove from one Diocese to another for greater preferment. 26. Had
not under them dumb, lazy, profane, Popish Priests, and Parsons, that have not
only pluralities of Livings, but pluralities of Offices belonging to their
Hierarchy.
Having thus laid down the Reasons against Archbishops and Diocesan Lord
Bishops, and likewise having showed you the difference between these Worldly
Monsters, and true Gospel-Bishops: it will in the last place be necessary to
answer some of the main Objections: and they are not many (as I apprehend) that
can be made, nor any but may be easily and soon answered; though men's wanton
and worldly wit, self-interest, and sinful sophistry would imagine more than
are real.

Obj. But were there not Bishops in the days of the Apostles? Was not Timothy
Bishop of Ephesus, and Titus Bishop of Crete?

Ans. There is no Scripture that proves either of them to be Bishops at all,
much less Bishops of those places.

Obj. What? Does not Paul in his superscription or subscription direct his
Epistle to them as such? 2 Timothy 4. end Tit. 3. end.

Ans. First, the superscriptions (or subscriptions) in the end of all Paul's
Epistles seem, (and are judged by many learned) to be added by men since, and
were not written by Paul. And it is evident, that some of those superscriptions
are contradictory to the very Epistles to which they are suffixed. As the 1
Epist. to the Corinth. by comparing the subscription with Act. 19 9, 22. with 1
Cor. 16.8.

Secondly, It is very probable that those particular subscriptions to Timothy
and Titus were not written by Paul, For,

1. Timothy and Titus were Evangelists, 2 Timothy 4.5. 2 Cor. 8.23. that is, men
not tied to one place or Church, but sometimes accompanied the Apostles in
their Journies from Country to Country, and assisted them in the work of the
Gospel, by preaching, visiting, and helping to settle Officers and good Order
in the Churches, as appears, Act. 17.14. and 19.22. 1 These. 3.12. 2 Cor. 2.12.
Gal. 2.1. 2 Cor. 5.6. 1 Timothy 1.3. Tit. 1 5. and as more fully (and
particularly) appears in the positive part of the parallel (to wit, what
Timothy and Titus were) between them and Diocesan-Bishops.

2. It is clear, that in Ephesus (which was but one Church in one City, Act.
18.19. Rev. 2.1.) there were diverse Bishops, Act. 20 17. compared with verse.
28. Bishops (so it is in the Greek) See Reas. first. And if there were diverse
Bishops there, how could Timothy be a single Bishop there? And if those Bishops
were chosen and ordained in Ephesus, whilst Timothy was attending upon Paul in
his Journies and Voyages, how could he be the first Bishop there? as the
subscription says, that he was ordained the first Bishop of the Church of the
Ephesians.

3. If Titus were Bishop of Crete, Crete called (...), that is a hundred Cities.
as the subscription says, he must be Archbishop: For, 1. Crete had a hundred
Cities in it (if we may credit diverse Historians and Expositors.) 2. He
ordained Bishops (or Elders, which is the same as was showed before) and that
was one of the main ends, why Paul left him in Crete, Tit. 1.5. compared with
verse. 7. And why Titus should be Bishop of many Cities, and that Timothy who
was his equal at least in most or all regards, and that had that commendation
from Paul himself, That he had no man like-minded, etc. and Timothy Bishop but
of one City or Church, Phil. 2.20.
as Ephesus was, let the next Synod of Bishops resolve and determine if they
can.


Obj. But in the Epistle directed to the seven Churches of Asia, there is
mention only of one Angel.

Ans. 1. It has been showed already, that in one of those seven Churches,
(viz. Ephesus) there were diverse Bishops; and so in the Church of Thyatira, The
Holy Ghost writes, to you, and the rest in Thyatira, which were more than one,
cap. 2.24.

2. Many good Angels termed one, as in Psalm. 34.7. and 91.11. 2 King. 6.16, 17.
and 19.35. So one Priest or Prophet is put for many, Isa. 3.2. Jer. 6.18, 19.
Ezekiel. 7.26. Hos. 4.6. One Angel is here taken for diverse; showing, that all the
Officers in the Congregation were entire and one.

3. If there were but one Bishop in those Churches; then the order in those
Churches, and in other Churches, would not be the same, as was showed before,
Phil. 1.1. Act. 14.23. and 20.28. But,

4. Lastly, suppose it be granted that there was but one Bishop in every one of
those particular Churches, and that their power did extend no further (as there
is no ground to believe it did) than in their particular Churches, then they
were not Diocesans.

Obj. The Government of Bishops is ancient, of fifteen hundred years standing;
therefore lawful.

Ans. 1. The Devil and Antichrist may make that Plea as well as they, John
8.44. 2 These. 2.4. 1 John 4.3.

2. See the differences clearly and fully shown in Smethy Annuus.
They that read the History of the Church (written by Eusebius, Sympson, etc.)
will easily discern the differences between the Bishops of the three first
Centuries, and our Diocesan-Bishops. The controversy is not about the ^^me (as
is acknowledged by all) but about the power of Bishops.

3. Mea entiquetas Christus est. August. Consuetudo sine veritate, est vetustas
erroris.
If the word of God be a perfect Rule (as it is) what need we go any further?
Bring your Episcopal Metal to this Touchstone, and if it will hold here, we
will honor it with its Gray hairs, and receive and reverence it as the right
Heir; If not, we must say with Gerhard, Antiquity without truth, is but a
cipher.

1 These. 5.21. Prove all things, hold fast that which is good. Isa. 8.20. To
the Law, and to the Testimony, if they speak not according to this Word, it is
because there is no light in them. Is qui praeest, si praeter voluntatem Dei,
vel praeter quod in sanctis Scripturis evidenter praecipitur, vel dicit
aliquid, vel imperat tanquam falsus aut sacrilegus habeatur, Can. Law.
FINIS.

