TO THE Religious and Worthy Mr. JOSEPH HOLDEN, OF LONDON, Gent. And my much
Esteemed Friend.
Dear and Honored Sir;
THE Dedication of Books unto Persons of Worth and Interest, Service and Honor,
(though often abused to Vain Flattery) is of Ancient Use, and oft-times does
Secure the same from the Euroclydons of a Censorious Age: And therefore, the
Custom is not to be Despised; especially considering, that one of the Luke 1.
Act. 1. 3.
Penmen of Holy Scripture has Hallowed it by his Practice; who Inscribeth his
Gospel and his Acts to Theophilus, a Person both Eminent in Religion, and So
much, I conceive, is intimated in that Form of Address. (...) a Term, which is
wont to be given to Persons of Honor; as Acts 24. 3. (...), and Acts 26. 5. In
both Places we render Noble.
Dignified with Birth and Place; which ever since has been Imitated by the Best
and Wisest of Men in all Ages: So that I shall use no further Apology on this
Account.

But the Reasons why I Address my Self to You in this manner, and Prefix your
Name to this Work, are many; a few whereof may not be needless here to Insert:
viz. Your eximious Piety, Faithfulness and Zeal toward God; your laudable Love
toward, and Tenderness of all (under what Names of Discrimination so-ever)
that have but aliquid Christi in them, which is rare now adays.

Sir, I speak my Conscience, That this is as an Orient Pearl shining in your
Breast; and in which lies much of your Eminency, viz. Unfeigned Love to the
Brethren; which is one of those No Man can Love Grace in another Man's Heart,
but he that has Grace in his own.
Excellent Things, that accompany Salvation. And that your Love is Unfeigned,
appears from the Spirituality, and the Universality of it: Your Love is
Spiritual, because it is a Love for the Image of God, that is stamped on the
Creature. In the next place; It is Universal, in that it extends to all Saints,
as Saints, how-ever Distinguished among us; and not making this or that
Difference in Judgment a Difference in Affection, which too oft-times is.
Saintship is the Ground of your Love; and wherever you Espy it, you Like it,
Love it, and Admire it, though their Errors may be many; so they be not
Fundamental, and Approved. Your Faith is enough to Justify this before God, and
your Faith and Good Works go ^gether, ^ough not in the Act of ^stifying.
Good Works enough to Justify it before Men: Of your Good Works, many poor
Souls (besides God, Angels, and your own Conscience) are Witnesses of: Among
whom I may well be accounted one; who am able to attest the Largness of your
Heart unto poor Christians, and the Filling-up that Relation, in which you
stand; viz. Your Succouring me in my Tempted Condition; your Fervent Prayers,
Set and Occasional, Solemn and Sudden, that were made with and for me; your
gracious Words, feeling Expressions, pious Discourses, wholesome Admonitions,
divine Cordials, A Simpathizing Friend (as one says) is like a Dry House in a
Wet Day.
simpathizing Epistles: And lastly, which Crowned all, was your encouraging and
forwarding me in that Holy Work, and Function, where-unto God has called me; of
which I must have despaired, as to all secundary Causes, and outward
Instruments assisting of me, had not God stirred up your Heart toward me, on
the Foresight of what I am now (through Divine Providence) arrived unto. In a
word; You believed for me, what I could not believe for my self: So that my
present State is an Effect of your Faith, and a Fruit of your Hope and Labor;
which I desire, may be to the Glory of God, the Good of Immortal Souls, and the
Fulfilling of your Expectations, which I know, are High concerning me: And well
they may, because of Expense that I have put you to. Besides, Your owning Some
two or three Ministers, that violently assailed my Book, Entitled; The Young
Man's Conflict with. and Victory over the Devil by Faith, etc. Reporting, that it
was Fictitious; which, Sir, next unto God, and my own Conscience, you your self
can bear witness unto the Truth thereof; being an Eyewitness of me, when I was
under the Workings of the greatest part, that I declare there. If my Method and
Style, being dark and obscure, and unbeseeming the Matter declared in that
Book, has offended any, I am sorry; and would not have done it, had I not in my
Judgment deemed it most In-offensive: How-ever, ^ hear of Good, that it has
done, and that almost Daily.
of me against the furious Onset of some prejudiced * Persons, (whose Names I
shall conceal for the Glory of God's Sake, and their own Reputation) that would
have parted between Friend and Friend, by whispering in your Ears things of me,
unbecoming them of their Place to say; especially, considering me to be a
Brother, though the Younger One, and the Unworthiest of all. Yet none of these
Things could bias your Unbyassed Disposition toward me; and by virtue of that
Spirit of Discerning, which God has given you, was more able to Judge of me,
than they: And therefore they could not come to a Person, with whom their Tales
could be more unwelcom, than with you. Whence it is, that (notwithstanding
those Jealousies, which they would have fomented) you have continued your Favor
hither-to unto me.

This, together with many other of your Favors, (which to enumerate, I know,
would but disgust you) have obliged me to this unfeigned Expression of my
Gratitude and Service, in what I may or can; especially, for your constant
Countenance, your undeserved Bounty, and your propitious Acceptance of my poor
fore-past A Sermon, Preached by me on Psalm. 22. v. 1.
Labors: So that, if you will but accept of this Plain and Unpolished Discourse
also, it will be an Additional Favor unto all the former. My Confidence
(beloved Sir) is in your Self, and not in any thing of my Style here, that may
merit an Admission into the Cabinet of your more serious Thoughts; Matter and
Method being both plain: Only this I can say for my Book; The Things contained
in it are Weighty and High, though the Expressions are Plain and Familiar. And
I know not of any thing here handled, but I first tried it by the Touchstone of
the Word, and could Seal to it by my own Experience: So that what comes to the
View of your Eye, will, I question not, but be approved. Some Rhetorical
Flourishes, that some much use, are here wanting; yet I am almost confident,
that it will prove Acceptable unto you, that be my Friend, and whose Property
all along has been, to wink at small Faults*

This Book (I hope) though it is not set out as some are, may be useful to
Christians of all sorts and sizes; viz. Babes, Little Children, Young Men, and
Fathers; and I suppose, the Unconverted may find something here-in to Chew also.

When I Preached these things, it was not without good Acceptance and Success;
as I have not a little Cause to presume.

The Happiness of Believers, and the Unhappiness of Unbelievers is here opened;
The Nature of True One Old piece of Gold is worth a thousand New Counters; so
one Old Truth of God is more worth, than a thousand New Errors.
Saving Faith is handled; Justification by Faith hinted: The Potency of
Christ's Intercession on the Behalf of the Elect: Believers Perseverance:
Satan's Wiles Discovered: Together, with many other Useful Things; All very
Material, Practical and Soulsearching.

Now these (Good Sir) do I Present unto you; not that you needed them: For I
question not, but that you have Treasured up every Thing, that may be of
Excellency in this Book, long before my Time, that am but of Yester-day. My
Desire is only (as in part I have said already) to express, what I would, if I
could: And more-over, To let you see something, that God has done for me; and
that your Endeavors have not been in vain (...) the Lord.

What is here, was intended you sooner; but some Emergent Occasions intervening
prevented: Besides, my Design was ^o have buried it in Oblivion; ^ut only, that
some that were Friends to it, Revived it. If this ^ittle Spark may give Light
or Heat to any Heart, I shall have my desire. What now remains (ever Honored
It Is not the Knowing of Truth, nor the Hearing of Truth, nor the Commending of
Truth, nor the Talking of Truth; but the Indwelling of Truth in your Soul, that
will keep your Judgment Chaste and Sound.
Sir) but that God may Prosper you in all your lawful Undertakings: That his
Blessing, which alone makes Rich, may be on your Head; and that you may see
the Fruit of your Loins in a good Old Age, to ^ample Satisfaction and Comfort.
God heard your Prayers in the ^ame Case, as he did Abraham of Old. Now Sir, you
know, Mercy calls for Duty: If God h^ had an Ear to your Voice (...) Prayer, I
hope you will not (...) fuse an Ear to God's Voice (...) his Commandments. It Is
b^ reasonable, That those who^ God has done much for, shou^ be much in doing
for him aga^ My Prayer shall be, that as y^ do outstrip many in Mercy; (...)
you may outshine in Life a^ Conversation.

I shall conclude with a Wo^ of Counsel or two; being as f^loweth.

First, Let nothing lie so ne^ your Heart to delight you, (...) God and his
Glory, Christ a^ his Merits, Grace and the Mea^ of Grace; the Soul, and its
Sa^vation. Let God be your chie^ est Deus est summum bonum, and omne bonum in
summo.
Good, and his Glory the Scope you level at in all yo^ Actions Natural, Civil
and Religious: For this you were Born, and Newborn; and this is the End of
Life Natural, Spiritual and Eternal. Next to this, Let many of your spare Hours
be spent in considering the Preciousness of the Soul; together with the
necessity of Salvation. The Soul is a Precious Substance; for it is of a
Spiritual Nature, and the Principal Part of the Man: The Body is but a Casket,
the Soul is the Jewel; and yet the greatest Care usually is to gratify the
Body. The Wiseman says; All a Man's Labor is for the Mouth: But, Sir, I hope
better Things of you; and that you know, who ever are concerned so with the
Body, as to neglect the Soul, are like such, that trim the Scabbard, and let
the Sword rust.

Man is in Dr. Manton in Jam. Cap. 1. 21.
part an Angel, and in part a Beast; Why should we please the Beast, that is in
us, rather than the Angel?

Our greatest Fear should be for the Soul, and our greatest Care should be for
the Soul. Your greatest Fear, Matthew. 10. 28. Fear not him, that can Kill the
Body; but Fear him, that can Cast both Soul and Body into Hell.

There is a double Argument: The Body is but the worser Part, and the Body is
alone: But on the other side, the Soul is the more Noble Part; and the State of
the Body depends upon the Well-or Ill-being of the Soul. He is able to Cast
both Soul and Body, etc.

And therefore it is the greatest Omnia siperdas, animam servar^ memento.
Imprudence in the World, out of a Fear of the Body to Betray the Soul.

But in the next place, Your greatest Care should be for the Soul. Matthew. 16.
26.

What is a Man profited, if he shall gain the whole World, and lose his own
Soul?

It Is but a sorry Exchange.

Sir, God has Honored you with the Bona Throni, and the Bona Scabelli; The
Good of the Throne, and the Good of the Footstool. But, I suppose, you look
upon all Earthly good Things, to be but Conveniences for the Body, and such as
will not profit, when you shall be laid in a Cold and Silent Grave: But
Salvation, How Excellent is it? How Sweet is it, as being that, without which
the Soul cannot be Happy? Now, Christ and his Merits procures this JesusChrist
has purchased a Salvation, that is possible, necessary, rare, near and
everlasting.
Salvation for the Soul: Grace, and the Means of Grace together, will confer
Grace on that Soul, that it may be Happy.

But my last Word of Counsel is this:

As I would have you to let nothing lie so near your Heart, as those Four
Things aforesaid, to Delight you; so I would, that you let nothing lie so near
your Heart, as these Four Things, to Humble you.

First, Your Sins: You and I, and all of us have our Sins, notwithstanding our
Regeneration: A Saint and a Sinner, in some sense may stand together. The Best
have the Remainders of Corruption in them: And tho we are Here the New Man is
mingled with the Old.
Renewed, we are but Renewed in part: Have we been Humbled for Sin? Why? yet we
have cause to be more Humbled.

Secondly, The Hiding of God's Face is another thing, that calls for
Humiliation. The Face of God is the Favor of God: The shining of his Face, and
the lifting up of his Countenance is the Spiritual Desertions many a gracious
Soul in his Life time is exercised with.
Manifestation of his Favor; but the hiding of his Face, is the loss of the
Sense of his Favor. Now, the Shinings of God's Face no Soul on Earth always
Enjoyes; but at sometime or other he is a Child of Light, walking in Darkness;
he has but his Lucid Intervals. No perfect Grace, that dwells in such a Soul,
a Soul that dwells in such a Body, a Man that dwells among such variety of
Business, Companies and Temptations, cannot but be under much Variableness and
Alterations.
Settledness can be attained to in this Life: Our Day will have a Night, our
Sunshine will have its Eclipses; Suavis hora, brevis mora, has been an Old
Saying.

But, Thirdly, The Imperfection of Grace: Grace while on Earth is Militant, and
not Triumphant, till it arrives to Heaven. Sir, Your Faith is not so perfect,
but there is Unbelief enough to humble you; and your Love is not so perfect,
but there is Luke-warmness enough to humble you; and your Patience is not so
perfect, but there is Impatience enough to humble you; and your Our Faith is
mixed with Unbelief, and our Humility is stain^d with Pride.
Humility is not so perfect, but there is Pride enough to humble you.

Sir, In speaking this to you, I speak it also to my self, and all, that may
Read these Lines.

Lastly, The Affliction of the Church should lie very near our Hearts. O Sir,
that you and I could but weep, when we ^emember Zion. Psalm. 137. verse. (...).

We Wept, when we remembered Zion.

If we are Members of the Body Mystical, there will be ^ome kind of Simpathy:
But, Oh the Paucity of them, that zhew themselves to be Members of the Body
Mystical, by making Zions Troubles their own!

Oh the Miseries of many Christians in Germany, the Dukedom of Savoy, and other
Foreign Parts of the world, who have God's Church is now rented with. Schisms,
eclipsed with Error, and oppressed with Trouble.
been driven from their Habitations, because they would not Desert the
Protestant, and Espouse the Popish Religion! Besides, the Oppression of the
Church of God in Scotland has been great for some considerable And now may be
added also, The Church of God in England, that is at this Day in great
Affliction.
Time: When we consider these Things, our Eyes should be bedewed with Tears.

God's Church is a Bleeding Vine; and the Spouse of Christ has now her Garments
rolled in Blood, which is enough to make a Tender Heart to bleed: So that, Sir,
you may by this time see, what should lift up the Heart of a Saint, and what
should cast it down. Pray God direct us both, that our Tears may always run in
the right Channel, and our Rejoicing may be always in the Lord.

Sir, May You, and your Consort, and your young Son live long; that God may
have the Glory of all you have, do and hope for: Humbly begging your Perusal of
this Treatise, in which you will find these Things more at large; And so you
will oblige him, that is,

From my Study in Bartholomew-Close, London, May, 16. 1678. SIR, Yours in all
due Observance, Thomas Powel.

TO HIS Most Honored Uncle, Mr. William Cawthorne, OF LONDON, Gent.
My Dear and Honored Sir,
ALthough I know not well, how you may Resent the Dedication of this Book unto
your Name also; yet so impetuous were my inward Inclinations here^nto, and such
solid Reasons I also ^ad for it, as that I could not get ^ver the same for my
Life: Whence (...) choosed rather to run the Hazard of your Acceptance, than
to exp^ my self unto the Imputation of Ingratus, qui beneficium accepisse se
negat, quod accepit; ingratus, qui id dissimulat; rursum ingratus, qui non
reddit: at omnium ingratissimus est, qui oblitus est,
I^ gratitude? which, of all Offence^ was esteemed by Queen Elizabet^ the most
Unpardonable; as being Vice most Hateful before God a^ Man, and which Heathens
have even blushed to own. I humbly the^ fore beg your Favorable Perusal a^
Acceptance of this Tractate; se^ing no less than a Threefold Cord which is not
easily broken, (viz. Affinity, Friendship and Affection have bound me so fast,
as that could not do any otherwise, than (...) make this Open Acknowledgement I
should have ever been Impriso^ ed in my Mind, had I suffered you^ Unmerited
Kindnesses to have been Buried in Oblivion; which certainly cannot well be now;
because (Scripta litera manet) what i^ Written, is Permanent; and
Acknowledgment is the least any one can (...) for a Favor; and no more is this.
^erefore, I pray you, Sir, give me ^ve to tell you, That I freshly bear (...)
Mind the The Mercies of God in number are as the glittering Stars of the
Firmament, the Drops of the Briny Ocean, and the Sands upon the Winding Shores;
the Dusts of the Earth, and the Atoms, the swim in the Sunbeams, are not so
numerous as them.
Mercies of God to^ds you, which are Various for their ^umber, Diverse for their
Kind, ^rious for their Methods, and Ama^g for their Circumstances: I ^shly bear
in Mind your Familiar ^olloquies with me in Private, (...) the end, that I
might Praise God your Behalf, Admire the Methods Providence, and Depend on God
(...) the Diligent Use of Means for ^e Supplies of this Life. So that I ^st
needs say; The Story of your ^ife, which oft-times you have Read ^to me, (to
the Praise of your Con^escension be it spoken) has afford^ me not only
Excellent Contem^lation, when I have been in your Com^y, but also in my
Solitudes; which compels me to say, (and I ho^ you will not be Offended) you
were (...) Unworthy to be in the Role of tho^ whose Names I use in Page 13^
etc. of this Book, as Famous (...) Good Works; which should I h^ done, it would
(I know) have p^ ved the greatest Offense, that e^ was offered unto you: And
therefo^ that which I dare not prove here (...) an Induction of Particulars;
(...) there is a Certain Which I understood from others, before I did from you.
Place, that do^ and which will Register your Na^ beyond a Tombstone.

Besides, Your Benign Influen^ on She, that is my Nearest Rel^ tion; together
with her Sister, (...) their Two Brothers, that now (...) Dead; that were also
Cared by y^ when You may (Sir) draw Comfort from Jam. 1. ult. Pure Religion,
and undefiled before God and the Father, is this; To Visit the Fatherless and
Widows in their Afflictions, etc.
Orphans; Provided for, (...) wisely Educated by you: and in (...) Things
showed your Self an Indulg^ Father and Mother, as well as a L^ving Uncle, in
the Place of the ^eceased; by whom they were Com^itted to you in Tender
Compassions, ^d of whom you have Discharged your ^lf in Faithfulness.

Lastly; Let me not forget your ^illing Parting with, and ready Giving ^to me
your Kinswoman in Mar^age; which, next to God, I must (...) You in it: For I
must acknow^dge, if Love and Contentation ^ders a Wedded Life Happy, I ^ve them
as much as any Man.

But lest my Affection, kindled by (...) Meditation on your Goodness (...)
Many, and to my Self in particu^, should dil^te it self too far, and (...)
displease you; I shall only say (...):

Though the The Giver should shut his Eyes, when he opens his Hands.
Dispenser of Love ^ould have a Slippery Memory; (...) the Recipient should
Engrave it (...) Pillars of Marble, and Pyramids of Brass. I never could endure
((...) Praise God for it) to let old Kindnesses sleep; and always did esteem
it a Shameful and Unthankful Part, continually to Crave, and never t^ Give: And
glad therefore I am, t^ snatch this Occasion of Testifying my Duty and
Affection unto you. An^ since I cannot find any thing to Present unto you, by
way of Retribution^ as AEshines said to Socrates, The One Thing, which I have,
I giv^ unto you (even My Self) to be yo^ Servant, and Solicitor in the Cou^ of
Heaven; which, I know, you (...) Esteem beyond the Dedication of Book: For you
are One, that car^ not to have your Name blazed (...) broad, (I speak my
Conscience) y^ hate it; which I could easily make to ap^ pear in sundry Signal
Instances, we^ it Convenient.

Your Humility should be every Christian's Upper-Garment.
Humility (Good Sir) Com^ands me to Conceal, and Fetters me (...) the Limits of
fewer Lines, than you ^eserve: therefore, what you will not ^ave in Paper,
shall lie Warm in my Breast.

Wherefore, (my Honored Sir) that (...) may draw to a Close: Seeing it ^as
Pleased Almighty God, (the So^ereign Disposer of Life and Death, in whose Hands
yours and all our Times are) as yet to continue you in ^he Land of the Living,
when many ^f your Dear and Near Relations have ^een taken away, and Are not. I
be^eech you, give me leave (if you do not ^ve it, I must take it) to Pray for
^he long Continuance of this Mercy; that your Days may still be prolonged on
Earth; and that you may Arrive at (...) far greater Age, than at present you
^re Arrived at. But it is probable, you ^ay be Impatient to be gone hence,
partly from the Infirmities and Pains, that attend Old Age, and your Weariness
of the World, and the fore-sigh^ of Calamities impending on this Nation; and
partly from the Longings o^ your Soul to be with Christ: B^ pray, Sir, if God
has more Generation-Work for you to do, patiently and quietly Wait all the
Days of your appointed Time, till your Change shall come. Heaven will be the
same many Years hence, that now it is^ and the longer you are kept out of it,
upon the Doing God's Work, the bett^ it will be to you at last. It Is one (...)
the Highest Degree of Grace a Saint can Arrive unto in this Life, to Long for
Heaven; and yet in order to Service, to be willing for a Time, to b^ kept out
of Heaven. This was the (...). Theodoretus.
Height of Paul's Grace, and the Excellency of his Spirit. Phil. 1. 23, 24,
25. For I am in a Strait betwixt Two, having a Desire to depart, and to be with
Christ; which is far better: Nevertheless, ^o abide in the Flesh, is more
needful for you. And having this Confidence, I know, that I shall abide and
continue with you All for your Furtherance and Joy of Faith.

Ingentis animi est, aliena causa ad vitam reverti.
Seneca has an Excellent Saying to this Purpose; It argues a Noble and Generous
Mind, for one to be willing for the Sake of another, to Return to Life again.

And now (Sir) to hold you no longer in the Porch, (which, I know, unto you is
tedious) I invite you into the House; and that you would be pleased to observe
a Candid Eye, what is contained herein: what of Good shall be in it, Esteem it
God's; and what of the Contrary shall be in it, know it to be my own: I do
confess, I fear, lest it may taste too much of the Distractions of the Times:
Yet I am Confident, there ar^ Truths in this Book, that call for (...)
Practical Improvement; Which, (...) much Respect, are Presented unto you, as
well as unto my Former Friend whom I have known longer than you^ Worthy Self;
and by whom, und^ God, I was Preserved for an Objec^ of your Kindness, and at
last, to b^ Related unto you in the Bond of Affinity: Being verily persuaded,
the you as well as him, will Pardon the many Faults, and Consent unto the man^
Blessed Truths contained herein (which may suit Christians of all Ranks,
Fathers and Strong Men, as well as Babes and Children.) And so you will further
Oblige,

From my Study in Bartholomew-Close. London, Febr. 22. 1678/9. SIR, Your most
Affectionate Kinsman and Servant, Thomas Powel.

A SANCTUARY FOR THE TEMPTED: BEING A Discourse on Christ's Friendly Admonition
to PETER.

Wherein the Fall and Rising of Peter, is at large considered: The Craft,
Potency, and Malice of Satan (that Arch-Enemy of our Salvation) discovered: His
various Wiles, Stratagems and Machinations invalidated: Several choice and
excellent Gospel Truths handled, and cleared (from the Calumnies and Objections
of Gainsayers.) Here is also Milk for the Weak, Meat for the Strong, Music for
the Melancholy, and Wine for the Wounded: Here the Tempted may be succored,
the Oppressed relieved, the Mourner comforted, and the Wanderer directed.
Delivered in sundry Sermons, at first; and now, Published for the Benefit of
God's Church in general.

To which is added, Four Sermons, Preached upon Sacramental Occasions.

By Thomas Powel, Preacher of the Gospel, and One, whom Satan has Winnowed.

London, Printed by T. M. for B. Harris, at the Stationers-Arms in
Sweetings-Rents, near the Royal Exchange in Cornhil, 1678.

A Sanctuary for the Tempted: BEING (...) Discourse on Christ's Friendly
Admonition to Peter.
Luke 22. 31, 32. And the Lord said, Simon, Simon, Behold, Satan has desired
to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat:

But, I have prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not; and when thou art
Converted, strengthen thy Brethren.


A Porch or Entrance into the Words; together with the Propositions resulting
therefrom.
MAN'S Life (says St. James) is a Vapor; but a Christian's Life (says St.
Paul) is a Warfare. We are no sooner born Christians, but we Enter our selves
Soldiers; and fight we must against the Devil, the World, and our own Selves.
There is not one Saint, bu^ what has experienced more or le^ the Tempations of
Satan, the Flatter^ of this World, and the Deceitfulne^ Vita ista sine
tentatione duci non potest. We cannot live without Temptations, says Augustine.
of their own Hearts. David must b^ dejected, Paul must be buffetted, an^ Peter
winnowed; and all, before the^ go hence, and be seen no more. The latter of
which Renowned Worthie^ (scil. Peter) is Him, whom our Saviou^ in the Text
called Simon, Simon^ Putting him in mind of three things^ First, Of his Fall,
to humble him^ Secondly, Of his Rising, to comfor^ him: Thirdly, Of his Duty,
to quicken him to Christ. First, Peter i^ put in mind of his Fall, in these
Words:

And the Lord said, Simon, Simon^ Behold, Satan has desired to have yo^ that
he may sift you as Wheat.

Wherein you may for Explication'^ sake observe; (1.) The Person speaking. (2.)
The Person spoken to (3.) The Matter spoken of. First The Person speaking, who
is described by his Title [Lord]: And the Lord said.] The Lord: Who is this
Lord? I answer, He is Jesus Christ, who is styled Lord not only here, but
elsewhere. He is frequently in Scripture called, The Lord our Righteousness,
and The Lord our Savior. So that this Lord, who speaks unto Peter, is Jesus
Christ, the Eternal Son of God: And the Lord said. -- Secondly, The Person
spoken to, in these Words; Simon, Simon: His Name is repeated twice, a Figure
that we call an Epizeuxis, which notes unto us the Singular Affection and Good
Will of the Mind. Simon, Simon, signifies thus much; Mi Charissime Piscat. in
Loc. Brugensis in Loc.
Simon, My most dear Simon: This Ingemination, and Doubling of his Name is to
stir him up to a serious Attention.

But does our Savior speak only unto Peter? I Answer, He speaks The
Assembly's Notes on the Place
unto All, though Peter's Name is only instanced: the reason whereof is thought
to be this; Our Savior by speaking unto Peter, does also admonish the rest of
the Disciples; being such, as were to be tried, sifted and winnowed, as well as
Peter: But, Peter's Fall (according to our Savior's Prediction) was to be more
than ordinary, (in regard, that his Self-Confidence was more than ordinary:)
Therefore, our Savior speaks particularly unto him, he being particularly and
specially eyed in the Prediction.

Thirdly, The Matter spoken of: and that is, Peter's Fall; which our Savior
sets forth by a Metaphorical Speech:

Behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat.

Or the Words may be read thus: Behold, Satan has desired to have you, that he
may sift you as Wheat; or, to sift you as Wheat.

The Word [Behold!] is variously accepted: Here it is to be taken as a Note of
Attention to a Matter of great Importance.

Satan Satanas ex petivit, etc. (...), etc. Expetiit, Quaesivit, Postulavit,
Depoposcit, Petiit vos sibi dedi; Allusio ad Jobi Historiam. Pool's Synopsis
Crit. Com. in Luc. 22. 31. Eos quaerit dejicere, quos videt stare. Cyprian.
Lib. 3. Epist. 1.
has desired to have you, that he may sift you as Wheat:

That is; Satan has asked Leave of God to try, sift and winnow ^hee, O Peter,
even as Wheat, which ^s shaken up and down in the Sun, ^carce ever lying still.
Here is the Malice of Satan, principally aiming ^t the Ruin of the Best: He
passes ^y Wicked Men, as his own Slaves and Vassals, of whom he is already
^ure. He is ambitious to cast them ^own, whom he sees standing.

Secondly, Peter is put in mind of his Rising, to comfort him: And this is done
by our Savior's giving ^ut the Promise of Perseverance, as a present Comfort
unto him upon this sudden sad News; and as a future Comfort unto him,
whenever it should be with him, as it was Predicted.

But I have Prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not, -- --

-- Or, Be wholly Eclipsed, as it is in the Original.

Thirdly, Peter is put in mind of his Duty, to quicken him unto Christ.

When thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren.

That is; When thou returnest again. For, we must note, That Peter was
Converted from the state of Sin Leigh in Loc.
before; but now from a particular Fall. -- -- --

-- Strengthen thy Brethren:

That is, Confirm all the Faithful.

Piscator upon these Words, Strengthen or Confirm thy Brethren, Paraphraseth
thus:

[That Peter ought by his Example to comfort the Weak in grief, and those that
fear; lest the Magnitude and Multitude of their Sins should hinder their
obtaining Remission of God: For, as Peter fell foully, in that he denied his
Lord and Master; yet by flying to Repentance, and the Grace of God in Christ,
had his Sins remitted; so, they that have fallen foully with Peter, may by
flying to Repentance, and the Grace of God in Christ, find the same Mercy, as
Peter did.]

From the Words thus opened, result these five Propositions:

Propos. 1.
That no Christian is so Eminent, but at some time or other may be remarkably
foiled by Satan.

See this made good in Peter, the Basis and Foundation of the Proposition. Was
Peter an ordinary Christian? a weak Believer? a small Instrument in the Hands
of Christ? You know, he was not; yet see this Truth verifyed in Peter, that
strong Believer and eminent Apostle of Jesus Christ.

Propos. 2.
That Satan dares not enter the Lists with any true Believer, unless he has
Commission, or (at least) Permission from God.

Simon, Simon, Satan has desired to have you. -- --

-- But he is fain to ask Leave of God first: For, without Leave, he can do
nothing at all to thee.

Propos. 3.
That Satan in all his Assaults strikes principally at Faith: -- --

-- Satan has desired to have you, tha^ he may sift you as Wheat.

That is; Sift the Faith (which is i^ you) as Wheat.

Propos. 4.
That the Faith of Elect Believe^ is so secure, and that by Virtue of the
Intercession of Christ, as that it shall never totally and finally fail; let
the Devil strike never so hard, or never so often at it. -- --

-- But I have Prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.

Propos. 5.
That those, whom God has done much for, should be much in doing for others.
--

-- When thou art Converted, strengthen thy Brethren. All these in their order:
with the First I shall begin.



CHAP. 1.
I Begin with the first Doctrine, which is this: No Christian is or has been
so Eminent, but at some time or other may be remarkably foiled by Satan.



I shall for the clearing of this Point unto you, speak something by way of
Explication; and that concerning 1. A Christian that is Eminent. 2. Satan. 3.
Our being remarkably foiled by Satan.

SECT. 1.
1. In the first Place, I am to speak something concerning a Christian, that is
Eminent: And

First, By an Eminent Christian, I understand not one of a low Pitch and
Stature; Every Dwarf is not a strong Believer, nor every Shrub a stately Cedar
in Libanon. But, when I speak of an Eminent Christian, I mean not a Babe in
Christ, but a Strong Man in Christ: I mean not not one, whose Stomach is so
weak, that he can digest nothing but Milk is used to denote weak Nourishment,
and is opposed to strong Meat. And thus Milk notes the first Principle of the
Oracles of God, the Alphabet of Christian Religion.
Milk; but one, in respect of whose Seize, can digest strong Meat.

Secondly, By an Eminent Christian, I understand not one of a middle Stature,
indifferent Size or Pitch, one that may be easily matched: But, by a Christian
that is Eminent, I understand one, who excells many, and may be termed a Man of
Men; or, Multis e millibus unus, one of a Thousand, a Nonesuch in his
Generation.

Thirdly, By an Eminent Christian I understand one, who has learnt the hardest
and most difficult Lessons; such as these: Denying himself, taking up the
Cross, following the Lamb where-so-ever he goes, Submissiveness under the most
smarting Rod, and content in all Conditions what-so-ever.

Fourthly, By an Eminent Christian I understand one, who has been in the Fire
of Affliction; gone through many Troubles, wrestled with many Difficulties; and
thereby, has given (...) Specimen of his Eminent Seize.

Fifthly, By an Eminent Christian (...) understand one, who does so excel ^n
some particular Grace or Virtue, (whereby he is, in an Eminent man^er,
distinguished from others) as that God Himself takes special Notice ^hereof;
and for the same, makes ^is Name ever to live. For, though ^he Regenerate have
the Seeds of every Grace in them; yet some one Grace or other may be said to be
^heirs in an Eminent manner. Thus ^braham was Eminent for Faith, Mo^s for
Meekness, and Job for Pati^nce.

SECT. II.
Secondly, I am to speak something ^oncerning Satan, by whom is ^eant the
Devil; who has his Name (...), Englished Satan, from Sitnah in Hebrew, which
signifies Hatred or Spitefulness; as Mr. Ainsworth on the Word observes. Some
say again, That Sitnah comes rather (...) Satan, Adversarius; because the
Devi^ is an Adversary to God, and the So^ of God. Diverse Names and Epithite^
are given unto Satan in Scripture Leigh's Critica Sacra.
whereby much of his Nature and Disposition may be read. Some times he is
called Beelzebus or Bah^ zebus, Muscarum Dominus, Master (...) the Flies: The
Greeks call hi^ ((...)) an Accuser, for his Calumnies and Slanders; and ((...))
the vil One, and so likewise Tempter for he Tempts the Faithful by st^ dying,
how to drive them into Si^ Satan, he is fitly called a Tempt^ for his
Suggestions; a Lion, for h^ Devouring; a Dragon, for his Cr^ Convenieunt rebus
nomina sepe suis. Ovid.
elty; and a Serpent, for his Subtilty As his Names are, so is he; as Fa^
answers to Face, so do Satan's Nam^ answer to his Nature: And indee^ he has
the worst Names, and the worst Nature, of all created Creature^

SECT. III.
In the Third and Last Place I am ^o speak concerning our being re^arkably
foiled by Satan: And now, Some fall as Wood or Cork into the Water, sink at
first, but get up again, being helped by the Hand of Divine Grace. Thus
Believers may fall: Some fall as Lead or Stone, even into the bottom of Hell,
^s Pharoah's Host into the Bottom of the Sea: Thus ^e Wicked fall.
when I say thus, I do not mean, that Eminent Believers may be so foiled ^y
Satan, as never to return again; (...) for, though true Believers may be ^oil'd
by Satan, and that remarka^ly too; yet, if True Believers, they shall rise, and
even foyl Satan, who once foiled them.) But, by being remarkably foiled by
Satan, I mean, Satan's getting such Advantage of them at some time or other, as
it cannot but be very observable and remarkable.

CHAP. II.
WE have finished the Explica^ tory Part of this Doctrine it remains now, that
we prove it And, Can you tell me of any (either in the Old or New Testament)
tha^ have been Famous for any Grace (...) Virtue, but Satan has gotten the
Advantage of them, even as to tho^ Graces and Virtues, which like (...) number
of Glorious Suns did shin^ in them, and very perspicuously showed themselves? I
will give yo^ a few Instances.

SECT. I.
First, I shall begin with Abraham, that Holy Patriarch, that Eminent Believer;
who for his Eminency in Faith is called, The Father of the Faithful: And such
Instances we have Recorded in Scripture, as that the like have not been known:
viz. His going from his Father's House into a Genesis 12.
strange Land, when God bid him. His believing the Genesis 15. 16.
Promise of God, concerning his having of an Heir, notwithstanding his Age, and
Sarah's Barrenness. His being Circumcised when he was Genesis 17. 24.
Ninety and Nine Years old, because God commanded him. His offering up Isaac
his Genesis 22.
Son, his only Son, the Son of the Promise, the Son whom he loved, because God
commanded him: And, Oh! What an Heroic Faith was this? It makes the strongest
in Faith to this Day stand amazed. And yet, notwithstanding these Noble
Exploits of Abraham's Faith, as aforementioned, Satan foiled him in one thing
of a far lesser moment, than any of those Pinches, that God did before bring
him to; viz. In the Case of Abimelech, and Sarah his Wife; the Story you may
read at ^arge, in Genesis 20. 11.

Give me leave to pause a little upon it; for, I look upon the Instance, as a
Lesson very useful for me, and all of us.

What now, Abraham? Could thou forsake thy Father's House, and follow God
into a Strange Land, and could thou not thus always follow him? What now,
Abraham? Could thou believe the Promise of God concerning an Heir, and
could thou not believe so still? What now, Abraham? Wast thou willing to take
away the Life of thy Son, thy only Son, the Son of the Promise, the Son whom
thou loved, steadfastly believeing, that God knew what to do, better than thou;
and yet, did thy Faith stagger, when thy Wife's, and thy own Life did but (as
thou thought) lie at Stake? Poor Man! as if God was not as able to appear for
thee in the Latter, as well as in the Rest?

Lord, what then shall I do? what will become of poor Me! if Satan foiled
Abraham, a Man so strong in Faith? Where must I go? What must I do, who am so
weak in Faith? Whence is it, that Satan does not only assail me, but ruin me,
considering what a Dwarf I am to proper Abraham, and what a Shrub I ^m to such
a Cedar as he? Yea Lord, when I consider the vast Disproportion between me and
others, and that Satan seeks to destroy me, as well as them, I admire, how it
is that I am kept? But when I do on the other hand consider tha^ Power, which
is concerned in the Perseverance of Believers, whether Weak or Strong, I am
then resolved, and by it my Admiration is turned into Praises; seeing clearly
from thence, that a Weak Believer, with thy Assisting Presence, can better
Encounter with Satan, than one under the With-drawings of thy Self can do, that
formerly was Strong, and very Eminent for his Conquests and Victories. All that
remains, O Heavenly Father, is only this; My Work is great, my Strength is
small, Enemies many, and Time short; so that, what I desire of thee, is, To
give me a Taste of Heaven before I come there, and afford me some Draughts of
Comforts out of the Promises; that I may, notwithstanding my Infirmness, and
the number of my Troubles, be still Aspiring after those Pleasures and
Beatitudes, that are Above.

2. A Second Instance is that of Moses, whose Excellency was in Meekness:
Moses, who so Meek as him? Numb. 12. 3.

Now the Man Moses was very Meek, The Judgments of God upon Sinners are in
Terrorem.
above all the Men, which were upon the Face of the Earth.

But read Chapter Twenty of the same Book, and Verse Ten, and there you shall
read another Character of Moses. One would think, that it The Examples of God's
Mercy to Saints, are for Props to our Faith, and Spurs to Holiness.
was impossible, for such a passionate Expression to drop out of Moses's Mouth:
Yea, his Speech was Passionate and Blasphemous, and God was sorely angry with
him for it; and because of that, Moses only had a Sight of Canaan.

3. A Third Instance is that of Job; a Patient Man, a Holy Man, a Perfect Man:
Who more Upright than Job? He had not his Fellow on Earth. See what a Character
God gives him, Job 1. 8.

And the Lord said unto Satan, Have Something we have Recorded of Job's
Impatience, as well as of his Patience. Holy Job (says one) had his Outbursts.
thou considered my Servant Job, that there is none like him in the Earth; a
Perfect and an Upright Man; one that fears God, and escheweth Evil?

And many Combats and Conflicts Job had with Satan, by which we have a great
Proof of his Faith: And the many Miseries, into which he was brought, do very
much demonstrate his Patience. But God lets not this Holy Man go out of the
World without some Token unto us of his Imperfection; and that he was but a
Man, and one whom Satan could easily Conquer, when God did but say, Satan, Job
is in thy Hands.

4. The next Instance, is that of Holy David; a Valiant Man, much David was a
Man (for the most part) Elevated, yet sometimes Dejected.
Endowed with Faith, and his Encomium is, A Man after God's own Heart; and yet
this good Man, David, notwithstanding his having a Promise from God, that he
should be King, (which was Grounds enough for Faith to Act upon) yet David's
Faith did at last so stagger, (in regard of the many and great Difficulties,
that he was to go through) that he feared, lest he should Perish by the Hands
of Saul, forgetting his former Expressions.

Yea, Though I walk through the Valley of the Shadow of Death, I will fear
Psalm. 23. 4.
no Evil: for thou art with me; thy Rod, and thy Staff, they Comfort me.

I will not be afraid of Ten Thousands Psalm. 3. 6.
of People, that set themselves against me.

Many Instances we have also in the New Testament, that may demonstrate the
Truth of this Point: I shall only allude to that of Peter; That no Christian
is, or has been so Eminent, but at some time or other may be remarkably Foiled
by Satan: See this verified in Peter. Who more strong in Faith, Love and Holy
Courage, than Peter? His Name was Simon, which signifies an Obedient Hearer;
and Peter, which signifies Strong and Confident, like a Rock, Invincible. Nay,
so Confident he was, that when our Lord Confidence is good, according to the
Goodness of the Subject, that it Reposeth upon. Wherefore, Confidence in God,
the only Sovereign Good, perfect, solid and immutable, is the best of all, and
the only, that can give Assurance and Content to the Soul: He that has such a
Confidence, is half in Paradise already; he shall not Fall with Peter, but
shall always remain Firm, Safe, Meek, Serene, and too Strong for all his
Enemies. Du Moulin.
told him, He should deny him, he could scarce credit it: Lord, I am ready to
go with thee (says he) both into Prison, and to Death. But, what says our
Savior unto him?

I tell thee Peter, The Cock shall not Crow this Day, before that thou shall
thrice Deny, that thou know me.

So that, Satan was too Strong for Weak Peter: He that thought, his Faith was
strong enough to Encounter with the whole World, most shamefully suffered (a
Maid) a Woman, and the Weaker Vessel to discountenance him. Well might Peter go
out and Weep bitterly, reasoning the Case thus with himself:

Oh! what have I done, miserable Man that I am! How foully have I Fallen, in
Denying the Lord of Life, my Lord!

I a Rebellious Sinner, to Deny Him Some say, That Peter after his sad Fall,
was ever and anon Weeping, and that his Face was even furrowed with continual
Tears
that saved me, and by his Death, Redeemed me! And was I so Wicked, as having
Denied him Once, I must proceed to Deny him Thrice together; and that with
Oaths, Curses, and Bannings! Has my Protestations, and Confident Boldness
come to this Issue! Have I showed my self so Cowardly, and such an Impotent
Weakling, that I could not remain Constant till the Morrow?

This Last Day I protested, If all the World were offended, yet I Clement otes,
That Peter so Repented, that all his Life after, every Night when he heard the
Cock crow, he would fall upon his Knees; and weeping bitterly, would beg Pardon
for his Sin.
would not be offended: Yea, I was ready to lay down my Life for Christ, my
Lord; and yet, lo! before the Cock crew Twice, I had Denied him Three times!

O Perjured Wretch, that I am! How have I Transgrest! and what (...) Shipwreck
have I made of my Faith!

Is this, not to be offended? Is this, ^o give my Life for my Master? Nay, Is
not this to forsake him quite, and to join with the Wicked Jews, ^o Condemn and
Crucify him?

For, What could I have done more Many there are, that can sin with David and
Peter, but cannot Repent with David and Peter.
^heinously against him, unless I had joined with the Wicked, to take his Life
from him? Judas did but Betray him, and Sell him for Money; and I have
voluntarily Denied him, without Hire, and without Money.

The World hereafter, and all Posterities shall take knowledge of my St. Cyril,
upon the Weeping of Peter says, Locum flendo recipit, quem negando perdidit:
He found that in Weeping, which he lost by Denying.
Sin. My Name deserves to go with a Brand upon it, like the Name of Jeroboam:
My Name cannot once be mentioned, but my Sin must likewise be remembered.

And surely, Peter had great cause for going out, and Considering thus with
himself; considering the Greatness of his Sin, he had great cause to Weep as he
did.

For, if Annah had cause to Weep for her Barrenness, much more cause Luther
ingenuously confesses, That before his Conversion he met not with a more
displeasing Word in all his Study of Divinity, than Repent; but afterward he
took delight in the Work, (Paenitens de peccato dolet, and de dolor gaudet.)
had Peter for his then Barrenness of Faith.

If Rachel wept for her Children, because they were not; much more cause had
Peter to Weep for his Graces, because they were not.

If Agar wept, being turned out of her Master's House; should not Peter Mourn
much more, for turning himself out of his Master's House, and Denying (as it
were) his Coat?

If Thamar wept, being Defloured of her Virginity; has not Peter cause to
weep, for being deprived of his Faith and Constancy?

Many Causes, we see, may procure Peter falls dreadfully, but rises by
Repentance sweetly: A Look of Love from Christ melts him into Tears.
Tears; but sure, to Deny Christ, as Peter did, is a Cause, that should even
Dissolve all Eyes into Tears. If ^he Eye be dry at any time, it ought ^n no
case to be dry, when we should ^eep for Sin: And withal take this ^y the way,
No Tears are lost, that ^all from the Eyes of Godly Men; ^or God catches them,
before they can fall to the Ground, and he treasu^eth them up in his Bottle.

Thus you see, Strong Believers, The Saints, though they do sin, yet it is not
(Voluntate plena, sed semi-plena,) with a whole Will, but, as it were, with a
half Will, an unwilling Willingness.
Eminent Christians, Patriarchs, Prophets and Apostles have all been (more or
less) Tempted, Dejected and Foiled by Satan.

But, wherefore is it, that I instance the Falls of all these Worthy Men? not
that any here-from may take Encouragement to Sin; but that they look to
themselves, and be here-by fore warned.

The chief Ends of God's Recording the Falls of his Saints, are these two: The
one is, to keep such, who fall through Weakness and Infirmity, from utter
Desparation: And the other is, That their Falls may be as Multorum disce
Exemplo quae facta ris, qua fugias. Cato.
Landmarks, to warn others that stand, to take heed lest they Fall.

If this Treatise therefore should come into the Hands of those, who are not
Spiritually Wise, and this Pa^ especially be viewed by them; and Satan by the
Help of their Ignorance, causes them to make that use of Good When you hear of
any Man's Slipping, say as Bernard, (Ille hodie, and ego cras.) He fell to Day,
so may I to Morrow.
Men's Failings, which neither God or the Author designed in reckoning them up;
Let him look upon this, which immediately follows: When Satan shall tell thee of
other Men's Sins to draw thee to sin, do thou think on the same Men's Sufferings,
Sorrows, and Repentance, which they have gone through for the same, to keep thee
from Sin: Yea say, Oh my Soul! if thou sinnest with David and Peter, thou must
suffer with David and Peter.

CHAP. III.
THat God's Children are subject to their Slips and Falls, De^ayings and
Declinings, we have al^eady proved.

It will not now be unnecessary or ^mpertinent, if we proceed to give ^ome
Reasons of the Point, or Re^olve this Question:

Why does God permit Satan to ^oyl Believers, and such that are E^inent? The
Solution whereof, shall ^atisfactorily be given in these follow^ng Reasons.

SECT. I.
First, To let us know, that Strong ^elievers are as incapable to wrestle ^ith
Satan, as the Weakest, if God ^oth but withdraw. That some Christians are so
Victorious, is not ^f themselves, or from their own Strength; but by Virtue of
the abundance of A Weak Believer, and a Strong Christ can do all things. Bolton.
Strength, that is in Christ their Savior. Should a Believer always Win, and
never Lose; always Conquer, and never be put to Flight; what would the World
think of him? Surely, he would be Idolized* Mortalis Divum auxilium desiderat
omnis. Ovid.
and esteemed as God among us. An^ therefore it is, that many times Go^ suffers
his Children, even in their greatest Strength and highest Valou^ to Fall, and
that foully; to be Foiled and that Remarkably. When Pa^ had the abundance of
Revelations, then the Messenger of Satan cam^ 2 Cor. 12. 7.
to Buffet him; and when Peter mad^ a great Ostentation of his Faith Love and
Courage, then did Satan Sequitur superbos ultor a tergo Deus. Sen.
Winnow him, and that to some purpose. Oh! God is a Wise God! h^ would not have
Pride to Reign in the Hearts of his Children; therefore, God Resists the
Proud.
he is pleased to take this way, (...) purge it out; and indeed, it is a ra^
way, in as much, as Pride by it (...) wholly expelled, and no Room for Let God
alone, to choose what is Good.
Boasting there is left. God love^ that his Children, while they are i^ this
World should be kept a little (...) awe; and that he does, by giv^g Satan
sometimes Commission, and arming him with Strength, to ^t him for the Battle.
Saints, they do Nunquam bella bonis, nunquam certamina desunt. Hor.
^ometimes Rejoice here on Earth; ^ut they must not Triumph, ^ll they ^ome to
Heaven: They must have ^any sharp Interdum miscentur tristia laetis.
Conflicts, terrible Com^ats, and very great Contests, before Certandum est,
nulli veniunt sine Mart Triumphi. Mar.
the Victory can be ^tained. ^torming and Fighting, Wrestling and Contending,
is the whole Life ^f a Christian here below: There ^s no Rest for the Sole of
his Foot, ^ill he comes to Heaven; and there ^e shall enjoy an Everlasting,
Uni^ersal and Un-interrupted Rest.

Secondly, God permits Satan some^mes to foyl Eminent Christians, ^at they may
be more Eminent. ^his, perhaps, may not easily be ap^rehended by some; that
Christians ^y their Falls should be Vita nostra in hac peregrinatione non
potest esse sine tentatione, quia profectus noster per tentationem fit, nec
sibi quisquam innotescit, nisi sit tentatus; ^ec potest coronari, nisi qui
vicerit; nec potest vincere, nisi qui ^rtaverit; nec potest certare, nisi
inimicum and tentationes ^abuerit. Aug.
Lifted-up; by their Troubles should be Adva^ ced; by their Foiles should be E^
alted; and by their Temptation^ should become more Famous than ev^ Why? this is
no more to be Adm^ red, than to be Believed: The mo^ Violent Satan's Assaults
are, the mo^ Instruction, Comfort and Benefit gracious Heart gains thereby. Wa^
thou Renowned (O Christian!) b^ fore Satan foiled thee, for Faith, Lo^ and Holy
Courage? Why? the^ shall be made more Conspicuou^ than ever before; and more
Famo^ shall thou be in the same, than ev^ thou wast. The burning Fire of S^
tan's Violent Assaults shall Puri^ and Refine all these Holy Grace that God
has Endowed thee wit^ The Devil's End indeed, is thy D^ struction; and that he
might (...) foyl thee, as never to let thee R^ more: His Design is, to make
the^ who wast so Famous, Infamous: (...) would fain stain thy Glory, subve^ thy
Faith, and get the upper-ha^ of thee. But here is thy Comfo^ O Believer! God's
Design, and S^ ^an's Qui no n facit Diaboli voluntatem, in eum non habet
potestatem. Alsted.
Design are Diversa and Oppo^ta; There is no Harmony between ^em: The one
would Ruin thee, ^ut the other will Reform thee: ^he one would Defame thee;
but ^e other will Renown thee, by ^ausing such Graces to Act in thee, ^ther
when or after thou art foiled, ^s have not (perhaps) showed them^lves for many
Years, when thou wast upon thy Legs. The Instance in Re^entance: Perhaps Peter
had not wept ^r a great while, till he Denied his ^ear Savior. We read indeed
of ^s Eminency in Faith and Love, ^fore his Fall; but after his Fall ^e find
Peter as Eminent in True ^epentance, and Godly Sorrow. He ^nt out, and Pliny
writes, That the Tears of the Vine do Cure the Leprosy of the Skin: So the
Tears of the Faithful, grafted into the True Vine Christ Jesus, do Cure the
Leprosy of Sin
Wept bitterly: Herein ^ter was the true Pourtraicture, and ^e lively Anatomy
of a Repentant ^nner: So that, Peter's Fall was his ^sing; and hereby he became
Fa^ous in a Grace, that the Scripture ^as silent in, as to him. And so, ^b
(before Satan troubled him) was ^okt upon (as indeed he was) as a ^oly,
Perfect, Just and Upright Man; so God reports of him, which indeed rendered him
exceeding Famous: and yet we find, that the Holy Ghost (by Job's own Mouth^
tells us, that notwithstanding hi^ Fame before, Impatiency and Mi^ carriages
during the sore Conflic^ that he had, yet after the End (...) his Troubles he
was more Famo^ than before; in that he did b^ Hear of God formerly with the
Hearing of the Ear; But now (says he) mi^ Eye sees thee, Job 42. 5.

Thirdly, God permits Satan to for Eminent Believers, that they may b^ capable
of administering Help, Succor and Comfort to those of their Brethren, whom
Satan has al^ foiled; and therefore, Satan by Fighting fights against himself;
in tha^ there is not so much as one Believing Soul, whom he To pity the
Tempted, is the least we can do.
tempts, but it turns (at last) to the Benefit of tha^ Soul, and others, as
God by his Divine Wisdom does order it. An^ therefore this is laid down, as on^
Reason, why our Lord Jesus wa^ Tempted, that he might succor those who were
Tempted. It is the Property of the Tempted to Succor ^he Tempted: and none can
so well Condole with poor Tempted Souls, as such, who have been Tempted.

Fourthly, God permits Satan to foyl Eminent Believers, that he may more
Eminently Display his Be sure, praise God, when thou receivest Power against
Sin and Temptation, and you shall experience all his Attributes, especially
these concerned in thy Conflicts.
Power, Mercy and Faithfulness, by the raising them up again: His Power, in
Re^king the Tempter; Mercy, in lay^ng no more upon us, than we can ^ear;
Faithfulness, in being as good ^s his Promise, suffering not so much ^s one
Iota's Variation. God pre^ers his own Glory above all things that so ever; and
exceedingly it is ^dvanced in the Ups and Downs of ^oly Saints.

Fifthly and Lastly, God permits Sa^an to foyl Eminent Believers, that ^ey may
the more breath and desire ^o be in Heaven, when they shall be ^oyl'd by Satan
no more.

Were Believers never to be disturbed here below, but to be always at rest;
surely, they would entirely make this World the Plac^ of their Residence:
saying, It is go^ for us to be here: Little Panting and Breathings they would
the^ have after Communion with God i^ Glory; but even satisfy themselv^ with an
Earthly Eternity. But now Satan molesting and disturbing the^ Peace, does put
an Edge to the^ Desires so that they long (a^ exceedingly long) to be
Dissolved, a^ be with Christ in the Heaven of Heavens, where there shall be no
Si^ or Temptation unto Sin, and when the Fiery Darts of Satan cannot rea^ or
come near them. While we a^ here, we are pestered with such Corruptions and
Temptations, as the we are even at our Wits end, knowing not, what to do; yea,
by the^ we are rendered Captives, though u^ willing Captives. Sometimes the are
so violent, that they would fai^ draw our What the Philosopher says of the
Soul, it is in every part; where there is Life, there is the Soul: for the Soul
is the Life. So, whatever is in us, comes from us, or ^s acted by us, is
sinful: If Christ' s Love is not gr^ter than our Lusts, his Mercy, than our
Iniquity, we she inevitably perish.
Souls unto the Devi^ had not our sweet Savior Mercy on us; and did not he
furnish us with Strength and Skill, we should even be slain by the Hands of
Satan, and thousands of Corruptions, that do compass us about. And so it
pleases God, that it should be, he would not have us to be of this World,
because the Captain of our Salvation, and Eldest Brother was not: Because,
Heaven is our Country, thence was our Descent, and thither-wards we should
steer our Course. Travelers Coelum non animum mutat, qui trans mare currit.
Hor.
Change their Climate, but not their Disposition. Let them come in what Place
so-ever, they have still a Lingering Mind Homewards: And so it is (more or
less) with every true Heaven-Born Child of God. And why does God permit us
sometime to be foiled by Temptations and Corruptions, but that our Desires
might be whetted, and made more acute and sharp, in Aspiring after those
Transcendent Pleasures and Beatitudes Above?

CHAP. IV.
COntaining part of the Application of the Point.

SECT. I.
Is it so, That no Christian has been so Eminent, but at some time Deduct. 1.
or other may be remarkably foiled by Satan? Then from hence I do infer, That
Satan is a Christian's That Satan is our Enemy is evident, if we do but
consider, that he wounds us with these several Darts of 1. Diffidence. 2.
Concupiscence. 3. Avarice. 4. Pride. 5. Luxury.
Enemy.

Who-ever foyls us in very good earnest, is our Enemy. But Satan foyls us in
very good earnest:

Ergo, He is our Enemy.

The Major, none will deny; The Minor, by the Experiences of Saints is
Confirmed: And the Conclusion naturally flows from the Premises.

And truly, Sirs, if Satan is our Enemy (as indeed he is) we had need stand off
and beware. Believers, this Message I have to bring unto you this Day; Satan is
your Enemy; and, I hope, none of you will deny it; or else I would call back
the word Believers again: Because, assured I am, that none so much as Believers
can speak of Satan's Enmity, and by Experience seal to this Truth. Satan indeed
is our Enemy: And that ye may understand, what a kind of Enemy it is, that you
have to Encounter; I shall endeavor to unmask him in Three things, (Two
especially) that do reside in Satan, as their proper Seat: 1. Subtilty. 2.
Malice. 3. Potency.

First, Satan is not only Satan is a Subtle Enemy.
Subtle, but Subtilty it self; Subtilty in the Abstract: Yea, this Corrupt
Quality is in the Devil formally, and casually. Subtilty is in Satan, as the
Subject of it: He is the God of it. Subtilty is in Satan, as the Fountain of
it: As he is the God of it, so he is the Giver of it; and therefore, who-ever
learns Subtle Persons like the Devil, who is a subtle Enemy. For he has bin
learning his Policies ever since he discarded himself from Heaven.
Subtilty, learns (...) of the Devil. Let none therefo^ brag of their Subtilty,
and corrup^ Wit; for the more they have of tha^ the more they are like the Dev^
their Father, and his Children the^ are, having his Image imprinted o^ them.
Satan is a Subtle Adversary For his Policy and Craft it is, tha^ he is called a
Serpent; and for hi^ long experienced Policy and Craft i^ is, that he is called
an Old Serpen^ Rev. 12. 9.
Satan was too Crafty for Man, i^ the State of Perfection; much more in the
State of Depravation: An^ what shall I say? A Christian is more endangered by
Satan's Subtilty, tha^ any thing else. It is reported of Julian, That by his
Craft he drew more from the Faith, than all his persecuting Predecessors could
do by their Cruelty: So, Satan does more hurt in his The Devil (says one) is
not always a Liar, but he is always a Deceiver.
Sheeps-Skin, than by Roaring like a Lion. And because of this, I shall the
longer dwell on this same Head, viz. Satan's Subtilty; and I shall consider it
in two main things, that he principally designs upon Believers. The First is,
Temp^ing them to a Sinful Licentiousness; and the Second is, Tempting them unto
a Sinful Despair. First, I shall speak of Satan's Tempting Believers unto a
sinful Licentiousness: And his Subtilty in carrying-on of his Design, does
show it self in these three things: 1. In the Seasons of Temptations: 2. In the
Temptations themselves: 3. In the Methods of his Temptations.

SECT. II.
First, Satan shows his exceeding great Subtilty, in the time that he Tempts:
All Seasons please not Satan; but so Politic he is, that he chooses those
Seasons that may prove most Apta ferunt magnam tempora rebus opem. Mant.
Advantageous unto him. There Is Time, and the Tempestivity of Time: Now, it is
the A fic Season much advantages any Affair.
Tempestivity of Time (we know) that gives the greatest Facility and Dispatch
unto any Business. There Is Time, and the Opportunity of Time; But Satan's Craft
appears, in choosing this Opportunity of Time; which, (...) diligently made use
of, he knows* that may Accidit in puncto, quod non speratur in anno.
happen then, which may never again. Unto every thing (sait^ the Wise Man)
there is a Season, Eccles. 3. 1. Christ can speak a Wor^ in Season; and Satan
(says one) ca^ Mr. Gurnal.
Tempt in Season.

And now, there are five Advantageous Seasons, that Satan makes use of, in
tempting Believers unto a sinful Licentiousness: And the First is, Satan has
great Advantage in tempting the Elect, before their Faith in Christ.
Before Believers come to be Believers. And now, this is the most Advantageous
Time of all; in that he has an old sinful Nature to work upon, without the
least Opposition being held unto him.

Nature not Refined, does contribute much to Satan's Help; it being (as I may
term it) Matter fitted for all his Temptations to be workt upon. Is not Man
Corrupt all over, even from Top to A capite ad calcem.
Toe: But especially, in the There are five Faculties of the Soul. 1.
Understanding. 2. Memory. 3. Will. 4. Affection. 5. Conscience. All which are
corrupt; yea, even them of Elect Believers before Conversion; during till which
time, is Satan's Season of Tempting them into a sinful Licentiousness: and a
very Advantageous Season it is, in as much as all the aforesaid Faculties are
capable of any Work, that the Devil shall employ them about.
Five Faculties of the Soul. All which do side with the Devil: So that, much
Advantage the Devil gets, before Elect Believers are effectually Called. What
is the Understanding, but the first Door, that the Devil knocks at? Do not the
Conceptions of Sin begin in the Understanding? Do not the Seeds of Error and
Heresy grow up naturally in it, without any Teacher? Is not the Memory dull
and slippery? Do we not forget all good things, that we should remember? and do
we not with readiness remember, that which we should not, retaining Errors and
Vanities (as Tales and Plays) much more than Godly Matters? Is not the Will
the Chair of Lust, which should be the Throne of Grace? What an Impotency is
there in it, to will any thing that is Good? and, How is it enslaved to Sin and
Satan, so that it only desires and lusts after that which is Evil? And are
not the Affections also Corrupted, such as Love and Hatred, Joy and Sorrow,
Hope and Fear, Anger and Desire, etc? Are not all these subject to Excess, and
being settled on wrong Objects? Lastly, Is not the Conscience Corrupt also, very
much distempered and defiled, both in giving Directions in Things to be done,
and in giving Judgment upon Things done? Does it not oftentimes become a Blind
Guide, forbidding to do a thing, which God allows, and commanding to do
things which God hates, 1 Cor. 8. 7. Col. 2. 21. Ioh. 16. 2? All which things
well pensitated and considered, it will be very obvious, that the time of Elect
Believers Unconverted Estate is an Advantageous Season for Satan to work in.

Secondly, The time of a Believer's God's Children sometimes advanced in this
World.
High Estate, is another Advantageous Season, that Satan makes use of in
Tempting. It often falls providentially out, that when Elect Believers are
called, God exalts them not only above others in the Church, but also above
others in the State; as that they are thereby rendered very Capable of doing
extraordinary Service for God either way. Then Satan thinks it high Time to be
pulling them down, either by putting them ^ut of their Authority, or driving
them into some gross Enormity or ^ther; whereby their former Glory and Eminency
in Holiness, and true Sanctity may be stained and diminished. This is evident
in that of Joseph, who when he was just upon his Preferment, and being
Advanced, Satan thence conjecturing, what use ^e would be in such a Place,
assaults him with his Mistress: Other like Instances we also have, as David and
Solomon.

Thirdly, The time of Christian's The Condition of God's Children may sometimes
be very low.
Low Estate as well as his High Estate, is a Season of Satan's Tempting; for he
does (as I told you before) forecast for the Time of Man's greatest Weakness,
and thereto he reserves his strongest Assaults. Now, a Man is most Weak, when
he is under any Trouble either in Mind or Body; and then is the time, that
Satan works in: When a Deluge of Afflictions is let-in upon a Believer. When
Deep calls unto Deep at the Noise of thy Water-Spouts: all the Psalm. 42. 7.
Waves and thy Billows are gone ove^ me. And is not this evidenced in ou^
Savior, who when he was in the Wilderness, and began to be Hungry, the Devil
(supposing him the^ to be Weak for want of Food) tempts him.

Fourthly, A Time of This present Age is too Licentious.
Licentiousness, is another Advantageous Season, that Satan makes use of to
temp^ in: He knows, that then is the only Season to spread Snares of those kind
abroad. The Season, in which Sin is most Tolerated, Satan knows, is the Time,
in which he must work: When and where Sin is Tolerated, then and there Satan
knows, he can best plead and argue it out with the Soul. Now (says Satan)
Godliness is frowned, but Ungodliness is smiled upon: Be you therefore Ungodly,
that the World may look pleasant on you; but not Godly, because few or none
countenance it.

Fifthly and Lastly, The Time in which a Christian is most Negligent, ^s
another Advantageous Season, that ^atan makes use of to Tempt in. While the Men
Vigilate and Orate should be the Motto of every Christian.
slept, the Envious Man came and Sowed Tares, Matthew. ^3. 25. When all are
secure, then ^he Thief breaks in; and when Chri^tians are off their Watch, and
lets down their Care, then Satan Tempts. Sirs, whilst you are sleepy and
prayerless, stretching your selves on a Bed of Ease, you even lay a Cushion for
Satan to lie down by you: Temp^ations do thereby enter into you, and ye into
Temptations.

SECT. III.
Secondly, Satan shows his exceeding great Subtilty in the Temptations
themselves, being mixed with Policy and Craft in the highest Degree. Satan's
Temptations are his Many are the Machinations and Stratagems of Satan.
Stratagems; and his Stratagems are Stratagems indeed. Now, the Devil's
Temptations are several; chiefly these: 1. To Atheism. 2. Security. 3. Love of
the World. 4. Hypocrisy. 5. A False Faith.

SECT. IV.
I shall now show somewhat o^ Satan's Subtilty in Tempting to Atheism; and
what Article is there o^ our Faith, but Satan many time^ makes poor Souls call
into Question^ I might insist on every one of them* and so show you, how it is,
that h^ Cavils at them; but I shall only speak of the Chief, viz. The Many
through the Prevalency of Temptations have called the Truth of God's Essence
into question; yea (with Pharaoh) they have said, Who is the Lord, Exodus 5. 2?
and with the Fool, that said in his Heart, There is no God. Psalm. 14. 1. [The
Fool has said in his Heart, There is no God.]

It is rather an Option, than an Opinion; that is (fai^ Austin) He could be
content, there were None. [In his Heart,] that is, None dare speak it, though
he may think it. [The Fool.] Every wicked Man is a Fool.

Haec Phrasis hunc sensum admittere potest: Impius sibi hoe persuadere conatur,
aut sibi aliter tamen sentienti, and convicto satis imponere satagit, Non esse
Numen, verum hoc ipsum nequit. 2. Impius dicit in cord suo, id est, ita secum
tacit loquutus est Impius, Non est Deus, vel, Utinam non esset Deus. In cord
dicere, nihil aliud significat, quam tacit secum contendere, and quasi
murmurando quippiam proferre. Nisi enim ea Phrasis ita acciperetur, non
potuisset Esaui cogitatio, si tantum cordis fuisset, non oris, citra peculiarem
Revelationem Rebeccae innotuisse. 3. Impius dicit in cord suo, non est Deus,
id est, Deus non est Objectum cogitatio^um ejus, neque circa Divina solicitus
est, prophanis ^ntentus; praesertim cum ita vivat, ac si non esset Deus, ac
nullo sensu, aut reverentia Numinis tangeretur. Pauli Voe^ii Theolog. Naturalis
Reformata, c. 2.


Being of a God, and so show you, what Satan has against this Primordial
Verity; and also furnish you with Answers sufficient to stop the Mouth of this
Roaring Lion; and prop up thy Faith in this Point.

The First pretended Ground of Atheism is this:
What Reason (says the Devil) is there for thee to believe One, whom thou or
no Body did ever see? Thou did never The Insivibility of God brought as an
Argument (by Satan) against his Existence.
see God, neither know thou any, that did see Him; and yet, notwithstanding
this, what a Talk is there of this supposed Deity? We must Walk with Him, we
must not Offend Him: but, How can we Walk with one, we see not; and Offend one,
who is not?

Answ.
What of all this (may the Soul answer?) Because I see Deus est, quicquid
vides, and Deus est, quicquid non vides.
not the Wind, is there no Wind? and because (...) see not my Soul, have I not
one? What absurd Ratiocination is this? More-over; I see God (says the Soul,)
which positively Denies, what yo^ have Asserted: for do I not see him (though
not as he is) in the Work^ of Creation and Providence? Do no^ the Works of God
show, that ther^ The Foundations of all Religion lie in Two things, That there
is a God, who Rules the World; and, That the Souls of Men are capable of
subsisting after Death: So that, if these things be not supposed, as most
agreeable to Human Reason, we cannot imagine, upon what Grounds Mankind should
embrace any way of Religion at all. For, if there be not a God, whom I am to
serve, and if I have not a Soul of an Immortal Nature, there can be no
sufficient Obligation to Religion, nor Motive inducing to it: Doctor Prideaux,
in his Eighth Lecture, De Salute Ethnicorum; and Doctor Stillingfleet's
Origines Sacrae. Caput est primum Divinae legis, ipsum Deum nosse. Lactantius.
is a God, Rom 1. 20? When we see a stately House, although we see not the Man
that Built it, although also we know not the Time, when it was Built; yet
conclude n^ otherwise we can, but that some Wise Artificier had a hand in it:
The House surely (say we) did not Buil^ it self. And therefore, when we take a
View of the Theater of Heaven and Earth, we conclude, That surely the Finger of
God has been there. Is not every Creature in Heaven and Earth a loud Preacher
of this Everlasting Truth? And does not Man, the Microcosm or Little World,
show, that there is a God? Could any make a Man, but One Wiser and Greater than
Man? Who taught the Birds to Build their Nests, and the Bees to make a
Commonwealth? What Power of Man or Angels can make one Pile of Grass, or put
Life into the least Fly, if once Dead? All which demonstrates the Being of a
God. But because this Infinite Being cannot be demonstrated unto Sense,
therefore the Atheist is so Impudent as he is; because he cannot Digito
monstrari and dicier, hic est, Point at him with our Fingers, etc. Is not this
Irrational, that Sense should be made the only Umpire of all kinds of Beings?
Must not all Intellectual Beings be proscribed out of the Order of Nature,
because they cannot pass the Scrutiny of Sense? Then will not Colors (by the
same Reason) be dashed out, because they cannot be heard? all Noises silenced,
because they cannot be seen?

The Second pretended Ground of Atheism is this:
Behold (says the Devil!) whether this can stand together; viz. The Trinity
cavilled at, and brought as an Argument (by Satan) to prove, that God is not.
Three Persons Distinct in Subsistence, but One in Substance, Being or Essence;
and not divided into Diverse Essences, Natures or Parts: This is against Reason;
and though it is, yet thou must believe it, if thou believe, that God is.

Answ.
This (the Soul may say) is not against Reason, but it is above Reason. We
cannot by the Light of Nature (says Esquire Leigh's Treatise of Divinity: The
Mystery of the Trinity (after a sort) shaddowed out by Four Resemblances.
one) know the Mystery of the Trinity, nor the Incarnation of Jesus Christ. But
when by Faith we receive this Doctrine, we may illustrate it by Reason. As the
Sun begets his own Beams, and from thence proceeds Light and Heat; and yet
there is none of them before another, otherwise than in respect of Order and
Relation: that is to say, That the Beams are begotten See Bishop Usher his Body
of Divinity. A Person is a distinct Subsistence of the whole Godhead.
of the Body of the Sun; and the Light and Heat proceeds from both. So
likewise, from one Flame of Fire proceed both Light and Heat; and yet but one
Fire. Again, In Waters there is the Wellhead, and the Spring boiling out of
it, and the Streams flowing from them both; Nam plura infinita esse nequeunt,
quia sic forent plura summa and prima. Aug. In this Mystery there is Alius and
Alius, Another and Another: but not, Aliud and Aliud, Another thing, and
Another thing.

The Doctrine of the Trinity is, That there are Three Persons in one and the
same Substance, Nature and Essence. What a Person in this Sense is, I have
showed you already: God the Father, is the First Person; God the Son, is the
Second Person; God the Holy Spirit, is the Third Person. All these are
Coequal, Coeternal and Co-essential; for though they are Distinguished, yet
not in their Natures and Being, but in their Names, Orders and Actions. And
that there is a Unity in Trinity, viz. Three Persons, yet One in Substance,
Nature and Essence, we must believe, let Reason suggest what it will; (though
the same may be illustrated by Reason, as above) because Scripture, which is
Infallible, does so declare: 1. See the Old Testament, where the Trinity
speaks in the Plural Number:

And God said, Let us make Man in our Image after our Likeness, Genesis 1. 26.
Isa. 6. 3. The Angels i^ respect of the Three Persons do cry three times, Holy,
Holy, Holy!

And so in the New Testament this Doctrine is mighty clear, as Matthew. 3. 16,
17. where the Father, the First Person of the Trinity, is Heard and Seen; so
that there is one. The Holy Ghost in the Shape of a Dove is Seen, and not
Heard; there is another: And then Jesus Christ in his Assumed Nature is both
Seen and Heard: So that this is good, Qui nescis Trinitatem, ito ad Jordanem.
More-over, we are Baptized in the Name of the Father, Son and Holy Ghost,
Matthew. 28. 19. Lastly, the 2 Cor. 13. 14. The Grace of our Lord Jesus Christ,
and the Love of God, and the Communion of the Holy Ghost be with you All.

Those Scriptures may suffice to prove, That there are Three Persons in the
Divine Essence. And now, that these Three are One, I prove from those two
Places in Scripture: The one is in the Old Testament, and the other is in the
New.

Deuteronomy. 6. 4. Hearken, O Israel; the Lord our God is One Lord: In the Hebrew
thus:

(...): Jehovah Elohenu Jehovah Echad. It signifies thus much; That the First
Jehovah, is God the Father; the Second Word Elohenu, our God, is God the Son;
the Third Word Jehovah, is God the Holy Ghost; and the Fourth Word Echad, that
is One, is to show the Unity of Essence in the Plurality of Persons.

The Jews did own the Doctrine of the Trinity, though now they deny it; for
their Ancient Rabbis did prove the Trinity out of the Old Testament; and Rabbi
Simeon, the Son of Johai, alleged this same aforementioned place for the
Proof thereof. And many other Passages might be taken out of the Writings of
the Ancient Rabbis to confirm this Truth; but this is already performed by
Galatinus in his Books De Arcanis Catholicae Veritatis.

The Place in the New Testament is this, which may serve for all; 1 John 5. 7.
For there are Three, that bear Record in Heaven, the Father, the Word, and the
Holy Ghost: and these Three are One.

To conclude; Singula sunt in singulis, and omnia in singulis, and singula in
Omnibus, and Unum omnia. Aug. lib. 6. De Trin. Cap. ult.

O Deus est indivise Unus in Trinitate, and inconfuse Trinus in Unitate. Justin.

Who can (says Mr. Watson, in his late Treatise of Self-denial) with the
Plum-line of Reason fathom the Trinity, which is Puteus profundus, a Deep Well.


and all these are but one Water. And so there are Three Persons in One
Godhead; yet but One God. Lastly, In Man the Understanding comes from the
Soul, and the Will from both.

The Third pretended Ground of Atheism is this:
Nay, this is not all (says the Evil One,) there is another Absurdity in your
Deity; and that is this: If thou believe, that there is a God; thou must
believe also, that he is from Eternity and to Eternity, (i. e.) One who has
neither It Is here to be noted, That Satan labors to argue from the
Wonderfulness of God's Attribute, his Nonexistence, or at leastwise, that God
is not so Wonderful, as he is Revealed in Scripture to be; and that you should
not conceive of God aright.
Beginning nor Ending: This is owned by all that profess your Deity, viz.
Eternity, as that which necessarily pertains unto Him, as God; which to me is
so strange, wonderful, and above Reason, as that I cannot but call it in
question, and therefore necessarily the Being, whereof it is predicated. What
say thou (O Soul!) concerning this?

Answ.
To this the Soul may reply: Avoid Satan! for who art thou, that chargest the
Holy One with Folly, and the Great God of Heaven and Earth with Absurdity? Know
therefore, that to believe what thou say, is the greatest Folly in the
World; Because thou art a Liar, and the Truth is not in thee. But to believe,
that God is Eternal, is the greatest Reason in the World; because He who is God
is Truth it self; and that he is Eternal, is as True as himself. Eternity is a
Being without Limitation of Time: Time is the Continuance of Things past,
present and to come. All Time has a Beginning, a Vicissitude, and an End, or
may have; but God's Essence is bounded by none of these Hedges.
Truth it self, has said so; 1 Timothy 1. 17. Isa. 41. 4. and 44. 6. Psalm. 90. 2.
Rev. 6. 11.

The Fourth pretended Ground of Atheism is this:
Oh! (says Satan) this is not all: For, if thou believe, that there is a
God; thou must then believe, that he is God's Immutability cavilled at.
Unchangeable. In Contradicting of which, there needs no other Instances than
these which follow, wherein his Changeableness does very much appear.

Instance I.
That God is Changeable (says the Devil) may appear, in that he was made
Christ's Incarnation cavilled at.
Man.

Confutation.
This the Soul may Confute by answering Satan after this manner: That God
became Man, was not by any Conversion or Deus est Immutabilis, mutans omnia,
nunquam novus, nunquam vetus. Aug.
Change of the Divinity, but by the Assumption o^ the Humanity.

Instance II.
If God alters not his Mind, why (...) he said to Repent.

Confutation.
Repentance is Attributed to God in Scripture; but not to signify any Mutation
or Change in his Nature, only in his Actions. God is said to Deus poenitere
dicitur, quando mutat factum. Pet. Mar.
Repent, not because he Changes; but because he does, as we do, when we
Repent. And now, what is it that we do, when we Repent? Why? we cease to do,
what we did; and destroy, what we formerly made. And upon this score God is
said to Repent: not that he does so Repent, as to Change his Mind; but because
he alters his Deus mutat opera, non mutat consilium. Aug. Repentance in God
is only to signify unto us his high Displeasure; because when we Repent, we are
highly displeased at a thing.
Works, and thereby does but fulfill, what he long ago determined.

Instance III.
There are many things Threatened and Promised by God in his Word, that do never
come to pass; which cannot be any otherwise, but a very great Impeachment to
his Unchangeableness.

Confutation.
The Threatenings and Promises of God considered, as not Absolute, but
Conditional; the Condition whereof being answered, the Non-Accomplishment or
Execution of the same does not make any Deus mutat sententiam, sed non
Decretum, says Profound Bradwardine, in his Book De Causa Dei.
Change in God. And thus you see these Instances that Satan has brought,
whereby to prove God's Mutability, made Insignificant. He, who would see more
of God's Unchangeableness Proved, Cleared and Opened, let him peruse Excellent
Mr. Pearces Book, Entitled, A Beam of Divine Glory.

The Fifth pretended Ground of Atheism is this:
This is not all (says Satan;) for if you believe, that there is a God; you
must also believe him to be God's Ubiquity cavilled at.
Omnipresent, that is, Every where at once: And how can it be?

Answ.
That there is a General Empedocles the Philosopher said well, That God is a
Circle, whose Center is every where.
Presence of God, nothing is more evident. Whither shall I flee from thy
Presence, says David, Psalm. 139. 7. Nothing is impossible with God; and
therefore, that he is Essentially Nusquam est Deus, and Ubique est, says
Chrysostom in Coll. 2. Hom. 5. God is Repletively every where, though
In^lusively no where. Deus intimior nobis intimo nostro, God is nearer to us,
than we are to our selves, said a poor Heathen. God is Higher than the Heaven,
Deeper than Hell, Broader than the Earth, and more Diffuse than the Sea. Bern.
Every where, is not Impossible: Ier. 23. 24. Can any hide himself in secret
Places, that I should not see him, says the Lord? Do not I fill Heaven and
Earth, says the Lord. Prove. 15. 3. The Eyes of ^he Lord are in Every Place,
beholding ^he Evil and the Good.

These with many others, do make ^od's Omnipresence and Omniscience very
Conspicuous.

The Sixth and Last pretended Ground of Atheism is this.
This is not all (says Satan:) for if ^ou believe, there is a God; you must
al^o believe him to be God's Omnipotency cavill'd at.
Omnipotent, (i. e.) One, who can do all things, ^ither with Means, without
Means, or ^ontrary to Means, and against all Op^osition what-so-ever: And do
you think, there is any Existing so Almighty? Why is it then, that the Interest
of God (which you call it) is so opposed in the World, as it is.

Answ.
To which the Soul may Answer: That God is Of all the Attributes of God this
only is mentioned in the Creed, I Believe in God, the Father Almighty; because
our Faith is specially to be fixed on the Power of God and Christ.
Almighty, I do firmly Believe; and that he can do Things either with Means,
without, or contrary to Means, is a Verity, that (...) do not at all question.
And tha^ God's Interest in the World is oftentimes opposed, is not, but that he
ca^ Advance his own Interest witho^ Opposition; but he permits it to be
opposed, that the Glory of his Omnipotency and Wisdom, in effecting such and
such things (notwithstanding Opposition) may shine forth more Perspicuously.
And thus I have give^ you a Sight of the Wiles of Satan, especially those that
he makes use o^ in Tempting to Atheism; abusing 1. The Invisibility of God. 2.
The Trinity of Persons in One Divine Essence, 3. Several of his Incommunicable
Attributes.

SECT. V.
I have already showed something of Satan's Subtilty in Tempting unto Atheism:
I now come to speak of Satan's Subtilty in his Temptations un^o Security; being
such as follow:

Temptation I.
One way that Satan has to make ^oor Souls Secure, is by presenting God unto
them, as a God only of Mercy. So Subtle is the Devil, that Proteus-and
Chamelion-like he can turn himself into any Shape or Color; rather than fail,
he will (though he cannot endure the Light) Turn himself into an Angel of
Light; and has got the knack and faculty of speaking Scripture to deceive. Mr.
Ven^ing.
O! (says the Devil) why ^rt thou so concerned about thy Salva^ion? Do thou
think, God that Made ^hee, will be so Cruel to Damn thee? and He who Formed
thee, will not Save ^hee? Alas! God is more ready to Pardon, than to Punish!
Mercy is his ^areling Attribute; but Judgment is his Strange Work! And thus
Satan does to make Souls Careless and Fearless; Careless of their Salvation,
and Fearless of their Damnation.

Reply.
To Repel this Temptation, must be by considering, that as God is Merciful, so
he is Just: Just in himself, and so will Punish all Sin; Merciful in the Face
of Christ, and so will Punish no Sin, he having in our stead born the
Punishment: A Just God toward an hard-Hearted Sinner; a Merciful God toward
an Humble Sinner. God is not all Mercy, and no Justice; nor all Justice, and no
Mercy: Submit to him, his Mercy embraces thee; Resist him, his Justice pursues
thee. Do not the Devils themselves, and all the Howling Reprobates in Hell
show, that God is Just? Is not Hell and Sodom The Scriptures are a Prospective-
Glass of God's Justice, as well as of his Mercy.
a Monument of God's Justice? And are not all the Crosses, Losses, Sicknesses
and Diseases that be in the World, Tokens of God's Displeasures? Besides, Does
not the pouring-out of his Wrath upon Jesus Christ, his dearly Beloved Son,
show, that our God is a Just Judge? More-over, to argue from Grace to Sin, from
Love to Lust, from Mercy to Iniquity, from Immunity to Impiety, is the Dialect
of Hell, and the Sophistry of the Prince of Darkness: To sin (I say) because
Grace abounds, is the Devil's Logic; and who-so-ever uses such kind of
Language, you may write, THIS SOUL IS LOST. In fine, The Apostle, Romans 12. 1.
and the Saints all a-long have made God's If God's Mercy is not a Lodestone to
draw thee to Him, it will prove a Millstone to sink thee into Hell.
Mercy the greatest Motive to Repentance.

Temptation II.
Another way that the Devil makes use of to make poor Souls Secure, is by
telling them; That all the World are Sinners, as well as them, and they may
make as good a Shift as the rest. What if you do go to Hell? You shall not go I
have heard of some that have said, They did not much care whether they went to
Hell, so that they had Company with them: But surely, such do not consider,
that there shall be no Bowls of Wine in Hell. Sir Francis Bacon, in his History
of Henry the Seventh, tells us, That it was a Common Word with the Lord Cords,
(who was Profane, Popish and Atheistical) That he could be content to lie
Seven Years in Hell, so he might win Calice from the English. This Popish Lord
was worse than the Devil; for he acknowledges Four Articles of our Faith,
Matthew. 8. 29. And And behold, they cried out, What have we to do with thee,
Jesus, thou Son of God? Art thou come hither to destroy us before the Time?
From whence observe, 1. God is acknowledged. 2. Christ. 3. The Day of
Judgment. 4. That they shall be Tormented then. They who scorn Hell and the
Day of Judgment, are worse than Devils.
alone; you shall have others with you.

Reply.
Here is Audacity and Absurdity: One would think, that the Devil should be
ashamed to argue thus, considering what a Scholar he is in Logic, Philosophy
and School Divinity; and yet by Raciocination of this kind does he prevail upon
dark Souls. Such kind of Reason (if it may be called Reason) in effect is thus
much:

Some have Cut their Throats, I must do it also; because in it I shall do no
more, than what others have done before me. A great Multitude of People are
resolved to run into the River of Thames, to see, how they can tread Water, and
Dance upon it; therefore I must do the like, because with me I shall have
Company; though in the Close, I shall lose my Life. I Will leave you to apply it.

Temptation III.
The next thing that Satan does to make poor Souls secure, is by telling them,
That Christ is a The Universal Point, the Devil likes.
Savior; and what, though they do sin, Christ has Died, and is Risen again for
their Justification.

Reply.
It is true, Christ is a Savior; but if He is not Condemnat me vita mea, sed
nomen Jesu salvavit me; O bone Jesu, sis etiam mihi Jesus. Gerhard. Meditat.
My Savior (may the Soul say) what does this argue for me? Christ has Dyed;
but if I cannot believe, his Death and Sufferings will be of little Advantage
unto me: He is Offered; but if I do not Receive Him, I shall not be Saved.
There may be Virtue enough in a Plaster to Heal a Sore; but if it be not
Applied, it will not Heal my Sore: So, there is Virtue enough in Christ to Wash
and Cleanse; but if it be not Applied to my Soul by Faith in Christ saves us.
Faith, it will not Wash or Cleanse me.

Temptation IV.
Surely (says Satan) God loves thee, or else he would not Bless thee in thy
Outward Estate; as in thy Corn, Children, Calling and Friends.

Reply.
Seriously consider (O Soul!) that God's Love is Twofold, Common and Special:
God's The whole Turkish Empire is nothing else, but a Crust cast by our Father
to his Dogs; and it is all they are likely to have: Let them make themselves
merry with it, says Luther.
Common Love, I reckon, is that which all partake of, viz. Good Men, and Bad
Men. Now, for any to have a great Estate, and to Prosper therein, together with
his Wife and Children, is that which is common to all, some only excepted. Now,
it is not Common Favor, but Special Favor, that must save thee, and a Token
or Evidence of it will Comfort thee: but this thy Gregory being advanced to
Places of great Preferment, professed, that he was exceedingly terrified with
the Speech of Abraham to Dives, Luke 16. 25. Son Remember, thou in thy
Lifetime receivedst thy good things.
Prosperity in the World is not; being that which is more ordinary to those who
go to Hell, than such who go to Heaven: And therefore, let not the Children of
God grudge and repine at the Wicked Man's Prosperity; because all the Wicked
shall have Misery enough Hereafter, for the little present Nimis delicatus es
Christian, qui voluptatem hoc seculo concupiscis. Tertullian.
Pleasure, that they enjoy Here. They that have their Heaven Here, are in
danger to lose it Here-after: God seldom gives his Children Heaven and Earth
too. Nihil infelicius felicitate peccantium, says St. Augustine; The Wicked
Man's Felicity is great Infelicity. Doubtless hence it was, that David prayed:
Deliver me from the Wicked, who have their Portion in this Life only, Psalm. 17.
14.

Nothing is so great a Sign of God's Curse, as the Prosperity of the The
Prosperous Estate of the Wicked is Matter rather of Pity, than Envy. Let Rich
Men read these Scriptures, Hos. 13. 11. Psalm. 37. Psalm. 78. 30, 31. Prove. 1.
32. Luke 12. 16. ^o the 22. Eccles. 5. 12. 13.
Wicked: The Lord will proportion Torment to all the Pleasure the Wicked have
had. Revel. 18. 7. How much She has lived Deliciously, so much Torment and
Sorrow give Her.

That Story of the Roman, who was by the Court-Marshal Condemned to Dye for
breaking his Rank to steal a Bunch of Grapes, is pregnant to our purpose: For,
as he was going to Execution, some of the Soldiers envyed him, that he had
Grapes, and they had none; Says he, Do you envy me for my Grapes? I must pay
dear for them. So, Wicked Men shall pay dear for their great Grandieur,
Dignities and Offices. How art thou fallen from Heaven, O Lucifer, Son of the
Morning! Isa. 14. 12.

Temptation V.
The Thief on the Cross, (says Satan) though a Sinner during his whole Life;
yet Repenting, was saved: So, (says Satan) if thou can but Repent or Reform
an Hour before thou Die, doubt not, but God will have Mercy on thee.

Reply.
It is true, the Thief Repenting and Believing in Christ, was saved at the very
Last; But was not this See Mr. Smith's Admirable Convert. page 80.
Miraculous? Did not Christ now upon a special Occasion, to show the Effect of
his Blood, the Power of his Passion, and to demonstrate unto the World his
Deity, even now at his lowest Ebb of Humiliation, show his Power in the
Conversion of the Thief? Must this Extra-ordinary Example now be propounded, as
a President for ever, that was but once Miraculous, and Wrought upon special
Occasion? But further consider,

First, It is not Impossible, but that this was the First Time of the Call of
this poor Thief, that he never heard Christ's Sermon before, or had any Outward
Call before this time: and so his Sins being of Ignorance, might excuse in
part, as Paul speaks of his; The Lord showed Mercy, because I did them
Ignorantly, 1 Timothy 1. 13. But now thou can not plead this Ignorance,
in-as-much as thou have lived under the Gospel, and have had an Outward Call by
the Preaching of the same.

Secondly, This Example of the Penitent Thief, as it was Extraordinary, so we
see it God Saved one at the last, that none might Despair; and but One, that
none might Presume.
Singular; the Scriptures not leaving us one Example more of the like. Now,
Particular Examples are not to be urged for a General Practice, especially in
so weighty a Thing, as the Salvation of the Soul is: If therefore Satan does
suggest unto thee of Repenting at thy own Qui promisit poenitenti veniam, non
promisit peccanti poenitentiam. Aug.
Pleasure, tell him from me; That it is a Thousand-fold more probable, that
thou shall Die, as thou have lived, and so be Damned; rather than to have such
a Singular Grace given thee, and Mercy showed at the last Hour.

Many more Temptations of Satan probably there are unto Security; but I shall
add no more.

SECT. VI.
The Third thing that Satan Tempts unto, is, The Love of the World. Ah! (says
Satan) All these things (the Matthew. 4. 9.
Kingdoms of the World, and the Glory of them) will I give thee, if thou will
fall down and Worship me. Here are fine and brave things, Grandeur and
Gallantry; Pleasures, Pomp and Profit: Here are the Lusts of the Eye, the Flesh
and Pride of Life. And thus Satan does in making poor Souls fall in Love with
the Cardinal Burbon would not lose his Part in Paris, for his Part in Paradise.
Act. and Mon. Fol. 899.
World.

Now, there are several Antidotes, that might be prescribed, to expel this
Poison, which Satan would fain invenom poor Souls with. Consider the World in
its Honor, Pleasures and Profits, and you shall find abundance of Deceit in
all these. 1. What is the Honor and Glory of this World, but fading and dying?
Is it not a Gilded Misery? a secret Poison? a hidden Plague? the Engineer of
Deceit? Mollerus on Psalm. 73. 20. tells the World, Honor, Riches and Pleasures
are the three Deities, that Worldlings Adore and Sacrifice their last Thoughts
unto Morning and Evening.
Honors and Dignities are but as idle Dreams, Splendid Braveries, and Lucid
Fantasies* St. Matthew calls the World's Glory (...), an Opinion: St. Luke
calls ^grippa's Pomp, (...), a Fantasy or Vain Show: And St. Pa^ calls it
(...), a Mathematical Figure; which is a mere Notion, and nothing in Substance.
How many have been blown to Hell, while they have failed with the Wind of
Popular Applause? Does the Honor of this World make a Man really the Better?
Surely no; but often the Worse: Is it not Magnum Nihil, a Great Nothing, and a
Glorious Fantasy? What is become of Proud Haman and Before the Pope sits in
his Chair, (at his Enthronization) a Triple Crown is put on his Head, a Wad of
Straw set on fire before him, and one appointed to say, Sic transit Gloria
Mundi: The Glory of the World is but a Blaze.
Pharaoh? And what will become of thy Honor, when thou art in the Grave, when
Death makes its Approach toward thee? Will the Glory and Honor of this World
stand thee instead at the Day of Judgment? Will not Heaven's Glory ^en
transcend it? Will thou not ^hen be mad with thy self, to think, that Heaven's
Glory was once offered unto thee; but thou to chose the World's, refusest
Heaven's?

Secondly, Consider this World in the Pleasures of it; And what are they? Be
they Satisfying? No: And are they not Bernard calls those Pleasures of this
World Dulce Venenum.
Killing? Yea. Some of the Treatise of Precious Faith, page 11.
Philosophers did place Men's Happiness in the Pleasures of this World; which
are but the sad Transformations of Men into Brutales sunt voluptates. Gerrard.
Meditat.
Bruits, says that Worthy Gentleman, Mr. Polhil. And yet, how many are there,
that cannot refrain themselves from these Sensual Pleasures; but whose Delight
in them is Inordinate, singing the Epicurean's Divinity; Ede, bibe, lude, post
mortem nulla voluptas; Let us Eat, Drink and be Merry; for to Morrow we shall
Die? Carnal Man is for the Things of the Flesh, pleasing his Flesh, and loving
that which is Fleshly: But consider (O vain Man, that pursues so hotly after
the Pleasures of this World) these three things; Death, Obversetur animo
memoria judicii Divini, ne te in servitutem abducat p^rversum judicium
appetitus sensitivi. Gerhard. Meditat.
Judgment and ^ternity. Let the Remembrance of Him that was Crucified, Crucify
in thee all the Desire of Pleasures: Let the Remembrance of Hellfire quench in
thee all the Fire of Lust. Compare the short Moment of Pleasure with Eternal
Punishment. Pleasures do but Captivate our Hearts, that they cannot be free in
the Love of God.

Thirdly, Consider this World in that which they call the Profits of it, and
you may easily understand the Vanity of Vanity, all is Vanity, was Solomon' s
Sermon.
Vanity of them. This Life is the Way to our Eternal Country: What then do much
Riches are but the Golden Dust of this World, that puts out the Eye of the Soul.
Riches profit? They do rather burden the Traveller: Christ, the King of
Heaven, is the Riches of God's Servants. The true Treasure must be within a
Man, and not without him: That is the True Treasure, which thou can carry
away with thee to the General Judgment; but all these outward Goods are taken
from us in Death. Riches do but take themselves Wings, and fly away: Nothing
more uncertain, than they; Fading, Dying and Perishing they are: For their
Transitoriness they may be compared unto a Shadow, a Ship, a Bird, an Arrow, a
Post that passes by. Comforts here below, are no Mundus turbatur and amatur;
The World is troubled and troublesome, (says Austin) yet too much loved.
Comforts; though supposed, and so eagerly pursued after by Faithless Men and
Women: Luther did solemnly protest, God shouldnot put him off with these things
here Below. Things present may be Pleasing, but then they are not Permanent.

SECT. VII.
The Fourth thing that Satan Tempts unto, is Hypocrisy. Oh! (says Satan) if
thou art resolved to be Serious, rather than so, get a Show of it: Paint thy
self, and play the Hypocrite; and so thou may go amongst Men for a Good
Christian.

Reply.
But hereunto the Soul may Answer in this Form:

First, Thou may tell the Devil, That it is true, by having the Form of
Godliness, thou may seem Holy, Pious and Religious among Men, in the Sight
of Men; but not in the Sight of God. Thou may indeed deceive Men, but thou
can not Deus nec fallere, nec falli potest. Aquin.
deceive God: He is privy to all thy Treachery, though thou keeps it under Lock
and Key. Thy Heart he can read without a Commentary: Time will not be long,
when God shall pull off thy Paint, unmask thee, and put thee in thy Proper
Dress. Though thou go among Men for an Eminent Saint; yet at the Day of
Judgment God shall show, what a Devil Incarnate thou art, what a Gilded
Hypocrite thou have been.

SECT. VIII.
The Fifth thing, that the Devil Tempts unto, is a False Faith. If thou art so
much for Jesus Chrisi, believe, that he is able to save thee; and so thou have
this Lively Faith, which will justify thee, live as thou will.

Reply.
Tell the Devil, That Impii praesumendo sperant, and sperando pereunt. Trap.
Presumption is not Faith; and that the Faith, which will enable thee to lay
hold on Christ, will also enable thee to walk in Him: And though Faith
Justifies us not, yet Works there must be to Justify our Faith.

SECT. IX.
Thirdly, Satan shows his exceeding great Subtilty, in the Methods of Tempting:
As

First, He paints his Temptations with pleasing Colors, and Plausible
Pretenses: If Satan's Temptations were to appear like themselves, the Heart of
Man would not consent so soon, as many times it does; but rather flee from the
same. Hence therefore it is, that Satan, very frequently Transforms himself
into an Angel of Light, 2 Cor. 11. 14. The Devil knows very well, that unless
he is Disguised, he cannot prevail, and have what he designs upon the Souls of
Men and Women. Many Vices there are, that the Devil Tempts us unto; and this he
does by giving them Turpiora sunt vitia quae virtutum specie celantur. Ier. The
most dangerous Vermin may ofttimes be found under the Fairest and Sweetest
Flowers, and the fairest Glove is often drawn upon the foulest Hand, and the
Richest Colors are often put upon the filthiest Bodies: So are the fairest and
sweetest Names upon the greatest and most horrible Vices and Errors, that be in
the World. Saepe latet molli coluber sub graminis umbra. Mant.
pretty Names and Titles: As for Instance:

When he Tempts to Pride, he presents it to the Soul under the Name and Notion
of Neatness and Comeliness. Covetousness he calls Good Husbandry; Drunkenness,
Good Fellowship; Riotness, Liberality; and Wantonness, a Trick of Youth.

Secondly, He is Gradual in his Temptations* a little now, and a little then.
The Devil will not Tempt too much at first, lest Suspicion gets ground: He creeps
into the Soul by degrees, and that Step by Step; until such times the Soul
becomes his own. Satan will first draw thee to Sit with the Drunkard, and then
to Sip with the Drunkard; and at last, to be Drunk with the Drunkard.

Thirdly, He is in his Temptations full of Politic Retreats. The Devil many
times makes the Soul believe, that he flies, when it is only under a Pretense,
and with a Design to overcome. Pray, take notice of this:

Satan is not always overcome, when he flies from you.

He sometimes draws back, that the Christian by following him, and going out of
the Trenches, may suddenly on the Plains be foiled.

Fourthly, He does in his Temptations reserve still fresh On-sets, as occasion
shall require. Satan (Commander-like) has more Assaults to bring on, as others
do decay: When one Temptation is beat back, he can soon come on with another.
Therefore Soul, cry not Vici, Vici, when thou over-comest one Temptation or so;
but let this Rule be observed by thee, scil.

When one Ubi una tentatio victa est, exspectanda est alia. Alsted.
Temptation is overcome, expect another.

CHAP. V.
I Have treated of Satan's Subtilty, in Tempting unto a Sinful Licentiousness:
I shall now consider it in his Tempting Believers unto a Sinful Despair. And
Satan's Subtilty, as in the former, so in this, it shows it self in Two things.
1. In the Seasons of Temptations. 2. In the Temptations themselves.

SECT. I.
First, Satan shows his exceeding great Subtilty, in choosing those Seasons for
Tempting unto Despair, (that may prove most Advantageous unto him) being such
as follows.

First, Satan Tempts to Despair, after great Manifestations of God's Favor and
Love to the Soul. When God smiles and opens himself a little Familiarly unto
us, we grow Wanton; and thereupon God The Spirit is going and coming, (says
Holy Mr. Latimer. A Christian' s Light may sometimes be Eclipsed, and his Joy
and Comfort put out.
with-draws, we sink in our Faith, and Satan eyes us on to Despair, by making
of us to conclude; That because God is withdrawn, he will never come again.
There is not a larger, and more pregnant Proof for this, than Peter. Had ever
any a greater Testimony from Heaven, than Peter? Who making an Excellent
Confession of his Faith, Matthew. 16. 17. Christ immediately pronounces him
Blessed, puts a singular Honor upon him, and makes him the The Experiences of
most Christians will confirm, what is here Asserted.
Representative for all the Saints. Now without doubt, this Favor to Peter
stirred up the Envious Spirit the sooner to Assail him. No marvel it was, that
Satan did show his Spite, even when and where Christ loved most dearly:
Therefore, soon after we find the Devil at Peter's Elbow, making him his
Instrument to Tempt Christ; who soon espied his Cloven Foot, and therefore
Rebukes Peter, with a Get thee behind me Satan.

He that seemed a Rock but just now, is through Satan's Policy become a Stone
of Offense for Christ to stumble at.

Secondly, Satan Tempts to Despair at the Hour of Death; What is said of the
Natural Serpent, (Nunquam nisi moriens producitur in longum: He never is seen
at length, till Dying) may be said of this Mystical Serpent: He never strains
his Wits and Wiles more, than when his time is short.
and indeed, his Assaults are usually sharpest then: And the Reason why he is
so busy with Christians when they come to Die, is, because he knows, his time
is then very short. As our Extremity is God's Opportunity to help us; so
likewise it is the Devil's Opportunity, in what he can to destroy us. When
Death approaches, we are Weak, and our Strength beginning to decay, Satan
thereupon furiously Assails us; yea, he does reserve his firiest Darts, his
deadliest Poison and his sharpest Sting, till he meets us on our Deathbed.

SECT. II.
Secondly, Satan shows his exceeding great Subtilty in the Temptations
themselves, which he works from the Consideration 1. Of our Sins. 2. Of God's
Anger. 3. Of Eternal Election. 4. Of our Unworthiness. 5. Of the Weakness of
our Faith. 6. Of great Adversity. 7. Of the Sharpness of Death. And here I
shall show you, how Satan from these things makes many to Despair; with proper
Remedies against the same Prescribed; and that in these following Sections.

SECT. III.
First, Satan Tempts to Despair, by making Sin Satan has learnt his Art very
well. When he has a mind to Tempt to Sinful Liberty, then he will endeavor to
extenuate and lessen Sin: And when he has a mind to Tempt to Despair, then he
heightens Sin as much.
very Great, and drawing up a Black Charge against the Soul. Thy Sins (says
Satan) are very many, and very great; nay, they are Infinite, for as much as
they have been against an Infinite God: Thou know very well, that thy Sins
are of no Ordinary Dye, and that the Wages of the least Sin is Death. -- -- --
Sin Indefinitely, whether great or small: And therefore how can thou (says
Satan) expect Mercy, who art a Sinner? Mercy from God, whom thou have offended
and provoked to Wrath? Surely, if ever any shall be Damned, thou shall: Thou
especially, because thou have been more than an Ordinary Sinner.

Remedy.
Truly, when Satan does Assail us in this kind, I know no other way to Foil
him, than by Answering him as the Sick Man; who, when he was Dying, the Devil
appeared, and showed him a Parchment, that was very long, wherein was written
on every side the Sins of the poor Sick Man. See thou? Behold thy Virtues,
(says Satan!) Unto which he Replied. It Is true Satan; but thou have not s^t
down all: for thou should have added; The Blood of Jesus All the whole Volum
of Perf^ctions, which are spread through Heaven and Earth, are Epitomized in
Christ. Omnia nobis est Christus, (says Ambrose) si esuris, ipse est panis; si
sitis, ipse est sons aquae vivae; si caecus es, ipse est lumen; si infirmus es,
ipse medicus; si mortuus, ipse vita gratiae and gloriae.
Christ Cleanses us from all Sins.

When Satan tells thee of thy Sins, do thou tell him of Christ's Una guttula
plus valor, quam coelum and terra. Luther. i. e. One little Drop (speaking of
the Blood of Christ) is more Worth, than Heaven and Earth.
Blood; whose Blood is of a deeper Purple, than thy Sins: There is as much
Virtue in the Blood of Christ, as there can be Venom in thy Sins. Tell the
Devil, (O poor Soul!) That though thy Sins have been against an Infinite God,
yet there is Infinite Mercy to Answer thy Sins: God can easily drown and
swallow up all thy Sins in the Ocean of his Mercy. When the Tempter Magnifies
thy Sins, do thou then Magnify thy Our Sins are great, but our Savior is
greater.
Savior and Physician. That I am a Sinner, it is true; but who else does
Christ Save? That I am Ungodly, it is true; but who else does God Justify? Pore
not so much upon thy Sins, as quite to forget thy Savior. The Devil tells thee
of thy Disease, do thou tell him of thy Remedy: Thou art Miserable, by reason
of Sin; but thou may be Happy and Restored again, by the Grace of God. There
is no Misery on this side of Hell and the Grave, but God (out of his Infinite
Free Grace) has appointed some Means proper for the same; viz. Hearing, and
Reading the Word for the Unconverted; Prayer, and Receiving of the Sacrament
for the Weak in Gifts and I am the Bread of Life; He that Comes to Me, shall
not Hunger; and he that Believes in Me, shall never Thirst: Joh. 6. 35.
Graces; and Christ unto all in general, who will Receive Him by Faith, Mat.
11. 28. Let thy Sins be never so great, Confess them but Humbly and Brokenly,
and thou shall find Mercy. David used the Aggravations of his Sins, as an
Argument with God to Pardon them: Pardon my Sins, because they are very great.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by causing the Soul to make a wrong Use of
God's Anger. God is Angry, (says Satan) and therefore what will thou do?
Behold, how he Looks? how he Chides? and how he Strikes? Do thou think, that
he will ever be Reconciled?

Remedy.
The only way to give Satan the Fall in this Respect, is by Answering him in
this wise: God may Chide bitterly, Look sowerly, and Strike heavily even when
and where he Loves most dearly. And moreover; That God is not so If God is
Angry, he will not always be Angry, may the Believer say, Isai. 54. v. 8. God,
as he is not (...), quickly Provoked; so neither is he (...), Long Displeased.
Angry, but while thy Soul is on this side of Eternity, thou may Pacify him,
by what he has appointed, as the Means, whereby those, who have sinned against
him, may now be Reconciled unto him; viz. The Sufferings of the Lord Jesus,
which have satisfied Divine Justice to the full. God is Love, and he writes not
Injuries in Marble.

SECT. V.
Thirdly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by causing the Soul to study that, which it
should not, viz. God's Secret Will. Thou art not Elected, (says the Devil) and
therefore all thy Praying and Reading, and taking Pains with thy Heart will be
but in vain.

Remedy.
The only way to invalidate Satan's Arguings in this Respect, is by
considering, that he has no Skill in the Black Book of Reprobation. Neither
Good nor Evil Angels can look into the Book of God's Decrees: Therefore thou
can not; for thou needst not: Have thou not the Book of thy Heart? look into
it, and see what is Written therein. He that finds the Bible Copied out into
his Heart, his Nature Transformed, the Bias of his Will turned, the Signature
and Engravings of the HolyGhost upon him, looks not like a Reprobate. When you
see the Fruits of the Earth spring up, you conclude, the Sun has been there.
It Is hard to climb up into The way to make our Election sure, is first to ma^e
our Calling sure. Culverwel's White-Stone
Election; but if we find the Fruits of Holiness springing up in our Hearts, we
may conclude, the Sun of Righteo^sness has Risen there. By our Sanctification
(says one) we must Calculate our Election. The Infa^lible Signs of Election
(in my Opinion) should satisfy any one, touching his Election: Why now? Have
thou not the Saving Graces of It Is plain, we are not to make Election a Ground
for our Faith, but our Faith a Medium or Argument to prove our Election.
Gurnal's Christian Armor, Part. 1. Page 131.
Faith, Love and Repentance? What are these, but the Infallible Signs of
Election?

Being not unsensible of the Intricacy, which attends this Subject of [These
Sentences in the Margent are the Notes of several Famous English Divines about
this Subject; who all agree in this, That a Man may k^ow his Election by his
Effectual Calling]
Election, and how the Devil puzzles many poor Souls by some Nice Questions
resulting therefrom. Something already I have said of it: But I do find much
thereof for Substance, Elegantly treated by the Elegant Culverwel in his
White-Stone; the Reading of which did exceedingly refresh my Soul; and
therefore hoping, that it may have the like Effect upon thee, I shall here
insert it; knowing, that I cannot mend it my self, whatever others may be able
to do. The Lines are these:

That Astrologer (says he) was deservedly Laughed at, that was so intensly
gazing upon the Stars, so admiring their Twinkling Beauties, as that unawares
he tumbled into the Water; where-as before, if he had been but pleased to look
so low as the Water, he might have seen the Stars there represented in that
Crystal-Glass. Such as will needs be prying into Stars, that will Ascend up
into Heaven, and gaze upon It is altogether Irregular and Anomalous, for the
Soul to pry into Election. It Is dangerous to tread on the highest Round first.
Election; they do but dazzle thine Eyes, and sometimes by this are overwhelmed
in the Depths of Satan: where-as they might easily see the Stars in the Water;
they might see Election in Sanctification. Now, Vocation Comments upon
Election. God's Decrees, that were set from Everlasting, do bud and blossom,
and bring forth Fruit in time. The Book was written before the Foundation of
the World were laid; but it was not Published, till God himself gave it an
Imprimatur. The Letter was Dated from Eternity, the Superscription was Writ in
time, in Vocation. Now, you know, though the Letter be Writ first; yet the
Superscription is Read first by him that receives the Letter. 'Twas decreed
from Eternity, that Decrees should be known in time. And the (...), is (...),
the Fullness of Time is the Time, when God's Decrees are fulfilled: When the
Decrees of God are Ripe, then he lets the Soul taste them; and then they are
Sweetest. Then thou perceivest, that thou art a Vessel of Honor, when God puts
thee upon an Honorable Employment. That Fountain of Love, which ran
underground from Everlasting, bubbles and flows to thee in time. That (...)
that was in Election, becomes (...) in Vocation.
Vocation does plainly and easily appear by that great and eminent Alteration,
which it brings along with it. It is a powerful Call; it is an audible and
quickening Voice; the Voice of the First Trumpet, that awakens Men out of the
Graves, and makes them Happy, by having their Part in the First Resurrection;
great and sudden Alterations, they are very Discernable.

Now, here is a most notorious and signal Change made; Old things are past away,
and all things are become New: Here Is a Change from Death to Life, from
Darkness to Light; and what more Discernable than this? A Living Man may know,
that he is Alive, and that without any further Proof or Demonstration,
whatever the Scepticks Old or New would persuade us to the contrary. Will you
not allow a Man to be certain, that he Lives, till a Jury of Life and Death
has past upon him?

Could not the Blind Man in the Gospel (think you) perceive, when his Eyes were
opened? Could he not easily tell, that now he could see, and discern Variety of
Objects? or must he only conjecture, that he sees, and guess at a Sunbeam?
Must he still at Noonday go groping in Uncertainties? And is there not an
easy and sure Difference between those thick Veils and Shadows of the Night,
between those Dark and AEthiopick Looks, and the Virgin-Blushes of the Morning;
those Beautiful Eyelids of the Day? The Smilings and Flow'rings out of Light,
much more the Advancement of Light to its Zenith and Noon-day-Glory? And why
then cannot an Intellectual Eye discern as well, that now it sees? that now it
looks upon God with an Eye of Love, with an Eye of Faith, with an Eye of
Confidence? and that now God looks upon him with an Eye of Tenderness and
Compassion, with an Eye of Grace and Favor, with an Eye of Delight and
Approbation? Who but an Anaxagoras will go about to persuade a Man, to
disbelieve his Eyes? And if a Corporal Eye deserve such Credit, why may not a
Spiritual Eye then expect as much? Say not then in thine Heart, Who shall
Ascend into Heaven, to bring down Assurance from Above? Who shall Unclasp the
Book of Life, that is Sealed, and turn thee to thy Name? or who shall bring
thee a Certificate, that it is Written there? Behold, it is nigh thee, even in
thine Heart: The Work of Grace there the Law Written on the Tables of thine
Heart, by the Finger of the Spirit, is the Exemplification and Counterpane of
that Decree. The safest Way, the best Way, the only Way to make sure of
Election, is first to make sure of thy Vocation.

SECT. VI.
Fourthly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by causing the Soul to pore too much upon
its own Unworthiness. You are Unworthy (says Satan) of the least Crumb of
Bread, or of the least Drop of Water; and how can thou therefore think of
expecting any Good from the Hands of God.

Remedy.
The only way to stop Satan's Mouth in this Respect, is by Assenting thus far:
That I am Unworthy, it is true; and that I do not We deserve nothing but Hell;
so that, what we have and enjoy, is through a Precious Redeemer.
deserve a Crumb of Bread, or Drop of Water, it is alike true: And yet I do not
err, if I say;

I am Unworthy, and yet Worthy: I deserve Nothing, and yet Merit what I Have.

Unworthy, and yet Worthy, (like the Spouse in the Canticles) Black, and yet
Comely; Black in Her Self, and yet Comely in Her Beloved.

SECT. VII.
Fifthly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by suggesting to the Soul, that no Man's
Faith is so Weak, as his. Behold! how Weak, Imperfect, Staggering and Trembling
it is.

Remedy.
What of all that? (may the Soul Reply;) A little Faith is Faith, as Cruciger
on his Deathbed prayed thus: Invoco te Domine languida and imbecilla fide, sed
fide tamen. Lord, I call upon thee with a weak and languishing Faith; but yet
with a Faith.
a Sparkle of Fire is Fire. Faith, though weak, yet it will Entitle us unto
Christ. A Child's Hand can receive a Pearl, as well as the Hand of a Giant: Out
of this little Grain of Mustard Seed Heaven will grow. In this Smoking Flax
there is a Divine Spark: Though the Smoke of Doubts and Temptations muffle it up
in Obscurity, it will break out at last into Flames of Love and Joy. Our
Imperfect Faith will entitle us unto a Perfect Righteousness.

SECT. VIII.
Sixthly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by making the Soul to infer Evil from
Adversity. Thou art Poor and Indigent, Beggarly and Despicable, says Satan. In
Answer unto which, I would refer the Reader unto Page 66, 67. where this is
Answered fully.

SECT. IX.
Seventhly, Satan Tempts to Despair, by causing the Soul to think much on the
Sharpness of Death. Thou Gloriest now, (says Satan) but ere long thy Condition
shall be changed; Thou Rejoycest, but yet know, that still thou art a What is
said of the Natural Serpent, may be said of Satan, that Old Spiritual Serpent;
Nunquam nisi moriens producitur in longum: He is never seen at his full Length,
till Dying.
Dying Creature. It is not thy Faith, Love and Hope, that can shroud thee from
Death, which is the King of Terrors: That Universal Monarch, which has made
even the Strongest and Stoutest to stoop unto him.

Remedy.
What though Death (may the Believing Soul say) is styled The King of Terrors?
yet if I am a Death is like the Pillar of Cloud; It has a dark Side to a
Sinner, but it has a Light Side to a Believer.
Child of God, it can do me no hurt. It Is an Enemy (I know) to the Mortal Part;
but a Friend to the Spiritual.

The Be by Stinging loses its Sting; so Death, while it Stung Christ on the
Cross, has quite lost its Death like a Snake may Hiss and Wind about the Body,
but the Sting is pulled out.
Sting to a Believer. Death is the Gate of Life: It puts off our Rags, and
gives us Change of Raiment. All the Hurt it can do us, is to put us into a
better Condition. The Devil therefore is a Liar, in saying, That it is not our
Faith, Love and Hope, that will Exempt us from Death: Whereas we know well
enough, that though we shall not be freed from Death; yet by having Faith in
Jesus Christ, we shall be freed from that which renders Death so Formidable,
viz. its Sting. Death's Pale Face looks Ruddy in the Blood of Sprinkling: Death
will free us from all Corporal and Spiritual Death is not Mors Hominis, but
Mors Peccati; not the Death of Man, but the Death of his Sin.
Maladies: It is our Best and Last Physician: It will Cure the Aching Head, and
the Unbelieving Heart. Sin was the Midwife, that brought Death into the World;
and Death shall be the Grave to Bury Filia devorabit Matrem.
Sin. Why then should we be unwilling to Die, seeing Death gives us a Receipt
of Ease from Ultimus morborum medicus Mors.
Infirmities and Weaknesses, from all Aches and Pains, Griefs and Gripings,
Distempers and Diseases both of Body and Soul. Here Sin will keep House,
whether we will or no: Evil Thoughts are continually arising out of our Hearts,
as Sparks out of a Furnace. When we would Pray, the Heart is as a Viol out of
Tune: When we would like a Bird fly up to Heaven upon the Wing of Meditation,
our Corruption (like a String tied to the Leg) pulls us down again: But after
Nemo ante funera felix. Solon.
Death we shall be Proud no more, grieve the Spirit no more. Come hither
therefore, (Oh ye Trembling Souls!) who through the Fears of Death have all
your Lifetime been subject to Bondage; Set your Feet upon the Neck of this
King of Terrors: Assume that Triumphant Challenge of the Apostle; Oh Death!
where is thy Sting? Oh Grave! where is thy St. Chrysostom admires the Bravery
of the Apostle's Spirit.
Victory? 1 Cor. 15. 25. The Glimmering Presence of God with a Believer here
below may Conquer the Fear of Death: But how much more (methinks) should the
Consideration of the full Enjoyment of him after Death? Faith gives us a
Propriety in Heaven, and Death gives us a Possession in Heaven. Death is only a
Dirty Lane, (says one) through which the Saint passes to a Kingdom, to a
great Kingdom, to a glorious Kingdom, to a quiet Kingdom, to an unshaken
Kingdom, to a durable Kingdom, to a lasting Kingdom; yea, to an Everlasting
Kingdom. Death is a dark, short Way, through which the Saints pass to the
Marriage-Supper of the Lamb.

Ever with the Lord: (says an Eminent Mr. Cases Mount-Pisgah.
Divine) This puts Lillies and Roses into the Ghastly Face of Death, and makes
the King of Terrors to outshine Solomon in all his Glory.

[A few Lines that Comforted me once in the same Case, I will adventure here to
Transcribe out of that Little, Useful Faith's Triumph over the Fears of Death,
page 71.
Treatise of Reverend Mr. Wadsworth, my Spiritual Father, viz.]

Oh! when Death draws near, do not startle: Cry not out, as one undone; as if
when thou Die, thou must needs totally Perish: But rather then lift up thy
Head, and Triumphantly proclaim to the Standers by; Now does the Day, the Hour,
the Moment of thy Redemption draw nigh!

Now art thou drawing near thy Home: Heaven is within Sight, and its Melody
almost within Hearing. Thy Lord has the Curtain in his Hand ready to draw it,
to show thee all that Glory, that hitherto he has been but telling thee of;
and give thee a Possession of all that, which hitherto thou have enjoyed only
in Hopes and Title. What do thou fear, and shrug and tremble at, my Soul?
Thou peevish froward Creature! Shall thy Father tell thee, thou must go Sleep,
and lay his Commands upon thee, to lie down in Peace? Shall thy dear Lord and
Savior stand by, persuading thee so to do; and by the Sweet and Glorious
Promises of Eternal Life, and Living with him in the Heavens, allure thee
quietly to obey thy Father and Himself, to go to Rest? Shall he sing thee a
Lullaby of his own falling Asleep, and his entering Paradise, that Day he Died
with the Soul of his Converted Prodigal; and of his Rising again in Body the
Third Day, being a certain Pledge of the Resurrection of thine hereafter; and
all this while gently rock thee in his tender Arms? Shall his Angels stand
waiting, to convey thy departed Soul home with Songs of Triumph? And shall
nothing of all this abate thy Fears, silence thy Complaints, and bring thee to
a Cheerful Submission? Art thou still amazed, and so affrighted, as if so
Gracious a Father, and so Tenderhearted a Redeemer were but commanding thee to
thy Hurt, and treacherously alluring thee to thy Undoing; as if he were about
to Butcher thee, and make thy Bed and Chamber the Sharnbles? O wretched
Unthankful Soul! either mend this Behavior, or I will doubt, whether thou ever
had any Saving Knowledge of God or Jesus Christ: For how can thou be said
either to know or love them, when thou dare not trust them? Fear not then, my
Soul; but boldly throw thy self into his Arms, who will certainly keep that
safe, which thou committest unto him.

I cannot omit also two or three Pregnant Lines, which you may find in a The
Christians Defense against the Fears of Death, page 375. cap. 20.
Treatise of Famous Dre^incourt, that French Protestant Divine.

There are certain Pictures with two Faces; the one Represents most ugly
Features, and the other, Beautiful and Pleasant things. This is the True Emblem
of Death; for it may be Painted with a fearful Face, a Lean Body and Iron
Hands, that snatch from us our Goods and our Honors; and that divide our
Persons, dragging our Bodies into a loathsome Sepulcher: If we look upon Death
in this manner, we can do nothing less, but Tremble and Fear. But on the other
Hand, we may look upon it as a Powerful Deliverer, that unlooseth all our
Fetters, breaks our Chains to pieces, lifts up our Souls to the highest Glory
and Happiness: And if we consider this, there is nothing more Lovely than
Death, and nothing more to be desired.

CHAP. VI.
THus far touching Satan's Subtilty: I shall now speak a little touching
Satan's Malice. As he is a Subtle Spirit, so he is a Malicious, Envious Spirit.
The several Names that Satan has, do declare, how maliciously he is affected
toward the Children of Men. 1. Satan; because he Mortally hates Men. 2. Devil;
because he Slanderously accuses them to God and Man, Job 1. ^1. and 2. 5. Rev.
12. 8, 9, 10. 3. The Old Serpent, for his Subtle Temptations. 4. The Great
Dragon, for his Destroying of many, Rev. 12. 8, 9.

Further-more; The Malice of Satan appears by those Evil Offices, which he
performs in Common against the Godly, and the Wicked: And they are either
such, as respect the Body, and the things belonging thereunto; or such, as
respect the The Devil (if permitted) can hurt both Soul and Body.
Soul.

SECT. I.
Now, the Devil many times for Man's Sin is permitted First, To ^urt the
Creature, that should serve ^or our Comfort, as the Air, Sea, ^rees, etc. Rev.
7. 1, 3. Secondly, To ^buse the The Devil hurts the Body, how and after what
manner.
Bodies both of Men and ^easts, for the effecting of his wick^d Purposes.
Thirdly, to delude the ^enses, making Men to believe things ^o be such, as they
are not; as he ^id by Iannes and Iambres in Egypt, and by the Witch of Endor.
Fourthly, To Inflict Sickness and Evils upon the Bodies of Men, and to Torment
and Pain them; as in Job, and the Egyp^ians. Fifthly, To strike some Dumb.
Sixthly, To Enter-into, and really to Possess the Bodies of Men, using them ^n
most fearful sort, as Matthew. 8. 16. and 12. 28. Seventhly, To Inflict Death
upon the Bodies both of Men and Beasts.

SECT. II.
The Devil many times for Man's Sin is permitted to hurt the The Devil hurts
the Soul; how and after what manner?
Soul: First, By depriving some of the Use of their Reason by Frenzy and
Madness. Secondly, By troubling and tormenting some with Grief and Vexation of
Soul. Thirdly, By Abusing some with Passions and Melancholy Fits, as Saul, 1 Samuel 16. 14. Fourthly, By Seducing others, 1 King 22. 21, 22. 2 Cor. 4. 4.
Fifthly, By manifold and fearful Temptations to Si^ and Wickedness. Sixthly, By
Prevailing in such Temptations. Seventhly, By Accusing before God those, with
whom they have so prevailed. Eighthly, By Hind'ring Men from doing Good things.

CHAP. VII.
IN the Third place, Satan is a The Devil is a Potent Enemy.
Potent Enemy; which appears from 1. His Names. 2. His Nature. 3. His Number.
4. His Order and Unity. 5. The Mighty Works that are Attributed to him.

SECT. I.
First, Satan by reason of his Power, Might and Strength has Names, which
denotes the same unto us. Hence it is, that he is called, The Strong Man, Luke
11. 21. The Prince of the Air, Ephesians. 2. 2. The God of this World, 2 Cor. 4. 4.
All which Titles do show, that the Devil is a Potent Spirit, and an Enemy not
to be Contemned either by Godly or Ungodly: Whence it is, that we are all
Commanded to Watch, 1 Pet. 5. 8.

SECT. II.
Secondly, The Devil's Nature shows his Power: It Is Angelical. Bless the Lord,
ye his Angels, that excel in Strength, Psalm. 103. 20: Strength is put for
Angels. Psalm. 78. 25. They did eat Angels Food: Hebr. The Food of the Mighty.
In two things the Power of Angelical Nature will appear; In its Superiority,
and in its Spirituality.

First, Its Superiority. Angels are the Top of the Creation: Man himself made a
little lower, than the Angels. Now, in the Works of Creation, the Superior
has a Power over the Inferior; the Beasts over the Grass and Herb, Man over
the Beasts, and Angels over Man.

Secondly, The Spirituality of their Nature. The Weakness of Man is from his
Flesh: His Soul made for great Enterprises, but weighed down with a Lump of
Flesh, is forced to Row with a Strength suitable to its weak Partner: But now,
the Devils being Angels, have no such Encumbrances; no Fumes from a Fleshly
Part to cloud their Understanding, which is Clear and Piercing; no Clog at
their Heel to retard their Motion, which for Swiftness is set out by the Wind,
and Flame of Fire: Yea, being Spiritual, they cannot be Resisted with Carnal
Force; Fire and Sword hurt not them. The Angel which appeared to Manoah, went
up in the Fire that consumed the Sacrifice; though such has been the Dotage,
and is at this Day of Superstitious Ones, that they think to Charm the Devil
with their Carnal Exorcisms. Hence the Romish Relics, Cross, Holy Water; yea,
and among the Jews themselves in Corrupter Times, who thought by their
Philacteries and Circumcision to scare away the Devil; which made some of them
Expound that Cant. 3. 8. of Circumcision: Every Man has his Sword on his
Thigh, because of Fear in the Night.

By Sword on the Thigh, they expound Circumcision, which they will vainly have
given as a Charm against Evil Spirits, that affright them in the Night. But,
Alas! the Devil cares for none of these; no, not for an Ordinance of God, when
by Fleshly Confidence we make it a Spell: He has been often bound with these
Fetters and Chains, (as it is said of him in the Gospel) and the Chains have
been plucked asunder by him; neither could any Man thus tame him. He esteems
(as Job says of the Leviathan) Iron as Straw, and Brass as Rotten Wood: It
must be a Stronger than the Strong-Man, that binds him; and none Stronger but
God the Father of Spirits. The Devil lost indeed by his Fall much of his Power,
in relation to that Holy and Happy Estate in which he was Created; but not his
Natural Abilities: He is an Angel still, and has an Angel's Power.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, The Number of Devils adds to their Power. What Lighter than the Sand?
yet Number makes it Weighty. What Creature less than Lice? yet what Plague
greater to the Egyptians? How Formidable then Devils be, who are both for
Nature so Mighty, and for Est autem horum (i. e. malorum Angelorum) quoque
numerus magnus, sed in Scriptura non definitus. Piscat. in Calvin Institut.
page 20.
Number such a Multitude? There are Devils enough to Beleague the whole Earth:
Not a Place under Heaven, where Satan has not his Troops; Not a Person,
without some of these Cursed Spirits haunting and watching him wherever he
goes: Yea, for some special Service he can send a Legion, to keep Garrison in
one Single Person, as Mark 5. And if so many can be spared to attend One, to
what a Number would the Muster-Role of Satan's whole Army amount, if known? And
now tell me, If we are not like to find our March difficult to Heaven, (if ever
we mean to go thither) that are to pass through the very Quarters of this
Multitude, who are scattered over the Face of the Earth? When Armies are
Disbanded, and the Roads full of Debauched Soldiers, wandering up and down,
it is dangerous Traveling; we hear then of Murders and Robberies from all
Quarters. These Powers of Hell are that Party of Angels, who for their Mutiny
and Disobedience were cashiered Heaven, and thrust out of that Glorious Host;
and ever since they have straggled here Below, endeavoring to do Mischief to
the Children of Men, especially them that Travel in Heaven-Road.

SECT. IV.
Fourthly, Their Unity and Order makes their Number Formidable. We cannot say,
there is Love among them, that Heavenly Fire cannot live in a Devil's Bosom;
yet there is Unity and Order as to this: They are all agreed in their Design
against God and Man: So their Unity and Consent is knit together by the
Ligaments not of Love, but of Hatred and Policy; Hatred against God and his
Children, which they are filled with; and Policy, which tells them, That if
they agree not in their Design, their Kingdom cannot stand. And how true they
are to this their Wicked Brotherhood, our Savior gives a fair Testimony, when
he says; Satan Fights not against Satan. Did you ever hear of any Mutiny in
the Devil's Army? or, That any of these Apostate Angels did freely yield up one
Soul to Christ? They are many, and yet but one Spirit of Wickedness in them
all. My Name, said the Devils, (not Our Name) is Legion.

SECT. V.
Fifthly, The Mighty Works that are Attributed to these Evil Spirits in
Scripture, declare their Power; and these either respect the Elementary,
Sensible or Intellectual Part of the World. The Elementary: What dreadful
Effects this Prince of the Power of the Air is able to produce on that, see in
the Word: He cannot indeed make the least Breath of Air, Drop of Water, or
Spark of Fire; but he can, if let loose (as Reverend Mr. Caryl says on Job 1.)
go to God's Storehouse, and make use of these in such sort, as no Man can
stand before him: He can hurl the Sea into such a In summa, triplicitur
possunt nocere, supra nos, intra nos, and circa nos. Supra nos; tempestates and
procellas ciendo, fulgura and tonitrua ejamlaudo, fragores horrendos edendo,
nubes cogendo. Intra nos; sensus internos and externos voluntemque movendo and
impellendo, sive id fiat ex part organi, sive ex part objecti; turbando
humores, loco motivam impellendo, vitio* rum somites subministrando. Circa nos;
loco movendo bono nostra, edes concutere and convellere, fluviorum cursus and
alveos mutare, pascua noxiis succis imbuere, fructus mutare and excutere,
pecudes morbis afficere. Alsted. Syst. Theolog.
Commotion, that the Depths shall Boil like a Pot, and disturb the Air into
Storms and Tempests, as if Heaven and Earth would meet. Job's Children were
Buried in the Ruins of their House by a Puff of his Mouth; yea, he can go to
God's Magazine, (as the same Author says) and Let off the Great Ordinance of
Heaven; causing such dreadful Thunder and Lightning, as shall not only
Affright, but do real Execution, and that in a more dreadful Way, than in the
Ordinary Course of Nature. If Man's Art can so sublimate Nature, as we see in
the Invention of Powder, that has such a strange Force; much more able is he
to draw forth its Power. Again, Over the Sensitive World his Power is Great;
not only the Beasts, as in the Herd of Swine, hurried by him into the Deep; but
over the Bodies of Men also, as in Job; whose sore Biles were not the
Breakings-out of a Distempered Nature, but the Print of Satan's Fangs on his
Flesh; doing that suddenly, which in Nature would have required more time to
Gather and Ripen.

CHAP. VIII.
COntaining the Second Deduction.

SECT. I.
If it be so, That such who are most Eminent and Renowned, may Fall; Deduct. 2.
then this consequently follows: Let him that Stands, take heed lest he
Falls. This is the same Exhortation, that the Apostle makes use of in 1 Cor.
10. 12.

Oh Christians! Consider, though now you are in your Beauty, Vigor and
Strength; yet a Time may come, wherein your Strength may be over-Match'd, and
Satan may be too Hard for you. Though I should Dye with thee, yet will I not
Deny thee. Matthew. 26. 34.
Peter was Confident, that he should keep close to his Master, in the Face of
all Difficulties whatsoever; but Satan was too hard for him. Peter presumed
upon his own Strength. It Is Just with God, that he who trusts to Himself,
should be left to himself: Self-Iealousie is very good. Man is a Proud piece of
Flesh: He is apt to be highly opinionated of himself. That which is my aim at
this time, is, That Christians would deny all Supercilious Thoughts of
themselves; and not as Peter, who denied Christ for want of denying Himself:
Not as Fox Act. and Mon.
Pendleton, who was Confident of himself, and said:

This Fat of mine shall melt in the Fire for Christ.

But instead of that, his Courage melted.

Not as these Clouds of Witnesses, who for some time were Glorious Professors,
and shined as Stars in the Church-Hemisphear; yet have been Falling Stars:

Porphyry, Julian, Cardinal Pool, Gardener, Judas.

Nay, some Saints, through God's withdrawing the Influence of his Spirit, have
for a time Relapsed: As Cranmer, and Origin, whose Heart fainted in the Seventh
Persecution, and he Offered Incense to the Idol. Who, that knows the Fierceness
of a Trial, or the Falseness of his Heart, will not Fear? The Si vis esse
securus, semper time.
Trembling Reed often stands, when the Confident Cedar falls.

There are certain Helps, which if observed, I am confident, will Antidote
many, that now Stands, not to Fall.

SECT. II.
First, Try thy self (O Christian) thoroughly aforehand:

If we would Judge our selves, we should not be Judged, 1 Cor. 11. 3.

Though I cannot say, If we would Try our selves, we should not be Tried; Yet
this I can say, If we would Try our selves, we should be the more likely to
abide the Trial of the Lord.

It Is for want of this, that many times we are shaken, when the Winds of
Temptation or Persecution blow a little upon us.

How is it with thee now (O Christian) in thy present Course? Art thou
Converted, and Born again? Do thou Walk with God? Do thou Live with God?
Suppose an hour of Temptation should come, How do thou think, thou could
endure it? Suppose, that now thou wast to Blessed Bilney tried his Finger by
himself in the Candle, before his whole Body in the Flames at the Stake.
Burn at a Stake, and the Fire was kindled before thee, Would thou embrace
it, rather than Deny Christ? Put, I beseech thee, such Practical Questions, and
Soul-searching Queries as these are, to thy self; and as thou find thy Heart
to Echo there-unto, accordingly thou may judge, how it would be with thee in
a time of Trial. What? am I now in my Graces, and my Obedience? Do I Love
Christ, Believe in Christ, and Abide in Him? Is my Obedience also Sincere,
Impartial, Evangelical, Universal and Perpetual? By thy Active Obedience, guess
(O Christian) what thy Passive may be.

Enter therefore (O my Soul) into thy Closet, and there Rip up thy Self;
Dissect and Anatomize thy Entrails: It is good to Try thy Self now, because (as
aforesaid) thou may guess a little thereby, how thou would endure an Hour
of Temptation, should it come. Besides, it may Pre-apprehension is the Mother
of Prevention.
Prevent God's Trying of thee: Would we but Sel^-Examination is a Root, which
bears Self-Knowledge; and at the Top of it grows Assurance; which is Apex
Fidei, The Highest Nature of Faith.
Try our selves in Secret, God would forbear Trying of so much as he does: But
know, If thou will not Try thy Self alone, by the Sun-Light of God's Word, thou
shall be Tried by the Candlelight, the Fire-Light of his Dreadful Works. The
Flail of Tribulation will discover the Chaff from the Wheat; and the Fire of
Affliction, the Dross from the Gold. How do thou think to Welcome a Prison,
Kiss a Stake, Smile at Torments, Look a Violent Death in the Face, with Color
in thy Cheeks, and Courage in thy Heart? How doe'st thou think to endure such a
Fiery Trial, that never did Try thy Self aforehand?

SECT. III.
Secondly, The only way to Stand in Trial, is to Expect them: This is one Chief
Expedient. No Man whatso-ever, how Good, Just, Pious, Wise so-ever, can by any
Means expect to be exempt from one kind of Trouble or other, at one Time or
another, in one Measure or another; and therefore, why do thou promise to thy
self Safety and Security? If thou art a Christian, thou must be Tried: Christ
thy Captain was Tried, although there was not any Fuel at all in him, to invite
Satan's Temptations. This Life is a Ring of Quid est diu vivere, nisi diu
torqueri. Aug.
Misery; We only Change our Troubles, not Finish them. Man's Life and Misery
are Twins: We may as well separate Weight from Lead, as Life is interlarded
with Trouble. Watson.
Trouble from a Man's Life. We came inthe World with a Cry, and we go out with
a Groan: And who will not say, but these are Trials; and Man is Born unto them,
even as the Sparks fly upward: And therefore, if here is not Grounds to expect
them, I know nothing at all. Now, he that expects Trials, will doubtless
prepare for them: What Man that is subject to sudden Qualms, but will have some
Comfortable Waters to take, when-so-ever they come again. You are Wise, and
know how to Apply it.

SECT. IV.
Thirdly, Trust not thy Self against such a Time. This is Self-Confidence; and
you know, that was the Undoing of Peter, and others, that I have already
instanced: Believe thy own Weakness. The Vine being weak, Twists about the Elm
to support it: A good Christian being Conscious of his own Imbecility, Twists
by Faith about Christ. Always when a Trial comes, go out of Self to Believers
should always keep their Recumbence upon the Goodness and Mercy of God.
Christ, or else thou Fallest.

SECT. V.
Fourthly, Wean thy Self from the Love of the World, and Converse with things
Above. Let thy Thoughts, Hopes and Desires Ascend up to Heaven. Many are Foiled
by Satan, through setting too great an Estimate upon the World; the greatest
Engine that the Devil has, whereby to Enchant and Ensnare poor silly Souls.
Who more free from Temptation than such, that set lightly by the Things of this
Life: But always observe, such that Love the Mundus turbatur and amatur.
World Inordinately, and are plunged in the Business thereof, are seldom or
never freed from a Temptation.

SECT. VI.
Mittamus preces cordis legatos. Cypr.
Fifthly, Give thy self to Prayer: Prayer sets God at Work. And one of the
greatest Preparatives for Trials, we have: When Christ Prayed, he met Judas.
This is the Compleation of all that I have said before: PRAY. Lead me not into
Temptation, Matthew. 6. 13. 2 Cor. 12. 8.
but Deliver me from Evil.

And for this thing I besought the Lord Thrice.

Prayer is the Key, that opens God's Storehouse; and fetches out from thence
those Mercies, that our various Wants and Necessities calls for.

CHAP. IX.
COntaining the Third, Fourth, Fifth, Sixth and Seventh Deduction.

SECT. I.
If it be so, That such, who are Eminent, may Relapse; then let us not Deduct.
3.
Censure all that have Relapsed, and been Guilty of Miscarriages. Eminent
Christians have been over-taken with a Fault; and therefore be Tender in your
Judging; and not be as some, who are Censorious and Rash, mis-judging the Cases
of such, that have been overcome by a Temptation. The Tempted are to be
Succored, much less Censured: Surely, such have not Learnt Christ, who have
not learnt this. So that there is great Cause of Lamentation, when we consider,
what little Commiseration is showed unto the Tempted, even by them that pretend
very much unto Religion. Ah! It grieves me exceedingly, I can truly say;
because I see not that Sympathy in the Professors of this Age, as there ought
to be. What Censures and Reproofs do we abound with, (to our Shame be it
spoken?) We should consider our Selves, as of the Body, and such that may be
Tempted. Gal. 6. v. 1.

Brethren, although a man be over-taken in a Fault, ye which are Spiritual,
restore such an one in the Spirit of Meekness, considering your Selves, etc.

I am verily persuaded, that scarce any Age has afforded less of Souls, that
understand the Doctrine of Temptation, than this: And therefore it is, that a
Loving Charitable, Sympathizing and Gaining Carriage is no more manifested unto
such, that are attended with Temptations. Thou that Censurest those that are
Tempted, may as well Censure our Savior himself; for he was Tempted. Heb.
2. 18.
Thou have more Reason (O Man) to be Jealous of thy Self, that have not been
Tempted; than others, that have been Tempted. More-over, none are able to Speak
a Word in Season unto such that are Tempted, than those who have been in
likemanner Exercised.

A Man that has Rid over a Place where are Boggs and Quicksands, is the
fittest to guide others through that dangerous Place. Who can better Unmask and
Discover Santan's Policies and Sugared Lies, than those who have been long in
the Fencing-School of Temptation.

SECT. II.
If it be so, That the Confident Cedar may Fall, such who are Eminent Deduct. 4.
in Christianity, may be subject to Lapses; then let not Christians themselves,
as well as others, think Evil of themselves, because they may sometimes Halt,
and have a Fall. How many Christians have I heard concluding Evil from their
Temptations; as if no such Promise as this was in the Bible? viz.

This is Jacob's Staff in the Hand of Faith, with which we may Walk cheerfully
to the Mount of God. What will satisfy or give content, if this will not?
Watson in Loc.
All things shall work together for Good, for them that love God.

All Things; that is, the Best Things, and the Worse Things: Good Things, and
Evil Things certainly are included in All Things; and if Evil Things as well as
Good Things, then surely Temptation: And if so, Why then do some say, as I have
heard; I am not a Child of God, because I am Temptations stir up the Paternal
Compassions in God to them, who are Tempted. Idem.
Tempted: Rather from thence conclude, That thou art a Child of God. They are
Bastards, and not Sons, that have not been Tempted more or less. God had one
Son without Sin, but no Son without Stripes: Christ the Cornerstone was Tried;
the rest of the Stones in the Heavenly Building must also be Tried. Why
murmurest thou because of thy Temptations, thinking amiss of thy self because
of them; when as thou can not be a Refined Christian, before thou passest
through this Furnace? Since then it is so, content thy self; believing, that
unless God had intended Good to thee, thou should not have been Tempted, as
thou have been: and say; Take (O Lord) the Trial of thy own Grace, bestowed
upon thy Unworthy Servant.

SECT. III.
If it be so, That Satan may Foil Eminent Deduct. 5.
Christians; then learn, whence it is, that Satan is a Proud Spirit: Pride
indeed he had, before ever he Foiled our First Parents, and our Selves; for
Pride was the first Sin that ever Reigned.
Pride it was, that made him a Devil: Yet doubtless, this adds much to his
Pride, That he sometimes by Permission does overthrow many of our Brave
Christians. Satan did much Rejoice, when he had gotten Advantage of Peter, One
so Eminent in the Church of Christ. Oh! therefore Believers, beware of Satan's
Devices; because if thou Fallest, he will Triumph.

SECT. IV.
If this be so; then we may hence learn, That if Eminent Believers do Deduct. 6.
Over come Satan, it is not in and by their own Strength: But when they are
Foiled, it is, because they went against him in their own Strength. Of our
selves we can do nothing; it is God in Venit Diabolus, subvenit Christus.
Christ, that must do all for us. If we Fight alone with the Goliath of Hell, we
are sure to be vanquished. Separate the Soul from the Body, and it is incapable
of Action or Service: And so, take God from the Soul, and it will be incapable
of Wrestling with such a Mighty Spirit, as the Devil is. Let Believers be like
the Vine, that being weak, twists about the Elm to support it: Being Conscious
of our own Imbecility, we should twist by Faith about Christ, 2 Cor. 12. 9.

And in Him we are more than God is above the Devil, should be every Tempted
Soul' s Motto.
Conquerours

Phil. 4. 13. I can do all things through Christ, which Strengthens me.

Sampson's Strength lay in his Hair, Ours lies in our Head Christ. Jesus Christ
has laid his Feet upon the Neck of that Old Serpent; and will enable you so to
do, if you will trust in him, and accept of him as the Captain of your
Salvation. If Christ Jesus does but bring in his Auxiliary Forces, Satan shall
then be trodden down.

SECT. V.
If this be so; then from hence we Deduct. 7.
may learn, What a mighty Power of God that Power is, which is concerned in the
Preservation of a Believer.

What a Mighty Power of God is concerned in our Preservation, as we are
Creatures? more, as we are Christians. Consider Man, as he is a Creature, and
we may stand amazed at the exceeding Great Power of God in his Preservation!
What a Tender thing is Man, when he is in the Womb of his Mother? and how
subject is he to Mis-carrying, even while he is there? And what Expectation is
there of his Coming forth into the World, mingled with Hopes and Fears, lest he
should become Abortive? And Lo! God in time brings him forth; and a Perfect Man
he is, as to the Limbs and Lineaments of his Body; notwithstanding the Perils
and Dangers, that encompassed him about, when he was but an Embryo in the Womb.

And then afterward Consider him not only in the Womb, but consider him also
in his Infancy, Childhood, Youth, Riper Years and Old Age; the Miseries, that
are proper to all these, and the Dangers, that he has gone through in all
these; and it is a Miracle, that Man should live to Old Age.

But further Consider him, as a Christian; and so you may have a greater
Prospect of the Admirable We are kept by the Power of God through Faith unto
Salvation, 1 Pet. 1. 5.
Power of God. A Soul is no sooner Newborn, but immediately Trials, Agonies
and Conflicts do come in upon him, as a great Tempestuous Sea. The first Cry
(says one) of the Newborn Infant Allarums all the Devils of Hell. The Devil
and the World set themselves in Battle-Array against the Children of God: And
one would think it impossible, for one to become a Christian: Nay indeed, all
things considered, and it is a Miracle to be a New Creature.

And when a Man becomes a New Creature, what an Admirable Power is concerned in
the Preserving of him, as such? What Difficulties goes he through, and wrestles
with, before he gets into the Port of Heaven: So that indeed, all that are
Saved, are Saved with a great deal of Difficulty.

CHAP. X.
COntaining the Eighth and Last Deduction.

SECT. I.
If this be so; then hence I infer Deduct. 8.
the Reason, Why many of God's own Children walk with sad Countenances, hanging
down their Heads like so many Bull-Rushes? It Is because the Devil many times
Bruises them by Falls, and breaks their Bones; insomuch that they can have no
Rest at all. We should be in a perpetual Shine, were it not for Showers of Rain
ever and anon falling from the Eyes, by reason of Cruel Buffetings from Satan.
Here we are troubled with a Vigilant, Subtle Adversary, that breaks our Peace,
and Disquiets us exceedingly: Were it not for a Tempting Devil, and a Deceitful
Heart, what brave Lives might we live? But because these attend us, therefore
are we oft-times disquieted, our Strength declines, and our Knees wax feeble.
Good Lord, vouchsafe therefore thy Strength, and let thy Comforts delight our
Souls; else the Devil, that Nimrod and Cruel Hunter, will pursue our Souls even
unto Death. This Creates in us Longings after Heaven, because then we shall be
Tempted no more: Here we are in a perpetual Hurry, and in a constant
Fluctuation. Our Lives are like the Tide, sometimes Ebbing, and sometimes
Flowing. What is this Life, but a Warfare? When one Temptation is over, another
comes. Would to God, the Winter was past, and the Singing of the Birds were
come! Were we but in Heaven, we should be out of Gunshot: Heaven is a Place of
Rest; no Bullets of Nullae ibi insidiae Daemonum. Bern.
Temptation fly there. We long, till Death sound a Retreat, and calls us off
the Field, where the Bullets fly so thick, to receive a Victorious Crown;
where, not the Drum, or Canon; but the Harp and Viol shall be ever sounding:

Come Lord Jesus, Come Lord Jesus, Come quickly, Rev. 22.

I long to be Dissolved, and to be with Christ Jesus, which is far better,
Phil. 1. 23.

SECT. II.
If this be so; hence I infer the Deduct. 9.
Necessity of a Spiritual Armor, which Demonstrateth its self in two things.
1. In that it is Commodious for a Soldier; besides, it is Commanded, Ephesians. 6.
11. 2. In that if we have it not, Satan will get Advantage of us.

But say you, What is this Armor? Quest.


I Answer; It is that Concatenation Answ.
of Graces, which you Read of in the Ephesians.

Wherefore take unto you the whole Armor of God, that ye may be able to
with-stand in the Evil-Day, and having done all, to stand. Stand therefore,
having your Loins girt about with Truth, and having on the Breast Plate of
Righteousness; and your Feet shod with the Preparation of the Gospel of Peace.

Above all taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye be able to quench all the
Fiery Darts of the Wicked: And take the Helmet of Salvation, and the Sword of
the Spirit, which is the Word of God.

SECT. III.
There are Three things, which are very convenient for the Christian Soldier,
and which are included in the Spiritual Armor above said.

First, Addict your selves to a Holy Vigilance and Watchfulness: Stand
therefore. And in the 1 Cor. 16. 13. Watch ye, stand fast in the Faith, quit
your selves like Men, be Strong.

There are Three things, that the Christian Soldier should Watch over. Vide
Sedgwick's Military Discipline. page 27, etc.
1. The Forts or Bulwarks of the Soul. 2. The Ports of the Soul. 3. The
Adjacent Outworks.

First, The Christian's Watch must be set over the Understanding; for the
Understanding or Intellectual Part of Man is the First Door, that the Devil
knocks at; or it is the Fist Customer, that he opens his Wares unto: It is the
First Shop, wherein Sin is Anvil'd; the Conceptions of Sin begin there. At this
also do all Heretics let fly their Cunning and Poisonous Arrows: Nay, Original
Corruption breaks out of thence, infinite Swarms of vile, vain, strange,
hideous Cogitations.

And therefore above all the Watchings, watch the Understanding; that first
Wheel, common Spring, or prime Commander in the Soul. Watch for it, that the
Saving Light of the Knowledge of Jesus Christ may arise, and dwell within it;
and that there may be wrought in it not only an Apprehension of Divine Truths,
but also a Subjection unto them, Practical Convictions of Good and Evil; with
that Efficacious Success, that what is Good, may be Approved; and what is Evil,
may be Condemned by you. More-over, that your Understandings may be the Seat of
Heavenly Wisdom, Divine Meditations, and Right Principles to direct the Will,
compose the Affections, and lead your Conversations in the many particular Acts
and Ways of them, according to that Righteous and Un-erring Rule, I mean, the
Word of God.

Watch over it, that it be not Captivated by the Powers of Ignorance and
Blindness, (How can you obey that Will of God, which you know not?) nor be
ensnared by the Subtilty of Heresies, or Apostacies; muchless, that it be
overrun with Atheism, Profaneness, Blasphemies against God, his Truths, Ways,
or Servants.

Yea, Watch it against all Idle and Unnecessary Surveys of Contemplative Evils
(Sparks of Sin dallied with in the Understanding, may easily beget Flames of
Wickedness in the Heart); and against all indiscreet Parleys with Satan's
Temptations: It is easier to Reject, than to Debate the Devil's Arguments: He
is sooner Conquered by Prayer, than by Dispute.

Watch it against all Curiosities, and Extreme Itchings: In the Practicals of
Religion, it is commendable to be Fervent; but in some Doctrinals, Moderation
and Sobriety is best. There are some Divine Mysteries, which with the Strength
of our short Reason to dive into and fathom, it is Dangerous: They may be a a
Consuming Fire, if we presume to come too near. Revealed Things are enough for
our Faith and Life: Leave the Secret unto God alone. VVatch it against Wavering
Lusts after Novelties.

Once more; VVatch it against the Insolent Intrusions of Corrupt and Proud
Reasonings. Take not all upon Trust or Semblances.

Secondly, The Watch must be also set over the Will; that Great Faculty, which
will either be the Chair of Lust, or Throne of Grace: We may say of it, what
the Prophet did of the Figs; Those which were Good, were very Good; and those
that were Bad, were very Bad.

If the Will be Corrupt, it is the only of Slaves, the Sink of the deepest
Rebellion, Perverseness, Resistance, and Extremest Malice against Christ, and
his Doctrine and Precepts: Nothing makes us more Desperately to hold out
against all Heavenly Counsels, Discoveries, Mercies, Entreaties, Motions, than
it. How often (says Christ) would I have gathered your Children, and ye would
not. But if it be Renewed, and made Good, it is now a Vital Spring, and of a
large Use and Service to Christ and Grace. As when a great City yields, this
brings many Dorps or Villages under Contribution: So when the Will yields to
Christ, acknowledges his Scepter, and embraces his Laws, all the Faculties of
the whole Man fall in with it, and become Tributaries.

We commonly affirm the Will to be a Royal Faculty, (the most Noble, so the
Schoolmen): O VVatch, that it does not Dis-noble and Stain its Excellency by a
Sordid League and Affinity with sinful Lusts; but rather raise and felicitate
us by a Believing Consent and Acceptance of that great Match betwixt our Souls,
and our Blessed Savior.

We likewise say, That it is a Free Faculty, free from Co-action, no Man doubts
it; Free, when Freed, we all with St. Augustine profess it: If the Son shall
make you Free, you shall be Free indeed.

In that Sense it is Free to Spirituals, but not in St. Paul's Sense: I was
Freeborn, Act. 22. 28.

Now VVatch, lest while you vainly Boast in the Strength and Liberty of your
Wills, you be not at the same time invasall'd and imbondaged to the Service of
your Vile and Carnal Affections. It is a Ridiculous thing, to hear a Iay-Bird
vaunt of his Descent and Blood; and it is as sad a thing, to observe a person
proudly arguing for Liberty, whose Will yet is fettered and entangled, and held
with the strongest Bonds of foulest Sins.

Lastly, You say, That the Will is a Commanding Faculty; The Schoolmen
generally give Imperium unto it: And you know, Sic Volo, sic Iubeo.
Questionless, it is of great Power with all the Faculties in Man, and for all
his Actions: But then Watch, that you may rather Glory in this, That you have a
Will able to Fall down and Obey God, than that you have a Power to Resist and
Defeat his Intention of Mercy and Goodness. Let Men wrangle as much as they
please; of this I am sure, It is a Miserable Dignity, that I am able to
Dis-obey God, and to Damn my Soul.

Thirdly, The Watch must be enlarged unto a Third Fort, which is our
Affections; which are to the Soul, as the Soldier to the Centurion:

If he said to one, Go, he went; if to another, Come, he came.

Some call them, the Messengers of the Doubtless, as that Systole and Dyastole
(of which the Anatomists speak) are to the Heart, so the Affections are to the
Will; the Openings and the Contractings of it.
Will; others call them the Wheels, the Chariots, the Wings, the Feet of the
Soul.

They are (for their Motions) like to those Two Elements of Fire and Water:
Whiles kept under, the best Servants; whiles keeping us under, the worst
Masters.

Dis-ordered Affections and Predominant, they are nothing else, but so many
Firebrarnds of Confusion, Land-Floods exceeding all Reason; yea, Deluges to
bear down our Graces. What Euripides spoke of Sorrows, is as true of all
Inordinate Affections, (...). As in a sudden Fray many a Man is wounded, so by
Tumultuous Affections many a Sin is increased; and the Devil (like Thieves in
Uproares) is most diligent about us, when our Affections are Distempered within
us: He can Master us most easily, when we can most difficultly Master our
selves. But if the Affections be rightly set and composed, they are then the
sweetest Spring of Duty, the gentlest Handmaids of Grace, our best Sails for a
Course of Piety, the Activest Weapons against Iniquity; our Flames in Prayer,
and Wings to Heaven. Therefore Watch these Affections: They are a Cole quickly
Kindled, but not so quickly Extinguished.

Your Safety lies much in this, How they are Set, and how they Work. The same
Strings may make Pleasant Music, or a Jarring Discord: All is as they are Set
and Fingred. Your Affections may be either your Pleasant Garden, or your
Turbulent Ocean: Therefore Watch them for Rectitude of Motion, for Measure of
Motion, and for Order of Motion.

If your Love (which is the General of the Affections) should be set not on
God, but the World or Sin:

If your Hatred should be directed not against Sin, but Good Men; or which is
worse, against Goodness it self:

If your Zeal should not be pure Flames for Divine Glory, but a burning Rage
against his Truth. If your Fear should not be a Flight from Evil, but an
Apostasy from Christ: If your Anger should be a Displeasure at another's
Eminencies, and not at your own Exorbitances: If your Hope should not be a
well-ballanced Expectation of Happiness, but a blind and venturous Presumption
of Mercy: And if your Grief should be Trouble, that you cannot be, and do more
Evil; Ah! how Vile, how Irregular, how Dangerous are Affections thus Routed and
Dis-ordered! But if Love and Hatred be looked unto to Keep their Right Centers,
to Move toward their Proper Objects, to Love nothing but Good, to Hate nothing
but Evil: Now there is Rectitude; and now there will be Peace and Comfort.

But stay not here; Watch likewise your Affections for their Order and Measure:
it is difficult to keep and observe these. O! How much Holiness of Heart, and
how large an Influence of Spiritual Wisdom is required to Guide the Affections
with an even and befitting Pulse, to keep those Metals in an Expedient Heat,
That I should utterly Hate and Abhor the Sin, and yet Mercifully Pity and Love
the Person! Be at the same time thoroughly Zealous, and yet abundantly Meek!
Contend earnestly for the Faith, and yet all this Contending to be carried
without any Contentiousness! Beat down Errors, and yet not Revile Persons!
Patiently bear Afflictions and Injuries with Silence, and yet not Slight any
Suffering with Unsensibleness! That when I do Behold much Mercy, yet I should
Fear! And when I Feel much Sin, yet I should Hope! Not Presume, nor yet
Despair! But temper Faith and Fear, Grief and Hope together.

This is the Orderly Composure of our Affections; and the Exercise of it is
very Difficult, though very Necessary: And therefore Watch!

The last Bull-Wark or Fort, which you must keep Watch on, is Conscience:
Solomon calls it the Heart, which must be kept with all Diligence. There is
much to be said, why it is to be Watched, that I will say but little. Is it not
God's Vicegerent in Man? The Spy up on us? Our Great Counselor? Our Best
Friend, or Worst Enemy? Our Heaven of Peace, or Hell of Torment? Our Wall of
Brass, or Prison of Iron?

Know ye not the Vigorous Supports of its Excusing Testimony? What Confidence
it gave to the Martyrs at the Bar? and what Rejoicing even in the Flames?

Have ye not heard the Terrible Affrightments and Amazements of its Condemning
Power? How when it has been awakened and stirred, it has so Imprinted on the
Proud Sinner the Wrath of the Great God, that he has been driven to Great
Consternation?

Well! be Advised in time! Great Sins will make Great Wounds in Conscience;
yea, and Little Sins Committed against the Light of Conscience, will occasion
great Stirs and Troubles. Speak no more against Conscience! Write no more
against Conscience! Flatter no more against Conscience! Live not in any Sin! do
nothing against Conscience!

Remember what befell Francis Spira, who adventured against the strong Dictates
of his Conscience; he could not Recover Peace to his Dying-Day. Remember what
besel Origin, who consented to Sacrifice: But Lord! What Horrors! what
Confusions! what Lamentations! what Despairs! what Extreme Exigencies in
Conscience did attend him for Sinning thus!

Remember Judas also, who Sold his Master to the High Priest: He Sold his
Master indeed, but Sold his Peace too. Instantly is he Arrested, and Charged by
Conscience; and the Guilt of his Sin Crucified Him, before the Rage of the
Soldiers could Crucify his Master. No Rest! no Hope! He chose Death rather
than Life; and hastened to Hell it self for some Ease!

O therefore Watch to Conscience! Get it Renewed and Purged from Dead Works!
Obey it, when it brings Light from Heaven to Command! Wound it not by Corrupt
Errors and Practio^s! Keep it Undefiled, and Resolute. Farewell Peace! farewell
Comfort, Hope, God, Heaven, Happiness, if you Sell your Consciences!

But if you would Live in Life, (Enjoy your Selves!) Live in Death, (Enjoy your
Hopes!) Live after Death, (Enjoy God and Christ!) As you desire Comfort from
God, from the Creatures, from your Selves, Watch! keep Conscience Right and
Sound! No, not for all the World make Shipwreck of Conscience! Thy Ark is Lost,
if Conscience be Split.

Secondly, The Ports or Gates to be Watched and Guarded; by which We Go out,
and an Enemy may Come in. These Ports are our Outward Senses, by which the Soul
Goes out, and Objects Come in.

I cannot so distinctly Prescribe for these, as for the rest; only this we
know, That Sensible Objects have great Force to actuate and excite Peculiar
Corruptions; and Vile Temptations usually slip in, and Cooperate with Outward
Representations. Satan by the Goodly Fruit deceived the Eye of Eve, and
Corrupted her to Transgression. David's wandering Eye occasioned two Horrid
Sins, one of Adultery, the other of Murder.

Therefore set a Strict Watch upon this Port, or Sense of Seeing. Job did so:
He made a Covenant with his Eyes. And Solomon Advises the Iunker not to Look on
the Wine, when it gives its Color in the Glass: And also not to Come near the
Doors or Presence of the Strumpet. Epiphanius says, That in the Old Law, when
any Dead Body was carried by any House, they were enjoined to shut their Doors
and Windows. And in a Moral Sense the same Counsel were good for us: When any
Objects are apt to come in at the Windows of our Eyes, Entising, Alluring us to
Sin, shut the Windows presently, lest Death should Enter by them.

My Eye (says Jeremy the Prophet) affects my Heart: Some read it thus; My Eye
has Sacked or Oculus meus depraedatus est animam meam.
Rifled my Soul. How Genuine that Reading is, I stand not on; only this, A
Careless Eye may quickly make a Graceless Soul.

The same might be said for another of our Ports, viz. our Hearing: It is a
double Wicket, and has a double Lock. Not that we should be ready to Hear
Much, but Well. Generally we account Hearing the Sense of Discipline; and so it
is, either of Good or Evil: But Naturally more open to Syren's Songs, than to
Heavenly Ditties; to Ziba's Slanders, Doeg's Informations; to Flatteries, to
Evil Counsels, Speeches, Seductions; rather than to the Precepts, and
Afflictions, and Reproofs of God. And therefore not without Cause does Christ
double the Guard at this Port: Take heed, what you Hear; and, Take heed how you
Hear. He Watches well at this, who delights to Hear the Voice of Christ, and
to follow it.

Thirdly, The Outworks to be Watched.

The Outworks are our Conversations: These Works of ours are that Part of our
Camp, which faces toward the World, the Eyes of Men.

There are some Internal Operations of the Soul, as the Thoughts and Desires,
etc. which only God can see, and our own Consciences: And there are other
Operations, as Words and Actions, which are External; which all the World may
see: And according to the Difference of our Relation to God, and Condition of
Place with Men they are more or less Conspicuous or Observable.

Christ gives this general Advice: Let your Light (he means principally that
Light of Life) so shine amongst Men, that they may see your Good Works, and
Glorify your Father.

Answerable to it is St. Paul's Admonition to the Philippians:

Let your Conversation be such, as becomes the Gospel of Christ.

Men judge of our Inward Temper by our Outward Pulse: Not what we are, but what
we do, is the Object of their Eye, and the Copy of their Imitation.

I will say no more of this; but let your Conversations be as straight a Line,
as may be, still drawn by the Rule: As Fair a Letter as may be, still written
without Just Rebuke or Spot: As even a Balance as may be, hanging without
Fraud and Injustice: As Fruitful a Grape as may be, dropping out into all the
Good Works of Piety and Charity: And as Sober a March as may be, without Vain
Excesses, and Boisterous Luxuriousness.

And thus you have heard touching Christian Watchfulness and Vigilance; what
it is they are to VVatch; and how they must VVatch it.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, Adventure not upon Occasions of Sin, lest thereby you Tempt the
Devil to Tempt you. It is our Wisdom, as we would shun Sin, to avoid all
Occasions of all Sins what-so-ever.

Stand therefore at a great Do as Mariners; when they know of a Rock that will
split them, they go not near it.
Distance from Satan: Take heed of Nibling and Playing with the Devil's
Golden-Bait, lest the Hook catches you. Go not near the House of the Harlot;
but Fly from all Appearance of Evil, 1 These. 5. 22.

The best Course to prevent Falling into the Pit, is to keep at the greatest
Distance: Such, that do adventure to Dance upon the Brink of the Pit, may by
the Just Judgment of God fall into the Pit. Would you not be Infected by the
Plague? Come not near those Houses then, in which the Plague is. Would you
avoid a Snare? Come not near the Snare then.

SECT. V.
Thirdly, Delight not so much as in One Traitor within the Castle may do more
Hurt, than a Multitude of Enemies without. Holy Policarp, in the time of the
Fourth Persecution, when he was Commanded but to Swear One Oath, made this
Answer: Four-score and six Years have I served God, and all this while he never
hurt me; How then can I speak Evil of so good a Lord and Master, who has thus
long preserved me. I am a Christian, and cannot Swear: Let Heathens and
Infidels Swear, if they will; I cannot do it, were it to the Saving of my Life.
Not able also is that Instance of Marcus Arethusius.
One Sin; Reserve not One Beloved Lust: Cherish not One Dalilah upon the Lap of
thy Soul; for if thou do, it will break thy Peace, and give thee (as Sampson)
into the Hands of the Philistines. One Sin is enough to entice the Devil, to
entice thee: One Flaw in a Diamond takes away the Luster and Price: One Puddle,
if we wallow in it, will Defile us: One Turn may bring a Man quite out of the
Way: One Hole in a Ship will Sink her: One Dram of Poison may poison a Man:
One Stab at the Heart may kill: So One Sin Allowed, Retained, Cherrished and
Practiced, will certainly undo a Man. Satan can hold a Man sast enough by One
Sin, that he allows and Lives in; as the Fowler can hold the Bird fast enough
by One Wing, or by one Claw.

One Sin is enough to make the Devil run after you: One Sin (I say) is enough
to make the Devil adventure upon you; it is enough to Encourage him in
Assailing you. For Sins are the Devil's In-mates; and if you give way to them,
they will make way for him. Say therefore unto all your Sins, as Ephraim to his
Idols; Get ye hence, I have no more to do with you. Cast them out, and shut the
Doors against them; and if they make Signs for Admittance, give them none at
all: But say to them, I know you not; than God to say to you, I know you not!

Finally, Be not like Herod, who though he heard John the Baptist; yet
Respecting and taking Delight in Herodias, he was spoiled.

SECT. VI.
Fourthly, Hide (with David) the Word of God in thy Heart. Psalm. 119. v. 11.

Thy Haeret mihi semper in animo tua Lex, ne unquam ab illa declinem, and qua
in re te offendam. Simeon de Muis.
Word have I hid in mine Heart, that I might not sin against thee.

I have hid it as a Treasure, that I might not lose it; and as a Rule, that I
might not Sin against thee.

No Weapons, but Spiritual Weapons will be Useful and Serviceable in Fighting
and Combating with the Devil.

The Weapons of your Warfare are not Carnal, but Mighty through God, to the
casting down of Strong Holds.

Now the Word of God is one of these Spiritual Weapons, viz. The Sword of the
Gladius dicitur Sermo Divinus, quia sicut gladius carnes praecidit, sic and
Sermo Divinus concupiscentias carnales. Chrysoft. hom. 8. in Matthew.
Spirit: And there is no Sword, but the Two-Edged-Sword of the Spirit, that
will be found to be Metal of Proof, when a Soul comes to Fight with the Devil.
It Is not a Spitting at Satan's Name, nor Crossing your Selves, nor Leaning to
your own Resolutions, that will get you the Victory. 'Twas not David's Sling
nor Stone, that gave him the Honor and Advantage of setting his Feet upon
Goliath; but his Faith, In the Name of the Lord of Host. The Word of God Read,
Heard and Meditated is a Sovereign Remedy against the Devil's Vide Capel. on
Tentation, page 97, 98, 99, 100, 101, 102, 103.
Temptations. The Word, that Sword well handled in its Preceptive, Promissive
and Threatening Part, will send the Devil packing. A few big Words of our own
will not make this Mighty and Crafty Foe to fly the Field: It must be done by
the Word, which is mighty through God. Learn of Believers when they are
Tempted, should plead as Christ their Savior: Scriptum est, It is Written.
Christ (says Luther) to have our Bible at command, and Satan will not dare to
stay: For all the Devils in Hell cannot stand before the Breath of the Lords
Nostrils.

But for thy Instruction in managing of this Spiritual Weapon, and that thou
may not err, or be mistaken, I shall Transcribe a Pregnant Line out of Mr.
Capel, in his Book of Temptation, viz.

I speak not, as though we were to turn the Text of Scripture into a Charm; as
though to repeat a Place by Rote, and in a heartless manner, would prove a
Bugbear to Satan.

SECT. VII.
Fifthly, and Lastly, Give thy self to Mitttamus preces cordis Legatos. Cypr.
Prayer: Prayer sets God at work; and Satan is sooner Conquered by that, than
by Disputing. Eve disputes, and falls in Paradise. Were we not better at
Praying than Disputing, Satan would quickly get the Mastery of us. Prayer is a
Dei sacrificium, Diaboli flagellum, and Christiani subsidium.
Sacrifice to God, a Scourge to the Devil, and a Shelter to the Soul.

Does the Devil, that Mighty Nimrod and Hunter, pursue thee? Draw nigh to God,
and he will undertake What the Key is to the Watch, that Prayer is to Religion:
It winds it up, and sets it going.
for thee: Look up to the Captain of thy Salvation: And when a Temptation
comes, say; Ah Lord! Here is a Temptation, that would Force me, that would
Deflour my Soul; and I have no Strength to with-stand it. Oh! Help, help, for
thy Honor's sake! for thy Son's sake! for thy Promise sake!

Immure thy self (O my Soul!) as in a Curious Labyrinth, from the tumultuous
World; and like a Spiritual Daedalus, take to thy self the Wings of Faith and
Prayer; and so fly into the midst of Heaven, among the Cherubims, where thou
shall be secured from the Violent Prayer is the Guard, to secure the Fort Royal
of the Heart. Prayer is the Porter, to keep the Door of the Lips; And Prayer is
the Strong Hilt, which defends the Hands.
Assaults of that Red Dragon, and Roaring Lion.

Great Exploits have been done by Prayer, that Weapon of Proof.

By Prayer is like the Ring, which Queen Elizabeth gave to the Earl of Essex;
bidding him, If he were in any Distress, send that Ring to her, and she would
Help him.
Prayer Fire has been quenched, Waters divided, the Mouths of Lions stopped,
Iron-Gates opened, Sin subdued, Grace bestowed, Kingdoms supported,
Church-Enemies scattered; the Blind Restored, the Dead Enlivened, Devils
Dispossessed, and the Blessed God Himself Conquered. Prayer is the Midwife, to
bring all those Mercies into the World to the Believers, which are Conceived in
the Womb of the Promises.

When Satan entered the Field against Paul, the Apostle held up this Shield of
Prayer, to Defend himself against his Fiery Darts.

For this I besought the Lord thrice, 2 Cor. 12. 7.

Though thou art Encompassed with the Black Guard of Hell, yet Praying without
Mr. Capel, in his Book of Temptations, tells us, That we are to Pray for three
things. ^st. Strength to Conquer Satan. Secondly, Wisdom, that we may not be
ignorant of his Wiles. 3dly. Long-Suffering, that we may hold out with him.
Ceasing will set thee at Liberty: If thou art (like the Psalmist) overwhelmed
with Sorrow, this Sighing into God's Ears by Prayer will ease thy Heart. Prayer
is not only a Storehouse of Mercies, but a Fort Royal to Defend the Soul
against Miseries.

CHAP. XI.
I Have now Finished the First Doctrine; and therefore shall proceed to the
Second that the Words afford;

Viz. That Satan dares not Enter the Lists with any True, Sincere Believer,
except he has Commission, or (at least) Permission from God.

The Devil (as we commonly phrase it) is held in a Chain: He and his
Instruments are under the Restraint of the Power of God.

The Devil dares not Enter the Lists; that is, He dares not so much as
Challenge a Believer into the Field, without God bids him: He cannot so much as
meddle, touch, or handle, except God gives forth the Word.

That this Comfortable Point of Doctrine may be rightly managed, we shall do
Three things.

First, Prove, That Satan dares not meddle with True Believers, except he has
Commission, or (at least) Permission from God. Secondly, Lay down some Reasons
for it. Thirdly, Make Improvement thereof by way of Application.

SECT. I.
First, For the First; and we need go no further than the Text; in which we
have an Account of God's Dealing with Peter, and Satan's Dealing with Peter:
Also, And how that Satan could do nothing to Peter, till he petitioned to God,
and had a Grant. But I shall prove this more largly in these Instances
following.

The First Instance is that of Job, (Chap. 1.) wherein we have this Threefold
Account: 1. Of Satan's Accusing Job to God. 2. God's giving Commission unto
Satan to Tempt Job. 3. Satan's Tempting Job upon this Commission or Leave
obtained.

The Second Instance is that of the Herd of Swine: The Devils could not Enter
into them, till Christ told them, they might; Matthew. 8. 31, 32.

The Third Instance, is that of Ahab; whom the Devil could not Seduce to his
Destruction, without Permission; 1 King. 22. 21.

What shall we say? The Devil could not have Entered into Judas without a
Permission; nor Judas Betrayed our Lord without a Permission.

This may suffice then, to satisfy you in this great Comfortable Point; viz.
That the Devil cannot do what he would; That his Power is but a Limited Power:
God holds him in, and will not let him go a Jot further than he pleases.

SECT. II.
The Reasons of this Point of Doctrine are these:

First, Because though Satan has a Power, yet it is not Absolute: His Power is
a Limited Power. Though Satan is Potent, yet he is not Omnipotent: God is above
him. Though he is Mighty, yet he is not Al-mighty: Though he is Great, yet he
is not Greatest: Though he can Do Many Things, yet he cannot Do All Things.
Finally, Satan's Power is narrower than his Will and Malice; otherwise, he had
not left a Church on Earth.

Secondly, As God has set Bounds and Limits to Satan's Power, as his Power is
not Absolute; so it is not Independent: It is Dependent, it hangs upon the
Power of God.

Thirdly, Though the Devil is a Spirit, yet he is but a Created Spirit; God
only an Uncreated Spirit. Now, the Created Spirit is the Less, the Uncreated
Spirit the Greater; and the Less is subject to the Greater: The Devil therefore
is subject to God. The Created Spirit is Finite, the Uncreated Spirit Infinite:
The Finite is Overruled by the Infinite; Therefore, Satan by God.

Fourthly, Though Satan is a Prince, yet he is but a Captive Prince; and though
he has a little Liberty to go up and down; yet he is under Bail, and in
Irresistible Chains of Providence.

Fifthly, Though Satan is Ruler, yet it is only of this Lower World; not of the
Heavenly. The Highest the Devil can go, is the Air, called, The Prince thereof:
He has nothing to do with the Upper World. Heaven fears no Devil; and
therefore, its Gates stand always open. Never durst this Fiend look into that
Holy Place, since he was first Expelled; but Rangeth to and fro here Below, as
a Vagabond Creature. Is not then this Matter of Joy, that Satan has no Power
there, where the Saints Happiness lies.

All the Mischief the Devil can do, is in our Way to Heaven; not in Heaven. He
cannot come to the Rolls, to blot thy Name out of the Book of Life: He cannot
Null thy Faith, make void thy Relation: He cannot dry up thy Comfort in the
Spring, though dam up the Stream.

Thus much for the Doctrinal Part; I Will come now to the Application of it.

SECT. III.
First, I infer from hence, why it is, that Believers are not Devoured as well
as others: It is not because Satan would not, but because he cannot.

Hence it is, That he Tempts Believers as he does; It is because he can give
them no other Hell. The Devil is sure of Unbelievers, and therefore lets them
alone: He troubles not them about their Salvation, as he does the Believer. All
the Devil does to Believers, is only Vexing and Molesting of them: He would
Devour them. That Believers, I say, are not Devoured, is, because the Devil
cannot: Believers, they are kept by the Power of God, through Faith unto
Salvation.

Satan designs the Destruction of All; and that All are not Destroyed, is not
for want of Good Will in him; but by Virtue of God's Power, and Special Grace.

SECT. VI.
Secondly, From hence learn, That God is to be Eyed, Observed, and taken Notice
of by Believers in their Conflicts, as well as Satan. When we have Combats, we
eye Satan, (he being the Instrumental Cause) as if we were to be Instructed by
him; or, as if we should do well enough, if we could but make up the Quarrel
with him: Not minding God all this while, or Praying to him; who only can
Restrain the Tempter. For is it not God, that permits us to be Tempted, and
that gives the Tempter leave to Buffet us?

SECT. V.
Thirdly, From hence we may learn, That the Way to be freed from Sore
Conflicts, Temptations and Combats, is by Appeasing the Angry God: And if he
does but call-in his Commission, Satan must be forced to stop. For it is God,
that gives Leave to Satan, to do what he does; and therefore, if this God be
thy Friend, Satan can do you no Harm, no Hurt, no Mischief. Maintain then
intimate and close Communion with thy God; who shall for thee bruise Satan and
tread him under thy Feet. Acquaint now thy self with God, and thereby Good
shall come unto thee.

CHAP. XII.
Containing diverse other Uses.

IF it be so, as we have already proved, viz. That Satan cannot meddle with a
Child of God, except he has Commission, or (at least) Permission from God:
Then,

SECT. I.
First, Let not Believers be overmuch dejected, or cast down; because Satan
cannot meddle with them, except their Father gives them Leave. There are Things
that should exceedingly comfort Believers in their Conflicts.

First, The Cause is Good; it is called, The By this it was, that Luther stirred
up Melancthon.
Good Fight of Faith: It Is about Heavenly Things, this Dispute is; Ephesians. 6.
12. It Is to Defend your own Rights and Liberties.

Secondly, The Battle is the Lord's: The Lord is on our Side, and he will Fight
for us.

This Day (says David to Goliath) will the Lord deliver thee into my Hands; for
the Battle is the Lord's, 1 Samuel 17. 46, 47. And,

If the Lord be Maximilian the Emperor, was so delighted with that Sentence of
Paul, [Si Deus nobiscum; If God be with us, who shall be against us,] that he
caused it to be Written upon the Walls in most Rooms of his Palace.
with us, it matters not then, who be against us.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is the Captain of your Salvation, and under him you
Fight: And Jesus Christ is such a Captain, as never turned his back; was never
Foiled; but went always on Conquering, and to Conquer. Nil desperandum Christo
duce, and auspice Christo: Look to Jesus, who is the Leader, and Bringer-up,
the Author, and will be the Finisher of your Faith: And now, What a better
Encouragement would you have, than to Fight under the Conduct of such a
Successful General?

Fourthly, You are to Fight with a The Devil is a Beaten Enemy, and he knows no
March, but Running away.
Conquered Enemy; One, that has been Conquered by Jesus Christ, and by many of
your Brethren: The Devil is not so Dreadful, as he was before Christ Dyed. The
Prince of Peace has Conquered the King of Terrors: and many of your Brethren
have Confuted and Defeated him many times.

Fifthly, You are provided with Armor of Proof, (Armor of God's Making, as
well as of God's Appointing) and there is None like it. You have the same
Sword, that Jesus Christ, and your Brethren have Conquered the Devil by: And
the same Shield of Faith, to quench his Fiery Darts with. This Armor is Mighty
through God; 2 Cor. 10. 3.

Sixthly, God will take care of your Pay; you shall not War at your own
Charges: 1 Cor. 9. 7.

Seventhly, God has promised you Certus enim promisit Apollo.
Success and Victory: He will tread Satan under your Feet shortly, Romans 16. 20.
He shall be cast out, and you shall Overcome him; Rev. 12. 9, 10, 11.

SECT. II.
Secondly, Let Believers be content, with what is allotted unto them in such a
way; For no Temptation is their Lot, but what God is the Allotter of. Not so
much as one Temptation shall pursue a Believer, above and beyond what is
allotted unto him. God has measured out thy Sufferings, O believing Man; and
not so much as one Trial shall thou have beyond the Divine Decree: So many, and
no less; so many, and no more.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, Let Believers take heed, and have a care, how they occasion God to
give Satan a Commission against them. There are several Things (which we would
do well to take heed of) that make God to set Satan upon us: Probably, these
may be some; Indulging one known Sin, or Omitting one known Duty; or being
Secure, when we should be Watchful; Drowsy, when we should be Vigilant; Lasie,
when we should be Diligent; or Asleep, when we should be Praying.

God permits Satan to run upon us for diverse Reasons: Some respect himself;
others us. The Chiefest that respect Himself, is the Glory of Himself; those
that respect us, may be these:

First, That we may be Humbled. (...). Chrysostom.
2 Cor. 12. 7. And least I should be Exalted above Measure, through the
Abundance of the Revelations, there was given to me a Thorn in the Flesh, the
Messenger of Satan to buffet me, lest I should be Exalted above Measure.

The Thorn in the Flesh was to prick the Bladder of Pride. Better is that
Temptation which Demosthenes being asked, What was the First Precept of
Eloquence? Answered, To Pronounce well: Being asked, What was the Secoud?
answered the like: And so the Third in like manner. Sure I am, the Precepts of
Religion, the First, Second, Third are Humility.
Humbled me, than that Duty, which makes me Proud,

Pride is apt to swell like a Bladder, even in the Best Saints; and therefore
the Messenger of Satan is very useful, as God Orders and Disposes it.
Notwithstanding, our being Vile in Progress, Egress, and Ingress, before we
were brought forth; we were as stinking Seed, and our Life but as a Sack of
Dung, and after Death, Meat for Worms: Yet (I say) How incident is Pride unto
us? And, How would it play King in the Heart; but now Temptations cure this? No
Gold that comes out of the Fire, is more Refined than God's Saints, that have
been in the Furnace of Temptations; because Humility was the First Lesson
taught to Adam after his Fall. 2 Cor. 12. v. 7. Dust thou art, and to Dust thou
shall return.
Humiliation is the Product thereof. Temptations Humble us in this Life, that
we might be Exalted in the Life to come If thou desire to Ascend where God
the Father sits, thou must put on Humility, which Christ the Son Teaches.
The truly Humble Soul is a Delectable Seat and Bed, says St. Austin.

Secondly, That we may be Proved and Tried: Fire proves Gold; and so
Temptations prove our Graces. Quam firma sit fides, nostra ostendit Tentatio.
Gerhard.
Faith shaken by Adversity, is confirmed more strongly in the Rock of
Salvation. When the Whirling-Winds, and the Stormy Weaves did beat upon the
Ship, then it appeared, of how little Faith some of the Disciples were. In the
Days of Queen Mary, her Sister Elizabeth was Locked up close in Prison: At
first, she was much daunted; but afterward she breaks forth into this Speech:
The When Grapes come to be pressed, then is discerned, what is in them.
Skill of a Pilot is unknown, but in a Tempest; The Valor of a Captain is
unseen, but in a * Nemo vires suas in pace cognoscit, si enim Bella desunt,
virtutum experimenta no prodeunt. Improvidus est miles, qui fortem se in pace
gloriatur. Greg. Mor. l. 23. c. 18.
Battle; And the Worth of a Christian does not appear, but in a Time of Trial
and Temptation. Strong Winds, Storms and Tempests try, what our Foundation is;
whether we be Built upon the Rock, or the Sands. Men do not know their own
Hearts, till Troubles come: They never thought, they had so much Pride, so much
Impatience, so much Unbelief: They thought, they could have submitted to the
Hand of God; that they could have born more than is now upon them, with
Patience and Meekness. But, now they find their Wretched Hearts murmur, repine,
fret and vex: Now they find Corruptions stir exceedingly.

When the Fire comes to Green Wood, there comes out abundance of Watery Stuff,
that was not discerned before: So Temptations and Afflictions do make that
appear, which before could not be discerned; 1 Pet. 4. 12. Deuteronomy. 8. 2, 3.

Thirdly, That we may be Reformed. Isa. 27. 9.

By this therefore shall the Iniquity of Jacob be Purged; and this is all the
Fruit to take away his Sin.

When Physicians Tentatio etiam purgat: Ad pestiferu^ amoris proprii and
mundani humorem extrahendum multis granis Aloes Medicus Christus utitur.
Gerhard Meditat. 11. page 171.
Purge the Body, they Purge out that which is Good, as well as that which is
Evil: But God Purges out only the Evil. As Aloes kill the Worms, so do fiery
Trials and sharp Temptations kill the Lusts, that are in our Hearts. What the
Flayl is to the Corn, it brings it from the Straw; what the File is to the
Iron, it takes of the Rust; and what the Fire is to Gold, it purges it from
Dross; that is Temptation to the Graces of God's People. Zach. 13. 9. I will
Refine them as Silver, and will Try them as Gold.

Fourthly, That we might be instructed: Instruction does always go along with
God's Rod; and his House of Correction is the Schola crucis, Schola lucis.
Cypr. Sermon. 4. De Immort.
School of Instruction. Qui tribulantur, sacras Literas melius intelligunt; sed
Securi eas legunt, sicut Ovidii carmen.
Those that are Tempted, do better understand Scripture (says Luther) but
those who are secure in their Prosperity, read them as a Verse in Ovid.

Three Things we are instructed in by Temptations: 1. The Malice of Satan. 2.
The Calamity of this Life. 3. That Security must be avoided.

First, The Malice of Satan is discovered in our Temptations, and by them we
come to know it: We clearly see Satan's Hand in every Bullet that he shoots.
Now, it is of great Advantage to a Soldier, that he knows what manner of Enemy
it is, that he is to Encounter with. Finally, None but the Tempted knows, what
the Tempter is; such understand all his Wiles, Stratagems and Devices: They
know, that the Devil is a Malicious Spirit, the Master of Envy, and God's
Childrens Capital Enemy: They know, that the Devil aims their Ruin, and
designs their utter Subversion. They know, that he is a Tempter for his
Suggestions; a Lion, for his Devouring; a Dragon, for his Cruelty; and a
Serpent, for his Subtilty: As his Names are, so is He.

Secondly, Temptations show, what a Miserable Worldly Felicity is but a Painted
Felicity.
World this is: Were we Above, Temptations could not reach us; but here Below,
Temptations attend us: The Devil can shoot his Darts any where here, even in
those Places where we Worship God. What then shall we say? This World is but a
Fluctuating Sea of Troubles; and the Sweetest Comforts contained therein, are
but as Gall and Wormwood.

Thirdly, Temptations do inform us of the Evil of Security, and that it must be
avoided, if we would be truly Secure. Security is oft-times the Cause of
Temptation, and Temptation is oft-times the Remedy of Cogita (devota anima)
salvandi difficultatem, and facile excuties omnem Securitatem. Gerhard.
Security. Temptations are like the Prick at the Nightingale's Breast, that
awakens her, and puts her upon her sweet and delightful Notes: Yea, the Rust of
Security is Filled off by Temptations. The Afflictions of the Godly (says one)
are Bitter Arrows, sent from the Sweet Hand of God to slay our Security.

Fifthly, Another End that God has in suffering us to be Tempted, is, That we
might be quickened to Duty; especially, that of Prayer. The more furiously
Satan Tempts, the more frequently and fervently the Soul does As Incense can
send up no Smoke, or sweet Perfume, till it come into the Fire; So the Prayers
of the Saints do never Ascend so forcibly, as in their Fiery Trials.
Pray. When the Messenger of Satan did buffet Paul, his very next Work was to
go to Prayer. 2 Cor. 12. 8.

For this thing I besought the Lord thrice.

When we are at Peace, God seldom hears from us; but when we are at Wars, How
fervently and frequently do we seek the Lord our God? What Oration sine malis
est sicut avis sine alis. Praver until Affliction stings, is like a Bird
without VVings.
Praying then without Intermission is there? A Christian's Life then is all
Prayer, only Prayer, and nothing but Prayer. The Deer being shot with the Dart,
runs faster to the Water: So the Soul whom Satan shoots with his Fiery Darts,
runs faster to the Throne of Grace. Our Devotions are quickened, and excited by
the sensible Feeling of God's Fatherly Correction; which all his Children are
Partakers of. Therefore quarrel not with God's Divine Providence, in
permitting your Souls sometimes to be Hurried with Satan.

Sixthly. We are Tempted, that it might appear, that we are Sons, and not
Bastards; Heb. 12. 8. And is it not a Blessed thing, to know our selves to be
the Children of God? Why? this is oft-times attained to by Chastisements: For
those whom God Loves, he Rebukes. Afflictions are Love Tokens from God, and
they do demonstrate his Favor unto us: God Afflicts with the same Love that he
Adopts. God is most Deus irascitur, cum non irascitur. Bern.
Angry, when he shows no Anger., says Bernhard. God has (as one excellently
observes) one Son without Sin, but no Son without Stripes. God has Thoughts of
Love in all that he does to his People: The Grounds of his Dealing is Love, the
Manner of his Dealing is Love, and the Ends of his Dealing is Love. The Saints
Troubles are not Penal, but Medicina non p^a, castiga^ non dam^tio. Aug.
Medicinal: They arise not from Vindictive Justice, but from a Fatherly Love.

Seventhly, God permits us to be Tempted, to show his Detestation of Sin, and
to let the World know, that he will not allow of Sin in the Best of his
Children. God's Dealing with his Children are sometimes Penal, as well as
Probational: Herein God's Justice appears. For should he punish Others for Sin,
and spare his Own, Wicked Men would say, He were Partial: But God by Afflicting
his Own, does declare his unspotted Justice; and also terrify the Wicked; who
may Read their future Miseries in the Saints present Troubles. For if Judgment
begins at the House of God, Where then shall the Wicked and Ungodly appear?
If it go thus with the Green Trees, How shall it go with the Dry? If Troubles
happen upon the Sheep of Christ, What shall then happen on the Wolves? If God
deals thus with his Friends, What then shall become of his Enemies?

Eighthly, God permits us to be Tempted, that we might be Cautioned and
Warned: Temptation, the Lesser Hell, makes God's Children to beware of the
Greater Hell. A Christian's * Our (...) will be our (...).
Woes are his Warnings: Warnings to himself, and Warnings to others. And hence
they are strict and precise: Have they Committed such a Sin through Temptation,
They will for the Time to come beware: So that, if a Temptation of that kind
(like Ioseph's Mistress) sollicites unto Evil, they will flee from it.

Ninethly, God permits us to be Tempted for the Exercise of our Graces: It is
one thing to have Grace, and another thing to exercise Grace: And Grace in its
Exercise, it is that Pleases and Delights God. Now Afflictions and
Temptations do stir up the Grace of God within us, and they do keep our Graces
in Vigor: For it is Grace in its Exercise appears Glorious.
Grace in its Actings, that Resemble God; who is Himself a Pure Act, always in
Action: And every Thing, the nearer it comes to God, the more it has its
Perfection in Working. When Spices are Beaten, then they send forth their
Fragrant Smell: So when God's Servants are in the Furnace of Trials, then their
Graces send forth their Sweetness. Grace is always the better for its wearing.
A Tool that is daily used, is kept Bright and Shining: And so Grace, when it is
most Exercised, it is most Glorious and Beautiful. God is highly displeased,
when Graces in our Souls lie Dormant: God loves that his Children should be in
Exercise: For the Soul without Action, is like the Instrument not Played upon,
or like a Ship always in Haven.

Tenthly and Lastly, We are Tempted, that we may be Glorified: The more
Temptations we have now, the more Per angusta ad augusta, per Spinas ad Rosas,
per motum ad quietem, per crucem ad coelum contendamus.
Glory we shall have hereafter. Gerhard in his Meditations says thus: Christ
Descended first into Hell, and afterward he Ascended up to Heaven; and so it
must be with all the Faithful: They must first Descend into the Hell of
Temptation, before they can Ascend up to Heaven: And therefore, the more
Temptations here, the more Glory will be heaped up in Heaven. Romans 8. 17.

If we Suffer with Him (Christ) we shall also Reign with Him: And so 1 Pet. 1.
7.

Nay further, Our Temptations will also Sweeten as well as Augment Heavenly
Glory.

The Philosopher Zeno said; Pleasures were nothing worth, if Torments sometimes
were not Experienced. Tertullian has a very Pathetical Expression, and very
pregnant to the Matter in hand: Majora certamina majora sequuntur praemia.
Tertul. ad Scapulam.
The Greater the Combats, the Greater are the following Rewards. Temptations
do but add Pearls unto our Crown: No Wearing of the Crown, but by Bearing of
the Cross.

I shall conclude with an Excellent Speech of St. Austin.

That I may after this Languishing Life see Christ in Glory, and be Partaker of
so great a Good; What though Sickness weakens me, Labors oppress me,
Watchings spends me, Cold be-nums me, Heat inflames me; nay, though my whole
Life be spent in Sighs and Sorrows; What is all to that Rest, which shall
ensue in the Life to come?

The Result of all from this Doctrine shall be this; If Satan be a Chained
Enemy, let not Christians fear him overmuch.

Look upon all Satan's Fiery Darts, to be but as the Waves tossing Mr. Isaac
Ambroses War with the Devil Book 1.. Page 2. Sect. 2.
the Ark, yet saving Noah: Or as the Whale, swallowing up (yet preserving)
Jonah: Or as the Dragon, pursuing the Woman, yet procuring her greater
Preservation: Or as the File, grating the Iron, yet making it Clearer and
Brighter than before: Or as the Mill, grinding the Wheat, yet making it Useful:
Or as the Coals, heating Perfume, yet making it thereby more Odoriferous.

CHAP. XIII.
I Have now done with the Second Point of Doctrine; and therefore shall proceed
to the Third the Words do afford;

Viz. That Satan in all his Assaults strikes principally at Faith.

This is that which he makes as his Butt, at which he shoots; viz. our Faith:
This he would fain weaken, and (if he could) shatter to Pieces. But that this
Point may be rightly improved, this Method shall be used.

1. What this Faith is? 2. What that Faith is which the ^il strikes at? 3.
Confirm the Point. 4. Assign some Reasons for the same. 5. Make Application.

SECT. I.
First, For the First; What this Faith is? Unto which I Answer; The Word
[Faith] has many Acceptions in Scriptures.

Sometimes it is taken Objectively; and so it imports the Gospel or Object Esquire
Polhil's Treatise of Faith.
of Faith: Thus St. Paul Preached the Faith, Gal 1. 23. That is, the Gospel,
which is the great Engine, that lets down God's Faith to Men, and catches up
Men's Faith to God.

Sometimes it imports a Dogmatical or Historical Faith, which is an Assent to
the Word of God, as True and Infallible: Thus the very Devils believe a God;
and (which is more than many Sinful Worms) they Tremble; Iam. 2. 19.

Sometimes it imports a Temporary Faith, which is but a Dogmatical Faith;
Budding and Blossoming, with some Tastes and Joys in the Things of God: Thus
the Stony Ground Received the Word with Joy, Matthew. 13. 20.

Sometimes it imports Saving Faith. called by the Apostle Precious Faith, 2
Pet. 1. 1.

This Faith Virtually includes all the rest, and it is this, which the Devil
strikes at.

SECT. II.
Secondly, What is that The Devil strikes at Faith, i. e. Saving Faith; and in
striking at that, he strikes at all the rest: But to say, He strikes at
Historical Faith, is not so proper, (because that does not comprehend the Main,
that Satan designs the Ruin of) though in striking at Saving Faith, he does
also strike at Temporal: For the Devil would hinder such a Faith as his own, if
he could.
Faith, which the Devil strikes at? Why? it is Saving Faith; Because that
Faith does apprehend Christ, and his Merits, and fetches from thence Power
against the Devil: And therefore he strikes at it. So that, whenever we talk
of a Faith, that the Devil strikes at, we must still understand a Saving Faith.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, This Point of Doctrine is to be Confirmed; viz. That Satan in all his
Assaults strikes principally at Faith.

Now this appears in these Things.

First, In that God's Childrens Faith has very often Strong Conflicts and
Combats; in so much that they are forced to cry out, and say; Woe is me! What
shall I do? What shall I do? The Saints No such irreconcilable Enemies, as
Faith, and the Devil.
Faith, and the Devil's Temptations do oft-times strive together; like the Sun,
and the Cloud, (to me) a fit Emblem thereof: One would get the Mastery, and the
Other would get the Mastery.

Secondly, In that God's Children's Faith is sometimes weakened and lost
Gradually, as to some Degrees of it; though it shall Recover it self again by
the Powerful Influences of the Holy Ghost. All that I have said about this, may
be confirmed in Abraham, David, Peter and Paul.

SECT. IV.
The Reasons of the Point may be these.

First, The First Reason may be this: Faith has the Pre-eminence above all
other Graces; It is the Chiefest of Graces: It is among Graces, as the Sun is
among the Planets; or as Solomon's Virtuous Woman among the Daughters, Prove.
31. 29. Though every Grace has done Virtuously, yet thou (O Faith) Excels
them. The Apostle indeed gives the Precedence to Love, and sets Faith on the
Lower Hand. 1 Cor. 13. 13.

Now abides Faith, Hope, Charity, these Three; but the Greatest is Charity.

But you must observe, That this Prelation of it before Faith, has a
particular Respect to the Saints Blessed Estate in Heaven; where Love remains,
and Faith cease: In which regard, Love indeed is the Greater; because it is
the End of our Faith. We apprehend by Faith, that we may Enjoy by Love: But if
we consider the Christians present State, while Militant on Earth; in this
respect, Love must give place to Faith. It Is true, Love is the Grace, that
shall Triumph in Heaven; but it is Faith, not Love, which is the Conquering
Grace on Earth. 1 Ioh. 5. 4.

This is the Victory that over-cometh the World, even our Faith.

Love indeed has its Place in the Battle, and does Excellent Service; but it
is under Faith its Leader. Gal. 5. 6. Faith, which works by Love. Even as the
Captain Fights by his Soldiers, whom he Leads on; so Faith works by Love,
which it Excites. Love ('it is true) is the Grace, that at last possesses the
Inheritance: But it is Faith, that gives the Christian Right unto it; without
which he should never have Enjoyed it. Ioh. 1. 12.

To as many as Received Him, He gave Power to become the Sons of God.

Faith is the Grace of Graces: It stands among them, as the Heart in the midst
of the Body: Other Graces are but Stars unto this Shining Sun. And now, that
Faith has such a peculiar Excellency above all other Graces, I shall show in
these following Particulars.

First, In that the Apostle Recommends it to us above all Things whatso-ever.
Ephesians. 6. 16.

Above all, taking the Shield of Faith, wherewith ye shall be able to quench
all the fiery Darts of the Wicked.

That Faith has a Pre-eminence above other Graces, appears 1. By the Piece of
Armor he compares it to, the Shield; which of Old was prized above all other
Pieces by Soldiers. They counted it greater Shame to Lose their Shield, than
to Lose the Field: And therefore, when under the very Foot of the Enemy, they
would not part with it; but esteemed it an Honor, to Dye with their Shield in
their Hand. It was the Charge, that one laid upon her Son, going into the
Wars, when she gave him a Shield;

That he should either bring his Shield Home with him, or he be brought Home
upon his Shield.

She had rather see him Dead with it, than come Home Alive without it. 2. By
the Noble Effect, which is here ascribed to Faith:

By which ye shall quench all the fiery Darts of the Wicked.

The other Pieces are nakedly Commended; Take the Girdle of Truth, Breast Plate
of Righteousness, and so the rest; but nothing singly ascribed to any of them,
what they can do: But when he speaks of Faith, he ascribes the whole Victory to
it: This quenches all the fiery Darts of the Wicked.

Secondly, The Commendations that are given to Faith above other Graces, show
that it has the Pre-eminence: For you shall observe, that in the same Action,
wherein other Graces are eminently Exercised, as well as Faith; even then Faith
is taken notice of, and the Crown set upon Faith's Head, rather than any of the
other. We hear nothing almost of any other Grace, throughout the whole Eleventh
of the Hebrews, but Faith: By Faith, Abraham; by Faith, Jacob, and the rest of
those Worthies did all those Famous Exploits. There was a Concurrence of the
other Graces with Faith in them all: But all goes under the Name of Faith.

The whole Army fight, yet the General or Captain has the Honor of the
Victory ascribed to him. Alexander's and Caesar's Names, are transmitted to
Posterity, as the Great Conquerours, that Over-came so many Battles; not the
Private Soldiers that Fought under them. Faith is the Captain-Grace; all those
Famous Acts of those Saints, are Recorded as the Atchievments of Faith.

Thirdly, The High Office that Faith busieth it self about, shows its
Pre-eminence above other Graces. Now the Office of Faith is twofold. 1. The
Office of Faith is to Unite us unto Christ. 1 Ioh. 1. 3.
Faith, and the Holy Spirit, are the Bonds of the Spiritual Union: The Spirit
on Christ's part, and Faith on Ours. Hence it is, that Faith is called,
Vinculum Unionis, the Ingrafting Grace. And in this it appears, that Faith does
more especially Excel all other Graces: Other Graces make us like Christ; but
Faith makes us one with Christ. By Love and Humility we imitate Christ; but by
Faith we are implanted into Christ. 2. To Justify us.

Being Justified by Faith, we have Romans 5. 1.
Peace with God.

Not Justified by Love, Repentance, Patience, or any other Grace, beside Faith.
O how harsh does it sound in a Christian Ear, Justifying Patience, Justifying
Repentance! If they were concerned in the Act of Justification, as Faith is,
the Name would as well become them, as it does Faith it self: But we find
Justification Appropriated only to Faith; and all other Graces are hedged out,
from having to do in the Act of Justification, though supposed and included in
the Person Justified. Faith (I say) Justifies us not Qualitative, but Relative,
in that it apprehends the Righteousness of Christ, the Subject matter of our
Justification. That we are Justified, is not by any Virtue that lies in Faith;
not in Faith considered purely, as a Grace, but as it has Respect to the
Object: The Virtue is not in Faith, but in Christ.

Fourthly, The Mighty and Universal Influence, that Faith has upon all her
Sister-Graces, makes her the Chief of them all. What makes the Sun so Glorious
a Creature, but because it is a Common Good, and serves all the Lower World
with Light and Influence.

First, Faith finds all the Graces with work. As the Rich Tradesman gives out
his Wool, some to this Man, and some to that; who all Spin, and work of the
Stock he gives them out: So that, when he cease to Trade, they must also;
because they have no Stock, but what he affords them. Thus Faith gives out to
every Grace, what they Act upon: If Faith Trades not, neither can they. To
instance in one or two Graces, for all the rest: Repentance; This is a Sweet
Grace, but set on work by Faith. Niniveh's Repentance is attributed to their
Faith: Jonah 3. 5.

The People of Niniveh believed God, and proclaimed a Fast, and put on
Sackcloath.

All is whist and quiet in an Unbelieving Soul: no News of Repentance, nor
Noise of any Complaint made against Sin, till Faith begins to stir. When Faith
presents the Threatening, and binds the Truth and Terror of it to the
Conscience, then the Sinner has something to work upon.

Secondly, As Faith sets the other Graces on work, by actuating their Objects,
about which they are Conversant: So Faith does assist them in working, by
fetching Strength from Christ. Christ is the Magazine, and Faith the Radical
Grace, sucks Virtue, Vigor and Strength from this Magazine.

Not to speak any more touching the Pre-eminence of Faith above other Graces,
though I might dilate in several Particulars more; I shall conclude this Head
with those several Appellations that are given to Faith, whereby the Glorious
Excellencies of that Grace are shadowed forth. 1. Faith is called a Key,
because as a Key it opens Hidden Heavenly Treasure. 2. Faith is called an Eye;
because as an Eye, it beholds Things, though Invisible. 3. Faith is called an
Hand, because it lays hold on Eternal Life, in that it Apprehends the Merits
of Christ, by which Salvation is Purchased. 4. Faith is called a Mouth, because
it Eats Christ the Bread of Life. 5. It is called a Ladder, by which we Ascend
up to Heaven.

Now in all these, the Excellency of Faith discovers it self. Moreover,

Faith is a Tree, the Root whereof is a Sound Knowledge of God, and his Ways;
The Branches thereof, is Assent and Application: And the Fruits of it is the
Production of Good Works. Yea, so Excellent is Faith, that it is compared to
the most Excellent of Creatures.

Faith is called Gold (1.) Because it has its Original from the Word, which is
more Precious than that of Gold. (2.) It is called Gold, because as Gold among
the Metals excels, so does Faith among the Graces. (3.) It is called Gold, in
regard of its Rarity. Again,

Faith is compared to the Sun in the Firmament, in regard (1.) Of its
Irradiating and Refulgent Beams. (2.) Of its Communication of Light.

SECT. V.
Secondly, Satan strikes principally at our Faith, because our Faith strikes
principally at him: The Devil cannot abide our Faith, because our Faith cannot
abide him. This Shield of Faith strikes at the Devil, by Discovering his
Policies, Unmasking his Deceit, Frustrating his Designs, Diverting his
Intentions, seeking Confirmation in the Word, fetching Strength from Christ.

SECT. VI.
Thirdly, Satan strikes principally at our Faith; because he knows, that if he
can but Subvert and Overthrow it, all the other Graces will fall with it:
While Faith is in the Soul, Love, Hope, Patience and Holy Courage, and diverse
other Graces are then present; But if Faith be lost, (were it possible) then
Love, Patience and Holy Courage will also be lost. Satan knows, That if he
could but Disarm us of our Shield of Faith, we should return Home Dead: It is
Faith, that Defends the Christian in the Exercise of all his Graces.

By Faith we stand, Romans 11. 20.

As a Soldier under the Protection of his Shield stands his Ground, and does
his Duty; notwithstanding all the Shot that are made against him, to drive him
back: But if Faith fails, then every Grace is put to the Run and Rout.
Abraham's Simplicity and Sincerity, how was it put to Disorder, when he
dissembled with Abimelech concerning his Wife? And why? but because his Faith
failed him. Job's Patience received a Wound, when his Hand grew weary; and his
Shield of Faith, which should have covered him, hung down. Indeed, no Grace is
safe, if from under the Wing of Faith: Therefore, to secure Peter from falling
from all Graces, Christ tells him, He had prayed, that his Faith should not
fail. This was the Reserve, that Christ took care should be kept, to Recover
his other Graces, when Foiled by the Enemy; and to bring him off that
Encounter, wherein he was so sadly Bruised and Broken. It is said, That Christ
could not Do many Mighty Things in his own Country, because of their Unbelief,
Matthew. 13. 58.

Neither can Satan do any great Hurt to the Christian, so long as Faith is upon
the place: It is true, he aims to Fight Faith above all; as that which keeps
him from coming at the rest; but he is not able long to stand before it. Let a
Saint be never so Humble, Patient, Devout; Alas! Satan will easily pick some
Hole or other in these Graces, and break-in upon him, when he stands in the
best Array; if Faith be not in the Field, to cover these. This is the Grace
that makes him face about, and take him to his Heels; 1 Pet. 5. 9.

CHAP. XIV.
IF this be so, That the Devil in all his Assaults strikes principally at
Faith; Then hence I infer (1.) The Believers Happiness. (2.) The Unbelievers
Misery.

SECT. I.
First, The Believers Happiness, in that he has a Shield to beat off the
Devil's Blows. They have Faith, which as a Shield, they Defend themselves by.
Faith Resembles a Shield in these Respects.

First, A Shield is a Piece of Armor, that is intended for the Defense of the
whole Body: Other Pieces are only for some particular Part of the Body; as the
Helmet for the Head, Plate for the Breast; but the Shield for the Whole. It was
used therefore to be made very Large: For its Broadness called (...) of (...),
a Gate or Door, because so long and large, as in a manner to cover the whole
Body. To which that Place alludes; Psalm. 5. 12.

Thou Lord wilt bless the Righteous; with Favor thou will compass him, as with
a Shield.

And if the Shield were not Large enough at once to cover every Part; yet being
a Moveable Piece of Armor, the skilful Soldiers might turn it this way, or
that way, to catch the Blow, or Arrow, from lighting on any Part they were
directed to. And this indeed does Excellently well set forth the Universal Use,
that Faith is of to the Christian.

It defends the whole Man: Every Part of the Christian by it is Preserved.
Sometimes the Temptation is levelled at the Head: Satan, he will be Disputing
against this Truth and that, to make the Christian (if he can) call them into
question; merely because his Reason and Understanding cannot Comprehend them:
And he prevails with some upon this very Account, to blot the Deity of Christ,
with other The Doctrine of the Trinity, of the Creation of the World, of the
Incarnation of Jesus Christ, of the Resurrection of the Body, and of the
Re-uniting of Soul and Body, are quarreled with by Humane Reason.
Mysterious Truths of the Gospel, quite out of their Creed. Now Faith
interposeth between the Christian, and this Arrow: It comes into the Relief of
the Christians weak Understanding, as seasonably, as Zerujah did to David, when
the Giant Ishlilenob thought to have Slain him. I Will trust the Word of God
(says Faith) rather than my own Pur-blind Reason.

Secondly, The Shield does not only Defend the whole Body, but is a Defense to
the Soldiers Armor also: It keeps the Arrow from the Helmet, as well as Head;
from the Breast, and Breast Plate also. Thus Faith, it is Armor upon Armor; a
Grace that preserves all the other Graces.

SECT. II.
Secondly, The Unbelievers Misery, in that he has no Shield to bear off
Satan's Blows: An Unbeliever is an unarmed Man; and therefore it is, that the
Devil takes him Prisoner without any Difficulty, and Rules in his Heart freely:
A Temptation overcomes such an one, without little or no Resistance. Nay, an
Unbeliever chooses rather to be taken Prisoner See more of this in Page 219.
by the Devil, than to dye a Conqueror in the Quarrel of God. What then shall
I say?

Lord, Who would be in such a Deplorable Condition for want of Faith? But such
it seems is the Case and Condition of Infidels; among whom, Lord, let not me be
found, lest the Strong Man (Devil) should Enter into me, and Devour me quite.

SECT. III.
Secondly, If this be so, Then here is a Use of Exhortation, which has USE
Second, Of Exhortation.
a double Aspect: 1. To such as have Faith. 2. To such as have not Faith.

SECT. IV.
First, You that have Faith, highly BRANCH 1.
prize it, and value it at a great Rate: This is the Hand, that Receives the
Pearl of Price, Christ Jesus, that Inestimable Jewel. Take heed of Shallow
Conceits of Faith; put an equal Estimate upon it: Value it, I say, and that for
Two Reasons chiefly (1.) Because it is Hard to be gotten. (2.) Because it is
Useful to such that have it.

First, Faith is Hard to be gotten: It is not a Common Universal Grace: It is
not an easy Thing to Believe; but to Believe, is a Powerful Supernatural Work.
To Believe (says Saint Paul) is Mighty Power of God, Ephesians. 1. 19.

To Believe is not only a Power, but an Almighty Power: There is no Power
(below that Power, which Raised Christ from the Dead, and Made this World) can
Raise the Heart of a Man to Believe. When God Made the World, there was nothing
to Oppose; He had only then to do with Simple Nothing: But when God comes to
make the Heart Believe, he finds Opposition and Rebellion. It is a Miracle for
a Man to Believe! Nay, What is Faith, but a Mystery.

Secondly, Faith is very useful to such that have it. Its Usefulness appears in
these Three Particulars.

First, In Repelling Temptations: Without Faith we cannot Resist so much as one
Temptation; Ephesians. 6. 16. By Faith we can Resist Temptations; by Faith we Bear
Afflictions; by Faith we Foil Corruptions; by Faith we Endure Persecutions; by
Faith we Overcome the World; and by Faith we Subdue Sin in its Conception, and
do even make Sinful Thoughts Abortive. No Wrestling with the Devil; no Entering
the Lists with him, but by having this Shield of Faith, which is so exceeding
Useful therein.

Secondly, Faith is Useful in an Art of Spiritual Extraction, that it has:
Faith can Extract Good out of Evil. An Unbeliever can see nothing in
Affliction, but a Lump of pining Grief and Sorrow; But a Believer knows, that
there is a Blessing in it: The Sharpness of it may let out his Corruption; the
Suddenness of it may Alarm his Spiritual Watch; and the Bitterness of it may
Wean him from the Breast of the Creature. Faith explains that Paradox; Can a
Man gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles: Yea, out of Trials and
Persecutions, Faith can Extract Joy and Peace.

Thirdly, Faith is Useful, in that it has a Mighty and Universal Influence
upon all our other Graces. The Spirit of God indeed does infuse all the Seeds
and Habits of Grace: But Faith is the Fountain of all the Acts of Grace: It is
as the Spring in the Watch, that moves the Wheels, and sets them all a-going.
How does Love work, but by Faith? and, How does Humility work, but by Faith?
and, How does Patience work, but by Faith?

SECT. V.
Secondly, Cherish Faith: This is BRANCH II.
(as I have told you) the Cardinal Grace. For the Sake of God, and for the sake
of your Soul, Water this Root.

Now there are Two Ranks and Degrees of Persons, that I shall take occasion to
speak unto. 1. Such who have Faith in a Great Measure. 2. Such who have Faith
in a Little Measure.

First, Such who have Faith in a Great Measure. And that which I have to say
unto you, is Grow: Though you have a great deal of Faith, yet you have need of
more; and it is possible for you to have more: For God has allotted unto every
Believer such a Degree of Grace, unto which he must attain before he is to be
taken up in Glory. The more Strong you are, the more Formidable you shall be to
the Devil. Sirs, Dream not of a Perfection in this Life: Though you have much
Faith, yet you have need of more; and therefore go Forward; because not to go
Forward, Non progredi est regredi.
is to go Backward. Could the Heathen-Painter be so intent and industrious upon
his Trade of Painting, that he could say; Nulla Dies sine linea, Not a Day
without a Line; and all, that he might Excel in that Art; and, Shall not
Christians be more intent upon in their Attendance to the Work of Grace in
their Souls?

Several Motives I shall lay down, that you may thereby be excited to Growth.

Motive I.
First, God calls for it; And shall we deny it? 1 These. 4. 1.

Further-more, Then we beseech you, Brethren, and Exhort you by the Lord Jesus,
That as ye have Received of us, how ye ought to walk, and to please God; so you
would abound more and more.

The Winds and Seas Obey God; Shall We be Rebels? Let us rather give an Answer
like the Echo! Lord, we will Grow: Do thou Bless thy Word and Sacraments to
us; Purge us; Cleanse us; Water us; Manure us; make us Capable of Growth; and
let us Daily Grow in every Grace, and never give over till our Dying Day: Say;
Lord make us every Day Better, and Best of all at last.

Motive II.
Secondly, God is Honored by our Growth: A High-grown Faith Glorifies God. The
Husbandman is Honored, when his Field and Orchard is Fruitful: Let God be
Honored by our Fruits of Piety, Charity, Righteousness, Patience and
Obedience; that Men may say, It is a Good God, and a Good Gospel, that has
wrought on this People.

Motive III.
Thirdly, God gives his Word, and Ministers and Sacraments for this End: All
our Preachers call for Growth. Let not God say:

I have given them the Great Things of my Law; but they esteemed them as a Vain
Thing.

Let not the Preachers say; We have Labored in vain; and have been beating the
Air, and Plowing upon the Seashore.

Motive IV.
Fourthly, If you Grow not, you will Perish by the Hands of Satan; that is, The
Devil will get the Advantage of you. The Tree that Grows not, must be Hewn
down, and cast into the Fire: And is it not better to be Flourishing, than
Perishing? If we take not pains to grow Better, we must suffer Pains for being
Worser.

Motive V.
Fifthly, The Truth of your Faith appears by the Growth of it; Faith may be
Little; but if it be True, it will not always be Little. Those that are of
God's own Planting, are Flourishing in their Old Age. If you begin in
Hypocrisy, you will end in Apostasy: A sound Young Convert proves an Old
Disciple. O let it not be said; Ye did Run well, You had Good Affections, You
were once Zealous! Let your Soundness appear by your Growth and Perseverance.

Motive VI.
Sixthly, A Growing Christian has most Comfort. There is Joy in Knowledge;

The more Knowledge, the more Comfort.

Let him that Glories, Glory in this; That he knows Me, Jer. 9. 23.

There is Joy in Believing, Romans 15. 13.

The more Faith, the more Joy. The Growing Christian gets the strongest
Evidences of God's Favor, of God's Spirit working in him: His Acts of Growth,
and Fruits of Obedience, are Seeds of Joy, and the Groundwork of Consolation.

Motive VII.
Seventhly, The Growing Christian wins Others: Those which Decline, do make as
if there were not that Power in God's Ordinances, that Sweetness in the
Promises, as was expected: As if a Godly Life had not the Contentments, nor
God's Rewards were so Sure, nor his Ways so Happy, as Men take them to be: And
therefore they give over. But he that Grows Better and Better, and holds on;
notwithstanding Opposing Heresies, Schisms, Reproaches, and Pleasant Baits, and
Sweet Allurements; He proclaims Vanity in the Creature, Satisfaction in God,
Power in his Word, Amiableness in Grace; He brings Credit on God's Family,
Honor to the Truth. Others see something in him, which is Supernatural; They
desire to be like him: They are Almost, yea, sometimes Altogether persuaded to
become Professors: They are drawn to Taste of God's Goodness, to Wait at the
Gates of Wisdom, to Read the Bible, to Pray, to make Conscience of their Ways,
by the constant Example of the Holy, Humble, Diligent, Conscionable, Growing
Christian.

These are the Words to them that have Faith in a Great Measure: They must not
be at a Stand, but Grow.

SECT. VI.
I shall now direct my Speech to Such that have Faith, but it is only in a
Little Measure.

First. Be Thankful for what thou have, and that is the way to get more: He
that is most Thankful, shall be most Thriving. What? though thy Faith is
Little, yet art thou not in a better Condition, than those who have None at
all. All Men have not Faith: It is a Rare Jewel. When Christ comes, shall he
find Faith on the Earth?

Secondly, Be Fervent in your Prayers and Supplications unto God: As the
Apostles were. Luke 17. 5.

Lord increase our Faith.

Thirdly, Get your Weak Faith Strengthened by a Holy and Frequent Application
of God's Promises, Meditation on God's Fatherly Affection, and Unspeakable
Goodness; Psalm. 104. 34.

Fourthly, By maintaining and keeping-up a Holy Communion with the Saints of
God; Ioh. 20. 19. 25.

Fifthly, By leading a Sincere and Sanctified Conversation; Psalm. 112. 6, 7, 8.
1 Ioh. 3. 19.

Sixthly, By a Holy Care to shun all Sin, with all Occasions leading
there-unto; Iam. 1. 27. 1 Thessalonians. 5. 22.

Seventhly, and Lastly, By a Patient Waiting on God; Psalm. 40. 1, 2, 3.

Quest. But will a Weak Faith Save me?

Answ. Yes: For it Ingrafteth us into Christ, makes us Just in God's Sight,
gathers * The Promises are made to True Faith, be it Small or Great. Hierom
upon the Beatitudes, observes there the Promises that are made to Weak Grace.
us into the Family of God's Children, and gives us Victory over Sin and
Satan; Ioh. 15. 1. Ioh. 1. 12. Gal. 3. 7. Isa. 42. 3. Isa. 40. 11. 1. Ioh. 5. 4.

A Weak Faith may lay hold on a Strong Christ. If your Faith be not Grown to a
Cedar, yet if it be a Bruised Reed, it is too Good to be Broken: Only, let not
Christians rest in Low Measures of Grace, but Aspire after Higher Degrees. The
Stronger our Faith, the Firmer our Union with Christ, and the more Sweet
Influence we draw from Him: A Weak Faith Christ Chides very much.

SECT. VII.
I now come to speak unto such that have no Faith: And there are Three Things
that I shall do. 1. Lay down some Motives, whereby you may be persuaded to get
Faith. 2. Directions, whereby to attain it. 3. Signs, whereby you may know,
whether your Faith be True or False.

CHAP. XV.
I Am to Lay down some Considerations or Motives, inducing to get Faith, which
shall be derived from the Misery of such that are Faithless; and that in these
following Sections.

SECT. I.
First, You cannot please God, Heb. 11. 6. And wherefore are you Made, if not
to Please God? This is the End of your Creation and Beings. The Creator would
fain take Complacency and Delight in you; but while you are Faithless, he
cannot. Unbelievers are not the Objects of God's Desire; because such can give
no Credit to the Report in the Gospel. Faith Pleases God, but Unbelief Unbelief
is a God-Affronting Sin.
Displeases him.

First, It puts the Lie upon God: It calls in question his Power, Mercy, Truth.
1 John 5. 10.

He that Believes not, has made God a Liar.

Secondly, Unbelief hardens the Heart. Mark 16, 14.

He upbraided them with their Unbelief, and Hardness of Heart. Unbelief and
Hardness of Heart are linked together.

Thirdly, Unbelief is the Root of Apostasy. Heb. 3. 12.

An Evil Heart of Unbelief, in departing from the Living God.

Unbelief Virtually includes all other Sins: It is a Big-bellied Sin.

Finally, As Faith is the Chiefest among Graces, so Unbelief is the Chiefest
among Sins.

SECT. II.
Secondly, You cannot Resist one Temptation: Let Satan shoot his Bullets as
fast as he can, one after another; and for want of True Faith, you shall remain
still, as so many Butts for the same. All of the Devil's Temptations shall find
Acceptance with thee, be they what they will. If Satan suggesteth to thee,
that there is no God, thou will with the Fool, say in thy Heart, There is no
God: Yea, where Faith is not, the Devil's Temptations in all kind shall be
closed with. His Temptations to Diffidence, and Distrust in the Promises will
be closed with; His Temptations to Lust will be closed with; His Temptations to
Avarice will be closed with; His Temptations to Pride will be closed with. What
is there not, but a Faithless Soul the Devil may Allure unto? There is not

Heretics never so much; yet our ^ith shall remain Firm. Though he may Shake
it, yet he shall not Overthrow it: Though he may Darken it, yet he shall not
wholly Eclipse it. The Believer all this while shall be Safe, and as Mount
Sion, which cannot be Removed.

Again, Let the Devil raise up a Multitude of Persecutors: and though they may
Strom us to some purpose by their Threats and Blows; yet our Faith, being
Sheltered under the Wing of Christ, supported and held up by the Intercession
of Christ, it shall never Totally and Finally fail.

Lastly, Let the Devil raise up Schismatics, and by them breed Schism,
Division, Dissension and Discord among the Children of God, (as not long ago in
this Nation he did; and indeed, I know not any thing, that tends more to the
Extirpation of True Zeal and Piety, than the same:) But yet notwithstanding all
these Things, the Faith of God's Elect is whole and entire in its Seed still.

There are diverse Arguments, whereby the Saints Perseverance is clearly
Evinced, and Proved against the Opposers thereof: but I am only confined to
make use of one among them; and therefore to use any of the rest, would be
justly deemed a Digression.

Arg.
What-so-ever our Lord Jesus Christ has Prayed for, shall certainly Mr.
Danson's Vindication of himself against Ives. Page 62.
come to pass: But he has Prayed for the Saints Perseverance, or that they may
not fall away Totally and Finally from Grace.

Ergo, The Saints shall Persevere.

The Major is proved from John 11. 42.

And I know (says Christ to the Father) that thou hear me always.

That Christ now does Pray for Saints Perseverance, is evident from my Text.

But I have Prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.

Now the great Thing, that remains in the Agitation of this Blessed Truth,
(though much Controverted) is to Illustrate the Potency of our Savior's
Intercession; on which depends the Perseverance of our Faith. Now the Potency
of it appears, if we consider these Three Things: 1. The Person that
Intercedes. 2. The Intercession it self. 3. The Persons for whom this
Intercession is made.

SECT. III.
First, If we consider the Person that Intercedes, being the Lord Jesus Christ
himself; who is Admirable for his Excellent Qualifications, and Great Interest,
that he has in Him, with whom he Intercedes. As to his Qualifications; He is
an Advocate, that is Wise, Faithful, Just and Tenderhearted; and therefore
doubtless, will Plead for us after a Perfect, Exquisite and Infallible Manner.
As to his Interest in Heaven, it is Great. For God, with whom he Intercedes, is
his Father: Now, Who can Speed better in this Suit, than God's own Son? Jesus
Christ is the Son of God Two manner of ways: 1. By Eternal Generation,
according to his Godhead; Psalm. 2. 7. 2. By Grace of Personal Union, according
to his Manhood; Luke 1. 35.

If You who are Earthly Parents, can find in your Hearts, to Give unto your
Children when they Ask; How much more then shall God Give unto us his Heavenly
Children, when we Ask of him? But I shall ascend higher.

If God our Heavenly Father can Give unto us his Adopted Children, his Children
that are only made so; How much more will God Give unto Jesus Christ, his Son
by Nature and Generation? If we the Children by Grace, can prevail so much with
God the Father; How much more then his So^ by Generation, betwixt whom there i^
an Unity not only of Nature, but Wi^ also, Ioh. 10. 32. More-over, see wha^ God
himself says to Christ: Psalm. 2. 8.

Ask of me, and I will Give thee.

SECT. IV.
Secondly, If we consider the Intercession it self, 1. In its Nature. 2. In its
Perpetuity. First, In its Nature; which is a Presenting his Person, Sufferings
and Merits unto his Father, for what he desires. Father (says Jesus Christ)
let such a Soul Persevere. Why so (may the Father Reply?) Because (says
Christ) I Suffered to this end. So that God the Father, according to his
Justice, which is Unspotted, says to his Son; Be (...) unto thee as thou will.
So, that Matter of our Saviors Request is but Just and Reasonable: What Christ
desires, is not desired Gratis, upon Terms unbecoming the Holiness and
^ighteousness of God to grant. Jesus Christ can Plead Merit in his Prayers.
^inally, God the Father is under a Co^enant, Tie and Bond to do what he ^ks.
For he Promised us to Christ, (on Condition of his Dying for us) (...) be his,
and Ruled by Him as he pleased: Where-upon Christ Accepted, and a Body was
Prepared for him; and so he became Obedient unto Death, even unto the Death of
the Cross. So that this Number for whom Christ Dyed, is really his, according
to the Faederal Transaction between the Father and Him. Accordingly also the
Mercies that Christ Intercedes for, are as due to him, as the Hire of the
Labor is, when the Work is Faithfully done.

Secondly, Let us consider our Saviors Intercession, in the Perpetuity o^ it:

He ever Lives, to make Intercession for us, Heb. 7. 25.

Our Names are always upon the Heart and Shoulders of this our Great
High Priest before God. His Intercession is a Permanent Importunity.
Christ's Intercession is Importunate and Perpetual. From hence we may draw
(sait^ Sermen 13. on Heb. 7. 25. Page 152.
Mr. Flavel) abundant Encouragemen^ against all Heart-Straitnings, and Dead
ness of Spirit in Prayer.

Thou complainest, thy Heart is Dead Wandering and Contracted in Duty: (...) but
remember, Christ's Blood speaks when thou can not!

Though the Vigor of thy Affections may sometimes Decay in Duty; yet know
then, even then Christ makes Intercession: When thy Prayer is done, Christ's
Prayer is still going on. His Praying is a Praying without ceasing: Yea, he
Incessantly Prays for us.

Christ is a Mediator for Ever; and his Intercession is a Daily Intercession.

It is the Business of Christ now in Heaven, to Intercede for us. Behold,
Christ Intercedes for you in Heaven: And therefore question not the Duration of
your Faith.

Many things here occur, that hinder the Permanency, and the Potency of our
Prayers: But Christ in Heaven meets with nothing, that interrupts his Praying
to, and Interceding with the Father on our Behalf. Christ Jesus is now in the
Exaltation of his Prophetical, Sacerdotal and Regal Office; and therefore what
he Wills, is Granted.

He (Christ) ever Lives, to make Intercession for us.

SECT. V.
Thirdly, If we consider the Persons for whom Intercession is made, being such
whom God the Father has a Kindness for: Did Jesus Christ indeed Intercede for
such, that the Father was no Well-wisher unto, it were something: But now,
these for whom Christ Intercedes, are the Friends of God, and the Children of
God, and the Brethren of Christ: Therefore these must Persevere. Jesus Christ
Prays not for the World, which is Enmity to God; but for a Select Number, whom
God the Father has determined to bring to Everlasting Life, through this
Prevalent and Successful Intercessor in Heaven.

SECT. VI.
Having Finished the Doctrinal Part, viz. Christ's Intercession, which is an
Act of his Priestly Office, is on Grounds of a Believers Perseverance in Faith:
I shall only Answer this Inquiry, that may be made about the Intercession of
Christ.

But why does Christ Pray now, seeing he is in Heaven, and can do all Things.

Answ.

1. Christ could do all Things, when he was upon Earth, and yet he Prayed.

2. Christ Prays now in Heaven, because as Man, he Rejoices both to be
Subject unto God, and to Acknowledge him as the Greater, and the Author of all
Good.

As Christ is Man, he ought not to omit those Things, which are proper to Men,
viz. Prayer.

SECT. VII.
For-as-much, as I have only been admitted to make use but of one Argument, for
the Asserting of Believers Perseverance, viz. Christ's Intercession, which the
Doctrine only contained: I shall therefore furnish you only with some
Scriptures, that may Evince this Truth, now in the Close. For loath I am, to
leave such a Comfortable Doctrine (as this is) Dark; Although what has been
said already about it, might suffice; yet in regard that the Holy Scriptures do
abound with Arguments for it, I shall just touch upon them, and that shall be
all.

CHAP. XIX.
Containing Eleven Arguments from Scripture, for Believers Perseverance; with
the Judgment of the Learned, Ancient and Modern about it.

SECT. I.
Arg. 1.
First, The Father in his Election is Insallible. Matthew. 24. 24.

For there shall arise False Christ's, and False Prophets, and shall show great
To grant Apostasy, would make Election Changeable. Mr. Buckly in his
Gospel Covenant.
Signs and Wonders; Insomuch, that (if it were possible) they shall Deceive the
very Elect.

Those whom God has Determined to be Saved, shall be Saved, let the Power of
Devils, Power of Corruptions, and Power of this World work jointly together
against the Children of God. The Elect cannot be Deceived: There is an
Impossible in the Case. Romans 8. also and verse. 30.

More-over, whom he did Predestinate, them he also Called; and whom he called,
them he also Justified; and whom he Justified, them he also Glorified.

2 Timothy 2. 19. Neverthess, the Foundation stands Sure, having this Seal, The
Lord knows them that are his.

Arg. 2.
Secondly, The Son in his Redemption shall not be frustrated; Heb. 2. 14. Isa.
42. 7. Rev. 3. 7. Matthew. 1. 11. Tit. 2. 14.

Certainly, Christ Dyed to some purpose: He would not have Deserted his
Father's Bosom and Palace for naught.

Arg. 3.
Thirdly, The Spirit in Application of the Benefits of Christ's Passion, is
Irresistible and Unchangeable; Zach. 36. 25, 26, 27, 28, 29. Isa. 11. 6. Luke
3. 5.

SECT. II.
Arg. 4.
Fourthly, The Regeneration of God's People is Perpetual; 1 Pet. 1. 2, 3. 1
Ioh. 3. 9. Iam. 1. 21. Ioh. 1. 14.

Arg. 5.
Fifthly, The Love of God to his Chosen Ones is Unchangeable; Ioh. 13. 1. Ier.
31. 3. Isa. 54. 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 10.

Arg. 6.
Sixthly, Their Union with their Head, Christ Jesus, is Unseparable; Ioh. 10.
28. Matthew. 16. 18. Hos. 2. 19.

Arg. 7.
Seventhly, The Kingdom and Dominion of Christ within them is Invincible; Luke
1. 33. Luke 21. 22. Dan. 2. 44. Psalm. 2. 9.

Arg. 8.
Eighthly, The Power by which they are Supported is Unconquerable; 1 Pet. 1. 4,
5. Psalm. 73. 24. 1 Cor. 1. 8, 9.

Arg. 9.
Ninethly, No Temptation shall utterly cast them down; 1 Cor. 10. 13. Matthew. 8.
26.

Arg. 10.
Tenthly, The Saving Gifts and Graces of God's Spirit are without Repentance;
Romans 11. 29. Ier. 32. 40, 41.

Arg. 11.
Eleventhly, All turn for the Best to them, that Love God; Romans 8. 28.

All these Arguments (Christian Reader) in my Mind, do so Evince the Truth,
that no Grounds of Doubting can be left.

SECT. III. Testimonies Ancient. 1.
That this Truth may not appear as a Novelty, see it owned by the Church, and
diverse Worthies Ancient and Modern.

Saint Chrysostom on Luke 22. verse. 32. (...). Chrysostom.


[But I have Prayed for thee, that thy Faith fail not.]

-- seems to be of this Opinion:

Mark (says he,) he does not say; I have Prayed for thee, that thou should
not Deny me; but, I have Prayed, that thy Faith should not Vanish, and be
Abolished.

As for Augustine, it is well known, he writ a whole Book of the De Bono
Persever.
Perseverance of the Saints; in which he has these Excellent Expressions:

Haec Perseverantia dicitur esse continua Fidei professio and fructuum Fidei
demonstratio: quoniam Electi sem^er retinent Fidem, and aliquos Fidei fructus.
Semper sunt instar ^oris Plantatae ad rivos aquarum, Psalm. 1. v. 3. Semper man
Jehovae sustentantur, Psalm. 37. v. 24. Sunt similes mon^ Sionis, qui non
dimovetur.
Perseverance is a continual Profes^ of Faith, and Demonstration of the ^its of
Faith: Because the Elect al^es Retain their Faith, and some ^its of it. They
are always as the ^ee planted by the Riverside, Psalm. 1. verse. 3.

They are always held up by the Hand (...) Jehovah, and therefore cannot fall.

They are always like Mount Zion, which cannot be Removed, Psalm. 25. ^rs. 1.

Bernhard in his Epistle 129. and Ser. ^7. Cant. has many Excellent Things
^out Perseverance.

Those who would be further Satis^d, as to the Judgment of the Fa^rs, may find
Passages enough for ^at end, Collected to their Hands, (...) Dr. Kendal's
Sancti Sanciti, in Eng^h; and in Latin in Hier. Zanch. De ^rs. Sanct. in
Miscell. V. 3. Oper.

Theolog. Didact. Scholast. Page 766. Cap. 29. De Conservatione Electorum.
Alsted, in his Famous Book of Theology says; That Perseverance is a Gift, and
such a Gift, whereby God does so firmly keep his Elect in a State of Grace, as
that they shall never fall from thence.

Dr. Wolleby in his System of Divinity, has Five Arguments deduced. * Christ.
Theolog. Page 184. Cap. 32. De Sanctorum Perseverantia.


1. From the Certainty of our Election; Matthew. 24. 24. 2 Timothy 2. 19. 2. The
Certainty of our Vocation; Romans 11. 29. 3. The Certainty of our Faith, though
Weak, if it be True. 4. The Certainty of our Justification; Romans 8. v. 1. 5.
The Certainty of our Sanctification; Phil. 1. 6.
Calvin was clearly for this Point, as you may see in his Institutions.
Institut. Lib. 2. Chap. 5. Sect. 3.


Luther's Words about this Doctrine are many, in diverse of his Writings: One
Passage of his especially I cannot omit; which I find quoted by Dr. Manton in
his Notes on Jude, page 58.

Sicut impossible est massam a pasta separare, etc.
As it is impossible to sever the Leaven and the Dough, when they are once
mingled and kneaded together; So Christ and a Believer, when they are United
together, there is no Parting more.

Melancthon on these Words, --

[Quis separabit nos a dilectione Melancthon in Epistol^m ad Romans Cap. 8. Page
170.
Dei?

Who shall separate us from the Love of God?] --

-- has these Famous Lines, which I shall Transcribe:

Conclusio est totius Consolationis, Cum Deus diligat nos propter Meritum and
Intercessionem Filii, certissimum est, servaturum esse Ecclesiam, etiamsi est
infirma, and horribilibus Furoribus Diabolorum and Impiorum oppugnatur.

Disputant autem hic aliqui, An possit Electus amittere Dilectionem, qua Deum
diligit? Haec Question aliena est ab hoc loco. Dictum est autem alibi; Electos
posse labi, sicut lapsi sunt Adam, Eva, Aaron, David.

Paulus autem hic loquitur de Dilectione, qua Deus universam Ecclesiam diligit,
and loquitur de Conservatione Universae Ecclesiae. Deinde etiam de singulis
Membris, quae reverae per Fidem sunt Ecclesiae Membra.

Haec Dilectio in Promissione revelata est, quae affirmat Deum semper
collecturum esse Ecclesiam, quae in tota Eternitate fruetur ejus Vita,
Justitia, and Laetitia, juxta Dictum, Portae Inferorum non praevalebunt
adversus eam.

Adfirma^ item Promissio Conversos, qui vera Fide inseruntur Christo, diligi a
Deo: ut Johan. 14. dicitur; S^ quis diligit me, sermonem meum servabit. De hac
Certitudine hic loquitur, qua Conservationem universae Ecclesiae scimus certam
esse. Certo etia^ scimus, singulos perseverantes in Fide, salvos fore. Addit
igitur, Servabitur Ecclesia, etiamsi erunt magna Certamina; and oppugnabitur
variis modis, dulcedine Vitae, metu Mortis, insidi is Diabolorum, terroribus
Tyrannorum and Exercituum. Nam Tyranno^ nominat (...), Exercitus autem (...),
videlicet, Tota agmina persequentium

SECT. IV. Modern Testimonies. 2.
WE B. Usher's Body of Divinity.
are in a better State by Christ, than we should have been in, if we had
continued in Adam; speaking of Perseverance.

I shall Transcribe a Letter concerning Falling away from Grace, by that
Incomparable Prelate, The Shaking of the Olive Tree, Page 38^
Joseph Hall.

My good Mr. B. you send me Flowers from your Garden, and look for some in
return out of mine: I do not more willingly send you these, than I do
thankfully receive the other. I could not keep my Hand from the Paper, upon the
Receipt of your Letters, though now in the Midst of my Attendance. As my Desire
of your Satisfaction calls me to Write something; so my other Employments force
me to Brevity, in a Question wherein it were easy to be endless.

I am sorry, that any of our New Excuti-fidians should pester your Suffolk;
although glad in this, that they could not light upon a Soil more Fruitful of
able Oppugners. It is a Wonder to me, to think, that Men should labor to be
Witty to rob themselves of Comfort. Good Sir, Let me know these New Disciples
of Leyden, that I may Note them with that Black Coal they are worthy of:
Troublers of a better Peace than that of the Church, the Peace of the Christian
Soul. They pretend Antiquity; What Heresy does not so? What marvel is it, if
they would wrest Fathers to them, while they use Scripture it self so
Violently? For that their First Instance of Hymeneus and Alexander, how vain is
it, like themselves?

Nothing can be more plain, than that those Men were Gross Hypocrites; who
doubts therefore, but they might fall from all that Good, they pretended to
have: What is this to prove, that a True Child of God may do so? But (say they)
these Men had Faith, and a Good Conscience: True, such a Faith, and Goodness of
Consci^nce, as may be incident unto a Worldly Counterfeit. Yea, but (they
reply) a True Justifying Faith: I think, such an one as their own; Rather, I
may say, These Men deserve not the Praise of Hymeneus his Faith; which is
nothing in this place, but Orthodox Doctrine. How often does St. Paul use the
Word so to his Timothy. 1 Timothy 4. 1.

In the latter Times some shall depart from the Faith (Interpreted in the next
Words) And shall give Heed to Spirits of Error, and Doctrines of Devils. And 2 Timothy 3. 6. he describes his False-Teachers by this Title, Reprobate, concerning
the Faith; which I think, no Man will Expound of the Grace, but the Doctrine.
Yet (say they) there is no necessity binds us to that Sense here. But the Scope
of this Place compared with others, may Evince it. That which follows, plainly
points us to this Meaning, (that they might learn not to Blaspheme:) Their Sin
was therefore an Apostasy from the Doctrine of the Gospel, and casting foul
Aspersions upon that Profession: So that an Opposition to wholesome Doctrine was
their Shipwreck. They except yet: A Good Conscience is added to this Faith:
Therefore it must needs be meant of Justifying Faith. Do but turn your Eyes to
1 Timothy 3. 9. where (as in a Commentary upon this Place) you shall find Faith,
and a^ Good Conscience so conjoined, that yet the Doctrine, not the Virtue o^
Faith is signified: St. Paul describe^ his Deacon there, by his Spiritua^
Wealth.

Having the Mystery of Faith i^ Pure Conscience, no Man can be s^ Gross, to
take the Mystery of Fait^ for the Grace of Faith; or for an^ other, than the
same Author (i^ the same Chapter) calls The Mystery of Godliness. It is indeed
fit, that a Good Conscience should be the Coffer, where Truth of Christian
Doctrine is the Treasure. Therefore both are justly commanded together: And
likely each accompanies other in their Loss. And that of Irenaeus is found true
of all Heretics; Sententiam impiam, vitam luxuriosam, etc. Yea, but Hymeneus
and Alexander had both these then, and lost both.

They had both in outward Profession, not in inward Sincerity: That Rule is
Certain and Eternal; If they had been of us, they had continued with us.
Nothing is more ordinary with the Spirit of God, than to suppose us such as we
pretend; that he might give us an Example of Charity in the Censure of each
other: Of which kind is that noted Place, Heb. 10. 29. And counted the Blood of
the Testament, wherewith he was Sanctified, an Unholy Thing: And those unusual
Elogies, which are given to the Churches, to whom the Apostolical Letters were
Directed.

This Place therefore intends no other, but that Hymenaeus and Alexander, which
were once Professors of the Christian Doctrine, and such as lived orderly, in
an Unblameable, and outwardly Holy Fashion to the World; had now turned their
Copy, cast off the Profession which they made, and were fallen both to Looseness
of Manners, and Calumniation of the Truth they had abandoned.

For that other Scripture, Romans 8. 12, 13 no Place can be more effectual, to
cut the Throat of this Uncomfortable Heresy. St. Paul writes to a Mixed
Company: It were strange, if all the Romans should have been truly Sanctified.
Those which were yet Carnal, he Threats with Death: If ye live after the Flesh,
ye shall Die.

Those which are Regenerate, (contrary to the Wicked Paradox of those Men) he
assures of Life: If ye Mortify the Deeds of the Flesh by the Spirit, ye shall
Live. How does he Exclude the Spirit of Bondage to Fear, which these good
Guides would lead in again? How confidently does he aver the Inward Testimony
of God's Spirit to ours; and ascribes that Voice to it, which bars all Doubt
and Disappointment; and tells us by the Powerful Assurance of this Abba, We are
Sons, and if Sons, Heirs, Coheirs with Christ?

Let them now go on, and say; That God may Dis-inherit his own Son, that he may
Cast off his Adopted: But, say they, to the same Regenerate Persons he applies
these Two Clauses; and says at once, Ye have Received the Spirit of Adoption;
And yet, If ye walk after the Flesh, ye shall Dye. What follows of this
Commination? Any Assertion of the Possibility of Apostasy in the Regenerate?
Nothing less. These Threats are to make us take better hold, and to walk more
warily. As a Father that has set his Little Son on Horseback, (it is Zanchies
Comparison) bids him hold fast, or else he shall fall, though he uphold him the
while; that both he may cause him hereby to sit fast, and call the more earnest
for his Supportation. But the Scope of the Place plainly extorts a Division of
Carnal Men and Regenerate. The Threats are propounded to the One, the Promises
and Assurance to the Other: And therefore no Touch from hence, of our
Uncertainty in a Confessed Estate of Renovation.

For that Matthew. 12. 43. The Apodosis, or Inference of the Parable might well
have stopped the Mouths of these Cavillers: For you shall find in the End of it:
So shall it be with the Wicked Generation. I suppose, no Man will be so Absurd,
as to say, These Jews had formerly received True Justifying Faith: How should
they, when they rejected the Messiah? And yet of them is this Parable spoken by
our Saviors own Explication. Maldonate himself, a Learned and Spightful
Jesuit, can Interpret it no otherwise. Ideo Christus hoc dixit, ut doceret,
pejores esse Iudaeos, quam si nunquam Dei legem and cognitionem accepissent.
And to this purpose he cites Hilary, Hierom, Beda. And this Sense is so clear,
that unless the Seven Devils had found Harbor in the dry Hearts of these Men,
they could not so grossly Pervert it. Quench not the Spirit, 1 Thessalonians. 5. will
never prove a Final or Total Extinction of Saving Grace The Spirit is Quenched,
when the Degrees of it are abated; when the Good Motions thereof are by our
Security let fall. We grant, the Spirit may be Quenched in tanto, not in toto.
Or if we should so take it, as they desire; I remember Austin Parallels this
Place with that other to Timothy; Let no Man despise thy Youth: Note (says he)
That the Spirit can be Quenched, or that Contempt can be avoided; but that in
the one we may not endeavor to do that, which may tend toward this Wrong to
the Spirit; and in the other, that we should be careful not to do that, which
may procure Contempt. The Place I remember not directly; But Numeros memini, si
verba tenerem: But in all likelihood, that Place sounds quite another way; as
may appear by the Connection of it with those two Sentences following. As if he
should have said; Discourage not the Graces, that you find in any of your
Teachers; Despise not their Preaching; Try their Doctrines. And now, What is
this to the Falling away from Grace? Which of us do not Teach the Necessity of
Perseverance? He only that Endures to the End, shall be Saved. Be Faithful to
the Death, and, etc.

But he that has Ordained we shall be Saved, has Ordained our Perseverance,
as a Mean to this Salvation; and has appointed these sharp Advices, as the
Means and Motives of our Perseverance: So as he that shall be Saved, shall also
Endure to the End; Because no Man shall pluck them out of my Hand, says
Christ. How evidently does the Spirit of God proclaim our Certainty against
these Doubt-Mongers? Every where is he as full of Assurance, as these Men of
Dis-comfort. He that is Born of God, sins not, neither can sin; because 1
Ioh. 3. 3.
he is Born of God, and the Seed of God remains in him: What an Invincible and
Irrefragable Consolation is this? The Seed of Life is Sown in the Hearts of the
Elect; ^ho they could be Dead to themselves, yet to God they cannot. And what a
Supposition is that of Christ; That if it were possible, the very Elect should
be Deceived? Desponsabo te mihi in perpetuum; and a Thousand of this Strain;
which your Exercise in those Holy Leaves has (I doubt not) abundantly furnished
you withal. Hold fast then (my Dear Friend) this Sure Anchor of our
Undeceivable Hope: And Spit in the Face of Men or Devils, that shall go about
to slacken your Hand. Let these Vain Spirits sing Despair to themselves: For
us, We know whom w^ have Believed.

Thus has my Pen run it se^ out of Breath, in this so Important a Demand; and
much ado have (...) had to Restrain it: Neither would I give you one Hour's
Intermissio^ to my Answer; which I know^ your Love cannot but accept, all that
which comes from an Heart Zealous both of God and You.

I shall now add the Testimony of Another; who speaking of a Believers A
Practical Commentary on Jude, By Tho. Manton D. D. Page 57, etc.
Perseverance, the Grounds of it tells us thus:

There are some Grounds on Go^ the Father's Part; viz. His Everlasting Love,
and All-sufficien^ Power. 2. There are Grounds o^ Christ's Part; His
Everlasting Merit, and Close Union between hi^ and us, and Constant
Intercession^ 3. On the Spirits Part, there is (...) Continual Influence, so a
to maintain the Essence and Seed of Grace, etc.

Another also says this:

Are you in Christ Jesus? Here Is Comfort as to your Perseverance, Doctor Jacomb
on Romans, page 83.
Stability and Fixedness in the State of Grace.

Another also says, speaking of Believers Mr. Cases Mount Pisgah. Part 1. Page
39. etc.
Union with Christ:

Here we may consider the Main Foundation and Reason of the Saints
Perseverance.

CHAP. XX. Containing a Use of Information an^ Reprehension.
SECT. I. Use 1. Of Information.
IS it so then, That the Faith of Elect Believers is so Secure by Virtue of
Christ's Intercession, as that i^ shall never Totally and Finally fail, le^ the
Devil strike never so hard, or often at it?

Then hence may be inferred the Excellency of the Gospel, above tha^ of the Law;
of the Second Adam, above that of the First; of the Evangelical Righteousness,
above that of the Legal. Sirs, Adam was created Perfect, but he could not keep
himself so; for being left in that State to the Freedom of his own Will, he
soo^ fell: But we that are under the Gospel Dispensation, are not left to the
Freedom of our own Will. Here Is our Excellency! Here Is our Happiness! and
Here Is our Unspeakable Privilege! That if once we can but get into Christ, we
need not fear a Final Apostasy. I do not dissuade from the Duty of Fear, but
from the Sin of Fear. It Is not here in and out; in to Day, and out to Morrow:
But it is Once in Christ, and Ever in Christ; Once a Believer, and ever a
Believer. ^ve has Thrown us down, but Christ has Raised us up: Eve's Tree ^f
Knowledge of Good and Evil has Thrown us down; but Christ the Tree of Life,
has Raised us up. St. O felix Culpa quae talem ac tantum meruit habere
Redemptorem.
Gregory is no afraid to say; O ^ppy! happy, happy Man was Adam, that ever he
so Sinned and Transgressed; ^cause by this Means both He and We ^ve found such
Plentiful Redemption, ^ch Inestimable Mercy, such Super^undant Grace, such
Felicity, such Eternity, and such Life by Christ's Death! As the Death of the
Lion was Sampson's Sustenance, so Christ's ^all is our Honey; and the Bitter
Death of Christ on the Cross, is the Sweet Life of Man, and the Basis of (...)
Believer's Perseverance.

SECT. II. Use 2. Of Reproof and Terror.
Secondly, If this be so, Then this strikes Terror to the Devils, and Reproof
to such (who-ever they be) that do Oppose this Soul-Chearing Doctrine. Terror
unto the Devils, in that they may strike hard, and again, and again; yet the
Faith o^ Elect Believers shall not Fail. Repro^ unto Arminiaus.
such, who are not ashamed to say; That God may Crown a Man one Day, and
Un-crown him the next: Such who blush not to say; That a Man may be Happy, and
Miserable; under Love, and under Wrath; an Heir of Heaven, and a Firebrand of
Hell; a Child of Light, and a Child of Darkness; and all in an Hour's time:
What Miserable Comforters are these? And, What Soul-disquieting, unsettling and
distracting Doctrine is this!

CHAP. XXI. Containing a Use of Caution, Comfort and Counsel.
SECT. I. Use 3. Of Caution.
THirdly, By way of Caution: Take heed of Presuming, in saying (...) thy self;
Thou art Secure, and therefore may do as thou lists. Let not this Doctrine
open a Gap to ^iousness, and puff you up with Pride. Such that take this to be
the Scope of this Doctrine, do much mistake it. This is just as if a Man should
say; --

I am now in the Bosom of Grace, but I would be cast down into Hell.

Who would argue thus? It Is the Devil's Divinity, and just as if a Man should
say; --

Because God has decreed how long I shall Live, (Job 14. 5.) therefore I will
not eat Bread, but live in the Neglect of all Means that preserve Life.

We must remember this, That God has joined the End and the Means together.

2 Thessalonians. 2. 13 But we are bound to give Thanks always to God for you,
Brethren, Beloved of the Lord; because God has from the Beginning chosen you
to Salvation, through Sanctification of the Spirit, and Belief of the Truth.

Though your Time here below is an Appointed Time, yet you must carefully avoid
Poison; and Eat, and Drink, and use Physic to Preserve your Life.

We do not say, (says Dr. Manton) On Jude, Page 55.
That a Believer is so sure of his Conservation in a State of Grace, as that he
needs not to be wary and jealous of himself: 1 Cor. 10. 20. Let him that
Standerh, take heed, lest he Fall. There is a Fear of Caution, as well as a
Fear of Diffidence and Distrust: And there is a great deal of Difference
between weakening the Security of the Flesh, and our Confidence in Christ. None
more apt to suspect themselves, than they that are most sure in God; lest by
Improvidence and Unwatchfulness they should yield to Corruption. Christ has
Prayed, That Peter's Faith might not fail; yet he bids him, with the rest of
of the Apostles, To Watch, Luke 22. 40, and 46.

SECT. II. Use 4. Of Comfort.
Fourthly, Here is a Use of Comfort to us, that are Believers, and that have an
Interest in Christ's Intercession. Here is Comfort under Fears of Barrenness,
and here is Comfort under Fears of Falling away.

First, Here is Comfort under Fears of Barrenness: I am afraid (says the Soul)
lest my Faith quite Fails, and so grow Dead at last; proving just like the
Barren Fig Tree in the Gospel, which was Cursed. But for thy Comfort know,
Christ prays, Tha^ thy Faith may not fail. It Is granted, the Devil will Sift
thee, and Winnow thee, and Level all his Temptations against thy Faith. Thou
art a Branch of that Vine, Christ Jesus; therefore shall never cease yielding
of Fruit. As long as there is a Fullness in Christ, Believers shall never Want.
This Holy Vine (Christ,) being Replenished with Sap, the Branches cannot choose
but be Fruitful. As long as the Root Lives, the Branches shall never Die.
Besides,

Saints should read Vide Leigh on the Promises, Page 236.
Promises, that are made to them in case of Spiritual Barrenness.

I am the Lord thy God, which Teasheth thee to profit, Isa. 48. 17.

In the Wilderness shall Waters break out, and Streams in the Desert; and the
That is, the most Barren Heart shall abound with Grace.
Parched Ground shall become a Pool, and the Thirsty Land Springs of Water,
Isa. 35. 6, 7.

Secondly, Here is Comfort under Fears of Falling away. I am afraid (says the
Christian,) that I shall be quite out of Breath, before I get to Heaven; either
I shall be blown down by Satan's Temptations, or faint under Sufferings. But
know, thou have Omnipotency to Support thee; Thy Faith is Sheltered under the
Wing of Christ, and Supported by the Intercession of Christ: So that it is
Secure, let the Devil strike never so hard, or often at it.

Adam, that Grew upon his own Root of Innocence, soon Withered: But thou have
Christ for thy Root; therefore thy Grace shall Flourish into Perseverance.
Believers, Christ holds you: It Is not your Holding of Christ, but Christ's
Holding of you, that Preserves you. He it is, that for thee Repels the Force of
Temptation, Over-powers the Rellicks of Corruption, and increases the Sparkles
of Grace.

SECT. III. Use 5. Of Counsel.
Fifthly, Here is a Use of Counsel, which has a Double Aspect: 1. To
Believers. 2. To Unbelievers.

First, To Believers. Does Christ in Heaven Intercede for you? Then (first)
keep you close to your Duty on Earth. Christ neglects not Praying for you in
Heaven; do not you then neglect Praying for your selves on Earth. Christ is
ready in Heaven, to present your Petitions to God, upon your presenting your
Petitions to him. (1.) If Christ cease not Praying for you, do not you cease
then Praying for your self. (2.) If Christ Prays and Pleads for you in Heaven,
then do you Plead for him on Earth. Believers themselves have oft-times many
Accusers; viz. The Devil, Evil Men, and Conscience; and when any of these do
Accuse them, Christ is then ready in Heaven to Plead. Seeing then, that Christ
Intercedes for you, and Pleads for you, when you are Accused and Dishonored;
do you Plead for Him, for his Honor, and for his Interest when Asperss'd by
the World. (3.) Does Christ in Heaven Intercede for Believers? Then let
Believers ascribe Perseverance to him; looking upon it, as his own Gift. Let
Christ have what is Due from you: Pay (I say) the Tribute of your Gratulation
unto him.

Secondly, To Unbelievers. Does Christ Intercede in Heaven for Believers? Then
what will become of Unbelievers? Hereupon I advise you, to Repair to The
greatest Inducement that I know of, whereby to persuade Sinners to get into
Christ, is 1. The Misery that they are in, by being out of him. 2. The
Happiness they would be in, were they in him.
Christ. No Interest in Christ, no Interest in his Intercession: Therefore,
instead of Christ's Blood Crying to God for you, it shall Cry to God against
you. He that is an Intercessor for some, shall be an Accuser to others: Yet
now, every Unbeliever despises Christ's Intercession, and treads it under
Foot. Christ's Death, Victory, Conquest, Merits, Spirit, Graces and
Intercession are nothing at all to Persons, that are in an Unbelieving State.
No Interest in any of these Benefits, unless you have Union with the Donor of
them: It Is Union with Christ, that gives us a Title to all the Privileges of
Christ. If thou have not Christ, thou have none of Christ's. How Deplorable
therefore is the Case of Christ-less Souls? They cannot argue any thing of
Comfort, from what he has done: Christ's Death, Merits and Sufferings avails
them not. Here is no Comfort to be spoken to you, till you get into hrist.

Ah then! What do Men and Women do, in rejecting the Tenders of Grace, and the
Offers of Christ in the What were the Old World the better for Hearing of an
Ark, when they would not get into it? So what are we the better for Hearing of
Christ, if we will not get into him?
Gospel? To Day therefore, if you will Hear his Voice, Harden not your Hearts.
Verily, he that now waits, and stands at the Door Knocking, will ere long give
over, and Knock at your Hearts no more. Possess your Souls therefore with an
Holy Impatience, until such time you can say; Christ is come! Christ is come!
Methinks, it should be a Burden for you to Live, unless Christ is Formed in
you: An Interest in him will render your Lives Pleasant, and your Death
Gainful. Be convinced therefore, of the Absolute Need of a Savior; by
considering, that till you are in him, you can have no Interest in his
Intercession and Satisfaction, the Great Effect of his Priestly Office: That no
Mercy will be a Mercy unto you, till then; but rather Curses, and given in
Judgment to you. And this is the Exact Pourtraiture of every Christ-less Man
and Woman.

CHAP. XXII. Wherein part of the Last Doctrine is handled.
SECT. I.
The Fifth and Last Doctrine is this:

Doctrine.
Those whom God has Done much for, should be much in Doing for others.

When thou art Converted, streng then thy Brethren.

I Shall Prosecute this Dostrine in this wise: 1. In what Sense we are to
understand God's Doing much for a Person. 2. What it is that such whom God has
Done much for, should be in Doing for others. 3. Confirm the Doctrine. 4. Apply
it.

SECT. II.
First, In what Sense we are to understand God's Doing much for a Person; or
when it may be said, God does much for a Person. Now God may be said to do much
for a Person Two ways: 1. To his Body. 2. To his Soul.

(1.) To his Body. By Body, I understand all Things relating thereunto; as
Life, Health, Estate, Good Name, and Negotiations.

First, God has done much for such, whose Threads of Lives he has lengthned
out: Once thou wast Heartsick, Crazy, and by no means could hold up thy Head,
expecting Death every moment; and by reason of exceeding Tortures, it was a
Burden for thee to Live. Medicines proved Ineffectual, Physicians Despaired,
Friends gave thee over; and a Dead Man thou wast in the Expectation of all. Yet
lo! Restituet eum Deus. qui antea morti vicinus fuit, and longiore vita
donabit. Mollerus.
God Miraculously raises thee up, smiles on thee, by Renewing thy Life; and
with Good Hezekias, adds Fifteen Years more unto thee.

Now here God Does much for a Person, with Respect to his Life.

Secondly, God has done much for such, whose Healths he has Preserved*
Soundness of Body is a great Mercy: What is Life? what is Riches? what is
Honor, without Health? These Things ('it is granted) in Conjunction with Health,
are Pleasing unto Man: But Health not Enjoyed, will render all the former
things Unprofitable.

Now here God Does much for a Person, with Respect to his Health.

Thirdly, Estate. Omni rerum copia affluet: Once thou wast Poor; not a Penny in
thy Purse, nor a Piece of Bread in thy Cubboard. But now thy Case is changed
from Worse to Better: The Candle of Prosperity shines upon thee, and an
Flourishing Estate thou have now about thee.

Here is God's Doing much for a Person, with Respect to his Estate.

Fourthly, God's Doing much for a Person, is sometimes discovered in a Man's
Good Name, being Bestowed and Preserved. Once a Cloud of Infamy and Reproach
was drawn over thy Name; but now it is dissipated and scattered. A Good
Valentinian the Emperor, did decree, Capitali sententiae subjugandum; That he
who was openly Convicted of this ^me of Slander, should Die for it. And Pope
Gregory did decree, That such a Person should be Excommunicated.
Name is one of the Greatest Blessings upon Earth; No Chain of Pearl does so
Adorn, is this. How many are there in the World, that are still paring off the
Credit of their Neighbors? And they make thick Parings; they sometimes pare
off all that is Good; nothing is left but the Core. The Children of God are
thus oft-times served: It was David's Complaint; Psalm. 35. 11.

They laid to my Charge, Things which I knew not.

Surius the Jesuit, reported of Luther; That he learnt his Divinity of the
Devil, and that he died Drunk: But Melancthon, who wrote his Life, affirms;
That he died in a most Holy, Pious manner, and made a most Excellent Prayer
before his Death. Has God now preserved or delivered thy Good Name from the
Unmercifulness of others, What is this, but a doing much for thee, with Respect
to thy Name?

Fifthly and Lastly, God has done much for those, whom he has Blessed in their
Negotiations. When thou did first set forth in the World, what Cares and
Fears did distract thee, lest thou should not do well, and so become
Bankrupt? But now, contrary to thy Fears, God has Prosper'd thee; and a Brave
Trade thou have, and Blessed thou art in thy Building, Planting, Journeying; or
what ever thou go about: The Honeycomb of a Blessing shall be still
dropping upon thee.

Thus much concerning God's Goodness with Respect to the less Noble Part of a
Man; viz. His Body.

SECT. III.
I now come to consider in what Sense God may be said to do much for a Person's
The Soul is the Princely Part, crowned with Reason: It is Dei insignita
imagine; It carries in it some Faint Idea, or Resemblance of the Trinity. Bern.
Soul, which is the most Noble Part of him. The Body is but a Shadow, the Soul
is the Substance: The Body is but a Shell, the Soul is the Kernel: The Body is
but a Cabinet, the Soul is the Jewel. The Soul is the Man of the Man: The Soul
of Plato is Plato..

But to proceed to the Point in Hand, viz. How God may be said to do much for
our Souls; see made forth, as follows.

SECT. IV.
God can never be said (in a strict Sense) to do much for the Soul of a Man,
till such time he Converts it to Himself: So that, it will not be out of the
way, to Enquire a little into the Nature of True Conversion. But this would be
too large a Field for me to enter in; and therefore, I shall only touch briefly
upon it.

SECT. V.
True Conversion consists in a Change upon the Inward and Outward Man: 1. In a
Change upon the Inward Man; which I shall only insist on.

First, The Understanding is turned from Darkness unto Light. Horrible
Ignorance of God, and the Things of Salvation, covers the Soul of every Man, as
Darkness upon the Face of the Deep. Unconverted Persons are therefore called
Darkness in the very Abstract, (Ephesians. 5. 8.) and that because of their
Original, Acquired and Judicial Blindness, which their Minds are possessed with.
All the World is said to sit in Darkness; From whence may be gathered, That by
By Nature there is a very Chaos upon the Understanding.
Nature we are desperately Ignorant about God, and the Things of God: Which
made our Savior to say to Peter upon his Confession;

Flesh and Blood had not Revealed these Things unto him.

In the State of Integrity, our Minds were furnished with all Glorious
Perfections and Abilities, as the Firmament with Stars: There was Sapience in
respect of God, Science in respect of all Natural Things to be known, and
Prudence in respect of all Things to be done.

But since the Fall, Man has received such a Bruise in his Understanding, as
that unless God Recovers it, it will remain for ever Irrecoverable. Therefore
the first Thing that God does, in order to Conversion, is to set up a Light in
the Soul, and take off that Vail of Darkness, which has overspread it. So
that, God does much for the Soul, in helping of the Understanding, and doing
much for it.

Secondly, Our Memory is in a great part the Understanding, knowing Things as
they are past.
Memories are in part (by Conversion) Cured. Oh! the Sinful Weakness,
Barrenness and Pollution of our Memories! How Te^acious is it, with Respect to
Evil? But, How Fallacious is it, with Respect Therefore Austin, and others
following him, make Three Powers or Faculties in the Rational Part of a Man;
His Understanding, his Will and Memory; which they call the Created Trinity.
to Good? Why is it, that many can better Remember a Piece of News, than a Line
of Scripture? That little Children can better Remember Obscene Songs and
Ballads, than the Principles of Religion, or a Good Sermon? The Memory by
Nature, is like a Sieve, that lets the Corn and Weighty Grain fall through; but
the Light, Refused Stuff, that it Retains: Thus what is Solid, and would do thy
Soul Good, that quickly passes away. Hence it is, that many of our Hearers are
so Unprofitable as they are: They forget the Good Sermons they Hear; and go
from Church no more bettered, than the Stones in the Wall: But now, where God
intends to do much for the Soul, he then does help the Memory, and Cures it in
part of its Weakness, Pollution and Unfaithfulness. The Memory will then Retain
all manner of Good; something of Good in every Thing: or at leastwise, it will
be better in Remembering Spiritual Things, than Carnal Things. If not all the
Sermon, part of the Sermon the Soul can now carry away with her: Yea, and she
can tell what Sermon among diverse, so many Years past, at such a Time, in such
a Place, and by such a Person, did her good. So that a Wonderful Change is here
passed upon the Memory, to the just Admiration of the Free Grace of God.

Thirdly, Where True Conversion is, a Change is also on the The Will is the
Primum Mobile, the great Wheel in the Soul, that moves all the Affections.
Will of Man; that Great Faculty, which will either be the Chair of Lust, or
Throne of Grace. We may say of it, what the Prophet did of the Figs; Those
which were Good, were very Good; and that were Bad, were very Bad. The Will in
Innocence was Regular; It did Echo to God's Will: But since the Fall, though
it retains its Freedom in Moral Actions; yet as to Spiritual, it is depraved.
If the Will could cease from Sinning, (says Bernhard) there would be no Cesset
voluntas propria, and infernum non ^rit.
Hell. Since the Fall the Will is not only Impotent, but Obstinate. Acts 7. 51.

Ye have always Resisted the Holy Ghost.

But now, when God proceeds in the Work of Conversion, he does in part also
Cure the The Mariners Compass being struck with Thunder, causes the Point of
the Needle to stand wrong. Man's Nature being Corrupted, causes the Will to
point wrong: It is strongly bent and inclined to that which is Evil.
Will of its Depravity; which consists in its Crookedness, Perverseness and
Stubbornness. Before it was Inflexible, but now it is made Flexible: And our
Noble Faculties, as Understanding and Memory, do not so much depend upon the
Power of the Will for their Actings; though we shall not have (till we are in
Heaven) such an Universal Dominion over all the Powers of our Soul. So that
they may Act, what Time and what Measure we please: Yet it is most certain,
that when we are New Born, we then learn to Abnegare seipsum dictur, qui
abnegat volunt^tem suam. Brug.
Deny our Wills; So that our Affections shall be no more subject to it, with
respect to their Rise, Progress and Degree. And thus God is said to do much for
the Soul, when he does much for the Will.

Fourthly, True Conversion consists in a Change upon the The Affections are
treated of severally by the Philosopher, the Physician, the Orator, and the
Divine.
Affections: For that these Affections by the Fall are Polluted, is evidently
and palpably manifested in the Dominion and Tyranny they have over the
Intellectual Part of Man. When the Judgment should Govern the Affections, the
Affections do the Judgment: A Man does now for the most part Reason, Believe
and Will according to his The Affections be the Pedes Animae, the Feet of the
Soul.
Affections and Passions. Aristotle observed this, when he said; Prout quisque
Affectus est, ita Iudicat; As every Man is Affected, so he Judges. They are
Unruly and Irregular in their Motions and Risings, in their Progress and
Degrees; and the Objects, that for the most part they Center in. But now, when
God proceeedeth in the Work of Conversion, then these Affections shall be
Restrained, Held-in and Ordered. Love and Hatred shall keep to their right
Centers, and move toward their proper Objects; To Love nothing but Good, to
Hate nothing but Evil.

Fifthly and Lastly, Here is a Change on Conscience. Now Conscience is God's
Preacher in the Bosom: A thousand Witnesses for or against a Man; A Heaven or
Hell on Earth: A great Friend, or a great Enemy.
Conscience is a Part of Understanding in the Reasonable Creatures, determining
of their Particular Actions with or against them. Now that this, as well as the
other Faculties of the Soul, (without a Change) is Polluted, appears in its
Blindness, and so it of-times misguides. In its Senslesness and Stupidity,
though Lusts as so many Thieves come to steal the Soul away; yet this Dog does
not so much as give one Bark. Sometimes Conscience Accuses and Excuses
falsely: But now, when God proceeds in the Work of Conversion, then This in
the first Place is awakened, and stirred up to do its Office. It will then deal
plainly even with the Greatest, and will tell them their own without Flattery;
and Trace them in all their Actions, and Haunt them where soever they go.

And thus I have showed, when God may be said to do much for our Souls; viz.
When he Converts them unto Himself: And wherein this Conversion consists, has
been showed; viz. God's Working upon, and Changing and Renewing the Five
Faculties of the Soul; viz. Understanding, Memory, Will, Affections and
Conscience.

CHAP. XXIII.
I now come to show, What it is, that those whom God has done much for, should
be in doing for others. Now questionless, every Man, (especially such a Man,
whom God has ^one much for) ought to Resemble him; which is that also God
justly requires and expects. Wherefore, Has God done much for thy Body in the
Sense above Written? But that thou should do much for the Bodies of others
also. Has God done much for thy Soul in the Sense above Written? Do thou also
much for the Soul of others, answering (according to the endeavors) what God
has done for thy Soul? Or has God done much for both, viz. Body and Soul? Then
do thou endeavor to do Good both to the Bodies and Souls of others; which
probably may be Comprehended in these following Sections.

SECT. I.
First, Do much for others, in point of Instruction and Reprehension; A Solemn
and Great Work, if Piously performed.

Much Pains should be taken in the Instruction of one another: Nay, we should
be often Admonishing, and Reproving too, if occasion be. The Converted need our
Instruction, the Unconverted need our Reproofs. David tells God what shall
follow upon the Ioys of Salvation being Restored to him. Psalm. 51. 13.

Then will I Teach Transgressors thy Ways, and Sinners shall be Converted unto
thee.

You and I should have Instructed one another; Have we done it? You and I
should have Reproved one another; Have we done it? In the Scriptures we find
the Saints Reproving one another: Moses Reproving Aaron, Exodus 32. 21. Nathan
Reproing David, 2 Samuel 11. Paul Reproving Peter, Gal. 2. 11. Sometimes you
shall hear Cursing and Swearing in your Presence: Sometimes you shall behold
Covetousness, Pride, Passion, Anger and Uncomliness. Here now are Opportunities
of doing Service for God, of Appearing and Witnessing for him against these
Vices. Therefore do not say; I am loath, or, I am afraid to speak; it will be
ill taken: I shall do no Good by Testifying; or, I shall be accounted a busy
Body. Away with all these Petty Objections, and attend to Duty, leaving the
Issue and Event to God; only beg Wisdom, which is profitable to Direct. If we
would not partake of the Sins of others, we must then fall upon Reproving-Work.
Ephesians. 5. 11.

And have no Fellowship with the Unfruitful Works of Darkness; but rather
Reprove them.

As there is a Holy Silence under God's Correction; Aaron held his Peace: So
there is a Sinful Silence under Man's Corruption; For Eli held his Peace also:
Aaron's Silence was a Good Silence; but Elie's Silence was a Naughty Silence.

SECT. II.
Secondly, Do much for others, in leaving Patterns, that may Survive you, and
Live, when you are Dead; I mean, Live Exemplarily, as Paul: Phil. 3. 17.

Brethren (says he) be Followers together of me; and mark them which walk so,
as ye have us for an Ensample.

This great Apostle denied himself, to make himself an Example to others. Take
heed of Scandals, and Visible Infirmities, which discourageth many to take up
with Religion.

Praecepta docent, Exempla movent.
Examples are very Prevalent In ^ramque partem; Either one way or other, either
for Good or Evil.

Oh! That the Professors of this Age, who are most Defective herein, would but
be persuaded, to live Lives for Posterity! Live Holy therefore, that others
imitating your Holiness, may be Holy also. But, How little Convincing,
Converting and Edifying are the Lives of most now a-dayes: Not considering,
that their Examples (one Day) shall have a Resurrection, as well as their
Bodies. Ah! How few are those, that are Writing Copies, for Posterity to Write
after! And, Where now a-dayes is Singularity of Life? Have not such Reason to
question, Whether the Root of the Matter is in them? For though Good Works
Justifies us not before God, yet they Justify us before Men; and they are
necessary for the Manifestation of our Faith Iustifies our Works, and our Works
Testify our Faith.
Faith, and the Glory of Christ our Redeemer. Methinks, I cannot speak enough
of such a Subject as this is, which is of very great Moment; viz. The
Transmission of Patterns to Posterity. But I must conclude this Particular with
the Exhortation of our Savior, that agrees with what I have been speaking.
Matthew. 5. 16.

Let your Light so shine before Men, that they may see your Good Works, and
Glorify your Father which is in Heaven.

SECT. III.
Thirdly, Do much for others, in Succouring and Relieving them, both with
Respect to Body and Soul. Here are Poor Saints: Some want Food; some Clothing;
some Lodging; some Money. You now that are Able, should follow Job's Example.

I have not withheld the Poor from their Desire, nor caused the Eyes of the
Job 31. 16. -- 21.
Widow to fail; nor Eaten my Morsel alone, but the Fatherless has Eaten of it
also. Neither have I seen any to Perish for want of Clothing, or any Poor
without Covering. But his Loins have Blessed me, and he was warmed with the
Fleece of my Sheep. The Stranger did not Lodge in the Street; but I opened my
Door to the Traveller.

Let us therefore Feed the Hungry, Mercy even to the Bruit Creatures shall
prolong, our Days; much more then Mercy unto Men.
give Drink to the Thirsty, Lodge the Harbourless, Cloth the Naked, Visit the
Sick and Imprisoned. Let us imitate Tabitha, to make Coats and Garments for
Widows. There is nothing lost by doing our Duty: An Estate may be Prove. 11. 25.
The Liberal Soul shall be made Fat.
Imparted, yet not Impared. Has God let the Candle of Prosperity to Shine upon
thee? Light then thy Neighbor that is in the Dark, and thou shall not by it
have the less Light thy self. Whatever is Disbursed to Pious Uses, God does
bring it in some other way; as the Loaves in breaking Multiplied, or as the * 1
Kings 17. 16.
Window's Oil Increased by pouring out.

Let us put on Bowels of Mercy, and be ready to Indulge the Miseries and
Necessities of others:

Be ye Merciful, as your Father also is Merciful. Luke 6. 36.


Our Fingers should drop with the Myrrh of Liberality. Augustine says
excellently; Da quod non potes retinere, ut accipias quod non potes amittere.
Give those Things to the Poor which you cannot keep, that you may Receive
those Things which you cannot lose.

St. Ambrose calls Charity the Sum of Christianity; and the Apostle makes it
the very Definition of Religion. Iam 1. ult.

Pure Religion, and Undefiled before God, and the Father, is this, To Visit the
Fatherless, and the Widows in their Affliction.

Without doubt, such that are Dives denied Lazarus a Crumb of Bread, and Dives
was denied a Drop of Water.
Cruel to the Poor, do Unchristian themselves. Unmercifulness is the Badge of
Heathenism; but Mercifulness is the Badge of O that it might not be said of
Christians now a-dayes, as it was of an Emperor, that had a Large Empire, but a
narrow, scamy Heart! Augustum imperium, angustum animum.
Christianity.

To abound in Works of Mercy, is to be Diffusively Good; and to be Diffusively
Good, is the great End of our Creation. Ephesians. 2. 10.

Created in Christ Jesus to Good Works.

He that does not answer his End in Respect of Usefulness, shall not enjoy his
End in Respect of Happiness. Every Creature answers the End of its Creation;
The Star Shines, the Bird Sings, and the Plant Bears: Besides, we our selves
Live upon Charity. We go a Begging to the Creation: One Creature gives us Wool,
another Oil, and another Silk. Nay, shall I tell you, concerning this Duty of
Charity, or There are Two sorts of Sacrifices; Expiatory, the Sacrifice of
Christ's Blood; and Gratulatory, the Sacrifice of Alms.
Almsgiving, you may take notice of these Things: 1. No Duty more Commanded,
than this of Charity. 2. No Duty more Commended and Extolled, than this. 3. No
Duty has more Choice and Precious Eleemosyna non est divitiarum dispendium,
sed ditescendi potius compendium, quaestusque omnium uberrimus. Giving Alms is
not the way to Waste our Wealth, but the Art of Thriving; and the most
Compendious Course to come unto Riches.
Promises annexed to it, than this. 4. No Duty tends more to the proselyting
and making others to Embrace our Religion, than this. 5. No one Duty has
greater Rewards attending it, than this.

I have met with a Notable Story to this Purpose, which I shall here Relate;
wishing, that it might have the same Effect, as upon some it has had: The
Story is this.

Synesius, a Good Bishop of Cyrene, labored much, and a long Time with one
Evagrius, an Heathen Philosopher, to Convert him to the Christian Faith, but
all in vain: The Philosopher still objecting, That the Christian Religion
Taught many strange and improbable Things: Among others;

That he that has Pity on the Poor, Lends to the Lord; and, He that Gives
to the Poor and Needy, shall have Treasure in Terrena servando amittimus,
largiendo servamus. Isidor.
Heaven, and shall Receive an Hundred Fold from Christ; together Our Earthly
Goods are lost by keeping, and kept by giving away.
with Eternal Life.

Things (says he) to be Derided, rather, than Believed. The good Bishop
notwithstanding ceased not to Travel with him: Assuring him by many Arguments,
That these Things were True; and at last prevailed: So that It is reported of
Cyrus, that he should say; That by doing Good, he hoarded up Riches for himself.
the Philosopher, and all his Children were Baptized. A while after he comes
to Synesius, and brings with him Three Hundred Pounds of Gold for the Poor:
Bids him take the same; but would have a Bill under his Hand, that Christ
should Repay it him in another World. Synesius took the Money for the Poor, and
gave him such a Bill under his Hand, as he desired. Afterward, the Philosopher
being near his Death, commanded his Sons; That when they Buried him, they
should put Synesius Bill into his Hand in the Grave, Blessed Mr. Bradford
counted that Time lost, wherein he did not some Good by his Tongue, Pen or
Purse.
which they did. The Third Day after he was Buried, the Philosopher seemed to
appear to Synesius in the Night; and said to him: [ Come to my Sepulcher, where
I lie, and take thy Bill; for I have Received the Debt, and am satisfied: which
for thy Assurance, I have Subscribed it with mine own Hand.] The Bishop not
well knowing the Meaning hereof, sent to his Sons; who told him all. Whereupon
taking them, and the Chief Men of the City with him, he went to the Grave, and
found the Paper in the Hand of the Corpse, thus Subscribed: [Ego Evagrius
Philosophus, tibi Sanctissimo Domino Synesio Episcopo salutem: Accepi debitum
in his literis manu tua conscriptum, Our Alms-Deeds shall be Rewarded with
Permanent Blessings.
satisfactumque mihi est; and nullum contra te habeo jus propter aurum quod
dedi tibi, and per te Christo, Deo and Salvatori nostro.] That is; I Evagrius
the Philosopher, to the most Holy Sir, Bishop Synesius, greeting: I have
Received the Debt, which in Quae stultitia est illic relinquere, unde exiturus
es: and illuc non praemittere quo iturus es? Chrysostom. in Matthew. 6.
this Paper is written with thy Hand; and I am satisfied: and I have no Action
against thee for the Gold which I gave thee, and by thee to Christ, our God and
Savior.

Whence plainly it appears, That the Seeds of our Liberality shall have an
Harvest of Happiness. Eccles. 11. 1, 2.

Cast thy Bread upon the Face of the

One of our Translations have Waters for Wet Faces; signifying, that Poor Men
do oft-times Weep.
Waters; for thou shall find it after many Days.

I have dwelt the longer here, because the Love of many has waxed Cold.

SECT. IV.
Fourthly, Comfort the Feeble-minded, 1 Thessalonians. 5. 14.
and Support the Weak. Speak a Word in Due Season to the Weary.

Once thou wast VVeak thy self; Remember therefore, I pray, your Low Estate,
and how glad thou would have been to receive Comfort from any; and God was so
Compassionate, as that he stirred up some Godly and Painful Minister to Admonish
thee, and to remove all those Lets and Impediments, that disturbed the
VVell-being of thy Soul: And lo! what he said unto thee, is Blessed; and thou
art now upon thy Legs, and have renewed thy Strength as an Eagle. Stand up
then, and show thy self a Son of Consolation: Wherefore has God done all this
for thee, but that thou should be capable of doing Good to others? Oh! the
Groans, Sighs, Sobs, and Breathings of Souls that are in Conflicts with the
Devil! And art thou a Stander by, and a Spectator of them, but do not so
much as put thy Hand to Chrstians should be like Christ and Mary; the One
always Doing Good, the Other was always Receiving Good.
help, art no wise Affected, thy Bowels within thee not at all moved? How Dis
ingenuous is this? Does it not argue either Ignorance or Ingratitude:
Ignorance, in that thou have not been so Tried thy self; and therefore know
not how to Pity others. Ingratitude, in that it was once thy own Case; but thou
have forgotten it, or at leastwise, would if thou could: and therefore take
not Notice of Souls thus Tempted, Tried, Afflicted. I shall only add this; I am
verily persuaded, there is as little Compassion showed to Weak, Desponding,
Tempted, and Oppressed Believers, as ever, if not less: The Consideration
whereof, I must needs tell you that are my Hearers this Day, grieves me as much
as any thing; and puts me much upon Prayer unto God, That he would be pleased
to continue my Condoleing Heart toward the Tempted; which through Grace I can
say, is much: Yet still I would rather have it Increased, than Diminished.

SECT. V.
Fifthly and Lastly, Those whom God has done much for, should be much in doing
for others, by Praying with, and for others.

Although God will have but One Intercessor in Heaven, yet he requires Many on
Earth. Here we may, yea, we must be Trading one with another; viz. Prayers for
Prayers, Ministers with People, and People with their Ministers, and one Saint
with another.

Oh! What a Trade did Paul Drive Mr. Hooks: Saints Privileges on Earth, beyond
those in Heaven.
this way? I have sometimes thought, what a Catalogue of Churches and Saints he
had to Commend to God in his Daily Prayers.

How many Churches did he usually Pray for? He says to the Church of Rome in
these Words:

God is my Witness, That without Ceasing, I make mention of you always in Rom
1. 9.
my Prayers.

The like for the Church at Ephesus:

I cease not to give Thanks for you, Ephesians. 1. 16.
making mention of you in my Prayers.

So for the Church at Philippy.

I remember you always in every Prayer of mine for you all, making Request
with Joy.

So the Church at Thessalonica:

We give Thanks to God always for 1 Thessalonians. 1. 2, 3.
you all, making mention of you in our Prayers; Remembering without ceasing your
Work of Faith, Labor of Love, and Patience of Hope in our Lord Jesus Christ.

And doubtless, had he Written Epistles to all other Churches, we should have
heard of his Prayers for them. Neither did he Pray only for Churches, but also
for several Saints in Particular: For he says; That he Prayed for Timothy
Night and Day; that 2 Timothy 1. 3.
is, Morning and Evening; the Whole put for the Part. And as for Philemon, he
says; That he made mention Philem. v. 4.
of him always in his Prayers.

To conclude; The least we can do for one another, is to be Earnest at the
Throne of Grace.

CHAP. XXIV. A Brief Application of the Point.
SECT. I. Use of Information.
THe First Use that this Doctrine affords us, is a Use of Information. If it be
so, That those whom God has done much for, should be much in doing for others:
Then hence Hostis gratiae, inimic^salutis. Bern.
we may learn, That such who are defective, and wanting herein, are Guilty of
the Highest Ingratitude against God.

Wherefore (O Man) has God done so much for thee, but that thou should do
something for Him? And wherein can thou better manifest a Doing much for Him,
than doing much for his Members. Mercy calls for Duty. Let something be done
by way of Retaliation; though Retaliation in our strict and proper Sense cannot
be made unto God. To be Ungrateful for Mercy, is like Absalom; who as soon as
David Kissed him, and took him into Favor, Plotted Treason against him. It was
a Saying of Lycurgus; Prodigiosa res esset, beneficium non rependere. Therefore
among all the Laws he made, he would not Establish against Ingratitude; looking
upon it as most Monstrous. But this the Sinner is Guilty of.
Ingratitude puts an Accent upon Sin, and makes it out of Measure Sinful.

If so be you cannot Lay your Selves out for the Good of Others, what then do
you in Testimony of Thankfulness to that God, who has done so much for you. O
Ungrateful! Worse than the very Beasts, for they are wrought upon with
Kindness; Isa. 1. 3.

This is AElian.
dealing with God, as we do with the Thames: The Thames brings us in our
Riches, our Gold, Silks, Spices: and we throw all our Filth into the Thames,
etc.

If Mercy be not a Lodestone to Draw thee to Duty, Judgment shall Compel thee.
Methinks, God's Goodness * Ungrateful Sinners (like Vultures) draw Sickness
from the Perfumes of God's Bounties.
should be a Whet-Stone. Do for others: If thou ask me, why? the Reason is
plain; Because God has done for thee. Therefore not to do any Good, argues want
of a Deep Sense and Impression of God's Signal Favors on us. Beware therefore
of going on any more in a Dissolute Course.

SECT. II. Use of Caution.
Secondly, By way of Caution: Take heed of Persisting in this Cursed Sin of
Ungratefulness. Though God has been Patient for a great while, yet the Lease of
his Patience will at last be Run out. Nothing so Cold as Lead, yet nothing more
Scalding when it is Melted. The Sweetest Wine degenerates into the Sharpest
Vinegar. Nothing Blunter than Iron; yet when Sharpened, it has an Edge that
will cut Mortally. Nothing Smoother than the Sea; yet when stirred into a
Tempest, nothing Rages more. Just so is it with the Patience and Goodness of
God: What Sweeter than the same? Yet the Abuse of them, turns them to Fury and
sore Wrath.

SECT. III. Use of Comfort.
Thirdly, By way of Comfort to such, that do Testify their Thankfulness to God
for his Bounties, in being Useful in their Places and Generation. You do but
Oblige God to do more for you: And without doubt, the more you do for God, the
more God will do for you. If God heaps the Coals of his Mercy upon the Heads of
his Enemies; What then would he do for you, that should walk Thankfully. As we
commonly do follow them with our Compensations, that are most * To be
Unthankful where there is great reason to be Thankful, is Folly in the Abstract.
Thankful; So God does vouchsafe his Benefits most, where he thinks they may be
Acknowledged. And as we will not bestow our Alms on a Mendicant, that can
neither Cringe nor Bow; So God will not bestow his Favors on any, but what
shall Worship Him, and give Thanks unto him. If therefore our Lives be
singularly Convincing and Converting, Exemplary and Gratulatory; you will
thereby the more attract Divine Indulgence unto you. Therefore, Who would not
but be Comforted with this; namely, That if any express their Thankfulness unto
God, by Usefulness in their Places, they shall not be Guilty of that Monstrous
Word, INGRATITUDE! But not only so: They who manifest their Thankfulness, shall
more infinitely oblige God unto them for the Future. Finally, God will Reward
them according to their Works.

SECT. IV. Use of Counsel.
Fourthly, Be Exhorted unto Thankfulness, and Acknowledgement of the manifold
Mercies of God.

Has the All-Merciful God been Merciful to thee? Express then thy Thankfulness
for the same, in being Merciful unto others. Has the Gracious God done much for
thee? Express then thy Thankfulness unto Him, by doing much for others.

Motives here-unto are these; and pray observe them.

Motive 1.
First, It Is Equity, that thou should do for others, The Word [As] notes
Similitude, not Equality.
as God has done for thee. Methinks, if Unmerciful Men did but consider this,
they would not do as they do: Such Extortion and Oppression would not be, as
is. Families would not be Ruined; Kingdoms would not be Depopulated, as they
are. One Man would not be a Devil to another, as now it is with a Witness.

You that are Cruel and Unmerciful, bear with me, if I put a few Questions to
you. Have you Received such Unkindness at the Hands of God, that you deal so
Unkindly with others? Has God dealt so Severely with you, that you can deal no
more Mildly with others? Has God fell upon you with Stroke after Stroke, that
you lay so much upon others? Did God ever punish thee, without giving Warning,
that thou art so Rigid with others, and take so much Advantage of them?
Speak, if thou can. Art thou Speechless? Blush then, for Shame; and Repent of
Unreasonable Madness. Suppose now it should fare as ill with thee, as it has
done with others: Suppose, what thou have wished to, and brought upon others,
should come on thy self; What, would thou say then, Lord be Merciful to me,
a Sinner? Will not thy Conscience say or suggest, It Is Just with God, it should
be so? Hence learn then; Do by others, as thou would have God do by thee.

Motive 2.
Secondly, Consider; To do much for others, is but what your Brethren (that are
gone before you) have done. I could give you a Cloud of Witnesses for this: See
first Scriptural Examples.

Christians, Acts 2. 45. and 4. 34. Scriptural Examples.


Women, Luke 8. 23. The Poor Widow, Mark 12. 2. Dorcas, Acts 9. 36.

Paul, Acts 24. 17. Cornelius, Acts 10. 2. Job, Chap. 31. 16. 21. Barnabas,
Acts 4. 36, 37. Zacheus, Luke 19. 8. Phebe, Romans 16. 2. Hebrews, Chap. 6. 10.
Philemon, Verse 5. 7. The Virtuous Woman. Prove. 31. 20. Obadiah, 1 King. 18.
13. Onesiphorus, 2 Timothy 1. 18.

Examples that we find in Ecclesiastic Ecclesiastical Examples.
Histories, may also be produced.

Holy Master Bradford, in a Hard Act. and Mon.
Time Sold his Chains, Rings and Jewels, to Relieve those that were in Want.
And it is further Reported of him; That he counted that Hour lost, wherein he
did not some Good, by his Tongue, Pen or Purse.

Trajan the Emperor, did Rend off a Piece of his own Robe, to wrap his
Soldiers Wounds.

The Jews also are noted in this kind.

I could tell you also of Heathens Titus Vespasian was so inured to Works of
Mercy, that remembering he had Given nothing that Day, cried out; Diem perdidi,
I have lost a Day.

Modern Testimonies might be also Clark's Examples.
here instanced; viz.

Mr. Bolton, Mr. Whately of Banbury, Mr. Bruen in the County Palatine of
Chester, Mr. Thomas Gataker, Mr. John Dod, Dr. William Gouge, Dr. Harris, Mr.
Richard Greenham; Cum multis aliis.

I might also here-unto add those in our own Age, lately Deceased: But I shall
only mention that never to be forgotten Man, (I am sure, by me) Mr. Thomas
Wadsworth; who had Christ Jesus Pourtrayed in his Life, as much as any Man, in
respect of all Things what-so-ever. One, that never knew, what a Temptation to
Pride did mean; which, I believe, scarce any one (besides himself) could say.
Eminent especially for Sincerity, Integrity and Charity: That would go up and
down his Parish, doing Good; buying Clothes for the Poor, that they might have
no Excuses for their Absence from the Church.

Newington, Southwark and Theobalds will tell you, what a Man he was.

Motive 3.
Thirdly, Consider; God's End in doing Good to thee, is that thou might be
Capable of doing Good to others. Abilities are not for thy Self only, but for
Others: And if a Man does not Improve what God has Given him, for the Benefit
of Others, even that which he has, God may justly take away.

Has God Given thee Wit, Learning and Understanding? be then Thankful to God
for the same; and use them well for thine own Good, and the Good of others.

Has God Given thee the Inward Graces of his Spirit? Give God the Glory
thereof, and Imply them for the Benefit of others. Instruct the Ignorant;
Confirm the Weak; Comfort the Distressed; Reduce the Wandering; and Bind up the
Brokenhearted.

Has God Given thee Riches? Be Rich then in Good Works, and lay up Treasure in
Heaven.

Motive 4.
Fourthly, Consider; What you do for any Poor Shall we Love the Father, and not
the Child? Shall we Love the Head, and not the Body? Shall we Love the
Mediator, and not the Members?
Member of Christ, Christ will take as done to Himself.

What Good you do to any of Christ's, he will take it as done to Himself; and
what you do not to His, he will take as not done to Himself; Matthew. 25. 35, 36,
37, 38, 39, 40.

If a Cup of cold Water, given to a Disciple of Christ, has a Reward attending
it; surely then, Things of a far greater Moment Christ will take notice of.

Motive 5.
Fifthly, Would you not Resemble your Redeemer, Christ Jesus? Imitate him, and
Write after so fair a Copy, as He is, that has neither Blot nor Blur in it.
Christ Jesus now is a Great Exemplar herein: As he is full of Merit, so he is
full of Bounty. When he was upon the Earth, he went up and down, doing Good.

CHAP. XXV. Containing more Motives.
SECT. I.
Motive 1.
COnsider; Would you be willing, that Persons in Miseries, Respecting either
Body or Soul, or both, should be laid at your Doors, in your not Succouring and
Administering Help unto them.

When you can do Good, and will not, know, that you neglect Duty; and that God
may justly deprive you of what you have, and make you as Desolate as others.
Having therefore an Opportunity, make use of it; for you know not how soon the
Balance of Witness the Fire of London.
Providence may be turned, as to thy self: Thou that art Rich to Day, may be
God grants no Man a Patent for Riches Durante vita, but Durante beneplacito,
(as the Lawyers speak)
Poor to Morrow. Nebuchadnezzar, a Mighty Conqueror, was turned a Grazing among
the Oxen. A Great Haman is Feasted with the King one Day, and made a Feast for
the Crows the next. Adonibezek, a Mighty Prince, was made a Fellow-Commoner
with Dogs. So Herod.

Belisarius, a most Famous General under Justinian the Emperor; after all his
Noble Achievements, had his Eyes put out in his Old Age, by the Empress
Theodora: And at the Temple of Saint Sophy, fain to Beg; Date panem Belisario,
etc. Give a Crust to Old Belisarius; whom Virtue Advanced, but Envy has
brought into Misery. Pythias Pined to Death for want of Bread, who once was
Able to Entertain and Maintain Xerxes his vast Army. Great Pompey had not so
much as Room to be Buried in: And William the Conqueror's Corpse lay Three Days
unburied; his ^nterrement being hindered by one, that claimed the Ground to be
his. Cum multis aliis.

It is Wisdom in this Sense, (says a Worthy Mr. Watson on the Beatitudes, Page
217.
Divine) to consider others. Remember, how soon the Scene may alter: We may be
put in the Poor's Dress; and then it will be no small A Good Man once High, but
now Low, told me; That the Consideration of his doing Good to others when he
was in Capacity, was a great Comfort to him in his Poverty.
Comfort to us, to think, that we Relieved others, when we were in Capacity to
do it.

Verily, my Friends, this is not considered: For would People but consider
this, Mercy and Goodness, Bounty and Compassion would Flourish more than they
do. There would not be (I say) so many Cubboards Empty, Purses Moneyless, and
Wounds not Cured or Bound up.

Motive 2.
Secondly, Consider, That the God sees whatever we do for others; What need we
therefore care who else see us?
Eyes of God, of Christ, of Angels, of Devils, of Sinners, of Saints, of Good
and Bad are always upon you: Therefore let this Motive, above all the rest, be
as a Spur to all Virtue, and a Whet Stone to all Duty. God takes Notice of all
thy Actions: Thy Tears in Secret he Bottles up, thy Prayers in Secret he
Registers; and what thou give to Pious Uses, he writes down in thy Memorandum
Book.

The Good Angels and Saints Honor thee for this: The Devil, and his Children
see hereby thy Faithfulness to Godward, and thy Goodness to Man-ward.

Motive 3.
Thirdly, I know not of a Better than this, whereby to induce you unto a
Public Spirit; viz. You shall have your (...). Theod.
Reward. If there be Degrees of Torments in Hell, then doubtless, there are
Degrees of ^lory in Heaven; And whose Glory shall be Multiplied, but such that
That Text which you have (...). Heb. 6. 10. is an Excellent Text.
have done most Good, when they were on Earth? All the Seeds of Liberality that
you Sow on Earth, shall turn to a Fruitful Crop in Heaven. You shall be paid
with Overplus: For a VVedg of Gold, which you have parted with, you shall have
a Weight of Glory: For a Cup of Cold Water, you shall have Rivers of Pleasure.

The End of the Salve for Soul-Sores; together with the Duty of Such, whom God
has dealt Bountifully with.

FINIS
SEVERAL SERMONS, Preached upon Sacramental OCCASIONS.

By THOMAS POWEL, Minister of the GOSPEL.

LONDON, Printed by T. Milbourn, for Benjamin Harris, at the Stationers-Arms in
Sweetings-Rents, near the Royal Exchange, in Cornhil, 1679.

SERMON I.
PSALM. 42. Verse. 1. As the Heart Pants after the Waterbrooks, so Pants my
Soul after Thee, O God.


Introduction.
THE Author of this Psalm was David, is Concluded on all Hands; as well as
other Psalms of the like Nature, which have not his Inscription upon them:
Penned by him at some sad Time, and in some sad Condition; viz. His Exilement
from Home, and the House of God; upon the Occasion of Readiness Persecution, who
Pursued him from Place to Place; and followed him, as a Patridge upon the
Mountains; as himself Expresses it, 1 Samuel 26. 20. The Words divided.


In the Words of my Text, the Prophet David intimates his Ardent Affections
toward God; Illustrating the same by a Similitude of the Heart toward the
Rivers of Water: Wherein (as in all other Similitudes besides) there are Two
Parts considerable; The Proposition, and the Reddition.

The Proposition we have in these Words:

As the As the Hinde] or the Heart, a Beast Thirsty by Nature; and whose Thirst
is Increased, when she is Hunted. The Hind, the Female, is here meant; as the
Word annexed, She Brayeth, and the Greek Article [He Elaphos] manifest. And in
Females the Passions are stronger, than in Males. Ainsworth in Loc.
Heart Pants after the Waterbrooks.

Now there is a Double Thirst in the Heart after the Waterbrooks; The One is
Natural, arising from its Temper and Constitution; and the Other is Occasional,
proceeding from the Different Case and Condition, in which it is: And even so
it is in a Christian.

The Reddition we have in these Words; My Soul Pants, etc. In the Hebrew it
is Brayeth.

More-over, The Strength of the Psalmist's Desire is Expressed by another Word,
in the Verse following the Text; THIRSTS.

We have here Represented by David the true Temper, Frame and Character of a
Christian Soul: What David says of Himself for his own Particular, is true of
all Believers in General.

The Doctrine from the Words is this:

Doctrine.
The Soul of a Christian vehemently desires God.

In the Opening and Prosecution whereof, Three Things will fall under our
Consideration.

1. The Object of a Christian's Desire; and that is God. 2. The Subject of a
Christian's Desire; and that is the Soul. 3. The Exercise or Activity of a
Christian's Desire; and that is, Pant^h after.
First, The Object of a Christian's Desire, and that is God Himself; Thee, O
God. Other Texts of Scripture Deus est summum bonum.
there are, that fully declares this; Psalm. 84. 2. 86. 4.

A Christian's Desire is (1.) After God Chiefly. (2.) After God Simply.

First, A Christian's Desire is after God Chiefly. The Main and Principal Thing
that he desires, is God. An Beatitudo formalis consistit in fruitione
Beatitudinis objectivae; Beatitudo autem objectiva est Deus: quia est bonum
perfectum satians appetitum.
Interest in God; Union and Communion with God. A Circle cannot fill a
Triangle: The whole World cannot fill the Heart of Man. Nothing but God, can
satisfy the Desire of a Christian. God only is the Proper, and most Adequate
Object of it: Nothing but the Waterbrooks, can Satisfy the Thirsty Heart:
Nothing but Enjoyment and Fruition of God can Refresh the Gracious Soul;
wha^ever comes short of this, is Condemned.

Whom have I in Heaven but Thee? and there is none upon Earth, that (...)
desire besides Thee, Psalm. 73. 25.

These two Places, Heaven and Earth, do take in the whole Compass and Latitude
of Things Desirable; but Nothing in any of them, less than God, will content a
Christian: God chiefly: Nothing but God, and only God, does the Gracious Soul
desire: Nothing but God in the Ordinances, and Nothing but God in the Creatures.

First, Nothing but God in the Ordinances; as Prayer, Hearing, and Receiving.

First, It Is God in Prayer, that the Gracious Soul only desires: He reckons True
Prayer is a Lifting up of the Mind and Soul to God. Elevatio mentis ad Deum.
Prayer not Prayer, unless he me^ts with God. Therefore he Prays, that he
might Converse with God, Speak to God, and Rest in God. Vision of God,
Communion with God, and Supplies from God is the End of Prayer: No Climbing up
to Heaven, but by this Jacob's Ladder.

Secondly, It Is God in Constantine the Great, when Hearing a Sermon, would ever
and anon start out of his Chair of State, and Hearing, that the Gracious Soul
only desires. Such an one comes not to Hear for the Sake of Man, but for the
Sake of God, and of his Soul: He knows, it is God that Speaks, and not Man. Such
Persons cannot Sleep at a Sermon, stand up for a while, being Affected, and (it
may be) Terrifyed with the Word; inso-much, that his Courtiers were amazed;
because such a Posture did not become so High a Place. Eusebius. de Vit. Constant.
l. 3. c. 17.
lest God in Judgment should say, Sleep on. If a Judge give a Charge, all
Listen; if a King Speaks, all give Attention. When Samuel knew it was the Lord,
that spoke to him, he lent an Ear: 2 Samuel 3. 5.

Speak Lord, thy Servant Hears.

If God does not Speak to a Soul in a Sermon, it Profits nothing. God must
come down in and by the Word upon a Sinner, or else the Word will be only as
Seed upon Thorny and Stony Ground: But if God goes along Powerfully with the
Word, then it is Effectual, even unto the Salvation of the Soul.

Thirdly, It Is God at a Sacrament, that the Gracious Soul only desires. He
comes not to a Sacrament, to Feed upon Bread only, but to To Feed upon an
Ordinance without Christ, is as Feeding upon the Dish, instead of the Meat.
Feed upon God in Christ. If God be Absent at such a Time, his Stomach is lost,
and he cannot Eat; because the Founder of the Feast is not there, to Invite and
Help him. God's Presence is the Heaven of Heaven's; and every Ordinance of
Divine Institution is a Heaven to the Soul; because of the Enjoyment of God in
and thereby: Therefore God and Christ is the Sweetness of an Ordinance.
Finally, All the Ordinances without God and Christ, are but Dead and Lifeless
Things, very Shadows.

Secondly, Nothing but God in the Omnes Creaturae sine Deo, non possunt esse
sufficiens objectum Humanae beatitudinis. Star. de Beat. Dis. Sect. 1.
Creatures satisfies a Gracious Heart. God Sweetens a Husband, a Wife, a Child:
God in these it is, that makes a Believer in Love with them. All Outward
Comforts are but Skin and Shell, without Enjoyment of God: All Things to a
Christian without God, is Nothing. Augustine has a Sweet Saying; Omnis copia
quae Deus men's non est, egestas est; All Abundance taken Abstractly from
Enjoyment of God, it is not better than Want it self. Mark the Difference
betwixt a Christian, and a Worldling: The Worldly Man cares not for God, if he
can but Enjoy the Comforts of this Fading Life; when as all
Creature-Excellencies are but Derivatives. And what are the Streams, compared
to the Fountain? the Rivers, to the Ocean? and the Excellencies of the Creature
to the Excellencies of the Creator, being in him Primitively and Originally.

Secondly, A Christian's Desire is after God Simply. God considered Abstractly
Solus Deus sine consortio ejus Creaturae, est sufficiens objectum beatitudinis.
Lib. Sect. 2.
from all other Things that come with him; like the true Wife, that takes her
Husband for his Person, not for his Estate. Manifold Benefits does the Soul
acquire by Enjoyment of God; yet still, it is God Simply, that the truly
Gracious Heart desires. Heaven without Christ is not a sufficient Dowry to him.
See here again the Temper of the World, distinct from the Saints: The Men of
the World are willing to have God, so far forth as he brings Worldly Things
with him; like the Jews, that followed Christ more for the Loaves, than
Himself. But now the Gracious Soul Pants after God, from an Apprehension of the
Worth and Dignity that is in him; separated from these Outward Enjoyments,
which so many are taken withal.

Secondly, We are to consider the Subject of this Desire, and that is the Soul;
My Soul Pants after thee. Thus in other Places; Psalm. 62. 1.

Truly, my Soul waits upon God.

Psalm. 86. 4. Rejoice the Soul of thy The Soul, that Princely Part of Man, is
only the Subject of such Noble Desires.
Servant, etc.

Isa. 26. 9. With my Soul have I desired thee in the Night, etc.

The Soul has its Longings, as well as the Body; and has its Contentments
answering to those Longings, as well as the Body. Not the Body, only the Soul
is capable of Thirsting after God, and having Communion with God.

Thirdly, We are to consider the Exercise and Activity of this Desire;

As the Heart Pants after.

I have told you, There is a Double Thirst in an Heart after the Waterbrooks:
The one is Natural, arising from its Temper and Constitution; the other
Occasional, proceeding from the different Case and Condition in which it is:
Even so is it in a Christian. This Thirst is Natural and Inherent: The constant
Frame and Temper of a Christian is to be Thirsty after God, the Living God. The
Desires of a Christian toward God, are not False and Feigned, but Real and
Imbred in him, as a Christian; not Imbred in him, as a Creature.
Imbred in him.

Again; As the Stag or Heart has a Natural Thirst, arising from the Heat of its
Constitution: So likewise, it has an Occasional Thirst, arising from the
Nature of its Condition, and present State in which it is.

Three Things here do occasion the Hart's Thirst; as Naturalists, and those
which Write the History of such kind of Creatures, observe.

First, The Place of a Stag's or Hart's Habitation is commonly in Deserts, and
such kind of Places, wherein there is Penury, and Scaroity of Water.

Thus a Christian, who sometimes is Remote from the When a People do not prize
the Word of God by the Worth of it, they shall be brought then to prize the
same by the Want of it.
Ordinances; and so a great Thirst is occasioned thereby. This was the Case of
David in the Text: He is now deprived of the Public Ordinances; and now he
Longs and Thirsts after God, with a great deal of Vehemence and Intension;
being in a Dry and Thirsty Land, where no Waters are. And thus it is with many
of the Servants of God, whose Restraints from the Means of Grace, does set an
Edge and Sharpness upon their Affections, and makes them more Eager than ever.
The full Stomach loathes the Honeycomb; but Stolen Waters are very Sweet.

Secondly, The Stag's or The Heart by Natural Instinct (they say) knows where
the Serpent's Holes are: He goes to the Hole, where he sees and thinks a
Serpent is; and breaths upon him, until he is forced to come out of his Hole:
And then he sets upon him, and teareth him to pieces; or else* Eats him up.
Franzius.
Hart's Food is commonly Serpents; the Poison whereof does so Heat and Inflame
their Bowels, that it causes an unmeasurable Droughth and Thirst in them. Just
so it is with a Christian in the State of Guilt and Corruption. This Serpent is
Sin, which a Soul many times (through a Temptation) swallows; and is
immediately thereupon Inflamed through the Venom of it: And so, like the Heart,
Pants after the Rivers of Water.

The Gracious Soul (I say) in this case Thirsts after God in Justification, for
the Pardoning of the Guilt of Sin to it; and Thirsts after God in
Sanctification, for the Washing away of the Filth of Sin from it. Sin makes the
Soul (I say) Thirsty, and is never satisfied, till it comes to the Laver of
Christ's Blood, and there take its Fill: For only the Blood of Christ is an
Antidote, to Expel the Poison and Venom of Sin.

Thirdly, The Stag's or Hart's Thirst arises from its being pursued and
followed in Hunting. Thus the Soul of a Christian is under Pursuit and
Persecution. There is a Threefold Persecution, that a Christian is subject
unto: 1. From God. 2. From Satan. 3. From the Instruments of Satan.

First, God sometimes Persecutes a Christian, and sets himself, as it were, in
Battle-Array. Job. 10. 16.

Thou Huntest me, as a Fierce Lion.

God sometimes Eclipseth his Face and Favor; and not only forbeareth some
Special Acts of his Love, but does (as it were) God can Look sowerly, Chide
bitterly, and Strike heavily, even when and where he Loves most ^early.
Contract his Brows, and Strike us heavily. This makes a Christian Thirst after
God; that is, after the Regaining of God's former Kindness.

Secondly, In Persecution from Satan, the Gracious Heart Thirsts after God. The
Devil many times, by throwing his Fiery Darts, dries up the Moisture of a
Christian; in-somuch, that he Thirsts exceedingly.

When Satan (that Nimro^, the Mighty Hunte^) Pursues a Christian, then does the
Christian Pant after God, even as the Heart Pants after the Waterbrooks. And
when the Soul under the Devil's Pursuits comes to God, and with a sure
Recumbency leans upon him; it has Leisure then, with a Holy Heaven is a Place,
where the Bullets of Temptations shall no^ fly.
Triumph to Out-brave the Enemy. And as for thee, that would make a Partition
between Me, and my God; see, if thou can Tear me from the Bleeding Wounds of
my Dying Savior. Rend me (if thou know how) from the Bowels, the Tendrest
Bowels of God's Dearest Compassions. See, if the Gates of Hell can prevail
against the Rock of Eternity. These, and such like be the Strong Pantings of a
Tempted Soul.

Thirdly, In Persecution from Satan's Instruments the Soul Pants after God.
Sometimes the Wicked Persecute God's Children in their Names, Persons and
Estates; even then do they Pant after God, the Living God. The Children of God
Act contrary to the Spirit of the Christ's Kingdom is not of this World;
therefore are they of his Kingdom hated, because they are not of this World.
World: The World knows them not; and therefore Satan raises up the whole World
to Storm them. The Effect whereof begets and increases Holy Desires in the
Children of God.

APPLICATION.
LEt us Examine our selves this Day, Use of Ex^mination.
Whether we do Spiritually Thirst and Breath after God? Is God Chiefly and
Simply the Object of our Desires, yea, or no? The Signs and Tokens of a Natural
Thirst do ordinarily accompany a Spiritual Thirst. Now the Signs of our
Spiritual Thirst.
Signs are these following:

First, Paul was Empty, when he said, In me there dwells no Good.
Emptiness. Natural Thirst flows from Emptiness, or want of what is Cold and
Moist: He that is Spiritually Thirsty, is Spiritually Empty. Art thou now
Soul-empty? Do thou behold thy Self within? Know thou, what a Fullness of
Rubbish and Evil there is in thy Heart? and what an Emptiness there is of all
Divine Good? Know thou (I say) how Spiritually Impoverished thou art? Thou
have not so much as one Penny of Grace in the Purse of thy Soul, to Help thee.
Be sensible of thy Poverty and Emptiness (I say) again, and again; for without
this, thou can not so much as put forth one Spiritual Breathing after God,
the Living God. While Laodicea was Conceited of her own Fullness, she could not
desire any of God's Gold and Silver: And if this be thy Case Sinner, know
whilst such, thou art Deplorable and Miserable. Get out therefore of it, as
you tender the Good of your Immortal Souls.

Secondly, Exquisite Sense; even a Painful Sense. Thirst is always accompanied
The Spiritual Infant is not Born without its Pangs.
with Feeling and Pain The Veins do so Suck, and Pull, an^ Draw, for Cooling
and Moistning that the Stomach is exceedingly Sensible, and Pained, and
Un-healthful So he that is Spiritually Thirsty, is very Sensible of his own
Wants, yea Painfully Sensible: No Rest no^ Quiet has he in that Condition and
therefore he is to be heavy Laden. Such an one is pricked at the Heart by Sin,
pained through Sin.

Thirdly, Anxious, Cares, and many Thoughts: Thirst Creates Thoughts, and
Confines them also. A Man's Thoughts in such a Condition run always toward
the Waters: Water to Cool him, and Water to Refresh him, is continually in his
Mind. Give us Water to Drink, says the Thirsty Israelite: So Moses. -- So one
that is Spiritually Athirst, all his Thoughts and Cares are for Heaven, and
Heavenly Things; how to get Christ, Reconciliation with God, and a Sanctified
Peace of Conscience. Acts 2. 37.

What shall we do?

Acts 16. 30. What shall I do to be Saved?

The Spiritually Thirsty Soul is exceeding Inquisitive, how to Please God, and
Save his own Soul.

What would thou have me to do, Lord? (says he) Am not I, and all that I
have, thine? at thy Dispose and Service? And is not my Soul my Darling? and
therefore, Am I not concerned to Secure it? All such a Soul's Cares and
Thoughts, Desires and Affections are strongly carried forth to the Lord Jesus,
and the Everlasting Concerns of his Soul. Give me Christ, or else I Die, says
he! None but Christ! None but Christ! As nothing but the Breast can still the
Babe, so nothing but Christ can still the Spiritual Babe. Toys and Trifles
take not with him: the Butter-Flies of this World he Plays not with. Nothing
here Below suffices him, or has his Cares and Thoughts. These Streams here
Below satisfy not his Thirst: Nothing less than the Ocean it self can fill
him. Christ only he cares for Christ, Christ, is his Language! A Savior I
want! A Savior I desire! I can be content with the want of all Things for the
Enjoyment of a Blessed Jesus; who surpasses all Things what-so-ever, and whose
Blood can Satisfy! Fill me: Yea, when my Conscience is in a Burning Fever by
Reason of God's Wrath, the Blood of my Savior will Cool it.

Fourthly, Great Impatience: Exodus 17. verse. 3.

The People Thirsted for Water; and the People murmured, and said; Wherefore
is this, that thou have brought us out of Egypt to Kill us, and our Children,
and our Cattle with Thirst?

A Man, that is Naturally Athirst cannot bear it long; but something of a
Cooling and Moistening Nature he must have. Give me Children, or else I Dye,
says Rachel: So says the truly Gracious Soul; Give me Christ, or else I Dye
with Thirst! The Soul that truly sees its Want of Christ, is impatient till
such time he has Union with him: And he thinks the Time Quamdiu, is such a
Soul's Motto.
long, till it be so. Cur non modo, Cur non modo, as Augustine has it; Why not
now, Lord? why not now, Lord? are the Pantings of this Thirsty, Impatient Soul.
He hates Delays, and Procrastinations he cannot abide. Till Christ and He are
Knit together, he thinks every Hour a Day, and every Day a Week, and every Week
a Year. How long, O Lord? How long, O Lord, will it be, ere I shall have a more
Intimate Union with thy self, than ever? When shall I appear before thee, and
see thy Face, as I was wont in the Sanctuary?

Fifthly and Lastly, Strenuous Endeavors, (I say) Strenuous There must be
Cogent Endeavors, as well as Vehement Desires: Our Endeavors do Demonstrate the
Reality of our Desires.
Endeavors. If we are Athirst, we do not Complain, and only Cry out for Drink;
but we do also Seek out, and are not at Rest, until we have found what we
desire, and most stand in need of: How do we run up and down, and Dig in this
Place, and Place of the Earth, till we have found these Waters? So he that
(...) Spiritually Athirst, Longs, Co^ plaineth; and not only so, but La^
boureth, and Striveth; trying at (...) very Pit or Well almost; from Ord^ nance
to Ordinance he goes. He will Pray and Read; he will Hear an^ Confer: He is at
every Pool, and i^ every Way of God; if so be at length he may meet with, and
Drink of the Water of Life: As the Church; Cant. 3. 1.

I sought him, whom my Soul Loves; I sought him, but I found him not.

Verse. 2. I will rise, and go about the i. e. In Public Ordinances. Brightman
in Loc.
City; in the Streets, and in the Broadwayes I will seek him, whom my Soul
Loves.

Motives inducing here-unto, are these.
First, Spiritual Thirst, Desires and Breathings are well-pleasing to God. God
Desires, that you should Desire him: And t^efore, when you send up your Desires
to him, he is well pleased with them. And this plainly appears, in that he
Satisfies those that Desire him: Yea, he Fills the Longing Soul, Psalm. 107.
9.

Secondly, Spiritual Thirsts, Desires and Breathings are the First Evidences of
the New Creature: Renewing Grace begins first in the Sense of Want, and then
in Desire of Help. Newborn Babes Desire the Milk, 1 Pet. 2. 2.

Thirdly, Without these Spiritual Desires and Breathings, there can be no Hopes
of Mercy and Salvation. It is the greatest piece of Presumption in the World,
to fancy, that Christ will be our Savior, when we do not so much as Desire
him. If then you Desire Salvation, Desire Christ. No Salvation, but what comes
by Christ. I am the Way, the Truth and the Life: No Man comes to the Father,
but by Me. Who would not then but Desire Christ? Thou never do any thing in
order to t^ Salvation, except thou Closest with Christ: It Is only Union with
Christ, that gives thee a Right to all the Privileges of Heaven. Before thou
Challenges therefore any Heavenly Privilege, get thy self into the Prophet's
Frame: Isa. 26. 9.

With my Soul, have I Desired Thee in the Night, etc.

SERMON II.
JOHN 10. Verse. 15. And I lay down my Life for the Sheep.


NOT to spend Time in Prefaceing: In the Words Read, you may observe (1.) A
Bright Emanation of Christ's Transcendent Dying is the highest Decree of Love,
that can be.
Love:

I Lay down my Life.

(2.) The Whole Body of the Faithful described, or such whom Christ thus Loves:

Sheep.

Join these both together, and so you may observe: 1. The Act; Lay down. 2. The
Subject; Life. 3. The Object; Sheep.

Now here is a Choice Significancy in every one of these.

First, In the Act you may observe: 1. The Person [I.] 2. The Act it self.

First, The Person; [I.]

I Lay down.

Who is this I? See Verse. 7. in this Chapter.

Then Jesus said unto them again; Verily, verily, I say unto you, I am the Door
of the Sheep.

So that, this [I] here, is the Lord Jesus Christ, the Eternal Son of God; that
King of Kings, Prince of Peace: The Savior of the Elect, and the Redeemer of
his People.

Secondly, The Act it self:

Lay down.

Here is the Freeness and Voluntaryness of our Savior's Sufferings; I Lay down.

This Text, that speaks of Christ's Laying down his Life; and Texts elsewhere,
that speak of Christ's giving Himself, denote unto us, what a Free and
Voluntary Sufferer Jesus Christ was.

Secondly, In the Subject you may observe: 1. The Subject it self; Life. 2.
Propriety; My Life.

First, The Subject it self; Life.

As if our Savior had said; It is not Gold and Silver, and such Corruptible
Things, that I Lay down for your Redemption; but it is that Flower, LIFE; that
All, LIFE: Besides which, nothing is more Sweet and The Property of the
Creature, is to Abhor nothing so much as Death, and to Desire noth^ng so much
as Life.
Precious.

Skin for Skin, and all that a Man has, will he give for his Life, Job 2.
Verse. 4.

Yet this Thing LIFE, I (Christ) parted with for your Sakes.

Secondly, Propriety; My Life.

It Is my own Life is Short, yet Sweet. Eurip.
Life, that I Lay down. To Part with the Life of my Friend, or near Kinsman, is
a great Expression of Love: But to Lay down my own Life, is the greatest
Expression of Love, that can be. The Life of my Friend or Kinsman is near; the
Life of my Son is nearer: But the Life of my own Self is nearest of all.

Yet such a Thing as Life, and my own Life, I parted with for your Sakes: In
fine, I Dyed for you.

Thirdly, The Object; Sheep: That is, Believers.

It Is a frequent Thing in Scripture, for the Holy Ghost to compare Good Men to
Good Beast, and Wicked Men to Cruel Beast. Good Men to Good Beast, as Sheep:
Wicked Men to Cruel Beast; as Bears, Lions and Tigers.

The Doctrines that this Text of Scriptures affords us, are these Two.

Doctrine 1. First, Believers are Christ's Sheep. Doctrine 2. Secondly, Christ
did Die for Believers, his Sheep.
And this is the Doctrine that I shall insist upon at this time: In the
handling of which I shall take-in much of the Former. And the Method that I
shall observe, is this: 1. I shall consider the Analogy, that there is between
Believers and Sheep. 2. What kind of Sheep Believers are. 3. Prove, That Christ
did Die for Believers, his Sheep. 4. How Christ did Die. 5. Make Application.

First, I shall observe the Analogy, that is between Believers and Sheep;
wherein they run Parallel one with another.

The Sheep, although it is a Domestic and Common Creature; yet it is worthy
our Observation to consider, it has pleased the Holy Ghost very often to
Compare Christ and Christians to Sheep.

Now Believers are like Sheep in Nine Things.

First, The Sheep is an Innocent and Harmless Creature; 'twill do no Harm
either to Man or Beast: So the Believer, he is an Innocent and Harmless
Creature; he does no Hurt either to his Friend or Foe. The World indeed calls
him It has been the Lot of God's Children in all Ages, to have Things Fathered
on them, that they have been Clear from. Surius the Jesuit, reported of
Luther; That he Learned his Divinity of the Devil, and that he died Drunk: But
Melancthon, who Wrote his Life, tells us; That he died Piously, and made a very
Good Prayer before his Death.
Factious, Rebellious, Stubborn, and that will not Yield to Authority: But
those that are Acquainted with these Innocent Sheep, will tell us otherwise;
namely, That they are Peaceable. Though the Nation (many times) wherein they
dwell, may not be at Peace with them; Yet they are at Peace with the Nation.
Though they may be Disturbed and Molested in their Worshipping of God, yet they
Disturb none; but desire to Live without Brawling and Wrangling, and to give
Honor, to whom Honor is Due. Though sometimes they are accused of
Disobedience and Irreverence; the Just Judge, that is in Heaven, knows, that
they are wronged, and falsely Accused: And ere long will make it appear to all
the World, that they have been Innocent and Clear from what is laid to their
Charge.

David was just such an Innocent Sheep; as appears, when Saul came out against
him: He might had taken away Readiness Life, as well as he had cut off his Skirt;
the Oppertunity was the same; only, he was God's Innocent Sheep, and so dared
not, 1 Samuel 24. 5.

Secondly, The Sheep is a Meek, Mild and Patient Creature. It has (they
Naturalists observe of it: Swine, and other Creatures are unwilling to be
Caught: and when they are about being Slain, they will make such an Hideous
Noise, as can scarcely be endured.
say) no Gall: Therefore more Patient than any other Creatures. What more
Patient than the Lamb or Dove? Lead the Sheep to the Slaughter, or to the
Shearer, and Dumb 'twill be; yea, Silent when it is going to be Slain.

Even so is a Believer: He is Meek, Mild and Patient: You may Hurt him, but he
wont Hurt you. Such an one was David: Psalm. 39. Verse. 9.

I was Dumb, I opened not my Mouth.

Believers, if Mocked or Reviled, will not Mock or Revile again. Moses was
Mocked by Aaron and Miriam, Numbers 12. but he Mocked not again.

Thirdly, The Sheep is a Simple Creature: It Is without Sheep are often troubled
with Weak and Infirm Heads; having nothing of Craft and Subtilty in them.
Craft and Subtilty, Fraud or Deceit; and so is easily Deceived. Thus
Believers, they are oft-times noted in Scripture for their Simplicity. Hence
they are Compared to the Sheep, and the Dove, which are Simple Creatures: And
by reason of their Simplicity, and guessing many to be like themselves, they
are easily Entangled and Ensnared. Sheep are not like the Foxes, or Leopards,
but Dull and Stupid; often wandering and running into Deserts and By-Places: By
their Simplicity and Foolishness, they Stray from the Flock, and oft-times run
into Ditches and Fens; where they are Destroyed without Remedy. So a Believer,
he many times Injures himself unawares through his Simplicity; one that is
easily deceived: Thus David, and Jacob by Laban, Genesis 29.

Fourthly, The Sheep is a Timorous, Fearful Creature: One Dog will Chase a
Thousand of them. So the Believer, he is a Temerity is a Grace, implanted in
the Hearts of God's Children.
Timorous, Fearful Creature; afraid of Offending God, and afraid of giving Just
Grounds of Offense also toward Man. Thus Joseph, he was afraid of Offending
God.

How can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against God; Genesis 39. Verse. 9.

So David, when he had cut off the Lap of Readiness Garment.

Fifthly, The Sheep is a Sociable Creature, and loves to be among their Sheep
commonly are together.
Fellows. So Believers, they are very Sociable: They love the Company one of
another. Christian Conference they are very much Delighted with; and they are
never better, but when they are Praying with and for one another. It Is said;

They that fear the Lord, speak often one to another, Mal. 3. 16.

Thence it is, that there is your gathered Churches; and that you have
Congregations, some in this Place, and some in that Place. Though God's
Children are scattered, yet many of them are in Number, some more, and some
less together: Yet together they keep; knowing, that thereby they are the more
Capable of Resisting Temptation, and the more Freed from Inconveniences, that
may attend them when they are Singly, and Apart by themselves.

Sixthly, The Sheep, when once it Strayeth, never Returns again of it self,
unless the Shepherd himself brings it Home. So a Believer is subject to go
Believers are oft-times Wandering Sheep.
Astray, i. e. Sometimes: And when it does thus Stray, it never of it self
Returns, unless the Lord Jesus Christ, the Great Shepherd of Souls, brings it
Home upon his Shoulders.

Thus Peter, he had never of himself Returned, were it not for a Look from
Christ Jesus: A Look from Christ melted his Heart, and caused him to think on
his Ways with Shame, and Compunction of Heart; Luke 22. 61.

Seventhly, The Sheep, when it is Pursued by the Wolf, has nothing where withal
to Defend it self. Nature (says one) has denied this The Sheep is not so
Strong as the Lion, so Subtle as the Fox, or so Swift as the Deer; as that it
is the most Unarmed of all Creatures.
Creature any thing where-withal to defend her self; that unless the Shepherd
steps forth, she becomes a Prey both to Man and Beast. Just so it is with
Believers: When they are Pursued by that Wolf, the Devil; that Nimrod, that
Mighty Hunter, the Devil: They have no Strength of their own, whereby to Resist
him, and Defend themselves; That unless Jesus Christ, the Great Shepherd of
Souls, appears for them, they are undone to all Eternity. It Is A Weak
Christian, and a Strong Christ (says one) can do Mighty Things.
Christ, that must work in them both to Think and Do: Without Christ they can
do Nothing; whereas through Christ they are Enabled to do All Things; Phil. 4.
13.

Eighthly, A Sheep is the most Profitable of Creatures Living, and when Dead.
Some Observe, how some Creatures are made to Labor, as Horses and Camels; some
only for Food, as Hogs; some for both, as Oxen; some for Safety, as Dogs.
Creatures are Profitable Living, but not Dead; as the Horse, and the Dog; and
some Creatures are Profitable Dead, and not Living; as the Hog, etc. But the
Sheep is Profitable Living and Dead. The Sheep when it is Alive, is Profitable
to us these manner of ways She gives Milk, brings fort^ Lambs: Her Wool
will also make u^ Cloth. When she is Dead, she i^ Profitable these manner of
wayes^ Her Skin will serve (as formerly) for Garments; her Guts will mak^ our
Music, and her Dung will mak^ the Ground Fertile.

So Christians, they are Profitabl^ Living and Dying. As for instance When they
are Alive, they will make good Parents, good Masters good Governors, good
Neighbors and so is Profitable in every one o^ these. When Dead, their Souls
stil^ Live, their Names still Live, their Instructions still Live, and their
Examples still Live: And when dead and gone, yet they are still Profitable in
their Instructions and Examples.

Ninethly, The Sheep were most Profitable under the Law for Sacrifices.

The Jews Offered more Sheep, than any other Creature. It Is Confessed, they
Offered also Calves, Goats, Oxen, Heifers, Kids, Turtles and Pigeons: But
their Daily Sacrifices consisted chiefly of Sheep, for above One Thousand, Five
Hundred and Eighty Two Years; all the while that the Mosai^l Law was observed.
Thus Christ and Christians.

Christ was Sacrifice to Divine Justice for our Sins; and Christians Bo^ies are
Sacrifices in the Service of ^od: And also, when they Die for Christ, they bear
in their Bodies (with ^he Apostle Paul) the Marks of our Lord jesus, and Seal
his Truth with their ^wn Blood: Romans 12. 1.

I beseech you therefore, Brethren, by (...) Mercies of God, that ye Present
our Bodies a Living Sacrifice, Holy, ^cceptable unto God; which is your
Reasonable Service.

Thus might I still go along, Paral^ling Sheep and Believers one with ^other,
might it not be deemed Superfluous.

I could show, how that Sheep are ^ommonly Marked: So Christ, he ^arks
Believers, that are his Sheep; and the Marks are Election and Vocation. The
Sheep is a very Cleanl^ Creature, and cannot endure (lik^ the Swine) to be in
Dirty Places.

So Believers, they are Clean; bu^ Wicked Men are All Ungodly Men are Bears and
Swine, though not in Physics, yet in Morals.
Swine; never content, but when wallowing in the Mire of Sin. Sheep Love the
Gree^ Meadows, and Clear Water: So Believers, they are for the Purest
Ord^nances of the Gospel, and the Word (...) God. Sheep will go Freely of
themselves; we do not use to bind the^ in Chains: So Believers, they nee^ not
be pulled or haled to their Duty; they serve God. with a Free an^ Enlarged
Heart. The Sheep is als^ very subject to Diseases; no Creatur^ so subject, as
the Man, Horse an^ Sheep are unto Diseases: So God i^ all Ages has been
pleased to Exercise his Church with many Afflict^ons and Calamities. Therefore
w^ find the Church in Scripture compare^ to a Sheep, that is Fatted for the
Slaughter. Lastly, When once the Sheep has the Scab, he is Separate^ from the
rest of the ^lock: So here as respecting Christians: Any one, that is a
Notorious and Scandalous Sinner, is not to have Communion with the Rest in
Special Communion and Fellowship. For as one Scabby Sheep Infecteth the whole
Flock; so the Slips and Failings of one Christian, is often the Cause of the
Fall of many Weak Ones.

Thus have I Performed the First Thing Proposed. The Second Thing is this; What
kind of Sheep Believers ^re:

1. There are your Straying Sheep. Isa. 53. verse. 6.

All We (like Sheep) have gone Astray.

2. There are Lost Sheep: that is, such who have wandered so far, as that they
know not the way Home again. Such an one was the Prodigal Son, Luke 15, etc.
and the Jews in Christ's Time.

3. There are your Seeming Sheep, but Inwardly are Ravenous Wolves, Matthew. 7.
Take heed of them.

4. There are your Spotted Sheep, such as Jacob's were, Genesis 30.

5. There are your Sheep without Spot or Blemish. In a Strict Sense, Christ
only is such a Sheep. He is that Immaculate Lamb of God; that Lamb without Spot
and Blemish, 1 Pet. 1. 19.

Next to Christ, Believers themselves are those Spotless Sheep; because no Sin
is imputed to them.

Thirdly, I am to prove, That Christ did Die for Believers his Sheep. That
Christ Died, nothing is more Evident in Scripture; And that he Died not for
Himself, but for Others, is as Evident: And that those whom he did Die for,
were his Sheep; that is to say, a Number Elected out of the World, is as Plain
also. Let two or three Places of Scripture suffice* John 15. 13.

Greater Love has no Man than this, that a Man lay down his Life for his
Friends.

Romans 5. 8. But God commends his Love toward us, in that while we were yet
Sinners, Christ Died for us.

Romans 8. 34. Who is he that Condemns? It is Christ that Died.

Fourthly, I am to show, how Jesus Christ Died for Sinners.

First, Though Jesus Died in the Place, Room and Stead of Sinners; yet he
himself was all this while Christ died Innocently.
Innocent, Blameless; he had neither Original Blemish, nor Actual Blot. No Sin
in his Heart, no Sin in his Life. He was no Sinner Actually or Inherently; but
our Iniquities were laid upon him: So that Christ Died Innocently. 1 Pet. 3. 18.

For Christ also has once Suffered for Sins, the Just for the Unjust.

Christ Died for Sins; yet not for his own, but for ours: And therefore, in
that Respect he Died Innocently.

Secondly, Jesus Christ Died willingly. Matthew. 26. 39.

Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou will.

Christ's Death was a Free and Christ died Freely and Voluntarily.
Voluntary Death; not Constrained or Forced. Austin says, That Christ Died
quia voluit, and quando voluit, and quomodo voluit; Because he would, when he
would, and how he would. There was no Law to Enjoin him; no Force to Compel him

Nothing could have fastened Christ to the Cross, but the Golden Link of Love.
Christ was big of Love: Therefore he freely Opens all the Pores of his Body,
that his Blood may flow out from every Part, as a Precious Balsom to Cure our
Wounds. The Bowels of Christ was so Big with Tender Compassions, that they
Traveled again, till they did break forth into a Bloody Sweat.

But now it may be Objected from the Scripture a-fore quoted: The former Part
whereof are these Words;

Father, if it be possible, let this Cup pass from me.

Therefore (say they) Christ did not Die so Willingly, as you think he did.

Answ.
Read the whole Text, and so you will find in it, 1. Vox Natarae, the Voice of
Nature: Let this Cup pass from me. 2. Vox Officii, the Voice of his Mediatory
Office: Nevertheless, not as I will, but as thou will.

The First Voice, [Let this Cup pass] is a great Argument of our Savior's
Humanity: That he was Man, as well as God, in that he dreads a Dissolution.
Christ owed it to Himself, as a Creature, to desire the Conservation of his
Being: And on this Score, he would have become Unnatural to Himself, had he not
Feared Death.

The Latter Voice, [Nevertheless, not as I will, but as Thou will) Expresses
the Full and Free Consent of his Will; Complying with the Will of his Father,
in that grand Everlasting Design, of bringing Man's Soul unto Glory. Here he
Died Freely and Willingly.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ Died Patiently; he never Resisted, never Rebelled, never
Opposed.

He was Led, as a Sheep to the Slaughter; and as a Lamb Dumb before the
Shearer, he Opened not his Mouth, Acts 8. 32.

Isa. 53. 7. And when he was Reviled, he Reviled not again; when he Suffered,
he Threatened not.

Lastly, We are to Apply this Doctrine: And the Uses that it affords, are
these; 1. Of Information. 2. Of Reprehension. 3. Of Examination. 4. Of
Exhortation.

The First is a Use of Information, consisting of Branches.
Branch 1.
First, Are Believers Christ's Sheep? Hence learn then, That Christ is the
Believers Shepherd. If we are Christ's Sheep, then Christ is our Shepherd; and
he Performs the Office of a Good Shepherd to us Nine Ways.

1. He Marks us, and that with the Marks of Election and Vocation.

2. He goes before us, and (Shepherd-like) Leads the way: 1. In Doctrine. 2. In
Life. 3. In Love. 4. In Suffering.

3. He Feeds us (as Shepherds do their Sheep) 1. In the Valleys of the
Scriptures. 2. In the Hills of Virtue. 3. In the Pleasant Fields of his Grace.

4. He bears us up with the Strong Water or Wine of Consolation.

5. He Washes us, his Sheep, 1. In the Laver of his own Blood. 2. In the Laver
of Repentant Tears.

6. He Heals us, Psalm. 103. verse. 3.

7. He Seeks us (as the Shepherds do) his Sheep; Psalm. 119. 175. Luke 15, etc.

8. He Carries us upon his Shoulders; Luc. 15. 5.

9. He brings us Home; Ier. 17. 24.

Branch 2.
Secondly, Is it so, that Believers are Christ's Sheep? Then hence we may
learn, that Unbelievers are not Christ's Sheep.

They are only the Cruel Beasts of the Forest; such as Bears, Lions, Wolves
and Tigers: So the Scripture calls them.

Branch 3.
Thirdly, Is it so, that Christ Died also for Believers, his Sheep? Hence learn
then, the Condescension and Love of Christ.

The Condescension of Christ, that he should Die; and how was he fain to Humble
himself, before he could become Capable of Dying? He was forced to become Man:
And, Oh great Condescension! That he who was the Son of God, Heir of Heaven,
Prince of Peace, should be enclosed in a That Eternity should be Born; That he
who Rules the Stars, should Suck the Breasts; That he who Thundered in the
Clouds, should Cry in a Cradle.
Womb, and come into this World.

Oh Infinite Humility! That a Savior should become a Servant! That the Lord of
Glory should lay aside his Robe, and become a Shepherd; nay, a Dying Shepherd
too! It Is just, as if a King should leave his Throne, and wait at Table.

The Love of Christ, in that he should Die for his Sheep; lay down his Life.
What a Shepherd is this? and, What a kind of Love is this Love? Here is a
Pattern without a Parallel.

Oh the Hights, Depths, Breadths and Lengths of the Who can Draw out Christ's
Love to the Life?
Love of God in Christ! That Christ should Die, and that for Sheep, Silly
Sheep: Lost, as we all were, before the Great Shepherd sought us.

Use 2. Of Reprehension.
Here is Reproof unto such, that Persecute Believers; because God will look
upon them, as so many Wolves, that Pursue his precious Sheep. And do you hear
this, Oh ye Ungodly of the World! Those whom you so Violently Persecute, are
the Sheep of Christ: And therefore you Incurr the Displeasure of Christ, that
is their Shepherd.

Use 3. Of Examination.
Let us Examine our selves, Whether we are Believers, and the Sheep of Christ?
Have we taken Christ for our Shepherd? And do we Act Faith upon him, under all
our Exigencies and Indigencies? Knowing, that because he is our Shepherd,
therefore we shall want no Good thing. If we are Christ's Sheep, we are
Innocent, Meek, Simple, and very Profitable, etc.

Use 4. Of Exhortation.
This Use of Exhortation has a double Aspect. 1. It looks to Believers, that
are Christ's Sheep. 2. It looks to Unbelievers, that are not Christ's Sheep.

First, It looks to Believers, that are Christ's Sheep. Is it so, That Christ
has Died for you, his Sheep? Then you, his Sheep, be willing to Die for Him,
your Shepherd. Christ did not Fear Men for you, don't you then Fear Men for
Him: He Endured the Cross, and Despised the Shame; he went through a Sea of
Wrath, and a Sea of Blood to Save you: And what, Will you do nothing for him?
He Loved you with a Love stronger than Death, Love him therefore with a Love
stronger than Life. We know not, how soon an Hour of Temptation may come; This
we may be assured of, Christ's Love has been Tried for us: Why then should not
our Love be Ttied for Christ? His Life was laid down for us; his Blood was shed
for us; and we have no such Blood to shed for him, as he had to shed for us: Is
our Love grown to such a High Stature, that we could Lay down Ten Thousand
Lives (had we them) for the Cause and Interest of Christ?

Secondly, It looks to Unbelievers: You that are not Christ's Sheep; Do you
this Day become Believers, that ye may be the Sheep of Christ. Would you be
Invested with Glorious Privileges? would you have your Souls Saved? would you
have an Interest in all the Benefits of Christ? Qui habet Christum, habet
habentem omnia.
Come over to him then. You must be joined to Christ, if you would have what
Christ has. He who has the Son, has Life; and he who has not the Son, has
not Life: So that it is Union with Christ, that gives us a Right to whatever
he has Purchased.

Object. But can Christ make me a Sheep, that has been such a Wolf?

Answ. Yea, take Christ, and he will quickly Change you, and make you to differ
from what you were. As for instance: What a Wolf was Paul? How fiercely did he
go out against the Church at Damascus? But Christ by the Power of Grace,
quickly turned the Fierceness of the Lion into the Meekness of the Lamb.

Object. But my Heart is Hard, and my Mind is Blind.

Answ. Why (says Christ) take me, and I can Soften your Heart, and turn the
Flint into Flesh.

Object. But I have not a Hand to Receive Christ.

Answ. Be willing to Receive Christ, and he will find a Hand for you. As Christ
has Promised to Save us by Believing; so likewise he has Promised to Help us to
Believe.

SERMON III.
LUKE 16. Verse. 50. But I have a Baptism to be Baptized with; and, How am I
Straightened, till it he Accomplished.


THAT these Words have a Coherence, easily appears by the Illative Particle
[BUT]; by which they are tacked to somewhat said before; viz. Verse. 49.

I come to send Fire on the Earth; and what will I, if it be already Kindled?

Cyril by Fire here, understands the Holy Ghost: But others more probably by
Fire, do understand the Fiery Trials of Persecutions and Afflictions. Our
Savior speaks this, as the Effect, which the Preaching of the Gospel should
produce; not of it self, but by reason of Men's Corruption and Abuse of it.

And so he comes in with -- But I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, etc.

i. e. Before this Fire on Earth, (viz. Persecutions, that the Gospel shall
occasion, for Discovery of Men's Impure Lusts) can be Accomplished, I have a
Baptism to be Baptized with. Oportet me multa pati, and tandem trucidari, ut
sanguine meo perfundar.


That is, (says Piscator on the Place) I must Suffer many Things; nay, be
Dipped, Plunged and Baptized in Blood.

So the Learned and Reverend Assembly of Divines, in their Notes upon the Place.

I have a Baptism to be Baptized with, etc.

Meaning, That his Self must first Suffer.

This in the Saints is called the Baptism of Martyrdom.

And how am I (...) Quomodo coarctor, a Metaphor taken from such Narrow Places,
where by meeting with an Enemy, we are put to it, by reason of the Enemy, and
by reason, that we cannot find out any other Passage.
Straightened, till it be Accomplished. As if he had said; I much desire, it were
Accomplished, and the Redemption of Man thereby.

The Words without any Stretching hard, would afford us Two Points of Doctrine:
But because I ^ntend only a SERMON from them; I shall therefore endeavor to
sum up the Substance of the Words in one Point of Doctrine.

Doctrine.
That Jesus Christ was Baptized with a Baptism of Blood for us; the
Accomplishment whereof he very much desired.

In the Opening and Prosecuting of this Doctrine we must take notice 1. (By way
of Explication) of the Person Baptized, viz. Jesus Christ. 2. What kind of
Baptism, viz. A Bloody Baptism, or a Baptism of Blood. 3. For whose Sakes, viz.
For us.


First, Of the Person Baptized, and that is Jesus Christ.

Quest. What is this Jesus Christ, say you?

Answ. A Christian, and ask What Jesus Christ is? Yea, and many such Ones I
believe there are (that is, Titularly, not Really) that know not the Lord
Jesus. Therefore I will tell you, (as well as Man can tell you) who Jesus
Christ is:

Jesus Christ is One, that is Related to God, and unto us. 1. Jesus Christ is
Related to God: By God we commonly understand the First Person of the Trinity;
and by Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the Trinity. Why now, God the First
Person of the Trinity, is Father to Jesus Christ, the Second Person of the
Trinity. So that Jesus Christ is the Eternal Son of God, two manner of ways:
By Eternal Generation, according to his Godhead; and by Grace of Personal
Union, according to his Manhood; Psalm. 2. 7. Luke 1. 35. 2. Jesus Christ is
Related unto Us also,

First, Jesus Christ is our Savior. Phil. 3. 20.

From whence also we look for our Savior, the Lord Jesus Christ.

And well may he be so Styled; for he Our Lives Condemn us, but the Name of
Jesus will Save us.
Saves us from the Roaring Lion, viz. the Devil, that is so called, 1 Pet. 5.
8. We were once in his Paw; but Christ our Savior Rescued us.

2. Jesus our Savior Saves us from Raging Lusts also, that would Devour our
Souls: But he over-powers them, and so prevents them.

Our Lusts, as so many Thieves, would steal away our Souls; and the Dog,
Conscience, does not so much as give one Bark: But now Christ, who is our
Savior, awakens Conscience, that has been asleep so long, and bids it do its
Office.

3. Jesus Christ Saves us from the King of Terrors; that is, he takes away all,
that renders Death Formidable. The Be by stinging, loses its Sting; so Death,
while it Stung Christ on the Cross, has lost its Sting to a Believer.

Secondly, Jesus Christ is our Husband. Revel. 22. 17.

And the Spirit, and the Bride say, Come.

Now the Spouse is in Sable, it being a Time of Absence from her Husband: But
still Christ continues in the We are Christians, because we have Union with
Christ.
Relation both of a Savior, and a Husband to the Believing Soul. And, What
Thoughts can afford more Comfort, than the Thoughts of a Spiritual, Real Union
between Christ, and my Soul? Than the Thoughts of this; That Christ and I am
One, that there is an Intimous, Indissoluble Union between Christ, and my Soul,
which is the Wellhead of all those Streams of Comfort that I Enjoy; by which I
can lay Claim to all Gospel-Rights and Privileges whatsoever.

Thirdly, Jesus Christ is our The Church is a Mystical Body, the Head whereof
is Christ.
Head. As a Body is either Natural or Politic; so a Head: And Christ is held
forth in Scripture under both these Capacities. He is unto his Church a Natural
Head, in regard of Influence; and a Politic Head, in regard of Government;
Ephesians. 4. 15, 16. Col. 2. 19.

Fourthly, Jesus Christ is our Life; for so he is expressed in Scripture. Col.
3. 4.

When Christ, who is our Life, shall appear, what the The Soul is the Life of
the Body, and Christ is the Life of the Soul.
Soul is to the Body, that is Christ to the Soul, Gal. 2. 20.

Not I, but Christ that Lives in me.

Fifthly and Lastly, Christ is our Advocate. 1 John 1. 2.

And if any Man Sin, we have an Advocate with the Father, Jesus Christ will
Plead for Believers, as the Advocate does for his Clients.
Christ, the Righteous.

All these manner of ways Christ is Related to Us.

Secondly, What kind of Baptism Jesus Christ was Baptized with, viz. A Bloody
Baptism, or a Baptism of Blood.

Divines do tell us of a Threefold 1. Baptismus Fluminis. 2. Flaminis. 3.
Sanguinis.
Baptism; A Baptism of Water, of the Spirit, and of Martyrdom: All these were
Fulfilled in Christ. But the Baptism in the Text, is the Baptism of Blood; in
his Saints called the Baptism of Martyrdom. And I may truly say, That Christ
was Baptized in Water but once; yet he was Baptized in Blood diverse times.
Christ was Baptized in Blood Three Times; or, which you will, he Bled Three
Times.

1. Jesus Christ did Bleed at his Circumcision; Luke 2. 21. (...)

2. Jesus Christ did Bleed in the Garden, Clodders of Blood came then from him;
Luke 22. 44.

3. Jesus Christ did Bleed, when he was Fastened and Nailed to the Cross: Then
Streams of Blood came from him; Luke 23.

John, the Beloved Disciple, was an Eyewitness of the Streaming out of
Christ's Blood, as he stood by Christ's Cross, uttering these Words:

O Gates of Heaven! O Windows of Paradise! O Palace of Refuge! O Tower of
Strength! O Sanctuary of the Just! O Flourishing Bed of the Spouse of Solomon!

Methinks, I see Water and Blood running out of his Side more Freshly, than
these Golden Streams, which ran out of the Garden of Eden, and Watered the
whole World.

Thirdly, For whose Sake, viz. For us.

Now this [For us] must be understood Exclusively: Not the World; Inclusively.
That Part of the World, Ephesians. 2. verse. 1.
which are Elected, and that in time are Effectually Called.

For us; i. e. We that were Dead in Trespass and Sin, as well as others.

Secondly, Proof of the Point.

That Jesus Christ was Baptized in Blood Willingly, and Desirously; much has
been spoken of this, in the Foregoing SERMON: I would not therefore swell,
when there is no need. Vide Page 384.

APPLICATION.
Use 1. Of Information.
Branch 1.
HEnce learn the Love of our Lord Jesus: What a Transcendant The Greatest
Logician and Rhetorician in the World, the Greatest Oracle and Orator in the
World, the Greatest Cicero and Demosthenes in the World cannot set out Christ's
Love to the Life.
Love it is? For it has brought him through a Sea of Wrath, a Sea of Sin, and a
Sea of Blood, to make us a Peculiar People unto himself. Our Savior's Baptism
of Blood Evidenceth the Greatness of his Love toward us: That shows, how Pure,
and how Excellent it is. O the Heights, Depths, Breadths and Lengths of the
Love of God in Christ! My Line is too Short, to found this Bottom. Finally,
This Love is a Surpassing Love; that which Excels all Loves whatsoever.

Branch 2.
Hence learn the Believers Duty. Was Jesus Christ Baptized in Blood for If
Christ Loved us with a Love stronger than Death, we should then Love him with a
Love stronger than Life.
You? Then be you willing to be Baptized for him. He did not Fear Men; but
Endured the Cross, and Despised the Shame. He bear'd the Wrath of God for us;
let us therefore be willing to bear the Wrath of Men for him. This is but Lex
talionis.

Branch 3.
Hence learn the Believers Privileges. Was Jesus Christ Baptized in Blood for
you? Three great Privileges Result therefrom.

First, The Dominion of Sin is taken away. Romans 6. 14.

For Sin shall not have Sin the Tyrant is Conquered.
Dominion over you: For ye are not under the Law, but under Grace.

Though Jesus Christ as yet has not Freed Believers from the Presence of Sin;
yet he has Freed Believers from the Dominion of Sin, and the Reigning Power of
it in their Souls: And ere long he will quite Free them also from the Presence
of Sin.

Secondly, The Sting of Death is taken away, 1 Cor. 15. 55.

O Death, where is thy Sting?

Christ by Dying has Overcome Death: And therefore Believers need not fear it,
though it has a Grim Visage, and a Ghastly Looks. Jesus Christ has Knocked out
the Teeth of this Lion.

Finally, Christ's Baptism of Blood makes the Pale Face of Death look Ruddy and
Pleasant.

Thirdly, The Door of Heaven is opened; Christ's Bloody Baptism is the Key,
that Unlocks it. Sin has shut up the Open Way to Heaven, but Christ's Blood has
Unlocked it.

Use 2. Of Exhortation.
SEcondly, Let Unbelievers get into Christ, that his Baptism of Blood may avail
them: For if they have not Union with Christ, whatever then Christ has done or
suffered, signifies not any thing to them.

SERMON IV.
MATH. 10. Verse. 16. Be ye therefore Wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves.


THE Words are an Inference, from what Immediately goes before.

Behold, I send you forth, as Sheep in the midst of Wolves: Be ye therefore
Wise as Serpents, and Harmless as Doves.

Be Wise, lest ye be Circumvented by others; and Harmless, lest ye Hurt others,
is the Sense of all Expositors on the Place.

Christian Religion is a Compound of these two; viz. The Serpent's Wisdom, and
the Dove's Simplicity.

The Serpent without the Dove is too Mischievous, and the Dove without the
Serpent is too Silly. Christ sends us here to the School of Nature, that we may
Learn.

Be ye therefore Wise as Serpents, etc.

The Text consists of two Parts; The Text Divided.
1. A Precept, which is double. 2. A Pattern, which is double.

1. A Precept, which is double; and that is, We must be Wise and Innocent.

2. A Pattern, which is double; i. e. The Serpent, and the Dove. The Serpent
for Wisdom, and the Dove for Simplicity.

Be ye therefore Wise as Serpents, etc.

From the Words resulteth two Points of Doctrine.

Doctrine 1.
That we must not disdain to be Taught of the most Despicable and Contemptible
of Creatures.

What more Contemptible than a Serpent? What more Despicable than a Dove? Yet
we are admonished to Learn of them.

Doctrine 2.
That Wisdom and Simplicity must go together.

It Is the First, that I shall at this time handle; viz. That we must not
disdain to be Taught of the most Contemptible and Despicable of Creatures.

What more Contemptible than a Serpent? What more Despicable than a Dove? Yet
we are Admonished to Learn of them.

These Creatures, viz. the Serpent, and the Dove, have Wisdom and Simplicity
not for Themselves, but for Us. The Jews must borrow Bracelets and Earrings
even of the Egyptians: So we may Receive some Good from wicked Men. Elias
Refuses not Meat, though brought by a Raven. The Herbalist looks not out, of
what Garden his Simples comes; but what Saladine Power it has.

Be ye therefore Wise as Serpents, etc.

Let us therefore see what there is in the Serpent and Dove, that is imitable.

First, We will begin with the Serpent.

Now there is in the Serpent that which is imitable, and not imitable; But from
both we may learn much Good.

The Wisdom of the Serpent shows The Properties of the Wise Serpent.
it self in these Properties, worthy of our imitation.

First, The Serpent is a very quick-sighted Creature: Whence it is, that he is
not so soon Entangled, as other Creatures are; viz. the Dove and the Sheep.

Herein should Christians answer the Serpent; They should be quick-sighted, and
apprehensive of those Perils and Snares that attend them here below. For while
Believers are Pilgrims, Satan can assail them. The World below is a Place in
which Nets (every where) is spread to catch the Souls of Men, as so many Birds
for Prey. The Best of Christians had need be Quick-sighted, like the Serpent,
because of Dangers; and when they go, they need to go on Tip-toe, because of
Nets spread abroad by that Fowler, the Devil.

Secondly, The Serpent will cast his Skin, and so loses his Deformity, and
Renews his Age.

In this the Serpent also is very imitable unto us: We must cast our Skin, i.
e. our Sins; we must Abhor, Leave and Eschew them: For they do Deform us, and
make God and us at Variance. Ezekiel. 18. 31.

Cast away from you all your Transgressions, whereby ye have Transgressed.

Sin does run Parallel with a Disease in many Things, and not the least in
this: Viz. As the Disease of the Body Deforms it; so does Sin as a Disease
Deform the Soul. The Souls of Men, that were Whiter than Snow, Ruddier than
Rubies, more Polisht than Saphirs in their First Original, are by Sin become as
Black as the Coal: The Soul of Man, that had the Image of God stamped on it in
Legible Char^ is now by Sin scarce Discerna.

Thirdly, The Serpent will stop his Ears against the Charmers: Just so must we
against Sin, and Satan's Baits of Pleasure and Profit. Satan will sometimes say:

O Soul! Here is a great deal of Pleasure and Profit, if thou will but Commit
this Sin.

Nay, he will further argue, by telling the Soul, That it is but a little Sin,
etc.

Although a Small Sin will Offend an Infinite God, and Exclude us out of a
Great Heaven: A Small Mote may put out our Eyes, as well as a Great Beam: A
Drop of Water helps to Drown the Ship, as well as a Great Flood.

Again, This also (which belongs unto the same Head) is very observable in the
Serpent; He will stop one Ear with his Tail, and the other with the Earth. Just
so must we stop our Ears against Satan's Charms. One of our Ears must be stopped
with the Tail; that is, by the Consideration of what the End of Sinning will
be; The other of our Ears must be stopped with the Earth; that is, by
Contemplating our Frailty and Mortality. The Thoughts and Consideration of our
Being Memento Mortis tuae, and non peccabis. Cypr.
Dust, and ere long Returning unto Dust, will keep us from Sinful Compliance.
Shall we go on in Sin, when God may say this Night:

Give an Account of thy Stewardship.

The way to give Sin a Death's Wound, is to set up a Death's Head.

Shall I be Sinning, when To Morrow I may be Dying?

This is Stopping of our Ears against Satan's Charms with the Earth.

Fourthly, The Serpent Rowles himself in the Dust, and Creeps through a narrow
Hole, and so gets Rid of his Skin.

Would to God, SIRS, that we could but make such a Shift to leave Sin, as the
Serpent does to leave its Skin. We can find Shifts for Sinning, but none for
being Holy; and, What a sad thing is this? Let us then for the Future Sin no
more; but with the Serpent, Roll our selves in the Dust of Repentance; Job. 42.
6.

Fifthly, The Serpent bends all his Parts to save his Head, because his Life is
there; so Ierom, Austin, Ambrose, Totum corpus in orbem circum voluit, ut caput
occultet.
etc.

Why now, Christ is a Christian's Head, and in that Head is the Christian's
Life; and we must Deny all, rather than that. Nay, Christ our Life is
Preserved, though we may loose our own.

Now, as there are Five several Things in the Serpent, which we shall do well
to observe, that we Practice them; so there are Three several Things in the
Serpent, that we shall do well to observe, that we may Avoid them.

First, The Serpent is Smooth in his Skin, yet he Stings to Death: He has a
Flattering Face, but a Stinging Tail. Now this we must beware of; we must not
have sweet Words, and War in our Hearts, etc.

Secondly, The Serpent is a Hostile Creature, and will not take VVrong: But we
must Suffer, etc.

Thirdly, The Serpent Lives in Deserts, and Solitary Places: But now,
Christians must not always be alone; but, like Sheep, be Sociable, that so
they may be a Common Good: According to that; Vir Bonus est Commune Bonum.

Having done with what we may Learn from the Serpent; I come now to the Dove;
and so shall enquire, what may be Learnt from it.

First, We should be like the Dove for Meekness; The Dove is a Meek * Simplex
est animal fell caret. Bish. Lake.
Creature: They say, It is without Gall. So Christians should be Patient, and
Meek, and of a Forgiving Spirit; not troubled with the Overflowing of the Gall;
forgetting Injuries, and writing Kindnesses on Marble.

Secondly, We should be like the Dove for Simplicity, Innocence and Harmleness.
The Dove has nothing of Guile, Fraud, Deceit or Malignancy: So Christians
should be Simple and Harmless; taking Wrong, but doing none.

Thirdly, We should be like the Dove for Chastity. The Dove is a Chaste
Creature, and keeps to its own Mate: So Christians should be. We are Admonished
hereby to keep close to our Savior, and not wander from Him by any means.
Every Believing Soul is Christ's Spouse, and Satan does oft-times Entice him to
Spiritual Uncleanness: But he having a Dove-like Nature, Abominates all
Thoughts, Words and Actions, that are Unchaste.

Fourthly, We should be like the Dove for Neatness, Purity and Cleanness.

Fifthly, We should be like the Dove for Love, and Loveliness.

Sixthly, We should be like the Dove for Sociableness: The Doves Flock together
to the Window; Isa. 60. 85.

Seventhly, We should be like Doves for Mourning. The Dove is a Mournful
Creature: Oh! that we, who have the Poison of the Serpent, might have the Tears
of the Dove!

APPLICATION.
Use 1. Of Information.
Branch 1.
HEnce we infer, That such who cannot Learn any thing from the Creatures that
God has made, are Carnal, and not Spiritual. S^culum est speculum; The World
Below is a Glass to discover the World Above.

And although I am not of their Opinion, who hold, That the Heathens may Spell
Christ out of the Sun, Moon and Stars: Yet this I know, That the Irrational and
Inanimate, as well as Rational Creatures have a Language: And though not by
Articulate Speech, yet in a Metaphorical Sense, they Preach unto Man the
Wisdom, Power and Goodness of God; Romans 1. 20.

Branch 2.
See, what Cause of Humiliation here is? That Man, who at first was led by the
Knowledge of God to the Knowledge of the Creature, must now by the Creatures
Learn to know God! That the Creatures (as one says) like Balaam's Ass, should
Teach their Master! But though this be the Unhappiness of Poor Man in his
Collapsed State; yet it is now his Wisdom, to improve such Helps. And whilst
others, by the Abuse of Creatures, are furthering their Perdition, to be by the
Spiritual Improvement of them promoting our own Salvation.

Branch 3.
See the Beastliness of such Men, that while they should Learn from the
Creatures, are Abusing o^ them: When they might be Promoting of their
Salvation by a Spiritual Improvement of them, they do further their Perdition
by an Unwarrantable Abuse of them. Surely, such are Beasts in the Shape of Men.

Use 2. Of Reprehension.
IT may Reprove such, that have not Learnt this Art of Spiritualizing Earthly
Objects.

Use 3. Of Exhortation.
THat we would more Contemplate for our Profit sake, than we do.

As Man (says an Excellent Divine) Husbandry Spiritualized.
is Compounded of a Fleshly, and Spiritual Substance; so God has Endowed the
Creatures with a Spi^tual, as well as Fleshly Usefulness. They have not only a
Natural Use in Alimental and Physical Respects; but also, a Spiritual Use, as
they bear the Figures and Similitudes of many Sublime and Heavenly Mysteries.

Believe me (says Contemplative Bernhard) Thou shall find more in the Woods,
than in a Corner; Stones and Trees will Teach thee, what thou shall not have
from Learned Doctors.

I shall Conclude with Job; Chap. 12. Verse. 7, 8.

Ask now the Beasts, and they shall Teach thee; and the Fowls of the Air, and
they shall Tell thee: Or speak to the Earth, and it shall Teach thee; and the
Fishes of the Sea shall Declare unto thee.

That is, (says Neat and Accurate Mr. Caryl in Loc.
Caryl) The Creatures Teach us, when we think of them. They Teach us, though
not Formally, yet Virtually: They Answer and Resolve the Question put to them;
though not Explicitly to the Ear, yet Convincingly to the Conscience. So then,
we Ask the Creatures, when we Diligently Consider them; when we search out the
Perfections and Virtues, that God has put into, or stamped upon them. To set
our Mind thus upon the Creature, is to Discourse with the Creature: The
Questions which Man asks of a Beast, are only his own Meditations. Again, The
Creatures Teach us, when we in Meditation make out Collections, and draw down a
Demonstration of the Power, Wisdom and Goodness of God in making them, or of
the Frailty of Man in needing them: Such Conclusions and Inferences are the
Teachings of the Creatures.

FINIS.
Books Printed for, and Sold by Benj. Harris, at the Stationers-Arms at the
East End of the Royal Exchange in Cornhil.
THE Accomplished Ladies Delight in Preserving, Physic, Beautifying and
Cookery: The Second Edition, with Large Additions Price 2s.

War with the Devil: Or, The Young-Man's Conflict with the Power of Darkness;
Discovering the Corruption and Vanity of Youth, the Horrible Nature of Sin: In
a Dialogue, between an Old Apostate, and a Young Professor: The Fifth
Impression. Price 1s.

The Second Part of the War with the Devil; The Grand Impostor Discovered: Or,
The Quakers Doctrine weighed in the Balance, and found wanting. A Poem, by way
of Dialogue; wherein their Chief and most concerning Principles are laid down;
and by the Authority of God's Holy Word, thereby Refuted. Price 1s.

Animae Astrologiae: Or, A Guide to Astrologers; with a New Table of the Fixed
Stars, Rectifyed for several Years to come; and diverse other Illustrations: By
W. Lilly, Student in Astrology. Price 1s. 6d.

Summonds to the Grave: Or, A Timely Preparation for Death. Demonstrated in a
Sermon; Preached at the Funeral of John ^rcost: With Two Elegies there-unto
prefixed. By the Author of War with the Devil. Price 8d.

The History of the Young Converted Gallant: Or, Directions for the Reading of
of that Divine Poem, War with the Devil. Showing the Readers thereof, how to
Read the same Poem right in these four Respects, etc. First, In reference to
the Substance or History thereof. Secondly, In reference to the Intent or
Mystery thereof. Thirdly, In reference to the Consequent Doctrine thereof.
Fourthly, In reference to the Practical Application thereof. Compiled in a
Poem; By John Mason, ^tleman of Fordham in Cambridge shire. Price 1s.

The Beauty, Vigor and Strength of Youth be-spoke for God: In a Sermon, lately
Preached to Young Men, from the Twelfth of Ecclesiastes, on Verse the First. By
Thomas Powel, Minister of the Gospel. Price 6d.

Blessed Rest for the Burdened Sinner: Or, The only Center of the Soul. Wherein
is Discovered, First, Who he is, that Invites, and calls Sinners to this Rest.
Secondly, The Encouragement to come unto him for Rest. Thirdly, Many
Obstructions and Impediments, which keeps back Sinners; with their
Unreasonableness answered. Fourthly, The Rest, that every one shall have, that
comes unto Christ. Delivered in several Sermons, from Matthew the 11. 12. By
John Hopwood, Preacher of the Gospel.


