William Powell alias Hinson Esquire; Plaintiff; The Warden and Fellows of
All-soules College in Oxford Defendants.
In the Chancellors Court of the University of Oxford in a pretended Cause of
Damage.
THis Suit is in the nature of an Action of the Case at the Common Law, and the
end of this Action is the same with that of an Action on the case at Law, and
that is to have a Reparation by way of damage for a wrong supposed to be done
by the Defendants to the Plaintiff.

The wrong complained of in the present Case is a preterition made by the
Defendants of the Plaintiff, in the renewing of a Lease for years of a Mesuage
and Lands in Wha^ly in the County of Oxon, which Lease, as the Plaintiff
pretends the Defendants have to his damage renewed unto George Herne.

1. Wherein I do agree first that the Lease has been so renewed by the
Defendants to George Herne. 2. I do admit that this renewing was to the
Plaintiffes damage.
But as I shall represent the truth of the Case to be; I conceive this damage
so much complained of by this Action will fall out to be within the reason of
those Cases of the Common Law, that being damnum abs^ue injuria, there is no
punishment of such Acts by any re^opence to be given in way of damage by any
action whatsoever.

And therefore wheresoever a man has liberty to do any act which no Law of the
Land forbids, no Action at Law lies against him for the doing of such an Act.

A Schoolmasters teaching School in a Town brought an Action upon the Case
against another that afterward set up a School in the same Town whereby those
Scholars that before gave him twenty pence a quarter, 11 Henry 4. Stat. in
accon. sur le Case
now will give him but twelve pence a quarter, and this being damnum absque
injuria, it was adjudged that the Action will not lie.

So in the Case of a new Mill, erected upon the same stream, by a Lord of a
Manor, to the prejudice of the Lord of the next Manor, who has an ancient
Mill standing upon the same stream, whereby the suit to the old Mill is
lessened and withdrawn, yet this Action lies not, 22 of H. 6 14. Bacon. jur le
case, 57. and 42.
for albeit it be a damage to the Owner of the old Mill, yet it is absque
injuria, there being no Law that makes such restraint either in the one case or
in the other.

To apply this to the present Case, there are three Competitors to the
Defendants for the renewing of the said Lease at Whately.

1. The Plaintiff as Executor to Sir Edward Powell. 2. Mr Ba^eman. 3. Mr
George Herne.
The College being the Defendants, are not only not prohibited, nor under any
restraint for the renewing of it, but are rather enabled by the Statute of 18.
Eliz. the present Lease being run within three years of expiration, to renew
this Lease to whom they please.

So as this being a power recommended to their own liberty, and being by them
executed according to their power to them given by that Law, legis executio non
habet injuriam, and no man can be said to do a wrong, qui jure su^ ut^tur.

The Defendants are the more to be justified herein, for that they did not
merely as an act of power, nor inconsiderately renew it; but first calling in
all parties, and suffering them to interplead before them, and hearing, and
examining their reasons, hinc and inde, they did at length upon a full and
deliberate consideration declare the right of renewing this Lease to belong to
George Herne, and accordingly renewed it to him; wherein I conceive that both
in Law and Equity they have done an Act that is most Collegiate, and such as
best suits with the honor of their College: and this will the better appear
by the Case it self as it stands in judgment upon the series and course of
the Leases themselves made by their Predecessors of this Land now in question.

Richard Powell being in the year 1634. possessed of a Lease for years before
that time made by All-soules College, does in the said year 1634. without
making any actual surrender thereof, accept of a new Lease for years there of
from the said College.

This his acceptance of the said new Lease is in Law an absolute surrender of
that old Lease, albeit no actual surrender were by him made of the said old
Lease, and the neglect of the then Warden and Scholars of the said College to
take in the said old Lease is no hinderance at all to the operation of the said
surrender in Law.

Then does Richard Powell in the year 1638. for 200. li. to him paid by
Bateman, affigne this renewed Lease unto Bateman, this is a good assignment of
a good Lease, then in being unto Bateman.

After this Richard Powell having still in his hands the said old Lease not
actually surrendered, but yet determined by such surrender in Law (ut supra)
does in the year 1639. for 340 li. paid by George Herne amongst other things
grant the said old Lease and the Lands thereby demised to the said George
Herne, who presently redemised the said Lands unto the said Richard Powell at
40. li. rent per annum and Powell still retained in his own hands the said old
Lease.

The said Richard Powell afterward in the year 1641. repaires to the
College, and concealing from them his said assignment to Bateman, and his said
grant to Herne, without the privity or concurrents of the said Bateman and
Herne, by their joining with him in their making of an actual surrender of
their, or either of their estates to the said College, upon his giving in of
the said old Lease made in the year of our Lord, 1626. obtaines a new Lease
from the said College to begin immediately, which he afterward mortgaged to
Sir Edward Powell.

1. The Lease renewed in 1634. to Richard Powell, then being Tenant in
possession, and which he afterward assigned to Bateman, was the only good
Lease in the Case.

2. The grant to Herne of an old Lease then pretended to be in esse, is not
good in regard the Lease intended was determined by Powels acceptance of a new
Lease in 1634.

3. The College new Lease to Richard Powell in the year 1641. was void, for
that the Lease to Bateman was then in being for many years then to come, and
that Lease not then surrendered.

4. Batemans Lease coming afterward within three years of expiration, the
College had then power to let a Lease to whom they pleased.

And they afterward making this Lease to George Herne, this is a good
execution of their power to them given by the Statute; and albeit a damage of
the Plaintiffes expectation to renew, yet no injury at all to the Plaintiff
for the reasons before delivered.

And so no cause of Action to the Plaintiff.

As to the objection that Richard Powell upon such his renewing in 1641. did
pay to the College 26. li. 13. s. 4. d. for a Fine.

It is answered, if any such money were by him paid for such a void Leasethen
to him made, and by him afterward assigned to Sir Edward Powell this 26. li.
13. s. 4. d. and the damages for the same if any due to any person, is due in
equity to the Executors of the said Richard Powell, who in his own wrong
departed with that money and cannot at all be due to the Plaintiff as Executor
of Sir Edward Powell, who as to that payment was and is a mere stranger to the
College, nor does the now Plaintiff by his Libell make any claim thereunto.

26 Septem. 1656. Charles Holloway for the Defendants.

William Powell Esquire, Plaintiff.
The Warden and Fellows of All souls College in Oxon, Defendants, in the
Chancellors Court of the University of Oxon, in a Cause of damages.
THere is no cause why the Flaintiff should recover damages against the
Defendants, for these reasons.

1. There is neither Law nor equity to compel them to Lease their land to any
one; for it was lawful for them to do what they would with their own,
observing this rule, sic utere tuo ut alienum non ledas, as here they did, for
they did no hurt to Sir Edward Powell by making their Lease to Heron, but lest
Sir Edward as they found him.

2 Heron was first deceived, and it was good reason he should be first
repaired; Qui prior est tempore poti^r est jure.

3 But if the College had made the last lease to Sir Edward Powell; had not
Heron as good equity to have sued the College for damages, as Sir Edward
Powels Executors pretends to now? certainly there had been aequale jus, if any
there was at all in either side to sue the College.

4. All the pretense for the Plaintiff, is, because his testator bought the
last lease made in 1641. This in truth was no Lease, it being made void by Act
of Parliament of 18. Eliz. in which every man's consent was had for him and his
heirs, that such Lease should be void because the former was not within three
years of expiration, which was unknown to the College, but well known to
Richard Powell the Lessee, who wittingly deceived himself, that he might cozen
Sir Edward Powell, the Plaintiffs testator.

5. If the case were of a body natural, and that the Plaintiff or his testator
had sustained damage by it by an act done unawares (as here by making a void
Lease) yet ignorantia facti excusat.

6. No crime can be imputed to a body politic aggregate, and this suit is
brought against a body politic, and the charge of this Libell is grounded upon
a deceit in making a Lease to a wrong man, which as is supposed, ought to have
been made to the Plaintiffs testator. Now deceit is a crime, and a body
without a soul (although it be Allsoules) cannot be guilty of a crime, and so
not be charged to pay damages, or any way punishable for a crime: And therefore
if any suit would have lien, it must have been against some natural persons of
that body; but to charge them as a body politic, there is no color.

7. As for the fine paid to the College for the void Lease, he paid it of his
own wrong; for non decipitur qui scit se decipi, he knew well he paid it for a
void Lease, and on purpose to cozen some body with it, As appears by his so
speedy putting it to sale to Sir Edward Powell. And it is clear this Richard
Powell (if he were living) could have no remedy against the College to recover
back this fine; for if he should, it would give countenance to such fraudulent
practices which the Law abhors; and by like reason this Richard Powel's
Executor, nor any claiming from him can be in better case to recover the fine
back again, then Richard Powell himself was; for titulus derivativus can be
no better then primitivus:

November 8. 1656. Tym. Tourneur.

William Powell alias Hinson Esquire, Plaintiff. The Warden and Fellows of
All-Soules College in Oxford, Defendants.
In the Chancellors Court of the University of Oxford, in a pretended Cause of
damage.
1. I Conceive that the Lease being void by an Act of Parliament, no remedy
lies against the College, because the Act which makes it void, gives no
remedy, it being lawful and valid before.

2. I conceive no remedy for this void Lease does lie against the College,
because in such cases no remedy was ever given, or damages ever recovered,
though many void leases have been made since the Stat. of 13. and 18. Eliz.

3. The Stat. of 18. Eliz. resolves the question, for that Stat. makes void all
Bonds and Covenants entered into for making good such void leases. Now Bonds and
Covenants cannot make the Lease valid that is void, but only give a
satisfaction by way of damages; But by that Law such securities as sound in
satisfaction and damages, are made void; a fortiori, an equity imploid is void,
for equit as sequitur lege^s.

4. And in truth, if an equity should be good against the College to make
satisfaction for the damages which such persons should sustain for want of an
intrest in law in the lands, then the Stat. ex obliquo must needs be evaded,
and ecclesiastical corporations in succession depauperated (the mischief
solely intended to be remedied by the law) for the recovery of damages, being
against the corporation, not against the natural individual persons, that
made that Lease void, and received the benefit of the Fine, then it does
clearly follow though the corporation in succession enjoies the land and the
profits of it, yet if they must yield as much in damages, what is this more in
effect, but receiving with one hand, and paying with another? And so the
College in succession is deteriorated in the matters provided against by the
Parliament.

Frustrapetis qued statim reddere cogeris. 5. Though the College have
collateral security to save them harmless; for what by law shall be recovered
against them in such a case, if by law nothing can be recovered against them
(though de facto there be an appearance of it) they shall never have any
benefit of their collateral security, so the College is the party politic
against whom these damages must be effectually recovered, and for a voluntary
re-imbursement, it is no argument one way or other.

6. For the Court where this controversy is depending ( viz. the University
Court of Oxford, which Court cannot have jurisdiction in this cause for two
reasons.

1. Because they have no jurisdiction but by ancient usage or Letters Patents.
By usage they can have no jurisdiction in this Cause, because the ground of the
question or controversy is upon the Stat. of 13. and 18. Eliz. there being no
such case that could come in question before those Statutes. So not by ancient
usage, and then not by Letters Patents, for they have no jurisdiction granted
by Letters Patents herein since those Statutes.

And secondly, Because the King cannot create a Court of equity by Charter; and
there is no Act of Parliament that does confirm their jurisdiction herein,
whether they will lay the foundation of their jurisdiction herein, either by
ancient usage or Letters Patents, because the Act of Parliament by which the
jurisdiction of the University Courts of Oxford and Cambridge are confirmed,
and which does confirm their jurisdictions formerly enjoied by usage or
Letters Patents, is a Prior act, viz. (13 Eliz.) to the Act of Parliament upon
which this question does properly arise, viz. 18. Eliz.

7. Admit they have a jurisdiction of the cause, yet they must judge secundum
legem terrae according to the Law of the Land, and not according to the civil
Law not formerly used in England.

1. Because no part of the Civil Law is of force in England (not in the
Ecclesiastical Courts of England) but what has been anciently used in England,
and is thereby become the Law of England, and in truth so much of the civil
Law as has been anciently used in England, is the common Law of England in
those cases.

2. Though the University Courts of Oxford and Cambridge do in formula juris,
that is to say, in the method of their procedings, seem rather to follow the
ecclesiastical Courts, then the common law. Courts and the advocats there are
civilians, yet in truth they are no ecclesiastical Courts, but Courts of Law
and equity mixed, established by usage, Letters Patents and Acts of Parliament,
and their judgments and sentences do bind the person and goods to execution,
and are as the Court of the Marshes of Wales that were mixed of law and equity,
and so though they have a peculiar jurisdiction in respect of the place, yet in
their judgments and sentences they must judge secundum legem terrae, as the
superior Courts of Law or equity would do in those cases.

From all which I conclude that the University Court of Oxford cannot give
damages against All-Soules College in this case.

November 10, 1656. George Starkey.


