Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE.

By JOHN POTTER, M. A. and Fellow of Lincoln College, OXON.

OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for ABEL SWALL, at the Unicorn, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, LONDON. MDCXCVII.

Archaeologiae Graecae: OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE.

VOLUME THE FIRST: CONTAINING I. The Civil Government of ATHENS. II. The
Religion of GREECE.


-- Antiquam exquirite matrem.
Ovid. -- Vos exemplaria Graeca
Nocturna versate manu, versate diurna.
Horat. OXFORD, Printed at the THEATER, for ABEL SWALL, at the Unicorn, in St.
Paul's Churchyard, LONDON. MDCXCVII.

Imprimatur, FITZ-HERBERT ADAMS, Vice-Can. OXON.

May 15. 1697.

THE CONTENTS.
BOOK I.
CHAP. I. Of the State of Athens till Cecrops. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the State of
Athens from Cecrops to Theseus. 6 CHAP. III. Of the State of Athens, from
Theseus to the Decennial Archons. 10 CHAP. IV. Of the State of Athens, from the
Decennial Archons to Philip of Macedon. 13 CHAP. V. Of the State of Athens,
from Philip of Macedon to it is delivery by the Romans. 20 CHAP. VI. Of the
State of Athens, from it is Confederacy with Rome to Constantine the Great 23
CHAP. VII. Of the State of Athens, from Constantine the Great. 27 CHAP. VIII.
Of the City of Athens, and it is Walls, Gates, Streets, Buildings, etc. 29 CHAP.
IX. Of the Citizens, Tribes, etc. of Athens. 45 CHAP. X. Of the Sojourners, and
Servants in Athens. 54 CHAP. XI. Of the Athenian Magistrates. 70 CHAP. XII. Of
the Nine Archons. 71 CHAP. XIII. Of the Athenian Magistrates. 74 CHAP. XIV. Of
the Athenian Magistrates. 76 CHAP. XV. Of the Athenian Magistrates. 79 CHAP.
XVI. Of the Council of the Amphictyones. 83 CHAP. XVII. Of the Athenian (...),
or Public Assemblies. 85 CHAP. XVIII. Of the Senate of the Five-hundred. 90
CHAP. XIX. Of the Senate, and Court of Areopagus. 94 CHAP. XX. Of some other
Courts of Justice. 101 CHAP. XXI. Of some other Courts of Justice, their
Judicial Process, etc. 105 CHAP. XXII. Of the (...), and (...). 114 CHAP.
XXIII. Of the Public Judgments, Actions, etc. 115 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Private
Judgments, Actions, etc. 118 CHAP. XXV. Of the Athenian Punishments, and
Rewards. 121 CHAP. XXVI. Of the Athenian Laws. 130 Attick Laws. 136 Laws
relating to Divine Worship, Temples, Festivals, and Sports. 136. Laws
concerning them who Officiate in holy Rites. 138 Laws relating to the Laws. 139
Laws referring to Decrees of the Senate, and Commonalty. 140 Laws concerning
Native, and Enfranchised Citizens. ib. Laws appertaining to Children
Legitimate, Spurious, or Adopted. 141 The Oath to be taken by the Ephebi. ib.
Laws belonging to Sojourners. 142 Laws relating to Slaves, and Freed Servants.
143 Laws relating to the Senate of Five-hundred. ib. Laws which concern
Magistrates. 144 The Oath. 145 The Examination, and Interrogatory Disquisition
of the Archons. 146 The Archon's Oath. ib. The Oath of the (...). 147 Laws
respecting Orators. ib. An Inspection into the Orators Lives. ib. Laws treating
of Duties, and Offices. 148 Laws about the Refusal of Offices. 149 Laws
concerning Honors, to be conferred on those who have deserved well of the
Commonwealth. 149 Laws referring to the Gymnasia. 150 Laws relating to
Physicians, and Philosophers. ib. Laws concerning Judges. ib. Of Laws relating
to Lawsuits. ib. Laws respecting Preparatories to Judgments. 151 A Form of the
Oath taken by Judges after Election. ib. Laws referring to Judgments. ib. Laws
concerning Arbitrators. 152 A Law about Oaths. ib. Laws treating of Witnesses.
ib. Laws touching Judgments already past. 153 Laws concerning Punishments. ib.
Laws referring to Receivers of Public Revenues, the Exchequer, and Money for
Shows. 154 Laws about Limits, and Landmarks. 155 Laws respecting Lands, Herds,
and Flocks. 156 Laws relating to Buying, and Selling. ib. Laws appertaining to
Usury, and Money. ib. Laws about Wares to be Imported to, or Exported from
Athens. 157 Laws respecting Arts. ib. Laws concerning Societies, with their
Agreements. 158 Laws belonging to Marriages. ib. Laws touching Dowries. 160
Laws referring to Divorces. ib. Laws belonging to Adulteries. ib. Laws
referring to the Love of Boys, Procurers, and Strumpets. 161 Laws appointed for
the Drawing up of Wills, and right Constitution of Heirs, and Successors. 162
Laws appertaining to Guardianship. 163 Laws about Sepulcres, and Funerals. 164
Laws against Ruffians, and Assassins. 165 A Law relating to Accusations. 167
Laws concerning Damages. ib. Laws belonging to Theft. ib. Laws restraining
Reproaches. 168 Laws about the Management of Affairs. ib. Laws referring to
Entertainments. ib. A Law relating to Accusations concerning Mines. 169 A Law
appertaining to the Action (...). ib. Military Laws. ib. Of Military
Punishments, and Rewards. 170 Miscellany Laws. ib.

BOOK II.
CHAP. I. Of the first Authors of Religious Worship in Greece. 172 CHAP. II. Of
their Temples, Altars, Images, and Asyla. 173 CHAP. III. Of the Grecian
Priests, and their Offices. 182 CHAP. IV. Of the Grecian Sacrifices. 187 CHAP.
V. Of the Grecian Prayers, and Supplications. 207 CHAP. VI. Of the Grecian
Oaths. 213 CHAP. VII. Of the Grecian Divination, and Oracles, in general. 229
CHAP. VIII. Of the Oracles of Jupiter. 233 CHAP. IX. Of the Oracles of Apollo.
240 CHAP. X. Of the Oracle of Trophonius. 256 CHAP. XI. Of other Grecian
Oracles. 261 CHAP. XII. Of Theomancy. 266 CHAP. XIII. Of Divination by Dreams.
271 CHAP. XIV. Of Divination by Sacrifices. 284 CHAP. XV. Of Divination by
Birds. 289 CHAP. XVI. Of Divination by Lots. 302 CHAP. XVII. Of Divination by
Ominous Words, and Things. 306 CHAP. XVIII. Of Magic, and Incantations. 315
CHAP. XIX. Of the Grecian Festivals in general. 324 CHAP. XX. Grecian
Festivals. 326 CHAP. XXI. Of the Public Games in Greece, and the Principal
Exercises used in them. 407 CHAP. XXII. Of the Olympian Games. 413 CHAP. XXIII.
Of the Pythian Games. 417 CHAP. XXIV. Of the Nemean Games. 420 CHAP. XXV. Of
the Isthmian Games. 422
Archaeologiae Graecae, OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE. BOOK I.
CHAPTER I. Of the State of Athens till Cecrops.
ALL Ages have had a great esteem and veneration for Antiquity; and not only of
Men, but of Families, Cities, and Countries, the most Ancient have always been
accounted the most Honorable. Hence arose one of the first and most Universal
Disputes that ever troubled Mankind; almost every Nation, whose first Original
was not very Manifest, pretending to have been of an equal Duration with the
Earth it self. Thus the Egyptians, Scythians, and Phrygians phansied
themselves to be the first race of Mankind, and the Arcadians boasted that they
were (...), or before the Moon. The want of Letters did not a little contribute
to these Opinions, for almost every Colony and Plantation, wanting means
whereby to preserve the memory of their Ancestors, and deliver them down to
Posterity, in a few Generations forgot their Mother-Nation, and thought they
had inhabited their own Country from the beginning of the World.

Our Athenians too had their share in this Vanity, and made as great and loud
pretensions to Antiquity, as the best of their Neighbors; they gave out that
they were produced at the same time with the Sun Menander rhetor.
, and assumed to themselves the Honorable Name (for so they thought it) of
(...), which word signifies Persons produced out of the same soil, that they
inhabit: For it was an old Opinion, and almost every where received among the
Vulgar, that in the beginning of the World, Men, like Plants, were by some
strange Prolifick Virtue produced out of the Fertile Womb of one common Mother,
Earth; and therefore the Ancients generally called themselves (...), Sons of
the Earth, as Hesychius informs us In voce (...).
. Alluding to the same Original, the Athenians would sometimes style themselves
(...), Grasshoppers; and some of them wore Grasshoppers of Gold, binding them in
their Hair as Badges of Honor, and marks to distinguish them from others of
later Duration, and less Noble extraction, because those Insects were believed
to be generated out of the Ground Th^cydides lib. 1. Eustathius ad Iliad. (...).
: Virgil has mentioned this custom in his Poem entitled Ciris, Ergo omnis caro
residebat cura capillo,
Aurea solemni comptum quem fibula ritu
Cecropiae tereti nectebat dente cicadae.
Wherefore she did, as was her constant Care,
With Grasshoppers adorn her comely Hair,
Braced with a Golden Buckle Attick-wise.
Mr. Io. Abell of Linc. Coll. Without doubt the Athenians were a very ancient
Nation, and it may be the first and only one that ever inhabited that Country;
for when Thessaly, and Peloponnesus, and almost all the fertile Regions of
Greece changed their old Masters every Year, the barrenness of their Soil
secured them from Foreign Invasions. Greece at that time had no constant and
settled Inhabitants, but there were continual Removes, the stronger always
dispossessing the weaker; and therefore they lived, as we say, from Hand to
Mouth, and provided no more than what was necessary for present Sustenance,
expecting every Day when some more powerful Nation should come and displace
them, as they had lately done their Predecessors Thucyd. ibid.
. Amidst all these troubles and tumults, Attica lay secure and unmolested,
being protected from Foreign Enemies by means of a craggy and unfruitful Soil,
that could not afford Fuel for contention; and secured from intestine and civil
Broils, by the quiet and peaceable Dispositions of it is Inhabitants; for in
those Golden-Days no affectation of Supremacy, nor any Sparks of Ambition had
fired Men's minds, but every one lived full of content and satisfaction in the
enjoyment of an equal share of Land, and other Necessaries with the rest of his
Neighbors.

The usual Attendants of a long and uninterrupted Peace are Riches and Plenty,
but in those Days when Men lived upon the products of their own Soil, and had
not found out the way of supplying their wants by Traffic, the case was quite
contrary, and Peace was only the Mother of Poverty and Scarceness, producing a
great many new Mouths to consume, but affording no new Supplies to satisfy
them. This was soon experienced by the Athenians, for in a few Ages they were
increased to such a number, that their Country being not only unfruitful, but
confined within very narrow bounds, was no longer able to furnish them with
necessary Provisions. This forced them to contrive some means to disburthen it,
and therefore they sent out Colonies to provide new Habitations, which spread
themselves in the several parts of Greece.

This sending forth of Colonies was very frequent in the first Ages of the
World, and several instances there are of it in later Times, especially amongst
the Gauls, and Scythians, who often left their Native-Countries in vast Bodies,
and, like general inundations, overturned all before them. Meursius reckons to
the number of forty Plantations peopled by Athenians; but amongst them all,
there was none so remarkable as that in Asia the Less, which they called by
the Name of their Native-Countrey, Ionia. For the primitive Athenians were
named Jones, and Iaones Herodot. lib. I. Strabo Geogr. lib. IX. Aeschylus
Persis.
; and hence it came to pass, that there was a very near Affinity between the
Attick, and old Ionick Dialect, as Eustathius observes Iliad. (...).
. And though the Athenians thought fit to lay aside their Ancient Name, yet it
was not altogether out of use in Theseus's Reign, as appears from the Pillar
erected by him in the Isthmus, to show the Bounds of the Athenians on the one
side, and the Peloponnesians on the other; on the East Side of which was this
Inscription Plutarch. Theseo.
, This is not Peloponnesus, but Ionia. And on the South Side this, This is not
Ionia, but Peloponnesus. This Name is thought to have been given them by Iavan,
which bears a near resemblance to (...), and much the nearer, if (as
Grammarians tell us) the Ancient Greeks pronounced the letter (...) broad, like
the Dipthong (...), as in our English word All, and so Sr. George Wheeler
reports the Modern Greeks do at this Day. This Iavan was the fourth Son of
Iapheth, and is said to have come into Greece after the confusion of Babel, and
seated himself in Attica. And this Report receives no small confirmation from
the Divine Writings, where the Name of Iavan is in several places put for
Greece. Two instances we have in Daniel Cap. X. v. XX
; And when I am gone forth, behold the Prince of Graecia shall come. And again
Cap. XI. v. II.
; He shall stir up all against the Realm of Graecia. Where though the Vulgar
Translations render it not Iavan, yet (as Mr. Rous has observed) that is the
Word in the Original. And again in Isaiah; And I will send those that escape of
them to the Nations in the Sea, in Italy and in Greece. Where Sr. Walter
Raleigh has taken notice, that the Tigurine Version, with that of Geneva,
retains the Hebrew words, and uses the Names of Tubal and Iavan, instead of
Italy and Greece. But the Grecians themselves having no knowledge of their true
Ancestor, make this Name to be of much later date, and derive it from Ion, the
Son of Xuthus. This Xuthus (as Pausanias reports) having robbed his Father
Deucalion of his Treasure, conveyed himself together with his ill-gotten Wealth
into A^tica, which was at that time governed by Erectheus, who Courteously
entertained him, and gave him his Daught^r in ^arriag^, by whom h^ had two
Sons, Ion and Achaeus, the former of which gave his Name to the Ionians, the
latter to the Achaeans. It is not improbable that (...) himself might r^ceive
his Name from Iavan; it being a Custom observable in the Histories of all
Times, to keep up the Ancient Name of a Fore-Father, especially such as had
bee^ eminent in the Times he lived in, by reviving it in some of the (...) his
Pos^erity

From the first Peopling of (...) the time o^ King Ogyges, we have no Account
of any thin^ (...) th^re; only ^lato Tima^.
reports, they had a Tradition, that (...) Athenian Power and Gl^ry were very
great in those Days; that they were exc^^l^^tly skilled both in Civil and
Military Affairs, were gov^r^'d by the J^st^st and most Equitable Laws, and
lived in far great^r Spl^nd^r, than they had ^^^iv'd to in his Time. But of the
Transaction^ of these, and the following Ages, till Theseus, or the Trojan War,
little or nothing of C^^t^inty must be expected; partly, because of the want o^
Record^, in (...) and illiterate Ages; partly, by reason of the v^st distance
o^ Time, wherein those Records they had (is they had any) w^r^ lo^t and
d^^tr^y'd; and partly, through the Pride and Vain-gl^^ (...), that out of an
affectation of being though^ (...) some Divine Original, industriously
concealed their Pe^igr^e^, and obscured their Ancient Histories w^^h idle
T^les, and Poetical Fictions. And to use the words of Plutarch Thes^o.
; As Historian^ in their Geographical Descriptions o^ Countr^ys, c^oud into the
farthest part of their Maps those things they have no knowledge of, with some
such remarks in the Margin, as these; All beyond is nothing but dry and desert
Sands, or Scythian Cold, or a Frozen Sea; so it may very well be said of those
things that are so far removed from our Age; All beyond is nothing but
Monstrous and Tragical Fictions, there the Poets, and there the Inventors of
Fables dwell; nor is there to be expected any thing that deserves credit, or
that car^i^s in it any appearance of Truth.

However I must not omit what is reported concerning Ogyges, or Ogygus, whom
some will have, to have been King of Thebes, some of Egypt, some of Arcadia,
but others of Attica, which is said to have been called after his Name, Ogygia
Stephanus Byzantin. de Urb. and Pop.
. He is reported to have been a very Potent Prince, and the Founder of several
Cities, particularly of Eleusis, and Pausanias tells us farther, that he was
Father to the Hero Eleusis, from whom that City received it is Name. He is said
to have been Contemporary with the Patriarch Jacob; about the Sixty-seventh
Year of whose Age he is supposed to have been Born Hieronym. Chronic. Eusebius.
, others bring him as low as Moses Justin. Mart Orat ad Gent^s.
. His Reign is the utmost Period that the Grecian Stories, or Traditions ever
pretended to reach to, and therefore when they would express the great
Antiquity of any thing, they call it (...), of which we have a great many
instances in several of the Ancient Writers, but I shall only give you one out
of Nicander's Theriaca, (...). And in allusion to the great Power, he is
supposed to have been possessed of, they call any thing Great or Potent, (...),
as two Learned Grammarians inform us. Hesychius, (...). Suidas, (...). And
therefore (...) are great and insupportable Evils; and (...) in Philo, extreme
Folly and Stupidity. He reigned two and thirty Years (for so Cedrenus computes
them) in full Power and Prosperity, and Blessed with the Affluence of all
Things, that Fortune can bestow upon her greatest Favorites; but the
conclusion of his Life was no less deplorable, than the former part of it had
been prosperous, for in the midst of all his Enjoyments he was surpised with a
sudden and terrible Inundation, that overwhelmed not Attica only, but all
Achaia too, in one Common Destruction.

There is frequent mention made in Ancient Authors of several Kings, that
Reigned in Attica, between the Ogygian Flood and Cecrops the first. As of
Porphyrion, concerning whom the Athmonians, a People in Attica, have a
Tradition, that he Erected a Temple to Venus (...) in their Borough Pausa^^as.
. Also of Colaenus Idem.
; and of Periphas, who is described by Antoninus Liberalis, Metamorphos. VI.
to have been a very Virtuous Prince, and at last Metamorphos'd into an Eagle.
Isaac Tzetzes in his Comment upon Lycophron speaks of one Draco, out of whose
Teeth he tells us, it was reported that Cecrops sprung, and this reason some
give for his being called (...). Lastly, to mention no more, Pausanias and
Stephanus speak of Actaeus, or Actaeon, from whom some will have Attica to have
been called Act; and this Name frequently occurs in the Poets, particularly in
Lycophron, a Studious affecter of Antiquated Names, and Obsolete Words, (...).

But small Credit is to be given to these reports, for we are assured by
Philochorus, an Author of no less Credit, than Antiquity, as he is quoted by
Africanus, that Attica was so much wasted by the Ogygian Deluge, and it is
Inhabitans reduced to so small a Number, that they lived an Hundred and Ninety
Years from the Time of Ogyges to Cecrops, without any King at all; and Eusebius
concurs with him in this Opinion Ch^onico.
.

CHAPTER II. Of the State of Athens from Cecrops to Theseus.
IT is agreed almost on all Hands, that Cecrops was the first that gathered
together the Poor Peasants, that lay dispersed here and there in Attica, and
having United them into one Body, (though not into one City, for that was not
effected till many Ages after) constituted among them one form of Government,
and took upon himself the title of King.

Most Nations at the first were Governed by Kings, who were usually Persons of
great Worth, and Renown, and for their Courage, Prudence, and other Virtues
promoted to that Dignity by the general Consent and Election of the People; who
yielded them Obedience out of Willingness, rather than Necessity, out of Advice
rather than by Compulsion: and Kings rather chose to be obeyed out of Love, and
Esteem of their Virtues, and Fitness to govern, than by the Force of their
Arms, and out of a Slavish Fear of their Power. They affected no uncontrolable
Dominion, or absolute Sway, but pre^err'd the good of their People, for whose
Protection they knew, and acknowledged themselves to have been advanced, before
any Covetous or Ambitious Designs of their own. They expected no bended Knees,
no prostrate Faces, but would condescend to converse familiarly, even with the
meaner sort of their Subjects, as often as they stood in need of their
Assistance. In short, they endeavored to observe such a just Medium in their
Behavior, and all their Actions, as might neither expose their Authority to
contempt, nor render them formidable to those, whom they chose rather to win by
Kindness into a voluntary Compliance, than to awe by severity into a forced
Subjection. They proposed to themselves no other Advantage, than the good and
welfare of their People, and made use of their Authority no farther, than as it
was conducive and necessary to that End. Their Dignity and Office consisted
chiefly in three Things.

First, in doing justice, in hearing Causes, in composing the Divivisions, and
deciding the Differences, that happened among their Subjects, in constituting
new Laws, and regulating the Old Tullii de O^fic. lib. II. Cap. XII.
, where they had any; But the People generally reposed such trust and
confidence in the justice and Equity of their Prince, that his sole Will and
Pleasure past ^or Law amongst them Justin. Hist. lib. I.
.

Secondly, in leading them to the Wars; where they did not only assist them by
their good Conduct and management of Affairs, but exposed their own Persons for
the Safety and Honor of their Country, pressing forward into the thickest of
their Enemies, and often encountering the most Valiant of them in single
Combat. And this they thought a principal Part of their Duty, judging it but
reasonable, that they who excelled others in Honor, should surpass them too in
Valor; and they that had the first places at all Feasts, and Public
Assemblies, should be the first also in undertaking Dangers, and exposing
themselves in the Defense of their Country; and thus the Hero in Homer argues
the Case with one of his Fellow-Princes, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...);
(...)
(...) Iliad. (...).

Glaucus, since us the Lycian Realms obey
Like Gods, and all united Homage pay,
Since we first seated have our Goblets Crowned,
Enjoy large Farms, near Xanthus streams, whose Ground
Is fertile, and beset with shady Trees around;
Ought we not in the Battel's Front t'engage,
And quell our furious Foes with doubled Rage?
Mr. Abell.

Thirdly, the Performance of the Solemn Sacrifices, and the care of Divine
Worship was part of the King's Business. The Lacedaemonian Kings at their
Coronation were consecrated Priests of Jupiter (...), and executed that Office
in their own Persons. No man can be ignorant of Virgil's Anius, who was both
King and Priest, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique sacerdos. We seldom
meet with a Sacrifice in Homer, but some of the Heroes, and those the Chief of
all then present, are concerned in the performance of the Holy Ceremonies; and
so far was it from being thought a Piece of Condescension, or any way below
their Dignity and Grandeur, that they thought it an Accession to the rest of
their Honors, and the Inferior Worshippers were no less careful to reserve
this piece of Service for them, than they were to give them the most Honorable
Places in the Banquets, which they refreshed themselves with, after the
Sacrifices were ended.

Let us now return to Cecrops, whom, as soon as he had established himself in
his new raised Kingdom, we shall find employed in laying the Model of a City,
which he designed for the Seat of his Government, and place of his constant
Residence. And as the most commodious place in his Dominions for this purpose,
he pitched upon a Rock, strongly fortified by Nature against any Assaults, and
situated in a large Plain near the middle of Attica, calling both the City, and
the Territory round it after his own Name, Cecropia. Afterward, when the
Athenians increased in Power and Number, and filled the adjacent Plains with
Buildings, this was the Acropolis, or Citadel.

Then for the better Administration of Justice, and the promotion of mutual
Intercourse among his Subjects, he divided them into four Tribes, the Names of
which were 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...).


And finding his Country pretty well stocked with Inhabitans, partly by the
coming in of Foreigners, partly by the Concourse of People from every Corner
and lurking-hole in Attica, where they had before lain, as it were, buried in
Privacy, he instituted a Poll, causing every one of the Men to cast a Stone
into a Place appointed by him ^or that purpose, and upon Computation he found
them to be in number Twenty-Thousand, as the Scholiast upon Pindar reports out
of Philochorus Olympionic. Od. IX.
.

But the Soil being in its own Nature unfruitful, and the People unskilled in
tilling and improving it to the best advantage, such multitudes could not have
failed of being reduced in a short Time to the greatest Extremities, had not
Cecrops taught them the Art of Navigation, and thereby supplied them with Corn
from Sicily, and Africa Johannes Tze^ze^ in Hesiodi (...)
.

Besides this, he was the Author of many excellent Laws and Constitutions,
especially touching Marriage, which according to his appointment was only to be
celebrated betwixt one Man, and one Woman, whereas before promiscuous Mixtures
had been allowed of amongst them, as the Poet intimates, (...),
(...)
(...) Nonnus Dionysiac. lib. XLI.
.
With curious Art Cadmus did Letters frame,
The Law's Invention from Wise Solon came,
But Cecrops glories in the Marriage tie
Of the united Pair. --
Mr. Abell.

Nor did he only prescribe Rules for the Conduct of their Lives, with respect
to one another, but was the first that introduced a Form of Religion, erected
Altars in Honor of the Gods, and instructed his People in what manner they
were to Worship them.

In the Reign of Pandion, the Fifth King of Athens, Triptolemus is said to have
taught the Athenians how to sow, and manure the Ground; and to have enacted
several useful and necessary Laws, three of which we find quoted by Porphyry
out of Xenocrates De abstinent. ab Animal lib. IV.
; 1. Honor your Parents. 2. Make Oblations of your Fruits to the Gods. 3. Hurt
not Living Creatures.


Cecrops the Second of that Name, and the Seventh King of Athens, divided his
Dominions into twelve Cities, or large Buroughs, compelling his Subjects to
leave their separate Habitations, and Unite together for the replenishing of
them Etymolog.
. Their Names were these, as they are delivered by Strabo in his Description of
Attica Geograph. lib. IX.
: Cecropia, Tetrapolis, Exacria, Decelea, Eleusis, Aphidnae, Thoriccus,
Brauron, Cytheris, Sphettus, Cephissia, and Phalerus. But Cecropia still
continued the chief Seat of the Empire, though each of these Cities (they are the
words of Sr. George Wheeler, who refers this Division to Cecrops the First, led
thereunto by the Authority of Eusebius, and some others) had distinct Courts of
Judicature, and Magistrates of their own; and were so little subject to their
Princes, the Successors of Cecrops, that they seldom, or never, had recourse
to them, save only in Cases of imminent and public Danger; and did so
absolutely order their own Concerns, that sometimes they waged War against each
other, without the advice or consent of their Kings.

In this state continued Attica, till the Reign of Pandion the second of that
Name, and eighth King of the Athenians, who was deprived of his Kingdom by his
Cousins, the Sons of his Uncle Metion; who themselves did not long possess what
they had thus unjustly gotten, being driven out of it by the more powerful Arms
of Pandion's ^our Sons, viz. Aegeus, Lycus, Pallas, and Nisus. These having
expelled the Metionidae, divided the Kingdom amongst themselves, as Apollodorus
reports. But others are of Opinion, that Pandion himself being restored to the
quiet possession of his Kingdom by the joint Assistance of them all, by his
last Will and Testament divided it into four Parts, bequeathing to each of them
his Proportion; And though it is not agreed amongst Ancient Writers, which Part
fell to every Man's Lot; yet thus much is consented to on all Hands, that the
Sovereignty of Athens was assigned to Aegeus, for which he was extremeley
envied by his Brethren; and so much the more, for that, as most think, he was
not the begotten, but only adopted Son of Pandion; and for this reason it was
(says Plutarch) that Aegeus commanded Aethra, the Mother of Theseus, to send
her Son, when arrived at Man's estate, from Troezen, the place where he was
born, to Athens with all Secrecy, and to enjoin him to conceal, as much as
possible, his Journey from all Men, because he feared extremely the
Pallantidae, who did continually mutiny against him, and despised him for his
want of Children, they themselves being Fifty Brothers, all the Sons of Pallas.
However, as the same Author tells us, they were withheld from breaking out into
open Rebellion, by the hopes and expectation of recovering the Kingdom, at
least after Aegeus's Death, because he was without Issue; but as soon as
Theseus appeared, and was acknowledged rightful Successor to the Crown,
highly resenting, that first Aegeus, Pandion's Son only by Adoption, and not at
all related to the Family of Erectheus, and then Theseus, one of another
Country, and a perfect stranger to their Nation, should obtain the Kingdom of
their Ancestors, they broke out into open Acts of Hostility; but were soon
overcome and dispersed by the Courage and Conduct of Theseus.

Theseus having delivered the Country from intestine Seditions, proceeded in
the next place to free it from Foreign Slavery. The Athenians having
Barbarously Murdered Androgeus, the Son of Minos, King of Crete, were obliged
by his Father to send a Novennial, or Septennial, or, as others, an Annual
Tribute of seven young Men, and as many Virgins into Crete, where they were
shut up within the Labyrinth, and there wandered about, till, finding no
possible means of making their Escape, they perished with Hunger, or else were
devoured by the Minotaur, a terrible Monster, compounded of the different
shapes of Man, and Bull. The time of sending this Tribute being come, Theseus
put himself amongst the Youths that were doomed to go to Crete, where having
arrived, he received of Ariadne, the Daughter of King Minos, who had fallen in
Love with him, a Clew of thread, and being instructed by her in the use of it,
which was to conduct him through all the Windings of the Labyrinth, escaped out of
it, having first slain the Minotaur, and so returned with his Fellow-Captives
in Triumph to Athens.

In his return through an excess of Joy for the happy success of his Voyage, he
forgot to hang out the white Sail, which should have been the token of their
Safety to Aegeus, who sat expecting them upon the Top of a Rock, and as soon as
their Ship came in View with a Black, and as it were, Mourning Sail, knowing
nothing of their Success, threw himself headlong into the Sea, and so made way
to Theseus's more early Succession to the Crown, than could otherwise have been
expected. And to this time from the Reign of Cecrops the First, the Government
and State of Athens continued with little alteration.

CHAPTER III. Of the State of Athens, from Theseus to the Decennial Archons.
THeseus being by the forementioned Accident advanced to the Regal Scepter,
soon found the inconvenience of having his People dispersed in Villages, and
cantoned up and down the Country. Therefore for the remedy of this Evil, he
framed in Mind (says Plutarch) a vast and wonderful Design of gathering
together all the Inhabitants of Attica into one Town, and making them one
People of one City, that were before dispersed, and very difficult to be
assembled upon any Affair, though relating to the Common benefit of them all.
Nay, often such Differences and Quarrels happened among them, as occasioned
Bloodshed and War; these he by his Persuasions appeased, and going from People
to People, and from Tribe to Tribe, proposed his Design of a Common agreement
between them. Those of a more private and mean condition readily embracing so
good advice, to those of greater Power, and Interest he promised a
Commonwealth, wherein Monarchy being laid aside, the power should be in the
People; and that, reserving to himself only to be continued the Commander of
their Arms, and the Preserver of their Laws, there should be an equal
distribution of all things else among them, and by this means brought most of
them over to his Proposal. The rest fearing his Power which was already grown
very formidable, and knowing his Courage and Resolution, chose rather to be
persuaded, than forced into a Compliance.

He then dissolved all the distinct Courts of Justice, and Council-Halls, and
Corporations, and built one common Prytaneum and Council-Hall, where it stands
to this Day. And out of the old and new City he made one, which he named
Athens, ordaining a common Feast and Sacrifice to be for ever observed, which
he called Panathenaea, or the Sacrifice of all the United Athenians. He
instituted also another Sacrifice, for the sake of Strangers that would come to
fix at Athens, called (...), which is yet celebrated on the 16th day of
Hecatombaeon. Then, as he had promised, he laid down his Kingly Power, and
settled a Commonwealth, having entered upon this great Change, not without
advice from the Gods. For sending to consult the Delphian Oracle, concerning
the Fortune of his new Government and City, he received this Answer, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Hear, Theseus, Pittheus Daughters's Son,
Hear what Jove for thee has done.
In the great City thou have made,
He has, as in a Storehouse, laid
The settled Periods and fixed Fates,
Of many Cities, mighty States.
But know thou neither Fear, nor Pain,
Solicit not thy self in Vain.
For like a Bladder that does bide
The Fury of the angry Tide,
Thou from high Waves unhurt shall bound,
A^ways tossed, but never drowned.
(Mr. Duke.) Which Oracle, they say, one of the Sibyls a long time after, did
in a manner repeat to the Athenians in this Verse, (...).
Thou, like a Bladder, may be wet, but never drowned.
Farther yet designing to enlarge his City, he invited all Strangers to come
and enjoy equal Privileges with the Natives, and some are of opinion, that the
Common form of Proclamation in Athens, (...), Come hither all ye People, were
the words that Theseus caused to be proclaimed, when he thus set up a
Commonwealth, consisting in a manner of all Nations.

For all this, he suffered not his State by the promiscuous multitude that
flowed in, to be turned into Confusion and Anarchy, and left without any Order
or Degrees, but was the first that divided the Commonwealth into three
distinct Ranks, (...), i. e. Noblemen, Husbandmen, and Artificers. To the
Nobility he committed the choice of Magistrates, the teaching and dispensing of
the Laws, and the interpretation of all Holy and Religious things; the whole
City, as to all other matters, being as it were reduced to an Equality, the
Nobles excelling the rest in Honor, the Husbandmen in Prosit, and the
Artificers in Number. And Theseus was the first, who, as Aristotle says, out of
an inclination to Popular Government, parted with the Regal Power, and which
Homer also seems to intimate in his Catalogue of the Ships, where he gives the
Name of (...) or People, to the Athenians only.

In this manner Theseus settled the Athenian Government, and it continued in
the same State till the Death of Codrus the seventeenth, and last King, a
Prince more renowned for his Bravery, than Fortune. For Attica Tull. Tuscul.
Quaest. Justin. l II. Vell. Pate^c* li^. II. Euse^ius.
being invaded by the Dorians, or Spartans, or Peloponnesians, or, as some will
have it, by the Thracians, the Oracle was consulted about it, and answer made,
that the Invaders should have Success, if they did not kill the Athenian King;
Codrus having heard this, and preferring his Countrie's Safety before his own
Life, disguised himself in the Habit of a Peasant, and went to a place not far
from the Enemies Camp, where picking a quarrel with some of them, he obtained
the Death which he so much desired. The Athenians being advertised of what had
happened, sent an Herald to the Enemy to demand the Body of their King,
whereupon they were so much disheartened, that they immediately broke up their
Camp, and left off their Enterprise without striking another blow.

The Athenians, out of reverence to Codrus's memory, would never more have any
Governor by the Name or Title of King, but were Governed by Archontes, whom
they allowed indeed to continue in their Dignity as long as they lived, and
when they di'd, to leave it to their Children, and therefore most Writers
reckon them rather amongst the Kings, than the Archontes that succeeded them,
who were permitted to Rule only for a certain time; yet they differed from the
Kings in this, that they were in a manner subject to the People, being obliged
to render an account of their management, when it should be demanded. The first
of these was Medon, the Eldest Son of Codrus, from whom the thirteen following
Archontes were Sirnam'd Medontidae, as being descended from him; During their
Government the Athenian State suffered no considerable alteration, but was
carried on with so great ease, and quietness, that scarce any mention is made
of any memorable Action done by any of them, and the very Names of some of them
are almost quite forgotten.

Thus have I endeavored to give you a short Account of the Athenian State,
whilst it was Governed by Kings, who were in all thirty, and Ruled Athens by
the space of seven-hundred-ninety-four Years, as the Learned Meursius has
computed them, to which if you add the two and thirty Years of Ogyge^, and the
intervall of an hundred and ninety Years, in which no Footsteps of any
Government are to be found, the number will amount to one thousand and twelve
Years.

A Catalogue of the Athenian Kings.
Years. Ogyges XXXII. Interregnum CXC. Cecrops I. L. Cranaus IX. Amphictyon X.
Ericthonius L. Pandion I. XL. Erectheus L. Cecrops II. XL. Pandion II. XXV.
Aegeus XLVIII. Theseus XXX. Menestheus XXIII. Demophoon XXXIII. Oxyntes XII.
Aphidas I. Thymoetes VIII. Melanthius XXXVII. Codrus XXI Medon XX. Acastus
XXXVI. Archippus XIX. Thersippus XLI. Phorbas XXX. Megacles XXVIII. Diognetus
XXV. Pherecles XIX. Ariphron XX. Thespieus XXVII. Agamestor XVII. Aeschylus
XXIII. Alcmaeon II.
CHAPTER IV. Of the State of Athens, from the Decennial Archons to Philip of
Macedon.
THE People of Athens continually got Ground of their Superiors, gaining
something by every alteration that was made in the State, till at length by
little and little the whole Government came into the hands of the Commonalty.
Theseus and Medon made considerable abatements in their Power, but what
remained of it, they kept in their own hands as long as they lived, and
preserved the Succession entire to their Posterity. But in the first Year of
the seventh Olympiad, both the Power, and Succession was devolved upon the
People, who the better to curb the Pride, and restrain the Power of their
Archons, continued them in their Government only for ten Years, and the first
that was Created in this manner, was Charops, the Son of Aeschylus. But they
would not rest contented here, for about seventy Years after, that the Archons
might be wholly dependent on the Citizen's favor; it was agreed that their
Authority should but last for one Year, at the End of which they were to give
an Account of their Administration, and the first of these was Cleon, who
entered upon his Charge in the third Year of the twenty-fourth Olympiad Clemens
Stromat. I.
.

In the thirty-ninth Olympiad Draco was Archon, and was the Author of many new
Laws, in which there is very little worth our Notice, only that they were very
Cruel and Inhumane, punishing almost every Trivial Offense with Death. Insomuch
that those that were convicted of Idleness were to Die, and those that Stole a
Cabbage, or an Apple, to suffer as the Villains that committed Sacrilege, or
Murder; and therefore Demades is remarked for saying that Draco's Laws were not
written with Ink, but Blood: and he himself being asked, Why he made Death the
punishment of most Offenses, replied, Small Crimes deserve that, and I have no
higher for the greatest.

But all these, that only excepted which concerned Murder, were repealed in the
third Year of the forty-sixth Olympiad, in which Solon being Archon, was
entrusted with the Power of new Modelling the Commonwealth, and making Laws
for it. They gave him Power over all their Magistrates, (says Plutarch,) their
Assemblies, Courts, Senates; that he should appoint the Number, Times of
meeting, and what Estate they should have that could be capable of being
admitted to them, and to dissolve or continue any of the present Constitutions,
according to his Judgment and Discretion Plutarch. in Solone.
.

Solon finding the People variously affected, some inclined to a Monarchy,
others to an Oligarchy, others to a Democracy, the Rich men Powerful and
Haughty, the Poor Groaning under the burden of their Oppression, endeavored as
far as was possible to compose all their Differences, to ease their Grievances,
and give all reasonable Persons satisfaction. In the Prosecution of this design
he divided the Athenians into four Ranks, according to every Man's Estate;
Those who were worth five hundred Medimns of liquid and dry Commodities he
placed in the first Rank, calling them (...). The next were the Horsemen, called
(...), being such as were of Ability to furnish out a Horse, or were worth
three hundred Medimns. The third Class consisted of those that had two hundred
Medimns, which were called (...). In the last he placed all the rest, calling
them (...), and allowed them not to be capable of bearing any Office in the
Government, only gave them Liberty to give their Votes in all public
Assemblies, which, though at the first it appeared inconsiderable, was afterward
found to be a very important Privilege, for it being permitted any Man after
the determination of the Magistrates to make an appeal to the People assembled
in Convocation, hereby it came to pass, that Causes of the greatest weight and
moment were brought before them. And thus he continued the Power and Magistracy
in the hands of the Rich Men, and yet neither exposed the inferior People to
their Cruelty and Oppression, nor wholly deprived them of having a share in the
Government. And of this Equality he himself makes mention in this manner, (...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
What Power was fit I did on all bestow,
Nor raised the Poor too high, nor Pressed too low;
The Rich that Ruled, and every Office bore
Confined by Laws they could not Press the Poor:
Both Parties I secured from Lawless might,
So none prevailed upon another's Right.
(Mr. Creech.) Not many Years after, the City being divided into Factions,
Pisistratus by a Stratagem seized upon the Government: for having on set
purpose Wounded himself, he was brought into the Marketplace in a Chair, where
he exposed his Wounds to the People, assuring them that he had been so dealt
with by the adverse Party for his affection to their Government. The unthinking
Multitude were easily drawn by so specious a pretense into a compassion of his
Misfortunes, and rage against his Enemies; and upon the motion of one Ariston,
granted him fifty Men armed with Clubs to Guard his Person. The decree being
past, Pisistratus listed the number of Men that were allowed him, and besides
them as many more as he pleased, no Man observing what he was a doing, till at
length in requital of the Citie's kindness and Care of him, he seized the
Citadel, and deprived them of their Liberty. After this Pisistratus lived
thirty Years, seventeen of which he was in possession of the Government of
Athens; but the State continued all that time unsettl'd, and in continual
motions, the City-Party sometimes prevailing against him and expelling him,
sometimes again being worsted by him, and forced to let him return in Triumph.

He was succeeded by his Sons Hipparchus and Hippias, whom Heraclides calls
Thessalus; the former of which was Slain by Aristogiton, and the latter about
three or four Years after compelled by Clisthenes, who called to his assistance
the banished Alcmaeonidae, and the Lacedaemonians, to relinquish his
Government, and secure himself by a dishonorable Flight. Being thus banished
his Country, he Fled into Persia, where he lived many Years, persuading Darius
to the Enterprise upon Athens, which at length to his eternal Shame and
Dishonor he undertook. For levying a numerous Host of Men he entered the
Athenian Territories, where both he, and his whole Army were totally Defeated,
by an inconsiberable number of Men, under the Conduct of Miltiades in that
Famous Battle of Marathon. This Victory was obtained twenty Years after
Hippias's Expulsion. And thus the Athenians recovered their Laws and Liberties,
about sixty-eight Years after they had been deprived of them by Pisistratus.

After this Success, they continued in a Flourishing condition, for three and
thirty Years, but then the Scene changed, and reduced them almost to the lowest
Ebb of Fortune. Xerxes in revenge of his Predecessor's Defeat, invaded their
Territories with an Army, (as some say,) of seventeen-hundred-thousand Men, and
forced them to quit their City, and leave it a prey to the insulting
Barbarians, who took it without any considerable resistance, and laid it in
Ashes; and in the Year following his Lieutenant Mardonius in imitation of his
Master's example, burned it a second Time. But these Storms were soon blown
over by the Wisdom and Courage of Themistocles and Aristides, who totally
Defeated the Persian Fleet at Salamis, and seconded that Victory by another of
no less importance over Mardonius at Plateae, whereby the Barbarians were quite
driven out of Greece, and Athens restored to her Ancient Government, arising
out of her Ruins, more Bright and Glorious then ever she had been before.

But the State suffered some alterations, for first, Aristides, a Person (as
Plutarch assures us) of a mean Extraction, and meaner Fortune, being in
consideration of his eminent Virtues, and signal Services to the Commonwealth,
preferred to the Dignity of an Archon, repealed Solon's Law, by which the
(...), or lowest Order of People, were made incapable of bearing any Office in
the Government. And after him Pericles having lessened the Power of the
Areopagites, brought in a confused Ochlocracie, whereby the Populace, and
basest of the Rabble obtained as great a share in the Government, as Persons of
the Highest Birth and Quality.

Notwithstanding these Alterations at Home, all things were carried on with
great Success abroad: the Athenians by the help of their Fleet, on which they
laid out their whole strength, when Xerxes forced them to quitt their City,
became sole Lords of the Sea, and made themselves Masters of the greatest Part
of the Aegaean Islands; And having either forced the rest of the Grecians into
Subjection, or awed them into a Confederacy, went on Conquerors to the Borders
of Egypt, and had (as Aristophanes reports) a thousand Cities under their
Dominions.

But afterward things Succeeding ill in Sicily, under the Command of Nicias,
and some other troubles arising in the Commonwealth, the Principal Men of
Athens (says Sr. Walter Raleigh) being wearied with the Peoples insolency, took
this opportunity to change the form of Government, and bring the Sovereignty
into the hands of a few. To which purpose conspiring with the Captains that
were abroad, they caused them to set up an Aristocracie in the Towns of their
Confederates; and in the mean time, some, that were most likely to oppose this
Innovation, being Slain at Athens, the Commonalty were so dismayed that none
durst open his Mouth against the Conspirators, whose Number they knew not; but
every Man was afraid of his Neighbor, least he should have a hand in the Plot.
In this general Consternation, the Government of Athens was usurped by
Four-hundred, who preserving in show the Ancient form of Proceeding, caused all
matters to be propounded to the People, and concluded upon by the greater part
of the Voices; but the things propounded were only such, as had been first
agreed upon among themselves; neither had the Commonalty any other Liberty,
than only that of approving and giving consent; for whosoever presumed to take
upon him any farther, was quickly dispatched out of the way, and no enquiry
made after the Murderers. By these means were many Decrees made, all tending to
the Establishment of this new Authority, which nevertheless endured not long;
for the Fleet, and Army, which was then at the Isle of Samos, altogether
detesting these Tyrannical Proceedings of the four-hundred Usurpers, recalled
Alcibiades from his Banishment; and partly out of fear of him, and partly
because they found the Citizens incensed against them, the Tyrants Voluntarily
resigned their Authority, and went into Banishment.

Yet was not this alteration of Government a full restitution of the Sovereign
Command to the People, or whole Body of the City, but only to Five-thousand,
which the Four-hundred (when their Authority began) had pretended to take to
them as Assistants in the Government; herein seeming to do little or no wrong
to the Commonalty, who seldom assembled in a greater Number; and therefore no
Decrees were passed in the Name of the Four-hundred, but all was said to be
done by the Five-thousand; and the Usurpers were called (says Alcibiad^.
Plato) (...), five-thousand, though they did not exceed four-hundred. But now
when the Power was come indeed into the hands of so many, it was soon agreed
that Alcibiades and his Friends should be recalled from Exile by the Citizens,
as they had before been by the Soldiers; and that the Army at Samos should be
requested to undertake the Government, which was forthwith reformed according
to the Soldiers desire.

This establishment of Affairs at home was immediately seconded with good
Success from abroad, for by the help of Alcibiades they in a short time
obtained several very important Victories; but the giddy Mul^itude being soon
after incensed against him, he was Banished a second time Diodor. Sic. lib.
XII. X^no^ho^. Hist. Gr^^c. lib. II. Justin. lib. V.
. His Absence had always before been fatal to the Athenians, but never so much
so, as at this time; for their Navy at Aegos-Potamos through the carelessness of
the Commanders, was betrayed into the hands of Lysander, the Lacedaemonian
Admiral, who took and sunk almost the whole Fleet, so that of two, or
three-hundred Sail of Ships there escaped not above eight.

After this Victory, Lysander joining his own Forces with those of Agis and
Pausanias, Kings of Sparta, marched directly to Athens, which was surrendered to
them upon Terms, whereby the Athenians obliged themselves to pull down the
Long-Walls, by which the City was joined to the Piraeeus, or Haven, and deliver
up all their Naval Forces, only ten, or as some say, twelve Ships excepted. Nay
there was a Consultation held whether the City should be utterly destroyed, and
the Lands about it laid wast; and Agis had carried it in the affirmative, had
not Lysander opposed him, urging, That one of the Eyes of Greece ought not to
be plucked out. However he forced them to alter their form of Government, and
change their Democracy into an Oligarchie, a State ever affected by the
Lacedaemonians.

In compliance therefore with the Commands of their Conquerors, the People of
Athens chose Thirty Governors, commonly called Thirty Tyrants, the Names of
which you may see in Xenophon. These (says an Author above mentioned) were
chosen with a design to compile a Body of their Laws, and make a Collection of
such Ancient Statutes, as were fittest to be put in Practice in that juncture
of Affairs, which were called (...), or New Laws. And to this Charge was
annexed the supreme Authority, and the whole Government of the City entrusted
in their hands. At the first they seemed to proceed with some show of Justice,
and apprehending such troublesome Fellows, as were odious to the City, but could
not be taken hold of by the Laws, condemned them to Death. But having
afterward obtained a Guard from the Spartans, to secure the City, as was
pretended, to their Obedience, they soon discovered what they had been aiming
at; for they sought no more after Base and Detested Persons, but invaded the
Leading and Principal Men of the City, sending Armed Men from House to House,
to dispatch such as were like to make any Head against their Government. And to
add the greater strength to their Party, and Color to their Proceedings, they
selected three-thousand of such Citizens, as they thought fittest for their
purpose, and gave them some part of the public Authority, disarming all the
rest. Being confirmed with this accession of Strength, they proceeded in their
Bloody designs with more Heat and Vigor than before, putting to Death all that
were possessed of Estates, without any form of Justice, or so much as any the
least Pique or Grudge against them, only that their Riches might fall into
their hands. Nay, so far were they transported with Cruelty, and Covetousness,
that they agreed that every one of them should name his Man, upon whose Goods
he should seize, by putting the owner to Death, and when Theramenes, one of
their own Number professed his detestation of so Horrid a Design, they
condemned him forthwith, and compelled him to drink Poison. This Theramenes was
at the first a mighty stickler for the Tyrants Authority, b^t when they began
to abuse it in the defense of such outrageous Practices, no Man more violently
opposed it than he, and this got him the Nickname of (...), or Jack of
both-sides, (...), from Cothurnus, which was a kind of a Shoe that fitted both
Feet.

At length the Athenians to the number of seventy, that had Fled to Thebes,
going voluntarily into Banishment to secure themselves from the Tyrants, entered
into a Conspiracy against them, and under ^he Conduct of Thrasybulus seized
upon Phyl^, a strong Castle in the Territory of Athens, and increasing their
Strength and Numbers by little and little, so far prevailed against them, that
they were forced to retire to Sparta, and then all their Laws were repealed,
and the upstart Form of Government utterly dissolved. And thus the Athenians
regained their Liberty, and were re-established in the Peaceable enjoyment of
their Lands and Fortunes in the fourth Year of the ninety-fourth Olympiad. And
to prevent all future Jealousies and Quarrels amongst themselves, they
proclaimed an (...), or Act of Oblivion, whereby all, that had been concerned
in the Outrages and Barbarities committed during the Sovereignty of the
Tyrants, were admitted to Pardon.

Thrasybulus having thus freed his Country from the heavy Yoke of the
Lacedaemonians, Conon established it in all it is Ancient Privileges and
Immunities, by another signal Victory at Cnidus, wherein he gave a total Defeat
to the Lacedaemonian Fleet. And having by this means regained the Sovereingty
of the Seas, they began again to take Courage, and aimed now at nothing less
than the restoration of Athens to her Ancient Glory: and Fortune was not
wanting in some measure to further their great Design; for they not only
reduced the I Will of Lesbos, Byzantium, Chalcedon, and other Places thereabouts
to their former Obedience, but raised Athens once more to be the most Potent,
and the Principal City in all Greece.

In this State they continued for some Years till the Thebans, who had been
raised from one of the most inconsiderable States in Greece to great Power, by
the wise Conduct and great Courage of Epaminondas, put a stop to her Grandeur,
and disputed the Sovereingty with her; but this Contest was soon decided by the
hasty Death of Epaminondas, at the Famous Battle of Mantinea, that put an End
to the Theban Greatness, which as it was raised, and maintained, so it likewise
perished with that great Man. So great alterations are the Wisdom and Courage
of one Man able to effect in the Affairs of whole Kingdoms.

The Death of Epaminondas proved no less fatal to the Athenians than the
Thebans, for now there being none whose Virtues they could emulate, or whose
Power they could fear, they Lorded it without a Rival, and being glutted with
too much Prosperity, gave themselves over to Idleness and Luxury; they slighted
the Virtue of their Ancestors; their hard and thrifty way of Living they
laughed at; the public Revenues that used to be employed in paying the Fleets
and Armies, they expended upon Games and Sports, and lavishly profused them in
Sumptuous preparations for Festivals, they took greater pleasure in going to
the Theater, and hearing the insipid jests of a Comoedian, than in manly
Exercises, and Feats of War, and preferred a Mimick, or a Stage Player, before
the most Valiant and experienced Captain; Nay, they were so besotted with their
pleasures, that they made it Capital for any Man to propose the re-establishing
of their Army, or converting the public Revenues to the maintenance of it, as
Libanius observes Argument. ad Olynthiac. L
.

This sottish and degenerate Disposition of theirs, and the rest of the Greeks,
who were also drowned in the same security, gave Opportunity and Leisure to
Philip, who had been educated under the Discipline of Epaminondas, and
Pelopidas; to raise the Macedonians from a mean, obscure, and underling
condition to the Empire of all Greece, and Asia; as Justin has observed
Histor. L. VI. Cap. IX.
. And this design was projected and begun by Philip, but achieved, and
perfected by his Son, Alexander the Great.

CHAPTER V. Of the State of Athens, from Philip of Macedon to it is delivery by
the Romans.
THE A^henians, and the rest of the Grecians, made some resistance against the
Victorious Arms of Philip, but were overthrown in a pitched Battle at
Chaeronea, in the third Year of the CXth. Olympiad. This Defeat put an End to
the Grecian Glory, and in a great measure to their Liberty, which for so many
Ages, and against the most puissant Monarchs they had preserved entire till
that time, but were never again able to recover it. However Philip, to the end
he might be declared Captain General of Greece, against the Persians without
any further trouble, and strengthen his Army by the accession of their Forces,
was content to forbear any farther attempt upon the Athenians, and permit them
to e^joy a show of Liberty.

No sooner was Philip dead, than they revolted, and endeavored to free
themselves from the Macedonian Yoke, but were easily brought into Subjection by
Alexander, and as easily obtained pardon of him, being then very eager of
invading Persia, and unwilling to be diverted by taking Revenge upon those
petty States, from a more Noble and Glorious Enterprise. And during his Life
they continued quiet, not daring to move so much as their Tongues against him.
Only toward the latter end of his Reign, when he was busi'd in the Wars with
remote Countries, and not at leisure to take notice of every little Opposition,
they refused to entertain the banished Persons, which Alexander had commanded
should be restored in all the Cities of Greece. However they durst not break
out into open Rebellion; but gave secret orders to Leosthenes, one of their
Captains, to levy an Army in his own Name, and be ready whenever they should
have occasion for him: Leosthenes obeyed their commands, and as soon as certain
News was brought, that Alexander was dead in Persia, being joined by some
others of the Grecian States, proclaimed open War against the Macedonians, in
defense of the Liberty of Greece. But being in the end totally defeated by
Antipater, they were forced to entertain a Garrison in Munychia, and submit to
what condition the Conqueror pleased to impose upon them. He therefore changed
their form of Government, and instituted an Oligarchie, depriving all those,
that were not worth two thousand Drachms, of the right of Suffrage, and ^he
better to keep them quiet, all mutinous, and disaffected Persons he
transplanted into Thrace. And by this means the supreme Power came into the
hands of about nine thousand.

About four Years after, Antipater died, and the City fell into the hands of
Cassander, who succeeded in the Kingdom of Macedon. From him they made many
attempts to free themselves, and regain their beloved Democracy, but were in
the end forced to submit themselves, in the third Year of the hundred and
fifteenth Olympiad, and accept of the same Garrison that Antipater had imposed
upon them, to live under the same form of Government, and obey any Person that
the Conqueror should nominate to the Supreme Power in it. The man appointed to
be their Governor was Demetrius the Phalerean, who, as Demetrio.
Diogenes Laertius reports, was of the Family of Conon, and studied Philosophy
under Teophrastus. He used them with all possible kindness and moderation,
enlarged their Revenues, beautified their City with magnificent Structures, and
restored it almost to it is former Luster; and they in requital of these
Favors, bestowed on him all the Honors, that in so poor a condition they were
able to give, erecting to him three hundred Statues, according to the number of
Days in the Attick Year, most of which were on Horseback Plinii Hist. etc.
. But all this was the effect of Flattery and Dissimulation, rather then any
real Respect to him, all his Moderation, all the Benefits he had conferred on
them, could not beget in them any sincere Affection for him; they still hated
him, though they had no other reason for it, than that he was set over them by
Cassander; and though their Power was gone, yet their Spirits were still too
high, to brook any thing that savored of Tyranny. And this in a few Years was
made manifest, for when Demetrius Poliorcetes, the Son of Antigonus, took up
Arms, as was pretended, in defense of the Liberty of Greece, they received him
with loud Acclamations, and all possible expressions of Joy, compelled the
Phalerean to secure himself by Flight, in his absence condemned him to dye, and
laid in wait to apprehend him, and bring him to Execution, and when they could
not compass his Person, vented their Rage and Malice upon his Statues, which
they pulled down with the greatest Detestation and Abhorrence, breaking some to
pieces, selling others, and drowning others, so that of three-hundred there was
none left remaining, except only one in the Citadel, as the forementioned
Author has reported.

Demetrius Poliorcetes having gotten possession of the City, restored to the
Athenians their Popular Government, bestowed upon them fifteen-thousand
Measures of Wheat, and such a Quantity of Timber as would enable them to build
an hundred Galleys, for the defense of their City, and left them in full
possession of their Liberty, without any Garrison to keep them in obedience.
But so transported were the Athenians with this Deliverance, that with a wild
and extravagant Gratitude, they bestowed upon Demetrius and Antigonus, not only
the Title of Kings, though that was a Name they had hitherto declined, but called
them their Tutelar Deities and Deliverers; they instituted Priests to them,
enacted a Law that the Ambassadors, which they should send to them, should
have the same Style and Character, with those which were accustomed to be sent
to Delphi, to consult the Oracle of the Pythian Apollo, or to Elis to the
Olympian Jupiter, to perform the Grecian Solemnities, and make Oblations for
the Safety and preservation of their City, whom they called (...). They
appointed lodgings for Demetrius in the Temple of Minerva, and erected and
consecrated an Altar in the place where he first alighted from his Chariot,
calling it the Altar of Demetrius the Alighter, and added infinite other
instances of most gross and fordid Flattery, of which Plutarch Demetri^.
, and others give us a large account; for (says a learned modern Author) the
Athenians having forgotten how to employ their hands, made up that defect with
their Tongues; converting to base Flattery that Eloquence, which the Virtues of
their Ancestors had suited unto more manly Arguments.

Bu^ afterward when Demetrius's Fortune began to decline, he was no longer
their God, or their Deliverer, but in requital of all his former Kindnesses,
they basely deserted him, denied him Entrance into their City, and by a Popular
Edict made it Death for any person so much as to propose a Treaty or
Accommodation with him. Then the City being embroiled in civil Dissentions, one
Lachares took this opportunity, to set himself up as an Usurper over it, but
upon the approach of Demetrius, was forced to quit his new-usurped Authority,
and preserve himself by a timely Flight.

Thus they were a second time in the possession of Demetrius, who
notwithstanding their former shameful Ingratitude received them again into
Favor, bestowed upon them an hundred-thousand Bushels of Wheat, and to
Ingratiate himself the more with them, advanced such persons to public
Offices, as he knew to be most acceptable to the People. This unexpected
Generosity transported them so far beyond themselves, that at the motion of
Dromoclides an Orator, it was decreed by the unanimous suffrage of the People,
that the Haven of Piraeeus, and the Castle of Munychia should be put into the
hands of Demetrius, to dispose of them as he pleased. And he having learned by
their former inconstancy not to repose too much trust in such humble Servants,
put strong Garrisons into those two places, and by his own Authority placed a
third in the Museum, to the end (says Plutarch) that those People, who had
showed so much Levity in their Dispositions, might be kept in subjection, and
not by their future Perfidies be able to divert him from the prosecution of
other Enterprises.

But all this care was not sufficient to keep a People restless, and impatient
of any thing that savored of Servitude in Obedience, for Demetrius's Power
being again diminished by diverse bad Successes, they made another revolt,
expelled his Garrison, and proclaimed Liberty to all Athenians; and to do him
the greater Disgrace, they displaced Diphilus, who was that Year the Priest of
the two Tutelar Deities, that is, Antigonus and Demetrius, and by an Edict of
the People restored the Priesthood to it is Ancient Form. Again Demetrius
having recovered himself a little, and being justly enraged against them for
their repeated Perfidies, laid close Siege to the City, but by the persuasion
of Craterus the Philosopher was wrought upon to quitt it, and leave them once
more in possession of their Freedom.

Some time after this, Demetrius died, and was succeeded by Antigonus Gonatas,
who again recovered Athens, put a Garrison into it, and left it in the hands of
his Successor: but upon the Death of Demetrius, the Son of Gonatas, the
Athenians made another ^^tempt to regain their Liberty, and called in Aratus to
their assistance, who though he had been signally affronted by them, and lain a
long time bedridden of an Infirmity, yet rather than fail the City in a time of
need, was carried thither in a Litter, and prevailed with Diogenes the
Governor, to deliver up the Piraeeus, Munychia, Salamis, and Sunium to the
Athenians, in consideration of an hundred and fifty Talents, whereof Aratus
himself gave twenty to the City. And of all these Changes and Successes we have
a large account in Pausanias, Plutarch, and Diodorus.

Not long after this re-establishment, they quarreled with Philip, King of
Macedon, who reduced them to great Extremities, laid waste their Country,
pulled down all the Temples in the Villages around Athens, destroyed all their
stately Edifices, and caused his Soldiers to break in pieces the very Stones,
that they might not be serviceable in the reparation of them, all which Losses
with a great many aggravations are elegantly set forth in an Oration of the
Athenian Ambassadors to the Aetolians, in Livie Lib. XXXI. cap. XXX.
. But the Romans coming to their Assistance, Philip was forced to forsake his
Enterprise, and being afterward entirely defeated, left the Grecians in a full
possession of their Liberty, which, at least some part of it, they enjoyed many
Years, under the Roman Protection.

CHAPTER VI. Of the State of Athens, from it is Confederacy with Rome to
Constantine the Great.
THE Grecians, and others that put themselves under the Roman Protection, though
they gilded their condition with the specious Name of Liberty, yet were no
farther free, than it pleased those in whose Power they were; they were
governed indeed by their own Laws, and had the Privilege of electing their own
Magistrates; yet their Laws were of small force, if they seemed any way to
oppose the Roman Interest and good Pleasure; and in the election of
Magistrates, and ordering public Affairs, though every man might give his Voice
which way he pleased, yet if he thwarted the Roman designs, or was cold in his
Affection to them, or (which ^as all one) but warm in the Defense of the
Liberties and Privileges of his Country, he was looked upon with a jealous Eye,
as a Favourer of Rebellion, and an Enemy to the Romans.

And for no other reason were a thousand of the most eminent Achaeans, without
any charge, or so much as suspicion of Treachery, sent Prisoners to Rome,
where, notwithstanding all the Testimonies of their Innocence, and the
Solicitations of their Country, which never ceased to importune the Senate for
their Liberty, they endured an imprisonment of seventeen Years; which being
expired, to the number of thirty of them were released, amongst whom was
Polybius, from whose impartial History you may have an account of all these
proceedings, which their own Historians endeavor to palliate, though they cannot
deny them; all the rest either died in Prison, or upon attempting to make
their Escape, suffered as Malefactors.

And by these and such like means, whilst some sought by Flattery and
Compliance to ingratiate themselves into the Favor of the Romans, others out
of Fear and Cowardice resolved to swim with the Stream, and those few that had
Courage and Resolution to appear for their Country were little regarded; every
thing was carried on according to the Desire of the Romans; and if any thing
happened contrary to it, their Agents presently made an Appeal to the Senate,
which reserved to themselves a Power of receiving ^uch like complaints, and
determining as they thought convenient, and they that would not submit to this
Decision, were proceeded against as Enemies, and forced by Power of Arms into
Obedience. No War was to be begun, no Peace to be concluded, nor scarce their
own Country to be defended without the advice and consent of the Senate; They
were obliged to pay what Taxes the Senate thought fit to impose upon them; Nay,
the Roman Officers sometimes took the liberty of raising Contributions of their
own accord, and though in the Macedonian War, upon several just complaints made
against them, the Senate was forced to put forth a Decree, that no Grecian
should be obliged to pay any Contribution, besides such as was levied by their
Order; yet if any man refused to answer the Demands of any Roman Officer, he
was looked upon as an encourager of Sedition, and in the End fared little
better, than those that broke out into open Rebellion.

In this State stood the Affairs of the Athenians under the Roman Government,
and whether in consideration of the easiness of this Yoke, if compared with
that which the Macedonians imposed on them; or through meaness of Spirit
contracted by being long accustomed to Misfortunes; or for want of Power to
assert their Liberty; or for all these reasons, they patiently submitted
themselves, seeming well satisfied with the enjoyment of this slavish Freedom,
which in a few Ages before, they would have rejected with the greatest
Indignation, and endeavored to deliver themselves from it, though their Lives,
and the remainder of their Fortunes should have been hazarded in the Enterprise.

And from this time till the War with Mithridates, they continued without any
remarkable alterations, but either by the persuasions of Ariston the
Philosopher, or out of fear of Mithridates's Army, they had the bad Fortune to
take his part, and receive Archestratus, one of his Lieutenants, within their
Walls; at which Sylla being enraged laid Siege to the City, took it, and
committed so merciless a slaughter, that the very Channels in the Streets
flowed with Blood. At this time the Piraecus, and Munychia, were burned to the
Ground, their Walls demolished, their Ancient Monuments destroyed, and the
whole City so defaced, that it was never able to recover it is former Beauty,
till the time of Adrian Plutarch. Syll. Strabo l. IX. Lucius Florus l. III. ^.
V. Appianus in Mi^hridatic^.
.

This Storm being blown over, they lived in Peace till the time of the Civil
War between Caesar and Pompey, in which they sided with Pompey, and were
closely Besieged by Q. Fufius Calenus, Caesar's Lieutenant, who spoiled and
destroyed all the adjacent Country, and seized upon the Piraeeus, being at
that time unfortified, and a place of little strength: But news being brought
that Pompey was totally routed, they yielded themselves into the hands of the
Conqueror, who according to his wonted Generosity received them into Favor,
and this he did out of respect to the Glory and Virtue of their Ancestors,
giving out, That he pardoned the Living for the sake of the Dead, as Dion
Cassiu^ reports L.XI.II.
.

But it seems they still retained some sparks, at least, of their old Love for
Popular Government, for when Caesar was dead, they joined themselves to Bru^us
and Cassius, his Murderers, and besides other Honors done to them, placed
their Statues next those of Harmodius and Aristogiton, two famous Patriots,
that defended the Liberty of their Country against the Tyranny of
Pisistratus's Sons.

Brutus and Cassius being defeated, they went over to Antony, who behaved
himself very obligingly toward them, and the rest of the Grecians, being fond
(says A^tonio.
Plutarch) of being styled a Lover of Greece, but above all in being called a
Lover of Athens, to which City he made considerable Presents; and, as others
tell us, gave the Athenians the Dominion of the Islands of Tenus, Aegina, Icus,
Cea, Sciatlius, and Peparethus.

Augustus having overcome Antony, handled them a little more severely for their
ingratitude to his Father, and besides some other Privileges, as that of
Selling the Freedom of the City, took from them the Isle of Aegina Dion Cassiu^.
. Toward the latter End of his Reign, they began to revolt, but were easily
reduced to their former obedience; and notwithstanding all the Cruelties,
Ravages, and other Misfortunes they had suffered, Strabo, who flourished in the
Reign of Tiberius Caesar, tells us they enjoyed many Privileges, retained their
Ancient form of Government, and lived in a flourishing Condition in his Days
Geogr. l. IX.
. And Germanicus, the adopted Son of Tiberius, making a Journey that way,
Honored them with the Privilege of having a Lictor, which was an Officer, that
attended upon the chief Magistrates at Rome, and was accounted a mark of
Sovereign Power.

In this condition they remained with little alteration till the Reign of
Vespasian, who reduced Aitica, and all Achaia to be a Roman Province, exacting
Tribute of them, and compelling them to be governed by the Roman Laws.

Under Nerva some Shadow, at least, of Liberty was restored them, but they were
still under the Government of a Proconsul, and received most of their Laws from
the Emperor, who also nominated the Professors in their public Schools, and
appointed them Archons; and hence it came to pass, that Adrian before his
advancement to the Empire, was invested in that Office. In the same State they
continued in Trajan's time, as appears from an Epistle of Pliny to Maximus, who
was sent to Govern Achaia, wherein he advised him to use his Power with
moderation, and tells him in particular of the Athenians, that it would be a
Barbarous piece of Inhumanity, to deprive them of that Shadow, and Name of
Liberty, which was all that remained to them Plin. l. VIII. Epist. XXIV.
.

But notwithstanding the Peace and Privileges they enjoyed under these, and
other Emperors of Rome, they were never able to repair those vast Losses they
had Suffered under Sylla, till the reign of Adrian, who in the time of his
being Archon, took a Particular Affection to this City, and when he was
promoted to be Emperor, granted them very large Privileges, gave them Just and
Moderate Laws, bestowed on them a large Donative of Money, and annual
Provisions of Corn, and the whole Island of Cephalenia; repaired their old
decayed Castles, and restored them to their ancient Splendour, and added one
whole Region of new Buildings at his own charge, which he called Adrianopolis;
and, in short, so Beautified the whole City, that it was called New-Athens, as
appears as well from other Records, as also from an Inscription upon an
Aquae-duct, begun by this Emperor, and finished by his Successor Antoninus,
IMP. CAESAR. T. AELIUS. HADRIANUS. ANTONINUS.
AUG. PIUS. COS. III. TRIB. POT. II. P. P.
AQUAEDUCTUM. IN. NOVIS. ATHENIS. COEPTUM. A. DIVO.
ADRIANO. PATRE. SUO. CONSUMMAVIT. DEDICAVITQUE Gruter. p. CLXXVII.
.
The meaning of which is, that Antoninus had finished the Aquae-duct in
New-Athens, that had been begun by his Father, and Predecessor Hadrian. And
from another of Gruter's Inscriptions, it appears that they acknowledged him to
be the second Founder of their City, (...)
(...) Gruter. page MLXXVIII.
.
The Substance of which is, that Athens was formerly the City of Theseus, but
does now belong to Adrian. Many other Privileges this Emperor grant^d them,
which were continued and enlarged by his Successors M. Antoninus Pius, and M.
Antoninus the Philosopher, the latter of which allowed them stipends for the
maintenance of Public Professors in all the Arts and Sciences, and was himself
initiated amongst them.

But Severus, having received some Affront from them, when he was a Private
Person, and Studied in Athens, was resolved to pay them Home, as soon as he was
Emperor, and for no other reason, as it is thought, deprived them of a great
part of their Privileges Spartianus.
.

Valerian was more Favorable to them, and permitted them to rebuild their
City-Walls, which had lain in Rubbish between Three and Four-hundred Years,
from the time that Sylla dismantled them Zosimus.
.

But these Fortifications could not Protect them from the Fury of the Goths,
who under Gallienus, as Zosimus, or Claudius, as Cedrenus reports, made
themselves Masters of it; but were soon driven out of their new Conquest, by
Cleodemus, who having escaped the Fury of those Barbarians, and got together a
considerable Number of Men, and Ships, defeated part of them in a Sea Fight,
and forced the rest to quit the City, and provide for their Safety by an early
Flight Zonarae.
. One thing remarkable Cedrenus reports of the Goths, That when they had
Plundered the City, and heaped up an Infinite number of Books, with a Design to
Burn them, they desisted from that purpose for this reason, viz. That the
Greeks by employing their time upon them, might be diverted from Martial
Affairs.

CHAPTER VII. Of the State of Athens, from Constantine the Great.
Toward the Declination of the Roman Greatness, the Chief Magistrate of
Athens, was called by the Name of (...), i. e. Duke, but Constantine the Great,
besides many other Privileges granted to the City, Honored him with the Title
of (...), or Grand-Duke Julian. Orat. I. Nicephoras Gregoras Hist. Romans l. VII.
. Constantius at the Request of Proaeresius, enlarged their Dominions, by a
Grant of several Islands in the Archi-pelago.

Under Arcadius and Honorius, Alarick, King of the Goths, made an Incursion
into Greece, Pillaged and Destroyed all before him, but as Zosimus reports, was
diverted from his Design upon Athens, by a Vision, wherein the Tutelar Goddess
of that City appeared to him in Armor, and in the Form of those Statues that
are Dedicated to Minerva the Protectress, and Achilles in the same manner that
Homer represents him, when being enraged for the Death of Patroclus, he fell
with his utmost Fury upon the Trojans Zosimus l. V.
. But the Writers of those Times make no mention of any such thing, on the
contrary they tell us, that Athens passed the common Fate of the rest of
Greece; and so Claudian reports, Si tunc his animis acics collata fuisset,
Prodita non tantas vidisset Graecia clades,
Oppida semoto Pelopeia Mart vigerent;
Starent Arcadiae, starent Lacedaemonis arces;
Non mare flagrasset geminum flagrante Corintho;
Nec fera Cecropias traxissent vincula matres Claudian. in Ru^sinum. l. II.
.
Had thus the embattl'd Grecians dared to oppose
With Rage and Power Divine their Barbarous Foes,
N'ere had their Land of Strength and Help bereft
T'insulting Conquerours a Prey been left.
The Spartan Land had n'ere such havoc seen,
It Is Splendour n'ere eclipsed, or Power depressed had been.
Arcadian Flocks might graze untainted Food,
And free from Plunder Pelops Isle have stood,
Corinth's proud Structures n'ere had felt the Flames,
Nor griping Chains enslaved the Athenian Dames.
Mr. Abell. And Synesius, who lived in the same Age, tells us, there was
nothing left in it splendid, or remarkable, nothing to be admired, besides the
Famous Names of Ancient Ruins; and that, as in a Sacrifice, when the Body is
consumed, there remains nothing of the Beast, but an empty Skin; so it was in
Athens, where all the Stately and Magnificent Structures were turned into
ruinous Heaps, and nothing but old decayed Outsides left remaining Syn^sius
Ep. CCXXXV.
.

Theodosius II. is said to have Favored the Athenians, upon the Account of his
Queen Eudocia, who was an Athenian by Birth. Justinian also is reported to have
been very Kind to them, but from his Reign, for the space of about
Seven-hundred Years, either for want of Historians in Ages so Rude and
Barbarous, or because they lived in Peace, and Obscurity, without atchieving,
or suffering any thing deserving to be transmitted to Posterity, there is no
Account of any thing that passed amongst them, till the Thirteenth Century.

At that time, Nicetas tells us, Athens was in the hands of Baldwin, and was
Besieged by one of the Generals of Theodorus Lascares, who was then the Greek
Emperor, but he was repulsed with Loss, and Forced to raise the Siege. Not
long after, it was Besieged by the Marquess Bonifacius, who made himself Master
of it Nicetas Choniates in Vita Balduini.
.

It was afterward Governed by one Delves, of the House of Arragon, and after
his Death fell into the hands of Bajazet, Emperor of the Turks Laonic.
Chalcocondylas lib. III.
. Afterward it was taken by the Spaniards of Catalonia, under the Command of
Andronicus Palaeologus the Elder Niceph. Greg. lib. VII.
. And these are the same, that Chalcocondylas calls (...), and reports, they
were dispossessed of it by Reinerius Acciaiolo, a Florentine, who having no
legitimate Male-Issue, left it by his last Will and Testament to the State of
Venice.

The Venetians were not long Masters of it, being dispossessed by Anny, a
Natural Son of Reinerius, who had given him the Sovereignty of Thebes and
Boeotia; and from this time it continued some Years under the Government of the
Acciaioli: for Antony was Succeeded by one of his Kinsmen, called Nerius;
Nerius was displaced by his Brother Antony for his Insufficiency, and Unfitness
to Govern, and after Antony's Death, recovered it again; but leaving only one
Son, then an Infant, was Succeeded by his Wife, who for her Folly was ejected
by Mahomet, upon the complaint of Francus, the Son of Antony the Second, who
Succeeded her, and having confined her some time in Prison, put her to Death,
and was upon that score Accused by her Son to Mahomet II, who sent an Army
under the Conduct of Omares to Besiege him; Francus upon this made his
Application to the Latins, but they refused to grant him any Assistance, except
he would Engage his Subjects, in all things to Conform to the Romish
Superstition, and renounce all those Articles, wherein the Greek Church differs
from them; which he not being able to do, was forced to Surrender it to the
Turks, in the Year of our Lord MCCCCLV Chalcocond. lib. VI and IX.
, and in their hands it continues to this Day.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the City of Athens, and it is Walls, Gates, Streets,
Buildings, etc.
THE City of Athens, when it Flourished in it is greatest Splendour, was one of
the fairest and largest Cities of all Greece, being, says Aristides, a Day's
journey in Compass Panathen.
. But this seems to be rather a Rhetorical Flourish, than a just and true
Account; for according to the most exact computation, the whole Circuit of it
contained no more than CLXXVIII. Stadia, that is, something above two and
twenty Roman Miles.

But many were the changes of Government, and Fortune, which it underwent,
before it arrived to this Pitch of Greatness, for at the first, that which was
afterward the Citadel, was the whole City, and was called Cecropia, from it is
first Founder Cecrops, who, they say, was the first that invented the manner of
Building Cities, and therefore the Athenians, Proud of every little pretense to
Antiquity, used to call it by way of Eminence (...), and (...), as being the
first City Stephanus V. (...).
* Afterward it changed it is first Name of Cecropia, and was called Athens in
Ericthonius's Reign, for which several reasons are given, but the most Common
is, that the Name was taken from Minerva, whom the Greeks call (...), because
she was the Protectress of the City; indeed almost all Towers, and Cittadels
were Sacred to this Goddess, who is therefore by Catullus called, -- D^va
tenens in summis urbibus arces.
-- Goddess that in Cittadels does dwell.
And Eustathius has remarked the same upon Homer's sixth Iliad, where he tells
us, Minerva's Temple was in the Trojan Citadel, (...) Page CCCCLXXXIII. Edit
Basil.
.
Minerva's Temple in the Citadel.
Cecropia was Seated in the midst of a large and pleasant Plain, upon the top
of a high Rock, for, as the forementioned Author observes, it was usual for the
First Founders of Cities in those Ages, to lay the Foundations of them upon
Steep Rocks, and high Mountains; and this they did, partly for that such places
were a good Defense against Invaders, but more especially, because they hoped
to be secured by them from Inundations Il. (...). p. CCCLXXXIV.
, which the People of those Times exceedingly dreaded, having heard and
experienced the sad Effects of them under Ogyges, and Deucalion. Afterward,
when the number of Inhabitants was increased, the whole Plain was filled with
Buildings, which were called from their Situation (...), or the Lower City, and
Cecropia (...), or (...), the Upper City.

The Circuit of the Citadel was Threescore Stadia, it was fenced in with
wooden Pales, or, as some say, was set about with Olive Trees; and therefore in
Xerxes's Invasion, when the Oracle advised the Athenians to defend themselves
with Walls of Wood, some were of Opinion, they were commanded to enter into the
Acropolis, and there receive the Enemy; which some of them did, but after a
desperate Resistance, were overpowered by Numbers, and forced to suffer the sad
Effects of their fond Interpretation Syrianus in Herm. Cornel. Nep.
.

It was Fortified with a strong Wall, one part of which was Built by Cimon, the
Son of Miltiades, out of the Spoils taken in the Persian War, and was called
(...), being on the South Side of the Citadel Plutarch. in Cimone.
.

Parthenion sive Templum Minervae


The North-Wall was Built many Ages before, by Agrolas, as Pausanias, or
Eurialus, as Pliny, and Hyperbius, two Brothers, that first taught the
Athenians the Art of Building Houses, whereas till that time, they lived in
Caves. They were Tyrrhenians born, and by that Nation all sorts of Building are
said to have been first begun in Greece, and from them Walls and Castles were
called (...) Phavorin. V. (...).
. This Wall was named (...), or (...), because the Founders of it, were called
Pelasgi, from their continual wandering, and removing from one Country to
another, in the manner of Storks, which the Greeks call (...) Strabo lib IX.
Plin. lib. VII. LVI. and Pausa^ias Atticis.
. Thucydides tells us, there was an Execration laid upon any that should build
Houses under this Wall, because the Pelasgi, whilst they dwelt there, entered
into a Conspiracy against the Athenians Thucydides ejusque Scholiast. lib. II.
. And Poll^^ adds, that it was unlawful to make Ditches, or sow Corn here, and
if any man was taken offending, he was apprehended by the Nomothetae, and
brought before the Archon, who was to lay a Fine of three Drachms upon him
Pollux lib VIII. c. IX.
. It was Beautified with Nine Gates, and therefore is sometimes called (...);
but though there were many lesser Gates, yet the Citadel had but one great
Fore-Gate, or Entrance, to which they ascended by Steps, covered with white
Marble, and it was Built by Pericles, with such Magnificence, that the expenses
of it amounted to above a Thousand Drachms Plutarchus Pericle. Pausan. Atticis.
Harpocrat. and Suidas V. (...)
.

The Inside of the Citadel, was adorned with innumerable Edifices, Statues,
and Monuments, wherein all the Ancient Stories were described at large,
insomuch that Aristides tells us, it looked like one continued Ornament
A^istides in Panatheniaca.
. The Description of all these would be tedious, and is already performed by
Meursius, who has with vast industry collected into one Body all the relics
of Antiquity that lay dispersed here and there in Ancient Authors. The most
remarkable of them were these:

The Temple of Minerva, called (...), or Victory, in which the Goddess was
represented, having a Pome-Granate in her right Hand, and an Helmet in her
left, and without Wings, in memory of Theseus's good Success in Crete, the Fame
whereof had not reached Athens, before his Arrival: but in other Places,
Victory was usually represented with Wings Suidas and Harpoc^at.
. It was placed at the right Hand of the Entrance of the Citadel, and was
Built with white Marble.

About the middle of the Citadel, was the Stately Temple of Minerva, called
Parthenion, because that Goddess preserved her Virginity pure and inviolate, or
because it was Dedicated by the Daughters of Erectheus, who were peculiarly
called (...) H^sy^hius.
. It was called also (...), because it was an Hundred-Foot square. It was
Burned by the Persians, but restored again by Pericles, and enlarged Fifty Foot
on each side Pausania^. Plutarch. Pericl.
. Sr. George Wheeler reports, that it is Two-hundred, and Seventeen Foot, Nine
Inches long, and Ninety-eight Foot, Six Inches broad, that it consists
altogether of admirable white Marble, and both for Matter and Art is the most
Beautiful piece of Antiquity, remaining in the World.

The Temple of Neptune Sirnam'd Erectheus, which was a double Building, and,
besides other Curiosities, contained in it the Salt-spring, called (...), which
was feigned to have burst out of the Earth, from a stroke of Neptune's Trident,
in his contention with Minerva. And this Part was Consecrated to Neptune. The
other Part of the Temple belonged to Minerva, Sirnam'd (...)* i. e. Protectress
of the City; and (...), from one of Cecrops's Daughters of that Name. Here was
the Sacred Olive, produced by Minerva; and the Goddess's Image, which was said
to have fallen from Heaven in Ericthonius's Reign; it was kept by one, or two
Dragons, called (...), and had a Lamp always burning with Oil, and an Owl
placed before it Apoll^dor. l. III. Plutarch. Symp. l. IX. Q. VI.
. Both of them remain to this Day, and the Lesser Edifice, which is an Entrance
to the other, is Twenty-nine Foot long, and Twenty-one Foot, Three Inches
broad; the Bigger is Sixty-three Foot, and a half long, and Thirty-six Foot
broad. The Roof is supported by Ionick Pillars Channelled, but the Chapters
seem to be a mixture between that, and the Dorick Order.

On the Backside of Minerva's Temple, was the public Treasury, called from
it is Situation (...), wherein, besides other public Money, a Thousand Talents
were laid in Store, against any very urgent Occasion, but if any Man expended
them upon a trivial Account, he was to be put to Death. Also the Names of all
that were indebted to the Commonwealth were entered in a Register in this
place, and therefore such Persons were called (...), as on the contrary, when
they had discharged their Debt, they were named (...). The Tutelar Gods of this
Treasury, were Jupiter (...), or the Savior; and Plutus, the God of Riches,
whom they represented with Wings, and (which was unusual in other Places)
Seeing Aristoph. Schol. Plut. Etymologus. Thucyd. l. II. Philostr^t. (...). l.
II. Demosthen. Schol. Orat. III. in Tim^crat.
. Aristophanes has taken notice of the Statues of both these Gods, in the
latter End of his Plutus, where he introduces Carrion very busy in placing that
God after the recovery of his Sight, next to the Statue of Jupiter the Savior,
KAP. (...),
O (...)
(...). IEP. (...).
KAP. (...)
(...),
(...).
Cario. Come, Courage, on God's will depends Success,
Which I Divine will answer to our Hopes,
For does not Jove, our President's approach
Without entreatie seem thus to presage?

Priest. Your Words bring Comfort.

Car. Therefore let us wait
For Plutus coming, him we'll substitute
An Overseer into the place of Jove
To the Treasury of Pallas our Goddess.

Mr. Abell. Afterward this Building was burned to the Ground by the
Treasurers, who having imbezzled the public Money, secured themselves by that
means, and prevented the City from calling them to Account Demosth. ejusque
Schol. Orat in Timocrat.
. There were also several other remarkable Edifices in the Citadel, as the
Chapels of Jupiter (...), and of Minerva (...) Lycurg. Orat. in Leocratem
. The Temple of Agraulus, the Daughter of Cecrops, or rather of Minerva,
Worshipped by that Name, in the Front, and Steep and Craggy side of the Rock
Herodot. l. VIII.
. And, to mention only one more, The Temple of Venus (...), Consecrated by
Phaedra, when she was in Love with Hippolytus Euripid. Schol. in Hippolyto.
. And thus much concerning the Citadel.

The Lower City, containing all the Buildings, which surrounded the Citadel,
with the Fort Munychia, and the two Havens Phalerum, and Piraeeus, was
encompassed with Walls of unequal Strength, being Built at different Times, and
by different Hands; The chief Parts of them were, The (...), that joined the
Haven of Piraeeus to the City, being about Five Miles in length, and therefore
Plutarch calls them, (...), long Legs Cimone.
, and Propertius long Arms, Inde ubi Piraeei capient me litora por^us,
Scandam ego Theseae brachia longa viae Lib. III. Eleg.
.
When I Have arrived at the Piraean Port,
And eased the shattered Vessel of it is Load,
I Will Scale the Walls of the Thesean Road.
Mr. Abell. They consisted of two Sides, one of which lay toward the North,
and was Built by Pericles Plutarch. Pericle.
, with vast Expense, containing XL. Stadia; the other lay to the South, and was
called (...), or (...), or (...), to distinguish it from the South-Wall of the
Citadel; sometimes (...), because it took in the Port Phalerum. It was Built
by Themistocles, of huge square Stones, not cemented together by Mortar, but
fastened by Iron and Lead. The Height of it was Forty Cubits, and yet was but
the half of what Themistocles designed; the Length of it was Thirty-five
Stadia. Upon both of them were erected a great Number of Turrets, which were
turned into Dwelling-houses, when the Athenians became so Numerous, that the
City was not large enough to contain them Plutarch. Themistocl. Appian. in
Mithridatico. Thucyd. lib. I. and II.
* The (...), or Wall, that encompassed the Munychia, and joined it to the
Piraeeus, contained LX. Stadia; and the exterior Wall on the other side of the
City, was in length XLIII. Stadia; so that the whole Circuit of the City
contained CLXXVIII. Stadia, which are something above Two and Twenty Roman
Miles.

1. The Principal Gates of the City, were the (...), afterward called (...),
because they were larger then any of the rest. They were placed at the Entrance
of Ceramicus, and therefore seem to have been the same with the (...), in
Philostratus Phi^ostratus in Philagro Sophist. lib. II. Xenophon Hist. Graec. l
II. Plutarch. Pericle, and Sylla.
.

2. (...)* leading to the Piraeeus; near which was the Temple of the Hero
Chalcodoon, and the Tombs of those that died in the Defense of their Country,
when the Amazons Invaded Attica under Theseus Plutarch. Theseo.
.

3. (...), near which Hyperides the Orator, and his Family were Buried
Hesychius.
.

4. (...), where they carried forth dead Persons to their Graves, so called
from (...), a Grave Theophrastus Charact. Ethic.
.

5. (...), the Gate leading to Eleusis, through which they that Celebrated the
Festival of Ceres Eleusinia, made a solemn Procession, from which Custom the
Gate received it is Name, it being usual to call every thing, that was any way
concerned in those Mysteries (...), Sacred.

6. (...), the Gate of Aegeus, the Father of Theseus, whose House stood in the
place, where afterward the Delphinium was Built, and therefore the Statue of
Mercury at the East End of that Temple, was called (...), by which it is
evident, that this Gate was near the Delphinium Plutarch. Theseo.
.

7. (...), the Gate of Diochares.

8. (...), the Gate that looked toward Acharnae, a Borough in Attica.

9. (...), that lay toward the Borough of the Diomians.

10. (...), the Thracian Gate.

11. (...), the Itonian Gate, near which was the Pillar erected in memory of
the Amazons Aeschines Philosophus in Axi^ch^.
.

12. (...), the Scaean Gate Hilduinus in V^ta Dio^ysii Arcopagi^o.
.

13. (...), the Gate of Adrian, by which they entered into that part of the
City, which that Emperor rebuilt, and called (...).

As to the Streets in Athens, thus much is said of them in general, that they
were not very Uniform, or Beautiful Dicaarchus in descriptione Gracia.
, and though Homer calls it (...), (...) Odyss. VII.
. Yet that seems only to imply the Bigness, and not the Beauty of them; for so
that Poet has used the same Epithet in other places. The number of them without
question was very great, but most of their Names are quite lost; and few, if
any, besides these that follow are to be met with in Authors. (...), or the Way
to Eleusis. (...), betwixt the long Walls, leading to the Piraeeus, which seems
to be the same with that, which was called (...), near the Academy. (...)^

(...), a Way near the Prytaneum, wherein were Places largely stocked with
Tripods of Brass, Curiously wrought; amongst which was the Famous Satyr, called
by the Greeks (...), being one of the Masterpieces of Praxiteles. And
concerning these Heliodorus is said to have written an entire Treatise (...) V.
(...).
.

It remains in the next place, that I give you an Account of the Buildings of
the Lower City; In doing which I shall only mention such as were most
remarkable, or had some History, or Custom depending upon them, for the rest
referring the Reader to Pausanias, and Meursius's larger Treatises.

(...), a stately Edifice, in which were kept the Sacred Vtensils, made use of
at Festivals, and all things necessary for the Solemn Processions prepared. It
was placed at the Entrance of the Old City, which looks toward the Phalerum,
and adorned with many Statues, of the Athenian Heroes. Indeed there was scarce
any place in the City, that was not filled with such like Representations.

The Temple of Vulcan, or of Vulcan and Minerva, not far from Ceramicus within
the City, seems to have been a public Prison, frequent mention b^ing made of
Persons Tortured there.

Near this place was the Temple of the Heavenly Venus, for they had a Twofold
Venus, one of which was called (...), and the other (...), the former presided
over Chaste and pure Love; the latter was the Patroness of Lust, and
Debauchery. And as their Natures and Characters were dif^^rent, so were also
the Ceremonies used in their Worship. They that worshipped the former, behaved
themselves with all Modesty and Gravity; but the latter was pleased only with
Lewdness and Wantonness. Nay, Solon permitted public Strumpets to prostitute
themselves in her Temple. Besides these, Venus had several other Temples
dedicated to her, as those which were erected upon the Account of Demetrius
Poliorcetes, to Venus Lamia, and Leaena, in Honor of two of his Mistresses,
called by those Names. Nay, so gross Flattery did the Athenians degenerate
into, that they enrolled several of his Parasites into the Number of their
Deities, and Honored them with Temples and Altars Plutarch. in Demetrio.
.

The Temple of Theseus was erected by Conon, in the middle of the City, near
the Place where the Youth performed their Wrestlings, and other Exercises of
Body, and was allowed the Privilege of being a Sanctuary for Slaves, and all
those of mean Condition that Fled from the Persecution of Men in Power, in
memory that Theseus while he Lived, was an Assister and Protector of the
Distressed. And a great many other Temples were Consecrated to him in his life
Time, as grateful acknowledgements of the Benefits, he had conferred upon the
City, all which, Four only excepted, he Dedicated to Hercules, and changed
their Names from (...), to (...), after he had been rescued by him from the
King of the Molossians, as Plutarch reports out of Philochorus Idem These^.
. One of these was put to diverse other uses, for certain Magistrates were
created in it by the Thesmothetae Aeschin. Orat. in Ctesipho^^.
. Causes also were heard there, and it was a public Prison Etym^logus.
, and therefore a Gaol-bird, is wittily called (...), in Aristophanes, such an
one Plautus with no less Elegancy names Colonus Carceris.

The Temple of Theseus, is to be seen at this Day, and is Built, as Sr. George
Wheeler reports, in all respects like the Temple of Minerva in the Citadel, as
to it is Matter, Form, and Order of Architecture, but not so large. It is
Dedicated to St. George, and still remains a Masterpiece of Architecture, not
easy to be paralleled, much less exceeded by any other.

(...), or the Temple of Castor and Pollux, called (...). In this Place Slaves
were exposed to Sale.

(...), or (...), a Temple erected in Honor of Jupiter the Olympian; it was
the most magnificent Structure in Athens, being in Circuit, no less than Four
Stadia, which was the reason they were forced to support it with Pillars, a
thing unknown in Athens before that time Plinius lib. XXXVI. cap. VI.
. The Foundations were laid by Pisistratus, and many succeeding Governors
contributed to the Building of it, but it was never completely finished till
Adrian's time, which was Seven-hundred Years after the Tyranny of Pisistratus.

The Temple of Apollo and Pan, at the Bottom of the Citadel on the North-side,
in a Cave or Grotto, called (...), or (...), where Apollo was feigned to have
deflowered Creusa, the Daughter of Erectheus, we find it mentioned in Euripides,
-- (...)
(...);
(...) Ione.
.


Templum Thesei.


Temple of the Eight Winds


The Temple of Diana, Sirnam'd (...), because in it Women, after their first
Child, used to Dedicate their Girdles to her Apollonii Schol. lib. I.
.

(...), was a Temple Dedicated to all the Gods, who, as they were United in one
Temple, so were they Honored with one Common Festival, called (...). This was
a very magnificent Structure, and supported by an Hundred and Twenty
Marble-Pillars, on the Outside were all the Histories of the Gods, curiously
Engraven, and upon the great Gate, stood two Horses, excellently Carved by
Praxiteles. It is to be seen at this Day, as Theodore Zygomalas reports, in an
Epistle to Martin Crusius, written A. D. MDLXXV. wherein he describes the then
present State of Athens.

The Temple of the Eight Winds, omitted by Pausanias, but mentioned and
described by Sr. George Wheeler out of Vitruvius, who reports that, such as had
made exact Observations about the Winds, divided them into Eight; as namely,
Andronicus Cyrrhastes, who gave this Model to the Athenians, for he Built a
Tower of Eight square of Marble, on every side of which he Carved the Figure of
a Wind, according to the Quarter it blew from. On the top of the Tower, he
erected a little Pyramid of Marble, on the point of which was placed a Brazen
Triton, holding a Switch in his right Hand, wherewith turning about, he pointed
to the Wind, that then blew. All the Winds answered exactly to the Compass, and
were represented by Figures answerable to their Natures, above which were
written their Names in large Greek Letters, which are these that follow, (...),
Eurus, South-East. (...), Subsolanus, East. (...), Coecias, North-East. (...),
Boreas, North. (...), Corus, North-West. (...), Occidens, West.(...), Notus,
South. (...), Libs, Africus, South-West. This Tower remains yet entire, the
Weathercock only excepted.

(...), or Portico's, they had a great many, but the most remarkable was that,
which was called (...), and afterward (...), from the variety it contained of
curious Pictures, drawn by the greatest Masters in Greece, such were
Polygnotus, Mycon, and Pandaenus, the Brother of Phidias. Here it was that Zeno
taught Philosophy, and instituted that Sect, which received their Names from
the Place, being called (...) from (...). And the Portico it self, is usually
put for that Sect of Philo^ophers, as when Athenaeus calls Zeno (...), the
Founder of the Stoics Deip. l. VIII.
.

(...) was a Fort near the Citadel, so called from the old Poet Musaeus, the
Scholar of Orpheus, that used to repeat his Verses in this Place, where also he
was Buried. This Fort was forced to entertain a Garrison by Antigonus, and his
Son Demetrius to make it the more secure surrounded it with a Wall.

(...) was a Musick-Theater, Built by Pericles, and for the contrivance of it
on the Inside, was full of Seats and Ranges of Pillars, and on the Outside in
the Roof or Covering of it, was made from one point at the Top with a great
many Bendings, all shelving downward, and it is reported, (says Plutarch,)
that it was so framed in imitation and after the Copy of the King of Persia's
Pavilion Plutarch. in Pericle.
. It was also a Tribunal as we learn from Aristophanes, (...)
(...) -- Vespis.
.
It was very much Beautified by Lycurgus Hyperid. Orat. pro Lycurgo.
, but being demolished in the Mithridatick War Appian. in Mithridatico.
, was re-edified by Herodes Atticus, with such Splendour and Magnificence, that,
as Pausanias tells us, it surpassed all the famous Buildings in Greece. It
stood in the

Ceramicus, of which Name there were two Places, so called from Ceramus the Son
of Bacchus and Ariadne Pausan.
; or (...), from the Potter's Art, which was first invented in one of these
Places by Coroebus Suidas. Plin l. VII. c. LVI.
. One of them was within the City, and contained innumerable Buildings, as
Temples, Theaters, Porticos, etc. The other was in the Suburbs, and was a
public Burying-place, and contained the Academy, and many other Edifices.

The Athenian (...), or Fora, were very numerous, but the most noted of them
were two; the Old Forum, and the New. The New Forum was in a Place called (...)
by Strabo Strabo l. IX.
. Which it is probable was not far from Zeno's Portico, because Pausanias tells
us, that in his Time the Forum was near that Place. The Old Forum was in the
Ceramicus within the City, called (...). In it were held the public Assemblies
of the People; but the chief Design of it was the the meeting of People to Buy
and Sell, and therefore it was divided into different parts, according to the
Wares exposed to Sale, for every Trade had a different place assigned to make
their Markets in; and hence we read of (...), where Slaves, and Vessels were
Sold Hesych.
: (...), and (...), where Women's Clothes and Ornaments were exposed; and
others without Number. Sometimes they called the Fora, by the single Names of
things Sold in them, as (...), the Wine-market, (...), the Oil-market, etc.
Pollux l. IX. c. V.
And an instance of this we have in these Verses of Eupolis, (...),
(...),
(...) --
The time in which things were exposed to Sale, was called (...), full Market,
from the multitudes of People that Assembled at such times; and there seems to
have been different Hours appointed for such and such Wares, which I suppose,
is the reason that Suidas in The Area of the Theater of Bacchus
The Odeum or Music Theater.
some Places tells us, the Full Market was at the Third Hour, in others that it
was at the Fourth, Fifth, and Sixth.

And besides these Places, the Tradesmen had their (...), or Publick-Halls,
wherein each Company met, and consulted about their Affairs. For Trades were
very much encouraged at Athens, and if any Man objected the living by such Gain
to another, as a matter of Reproach, the Person affronted might have an Action
of Slander against him Demosth. Orat. in Eubulidem.
. Nay, Trades were so far from being counted a mean an^ ignoble way of Living,
that Persons of the greatest Quality did not disdain to betake themselves to
such Employments, and especially to Merchandise, as Plutarch informs us; Solon
(says he) applied himself to Merchandise, though some there are that report, that
he Traveled rather to get Learning and Experience, than to raise an Estate. In
his time (according to Hesiod) a Trade was not Dishonorable, nor did it debase
it is followers; but Merchandise was a worthy Calling, which brought Home the
good things that Barbarous Nations enjoyed, was the occasion of Friendship with
their Kings, and Mother of Experience. Some Merchants have Built great Cities,
as the Founder of Massilia, that Man so much esteemed by the Gaul's, that lived
about the Rhine; some also report, that Thales, and Hippocrates the
Mathematician Traded; and that Plato defrayed the charges of his Travels by
Selling Oil in Egypt. Thus Plutarch Pl^tarchus Solone.
.

Aquaeducts were not common at Athens, before the Roman Times; and the want of
them was supplied by Wells; some of which were Dug by private Persons, others at
the public Expense; but because the Country having but few potable Rivers,
(for Eridanus Strabo Lib. IX.
tells us was Muddy, and not fit for use,) Lakes, or large Springs, was but
poorly furnished with Water, which gave occasion to continual Quarrels amongst
the Citizens, Solon enacted a Law, that where there was a public Well, within
an Hippicon, (that is, four Furlongs) all should have the Privilege of drawing
at that; but those that lived at a greater Distance, should be obliged to
provide a private Well; and if they had Dug ten Fathom deep, and could find no
Water, they had liberty to fetch ten Gallons a Day from their Neighbors; for
he thought it prudent (says my Author) to make Provision against want, but not
encourage Laziness Plutarchus Solone.
. Adrian, besides other magnificent Structures, laid the Foundations of a
stately Aquaeduct, which was finished by his Successor Antoninus. And one part
of it remains to this Day, sustained by Ionick Pillars; which Sr. George
Wheeler is of opinion, was the Frontis-piece of the Repository, or Receiver of
the Water.

Gymnasia are said to have been first in use at Lacedaemon, but were afterward
very common in all the parts of Greece, and imitated, very much augmented, and
improved at Rome. They were not single Edifices, but a Knot of Buildings
united, being so Capacious as to hold a great many Thousands of People at once,
and have Room enough for Philosophers, Rhetoricians, and the Professors of all
other Sciences to read their Lectures; and Wrestlers, Dancers, and all others
that would, to Exercise at the same Time without the least Disturbance, or
Interruption. They consisted of a great many Parts, the Chief of which were
these,

1. (...), the Porticos, which were full of (...), and Side-Build^^gs furnished
with Seats, and fit for Study or Discourse; and here it is probable the
Scholars used to meet.

2. (...), the Place where the Ephebi, or Youths Exercised; or, as some say,
where those that designed to Exercise met, and agreed what kind of Exercise
they should contend in, and what should be the Victor's Reward.

3. (...), the Undressing-room.

4. (...), the Place where those that were to Wrestle, or had Bathed, were
Anointed.

5. (...), the Place where the Dust, with which they besprin^led those that had
been Anointed, was kept.

6. (...), which sometimes is taken for the whole Gymnasium, but in it is proper
acceptance signifies the Place, wherein all the Exercises of the (...), or
(say others) only Wrestling, and the (...) were performed; and least the
Combatants should Slip, or Hurt themselves by Falling, the Bottom of it was
covered with Dust, or Sand. Also there was another Room in the Gymnasium,
filled with Sand, much deeper than that in the Palaestra.

7. (...), a Place appointed for diverse sorts of Exercises, but more especially
for the Ball.

8. The Spaces between the Porticos and the Walls left Void to admit the Light,
and the Area of the (...), or Piazza, which was a large Place square, or
sometimes oblong in the middle of the Gymnasium, designed for Walking, and the
performance of those Exercises which were not practiced in the Palaestra, or
the Deeper Sand, or any other place of the Gymnasium, such were (as some are of
opinion) Leaping, and the Discus.

9. (...), and (...), which were distinct Places both in Greece, and Rome.
Xysti, were places covered at the Top, designed for the Exercise of Wrestlers,
when the Weather did not permit them to contend in the open Air. Xysta,
sometimes called (...), were Walks open at the Top, designed for Exercises, or
Recreation in the heat of Summer, and milder Seasons of the Winter.

10. The Baths, in which were Waters hot and cold in different Degrees, and in
these they refreshed themselves, when they were wearied with Exercise, and at
other Times. Amongst the Ancient Greeks, Baths were not much frequented, being
rarely used but after the Accomplishment of some very great Work, which
required abundance of Labor and Toil, as the ending of a War, or atchieving
any great and painful Enterprise Artemidorus Onei^oc^it. lib. I.
. And thus Agamemnon after the Trojan War, at his return Home, went into the
Bath, there to Wash away the remembrance of all his past Labors, and was slain
by the Treachery of his Wife Clytaemnestra Ly^ophron.
. In latter Ages they became more common, and were frequently used for Health
or Recreation by both Sexes, who at Sparta Washed in one common Bath, but in
other Cities had distinct Places appointed them.

11. The Stadium was a large Semicircle, in which Exercises were performed; and
for the better convenience of Spectators, which flocked thither in vast
Multitudes, was Built with Steps one above another, that the higher Ranks might
look over the Heads of those that were placed below them. Several of these
there were at Athens in their Gymnasia, and other Places, but the most
remarkable was that, which was Built near the River Ilissus by Lycurgus, and
afterward enlarged by Herodes Atticus, one of the Richest Citizens Athens ever
had; it was Built of Pentelick Marble, with so great Magnificence, that when
Pausanias comes to speak of it, he tells his Readers, That they would hardly
believe, what he was about to tell them, it being a Wonder to all that beheld
it, and of that stupendous Bigness, that one would judge it a Mountain of white
Marble, upon the Banks of Ilissus. Sr. George Wheeler reports, that at this Day
there remains some of the Stone-Work at the End toward the River, but the rest
is only a Stadium of Earth above Ground. However it is Figure, and Bigness
continue, though the Degrees be all taken away. It is a long Place, with two
parallel sides, closed up circularly to the East End, and open toward the
other end; and is about One-hundred, Twenty-five Geometrical Paces long, and
Twenty-six, or Twenty-seven broad, which gave it the Name of a Stadium, which
was a measure ordinarily used among the Greeks, being the Eighth part of a
Roman Mile.

Athens had several Gymnasia, of which these Three are of most note, Lyceum,
Academia, and Cynosarges. (...), Lycaeum was Situated upon the Banks of
Ilissus, it received it is name from Apollo (...), or (...), to whom it was
Dedicated; Nor was it without reason (says Plutarch) that this Place was
Sacred to Apollo, but upon a good and rational Account, since from the same
Deity that Cures our Diseases, and restores our Health, we may reasonably
expect Strength and Ability, to contend in the Exercises Plutarch. in Symp l.
VIII. ^. IV.
. The Building of this Structure, is by some ascribed to Pisistratus, by others
to Pericles, and others to Lycurgus; which makes it probable that all of them
might contribute something toward it; and perhaps Pisistratus laid the
Foundations of it, Pericles raised it, Lycurgus enlarged and beautified it.
This was the Place where Aristotle taught Philosophy, and discoursed with ^uch
as resorted to him for Instructions, walking constantly every Day till the Hour
of Anointing, for the Greeks usually Anointed before Meals; whence he, and his
Followers were called (...), Peripateticks from walking Suida^ etc.
. Though others report, that his walking and discoursing Philosophy with
Alexander, was the occasion of that Name.

(...) was part of the Ceramicus without the City, from which it was distant
about Six Stadia, so called from Academus, an old Hero, that, when Helena was
Stolen by Theseus, and concealed at Aphidnae, discovered her to Castor and
Pollux, for which reason he was extremel^ Honored by them during his Life; and
the Lacedaem^nians, when in After-ages they made several Incursions into
Attica, and destroyed all the Country round about, always sp^r'd this Place
for his sake. But Dicaearchus writes, That there were two Arcadians in the Army
of Cas^^r and Pollux, the one called Echedemus, and the other Marathus, from
the former that, which was afterward called the Academy, was then named
Echedemia, and the Borough of Marathon had it is Name from the latter. Thus
Plutarch Theseo.
. It was beset with Shady Woods, and Solitary Walks fit for Study and
Meditation, as the Poets and others witness. This Verse is cited out of Eupolis
In (...).
, (...).
In Academus Shady Walks.
And Horace speaks to the same purpose, A^que inter sylvas Hecademi quaerere
verum Lib. II. Ep II.
.
In Hecademus Groves to search for Truth.
At the first it was a desert Place, and uninhabited by reason of the Fens and
Marshes that were in it, and rendered it very Unhealthful, but they being
drained by Cimon, it became Pleasant and Delightful, and was much frequented by
all sorts of People, especially such as applied themselves to the Study of
Philosophy, for they resorted thither in great Numbers to Plato's Lectures, who
read constantly in this Place; and having contracted a Distemper through the
Unwholsomness of the Air, which was not yet wholly rectified, and being advised
by his Physicians to remove his School to the Lyceum, made answer, That he
chose the Academy to keep his Body under, least by too much Health it should
become wanton, and more difficult to be governed by the dictates of Reason, as
Men prune Vines, when they spread too far, and lop of the Branches that grow
too luxuriant Basil. Mag. lib. de legend. Gentil. libris.
. I must not forget to add, that it was surrounded with a Wall by Hipparchus,
the Son of Pisistratus, who to defray the Charges of it, laid so heavy a Tax
upon the People, that ever after, any Chargeable and Expensive business was
called (...).

(...) was a Place in the Suburbs, near the Lyceum, so called from a white, or
swift Dog, in Greek (...), that, when Diomus was Sacrificing to Hercules,
snatched away part of the Victim Hesych. aliique innumeri.
. It was adorned with several Temples, Dedicated to Hebe, Alcmena, and Iolaus,
all which bore some Relation to Hercules, the chief Deity of the Place, and he
also was Honored with a Magnificent Temple. But there was nothing in it so
remarkable a^ the Gymnasium, in which Strangers, and those that were but of the
half Blood, or had but one Parent an Athenian, were to perform their Exercises,
because Hercules, to whom it was Consecrated, was under some illegitimacy, and
was not one of the immortal Gods, but had a mortal Woman for his Mother; and
therefore Themistocles being but of the half Blood, persuaded diverse of the
Young Noblemen to accompany him, to Anoint and Exercise themselves at
Cynosarges; in doing which he seemed with some Ingenuity to take away the
distinction between the truly Noble and the Stranger; and between those of the
whole, and those of the half Blood of Athens Plutarch. Themistocle.
. There was also a Court of Judicature in this Place, wherein Causes about
Illegitimacy were heard, and Examination made concerning Persons, that lay
under a Suspicion of having falsely inserted their Names among the true born
Athenians N^nnus Monachus in Collect. Hist.
. In this Gymnasium Antisthenes instituted a Sect of Philosophers called (...),
Cynicks, from the name of the Place Diog. Laert. A^tisthene.
, as some are of Opinion.

All Theaters were Dedicated to Bacchus, and Venus Lactant. l. VI.
, the Deities of Sports and Pleasure; to the former of which they are said to
owe their Original Polydor. Virg. l. III. c. XIII.
, and therefore Plays Acted in them were called (...), and the Artificers that
labored in the Building of them (...), as belonging to (...), or Bacchus.

The most Ancient Theaters were Temporary, being composed of nothing but
Boards, placed gradually above each other, for the convenience of Spectators,
and therefore they were called (...) Hesych. in V.
. But these slight Buildings had well-nigh proved fatal to the Commonwealth,
for almost the whole City, as well the Magistracy and Nobility, as those of
inferior Ranks, being assembled, as their manner was, to hear Pratinas Act a
Tragoedy; the Theater, too weak to support the vast weight of thronging
Multitudes, on a sudden tumbled down, and wanted not much of Burying them in
it is Ruins Suidas in (...).
. This narrow escape made them more cautious, and was the occasion of erecting
a Theater of Stone, for their better security. And from this Time the
Athenians, whose Example the rest of the Grecians followed not long after,
erected fixed and durable Theaters of Stone, commonly of Marble, which by
degrees were increased to that Magnitude, that they exceeded almost all other
Buildings in Greece.

The Figure of Theaters was Semicircular, though they were not exact Semicircles,
but contained the bigger half of the Circle, and therefore Amphitheaters, which
were made in the same Figure, as if two Theaters should be joined together,
were not nicely Orbicular, but Oval. They consisted of two parts, (...), Scena,
and (...), Cavea. Scena was a Partition, assigned for the Actors, reaching
quite cross the Theater, which at the first, agreeably to the Ancient
simplicity, was dressed with Boughs and Leaves, but in more Expensive Ages was
adorned with Rich and Costly Hangings, to hide the management of Machines, and
other actions of the Players from the Spectators. It was either so framed as
that it might be turned round, and then it was called Versatilis, or drawn up,
and then it was Ductilis, and this way is usually practiced in our Theaters, in
changing the Prospect. It had Three Principal-Gates, one upon the Right hand,
another upon the Left, by which were presented meaner and smaller Edifices; and
a Third in the Middle, by which more magnificent Structures, as Temples of the
Gods, or Palaces of Kings, were brought in View; and on each side of the Gate
was a lesser Entrance, through which the Persons either of Gods, or Men were
introduced by Various Machines, and Instruments, the Names whereof you may find
explained in Julius Pollux Onomast. l. IV. c. XIX.
. The whole Scene was divided into several parts, the most remarkable whereof
are these;

(...), a Place underneath the Floor, wherein were kept Brazen Vessels, full of
Stones and other Materials, with which they imitated the noise of Thunder.

(...), a Place upon the Top of the Scene, in which all the Machines, whereby
they presented the various Figures and Prospects, were moved.

(...), the Tiring-Room, a Place behind the Scenes wherein the Actors dressed
and adorned themselves.

(...), the Stage, a Place before the Scenes, in which the Players Acted. And
(...) was that Part in which the Chorus used to Dance and Sing, in the middle
of which was placed the Pulpit, in Greek (...), or (...).

(...), a Partition under the Pulpit, appointed for the Music.

The (...), or Caevea, was appointed for the Spectators, and consisted of Three
Parts, placed in equal Degrees one above another; the Lowest of which belonged
to Persons of Quality, and Magistrates; the Middle to the Commonalty; the
Uppermost to the Women.

And because Theaters were open at the Top, they erected Porticos behind the
Caevea, whither they retired for Shelter, in Rainy weather.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Citizens, Tribes, etc. of Athens.
THE Inhabitants of Attica were of Three sorts, 1. (...), o^ Freemen. 2.
(...), or Sojourners. 3. (...), or Servants. The Citizens surpassed the others
in Dignity, and Power, as having the Government in their Hands, but were far
exceeded by the Slaves in number; most of the Freemen maintaining several
Servants to attend upon them, or do their Business. The number of Citizens in
in Cecrops's time, I have already said was Twenty-Thousand; in Pericles's, they
were not so many, as appears from Plutarch Pericle.
; and when Demetrius the Phalerean was their Governor, they exceeded their
first number under Cecrops only by One-thousand, at the same time the
Foreigners were Ten-thousand, and the Slaves Four-hundred-thousand, as appears
from a Poll instituted at the command of Demetrius, and mentioned in Athenaeus
Deipnos. l. VI.
.

Whence it is evident, that the Increase of the Athenians themselves was very
inconsiderable, but those growing Numbers of Inhabitants, that swelled the City
to that Bigness, to which it was extended in after-Ages, were either of Slaves,
or Strangers, that for the advantage of Trade, or other Conveniences, came, and
settled themselves at Athens; and of these two Sorts, in the time of Cecrops,
it is probable there were few or none, because through the Scarcity of Men in
his new-form'd Government, for the encouragement of Foreigners to settle
there, he was forced to allow them the same Privileges, that were enjoyed by
the Natives.

And for several Ages after, it was no difficult Matter to obtain the Freedom
of the City; but when the Athenian Power grew Great, and their Glorious Actions
rendered them Famous through all Greece, this Privilege was accounted a very great
Favor, and granted to none but Men of the greatest Birth, or Reputation, or
such as had performed some Notable piece of Service for the Commonwealth. Nor
was it without much difficulty to be obtained even by them; Menon the
Pharsalian, who had sent the Athenians a Supply of Two-hundred Horse, in the
War against Eon, near Amphipolis, desired it, and was rejected. And Perdiccas,
the King of Macedonia, after having assisted them against the Persians, could
obtain no more than a bare (...), or Immunity from Tribute paid by those that
Sojourned amongst them, but no right of Suffrage, or other Privileges common to
the Freemen.

But this peremptory Stifness, which Success and Victory had put into them, did
not always make them so Obstinate, nor hinder but that many Worthies, though
neither equal in Birth, or Fortune to the former, were enrolled amongst the
Citizens, such were Hippocrates the Physician, Eurysaces the Son of Ajax, with
many others, beside the whole City of the Plataeans, to which they granted
Freedom, for their ^ignal Services in the Persian War. But by these Grants,
though the number of the Citizens may be said to have been Increased, yet nothing
was added to the number of the Inhabitants, which remained still the same,
because the Persons thus admitted, seldom made use of their Privilege, and Sued
for it rather as a Title of Honor, than with a design to be any ways
Advantaged by it.

This Title could not be conferred upon any man, without the Consent of
Six-thousand Citizens at the least. And for fear the Authority, or Interest of
any Person should sway them to Comply with such Requ^sts against their
Inclinations, they gave their Votes privately, by casting little Stones into
Urns, placed on purpose in their Assemblies by the Prytanes, who were also
obliged to provide a sufficient Number of Stones for the Suffragants; Nay,
farther, till all had done Voting, the Strangers that Petitioned for Freedom
were not permitted to come into the place of the Assembly. And after all this,
if any one appeared to be Undeserving of the Honor, they had conferred upon
him, an Appeal might be made to the Court; which had Power to enquire into the
Lives and Conditions of these Persons, and deprive such as they sound Unworthy,
by recalling the Freedom, which had been granted through the Ignorance, and
Inconsideration of the Multitude; and this Disgrace befell Pytholaus the
Thessalian, and Apollonides the Olynthian Dem^sth. Orat. in Aristocrat.
.

The manner of Admission was by declaring that such an one was incorporated
amongst the Denizons of Athens, and invested with all the Honors, Privileges,
and Immunities belonging to them; and had a Right to partake of, and assist at
the performance of all their Holy Rites, and Mysteries, except such as were
appropriated to ce^tain Noble Families, such as were the Eumolpidae, Ceryces,
Cynidae, which had certain Priesthoods, and Holy Offices peculiar to
themselves; except also the Offices of the Nine Archons, which none but
Freeborn Athenians were allowed to Execute; Lastly, they were admitted into a
certain Tribe, and Hundred, and so the Ceremony ended Demosthen. Orat in
Neaeram.
.

Freeborn Athenians were those that had both, or one of their Parents an
Athenian; and Aristotle tells us, that in several Commonwealths, at the first,
Those were accounted Free, that were born of a Free Woman; but when the Number
of Inhabitants increased, such only were esteemed Free, as were descended from
Parents, that were both Free Aristotel. Polit. l. III. c. V.
. And so it come to pass in Athens; for Pericles, when he flourished in the
State, and had Sons Lawfully begotten, proposed a Law, that those only should
be reputed true Citizens of Athens, who were Born of Parent^, that were both
Athenians; and having prevailed with the People to give their consent to it,
little less than Five-Thousand were deprived of their Freedom, and Sold for
Slaves, and those, who enduring the Test, remained in the Government, and past
Muster for True-born Athenians, were found in the Poll to be Fourteen-thousand
and Forty Persons in Number. But Pericles himself af^erwards having lost all
his legitimate Sons, so far persuaded the Athenians, that they cancelled the
Law, and granted that he should Enroll his Bastard-Son in the Register of his
own Ward, by his Paternal Name; thinking that by those Losses he had been
sufficiently Punished for his former Arrogance and Haughtiness, and therefore
being of Opinion, that he had been Shrewdly handled by the Divine Vengeance, of
which he had run so severe a Gantlope, and that his Request was such as became
a Man to ask, and Men to grant. Thus Plutarch In Pericle.
.

But those that were only of the Half-blood, when they were in^ested with
Freedom, were always reputed Inferior, and less Ho^ourable then those that
were of the Whole; and several Marks, and Customs they had to distinguish them
from the others, as particu^arly, that those who had but one Parent, an
Athenian, were not al^ow'd to Exercise themselves in any of the Gymnasia, that
were ^requented by those, who had both; but only at the Cynosarges, a Place
without the City; and that this was esteemed a Mark of Disgrace, ^s evident
from the Practice of Themistocles, who was but of the Half-^lood of Athens, and
to take away, or, at least, lessen this Distin^tion, used to Engage the Noble
Athenians to go, and perform their Exercises with him Plutarch. in Themistocle.
. In the same Place, there was a Court of Judi^ature, where Persons suspected
of Illegitimacy were Tried, and those that were found Guilty, deprived of the
Freedom they Falsely pre^ended to, and Sold for Slaves.

Cecrops, after he had settled a Form of Government amongst the Athenians, for
the better administration of Justice, and the preven^ion of Deceit, and
overreaching one another in Commerce, di^ided them into Four (...), or Tribes;
each Tribe, he subdivided unto three Parts, called (...), or (...); and each of
^hese into Thirty (...), or Families, which, because they consisted ^f Thirty
Men, were called (...); and they that were Mem^ers of these, were called (...),
and (...), not from any ^elation to one another, but only because they lived in
the same ^urrough, and were Educated together, and joined in one Body, or
^ociety; the same Persons were called (...), because they participa^ed of the
same Sacrifices, and Worshipped the same Gods together, from (...), which, though
it properly signifies only the Mysteries of ^acchus, yet is often taken for the
Ceremonies used in the Worship of any other Deity Pollux lib. III. cap. IV.
lib. ^III. cap. IX.
.

The names of the Tribes were these, 1. (...), from Cecrops, for ^t was usual
with the Ancients, out of an earnest desire of continuing their memories to
Posterity, to call Cities, or Countries, or any Monuments, that seemed likely
to remain to succeeding Ages, by their own Names. 2. (...), from a King of that
Name, reported by some to have reigned in some part of Attica before Cecrops;
or rather from the Name of (...), in which the Athenians gloryed not a little.
3. (...), from Actaeus, or Actaeon, another of the Kings before Cecrops; or
from (...), which signifies a Shore, because a great part of Attica, and that
in particular, where this Tribe inhabited, lay toward the Sea, and this was
the reason, why the whole Country was sometimes called Act. And the same
Cause is given, for the Name of the Fourth Tribe, which they called (...), from
it is nearness to the Sea.

In the Reign of Cranaus, new Names were imposed upon them, and they were
called, 1. (...), from the King's Name. 2. (...), from a Young Lady, the
Daughter of Cranaus. 3. (...). 4. (...). And both these, I suppose, were named
from their Situation; the latter being Seated upon a Craggy Shore, and the
former in the Inland part of the Country.

Ericthonius being advanced to the Kingdom, called them after the Names of
Jupiter, Minerva, Neptune, and Vulcan, 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...)
Pollux l. VIII. c. IX.
.

Afterward under Erectheus, they received new Names from the Sons of Ion, a
Man of great Repute amongst the Athenians, and General of their Armies, as
Herodotus reports Lib. VIII. cap. XLIV.
. These Names were* 1. (...). 2. (...). 3. (...). 4. (...). And of the^^ Names
Euripides is to be understood, when he introduces Minerv^ speaking thus of Ion
Ion. ad finem.
, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Here, Nurse Creusa, since this Child by Birth
Claims the just Priv'lege of Erectheus Line,
Take him to Athens, and Proclaim him King,
For he has just Pretensions to the Crown;
His Blooming Courage is a previous Sign,
With how much Prowess, Policy, and Art
Greece's Dominions he will Sway, the Gods
Shall bless him with Four Sons, by whom in Tribes
High Seated Athens shall divided be,
And bear her several Names derived from Them.
Mr. Abell. And Herodotus Lib. V. c LXVI.
, and Pollux are of the same Opinion, though they are herein contradicted by
others, as we find it in Plutarch, who has made some alteration in the Names,
his Words are these, Some affirm that the Tribes did not take their Names from
the Sons of Ion, but from the different sorts of Occupations, that they
followed; the Soldiers were called (...); the Crafts-men, (...); and of the
remaining three, ^he Farmers, (...); the Shepherds, and Grasiers, (...)
Plu^arch. Solone.
.

Afterward, when the number of Inhabitants was increased; Clisthenes having
first advised with Apollo's Oracle, as it was usual to do in every Concern of
moment, altered the number of the Tribes, increasing them from Four to Ten, and
gave them new Names, taken from certain Ancient Heroes, all Born in Attica,
except Ajax, the Son of Telamon, to whom he gave a Place amongst the rest, as
being a Neighbor, Friend, and Companion in the Wars He o^ot. and Pollux locc.
citatis.
, for, as Homer reports, Ajax's forces were joined to those of Menestheus, the
Athenian General, (...),
(...).
Twelve Ships from Salamis Stout Ajax brought,
And ranked his Men, where the Athenians Fought.
Mr. Creech. And Plutarch reports, that when the Athenians, and Megarensians,
both made pretensions to Salamis, and Chose the Spartans to decide the
Controversy, these Lines of Homer being produced by Solon, did the Athenians a
considerable Kindness, serving very much to strengthen their Title to that
Island. To return, these Heroes, from the Name they gave to the Tribes, were
called (...), and were Honored with Statues, erected near the Senate House.
Their Names are recorded by Pausanias, and are these, Erectheus, Cecrops,
Aegeus, Pandion, Acamas, Antiochus, Leo, Oeneus, Hippothoon, Ajax. And the
Names of the Tribes are these, (...).

Afterward when Antigonus, and Demetrius freed the Athenians from the
Macedonian Slavery, they augmented their Tribes, adding Two to their former
Number, which in Honor of their Deliv^rers, they called from their Names,
(...), and (...) Plutarchus Deme^rie.
. But the Gratitude of the Athenians being no longer lived, than the good
Fortune, and Successes of those Two Princes, the Tribes soon changed their
first Names, for those of (...), and (...), the former of which was derived
from Attalus, King of Pergamus; the latter, from Ptolemee, King of Egypt, from
both of which the Athenians had received some signal Favors Stephan. V (...),
and (...).
.

This was the constant Number of the Athenian Tribes, which lasted as long as
the City maintained it is Liberty, and Form of Government. Each of these was at
the first divided into Thirty (...), every one of which consisted of Thirty Men
Pollux lo^ ci^.
. And the better to maintain a mutual Correspondence, and for the promotion of
good Fellow-ship, and Kindness amongst them, they had public Feasts, first
instituted by Solon, where they all met together, and made Merry Ath^n. Dip. l.
XV.
. These Meetings were Named from the Persons assembled at them, for is (...)
whole Tribe came together, then they called it (...); if only one (...), then
it was (...); or if a (...), it wa^ (...).

These (...), were little Buroughs in Attica, several of which belonged to
every Tribe, and though they were reckoned together in the Business of the
Commonwealth, yet had separate Habitations, and distinct Rites and Ceremonies
in the performance of Holy Worship; nay, and different Gods too, for each of
them adored peculiar Deities, and yet all unanimously agreed in Worshipping
Minerva, who was the Tutelar Goddess of the whole Country, whereas the other
Deities had only certain Parts assigned them, and in those they were inferior
to Minerva, the only supreme Governess. And this Difference in Religion was
very Ancient, being of no less Duration, than the Commonwealth it self, for
when Theseus had prevailed upon them to leave their Countrey-Seats, and Unite
themselves in one City, they thought it would be an impious and unpardonable
Action to desert the Gods of their Ancestors, and therefore Judged it
convenient, and more agreeable to the Respect due from them to their Tutelar
Deities, to pay them the same Honors, and frequent the same Places of Worship,
they had formerly done Livius. Pausa^. A^ticis.
.

The greatest use we have of these (...), is in their Forms of Law, and
Contracts, whereby sufficient Provision was made against all Fraud, Deceit, and
Mistakes. Hence we read of such punctual Clauses in their Writs, as these, N.
the Son of N. of the Tribe of Aeantis, of the Borough of Rhamnus, etc.

The Number of them was an Hundred-seventy-four Eustath. Il. (...). Strab^ l IX.
, some of which having the same Names, were distinguished by their Situation,
being called (...), and (...), Upper, and Lower. All of them were divided into
Greater, and Less; the (...), or Less, were these Pausan. Atticis.
, Alimusians, Zoster, Prospaltians, A^^gyrasians, Cephale, Prasieis, Lampreis,
Phyleis, Myrrhimisians, Ath^^nians, Acharnae, Marathon, Brauron, Rhamnus. The
rest were Greater; take them promiscuously according to their Tribes.

(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...)* (...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...). (...), (...),
(...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...) (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...). (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...).
(...).
(...), (...), (...).
(...).
(...).
Besides these, there were several other Buroughs, of which it is uncertain,
what Tribe they belonged to, such are these; (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...),
(...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...), (...). etc.


CHAPTER X. Of the Sojourners, and Servants, in Athens.
THE Second sort of the Inhabitants of Attica, were called (...), by which Word
were signified Persons, that came from a Foreign Country, and settled in
Attica, being admitted by the Council of Arcopagus, and entered in a public
Register. They differed from the (...), or Citizens, because they were not
Freeborn Athenians, but either came from another City themselves, or were
Descended from such as did; and from the (...), or Strangers, because these
took up their Lodgings only for a short Time, whereas the (...) had six'd
Habitations, and constantly resided upon the Place, whither they had
transplanted themselves.

They were permitted to dwell in the City, and follow their own Business,
without disturbance, but could not Serve in any public Office, give their
Votes in the Assemblies, or have any Share in the Government; but were obliged
to sit still, as Spectators in a Theater, without intermedling, or any way
concerning themselves with State Affairs, and patiently submit to the Decrees
enacted by the Citizens, and observe all the Laws and Customs of the Country.
And therefore Aristophanes in Suidas, compares them to Chaff, as being an
unprofitable and useless Part of the Commonwealth, (...).
The Sojourners (if I may speak my Mind)
Are, as it were, the City's Chaff, and Scum.
(Mr. Abell.) They were not allowed to Act any Thing, or manage any Business in
their own Names, but were obliged to Choose out of the Citizens one, to whose
Care and Protection they committed themselves, and whose Duty it was to Defend
them from all Violence, and Oppression. An hint of this we have in Terence's
Eunuchus, where Thais puts her self into the Hands of Phaedria's Family, -- CHAPTER
Tum autem Phaedriae,
Meo fratri, gaudeo amorem esse omnem in tranquillo (...) domus,
Thais patri se commendavit, in clientelam and fidem
Nobis dedit se -- Act. ult. Scen. ult.
.
My Brother's good Success in his Amor,
Does glad my Soul, for Thais now is his (...),
Since the Protection of her self she leaves
To my old Father's care, and managemen^*
Mr. Abell, The Person, to whom they committed themselves, was called (...),
and might Demand several Services of them, i^ which if they failed, or if they
neglected to Choose a Patron, a Lawsuit was commenced against them, called
(...), and their Goods were Confiscated.

In consideration of the Privileges (...) ^^em, the Commonwealth required them
to perform several Duties; for instance, in the Panathenaea, a Festival
celebrated i^ Honor of M^nerva, the Men were obliged to carry certain Vessels,
called (...), and the Women (...), or Water-Pots, and therefore the Men are
sometimes called (...), or (...) by the Comedians, and the Women (...).

Beside t^is, the Men paid an annual Tribute of Twelve Drachms, though Hesychius
mentions Ten only, and the Women that had no Sons, were liable to be Taxed
Six; but such as had Sons that paid, were excused. This Tribute was called
(...), and was exacted not only of those that dwelt in Athens, but of all such
as settled themselves in any Town of Attica, as appears from the instance given
us by Lysias Orat. in Philonem.
in Oropus, which was an Athenian Town, Situated upon the confines of Boeotia.
About the time of Xerxes's Invasion upon Greece, Themistocles having by his
eminent Services raised himself to a great Power in the Commonwealth,
prevailed so far upon the Athenians, that they remitted this exaction, and
continued the Sojourners, in the enjoyment of their Privileges, without
requiring any such acknowledgment from them Diodor. Sicul. lib. XI.
. How long they enjoyed this Immunity, I cannot tell, but it is certain they
kept it not long, and probably it might be taken from them, and the Act
repealed, as soon as Themistocies fell into Disgrace. Upon non-payment of this
Imposition, the delinquent was immediately seized by the Tax-masters, and
carried away to the Market set apart for that Purpose, (called by Plutarch
(...) Flaminio.
, and by Demosthenes Orat. I. in Aristogit.
(...), where they were exposed to Sale by the (...), which were Officers
concerned in the public Revenues. And this Fate had the Famous Philosopher
Xenocrates undergon, had not Lycurgus rescued him out of the hands of the
Officers, as Plutarch reports Loc. cit.
: Diogenes Laertius Xe^ocrate.
tells us, he was actually Sold, because he had not wherewithal to pay the
Tribute, but was redeemed by Demetrius the Phalerean, who because he would not
Violate the Laws of the City, nor yet could endure to see so great and worthy a
Person reduced to so miserable a Condition, restored him his Liberty, and paid
for him what the Tax-masters demanded.

But though these Men were incapable of having any Preferment, or bearing any
Office in the Commonwealth, yet they were not wholly Destitute of
Encouragements to the Practice of Virtue, and the undertaking of Noble Actions,
and being serviceable to the Public. For such as signalized themselves by any
notable Exploit, were seldom passed by neglected, or unrewarded; but were taken
into public^ Consideration, and by a special Edict of People, Honored with an
Immunity from all Impositions, Taxes, and other Duties, excep^ such as were
required of the Freeborn Citizens, and therefore they called this Honor
(...), and the Persons that enjoyed it (...) because they did (...), pay only
an equal Proportion with the Citizens. This was a sort of an half Freedom,
being the same with what we sometimes find called (...), of which I have spoken
already, and was granted to Foreigners, that had deserved well of the Public,
but not merited enough to be Enrolled amongs^ the true Citizens; an Instance of
which we have in Perdiccas, King of Macedon, and sometimes in whole Cities and
Commonwealths, that had by some special Service demonstrated the Kindness, and
good Affection they bore to Athens; two examples of this we have in the
Thebans, and Olynthians in Theophrastus, as he is Cited by Suidas, to whom with
Harpocration, and Hesychius, we are obliged for this Account.

I proceed in the next place, to speak of the Third, and most numerous part of
the Inhabitants of Attica, I mean the Servants, of which there were Two sorts,
the First was of those, that through Poverty were forced to Serve for Wages,
being otherwise Freeborn Citizens, bu^ not having any Suffrage in public
Affairs, by reason of their Indigency, it being forbidden at some times (for
this Prohibition was no^ perpetual) that Persons not having such an Estate, as
was mentioned i^ the Law, should have the Privilege of giving their Voices.
The^^ were properly called (...), and (...) Pollux l. III. c. VIII.
, and were the most Genteel sort of Servants, being only in that State during
their own pleasure* and necessities; and having Power either to change their
Masters, o^ (if they became able to subsist by themselves) wholly to release
themselves from Servitude.

The Second sort of Servants, were such, as were wholly in the Power and at the
Disposal of their Lords, who had as good a Title to them, (...) to their Lands,
and Estates, a considerable part of which they were Esteemed. They were wholly
at their Command, to be employed as the^ saw convenient, in the worst and most
wretched Drudgeries; and to be used at their discretion, Pinched, Starved,
Beaten, Tormented, and that, in most Places, without any appeal to Superior
Powers, and Punished even with Death it self. And, which yet farther enhans'd
the Misery of their Condition, they had no hopes of recovering their Freedom
themselves, or procuring it for their Posterity, but were to continue in the
same Condition, as long as they lived, and all the Inheritance they could leave
their Children (for their Masters not only allowed, but encouraged them to
Marry, that they might increase in Number) was the Possession of their Parents
Miseries, and a Condition scarce any way better than that of Beasts.

The Ancients were very sensible of the hard Usage Slaves m^t with; and the
earnest desire of Liberty, that reigned in their own Breasts, and made them
always forward to expose their Lives in the Defense of it, was a sufficient
Cause to beget in them a Jealousy of the like in other Persons; Men being
generally very apt to suspect others of the same Passions and Inclinations,
which themselves have been guilty of. And we find them very Industrious to
prevent, and suppress all such motions, by keeping the Slaves at a very great
Distance from them, by no means Condescending (I speak of the generality of
them) to familiar Converse, much less to Jest with them; by instilling into
them a mean Opinion of themselves; debasing their Natures, and extinguishing in
them (as much as possible) all sparks of Generosity, and Manhood, by an
illiberal Education, and accustoming them to Blows, and Stripes, which they
thought were very disagreeable to Ingenuous, and Freeborn Natures; and
subduing them with hard Labor, and Want; and, in short, by using them almost
in the same manner, nay, sometimes worse, than we do Brute Animals. A
sufficient proof whereof (were there no more) we have in the Famous Roman Cato,
a Man celebrated in all Ages for his exact observance of the nicest Rules of
Justice, nor does it at all Invalidate the Evidence, that this was done by a
Roman, since both at Rome, and in Greece, and most other Civilized Countries,
the usage of Slaves seems to have been much what the same, some few Alterations
excepted. This Cato, (Plutarch tells us) when his Servants grew Old, and unfit
for Labor, notwithstanding they had been very Faithful, and Serviceable to
him, and had spent their Youth, and Strength in Laboring for him; for all
this, when Years came upon them, and their Strength failed them, ^he would not
be at the charge of maintaining them, but either turned them away, unable to
provide for themselves, or let them Starve to Death in his own Family Pluta^ch*
Catone.
. It is true, this Barbarity was not Practiced in all Places, and my Author
thinks the Censor blameworthy for it, imputing it to a Savage and Unnatural
Temper; yet hence appears the miserable Condition of Slaves, that were forced
to undergo the most Arbitrary, and unjust Impositions of the Cruellest and most
Barbarous Tyrants. Now the better to show you what State they were in, I will
give you a Taste of the constant Behavior of their Masters toward them in a
few instances, which were not the effects of the Passion, Pride, or Humor of
private Persons, but the common and general Practice of the whole Country.

It was accounted an unsufferable piece of Impudence, for a Servant to Imitate
the Freemen in any thing, or affect to be like them in their Dress, or any
part of their Behavior. In those Cities, where they let their Hair grow long,
for a Servant to have long Hair, was an unpardonable Offense, insomuch that the
Comedian, speaking it Proverbially of one that does, what becomes him not,
says, (...) Aristophan. Avibus.
.
Then you disdaining your own State, affect
To wear long Hair, as Freemen. --
(Mr. Abell.) They had a peculiar Form, after which they cut their Hair, called
(...), which they laid aside, if ever Fortune was so propitious, as to restore
them their Liberty. Now because Slaves were generally Rude and Ignorant,
therefore (...), was Proverbially applied to any Dull, Stupid Fellow Eustath
II. (...). p. 59. Edit. Bas.
. The Garments also of Slaves were different from those of Freemen; for the
Free-men's Coats were (...), had two Sleeves; whereas those of Slaves were
(...), had only one Sleeve Pollux On. l. VII. c. XIII.
.

At Athens, it was common to be in Love with Boys, Socrates, and Plato's Amors
are notorious enough, and Solon himself was too weak to resist this Passion,
but thought it neither unlawful, nor Scandalous, but on the contrary
Honorable, and well becoming an Ingenuous Education; therefore he forbad
Slaves, the use of this Pleasure, as it were inviting the Worthy to Practice,
when he commanded the Unworthy to forbear, says Plutarch Solone.
. The same Lawgiver forbad them to Anoint, or Perfume themselves with sweet
Odours, allowing those pieces of Gentility, only to Persons of better Birth,
and Quality.

Slaves were not permitted to Communicate at the Worship of some of the
Deities, but were accounted Unholy, and Profane; and thought to be Offensive
to the Gods, and to Pollute the Worship by their Presence; as for instance, at
the Worship of the Eumenides, or Furies, at Athens; and Hercules, at Rome. Of
which I shall have occasion to speak something more hereafter.

Their Education was quite different from that of Freeborn Children, these
were instructed in all the Liberal Arts; the others only taught how to Obey,
and Drudge in their Masters Business. And whereas the common method was, to win
those of Ingenuous Birth by gentle means into a performance of their Duty; the
manner of Tutouring Slaves, was the same that they used to Tame Wild Beasts,
namely, Stripes, and the Cruellest Severity. For all this, there wanted not
some, whom Nature had Blessed with a more happy Genius, and a larger share of
Parts than the rest, and Fortune directed to Kind and Gentle Masters, that by
their great Improvements in Learning, and Wisdom, were a sufficient evidence,
that Nobility of Soul, and Greatness of Understanding are not confined to any
Rank, or Quality, but that even the meanest and most abject Persons may dive
into the most hidden Secrets of Nature, and be admitted to the most intimate
Converse with the Muses. Poor deformed Aesop, and the Poet Alcman Aelian. V. H.
, are undeniable proofs of it, and (to mention no more) Epictetus, the Famous
Moralist, confirms the same, of whose Poverty, and Servile condition we have
mention in this Epigram, (...),
(...).
The Gods to me great Favors do dispense,
Tho'n Bondage, Crippled, and in Indigence.
Mr. Abell. They thought it a piece of Presumption, as detracting something
from the Freeborn Citizens, to call Slaves by any Name, that was in use
amongst them; But if any man was so Bold, as to give his Servant the Name of a
Person of Quality, or Honor, it was a signal Affront; Domitian is said to have
Punished Metius Pomposianus, for calling his Slaves by the Illustrious Names of
Hannibal, and Mago; and, to come nearer to our purpose, the Athenians enacted a
Law, that no Man should presume to call any of his Servants by the Names of
Harmodius, and Aristogiton, two Famous Patriots, that with Courage and
Resolution opposed the Tyranny of Pisistratus's Sons Alex. ab Alex. l. III. c.
XX
. For the most part, as Strabo reports, they were called after the Names of
their Native-Countries, as (...), or (...), if they were Born in Lydia, or
Syria; or, by the Names, that were most used in those Nations, as Manes, or
Midas in Phryg^a; or, Tibias in Paphlagonia. The most common Names in Athens
were Geta, and Davus, being taken from the Getes, and Daci, whom my Author
thinks to have been formerly called (...), or Davi Strabo l. VII.
. They seldom consisted of above two Syllables, and therefore Demosthenes
having objected to Aeschines, that his Father was a Slave, tells him farther as
a proof of what he had affirmed, that he had falsified his Name, calling him
Atrometus, whereas in truth it was Tromes Orat. (...).
. The reason of this seems to have been, that their Names, being short, might
be more easily and quickly pronounced. Upon the same account, Oppian advises to
give Dogs short Names, -- (...)
(...) (...).
.
Let Hounds that are designed for Game, and Sport,
Have Names imposed that ^asie be, and short;
Least at the Hunts-man's call they trace in vain,
And run with open cry confusedly over the Plain.
Mr. Abell.

Above all things, especial care was taken that Slaves should not wear Armor,
which (considering the number of them, that was usually almost Twenty times as
great as that of the Citizens) might have been dangerous to the Public. For
this reason it was not usual for them to Serve in the Wars, and therefore when
Virgil speaks of such an one's assisting in the War of Troy, he tells us, it
was contrary to Law, or Custom, -- Vix unus Helenor,
Et Lycus elapsi, quorum primaevus Helenor;
Maeonio regi quem serva Lycimnia furtim
Sustulerat, vetitisque ad Trojam miserat armis Ae^e^d. ^. IX. v 545.
.
Scarce Lycus and Helenor 'scap'd away
From the sad Ruins of that dismal Day.
Against the enacted Law for Slaves, in Arms
Helenor had Stole of to War's Alarms,
For he a Spurious Issue was brought forth
By a Bondwoman of Plebeian Worth
To the Maeonian King. --
Mr. Abell. Only upon some emergent and extraordinary Occasions, we find the
Slaves Armed in the Defense of their Masters, and themselves; but this was
never done except in Cases of most extreme Danger, when all other means of
preserving the Commonwealth were taken away; and the first time it was
practiced, is said to have been when the Persians under Darius invaded the
Athenians, and received a total Overthrow by them in Marathon Tausanias.
. The like was afterward put in Practice by other Commonwealths, but not
without great Caution; Cleomenes, King of Sparta, being sore pressed by the
Macedonians, and Achaeans, and finding himself unable to make Head against
them, Armed Two-thousand of the Helotae, or Lacedaemonian Slaves, that he might
make a fit Body to Oppose Antigonus's Leucaspidae, or White Shields; but
ventured not to List any more of them, though Laconia was at that time Furnished
with much greater Numbers Plutarch. Cleomene.
. And their Prudence in this Case deserves Commendation, for having exasperated
them so much by their hard Usage, they had no reason to expect any Mercy from
them, if ever they should get the upper hand. And to me it seems not much less
than a Miracle, that Four-hundred-thousand Men should groan under the
Oppression of Twenty, or Thirty-thousand (for those, I have told you already,
were the Numbers of the Slaves, Citizens, and Sojourners, in Attica) without
ever (some few times excepted) attempting to assert their Liberty; when it is
evident, they wanted not strength to turn the State upside down; and
impossible, but that they might have met with many Opportunities, especially in
times of War, Sedition, and Tumults, in which the City was continually
embroiled, to accomplish such a design. But this must be ascribed partly to the
watchful Eye, their Masters, and the whole State had upon them; and partly, to
that Cowardice and Degeneracy, which usually in a great measure corrupt and
debase the Minds of those, that Fortune has placed in a servile Condition,
however Noble and Daring they be by Nature; for it is a true saying of Homer,
(...)
(...).
True Valor n'ere can animate that Mind,
Whose inbred Seeds by Slavery are confined.
Mr. Abell. But neither the Care of the State, nor the great Power that
Oppression has to debase Men's Souls, could always keep them in Subjection; but
Nature sometimes would exert it is self, when either a fair Opportunity invited,
or some insufferable Oppression compelled them to endeavor the Recovery of
their Liberties, that is, their Lives, their Fortunes into their own Hands.
Athenaeus reports, that in Attica they once seized upon the Castle of Sunium,
and committed Ravages throughout the Country; and at the same time made their
second Insurrection in Sicily, for in that Country they frequently Rebelled,
but were at last reduced with great Slaughter, no less than a Million of them
being Slain Athenaus Deipn. l. VI.
. Several other efforts we find made by them in other Places, to the great
danger, and almost utter subversion of those Countries. Sometimes, in times of
War, the Slaves would run over to the Enemy, and this Desertion they called
(...) Aristo^h, Equit.
, which, excepting Theft, a Crime almost peculiar to them, was the most common
Offense they committed, being in most Places the only way they had to deliver
themselves; but if they were taken, they were made to pay dearly for their
desire of Freedom, being bound fast to a Wheel, and Unmercifully beaten with
Whips, as the Comedian tells us, (...),
(...) Aristoph. Pace.
.
If wretched Slaves harrass'd, and weari'd out
Under the Thraldom of dire Servitude,
Should but anticipate sweet Freedom's Joys,
And make Revolt to their more gentle Foes,
Fast to a Wheel being bound with Cords, they are Whipped.
Mr. Abell. The same Punishment was inflicted on them for Theft, as we learn
from Horace Epist. lib. I.
, Non furtum feci, nec fugi, si mihi dicat
Servus, habes pretium, loris non ureris, aio.
Suppose, my Slave should say, I neither Fly
Nor Steal: Well, thou have thy reward, say I,
Thou art not Scourged. --
Mr. Creech. Sometimes they were racked upon the Wheel, (a Cruelty never
practiced upon any Freeborn Person) to Extort a Confession from them, when
they were suspected to have been Accessory to any Villainous Design, as
Aristophanes informs us in his first Comedy, where one says to a Slave, (...)
(...). --
We ought to Wrack you with incessant Pain,
To force you to reveal your Rogueries.
Mr. Abell. The common way of correcting them for any Offense, was to Scourge
them with Whips, wherefore a Villain, that had been guilty of any Crime that
deserved Punishment, was said (...), to stand in need of, and, as it were, Itch
for a Scourge. Sometimes to prevent their shrinking, or running away, they were
tied fast to a Pillar; and therefore Hyperides in Pollux says, (...). For so,
I think, that place ought to be read, and not, (...). On. l. III. c. VIII.
. As the Vulgar Editions have it.

If they stood guilty of any notorious Offense, they were Condemned to Grind at
the Mill, a Labor exceeding toilsom in those Days, when they were forced to
beat their Grain into Meal, being unacquainted with the easy way of Grinding,
that is used amongst us, and was the invention of later Ages. And therefore
when they had a mind to express the greatness of any Labor, or Toil, it was
usual to compare it to Grinding in a Mill, Tibi mecum erit, Crasse, in eodem
pistrino vivendum, says Tully De Orat.
, that is, You and I, Crassus, must undergo the same troublesome course of Life.
But beside the Labor they were put to, they were beaten with Rods, or
Scourges, sometimes, if their Offense was very great, to Death, as we learn
from Terence, the Scene of whose Drama is laid in Attica, Verberibus caesum te
in pistrinum, Dave, dedam usque ad necem Andria.
.
I Will have you flayed, you Villainous Curr, to Death.
Mr. Abell. Or else, as others understand this Place, they were Condemned to
that Punishment, as long as they lived.

These Mills, were called in general (...), which Word, because of the Cruelty
exercised upon poor Slaves there, Pollux tells us, was (...), Unlucky, or
Inauspicious, and not to be named, and therefore calls it (...). They had
several Names from the different Sorts of Grain, that was ground in them, as,
(...), or (...), or (...), and (...), whence comes the word (...), to examine
upon the Rack, as was usual in that Place Pollux l. III. c. VIII. Hesychius.
Suidas. Etymolog.
.

Beside this, they Stigmatized them, in the Forehead, for the most part, and
sometimes in other places, for, as Galen observes Lib. VI.
, it was Customary to Punish the Member that had O^fended, if the Slave was a
Glutton, his Belly must suffer; if a Tell-tale, his Tongue must be cut out, and
so of the rest. The common way of Stigmatizing was by burning the Member with a
red-hot Iron, upon which certain Letters were Engraven, till a fair Impression
was made, and then pouring Ink into the Furrows, that the Inscription might be
the more conspicuous and legible. Persons thus used, were called (...), and
(...), says Pollux; or Attagae, because that Bird was (...), of diverse
colors, as Aristophanes tells us Avibus.
. Pliny calls them Inscripti Lib. XVIII. c. III.
; and others Literati, as Plautus, -- sic hic literatus me sinat Casina Act.
II. Sc. VI.
. And what the same Author means by Trium literarum homo, no man can be
ignorant. This Punishment was seldom, or never inflicted upon any, but Slaves,
and with them it was so frequent, that the Samians, when they gave a great
number of Slaves their Liberty, and admitted them to Offices in the State, were
branded with the Infamous name of Literati, (...),
The Samian People (Fie for Shame)
For store of Letters have great Fame,
Dr. Littleton. Says Aristophanes in Plutarch Pericle.
; though others, and amongst them Plutarch himself, assign different Reasons for
this Appellation Erasm. Adag.
. This was the greatest mark of Infamy, that could be inflicted on them, and
therefore Phocylides advises to forbear it, even in Slaves, (...) V. 212.
.
Brand not your Slave with Characters of Infamy.
On the contrary in Thrace, Herodotus tells us, it was accounted a Badge of
Honor, and used by none but Persons of Credit, nor omitted, but by those of
the meanest Rank Lib. V.
.

At Athens, Slaves had a little more Humanity shown them, than in most other
Places, for if any of them were grievously Oppressed, they were allowed to fly
for Sanctuary to Theseus's Temple, whence to force them was a piece of
Sacrilege Plutarch. Theseo.
. And those that had been Barbarously treated by their Masters, had the
Privilege of commencing a Suit at Law against them, which they called (...), or
(...), the former of which was against such, as had made any violent Attempts
upon the Chastity of their Slaves; the latter against those, that had used too
much Severity in Punishing them; and if it appeared, that the Complaint was
reasonable and just, the Master was obliged to Sell his Slave.

Beside the being delivered from the injurious Treatment of Tyrants, the Slaves
at Athens had a great deal the Advantage of their Brethren in other Places, in
many Respects; they might use their Tongues with far greater Freedom, as
appears every where from the Comedies of Aristophanes, Plautus, and Terence;
and indulge themselves in the Enjoyment of a great many Pleasures, that in
other Places they had not the smallest Taste of, insomuch that Demosthenes tells
us, The Condition of a Slave in Athens was preferable to that of a Free Denizon
in some other Cities Philipp. III.
, and Plautus sufficiently testifies the truth of what he says, Atque id ne
vos miremini, homines servulos
Potare, amare, atque ad coenam condicere;
Licet hoc Athenis -- Sticho.
.
The Laws at Athens don't our Slaves restrain
From Pleasure, Mirth, and Gayety of Life,
For they may revel, be inflamed with Love,
And live as much at Ease, as some Free Denizons.
Mr. Abell.

Farther, they were permitted to get Estates for themselves, paying only a
small Tribute to their Masters every Year out of them, and if they could
procure as much as would pay for their Ransom, their Masters had no power to
hinder them from buying their Liberty, as may be observed from the same Author,
who introduces a Slave speaking in this manner, Quid tu me vera liberate
territas?
Quod si tu nolis, filiusque etiam tuus,
Vobis invitis, atque amborum ingratiis,
Vna libella liber possum fieri Casina.
.
Pray, Sir, good Words, since nor you, nor your Son
Can me my Liberty deny, although
You pour out Threatenings with such rigorous awe,
For if I please, one Pound can me release,
And purchase Freedom. --
(Mr. Abell.) Sometimes, if they had been faithful, and diligent in their
Master's Business, they dismissed them of their own accord; and upon the
Performance of any remarkable Service for the Public, the State usually took
care to reward them with Liberty. Such of them as were admitted to serve in the
Wars, were seldom left in the Condition of Slaves, either for fear the
Remembrance of their sormer Oppression might move them to revolt to the Enemy,
or raise a Sedition at Home, so fair an opportunity being put into their Hands;
or, to animate them with greater Courage and Constancy to oppose the Invaders,
when they were to receive so great a Reward for the Dangers they underwent; or,
because it was thought unreasonable, that such as hazarded their Lives in
Defense of their Country's Liberty, should themselves groan under the heavy
Yoke of Slavery, and be deprived of even the smallest part of that, which was
in a great measure owing to their Courage and Loyalty; for one, I say, or all
these reasons, such as upon emergent Occasions took up Arms for the public
Safety, seldom failed of having their Liberty restored to them. An instance
whereof, to mention no more, we have in the Slaves, that behaved themselves
Valiantly in the Sea Fight at Arginusae, where the Athenians obtained a signal
Victory against Callicratidas, the Lacedaemonian Admiral; and therefore the
Slave in Aristophanes, being almost ready to faint under an heavy Burden,
accuses his own Cowardice, that hindered him from listing himself amongst the
Marine-Forces, and thereby recovering his Liberty, (...) Ranu Act. I Scen. I.
;
Pox take this Heart, that durst not meet
In boisterous Seas the Spartan Fleet.


Slaves, (...) long they were under the Government of a Master, were called
(...), but after their Freedom was granted them, they were (...), not being,
like the former, a part of their Master's Estate, but only obliged to some
grateful Acknowledgements, and small Services Chrysippus de Concordia l. II.
, such as were required of the (...), to whom they were in some few things
inferior; but seldom, perhaps never, arrived to the Dignity of Citizens,
especially if they had received their Freedom from a private Person, and not
upon a Public Account; for such as were advanced for Public Services, seem to
have lived in greater Repute, and enjoyed a larger share of Liberty, than
others, that had only merited their Freedom, by the Obligations, they had laid
upon particular Persons.

A Tribute of twelve Drachms was exacted of the (...), and the same with an
addition of Three Oboli was required of the Free'd-men Harpocr^t.
. Also they were obliged to choose a (...), who was to be no other, than the
Master, out of whose Service they had been released; upon him they attended
almost in the same manner with the Roman Liberti, and Clientes; but in Case
they behaved themselves Stubbornly, and Ungratefully toward him, he had power
to Arrest them, and carry them before a Judge, by whom, if they were found
Guilty, they were deprived of their Liberty, and reduced to their former
miserable Condition; this Suit was called (...), which name was also given to
the complaints made by Servants, and Free'd-men against their Masters, and
Patrons, which both of them were allowed to Prefer, if they were not treated
with all the Humanity that was thought due to their respective Conditions; but
because all the Free'd-men's public Business, like that of the (...), was to
be managed chiefly by Proxies; at their restoration to Liberty, both of them
had the Privilege of choosing an (...), or Curator, who in case his Client
received any Injury from his Patron, was to Defend him, to Appeal for him, and
plead his Cause before the Judges, who out of respect to the Patron, were
appointed out of his own Tribe Suidas, Harpocrat.
.

This was the Condition of Slaves in Athens, which, though in it self deplorable
enough, yet if compared with that of their Fellow Sufferers in other Cities,
seems very easy, at least tolerable, and not to be repined at. I might here
give you an account, of the various Conditions of Slaves in the several
Countries of Greece, such as the Penestae in Thessaly; the Clarotae, and
Mnoitae in Crete; the Corynephori at Sicyon; the Gymnitae at Argos, and many
others; but I shall only at present lay before you the State of the Helotae in
Sparta, which, because of the frequent mention made of them in Authors, must
not be omitted; and from their Treatment (though they were a more Gentile sort of
Slaves, and enjoyed more Privileges Pollux. l. III. ^. VIII.
than the rest) will appear the Truth of what Plutarch tells us, was commonly
said of Sparta, (...), That in Sparta he that was Free, was most so; and he
that was a Slave, was the greatest Slave in the World Plutarch. Lycarg.
.

The Helotae were so called from Helos, a Laconian Town, Conquered by the
Spartans, who made all the Inhabitants Prisoners of War, and reduced them into
the condition of Slaves Strabo l. VIII. Harpocrat.
.

The Freemen of Sparta, were forbidden the Exercise of any mean or Mechanical
Employment, and therefore the whole Care of supplying the City with Necessaries
was devolved upon the Helots, the Ground was tilled, and all sorts of Trades
managed by them, whilst their Masters, Gentlemen like, spent all their time in
Dancing, and Feasting, in their Exercises, Hunting matches, and the (...), or
places where good Company used to meet Plutarch. Lycurgo.
.

But the being Condemned to such Drudgeries all their Lives, had been, at
least, supportable, had they not been also treated in the most Barbarous
manner, abused beyond the patience of Man, and often Murdered without
committing any Fault, and without any show of Justice. And of this the (...),
or secret Law, is a sufficient proof; It was an Ordinance, (these are
Plutarch's own Words,) by which those, who had the care of the Young Men,
dispatched privately some of the ablest of them into the Country, from time to
time, Armed only with Daggers, and taking a little necessary Provision with
them; these in the Daytime, hid themselves in the Thickets and Clifts, and
there lay close; but in the Night issued out into the Highways, and Murdered
all the Helots they could light upon; sometimes they set upon them by Day, as
they were at work in the Fields, and killed them in cold Blood, as Thucydides
reports, in his History of the Peloponnesian War. The same Author tells us,
(says Plutarch,) that a good number of them being crowned by Proclamation,
(which was a token of their being set Free) enfranchised for their good
Services, and led about to all the Temples in token of Honor, disappeared all
of a sudden, being about the number of Two-thousand, and no Man either then, or
since could give any Account, how they came by their Deaths. Aristotle adds,
that the Ephori, so soon as they were entered into their Office, used to declare
War against them, that they might be Massacred with a pretense of Law.

It is confessed on all hands, (proceeds my Author,) that the Spartans dealt
with them very hardly; for it was a thing common to force them to drink to
Excess, and to lead them in that Condition into their Public Halls, that their
Children might see, What a contemptible and beastly sight a drunken man is.
They made them to Dance uncomely Dances, and Sing ridiculous Songs; forbidding
them expressly to use any that was Serious, and Manly, because they Would not
have them Profaned by their Mouths. For this reason, when the Thebans made an
Incursion into Laconia, and took a great number of the Helots Prisoners, they
could by no means persuade them to Sing the Odes of Terpander, Alcman, or
Spendon, Poets in repute at Lacedaemon, For (said they) they are our Master's
Songs, we dare not Sing them Plutarch. ibidem.
.

Having given you a Survey of the usage, Slaves generally met with amongst the
Ancients, it remains that I give you an account how they came to fall into this
deplorable Condition, from that Liberty, which all Men are by Nature made
Masters of. And it seems to have happened these Three ways: First, from
Poverty, whereby Men being unable to subsist of themselves, and perhaps, deeply
in Debt, were ^orc'd to part with their Freedom, and yield themselves Slaves to
such as were able to maintain them; or Sell their Bodies to their Creditors,
and pay them in Service, what they were not able to do in Money. Secondly, Vast
numbers were reduced to Slavery by the chance of War, by which the Conquered
became wholly at the disposal of their Conquerors. Thirdly, By the
perfidiou^ness of those that Traded in Slaves, who would often Steal Persons of
Ingenuous Birth and Education, and Sell them. Aristophanes tells us, the
Thessalians were notorious for this sort of Villainy, -- (...);
(...). (...),
(...); (...)
(...) Plut. Act. II. Sc. V.
.
POV. How will you, Sir, get Slaves? CHR. I Will Buy with Coin.
POV. But where? since all the Merchants leave of Sale,
Having got Wealth enough. CHR. I Will warrant you,
Slave-mongers will come here from Thessaly,
Driven by hopes of getting more. --
Mr. Abell. But if any Person were convicted of having betrayed a Freeman, he
was severely Punished by Solon's Laws, except it were a Daughter, or a Sister,
for those they were permitted to Sell, if they had caught them with a Man
Plutarch. Solone.
.

At Athens, they had several places in the Forum appointed for the Sale of
Slaves, of which I have ^poken already; and upon the first of every Month, the
Merchants, called (...)* brought them into the Market, and exposed them to Sale
Aristoph. (...). Equit.
, the Crier standing upon a Stone erected for that purpose, called (...) and
calling the people together Pollux l. III. c. VIII.
; whence Cicero opprobriously calls the Tribunes, emp^os de Lapide, because
they were suspected to have been hired to the management of an Affair Orat. in
Pi^^nem.
.

At Athens, when a New-bought Slave was first brought Home, there was an
Entertainment provided to welcome him to his new Service, and certain
Sweetmeats were poured upon his head, which for that reason they called (...)
Aristoph. Pluto, and Pollux loc. cit.
. But I do not find that this Ceremony was practiced in other Places; though in
all Countries, Slaves were Bought and Sold like other Commodities; the
Thracians are particularly remarkable for Purchasing them with Salt, and
therefore they were called (...); Eusta^hi^^ adds, that (...), signified those,
that were Bought at a very low Rate. The Chians are reported to have been the
first that gave Money for them C^^l. Rhod. Antiquitat l. XXV. c. IX.
; whereas before, they were usually exchanged for other Commodities; indeed,
the Ancient Trade was wholly managed that way; Homer's Heroes are often said to
have exchanged their Captives for Provisions, and particularly at the end of
the Seventh Iliad, (...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
The Grecian Chiefs by bart'ring of their Ware,
Their choice Provisions, and their Wine prepare;
Some Brass exchange, some Iron, some Beast's hydes,
Some Slaves of War, some Cattle. --
Mr. Abell. Whence it appears, that the Barbarous Oppression, and Cruelty used
toward Slaves, was not an effect of the Pride of later Ages, but practiced in
the most primitive and simple Times; how long it continued, is not certain.

Adrian is said to have been the first, that took away from Masters, the power
of putting their Slaves to Death, without being called to Account for it. And
in the Reign of Nero, and other Cruel Emperors of Rome, the Masters were
forced to give them Civil Treatment, for fear they should accuse them, as
Persons disaffected to the Government.

But the growth of Christianity in the World seems to have put a final Period
to that unlimited Power, that Lords i^ former Ages claimed over their Slaves;
for the Christians behaved themselves with abundance of Mildness, and
Gentleness toward them; partly, to encourage them to embrace the Christian
Religion, the Propagation of which they aimed at more, than the Promotion of
their own private Interests; and partly, because they thought it Barbarous, and
Unnatural, that Persons endu'd by Nature with the same Powers and Faculties,
the same Tempers and Inclinations with themselves, should be treated with no
more Kindness, than those Creatures, that are without Reason, and have no Power
to reflect on their own Condition, nor to be sensibl^ of the Miseries they lie
under.

CHAPTER XI. Of the Athenian Magistrates.
THE Magistrates of Athens are divided by Aeschines Orat. in ^tesiphont.
Ulpian. in Androtiana.
into Three sorts, the Ground of which Distinction, is taken from the different
methods of their Election, and Promotion.

1. (...), were such as received their Dignity from the People, met together in
a Lawful Assembly, and were so called from the manner of their Election, in
which the People gave their Votes by holding up their Hands.

2. (...), were those that owed their Promotion to Lots, which were drawn by
the Thesmothetae, in Theseus's Temple.

3. (...), were extraordinary Officers, appointed by the whole People, or
particular Tribes, to take care of any Business; such were the Surveyors of the
public Works, and such like.

According to Solon's Constitutions, no Man was capable of being a Magistrate,
except he was possessed of a considerable Estate; but by Aristides's means, the
Poorer sort were admitted to a share in the management of the Government, and
every Free Denizon rendered capable of appearing for the highest Preferments.
Yet such was the Modesty of the Commons, that they left the chief Offices, and
such as the care of the Commonwealth depended upon, to Persons of superior
Quality, aspiring no higher, than the management of petty and trivial
Businesses Xenophon de Rep. Athe^.
.

But though no Man's Quality, or Condition, could exempt him from bearing public
Offices, yet his course of Life, and Behavior might; for if any Man had lived
a Vicious, and Scandalous Life, he was thought unworthy of the meanest Office;
it being improbable that a a Person, that could not behave himself so as to
gain Reputation in a private Capacity, should be able to demean himself
Prudently and Wisely in a public Station; or that he, who had neglected his
own Concerns, or failed in the management of them, should be capable of
undertaking public Business, and providing for the Commonwealth. And
therefore before any Man was admitted to a public Employ, he was obliged to
give an account of himself, and his past Life, before certain Judges in the
Forum, which was the Place appointed for this Examination, which they called
(...) Lysiae Orat. in Evandr. Aeschines contra Timarchum.
. Nor was this alone thought sufficient, for though at this time they past the
Trial with Credit, yet in the first Ordinary Assembly after their Election,
they were a second time brought to the Test, when, if any thing Scandalous was
alleged, and made out against them, they were deprived of their Honors
Demosthen. in Theoc^.
. And when their Offices were expired, they were obliged to give an account of
their Management to the Notaries, and the Logistae, which was called (...), and
if any neglected to do it, or, had not undergon the former Probation, the
People were forbidden, by an express Law, to present him with a Crown, which
was the usual Reward of such as had gained themselves Honor and Reputation, by
^he careful and wise Management of public Employments. Also till their
Accounts were passed, they were not permitted to Sue Suidas, Hesychius,
Aeschin. Orat. de Ement. Legate.
for any other Office, or Place of Trust, or to Travel into any Foreign
Coun^^ey, or to dispose of their Estates, or any part of them, whether by Will,
or Consecrating them to Pious uses, or any other way; but the whole was to
remain entire, that in case they should be found to have embezzl'd the Public
Revenues, the City might not loose by them Aeschin. in Ctesiphont.
.

The Day in which the Magistrates entered upon their Offices, was the first of
Hecatombaeon, the first Month in the Athenian Calendar; it was a Solemn
Festival, which from the occasion had the Name of (...), and was celebrated
with all the expressions of Mirth, and Joy used at ^uch public Days. Also
Sacrifices were Offered to the Gods by the Senators, and most of the other
Magistrates; and Prayers made for the Prosperity of the City, in the Chapel of
Jupiter and Minerva, the Coun^ellors Suidas, Ulpian. in Medianam, Anti^hon.
Orat. de ^hore^ta.
.

CHAPTER XII. Of the Nine Archons, etc.
THE chief of Magistrates of Athens were Nine in Number, and had all the common
Name of Archontes, or Rulers. They were elected by Lots, but were not admitted
to their Offices, till they had undergone a twofold Trial, one in the
Senate House, called (...), and a second in the Forum, called (...). The
Questions which the Senate proposed to them, were such was these, Whether they
were descended from Ancestors, that had been Citizens of Athens from three
Generations? Of what Tribe, and Hundred they were, and whether they bore any
Relation to Apollo, and Jupiter Herceus? Whether they had been Dutiful to their
Parents, had Served in the Wars, and had a competent Estate Demosth. in
Eubulid. Pollux Onom. l. VIII. c. XIII.
? And, as some are of Opinion, the same Questions were demanded of all the
other Magistrates Dicaear^^^^ contra Aristogit.
.

But what was more peculiar to these Magistrates, was the Oath required of
them, before their Admission, in the Portico, called (...), (...), to this
Effect; That they would observe the Laws, and administer Justice without
partiality, would never be corrupted by Bribes, or if they were, would dedicate
a Statue of Gold to the Delphian Apollo: From thence they went into the
Citadel, and there repeated the fame Oath.

This done, they undertook their Charge, some parts of which were to be
executed by them separately, according to their respective Offices, others
equally concerned them all. They had all the Power of Punishing Malefactors
with Death, were all Crowned with a Garland of Myrtle; they had a joint
Commission for appointing the (...), and (...) by Lots, Electing out of every
Tribe one; as also of Constituting the (...), and (...), of inquiring into the
Behavior, and Management of other Magistrates, and deposing such as were by
the Suffrages of the People declared to be unworthy of bearing the Office, that
had been committed to them Pollux ibid. Idem ubique laudatur in his capitibus.
. And as a recompense for their Services, they were free from all Taxes, and
Contributions exacted of other Citizens for the Building of Men of War, which
was an immunity never granted to any besides themselves.

And thus much of the Nine Archons in common, I shall now speak of them in
particular; only first begging leave to tell you, that concerning the first
Original of their Names nothing certain is recorded; but Sigonius conjectures,
that the Names of (...), and (...), were in imitation of the chief Magistrates
of former Ages, wherein the City was first Governed by Kings, and then by
Archons; and that of (...), in memory of the General of the Army, an Officer
usually created by the first Kings to assist them in times of War. And the
(...), as their Name imports, seem to have been constituted in behalf of the
People, to protect them in the possession of their Laws and Liberties, from the
usurpation of the other Archons, whose power before Solon's regulation of the
Commonwealth seems to have been far greater; and more unbounded, than
afterward; for by that Lawgiver it was Ordered, that their Offices should
consist chiefly in these Things, that follow.

(...), so called by way of Eminence, was Chief of the Nine, and is sometimes
named (...), because the Year took it is denomination from him. His Jurisdiction
reached both Ecclesiastical, and Civil Affairs. It was his Business to
determine in all Causes betwixt Men and their Wives; concerning Wives brought
to Bed after the Death of their Husbands; concerning Wills and Testaments;
concerning Dowries, and Legacies; (...) take care of Orphans, and provide
Tutors, and Guardians for them; to hear the Complaints of such as had been
injured by their Neighbors; and to Punish such as were addicted to
Drunkenness; also to take the first cognizance of some public Actions, such
were those they called (...), of which in their place. He kept a Court of
Judicature in the Odeum, where Trials about Victuals, and other Necessaries
were brought before him. It was his Duty also to appoint Curators, called
(...), to make Provision for the Celebration of the Feasts, called (...), and
(...), with some other Solemnities; to take care for the regulation of
Stage Plays, and provide Singers, Choristers, and other Necessaries for them
Pollux Onomastic. hic and ubique, Lipsias in Aleibiadem. Demosthen. in
Macartat. Suidas, Harpocration, and ubique in his capitibus.
.

(...), had a Court of Judicature in the Royal Portico, where h^ decided all
Disputes that happened amongst the Priests, and the Sacred Families, such as
were the Ceryces, Eteobutadae, etc. to whom certain Offices in the Celebration
of Divine Worship belonged by Inheritance. Such also, as were accused of
Impiety, or Profanation of any of the Mysteries, Temples, or other Sacred
things were brought before him. It was his Business to assist in the
celebration of the Eleusinian, and Lenaean Festivals, and all those, in which
they ran Races with Torches in their hands, viz. Panathenaea, Hephaestia, and
Promethea; and to Offer public Sacrifices for the Safety, and Prosperity of
the Commonwealth; in several of which Duties, he had the Assistance of his
Wife, whom they called (...), who, if not descended from a Family that was of
the whole Blood of Athens, or had been Married to another Husband before the
(...), was not duly qualified for her Place by Law. Beside this, he had some
concernment in Secular Affairs, for Disputes about inanimate things were
brought before him; as also accusations of Murder, which it was his Business to
take an Account of, and then refer them to the Areopagites, amongst whom he had
a right of Suffrage, but was obliged to lay by his Crown, (which was one of the
Badges of his Office) during the Trial Demosthenes in Lacritum, and Nearam.
.

(...), had under his care all the Strangers, and Sojourners in Athens, and
exercised the same Authority upon them, that was used by the Archon toward the
Citizens. It was his Duty to Offer a Solemn Sacrifice to Enyalius, (who is by
some taken for Mars, by others for one of his Attendants) and another to Diana,
Sirnam'd (...), from one of the Athenian Buroughs; to celebrate the Exequies
of the famous Patriot Harmodius; and to take care, that the Children of those
Men that had lost their Lives in their Countrey's Service, should have a
competent Maintenance out of the public Exchequer.

But because these three Magistrates were often, by reason of their Youth, not
so well skilled in the Laws, and Customs of their Country, as might have been
wished, that they might not be left wholly to themselves, it was Customary for
each of them, to make choice of two Persons of Age, Gravity, and Reputation to
sit with them upon the Bench, and direct them as there was Occasion. These they
called (...), or Assessors, and obliged them to undergo the same Probation in
the Senate House, and public Forum, with the other Magistrates, and like them
too, to give an Account how they had behaved themselves in their respective
Trusts, when their Offices were expired.

The six remaining Archons were called by one common Name, Thesmothetae. They
received Complaints against Persons Guilty of false Accusations, of
Calumniating, of Bribery, of Impiety, which also was part of the King's Office,
but with this difference, that the Accusers did only (...), inform against the
Impious, by word of Mouth at the King's Tribunal, whereas before the
Thesmothetae, they did (...), deliver in their Indictment in Writing. Also all
Causes, and Disputes between the Citizens, and Strangers, Sojourners, or
Slaves, and Controversies about Trade and Merchandise were brought before them.
Appeals to the People were Preferred, the public Examination of several of the
Magistrates performed, and the Suffrages in public Assemblies taken by them.
They ratified all public Contracts, and Leagues, appointed the Days upon which
the Judges were to sit, and hear Causes in their several Courts of Judicature,
took care that no Laws should be established, but such as conduced to the
Safety, and Prosperity of the Commonwealth, and Indicted those, that
endeavored to seduce the unwary Multitude, and persuade them to give their
Consent to what was contrary to the Interest of the Commonwealth.

(...), were Ten Officers appointed to assist the Archons, and pass the
Accounts of the Magistrates, and to set a Fine upon such as they found to have
imbezzl'd the public Treasure, or any way injured the Commonwealth by their
maladministration. Aristotle Polit. l. VI. cap. ultimo.
tells us, they were sometimes called (...), and (...), and others will have
them to be the same with the (...); but these are by Aristotle said to be
distinguished from them.

CHAPTER XIII. Of the Athenian Magistrates.
(...), the Eleven, so called from their Number, were elected out of the Body
of the People, each of the Ten Tribes sending one; to which there was added a
(...), or Register, to make up the Number; sometimes they were called (...),
Keepers of the Laws, which appellation was taken from their Office, being in
some things not unlike that of our Sheriffs; for they were to see Malefactors
put to Execution, and had the Charge of such as were committed to the public
Prison. They had also Power to seize Thieves, Kidnappers, and Highway-men upon
Suspicion, and, if they confessed the Fact, to put them to Death; if not, they
were obliged to Prosecute them in a Judicial Way.

(...), were Magistrates that presided over the Athenian Tribes, one of which
was allotted to each of them. Afterward, this Name became peculiar to a
Military Command, and the Governors of Tribes were called (...). Their
Business was to take care of the public Treasure, that belonged to each Tribe,
to manage all their Concerns, and call them together to Consult, as often as any
thing happened, that required the presence of the whole Body.

(...), seem to have had, in most things, the same Office, with respect to
particular Tribes, that the (...) had, with respect to the Commonwealth. They
were chosen out of the (...), or Nobility, had the care of public Sacrifices,
and other Divine Worship peculiar to their respective Tribes, and kept their
Court in the Portico called (...), and sometimes in the (...).

(...), and (...), had in the several (...), and (...) the same Power, that the
(...) Exercised over the whole Tribe.

(...), had the same Offices in the (...), took care of their Revenues, out of
which they paid all the Duties required of them, assembled the People in the
Buroughs under their Jurisdiction, all whose Names they had written in a
Register, and presided at the Election of Senators, and other Magistrates
chosen by Lots. Sometimes we find them called (...), and the Buroughs (...),
because each of them was obliged, besides two Horsemen, to furnish out one
Ship for the public Service.

(...), were Six in Chief, but were assisted by Thirty inferior Officers, in
laying Fines upon such as came not to public Assemblies, and making Scrutiny
amongst those that were present; such also as were busy in the Market they
compelled to leave their Buying and Selling, and attend on the public
Business, and this they did by the help of the (...), who were certain petty
Officers, or rather Servants, much like the Roman Lictors, and our Sheriff's
Livery-men, Bailiffs, etc. the City of Athens had a Thousand of them, that
lived in Tents, erected in the middle of the Forum, and were afterward removed
to the Areopagus. Their name seems to have been taken from the Arms they
usually carried with them, in the same manner that the Life-guards of Kings are
called (...). Sometimes they are called (...), a Name, that was taken from
their Offices; sometimes (...), from Peusinus, one of the Primitive Athenians,
that either first instituted this Office, or gave rules for the Ordering of it;
and sometimes (...), from the Country of Scythia, for generally Men of that
Country were chosen into this Place, as being Brawny, Sturdy Fellows; and
therefore one of them is introduced by Aristophanes, speaking in an uncouth and
Barbarous manner Aristophanes, ejusque Scho^^ast. Acharn. and Thesmoph.
. But to return to the Lexiarchi, They were the Persons that had the keeping of
(...), or (...), or public Register of the whole City, in which were written
the Names of all the Citizens, as soon as they came to be of Age to enter upon
their paternal Inheritance, which they called (...).

(...), were Officers, whose Business it was to see that both the Magistrates,
and Common People lived conformably to the Laws, and to Punish the Stubborn and
Disobedient ^icero de Legib. lib. III. Colume^la de Re Rust. lib. XII. cap. III.
. To this End in public Assemblies they had Seats appointed with the (...),
that they might be ready to Oppose any Man that should Act contrary to the
Laws, and received Customs, or Promote any thing against the public Good. As a
Token of the Honorable Station they were placed in, they always wore a white
Ribband in the Solemn Games, and public Shows, and had Chairs erected for
them, over against those of the Nine Archons.

(...), were a Thousand in Number, their Office was not (as the Name seems to
imply) to enact new Laws by their own Authority, for that could not be done
without the approbation of the Senate, and the People's ratification; but to
inspect the old, and if they found any of them useless, or prejudicial, as the
State of Affairs then stood, or Contradictory to another, they caused them to
be abrogated by an Act of the People. Beside this, they were to take care that
no Man should Plough, or Dig deep Ditches within the Pelasgian Wall, to
apprehend Offenders, and send them to the Archon.

CHAPTER XIV. Of the Athenian Magistrates.
THE Treasurers, and General Receivers of Athens were of several Sorts; but
before I proceed, to give an Account of their Offices, it will be necessary to
premise a word or two concerning the public Revenues; which are by the
Accurate Sigonius divided into these four following Sorts;

1. (...), signify those Revenues that were brought in by Lands, Mines, Woods,
and other public Possessions, set apart for the use of the Commonwealth; and
the Tributes paid by the Sojourners, and the Free'd-Servants; as also the
Customs required of certain Arts, and Trades, and particularly of Merchants for
the exportation, and importation of their Goods.

2. (...), were the annual Payments exacted of all their Tributary Cities,
which after Xerxes's Overthrow, were first levied by the Athenians, as
Contributions to enable them to carry on the War, in case, as was feared, the
Enemy should make a new Invasion upon them. The first Collector of this Tax was
Aristides, who (as Plutarch reports in his Life) assess'd all particular
Persons, Town by Town, according to every Man's Ability; and the Sum raised by
him, amounted to Four-hundred, and Sixty Talents. To this Pericles added near a
Third part, (proceeds my Author) for Thucydides reports, that in the beginning
of the Pe^oponnesian War, the Athenians had coming in from their Confederates
Six-hundred Talents. After Pericles's Death the Orators and Men Powerful
amongst the People, proceeded to increase it by little and little, till it
amounted to One-thousand, and Three-hundred Talents; and that not so much
because of the extraordinary Expensiveness of the Wars, as by exciting the
People to Largesses, Play-house-expences, and the erecting of Statues, and
Temples.

3. (...), were Taxes laid upon the Citizens, as well as Sojourners, and
Free'd-Servants, by the Order of the Assembly, and Senate, for the defraying of
extraordinary Charges, occasioned by long and unsuccesful Wars, or any other
Means.

4. (...), were Fines and Amercements, all which were carried into the
Exchequer, except the Tenth part, that was given to Minerva, and the Fiftieth
part, which belonged to the rest of the Gods, and the Heroes called (...).
Having said thus much of the public Money, I shall now proceed to the Persons,
that had the Disposal, and Management of it.

(...), was elected by Lot out of the Prytanes, and had in his Custody the Keys
of the public Exchequer, which Trust was thought so great, that no Man was
permitted to enjoy it above once. Of the rest of the Honors and Offices of
this Magistrate I shall speak in another place.

(...), were Ten in number, and, together with those that had the care of the
Money designed to be expended upon public Shows, had the Power of letting out
the Tribute-money, and all the Revenues, and Selling Estates that were
Confiscated; all which bargains were ratified in the name of their President.
Beside this, it was their Office to Convict such as had not paid the Tribute,
called (...), and Sell them by Auction. Under these were certain inferior
Officers, called (...), whose business it was to Collect the public Money, for
such as had Leases of the City's Revenues, whom they called (...); these were
always Persons of good Credit themselves, and beside their own Bonds, were
obliged to give other Security for the payment of the Money due according to
their Leases, in which if they failed any longer than till the Ninth Prytanea,
they were under a Forfeiture of twice the Principal, to be paid by themselves,
or their Sureties, upon neglect of which they were all cast into Prison, and
their Estates confiscated Suidas, Ulpianus in D^mosthen. etc.
. After the expulsion of the Thirty Tyrants, certain Officers, called (...),
were Created, with power to take cognizance of all Complaints about the
confiscation of Goods, as appears from an Oration of Lysias in behalf of Nicias.

(...), were Officers that Rated all those, of whom Taxes and Contributions
were required, according to every Man's Ability, kept the public Accounts, and
Prosecuted such as were behind hand with their Contributions.

(...), were Ten General Receivers, to whom all the public Revenues,
Contribution-money, and Debts owed to the public, were paid, which done, they
Registered all their Receptions, and crossed out of the public Debt-book, such
as had discharged their Debts, in the presence of the whole Senate. If any
Controversy happened about the Money, or Taxes, they had power to decide it,
except it was a difficult and knotty Point, or of high Concern, for such they
referred to the hearing of some of the Courts of Judicature.

(...), was a public Notarie, appointed, at the first institution of the
Office, by Election, and afterward by Lot, to take a Counter-pain of the
Accounts of the (...), for the prevention of all Deceit, and Mistakes.

(...), or (...), had the same Offices in the Tributary Cities, that belonged
to the (...) in their own Territories.

(...), were those that received the Money due to the City, from Fines laid
upon Criminals.

(...), were those that received that part of the Fines, which was due to
Minerva, and the rest of the Gods, which was done before the Senate. They were
Ten in Number, were chosen by Lots out of the (...), or Nobles, and had power
of remitting any Man's Fine, if it was made appear to them, that the
Magistrates had unjustly imposed it. Pollux tells us, they were the same with
those they called (...), and these, as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes reports,
used to receive not only the Money due to the Gods from Fines, but other
Incomes designed for Civil Uses, and particularly the (...), distributed
amongst the Judges, and therefore called (...). They were so named q. (...),
because they were a kind of Priests, and used to claim as their Due the
Relics of Sacrifices; amongst which were the Skins, and the (...) Aristoph
Schol. Av^^us, Vespis.
.

(...), were Officers appointed upon extraordinary Occasions to enquire after
the public Debts, when through the neglect of the Receivers, or by other means
they were run up to large Sums, and began to be in danger of being lost, if
they were not called in.

The distinction of the Officers hitherto mentioned* has been taken chiefly
from the different Receptions of the public Money; I shall proceed in
Sigonius's method, and give you an account in the next place of those, that
were distinguished by the different manners of disbursing it. And to this End,
you must know the Public Treasure was divided into Three sorts, according to
the various Uses in which it was employed, the First, they called

1. (...), being such as were expended in civil Uses.

2. (...), those that were required to defray the Charges of the War.

3. (...), such as were consecrated to pious Uses; in which they included the
Expenses at Plays, public Shows, and Festivals, because most of them were
celebrated in Honor of some of the Gods, or in Memory of some deceased Hero;
and Pollux tells us, the Money given to the Judges, and the People, that met in
the public Assemblies, was called by this Name.

(...), otherwise called (...), was the principal Treasurer, being far
superior to all the rest in Honor, and Power, created by the People, and
continued in his Office for Five Years, after which, if he had behaved himself
with Honesty and Integrity, it was an usual thing for him to be elected a
Second and Third time.

(...), seems to have been one that kept a Counterpain of the chief Treasurer's
accounts, to preserve them from being falsified, or corrupted.

(...), was the Play Master General of the Army.

(...), or (...), had the disposal of the (...), for the Uses above mentioned.
But the greatest and most troublesome part of his Office consisted in
distributing them to the Poor Citizens, to buy Seats in the Theater; which
Custom was first ^egun and enacted into a Law by Pericles, to ingratiate
himself with ^he Commonalty Plutarch. Pe^icle.
; for, as Libanius observes, in the Primitive Ages ^f the Commonwealth, when
the Theaters were composed of Wood, ^he People, being eager of getting places,
used to quarrel among themselves, and sometimes Beat and Wound one another; to
prevent which inconvenience, it was ordered that every one, before he entered
unto the Theater, should pay two Oboli, or a Dram, according to Harpocration,
for admittance; and least by this means the Poorer sor^ should be deprived of
the pleasure of Seeing, every Man was allowed ^o demand that Sum of the public
Exchequer In Olynthi^c.
.

CHAPTER XV. Of the Athenian Magistrates.
(...), were so called from their Office, which was to lay in Corn for the use
of the City, and to this end the (...), was to furnish them with as much Money,
as they had occasion for. Athens was Seated in a barren and unfruitful
Country, that was no^ able to furnish it is own Inhabitants with necessary
Provisions, whereby they were forced to ^etch Corn from Forreig^ Nations, and
supply their own Wants by the Superfluities of others, and this it was, that
caused them to institute this Office.

(...), were Fifteen in Number, Ten of which Officiated in the City, and Five
in the Piraeeus; their business was to take care, that Corn and Meal should not
be Sold at too dear a Price, and to appoint the size of Bread. Nearly related
to these were the (...), or (...), whose Office was to see, that the Measures
of Corn were jus^ and equal.

(...), were Ten in Number, Five belonging to the City, and as many to the
Piraeeus. Their business lay in the Market, where they had the care of all
Vendibles, except Corn; and were especially obliged to see that no Man wronged,
or any way circumvented another in Buying, or Selling The^phrast. de Legibus.
.

(...), were Officers that inspected all sorts of Measures, excep^ those of
Corn; there were Five of them in the City, and double tha^ number in the
Piraeeus, in which the greatest Mart in Attica was kept.

(...), were Officers that belonged to the Haven; they were Ten in number, and
the Chief part of their business was, to take care, that two parts, at least,
of all the Corn, that was brought into the Port, should be carried into the
City, and that no Silver should be exported by any Private person, except such
as designed to Trade in Corn Demosthen. in La^ritum.
.

(...), or (...), had Cognizance of Controversies that happened between
Merchants, and Mariners, and examined Persons, that, being the Children of
Strangers both by the Father, and Mother's side, had by fraud inserted their
Names into the public Register, thereby claiming the Privileges of Freeborn
Citizens; this they did upon the Twenty-sixth of every Month. Not much
different from these were the (...), according to Sigonius, and Emmius's
account of them, only they were to hear such Causes in matters of Trade, as
required dispatch, and could not be differr'd to the Monthly Sessions of the
(...). But Pollux tells us, that, beside those Trials, they had Cognizance of
Controversies about Feasts and public Entertainments.

(...), were public Scavengers.

(...), were the Surveyors of the Ways.

(...), were those that took care of the Aquae-ducts, and other Conveyances of
Waters. But the Fountains belonged to oth^^ Officers, called (...). And the
Offices of these Four are b^ Aristotle comprehended under the name of (...).

(...), were Officers, with whom was entrusted the Care, Contrivance, and
Management of all public Edifices, except the City-Walls, for which there were
peculiar Curators, called from their Offices (...), whose number was usually
the same with that of the Tribes, every one of which had the choice of one
(...), as often as Occasion required.

(...), were in number Ten, and, as their Name imports, took care that the
Young Men behaved themselves with Sobriety and Moderation Aeschin. in Axiocho.
. For the same end, the Thesmothetae used ^o walk about the City in the
Nightime, and correct such as they found committing any Disorder Ulpian. in
Orat. advers. Mediam.
.

(...), were Three Officers, that provided Lights and Torches at the public
Entertainments, and took care that every Man drunk his due Proportion Athen^us
lib X.
.

(...), also had an Office at public Feasts, Sacrifices, Marriages, and other
Solemnities, and took care that nothing should be done contrary to Custom Idem
lib. VI.
.

(...), were Magistrates, whose business it was to Regulate the Women's
Apparel, according to the Rules of Modesty and Decency; and set a Fine upon
such as were too Nice, and Fantastical in their Dresses, which they exposed to
public View in the Ceramicus.

(...), were Persons of considerable Estates, who by their own Tribe, or the
whole People, were ordered to perform some public Duty, or supply the
Commonwealth with Necessaries at their own Expenses. Of these there were
diverse Sorts, all which were elected out of Twelve-hundred of the richest
Citizens, which were appointed by the People to undergo, when they should be
required, all the burdensome and chargeable Offices in the Commonwealth, every
Tribe electing an Hundred and Twenty out of their own Body; though, as Sigonius
has observed, this was contrary to Solon's Constitution, by which every Man of
what Quality soever, was obliged to serve the Public, according to his Ability.

These Twelve-hundred were divided into two Parts, one of which consisted of
such as were possessed of the greatest Estates, the other of Persons of meaner
Abilities. Each of these were divided into Ten Companies, called (...), which
were distinct Bodies, and had distinct Governors, and Officers of their own.
They were again subdivided into two Parts, according to the Estates of the
Persons that composed them; and thus out of the first Ten (...), were appointed
Three-hundred of the most wealthy Citizens in Athens, who upon all Exigences
were to furnish the Commonwealth with necessary supplies of Money, and,
together with the rest of the Twelve-hundred, were required to perform all
extraordinary Duties in their Turns Ulpian. in Olynthiac. II. and Apho^. I.
.

(...), were at the expense of Players, Singers, Dancers, and Musicians, as often
as there was Occasion for them at the celebration of their public Festivals,
and Solemnities L^^ias Orat. de Muneribus, Plutarchus de Prudentia Atheniensium.
.

(...), were at the charge of the Oil, and such like necessaries for the
Wrestlers, and other Combatants Ul^ianus in Leptinian.
.

(...), were such as upon public Festivals made an Entertainment for their
whole Tribe Demosthen. Mediana, and Leptintana.
.

(...) were obliged to provide all sorts of Necessaries for the Fleet Plutarch.
loc. citato.
.

(...), were required, according to their Abilities, to supply the Public with
Money for the payment of the Army, and other Occasions Lysias Orat. de
Muneribus.
.

Beside these, upon extraordinary Occasions, when the usual supplies were not
sufficient, as in Times of long and dangerous Wars, the Rich Citizens used
generously to Contribute as much as they were able to the public Necessities,
beside what was required of them, and could not be avoided. These are by Pollux
called (...), etc.

Others there were, that were not properly Magistrates, yet, because they were
employed in public Business, must not be omitted in this Place.

Such were the (...), or Orators appointed by the People, to Plead in behalf of
any Law, that was to be abrogated, or enacted, of which I have spoken in
another place.

(...), were Ten in number, elected by Lots, to Plead public Causes in the
Senate House, or Assembly, and for every Cause wherein they were retained, they
received a Dram out of the public Exchequer. They were sometimes called
(...), and their Wages (...) Aristo^han. Scholiast. in Vespas.
.

(...), were Ambassadors chosen by the Suffrages of the People to treat with
Foreign States. Sometimes they were sent with full Power to act according as
themselves should judge most conducive to the Safety and Honor of the
Commonwealth, and then they were (...), or Plenipotentiaries, and were not
obliged, at their return home, to render an Account of their Proceedings; but
their Power was usually limited, and they liable to be called in Question, if
they exceeded their Commission, by concluding any Business, besides what they
were sent about, or in any other Manner, than what was prescribed them.

The (...) were usually attended by a (...), or Herald; and sometimes the (...)
were sent upon Embassies by themselves, as Sigonius observes, especially in the
primitive Times, when all Embassies were performed by these Men, who were
accounted Sacred and Inviolable, not only as being descended from Mercury, and
employed in his Office, but because they were public Mediators, without whom
all Intercourse, and hopes of Reconcilement between Enemies must be at an End.
Therefore, as Eustathius observes Iliad. (...). p. 183. Edit. Basil.
, whenever Ulysses in his Travels dispatched his Scouts to discover what sort
of Country and People, the Winds and Seas had brought them to, he always sent
a (...) along with them, whereby they were secured from receiving any harm in
all parts of the World, whither they were driven, except in the Countries of
the Laestrygones, Cyclopes, and such Savages, as were altogether Barbarous, and
void of Humanity.

Beside the forementioned Magistrates and Officers, there were several others,
as the (...), etc. But of these, and such as had Military Commands, or were
employed in the divine Service, I shall give an Account in their own places.

CHAPTER XVI. Of the Council of the Amphictyones.
BEING, in the next place, to speak of the Athenian Councils, and Courts of
Justice, I cannot omit the famous Council of the Amphictyones; which, though it
sat not at Athens, nor was peculiar to that City, yet the Athenians, and almost
all the rest of the Grecians were concerned in it.

It is commonly thought to have been first instituted, and received it is Name
from Amphictyon, the son of Deucalion Pausanias Phocicis, Suidas, etc.
; but Strabo is of Opinion, that Acrisius, King of the Argives, was the first
that founded, and gave Laws for the Conduct and Management of it Geogr. l. IX.
; and then it must have it is Name from (...), because the Inhabi^ants of the
Countries round about met in that Council Suidas.
; and Androtion in Pausanias tells us, that the primitive Name of those
Senators was Amphictiones, however in later Ages it has been changed into
Amphictyones. But the former Opinion receives confirmation from what Herodotus
reports of the Place, where this Council was Assembled, viz. That in it was a
Temple Dedicated to Amphictyon, and Ceres Amphictyonis Lib. VII. cap. CC.
; and Strabo also reports, that this Goddess was Worshipped by the Amphictyones.

The Place, in which they Assembled, was called Thermopylae, and sometimes
Pylae, because it was a strait, narrow Passage, and, as it were, a Gate, or
Inlet into the Country. Hence these Counselors are often called (...), and
the Council (...) Herodot. Hes^^h. Suidas, Harpocration, Strabo, Pausanias
Ach^icis.
; But the Scholiast upon Sophocles tells us, that this Name was given them from
Pylades, the Friend of Orestes, who was the first that was arraigned in this
Court, having assisted in the Murder of Clytaemnestra. Sometimes they met at
Delphi, where they were entrusted with the care of Apollo's Temple, and the
Pythian Games, which were celebrated in that Place Pausan. Phocicis, and
Achai^is, aliique.
, the Situation of which rendered it very commodious for them to Assemble in,
for it was Seated in the midst of Greece, as the Geographers tell us.

The Persons, that composed this Assembly, were, according to Pausanias, the
Representatives of the Ionians, amongst whom the Athenians were included,
Dolopeans, Thessalians, Aenianians, Magnesians, Meleans, Phthians, Dorians,
Phocians, and the Locrians, that Inhabited near Mount Cnemis, and were called,
upon that account, Epicnemidii. Strabo reports, that, at their first
Institution, they were Twelve in Number, and were delegated by so many Cities.
Harpocration also, and Suidas reckon up Twelve Nations, of which this Council
consisted, viz. Ionians, Dorians, Perrhaebians, Boeotians, Magnesians,
Achaeans, Phthians, Melians, Dolopians, Aenianians, Delphians, Phocians.
Aeschines reckons only Eleven, instead of the Achaeans, Aenianians,
Delphinians, and Dolopians, placing these Three only, viz. Thessalians,
Oetaeans, Locrians Orat. (...).
.

Afterward, in the Time of Philip, King of Macedon, and Father of Alexander
the Great, the Phocians, having ransacked and spoiled the D^^phian Temple, were
by a Decree of the Amphictyones Invaded by the rest of the Grecians, as a
Sacrilegious and Impious Nation, and after a Ten-Years War, deprived of the
Privilege of sitting amongst them, together with their Allies, the
Lacedaemonians, who were one part of the Dorians, and, under that Name, had
formerly Sat in this Assembly; and their vacant Places were supplied by the
Macedonians, who were admitted, in return of the good Services they had done in
the Phocian War. But about Sixty-eight Years after, when the Gauls, under the
Command of Brennus, made a terrible Invasion upon Greece, Ravaging and
Destroying all before them, sparing nothing Sacred or Profane, and with a
Barbarous and Sacrilegious Fury, Robbed and Despoiled the D^^phian Temple; the
Phocians behaved themselves with so much Gallantry, signalizing themselves in
the Battle above the rest of the Grecians, that they were thought to have made
a sufficient Atonement for their former Offense, and restored to their Ancient
Privilege and Dignity Pausanias Phocicis.
.

In the Reign of Augustus Caesar they suffered another Alteration, for that
Emperor, having worsted Antony in a Sea Fight at Actium, in Memory of that
Victory Founded a new City, called it Nicopolis, and was desirous that it is
Inhabitants should be admitted into this Assembly, and to make Way for them,
ordered, that the Magnesians, M^leans, Phthians, and Aenianians, who till that
Time had distinct Voices, should be numbered with the Thessalians, and send no
Representatives, but such as were common to them all; and that the Right of
Suffrage, that formerly belonged to those Nations, and the Dolopians, (a People
whose State and Name were extinct long before) should be given to the
Nicopolitans Idem. ibid.
.

Strabo, who flourished in the Reigns of Augustus, and Tiberius, reports that
this Council, as also the general Assembly of the Achaeans, was at that Time
dissolved; but Pausanias, who lived many Years after, under Antoninus Pius,
assures us, that in his Time it remained entire, and that the number of the
Amphictyones was then Thirty, being delegated by the following Nations, viz.
the Nicopolitans, Macedonians, Thessalians, Boeotians, (who in former Times
were called Aeolians, and Inhabited some Parts of Thessaly) Phocians,
Delphians, Locrians, called Ozolae, with those that lie opposite to Euboea,
Dorians, Athenians, and Eu^oeans.

This Assembly had every Year only two set Meetings, one in the beginning of
Spring, the other in Autumn Strabo. loc. cit.
, except some extraordinary Occasion called them together. The Design of their
Meetings, was to determine public Quarrels, and decide the Differences that
happened between any of the Cities of Greece, when no other Means were left to
compose them. Their Determinations were always received with a great deal of
Respect and Veneration, and held inviolable, the Grecians being always ready to
join against those that rejected them, as common Enemies.

An Assembly of Neighboring Cities, met to Consult about the common Good,
seems usually to have been called (...), and, be^ide the Famous one already
spoken of, Strabo mentions another held in the Temple of Neptune, at Troezen,
at which the Delegates of the Seven following States were present, viz.
Hermione, Epidaurus, Aegina, Athens, the Prasians, Nauplians, and the
Orchomenians of Boeotia Geogr. lib. VIII.
.

CHAPTER XVII. Of the Athenian (...), or Public Assemblies.
(...), was an Assembly of the People met together according to Law, to Consult
about the Good of the Commonwealth. It was of two sorts, the First of which
they called (...), the other (...).

(...), were so called, (...), because in them the People confirmed and
ratified the Decrees of the Senate; or rather, because they were held upon
(...), or (...), Days constant, and appointed by Law Suidas, Aristoph. Schol.
Acharn.
.

They were held four Times in Five and Thirty-days, which was the time that
each (...), or Company of Prytanes, presided in the Senate. The first Assembly
was employed in approving, and rejecting Magistrates, in hearing Actions called
(...), and proposals concerning the public Good; as also in hearing the
Catalogue of such Possessions, as were confiscated for the Service of the
Commonwealth, and several other things. The second made Provision both for the
Community, and Private Persons; and it was permitted every Man to prefer any
Petition, or speak his Judgment concerning either of them. In the third,
Audience was given to the Ambassadors of Foreign States. The fourth was wholly
taken up with Religion, and matters relating to the Divine Worship Pollux l.
VIII. c. VIII.
. The First Assembly was upon the Eleventh Day of the Prytanea; the second,
upon the Twentieth; the third, upon the Thirtieth; the fourth, upon the
Thirty-third. Some there are, that reckon by the Month, and tell us, that they
had three Assemblies every Month, upon the First, Tenth, and Thirtieth Days; or
upon the Tenth, Twentieth, and Thirtieth Ulpian. in Demosthen. Aristoph. Schol.
. But the former Computation seems to be more agreeable to the Custom of the
Ancient Athenians, amongst whom were Ten (...), according to the number of
their Tribes, each of which Ruled Thirty-five Days, in which they had Four
Assemblies. Afterward, the number of the Tribes being increased by an
Accession of two New ones, the (...), were also Twelve in number, each of which
ruled a Month, and then perhaps Ulpian's Computation might take place.

(...), were so called (...), because the People were summoned together,
whereas in the (...), they met of their own Accord, without receiving any
Notice from the Magistrates, as Ulpian observes In Orat. de fals^ Legate.
. The Persons, that summoned the People, were commonly the (...), or the (...)
in their Names, because the Occasion of these extraordinary Assemblies was, for
the most part, the coming on of some sudden, unexpected, and dangerous War;
sometimes the Prytanes, if the Senate so ordered it, as they usually did, when
any Civil Affairs, in which the (...) were not concerned, required a quicker
Dispatch, than could be given them in the (...).

(...), as Pollux, or (...), as Hesychius calls them, were Assemblies held upon
some very weighty and momentous Affair, to which they summoned not only those
Citizens, that resided in the City, but all that lived in the Country, or were
in the Ships, then at Anchor in the Haven.

The places, where the (...) were Assembled, were several, as First,

(...), or the Marketplace; and there, not the Athenians only, but most other
Cities, had their public Meetings, because it was usually very capacious.
Hence the Assemblies themselves came to be called (...), and to make a Speech,
(...), as Harpocration observes.

(...), was a Place near the Citadel, so called (...), because it was filled
with Stones, or Seats set close together, or from the Crowds of Men in the
Assemblies, and therefore (...), is by the Comedians taken for the Thronging
and Pressing of a Multitude Aristoph. Schol. Acharn. Equit. etc.
. It was remarkable for nothing more, than the meanness of it is Buildings, and
Furniture, whereby in Ages, that most affected Gaiety and Splendour, it remained
a Monument of the Ancient Simplicity Pollux lib. VIII. c. VIII.
.

The Theater of Bacchus, in later Times was the usual place, in which the
Assemblies were held Demosthen. Mediana.
, but even then Pnyx was not wholly forsaken, it being against Law to Decree
any Man a Crown, or Elect any Magistra^es in any other Place, as Pollux, or, at
least, the (...), as Hesychius reports.

The Ordinary Assemblies were held in the forementioned Places, but such as
were called upon extraordinary Occasions, were not confined to any certain
Place, being sometimes held in the Piraeeus, where there was a Forum, called
(...), Munychia, or any other Place capacious enough to contain the People.

The Magistrates, that had the care and management of these Assemblies, were
the Prytanes, Epistata, and Proedri.

The Prytanes sometimes called the People together, and always before their
meeting set up a (...) in some place of general Concourse, in which was
contained the Matters to be consulted upon in the following Assembly, to the
end that every Man might have time to consider of them, before he gave his
Judgment Pollux lib. VIII. cap. VIII.
.

(...), were so called from the first places, which they had in the Assemblies.
Whilst the Tribes of Athens were no more than Ten, the Proedri were Nine in
number, being appointed by Lots out of the Nine Tribes, which at that time were
exempted from being Prytanes. Their Business was to propose to the People the
Things they were to deliberate upon, and determine in that Meeting Ulpianus in
Timocrat.
, at the End of which their Offices expired.

(...), the President of the Assembly, was chosen by Lots out of the Proedri;
the chief part of his Office seems to have consisted, in granting the People
Liberty to give their Voices, which they were not permitted to do, till he had
given the Signal Harpocration, Demosthenes Androtiana, Aeschines in ^tes^ph^nt.
.

If the People were remiss in coming to the Assemblies, the Magistrates used
their utmost Endeavors to compel them; they shut up all the Gates, that only
excepted, through which they were to pass to the Assembly, they took care that
all Vendibles should be carried out of the Market, that there might be nothing
to divert them from appearing; and if this was not sufficient, the Logistae
(whose business this was) took a Cord died with Vermilion, with which they
detatch'd two of the (...) into the Market, where one of them standing on one
side, and another on that which was opposite, pursued all they found there, and
marked with the Cord as many as they caught, all which had a certain Fine set
upon them, as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes observes at this Verse, (...)
(...) Ach^rn.
.
They in the Forum chat, and up and down
Scamper to avoid the Cord Vermilion-dy'd.
Mr. Abell.

If any Boisterous and Tempestuous Weather, or sudden Storm, which they called
(...) Aristophan. Schol. ibid
, or Earthquake happened, or any Inauspicious Omen appeared, the Assembly was
immediately adjourned. But if all things continued in their usual Course, they
proceeded in this Manner.

First, the place, where they were appointed to meet, was purified by killing
young Pigs, which, as was usual in such Lustrations, they carried round about
the utmost Bounds of it; on the outside of which no Man was permitted to stand,
because those places were accounted Profane and Unsanctified, and therefore
unfit for the transacting business of so great consequence, as that in which
the Welfare and Safety of the State was nearly concerned; this we learn from
Aristophanes, in whom the public Crier warns the People to stand on the inside
of the (...), for so they called the Sacrifices Offered at Expiations, (...).
The Person, that Officiated in the Lustration, was called (...), and (...),
from (...), another Name for (...) Aristoph Schol. ibid. and Concionatric. etc.
Suida^, Harpocration.
, and (...), according to Pollux.

The Expiatory Rites being ended, the public Crier made a Solemn Prayer for
the Prosperity of the Commonwealth, and the good Success of their Counsels and
Undertakings Demosthen. Tim^cras.
. For amongst the Primitive Heathens, all things were carried on with a great
show of Piety and Devotion; and so great a share they thought their Gods had in
the management of Human Affairs, that they never undertook any thing of Weight
or Moment, especially in public Business, without having first invoked their
Direction, and Assistance.

Then he pronounced a bitter Execration against such, as should endeavor any
thing in that Assembly to the Prejudice of the Commonwealth, praying, That he,
and his whole Family might be made remarkable examples of the Divine Vengeance
Demosthen. (...).
.

Then the Proedri proposed the things, that were to be Consulted about, and
repeated the Decree of the Senate, which, in most businesses of Importance,
took care that nothing should be proposed to the Assembly, before it had passed
their House. Then the People were asked, whether the Senate's Decree should
pass into a Law? and this they called (...), as being antecedent to the final
determination. If they approved it, Good; if not, a Consultation was to be held
about it, in this Method;

The Proedri having given the Command, the Crier proclaimed with a loud Voice,
(...); Who will make an Oration? Then first those, that were above Fifty Years
of Age, rose up, and ascending the Suggestum delivered their Opinions, after
them the next in Years, and so on to the Youngest Aristophan. Acharn.
Demosthenes, and Aeschines in Ctesipho^t..
. For as they judged it unreasonable, that any Man's Quality or Age (so he were
not under Thirty) should debarr him from uttering what he had conceived for the
good of the Commonwealth, so on the other Hand, it was thought very undecent,
and unbecoming for Young Men to give their Opinions, before they had heard what
were the Sentiments of such, as Years and Experience had rendered more fit and
able to judge.

But the Wisdom of the Lawgiver thought it not expedient to permit every Man
without distinction to deliver his Opinion; for such as were convicted of any
heinous Crime, of Impiety, Profaneness, or Debauchery, had Fled from their
Colors, or were deeply Indebted to the Commonwealth, he excluded from having
any thing to do in such Consultations Demosthen. in Aristogit. A^schines in
C^esiph^nt.
; it being scarce probable that Persons of wicked Lives, or desperate Fortunes
should endeavor any thing conducive to the Peace and Prosperity of the State,
but rather that they should design the Confusion and Ruin of it, that
themselves might be enriched with the Spoils of Honest Men, and be at Liberty
to take their full Career in their unlawful Pleasures, without the restraint of
Laws, and fear of Punishments.

When the debates were ended, the Crier by the Command of the Epistata, or
Proedri as others report, asked the People, Whether they would Consent to the
Decree? permitting them to give their Voices, and thereby either establish, or
reject it, the doing which they called (...), or (...).

The manner of giving their Suffrages, was by holding up their Hands, and
therefore they called it (...); and (...) signifies to Ordain, or Establish any
thing; (...), to disannull by Suffrage. This was the common Method of Voting,
but in some Cases, as particularly when they deprived Magistrates of their
Offices for Maladministration, they gave their Votes in private, least the
Power and Greatness of the Persons accused, should lay a restraint upon them,
and cause them to act contrary to their Judgments and Inclinations.

As soon as the People had done Voting, the Proedri, having carefully examined
the number of the Suffrages, pronounced the Decree ratified, or thrown out,
according as the Major-part had approved, or rejected it. The Business being
over, the Prytanes dismissed the Assembly, as we read in Aristophanes Acharnens.
, (...).

CHAPTER XVIII. Of the Senate of the Five-hundred.
By Solon's Constitution the whole Power and Management of Affairs were placed
in the People, it was their Prerogative to receive Appeals from the Courts of
Justice, to abrogate old Laws, and enact new, to make what Alterations in the
State they judged convenient, and, in short, all Matters, whether Public or
Private, Foreign or Domestic, Civil, Military, or Religious were determined
by them.

But because it was dangerous, that Things of such vast Moment, and Concern
should be without any farther care committed to the Disposal, and Management of
a giddy and unthinking Multitude, that every cunning and subtle Fellow might
impose upon by smooth Words, and fair Pretenses, and persuade to enact Things
contrary to their own real Interests, and destructive of the Commonwealth; the
wise Lawgiver to prevent such pernicious Consequences, judged it absolutely
necessary for the Preservation of the State, to institute a great Council,
consisting only of such as were Persons of the best Credit and Reputation in
the City, whose business it should be to inspect all Matters before they were
propounded to the People; and take care that nothing, but what had been
diligently examined, should be brought before the general Assembly Plutarch.
Solone.
. At the same time he instituted, at least, regulated another Council, I mean
that of the Areopagites, which, though inferior to the former in Order and
Power, yet was superior to it in Dignity and Esteem, and therefore was called
(...), or the upper Council; to this he gave the Inspection and Custody of the
Laws, supposing that the Commonwealth being held by these two, as it were by
firm Anchors, would be less liable to be tossed by tumults, and made a prey to
such as had Knavery enough to design, and Cunning and Eloquence to entice the
People to their own Destruction Idem.
.

At the first Institution of the former Council, it consisted only of
Four-hundred Senators, one Hundred of which were appointed out of each Tribe,
for the Tribes in Solon's time were only Four in Number Idem.
.

They were elected by Lots, in drawing of which they made use of Beans, and
therefore Thucydides calls them (...), and the Senate, (...). The manner of
their Election was thus: On a certain Day before the beginning of the Month
Hecatombaeon, the President of every Tribe gave in the Names of all the Persons
within his District, that were capable of this Dignity, and had a mind to
appear for it; these were engraven upon Tablets of Brass, called (...)
Harpocrat.
, and cast into a Vessel set there for that purpose; into another Vessel were
cast the same numbers of Beans, an Hundred of which were White, and all the
rest Black. Then the Names of the Candidates, and the Beans were drawn, one by
one, and those, whose Names were drawn out together with the White Beans, were
received into the Senate Sigonius and Emmius de Rep. Athen and ubique in hac
part hujus libri.
.

About Eighty-six Years after Solon's regulation of the Commonwealth, the
number of Tribes being increased by Clisthenes from Four to Ten; the Senate
also received an Addition of one Hundred, which being added to the former, made
it to consist of Five-hundred, and from that Time, it was called (...).

Afterward, two new Tribes were added to the former in Honor of Antigonus,
and his Son Demetrius, from whom, they received their Names; and then the
Number of the Senators was augmented by the accession of another Hundred
Stephan. Byzant. de Urbb. and Populis.
; for in both these last Alterations, it was ordered, that out of every Tribe
Fifty should be elected into the Senate. As to the manner of Election, that
continued the same, excepting only, that instead of an Hundred White Beans
drawn by each Tribe, they had now only Fifty, according to the Number of their
Senators.

After the Election of Senators, they proceeded in the next place to appoint
Officers to preside in the Senate, and these they called (...). The manner of
their Election was thus; The names of the Tribes being thrown into one Vessel
with Nine Black Beans, and a White Bean cast into another, the Tribe, whose
Fortune it was to be drawn out together with the White Bean, presided first,
and the rest in the Order, in which they were drawn out of the Vessel; for
every Tribe presided in it is Turn, and therefore, according to the Number of
Tribes, the Attick Year was divided into Ten parts, each of which consisted of
Thirty-five Days; only the Four first Parts contained Thirty-six, thereby to
make the Lunar Year complete, which, according to their Computation, consisted
of one Hundred and Fifty-four Days Harpocrat.
. Others are of Opinion that those four Supernumerary Days were employed in the
Creation of Magistrates, and that, during that Time, the Athenians had no
Magistrates at all Liban. Argument. in A^d^otian.
, and therefore they called them (...), and (...). Afterward, when the Tribes
were increased to Twelve, every one of them presided a Full Month in the
Senate, as we learn from Pollux Lib. VIII. cap. IX.
. The Time, that every Company of Prytanes continued in their Office, was
termed (...), during which they were excused from all other public Duties
Ibid. cap. ult.
.

Beside these, there were other Officers in the Senate, all which were elected
by Lots. The first was (...), or President of the Prytanes, who had the Custody
of the public Seal, and Keys of the public Exchequer; which was accounted a
Trust so great, that no Man was permitted to enjoy it above one Day, or to be
elected into it a second Time Id^m l. VIII c. VIII.
.

Every Time the Senate was assembled, the (...) appointed Nine (...) by Lots,
electing one out of every Tribe, except that which had the Honor of Presiding
Ibid. and Harp^^r.
. Both of these were different from the (...), and (...) in the Popular
Assemblies.

One thing more there is remarkable in the Election of Senators, that beside
those, who were immediately admitted into the Senate, they chose Subsidiaries,
who, in case any of the Senators were deposed for Maladministration, or died
before the expiration of their Offices, should without any farther trouble
supply their Places; and these they called (...) H^rpocrat.
.

The Authority of the Prytanes consisted chiefly in assembling the Senate,
which, for the most part, was done once every Day, (Festivals only excepted)
and oftener if occasion required. And that they might be ready to give Audience
to all such as had any thing to propose, that concerned the Commonwealth, they
constantly resorted to a Common Hall near the Senate House, called Prytaneum,
in which they offered Sacrifices, and had their Diet together Pausania^
.

If any Man offered any thing, that deserved to be taken into Consideration,
they engraved it upon Tablets, that all the Senators might beforehand be
acquainted with what was to be discussed at their next Meeting; in which, after
the Prytanes, or Epistata had propounded the Matter, every Man had liberty to
declare his Opinion, and give his Reasons either for, or against it. This they
did standing, for it is every where observable in ancient Authors, that no
Person, of what Rank or Quality soever, presumed to speak sitting, and
therefore whenever a Poetical Hero makes an Oration, he is always first said
to rise, (...), Says Homer; and Ovid, to trouble you with no more Instances,
mentions the same Custom, Surgit ad hos clypei Dominus semp^emplicis Ajax.

When all had done speaking, the Business designed to be passed into a Decree,
was drawn up in Writing by any of the Prytanes, or other Senators, and repeated
openly in the House Demosthen. Orat. in (...). and in Nearam.
; after which, leave being given by the Epistata, or Prytanes, the Senators
proceeded to Vote, which they did in private, by casting Beans into a Vessel
placed there for that purpose. The Beans were of two Sorts, Black, and White,
and if the Number of the former was found to be greatest, the Proposal was
rejected; if of the latter, it was enacted into a Decree Ulp^anus.
, which they called (...), and (...), because it was agreed upon in the Senate
with a design to have it afterward propounded to an Assembly of the People,
that it might receive from them a farther Ratification, without which it could
not be passed into a Law, nor have any Force or Obligatory Power, after the end
of that Year, which was the Time that the Senators, and almost all the other
Magistrates laid down their Commissions.

The Power of this Council was very great, almost the whole care of the
Commonwealth being devolved upon them; for the Commonalty being by Solon's
Constitutions invested with supreme Power, and entrusted with the Management of
all Affairs, as well public, as private, it was the peculiar charge of the
Senate to keep them within due Bounds, to take cognizance of every thing before
it was referred to them, and to be careful that nothing should be propounded to
them, but what they upon mature Deliberation had found to be conducive to the
public Good. And befide the care of the Assembly, there were a great many
things, that fell under the cognizance of this Court, as the Accounts of
Magistrates at the expiration of their Offices Pollux lib. VIII. cap. VIII.
, and the care of poor Persons, that were maintained by an Allowance out of the
public Exchequer Harpocration.
. It was their business to appoint Gaolers for the public Prisons, and to
examine and punish Persons accused of such Crimes, as were not forbidden by any
positive Law Pollux.
, to take care of the Fleet, and look after the Building of new Men of War
Aristoph. Avibus, and Libanius Argument. in Androtianam.
, with several other Things of great Consequence.

Now because those were Places of great Trust, no man could be admitted to
them, till he had undergon a strict (...), or Probation, whereby the whole
Course of his Life was inquired into, and found to have been managed with
Credit and Reputation, else he was rejected Aeschines in Timarch.
.

And to lay the greater Obligation upon them, they were required to take a
Solemn Oath, the substance whereof was this; That they would in all their
Counsels endeavor to promote the public Good; and not advise any thing
contrary to the Laws. That they would sit as Judges in what Court soever they
were elected to by Lots, for several of the Courts of Justice were supplied
with Judges out of the Senate. That they would never keep an Athenian in Bonds,
that could give Three Sureties of the same Quality, except such as had bought
or collected, or been engaged as a Surety for the public Revenues, and did not
pay the Commonwealth, and such as were guilty of treasonable Practices against
the Government. But this (as Demosthenes interprets it) must be understood only
of Criminals before their Condemnation Demosthen. Timocrat.
, for to put them in Fetters after Sentence passed upon them, was no breach of
the Law.

If any of the Senators was convicted of breaking his Oath, committing any
Injustice, or behaving himself otherwise, than as became his Order, the rest of
his Brethren expelled him, and substituted one of the (...) in his place. This
they called (...), from the Leaves, which they made use of in giving their
Suffrages, in the same manner that the (...) were used by the Commonalty in
decreeing the Ostracism. But this Custom was not very ancient, being invented
upon the account of one Xenotimus, an Officer, that by changing the Beans
(which till that time were always made use of) was found to have corrupted the
Suffrages Pollux lib. VIII. cap. V. Harpocration. Etymolog. Suidas.
.

On the contrary, such as had behaved themselves with Justice and Integrity,
were rewarded with an Allowance of Money out of the public Exchequer
Demosthen. Timocrat.
. And if any Men of War had been built during their Regency, the People in
their public Assembly Decreed them the Honor of wearing a Crown; if not, the
Law prohibited them from Suing for this Privilege, as having been wanting to
the Commonwealth, whose S^fety and Interest depended upon nothing so much, as
the Strength and Number of their Ships Idem A^drotiana.
.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the Senate and Court of Areopagus.
THE Name of this Senate was taken from the place, in which it was wont to be
assembled, being an Hill not far distant from the Citadel Herodotus lib. VIII.
, called (...), or (...), that is, Mars's Hill, from Mars, the God of War and
Blood, because all wilful Murders came under the cognizance of this Court
Suidas.
; Or, as Fables tell us, from the arraignment of Mars, who was the first
Criminal that was Tried in it Pausan. Aristid^s Panathen* Suidas.
; Or, lastly, because the Amazons, whom the Poets feign to have been the
Daughters of Mars, when they besieged Athens, pitched their Camps, and offered
Sacrifices to the God of War in this place Aeschylus Eumenidib. Etymologici
Auctor.
.

When this Court was first instituted it is uncertain, some there are, that
make it as ancient as Cecrops, the first Founder of Athens, others think it was
begun in the Reign of Cranaus; and lastly, others bring it down as low as the
times of Solon. But this Opinion, though defended by Authors of no less Credit
than Plutarch Solone.
, and Cicero De Offic. l. I.
, is in express terms contradicted by Aristotle Polit. l. II.
, and one of Solon's Laws cited by Plutarch himself, wherein there is mention
of Judgments made in this Court, before Solon had reformed the Commonwealth.
What seems most probable, is, that the Senate of Areopagus was first instituted
a long time before Solon, but was continued, regulated, and augmented by him;
was by him made superior to the Ephetae, another Court instituted by Draco
Pollux lib. VIII. cap. X.
, and invested with greater Power, Authority, and larger Privileges, than ever
it had enjoyed before.

The number of the Persons that composed this venerable Assembly is not agreed
upon, by some it is restrained to Nine, by others enlarged to Thirty-one, by
others to Fifty-one, and by some to more. Maximus tells us, it consisted of
Fifty-one, (...), beside such of the Nobility, as were eminent for their
Virtue, and Riches; by which Words he seems to aim at the Nine Archons, who
were the constant Seminary and Nursery of this great Assembly, and, having
discharged their several Offices, passed every Year into it Plutarch. S^lone,
and Pericle.
. This was the reason, why their Number was not always the same, but more, or
less, according as those Persons happened to continue a greater, or lesser Time
in the Senate. Therefore when Socrates was condemned by this Court, (as the
nature of his Crime makes it evident he was) we find no less than
Two-hundred-four-score and one giving their Votes against him, besides those
who Voted for his Absolution: And in an Ancient Inscription upon a Column in
the Citadel at Athens, erected to the Memory of Rufus Festus, Pro-consul of
Greece, the Senate of Areopagus is said to consist of Three-hundred.

All, that had undergon the Office of an Archon, were not taken in to this
Senate, but only such of them, as had behaved themselves well in the discharge
of their Trust; and not they neither, till they had given an account of their
Administration before the Logistae, and obtained their Approbation, after an
enquiry into their Behavior, which was not a bare piece of Formality, and a
Thing of Course, but extremely severe, rigorous, and particular Plutarch.
Pericle, Pollux l. VIII. c. X. Demosthen. Timocrat.
. This being done, after the performance of certain Sacrifices at Limnae, a
place in Athens Dedicated to Bacchus, they were admitted upon set Days
Demosthen. in Nearam.
. Thus it was ordered by Solon's Constitutions, which were nicely and
punctually observed for many Ages; but toward the Declination of the Athenian
Grandeur, together with many other useful and excellent Ordinances, were either
wholly laid aside and abrogated, or, which was all one, neglected and not
observed. And then, not the Archons only, but others, as well those of loose
Lives, and mean Fortunes, as Persons of high Quality, and strict Virtue, nay,
and even Foreigners too were taken into this Assembly, as appears by several
Instances produced by the Learned Meursius, and particularly that of Rufus
Festus, mentioned in the aforesaid Inscription, as a Member of it.

Aristides tells us, this Court was (...), the most sacred and venerable
Tribunal in all Greece; and if we consider the Justice of all their Sentences,
and judicial Determinations, the unblameableness of their Manners, their wise
and prudent Behavior, and their high Quality, and Station in the
Commonwealth, it will easily appear, that this Character was not unreasonable,
or undeserved. To have been sitting in a Tavern, or public House, was a
sufficient Reason to deny an Archon's admission into it Athenaeus lib. XIV.
; and though their Dignity was usually continued to them as long as they lived,
yet if any of the Senators was convicted of any Immorality, he was without
Mercy or Favor presently expelled. Nor was it enough that their Lives were
strictly innocent and unblameable, but something more was required of them,
their Countenances, Words, Actions, and all their Behavior must be composed,
serious, and grave to a Degree beyond what was expected from other (the most
virtuous) Men. To laugh in their Assembly, was an unpardonable piece of Levity
Aeschin. in Timarch.
, and for any of them to write a Comedy, was forbidden by a particular Precept
of the Law Plutarch. de Gloria Atheniens.
.

Nay, so great an Awe and Reverence did this solemn and grave Assembly strike
into those that sat in it that Isocrates Areopagitica.
tells us, That in his Days, when they were somewhat degenerated from their
primitive Virtue, however otherwise Men were Irregular and Exorbitant, yet once
chosen into this Senate, they presently ceased from their vicious Inclinations,
and chose rather to conform to the Laws and Manners of that Court, (...), than
to continue in their wild and debauched Course of Life. And so exactly upright
and impartial were their Proceedings, that Demosthenes Aristocratea.
tells us, that to his Time there had never been so much as one of their
Determinations, that either Plaintiff or Defendant had any just reason to
complain of. This was so eminently remarkable in all Parts of Greece, that even
Foreign States, when any Controversies happened among them, would voluntarily
submit to their Decision: Pausanias Messeniacis.
reports in particular of the Messenians, that, before their first Wars with
the Spartans, they were very desirous that their Quarrel should be referred to
the Areopagites, and both Parties stand to their Determination.

It is reported that this Court was the first, that sat upon Life and Death
E^ymolog. V. (...).
; and in later Ages, a great many capital Causes came under it is Cognizance;
before it were brought all Incendiaries, all such as Deserted their Country,
against whom they proceeded with no less Severity, than was used to those that
were convicted of Treason, for both were alike punished with Death Lycurgus in
Leocratem.
; such also as had laid wait for any Person's Life, whether their wicked
Contrivances were Successful, or no, for the very designing to murder any Man
was thought to deserve no less than Capital Punishment; others are of Opinion,
that such Causes were tried at the Tribun^l of the Palladium Harpocrat. Suidas.
. However that be, it is certain, that all Wounds given out of Malice, all
wilful Murders, and particularly such as were effected by Poison, came under
the Cognizance of this Court Demos^hen. Aristocrat. Pollux lib. VIII. cap. X.
aliique.
. Some say that there was no appeal from the Areopagites to the People; but
others, amongst whom is Meursius, are of a contrary Opinion, and assure us,
that not only their Determinations might be called in Question, and, if need
was, retracted by an Assembly of the People Di^archus Orat. in Aristogiton.
, but that themselves too, if they exceeded the due Bounds of Moderation in
inflicting Punishments, were liable to Account for it to the Logistae
Demosthen. in Neaeram, Aeschin. in Cresi^hont.
* The same Author tells us afterward, that this Court had power to cancel the
Sentence of an Assembly, if the People had acquitted any Criminal that deserved
punishment Demosthen. pro Co^ona.
, and to rescue out of their hands such innocent Persons, as were by prejudice
or misinformation condemned by them. Perhaps in both these Opinions there is
something of Truth, if you understand the former of the Areopagus in it is
primitive State; and the other, when it is Power was retr^nch'd by Pericles.

Their Power in the Commonwealth was very great, for by Solon's Constitution,
the Inspection, and Custody of the Laws were committed to them P^utarch. Solone.
, the public Fund was disposed of and managed according to their Discretion
Plutarch. Themistocle.
, the Care of all Young Men in the City belonged to them, and it was their
Business to appoint them Tutors, and Governors Aeschines Philofophus in
Axi^cho.
, and see that they were educated suitably to their several Qualities Iso^rates
Areopagitic.
. Nor did they only superintend over the Youth, but their Power was extended to
Persons of all Ages, and Sexes; such as lived disorderly, or were guilty of any
Impiety, or Immorality, they punished according to the merit of their Offenses;
and such as were eminent for a virtuous course of Life they had Power to
reward. To this End, they went about with the Gynaeconomi to all public
Meetings, such as were Marriages, and solemn Sacrifices, which were usually
concluded with a Banquet, to see that all things were carried on with Decency,
and Sobriety Athen^us l. VI
. Idleness was a Crime that came more especially under their Cognizance, and
(which seems to have been an Institution peculiar to Solon) they were empowered
and commanded to enquire strictly after every Man's course of Life, and to
examine by what means he maintained himself in the Station he was in, that so
there might be no Room for such as lived by unlawful Arts, by Cheating and
Cozenage, or Theft and Rapine Plutarch. Solo^e, Valor. Max. l. II. c. VI.
. Beside this, matters of Religion, Blasphemy against the Gods, Contempt of the
Holy Mysteries, and all sorts of Impiety, the Consecration also of new Gods,
erection of Temples and Altars, and introduction of new Ceremonies into Divine
Worship, were referred to the Judgment of this Court; therefore Plato, having
been instructed in the knowledge of one God in Egypt, was forced to dissemble
or conceal his Opinion, for fear of being called to an Account for it by the
Areopagites Justinius Martyr.
; and Saint Paul was arraigned before them, as a setter forth of strange Gods,
when he preached unto them Jesus, and (...), or the Resurrection Act. Apostol.
XVIII. 1^, 19
. These were the chief Businesses that this Senate was employed about, for they
seldom intermedled in the Management of public Affairs, except in cases of
great and imminent Danger, and in these the Commonwealth usually had recourse
to them, as their last and surest Refuge Argum^nt Orat. A^drot
.

They had three Meetings in the Areopagus every Month, upon the Twenty-seventh,
Twenty-eighth, and Twenty-ninth Days Pollux lib. VIII. cap. X.
. But if any Business happened that required dispatch, it was usual for them to
assemble in the (...), or Royal Portico, which they encompassed with a Rope, to
prevent the Multitude from thronging in upon them Demosthen. Orat. I. in
Ari^^og^t.
, as was usual also in other Courts of Justice.

Two things are very remarkable in their Judgments; First, that they sat in the
open Air Pollux loc. citat.
, a Custom practiced in all the Courts of Justice, that had Cognizance of
Murder; partly, because it was unlawful for the Accuser and Criminal in such
Cases to be under the same Roof; and partly, that the Judges, whose Persons
were esteemed Sacred, might contract no Pollution from conversing with Men
profane and unhallowed, for such they were accounted, that had been guilty of
so black and heinous a Crime Antipho^. Orat. de caede Herodis.
. Secondly, they heard and determined all Causes at Night, and in the Dark, to
the End, that having neither seen the Plaintiff, nor Defendant, they might lie
under no Temptation of being biased or influenced by either of them Lucian.
He^m^timo.
.

Actions about Murder were ushered into the Areopagus by the (...), who was
allowed to sit as Judge amongst them, laying aside his Crown, which was one of
the Badges of his Office Pollux.
.

The common Method, they proceeded in, was this: The Court being met, and the
People excluded, they divided themselves into several Committees, each of which
had their Causes assigned to be heard and determined by them severally, if the
multitude of business was so great, that the whole Senate could not take
Cognizance of them singly. Both these designations were performed by Lots, to
the End, that every Man coming into the Court before it was determined what
Causes would fall to his Share, none of them might lie under any Temptation of
having his Honesty corrupted with Bribes Lucian. Bis accusato
.

Before the Trial began, the Plaintiff and Defendant took solemn Oaths upon the
Testicles of a Goat, a Ram, and a Bull, by the (...), or Furies. The Plaintiff
(in case of Murder) swore that he was related to the deceased Person, (for none
but near Relations, at the farthest a Cousin, were permitted to prosecute the
Murderer) and that the Prisoner was the cause of his Death. The Prisoner swore
that he was innocent of the Crime laid to his charge. Both of them confirmed
their Oaths with direful Imprecations, wishing, That, if they swore falsely,
Themselves, their Houses, and their whole Families might be utterly destroyed
and extirpated by the Divine Vengeance Demosth^n. Aristocrat. Dinarchus in
Demosthen. ^^sias in Theomnestum, Pollux l. VIII. c. X.
, which they looked upon to be so dreadful, and certain, that the Law inflicted
no Penalty upon those that at such a Time were guilty of Perjury, remitting
them, as it were, to be punished by an higher Tribunal.

Then the two Parties were placed upon two silver Foot-stools; the Accuser was
placed upon the Stool of (...), or Injury; the Prisoner upon the Stool of
(...), or Impudence, or, according to Adrian Iunius's Correction, of (...), or
Innocence; these were two Goddesses, to which Altars, and afterward Temples,
were erected in the Areopagus Pausanias, Cicero de Legib. l. II.
. The Accuser in this place proposed three Questions to the Prisoner, called by
Aeschylus, (...) Eumenidibus.
, to each of which he was to give a distinct Answer. The first was, (...); Are
you guilty of this Murder? to which he made answer, (...), or (...), Guilty,
or, Not guilty. Secondly, (...); Why did you commit this Murder? Thirdly,
(...); Who were your Partners and Accomplices in the Fact?

In the next place the two Parties impleaded each other, and the Prisoner was
allowed to make his Defense in two Orations, the first of which when he had
ended, he was permitted to secure himself by Flight, and go into voluntary
Banishment, if he suspected the goodness of his Cause; which Privilege if he
made use of, all his Estate was confiscated, and exposed to Sale by the (...)
Demosthen. in Aristocrat. Pollux. l. VIII.
. In the primitive Times both Parties spoke for themselves Sextu^ Emp^ricus
adv. Mathemat. l. II.
, but in later Ages they were permitted to have Counsel to plead for them. But
whoever it was that spoke, he was to represent the bare and naked Truth,
without any Preface, or Epilogue, without any Ornaments, Figures of Rhetoric,
or any other insinuating Means to win the Favor, or move the Affections of the
Judges Aristotele^ Rhetoric. l. I. Lucianus Anacharside, Demosthen. Quintilian.
aliique innumeri.
.

Both Parties being heard, if the Prisoner was resolved to stand the Trial,
they proceeded to give Sentence, which they did with the most profound Gravity
and Silence; hence (...), and (...) came to be proverbial Sayings; though some
derive them from their Re^erve^ness, and severe Gravity, and therefore (...),
is usually taken for a grave, majestic, rigid Person; and others, from the
great care they took to conceal the Transactions of their Senate, of which the
Poet speaks, Ergo occulta reges, ut Curia Martis Athenis Iuvenat. Sat. IX.
.

The manner of giving Sentence was thus; There were placed in the Court two
Urns, one of which was of Brass, and they called it (...), from the place it
stood in; (...), because the Votes cast into it pronounc'^ the Accusation
valid; and (...), because they decree'^ ^he death of (...) ^^isoner. The second
Urn was of Wood, being placed behind the former, into it they, that acquitted
the Prisoner, were to cast their Suffrages; for which reasons it was called
(...), or (...), and (...) Aristophan. Schol. Vesp. Equit.
. Afterward the Thirty Tyrants, having made themselves Ma^ters of the City,
ordered them to give their Voices in a manner more public and open, by casting
their Calculi upon two Tables, the former of which contained the Suffrages,
that acquitted, the latter those, that condemned the Prisoner, to the End, that
it might be known, which way every Man gave his Voice, and how he stood
affected to their interest and Proceedings Lysias in Agorat.
.

Beside the Crimes that came peculiarly under their Cognizance, there were
sometimes others brought before them, in which their Sentence was not final or
decretory, for there lay an Appeal to the Court, to which they properly
belonged, as Sigonius observes.

The Senators of Areopagus were never rewarded with Crowns for their Services,
being not permitted to wear the^ Aeschines in Ctes^^hont.
; but received a sort of Maintenance from the Public, which they called (...),
Hesychius in (...).
; and, Meursius has observed out of Lucian Bis accusato.
, that they had the same Pension, that was allotted to some other Judges, viz.
three Oboli for every Cause, they gave judgment upon.

Their Authority was preserved to them entire, till the time of Pericles, who,
because he could not be admitted amongst them, as never having born the Office
of an Archon, employed all his Power and Cunning against them, and having
gotten a great Interest with the Commonalty, so embroiled and routed their
Senate by the assistance of Ephialtes, that most of the Causes and Matters,
which had been formerly tried there, were discharged from their Cognizance
Plutarch. Pericle.
. From this time the Athenians, being, in a great measure, freed from the
restraint, that had been laid upon them, began sensibly to degenerate from
their anci^nt Virtue, and in a short time let loose the Reins to all manner of
Licentiousness Isocrates Areopagit.
, and therefore are compared by Plutarch to a wild unruly Horse, that, having
flung his Rider, would be governed and kept in no longer. The same Vices and
Excesses, that were practiced in the City, crept in by degrees amongst the
Areopagites themselves; and therefore Demetrius, one of the Family of the
Phalerean, being censured by them as a loose Liver, told them plainly, that if
they designed to make a Reformation in the City, they must begin at Home, for
that even amongst them there were several Persons of as bad, and worse Lives,
than himself, and (which was a more unpardonable Crime, than any that he had
been guilty of) several, that debauched and corrupted other Men's Wives, and
were themselves corrupted and seduced by Bribes Athenaus (...).
.

CHAPTER XX. Of some other Courts of Justice.
(...), was a Court of Judicature instituted in the Reign of Demophoon, the Son
of Theseus, upon this Account: Some of the Argives under the Conduct of
Diomedes, or, as others say, of Agamemnon, being driven in the Night upon the
Coasts of Attica, landed at the Haven of Phalerus, and, supposing it to be an
Enemies Country, went out to spoil, and plunder it. The Athenians presently
took the Alarm, and having united themselves into one Body under the Conduct of
Demophoon, repulsed the Invaders with great Loss, killing a great many of them
upon the place, and forcing the rest to retire into their Ships; but upon the
approach of Day, Acamas, the Brother of Demophoon, finding amongst the dead
Bodies the Palladium, or Statue of Minerva brought from Troy, discovered that
the Persons, they had killed, were their Friends, and Allies; whereupon (having
first advised with an Oracle) they gave them an honorable Burial in the place
where they were slain, consecrated the Goddess's Statue, erecting a Temple to
her, and instituted a Court of Justice, in which Cognizance was taken of such
as were indicted for involuntary Murders. The first that was arraigned in it,
was Demophoon, who, in his return from the forementioned Conflict, killed one
of his own Subjects by a sudden turn of his Horse. Others report, that
Agamemnon being enraged at the loss of his Men, and di^^a^isfied at Demophoon's
rash and hasty Attempt upon them, refer^'d the Quarrel to the decision of Fifty
Athenians, and as many Argians, whom they called (...)* because both Parties
committed the Determination of their Cause to them.

Afterward, the Argians were excluded, and the number of the Ephetae reduced
to Fifty-one by Draco, whom some affirm to have been the first Instituter of
them; but others with more probability report, that he regulated and reformed
them, augmented their Power, honored them with many important Privileges, and
made them Superior to the Senate of Areopagus. In this State they continued
till Solon's Time, by whom their Power was lessened, and their Authority
restrained, the Causes which had formerly been tried by them, were di^charg'd
from their Cognizance, and only those about Manslaughter, and Chance-medly,
and, as some say, Conspiracies against the Lives of Citizens, that were
discovered before they took effect, left to them.

Fifty of them were appointed by Election, Five being chosen out of every
Tribe, but the odd Man was appointed by Lots; all of them were Men of good
Characters, and virtuous Lives, of severe Manners, and a settled Gravity, for
no Person under the Age of fifty Years was admitted into their Number.

Causes were entered in this Court by the (...), and the Proceedings were in
some things agreeable to those of the Areopagus, for both Parties, the
Plaintiff, and Defendant, were obliged to confirm their Allegations by solemn
Oaths, and Curses, and then, the Orators having performed their parts, the
Judges proceeded to give Sentence Pausanias, Harpocration, S^id^s, Pollux lib.
VIII cap. X.
.

(...), was a Court of Justice in the Temple of Apollo Delphinius, and Diana
Delphinia. Under it is Cognizance came all Murders, wherein the Prisoner
confessed the Fact, but pleaded that it was committed by permission of the
Laws, as in the case of self-preservation, or adultery, for it was allowed any
one to kill an Adulterer, if he caught him in the Act Plutarch. Solone.
. The first Person that was tried in this Court, was Theseus, who, in his
Journey to Athens, had slain the Robbers, that infested the Ways between Tr^zen
and that place; and afterward the Sons of Pallas, that raised a Rebellion
against him ^ollux loc. cit. Pausanias.
.

(...), was a Court of Judicature, which had Cognizance of Murders committed by
Things without Life, or Sense, as Stones, Iron, Timber, etc. which, if they
killed a Man by Accident, or by the direction of an unknown Hand, or of a
Person that had escaped, had Judgment passed upon them in this place, and were
ordered to be cast out of the Territories of Athens by the (...). This Court
was as ancient as Erectheus, and the first thing, that was brought to Trial in
it, was an Ax, wherewith one of Jupiter's Priests killed an Ox, (an Animal
accounted very sacred in those Days) that had eaten one of the consecrated
Cakes, and as soon as he had committed the Fact, secured himself by Flight
Iidem. Aelian. V. H. lib. VIII. cap. III. Harpocration.
. This place also was the Common Hall, in which public Entertainments were
made, and the sacred Lamp, that burned with a perpetual Fire, was kept by
Widows, that had passed the years and desires of Marriage, and were devoted to
the Mother of the Gods, which Lamp, as Plutarch in the Life of Numa tells us,
was extinct under the Tyranny of Aristion; it was always managed with the same
Rites and Ceremonies, that were used at Rome, about the Vestal Fire, which he
says was ordained and instituted after the Pattern of this, and another holy
Fire of the same Nature among the Delphians.

(...), was seated upon the Seashore in the Piraeeus, and received it is Name
(...), because it stood in a Pit, and therefore Pollux calls it (...), or, as
is more probable, from the Hero Phreutus. The Causes heard in this Court, were
such as concerned Persons that had fled out of their own Country for Murder,
or, those that fled for involuntary Murder, and had afterward committed a
wilful and deliberate Murder. The first Person, that was tried in this Place,
was Teucer, who, as Lycophron reports, was banished out of Salamis, by his
Father Telam^n, upon a groundless suspicion, that he had been accessory to
Ajax's Death. The Criminal was not permitted to come to Land, or so much as to
cast Anchor, but pleaded his Cause in his Bark, and if found guilty, was
committed to the Mercy of the Winds, and Waves; or, as some say, suffered
condign punishment: if innocent, was only cleared of the second Fact, and (as
'twas customary) underwent a Twelve-month's Banishment for the former
Demosthen. in Arist. Harpocrat. Pollux. loc cit. He^ychius.
.

The Judges that presided in all these Courts, were (after Draco's Time) the
Ephe^ae, as Harpocration observes Voce (...).
. The Scholiast upon Aristophanes Pluto.
, speaks of other Judges that were elected by Lots to hear Causes in all the
Courts of Justice, which, however it might be done in later Ages, it is certain
was never practiced among the primitive Athenians, except it may be understood
of some of the inferior and l^ss remarkable Courts, which I am inclined to
believe. The Method of electing these Judges is described in this Manner: At
Athens there were Ten Courts of Justice, according to the Number of the Tribes,
upon each of these were engraven large. Capital Letters, all painted with Red,
or, as others report, with different Colors, from some of which several of the
Courts received their Names, as (...), etc. Now when Causes were to be heard,
the Thesmothetae, accompanied with a Register, appointed the Judges to take
Cognizance of them by Lots, on which were inscribed the Letters belonging to
the Courts; the Lots being drawn, the Judges took each of them his Chance, and
went to the Court, on which the same Letter, which was upon his Lot, wa^
^ngrav'd, where he received from the public Crier a Tablet, on which he was to
write the Heads of the Orations of both Parties, and a Staff, which was in
former Ages the constant, and perhaps only Badge of Judicial, and Sovereign
Power, therefore the (...) in Homer are accounted sacred, and the most solemn
Oaths taken by them, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...). -- Iliad. (...). v. 233.

But this I do with solemn Oath declare,
An Oath, which I Will by this same Scepter swear,
Which in the Wood has left it is native Root,
And sapless n'ere shall boast a tender shoot,
Since from it is sides relentless Steel has torn
The Bark, but now by Grecian Chiefs is born,
Chiefs that maintain the Laws of mighty Jove
Committed to their Charge. --
Mr. Hugh Hutchin of Linc. Coll. Sometimes we find the Scepters of Kings, and
great Persons adorned with Studds of silver, or gold, -- (...)
(...). -- Iliad. (...). v. 245.

-- he cast his Scepter on the Ground
Embossed wi^h Studs of Gold. --
To return, the Athenian Judges, having heard the Causes, they were appointed
to take Cognizance of, went immediately and delivered back their Scepter to the
Prytanes, from whom they received the reward due to them.

And thus much may suffice concerning the Courts for Capital Offenses; it
remains that I give you an account of those, which had the Cognizance of Civil
Affairs.

CHAPTER XXI. Of some other Courts of Justice, their Judicial Process, etc.
(...), was, as the Name seems to import, a Court of no great Credit or
Reputation, having Cognizance only of trivial Matters, whose value was not
above one Dram. Pollux reports, there were two Courts of this Name, one of
which was called (...), and the other (...). The Persons, that sat as Judges,
were the Eleven Magistrates, called (...) Harpocrat. Suidas etc.
.

(...), was, in all probability, so called, because it was Triangular I^dem.
.

(...), received it is Name from the Temple of the Hero Lycus, in which it was
erected. The same Person had a Statue in all the Courts of Justice, by which he
was represented with a Wolf's face, and therefore (...) signifies Sycophants,
who by Tens, that is, in great Numbers, frequented those Places Aristoph.
Schol. Vesp. Zenobius, Harpocrat. Pollux, Suidas, etc.
.

(...), was so called from one Metichus, an Architect, by whom it was built. It
was a Court much frequented, and of better Note than the Three former; and the
Persons that sat as Judges were required to be of good Birth and Credit, free
from public Debts, and, at the least, thirty Years of Age Pollux etc.
.

The Judges in all these Courts were obliged to take a solemn Oath, by the
Paternal Apollo, Ceres, and Jupiter the King, that they would give Sentence
uprightly, and according to Law; which Oath, as also that which was taken by
those that judged in the Heliaea, was given in a Place near the River Ilissus,
called Ardettus, from a Hero of that Name, who in a public Sedition united
the contesting Parties, and engaged them to confirm their Treaties of Peace by
mutual Oaths in this Place. Hence it was, that common and profane swearers were
called (...) Etymolog. Pollux, Suidas, Hesych. Harpocrat.
.

Of all the Judicatories, that handled Civil Affairs, (...) was far the
greatest, and most frequented, being so called (...), from the People's
thronging together Ulpian. in Demosthen.
, or rather (...), because it was an open place, and therefore exposed to the
Sun Idem. Aristoph. Schol. Nub. Equit. Vesp. Suidas.
.

The Judges, that sat in this Court, were, at the least, Fifty, but the more
usual Number was Two, or Five-hundred, being appointed by Lots out of the Body
of the People; but if the Exigency of the Causes required, they were increased
to a Thousand, and then they were forced to join two Courts together, sometimes
to Fifteen-hundred, or Two-thousand, and then Three, or Four Courts were
united, to contain so vast a Multitude Pollux lib. VIII cap. X. Stephan.
Byzantin. V (...). Harpocrat.
.

They had Cognizance of Civil Affairs of the greatest Weight and Importance,
and were not permitted to give Judgment till they had taken a solemn Oath, the
Form whereof was this, as we find it in Demosthenes Orat. in Timocrat.
; I will give Sentence according to the Laws, and the Decrees of the People of
Athens, and the Council of Five-hundred; I will not consent to place the
supreme Power in the hands of a single Person, or a Few; nor permit any Man to
dissolve the Commonwealth, or so much as give his Vote, or make an Oration in
defense of such a Revolution: I will not endeavor to discharge private Debts,
nor to make a Division of Lands, or Houses: I will not restore Persons sent
into Banishment, nor pardon those that are condemned to die, nor expel any Man
out of the City, contrary to the Laws, and Decrees of the People, and Council
of Five-hundred, nor permit any other Person to do it: I will not elect any
Person into any public Employ, and particularly I will not create any Man
Archon, Hieromnemon, Ambassador, public Herald, or Synedrus, nor consent that
he shall be admitted into any of those Offices, that are elected by Lots upon
the same Day with the Archons, who has undergon any former Office, and not
given in his Accounts; nor that any Person shall bear two Offices, or be twice
elected into the same Office in one Year: I will not receive Gifts my self, nor
shall any other for me, nor will I permit any other Person to do the like, by
any means, whether direct, or indirect, to pervert Justice in the Court of
Heliaea: I am not under Thirty Years of Age: I will hear both the Plaintiff,
and Defendant, without Partiality, and give Sentence in all the Causes brought
before me: I swear by Jupiter, Neptune, and Ceres; if I violate this Oath, or
any part of it, may I perish with my whole Family, but if I religiously keep
and observe it, may we live and prosper.

These seem to have been the Ten public Courts in Athens; others there were of
less Note, where particular Magistrates, or the (...), or the (...), took
Cognizance of Causes belonging to their several Offices; such was the Court at
Cynosarges, Odeum, Theseus's Temple, Bucoleum, and some others.

The method of Judicial Process was thus;

When any Man had received an Injury, for which he required satisfaction, he
went to the Magistrate, whose business it was to take Cognizance of such
Complaints, and report them to the Court; to him he delivered in a Tablet,
wherein was written his own (the Plaintiff's) Name, and the Criminal's,
together with an account of the Crime laid to his charge, and the Name of the
(...), or Bailiff, by whom he was summoned to make his appearance before the
Magistrate, which was the first thing to be done in these Proceedings, and
called (...) Ulpian. in Demosthen. Aristoph. Scholiast.
. But before this, the Magistrate asked the Plaintiff, Whether he was resolved
to prosecute his Action, and had Witnesses that would swear to his Indictment;
and whether he had all things in readiness to proceed to a Trial? This
Examination was called (...) Demosthen. in Olympiod. Idem in Nicostrat.
.

The Person accused, being summoned to appear before the Magistrate, had a
certain Day appointed to answer for himself, and was obliged to give sufficient
Bail, that he would make his appearance at the Time appointed Aristoph. Concion.
.

This being done, the Magistrate proceeded to the election of Judges, which was
performed by Lots; and they, upon the (...), or appointed Day, came to the
Tribunal, and took their Places; the public Crier having before commanded all
those that had no Business to depart in these Words, (...). Then to keep the
Crowds from thronging in upon them, the Court was surrounded with a Rope, by
the command of the Magistrate, and Sergeants appointed to keep the Doors, which
they called (...), being the same with those which the Romans called
Cancellatae Pollux l VIII. c. X.
. Now least any of the Judges should be wanting, Proclamation was made in this
manner, (...), If any Judge be without the Door, let him enter; for if any Man
came after the Cause began to be discussed, he could not have Admission, as not
being capable of giving Sentence, because he had not heard all that both
Parties could say for themselves Aristophan. ejusque Schol. Vesp.
.

Then the Magistrate proposed the Cause to the Judges, and gave them Power to
determine it; the doing which they called (...), the Cause it self (...), and
the Person that entered it (...). For by the Laws of Athens, there were certain
Causes brought before several of the Magistrates, who had no Power to determine
them by a final Decision, but were only to examine into the Matter, and, if it
deserved to be heard in the Court, refer it to the Cognizance of Judges
appointed for that purpose, upon a Day fixed by himself, and this is what they
called (...)

Then the Indictment was read by the public Crier, in which were contained the
reasons of the Accusation, with an account of the Injury said to be received,
the manner also of it, and the damage suffered by the Plaintiff; the Heads of
which the Judges took in writing Demosthen.
.

If the Person accused did not make his appearance, Sentence was given against
him without any farther trouble, and this they called (...), and (...). But if
in the space of Ten Days he came and presented himself, proving that he had
been detained by Sickness, or any other extraordinary and unavoidable
Necessity, the former Sentence was disannulled, and therefore this Proceeding
they called (...). Then the Trial was to be brought on afresh within the space
of two Months by the Defendant, and this they called (...), and the doing
(...); but if he neglected to have the Cause decided in that Time, the former
Sentence was to stand good, and be put in Execution upon him Ulpian. in
Demosthen. Pollux lib. VIII. cap. VI.
.

Beside this, the Defendant was permitted to make three Pleas for himself,
before the Cause was put to a final Decision:

1. (...), or (...), whereby he alleged that the accusation was not (...), or
capable of being tried at that time; as, for instance, if the Injury, said to
be received from him, ha^ been done so long before, that the Law could take no
hold of him for it; or, if he had been before tried, and acquitted, or
condemned, and punished for it. This Plea the Defendant obviated by proving the
contrary of what the Plaintiff objected; and this, with the (...), was by one
common Name called (...) P^llux loc. cit. Harpocr^^. etc.
.

2. (...), whereby he desired the Judicial Process might be differr'd, giving
in upon Oath, that some urgent Occasion, such as the sickness of himself, or
Relations, hindered him from attending the Court at that Time Ha^pocrat.
.

3. (...), whereby the Defendant turned Plaintiff, and retorted the Accusation
upon his Adversary Hes^ch. Pollux loc. cit.
.

If the Defendant urged none of these Pleas, but was willing that the Trial
should immediately go forward, he was said (...), and the Pr^cess was called
(...). Then both Parties took solemn Oaths* the Plaintiff swore, That he had
been injured by the Defendant: the Defendant, That he had not injured the
Plaintiff. The Plaintiff's Oath was called (...), the Defendant's (...), as
most of the Grammarians are of Opinion, but in Pollux, the Defendant's Oath is
(...), and Plaintiff's (...); and both of them were named (...). These Oaths,
together with the allegations of the Witnesses, were delivered in writing to
the Judges, by whose order they were put together into a Vessel of Brass, or
sometimes of Earth, called (...) Pollux* Suida^* Harpo^rat. Aristoph. Schol.
Vesp.
. In Causes wherein the Public was concerned, the Plaintiff took a ^arther
Oath, that he would accept no bribes, nor be by any means prevailed upon to act
treacherously in the Cause, or desist from the legal prosecution of it
Aeschines in Timarch.
.

Before the Trial began, both Parties were obliged to deposite a certain sum
of money, which they called (...), into the hands of the Magistrate that
entered their Cause into the Court, who, upon failure of the payment
immediately expunged the Cause out of the Roll, and hindered it from proceeding
any farther. If the Cause in Debate was concerning the value of an Hundred
Drachms, or upwards to a Thousand, they deposited three Drachms; if it is value
was upwards of a Thousand, and not above Ten-thousand, they deposited Thirty,
which, after the Decision of the Cause were divided among the Judges, and the
Person, that was Cast, was obliged, beside the payment of other Charges, to
restore the Money to his Adversary Pollux, Harpocration.
.

(...), was a sum of Money deposited by those that sued the Commonwealth for
confiscated Goods, or any others that were claimed by the public Exchequer, or
private Persons for the inheritances of Heiresses; the former deposited the
fifth; the latter the tenth part of the Estate contended for Iidem.
.

(...), was one Dram deposited in Lawsuits about small and private Matters,
which were decided by the (...) Iidem.
.

(...), was a Fine laid upon those that could not prove the Indictment they had
brought against their Adversaries, so called, because they were obliged to pay
the sixth part of the Value of the thing they contended for, from (...),
because out of every Dram, they deposited one Obolus, which is the sixth part
of a Dram Iidem*
. Some of these sums were deposited in all Lawsuits, a very few excepted,
before the Trial could proceed.

Then the Witnesses were produced, and is any of them refused to make his
Appearance, he was summoned by a Sergeant, whom they called (...), and if he
seemed unwilling to be an Evidence, had three things proposed to him, viz. To
swear to the Fact; To a^jure i^, or deny that he was privy to it; or, lastly,
to pay a Mulct of a Thousand Drachms; he that was fined for refusing the Oath,
or that took it out of fear, was said (...); he that was only summoned, and
took it voluntarily (...) Iidem^
. The Oath was taken at the Altar with all the Solemnity imaginable, to which
end they erected Altars in all the Courts of Judicature.

The Persons that gave Evidence, were Men of Credit, Freeborn, and
disinterested; for no Man's Oath was taken in his own Cause, and such as by
their ill Behavior had forfeited their Privileges, and were (...), or,
disfranchis'd, had not Reputation enough to deserve belief; the Slaves were not
permitted to have any Concern in public Business, and therefore could neither
be Evidences, except they were examined upon the Rack, nor plead in any Court
of Justice Vide Petitum de Legibus Attici^.
.

There were two sorts of Evidences; the first of which they called (...), when
the Person that swore, was an Eyewitness of the Fact: The other (...), when
the Juror received what he testified from a third Person, that had been an
Eyewitness of it, but was at that time either dead, or in a Foreign Country,
or detained by Sickness, or hindered by some other unavoidable Accident from
making his Appearance; for, except in such Cases, the Allegations of absent
Persons were never taken for Lawful Evidences Harpocrat. Pollux.
.

When the Witnesses were sworn, the Plaintiff being placed upon the left hand
of the Tribunal, and the Defendant upon the right Aristotel. Problem.
; both of them spoke set Orations in their own behalf, that were, for the most
part, composed, by some of the Orators, which Custom was first introduced by
Antiphon a Rhamnusian Idem Rhetor. lib. I. cap. XXXIII.
. Sometimes, if they desired it, the Judges granted them (...), or, Advocates
to plead for them, the doing which they called (...), to plead for a Fee
Clemen^ Alexandria.
. And least by the length of their Orations they should weary the Judges
patience, and hinder them from proceeding to other Business, they were limited
to a certain Time, called (...) Harpocration.
, which was measured by a (...), or Hourglass, differing from ours in this,
that instead of Sand, they made use of Water; and to prevent all Fraud and
Deceit, there was an Officer constituted on purpose to distribute the Water
equally to both sides, whom, from his business, they called (...), or (...).
When the Glass was run out, they were permitted to speak no farther, and
therefore we find them very careful not to loose, or mispend one drop of their
Water, and whilst the Laws quoted by them were reciting, or if any other
business happened to intervene, they gave order that the Glass should be
stopped Demosthen.
. Yet if any Person had made an end of speaking, before the Time allotted him
was expired, he was permitted to resign the remaining part of his Water to any
other that had Occasion, and this is meant by the Orator when he says, (...),
let him speak till what remains of my Water be run out.

When both Parties had made an End of speaking, the public Crier, by the
Command of the Magistrate that presided in the Court, ordered the Judges to
bring in their Verdict; and in such Cases, as the Laws had made Provision, and
appointed Penalties for, (which were called (...)) a single Verdict, whereby
the Person was declared Guilty, or, not Guilty, was sufficient; but in those
Cases, that the Laws were silent in, (which they called (...)) a second
Sentence was required, if the accused Person was brought in Guilty, to determine
what punishment was due to his Offense Harpocratio^.
. And here, before they proceeded to give Sentence, the condemned Person was
asked, What damage he thought his Adversary had received from him, and what
recompense he ought in Justice to make him? And the Plaintiff's account, which,
together with the Indictment he had delivered in before, was taken into
consideration; and then, the circumstances on both sides being duly and
impartially weighed, the final and decretory Sentence was given.

The most ancient way of given Sentence was by Black and White Sea-shells,
called (...); or Pebbles, called (...), Ovid has taken notice of this Custom,
Mos erat antiquis, niveis atrisque Lapillis,
His damnare reos, illis absolvere culpa Metamorph. lib XV.
.
Black, and White stones were used in ages past,
These to acquit the Prisoner, those to cast.
Mr. Hutchin. After them, (...), which were pellets of Brass, came into use;
which, when laid aside, (...), or Beans succeeded; they were of two sorts,
White, and Black; the White were whole, and were made use of to absolve, the
Black were bored through, and were the instruments of condemnation Pollux,
Hes^chius, Harpocration, Aristo^h. Scho'. Ran. and Vesp. etc.
.

Hence it is, that in Aristophanes Equit.
Judges, that lived upon the Gifts they received for doing Justice, are called
(...), Eaters of Beans; and (...) is a Proverb, not much different from (...),
or Amaltheae capra, being usually applied to things that bring in large gains,
and are a maintenance to their Masters Hesychius, Eustathius Iliad. (...). page
884. Edit. Basil.
.

These Beans the Judges took from the Altar, and two Urns, which they called
(...), or (...), being placed, they cast in their Beans through a little Tunnel
called (...), holding them only with three Fingers, viz. the Forefinger,
Middle, and Thumb, that it might be impossible for them to cast in above one at
a Time. The rest of their customary Rites, are much-what the same with those I
have already described in the Judgments of the Court of Areopagus, except that
in private Causes there were four Urns placed in the Court, as Sigonius has
observed out of Demosthenes Orat. in Macart.
.

But this perhaps might be occasioned by the Number of the Persons concerned in
the Trial, for if there were more than two Competitors, that laid claim to an
Estate, each of them had a distinct Urn, into which those, that passed Sentence
on his side, were to cast their Beans, and he that had the greatest number,
obtained the Victory, which Sigonius seems not to have observed.

When all had given over Voting, least any Man out of Favor should suspend his
Suffrage, the Crier made Proclamation in this manner, (...), If there be any
that has not given his Voice, let him now arise, and give it.

Then the Urns were opened, and the Suffrages numbered in presence of the
Magistrate, who stood with a Rod in his Hand, which he laid over the Beans, as
they were numbered, least any Person should, through Treachery, or Mistake, omit
any of them, or count the same twice. If the number of the Black Beans was
greatest, he pronounced the Person guilty, and as a mark to denote his
condemnation, drew a long Line, whence (...) in the Comedian, signifies to
condemn All; on the the contrary, he drew a short Line in token of Absolution,
if the white Beans exceeded, or only equaled the number of the Black
Aristophan. ejusque Schol. Ran. and Vesp.
, for such was the Clemency of the Athenian Laws, that, when the case seemed
equally disputable on both sides it was provided, that the severe and rigorous
Commands of Justice should give place to the milder Laws of Mercy and
Compassion; and this Rule seems to have been ever observed in all the Courts of
Athens. Euripides, to omit a great many others, has mentioned this Custom in
several places, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...) Electra. v. 1265.
.
Courage Orestes, if the Lots hit right,
If the Black pebbles don't exceed the White,
You'r' safe; and since it awful Phoebus was
The Parricide advised, your tottering cause
He Will on himself transfer: and hence shall be
This Law transmitted to Posterity,
That Lots, if equal, shall the Prisoner free.
Mr. Hutchin. And again to the same purpose, in another Tragedy, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...) Iphigenia Taurica. v. 1469.
.
Since you with equal Suffrages I freed,
When Justice ample Vengeance had decreed,
And once before when we debating sat
At Areopagus on your dubious Fate,
And there the dooming Sentence must have passed,
Had I not you with equal Lots releast;
On this account shall after-ages save
Such Criminals, as equal Voices have.
Mr. Hutchin.

The Plaintiff was called (...); the whole Suit, (...); and the Defendant,
(...). The Indictment before Conviction was named (...); after Conviction,
(...); and after Condemnation, (...)* All the Time the Cause was in suspense
and undetermined, it was exposed to public View, being engraved in a Tablet,
together with the Name of the Person accused, and hung up at the Statues of the
Heroes sirnam'd (...), than which there was not a more public place in the
whole City; this they called (...) Demosthen. ejusque Schol. in Median.
, and it seems to have been done with a design, that all Persons, who could
give any Information to the Court, having sufficient Notice of the Trial, might
come and present themselves.

If the convicted Person was guilty of a Capital Crime, he was delivered into
the hands of the (...), to receive the punishment due to his Offense: but if a
pecuniary Mulct was laid upon him, the (...) took care to see it paid; but in
case his Estate was not able to make payment, they issued out a Writ of
Outlawry against him, and confined him to perpetual Imprisonment Demosthen.
Androtian. Cornel. Nep. Miltiade.
.

If, on the contrary, the Plaintiff had accused his Adversary unjustly, and
produced false Evidence against him, he was, in some places, obliged to undergo
the punishment due by Law to the Crime, of which he had fasly accused an
innocent Person, but at Athens had only a Fine laid upon him. And both the
Villain that had forsworn himself, and he that suborned him were severely
prosecuted, the former by an Action of (...), the latter, of (...). Of these,
and the punishments due to such Offenders, I shall speak more in another place.

When the Trials were over, the Judges went to Lycus's Temple, where they
returned their (...), or Staffs, or Scepters, which were a badge of their
Office, and received from certain Officers called (...) a piece of Money for
their service, which, at the first, was only one Obolus, afterward it was
increased to two, then to three, and at the length to a Dram, which was six
Oboli, as we learn from the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Ran. Vesp. Item Suidas,
Pollux, Hesychius.
. And though these rewards may seem trifling and inconsiderable Expenses, yet the
troublesome temper of the Athenians, their nice and critical exaction of every
little Duty, or Privilege, occasioned so great a Number of Lawsuits, that the
frequent payment of these small sums by degrees so exhausted the Exchequer,
that they became a burden to the Commonwealth, and are particularly reflected
upon by Aristophanes Ran. page 280. Edit. Aemil. Porti, and Scholiast. ibid.
, who takes occasion every where to ridicule, and expose this quarrelsom,
litigious Humor, which was grown to such a height amongst them, that every
Corner of the Streets was pestered with whole swarms of turbulent Rascals, that
made it their constant business, to pick up petty Stories, and catch at every
occasion to accuse Persons of Credit and Reputation; these t^^y called (...),
which word sometimes signifies False-witness^^, but is more properly taken for
what we call common Barr^t^^^* being derived (...), from indicting Persons,
that exported Figs; for amongst the primitive Atheni^ns, when the use of that
Fruit was first found out, or in the time of a Dearth, when all sorts of
Provision were exceeding scarce, it was enacted that no Figs should be exported
out of Attica; and this Law, not being actually repealed, when a plentiful
Harvest had rendered it useless, by taking away the reason of it, gave occasion
to ill-natured, and malicious Fellows, to accuse all Persons they caught
transgressing the Letter of it, and from them all busy Informers have ever
since been branded with the Name of Sycophants Suidas, Aristoph. Schol. Pluto,
Equit. etc.
.

CHAPTER XXII. Of the (...), and (...).
OI (...), were Forty Men, that went their Circuits round the several
Buroughs, and had Cognizance of all Controversies about Money, when the sum
exceeded not ten Drachms; also, as Demosthenes reports Orat. in Pantanet.
, had Actions of Assault and Battery brought to their hearing. Pollux tells us,
that, at their first Institution, they were no more than thirty in Number; but
Hesychius reports, the Magistrates, or Judges called (...), were those, that
amerc'd the People for absenting themselves from the public Assemblies.

(...), or Arbitrators, were of two sorts,

1. (...), who were Fourty-four Men, above the Age of sixty, as Pollux, or
fifty, as Suidas reports, drawn by Lots out of each Tribe, to determine
Controversies about Money, when the sum was above ten Drachms. Their Sentence
was not final, so that if either of the contesting parties thought himself
injured by it, he might appeal to the superior Courts of Justice Demosthen.
Orat. in Aphobum.
. At their first Institution, all Causes whatsoever that exceeded ten Drachms
were heard by them, before they could be received into the other Courts Pollux,
Ul^ian.
. They passed Sentence without obliging themselves by any Oath, but in other
things acted in the same manner with the rest of the Judges, they received a
Dram of the Plaintiff, which was called (...), and another of the Defendant
when they administered his Oath to him; and in case the Parties did not appear
at the appointed Time and Place, they staid expecting them till the Evening,
and then laid a Fine upon them. Their Office continued a whole Year, at the end
of which they gave up their Accounts, and if they were proved to have refused
to give ^udgment, or to have been corrupted Demosthen. and Ulpian. Median.
Petic. Misc. lib. VIII.
, a Writ of Outlawry was issued out against them. Under them were certain
Officers called (...), whose business it was, (...), to receive the Complaints
that fell under the Cognizance of the (...), and enter them into their Court
Pollux.
.

2. (...), or Compromissarii, were such, as two Parties chose to determine any
Controversy betwixt them; and these the Law permitted any Person to request,
but obliged him to stand to whatever they determined, without any far^her
appeal, and therefore, as a greater obligation to Justice, they took an Oath,
that they would give Sentence without Partiality Demosthen.
.

The determination of the (...), was called (...), and (...)* and to refer any
thing to them, (...) Pollux.
.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of the Public Judgments, Actions, etc.
THE Athenian Judgments were of two sorts, Public, and Private, the former
were about such Crimes, as tended to the prejudice of the State, and were
called (...); the latter comprehended all Controversies that happened between
private Persons, and were called (...) Isocrates.
. Nor did they only differ as to their Matter, but in the whole Process, and
Management of them, and particularly in this, that in private Actions, no Man
could prosecute the Offender, beside the Party injured, or some of his near
Relations, whereas in the Public, the Laws encouraged all the Citizens to
revenge the public wrong, by bringing the Criminal to condign punishment
Plutarchus Solone.
.

The public Judgments were these,

1. (...), was an Action, laid upon such as had been guilty of any of the
following Crimes Pollux. lib. VIII. cap. VI. Sigonius de Rep. Athen.
,

(...), Murder.

(...), a Wound given out of Malice.

(...), Firing the City.

(...), Poison.

(...), a Conspiracy against any Person's Life; or, the Crime of the
City-Treasurers, that entered into the public Debt-book Persons not indebted
to the City Harpocrat.
.

(...), Sacrilege.

(...), Impiety.

(...), Treason.

(...), Uncleanness.

(...), Whoredom.

(...), Coelibacy.

(...), Refusing to serve in the Wars.

(...), Desertion of the Army.

(...), Desertion of a Man's Station, as when any Person refused to serve on
Foot, and listed himself amongst the Horsemen, which by Solon's Laws was
esteemed as great a Crime as a total Desertion of the Army.

(...), Cowardice.

(...), Desertion of the Fleet.

(...), Refusing to Serve, and Fight in the Fleet.

(...), Loosing a Man's Shield.

(...), was an Action, against those that falsely charged others, and sued them
for public Debts, which Harpocration calls (...); but this seems rather to
have been an Action for false Arrests, according to Pollux.

(...), Barretry, or false Accusation.

(...), taking Bribes to manage any public Affair, or pervert Justice; nor was
it thought enough to punish the Receiver, but the Person also that offered
Bribes was prosecuted, and the Action laid against him called (...). The same
Action in Causes about Freedom of the City, was by a peculiar Name termed (...).

(...), Beating a Freeman, or binding him, as they used to do Slaves.

(...), Erasing a Name out of the public Debt-book, before the Debt was
discharged.

(...), Digging a Mine without acquainting the public Officers; For before any
Person could dig a Mine, he was obliged to inform certain Officers, appointed
by the People, of his Design, to the end that the twenty-fourth part of the
Metal might be reserved for the public Use.

(...), was against Magistrates, that had neglected to give up their Accounts.

(...), against such as in proposing a new Law, acted contrary to the old and
established Laws.

(...), was against Magistrates, Ambassadors, or other Officers that had
mis-employ'd the public Money, or committed any other Offense in the Discharge
of their several Trusts. That against Ambassadors was sometimes by a peculiar
Name called (...).

(...), was a Probation of the Magistrates, and Persons employed in public
Business.

(...), was an Action against Persons disaffected to the Government, and such
as imposed upon the People; against Sycophants, and such as at the celebration
of any Festival had caused an uproar* or committed any thing undecent, and
unsuitable to the Solemnity.

(...), was when any Person, being sued for Debts said to be due to the
Public, pleaded that they were falsely charged upon him, withal producing all
the Money he was possessed of, and declaring by what means it came into his
Hands. Suidas adds, that (...) is sometimes taken for an Action against such as
neither paid the Fines laid upon them, before the ninth Prytanea following
their Sentence, nor were able to give sufficient Security to the City.

(...), was sometimes the same with (...), as we learn from Suidas; but was
also usually taken for the Account of Estates given at the Exchange of them
together with public Employments. For when any Man would excuse himself from
any troublesome and chargeable Trust, by casting it upon another richer than
himself, the Person produced by him, had power to challenge him to make an
Exchange of Estates, and thereby compel him to undergo the Office he had
before refused.

2. (...), was commonly taken for the discovery of any hidden and concealed
Injury, but more peculiarly signified an Action laid against such as exported
Corn out of Attica, imbezzled the public Revenues, and converted them to their
own private Use, or appropriated to themselves any of the Lands, or other
Things, that of right belonged to the Commonwealth. It is sometimes taken for
an Action against those, that were Guardians to Orphans, and either wholly
neglected to provide Tenants for their Houses, and Lands, or let them at too
easy a rate.

3. (...), was against such, as committed any Action, or affected any Place, of
which they were incapable by Law; as when a Person disfranchis'd, or indebted
to the Public sued for Offices in the State, or took upon him to determine
Controversies in a judicial Way. Also against those, that confessed the Crimes
laid to their charge, without standing the Trial.

4. (...), was the carrying a Criminal taken in the Fact to the Magistrate. If
the Accuser was not able to bring him to the Magistrate, it was usual to take
the Magistrate along with him to the House, where the Criminal lay concealed,
or defended himself, and this they called (...), and the Action (...).

5. (...), or (...), was an Action against such as protected Persons guilty of
Murder, by which the Relations of the deceased were empowered to seize three
Men in the City, or House, whither the Malefactor had fled, till he were either
surrendered, or satisfaction made some other way for the Murder.

6. (...), was of three sorts; the first was about great and public Offenses,
whereby the State was brought into Danger, such Actions were not referred to
any Court of Justice, but immediately brought before the Senate of
Five-hundred, or the popular Assembly, were the Delinquent was severely
punished, but the Plaintiff underwent no danger, although he could not prove his
Indictment, except he failed of having the fifth part of the Suffrages, for
then he was fined a thousand Drachms. The second sort of (...), was an Action
of (...), of which I shall speak in another place; it was brought before the
Archon, to whom the Plaintiff gave in his Accusation, but was not liable to
have any Fine laid upon him, though Sentence was given against him. The third was
an Action against the (...), preferred by Persons that thought themselves
unjustly dealt with by them, who ran the hazard of being disfranchis'd, and
forfeiting their Freedom, if they were not able to make good their Accusation.
Indeed, in all the forementioned Accusations, the (...) only excepted, this
Penalty, together with a Fine of a thousand Drachms, was inflicted upon the
Plaintiff, if he had not the fifth part of the Suffrages.

CHAPTER XXIV. Of the Private Judgments, Actions, etc.
(...), was an Action of Slander, by which the Criminal was fined five-hundred
Drachms.

(...), was an Action of Battery, in which case there was no set Penalty
inflicted by the Laws, but the Judges took an account of the Damages suffered
by the Plaintiff, and compelled the Delinquent to make sufficient retribution.

(...), or, (...), was an Action against such as ravished Women, or had used
Violence toward any Man's Person.

(...), was an Action of Trespass, being against those, that had endammag'd
another man's Estate, Lands, Houses, Clothes, etc.

(...), or (...), was an Action entered by Heiresses against their Husbands, by
Parents against their Children, and Orphans against their Guardians, when they
were ill used, or injured by them.

(...), was an Action of Divorce, when the Husband had put away his Wife. On
the contrary, when the Woman fled from her Husband, the Action was called (...).

(...), was against Thieves. Demosthenes Timoc^a^ea.
reports, that if any Man had stolen above fifty Drachms in the Daytime, he was
to be indicted at the Tribunal of the Eleven. But if any The^t was committed in
the Night, it was lawful to kill the Criminal, if he was caught in the Fact, or
to pursue him, and, if he made any resistance, to wound him, and so hale him to
the Eleven, by whom if he was convicted of any of those Crimes, that bore an
Action of (...), he was not not permitted to give Bail, but immediately
suffered Death. If any Person surreptitiously conveyed any thing of the
smallest value out of the Lyceum, Academy, Cynosarges, or any of the Gymnasia,
or out of Havens above the value of ten Drachms, he was adjudg'd to dye. If any
Man was convicted of Theft by a private Ju^gment, he was to make retribution to
the Person he had injured, by paying him double the value of what he had
deprived him of; nor was this punishment alone thought sufficient to expiate
his Offense, but it lay in the Judges Power to keep him in Bonds five days, and
as many nights, and expose him in that condition to the view of all the People.

(...), was against such as refused to restore any thing committed to their
Charge.

(...), was a Suit betwixt Debtors and Userers.

(...), was an Action against those that would not stand to their Contracts, or
Bargains. Not much different from this was (...), only, (...) are distinguished
from (...) in this, That these chiefly imply private Contracts about the Lone
of Money, Division of Inheritances, and References to the (...), whereas the
other are extended, as well to public Negotiations between Cities and
Kingdoms, as to Bargains made by private Persons. Others there are, that
acknowledge no such difference betwixt them.

(...), was an Action against such Persons as would not consent to make a
division of Goods, or Estates, wherein other Men were sharers with them.

(...), was about public Duties, whereby it was required that the Person
designed to undertake them, should have a Time appointed, wherein he should
enter upon his charge. It is also taken for (...), and (...).

(...), when Daughters inherited the Estates of their Parents, they were
obliged by Law to marry their nearest Relation. This was the occasion of this
Suit, which was commenced by Persons of the same Family, each of which
pretended to be more nearly allied to the Heiress than the rest. The Virgin,
about whom the Relations contested, was called (...) was a Daughter, that had
no Brothers lawfully begotten, and therefore inherited her Father's whole
Estate. (...) was one that had Brothers, and shared the Estate with them.

(...), was a Suit commenced by one that made pretensions to the Estate of a
deceased Person, as being his Son either by Nature, or Adoption.

(...), was an Action entered by the Relations of the deceased, whereby they
claimed a right to the Estate, as belonging to them by reason of their
Consanguinity, or bequeathed by Will. It was so called (...), because the
Plaintiff deposited the tenth part of the Inheritance, if the Cause was
private, and the fifth, if it was a public Estate he contended for: this he
was to forfeit, if he could not make his Plea good.

(...), was a Lawsuit about Kindred, whereby any Person claimed a Relation to
such, or such a Family, and therefore it seems to have been of the same Nature
with (...).

(...), was a Protestation that the deceased Person had left an Heir, made to
hinder the Relations from entering upon the Estate.

(...), was an Action, whereby the (...) was proved to be false, and groundless.

(...), was when any Person claimed some part of another man's Goods, which
were confiscated, and sold by Auction.

(...), when a Husband divorced his Wife, the Law obliged him to restore her
Portion, or, in case he refused that, to pay her for each Pound nine Oboli
every Month, upon the failure of which he was liable to have this Action
entered against him in the Odeum by his Wife's (...), or, Guardian, whereby he
was forced to allow her a separate Maintenance.

(...), etc. (...), sometimes called (...), was an Action against Guardians,
that were negligent in the management of the Affairs of their Pupils, and
either let out their Houses, or Estates, at too small a price, or suffered them
to lie void of Tenants. When any House was vacant, it was Customary to signify
so much by fixing an Inscription upon the Door, or other part of it, as Mr.
Rous has observed from these words of Terence, -- Inscripsi illico
Aedes mercede Heaut. Act, I. Scen. I.
. --
Over the Door I Writ,
This House is to be Let.


(...), was an Action against Guardians, that had defrauded their Pupils. It
was to be commenced within five Years after the Pupil was come to Age,
otherwise it was of no Force.

(...), when any Man laid claim to an House, he entered an Action against the
Person that inhabited it, whereby he demanded the Rent of the House. If he
claimed an Estate of Land, the Action was called (...), or, (...), because the
Fruits of the ground were demanded. If the Plaintiff cast his Adversary in
either of the former Suits, he entered a second Action against him, whereby he
laid claim to the House, or Land, as being a part of his Estate, for which
reason it was called (...). After this, if the Person in possession continued
obstinate, and would not deliver up the Estate to the lawful Owner, there was a
third Action commenced, and a Writ of Ejectment issued out against him, which
was named (...), from (...), to eject. The same Name is used for all Writs of
Ejectment upon what account soever.

(...), was an Action whereby the Buyer compelled the Seller to confirm, or
stand to his bargains.

(...), was designed as an enquiry into some thing that was concealed, as stolen
Goods.

(...), was against a Freeman, that endeavored to give a Slave his Liberty,
without his Master's consent.

(...), was an Action against Sojourners, that neglected to choose a Patron, of
which custom I have spoken in another place.

(...), was an Action commenced by a Master, or Patron against his Clientes,
such as were the Freed Slaves, when they refused to perform those Services,
they were bound to pay to him.

(...), was a Suit about Money put into the Bankers hands, which the ancient
Athenians called (...), and the modern (...).

(...), was, when a Person deeply indebted desired the People to remit part of
his Debt, upon pretense that he was unable to make payment.

(...), was against false Witnesses.

(...), was against those that suborned false Witnesses.

(...), was against such, as, having promised to give Evidence in a Cause,
disappointed the Person that relied upon them.

Several other Judgments we meet with in ancient Authors, some of which I have
already spoken of in other places, and the Names of the rest are so well known,
that I need not give you any explication of them; such were (...), and some
others Hes^chius, Harpocration, Suidas, Pollux, Ulpianus in Demosthen. Sigonius
de Rep. Athen. and Rousaus in Arch. Attic. Iidemque ubique in his capitibus
sunt consulendi.
.

CHAPTER XXV. Of the Athenian Punishments, and Rewards.
THE most common and remarkable Punishments inflicted at Athens on Malefactors
are these,

(...), which, though sometimes it be used in a large and general sense for any
punishment, yet has often a more limited and restrained signification, being
taken for a pecuniary Mulct, or Fine, laid upon the Criminal according to the
merit of his Offense.

(...), Ignominy, or public Disgrace, whereby the Offender was rendered
incapable of bearing any Office, pleading in the Courts of Judicature, or
giving his Voice in the public Assemblies, and deprived of all other
Privileges of a Citizen, that gave him any Title to the management of the
Commonwealth. Out of these Men, the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Ranis.
tells us, they appointed whom they pleased to labor at the Oars, to which
Drudgery, Plutarch reports, it was usual to put their Prisoners of War Lysandro.
.

(...), Servitude, was a punishment, by which the Criminal was reduced into the
condition of a Slave. It was never inflicted on any besides the (...),
Sojourners, and Free'd-servants, because it was forbidden by one of Solon's
Laws, that any Freeborn Citizen should be treated as a Slave.

(...), was a severity seldom exercised upon any but Slaves, or some very
notorious Malefactors, of which before I have spoken more at large.

(...), was, as the word imports, a Pillar, wherein was engraven in legible
Characters an account of the Offender's Crime. The Persons thus exposed to the
laughter and reproaches of the World, were called (...). Hence (...) is taken
for any invective, or defamatory Oration.

(...), was a punishment, by which the Criminal was condemned to Imprisonment,
or Fetters. The Prison was called by a lenitive Name (...), or House; for the
Athenians used to mitigate and take of from the badness of things, by giving
them good and innocent appellations; as a Whore, they would call a Mistress;
Taxes, Rates; Garrisons, Guards; and this (says Plutarch) seemed at first to
be Solon's contrivance, who called the releasing the People from their Debts
(...), a throwing off a burden Plutarch. Solone.
. Plato tells us, the Athenians had three sorts of Prisons; The first was near
the Forum, and was only designed to secure Debtors, or other Persons from
running away. The second was called (...), or a House of Correction, such as
our Bride-well. The third was seated in an uninhabited and lonesome place, and
was designed for Malefactors guilty of Capital Crimes Plato de Legib. lib. X.
. One of their Prisons was called (...), and the Gate, through which Criminals
were led to Execution, (...), from Charon, the infernal Ferry-man. At the
Prison-door was erected the Image of Mercury, the Tutelar Deity of the place,
called (...), from (...), the hinge of a Door.

Of Fetters there were diverse sorts, the most remarkable are these: (...), a
Collar usually made of Wood, so called from (...), because it constrained the
Criminal to bow down his head. This punishment was called (...), and hence
pernicious Fellows, or Things, are sometimes named (...) Aristophan. Schol.
Pluto.
; others call it (...), or (...), or (...), from (...), because the Criminal's
Neck was shut, or enclosed within it. Some Grammarians tell us, the Neck,
Hands, and Feet were made fast in it, and therefore it is probable, it was the
same with the (...), or Fetters with five holes, mentioned by Pollux, and seems
to resemble the punishment of binding Neck and Heels, used amongst our
Soldiers. Aristophanes calls it (...), as his Scholiast informs us in his
Comment upon these words in Lysistrate, -- (...),
(...).
(...)
(...).
Women must have their stiff and haughty Necks
With Fetters crampt, least they grow insolent
And us of our Authority divest,
For see here, in this Canvass-pourtraiture
By skilful Micon drawn, how the Amazons
Mounted on prancing Steeds with burnisht spears engage*
Mr. Abell. (...), signifies Fetters in which the Feet, or Legs were made fast,
as we are informed by Aristophanes in his Plutus, where speaking of an
impudent, and insolent Slave, he says, he deserves to be set in the Stocks, --
(...)
(...).
You'r' ripe, you Rogue, for Fetters, the Stocks groan for you.
Not much unlike this seems to have been the (...), or (...), sometimes called
(...), from the matter it was made of Aristophan. Schol. Equit.
. (...), was a piece of Wood, to which the Malefactor was bound fast, as the
same Poet reports Thesmopho^.
, -- (...),
(...). --
Here, Lictor, bring him in, and bind him to the Rack.
And a little after, -- (...)
(...).
Order the Executioner to strip
Me naked, and to cord me to the Rack.
Mr. Abell. Beside these, many others occurr in Authors, which barely to
mention would be both tedious, and unnecessary.

(...), perpetual Banishment, whereby the condemned Persons were deprived of
their Estates, which were publicly exposed to Sale, and compelled to leave
their Country without any possibility of returning, except they were recalled
(which sometimes happened) by the same Power that expelled them; wherein it
differed from (...), which only commanded a Ten years absence, at the end of
which, the banished Persons were permitted to return, and enjoy their Estates,
which were all that time preserved entire to them Aristoph. Schol. Equit. and
Vesp.
. It was instituted not so much with a design to punish the Offender, as to
mitigate and pacify the fury of the Envious, that delighted to depress those,
who were eminent for their Virtues, and glorious Actions, and by fixing this
disgrace upon them, to exhale part of the venomous rancour of their Minds. The
first, that underwent this condemnation was, as Plutarch reports, Hipparchus
the Cholargian, a Kins-man to the Tyrant of the same Name. Eustathius makes it
much ancienter, and carries it as high as Theseus's Time, who, he tells us out
of Theophrastus and Pausanias, was the first that suffered it Ili^d. ^.
. Heraclides will have it to have been first instituted by Hippias, the Tyrant,
a Son of Pisistratus Lib. de Rep.
; Photius, by one Achilles, the Son of Lyco Excerpt. ex Pt^lom. Hephast. l. VI.
; and Aelian, by Clisthenes, who also, as he tells us, was the first that
underwent it V r. Hist. lib. XIV. cap. XXIV.
. It was never inflicted upon any but great Persons; Demetrius, the Phalerian,
(as Plutarch reports) will have it to have happened to none but Men of great
Estates, and therefore as an argument to prove the ple^tiful condition of
Aristides, (whom he maintains to have been possessed of a large Fortune,
contrary to the opinion of most other Writers) he alleged, that he was
banished by Ostracism. But my Author is of another opinion, and not without
reason, for all Persons were liable to the Ostracism, who for Reputation,
Quality, Riches, or Eloquence, were esteemed above the common level, and
exposed to the envy of the People, insomuch, that even Damon, Preceptor to
P^ricles, was banished thereby, because he seemed a Man of more than ordinary
Sense. Afterward, when base, mean, and villainous Fellows became subject to
it, they quite left it off, Hyperbolus being the last, whom they banished by
Ostracism. This Hyperbolus was a very rascally Fellow, who furnished all the
Writers of Comedy in that Age with matter for their Satirical invectives; but
he was wholly unconcerned at the worst things they could say, and being
careless of glory was also insensible of shame; he was neither loved, nor
esteemed by any body, but was a necessary tool for the People, and frequently
made use of by them, when they had a mind to disgrace, or calumniate any Person
of Authority, or Reputation. The cause of his Banishment was this; Alcibiades,
Nicias, and Phaeax at that time were of different Factions, and each of them
bearing a great sway in the City, lay open to the envy of the inferior
Citizens, who, at Hyperbolus's persuasion, were very eager to decree the
Banishment of some one of them. Alcibiades perceiving the danger they were in,
consulted with Nicias, or Phaeax, (for it is not agreed whether) and so
contrived matters, that by uniting their several parties, the Ostracism fell
upon Hyperbolus, when he expected nothing of it. Hereupon the People, being
offended, as if some contempt or affront had been put upon the Thing, left off,
and quite abolished it. It was performed, to be short, in this manner; Every
one taking an (...), or Tyle, carried it to a certain part of the Marketplace
surrounded with wooden Rails for that purpose, in which were ten Gates,
appointed for the ten Tribes, every one of which entered at a distinct Gate.
That being done, the Archons numbered all the Tyles in gross, for if there were
fewer than six-thousand, the Ostracism was void; then laying every name by it
self, they pronounced him, whose name was written by the major part, banished
for ten Years, enjoying his Estate Plutarch. A^istide, Alcibiade, Nicia,
Themistocle.
. This punishment was sometimes called (...), from (...), because the (...), by
which the People gave their Suffrages were Earthen Tyles, or pieces of broken
Pots Hesych. in V.
. The like was used at Argos, Megara, and Miletum Aristoph. Schol. Equit.
; and the Syracusian (...) was instituted upon the same account, in the third
Year of the eighty-sixth Olympiad, but differed from it in this, That this
Banishment was but for five Years, and instead of (...), the People made use of
(...), or Leaves, usually those of the Olive Tree, in giving their Voices
Diodor. Sic. lib. XI
.

(...), Death, was inflicted on Malefactors several ways, the chief of which
were these,

(...), with which the Criminal was beheaded.

(...), with which he was either strangled after the Turkish fashion, or hanged
in the manner usual amongst us, for that this was a very ancient, but withal a
very ignominious Punishment, appears from Homer, in whom Ulysses and Telemachus
punish the Men, that took part with the young Gentlemen, who made love to
Penelope, only with a common and ordinary Death; but the Maidservants that had
submitted to their Lust, and behaved themselves with scorn and contempt toward
their Masters, as being guilty of a more heinous and notorious Crime, they
ordered to be hanged; the manner of it the Poet has described in these words
Odyss. (...). v. 465.
, -- (...)
(...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...).
Then young Telemachus a cable tied
Hardened with pitch t'a lofty Pillar's side,
That he might there make swings above the floor
For all his nasty Queans, who'd played the Whore;
In hempen Twists they all hung in a Row
Tossing their Legs, and moving to and fro.
So have I seen the warbling Larks beset
With knotty mazes of the Fowler's net,
H^w they do make a flutter and a rout
With wings expanded, though they cannot get out.
Mr. Abell. (...), Poison, of which there were diverse sorts, yet what they most
commonly made use of, was the juice of the Herb (...), Cicuta, not much unlike
Hemlock, which through it is extreme coldness is poisonous; it was a draught of
this gave Socrates his death, Rem populi tractas, barbatum hoc creed Magistrum
Dicere, sorbitio tollit quem dira cicutae.
You, who sustain the weight of Government,
To these prudential Maxims be attent,
Maxims, not mine, but that grave Sir's, whose fate
A draught of Hemlock did precipitate.
(Mr. Abell.) Says Persius, meaning Socrates Satir. IV. v. 1.
.

(...), a Precipice, from which the Malefactor was tumbled headlong.

(...), or (...), were Cudgels of wood, with which Malefactors were beaten to
death Aristoph. Schol: Pluto, Suidas, Hesychius, Etymolog. Pollux, and ubique
in hoc capite.
, being hanged upon a Pole, which was also called (...), and therefore (...) is
by Suidas, and the Etymologist expounded (...), and (...) by Hesychius; for
their conceit is vain and ridiculous, that would thence infer it to have been
a kind of Gallows, or Cross. No less groundless and frivolous is their opinion,
that imagine it to have been an instrument, on which Criminals were distended,
like the Covering of a Drum, which the Greeks call (...), and to have been of
the same nature with the Roman Fidiculae, which were little Cords, by which Men
were stretched upon the Rack, and seem to have resembled the Greek (...), used
in the punishment called (...).

(...), the Cross, mentioned in Thucydides Lib. I.
, was used in Greece, but not so frequently as at Rome: it consisted of two
Beams, one of which was placed cross the other; the figure of it was muchwhat
the same with that of the letter T, as Lucian tells us (...).
, differing only from it, because the transverse Beam was fixed a little below
the top of the straight one. The Malefactor was hanged upon the Beam that was
erect, his Feet being fixed to it with Nails, and his Hands to each side of
that which was transverse.

(...), was a deep Pit belonging to the Tribe Hippothoontis, into which
condemned Persons were cast headlong, it is sometimes called (...), whence the
public Executioner received the appellation of (...). It was a dark, noisome
hole, and had sharp Spikes at the top, that no Man might escape out, and others
at the bottom, to pierce and torment such as were cast in Aristoph. Pluto.
Schol.
. From it is depth and capaciousness, it came to be used proverbially for a
covetous, Miser, or voracious Glutton, that is always craving, and can never be
satisfied; and such an one the Latins called Barathro, hence Lucre^ius Lib. III.
, Aufer abhinc lacrymas, Barathro, and compesce querelas.
-- Forbear thy sighs,
Thou Miser, cease complaints, and dry thine Eyes.
And Horace, Mendici, mimae, Barathrones, hoc genus omne Satir. lib. I. Sat. II.
.
Beggars, Jack-puddings, Rooksters, and such like.
A place of the same Nature was the Lacedaemonian (...), into which Aristomenes
the Messenian being cast, made his escape after a wonderful manner, as
Pausanias reports Mess^niac,
.

(...), or Lapidation, was a common punishment, and usually inflicted by the
primitive Greeks upon such as were taken in Adultery, as we learn from Homer's
third Iliad, where Hector tells Paris, he deserves to dye this death, (...).
For all your villainies you shall be stoned to death.
Many other punishments there were, which they inflicted for particular Crimes,
some of which I shall treat of in their proper places.

As the Laws inflicted severe Penalties upon Offenders, thereby to deterr Men
from Vice and Wickedness, and from base and dishonorable Designs, so again
they conferred ample Rewards upon such as merited them, thereby to incite
others to the practice of Virtue and Honesty, and the performance of good and
glorious Actions; and upon the just and equal dispensation of these two Things,
it was Solon's Opinion, that the Safety of any Commonwealth chiefly depended
Ciceron. Epist. ad M. Brutum.
. Now not to mention public Honors and State-preferments, to which even those
of the inferior Sort might not despair of advancing themselves in a popular
State, if by their eminent Services they approved themselves to the People;
beside these, I say, there were several public Rewards, and Honors conferred
upon such as had merited enough to be thought worthy of them; The chief of
which were these;

(...), or, the privilege of having the first place at all Shows, Sports,
Banquets, and public Meetings Aristoph. Equit.
.

(...), or, the Honor of having their Pictures, or Statues erected in the
Citadel, Forum, or other public places of the City Demosthen. Orat. de Falsa
Legate. aliique.
. With such monuments of Virtue Athens seems to have abounded more than any
City in the World, as will evidently appear to any, that will be at the pains
to peruse Pausanias's accurate description of them.

(...), or, Crowns, were conferred in the public Assemblies by the Suffrages
of the People, or by the Senators in their Council; but of these, because they
were for the most part bestowed upon those that had signalized themselves by
their Valor, as also of other Military rewards, I shall give you an account of
in another place.

(...), was an immunity from all public Duties, Taxes, and Contributions,
except such as were required for carrying on the Wars, which no man was excused
from. This Honor was very rare, but yet there want not instances of it, as
particularly those of Harmodius, and Aristogiton's whole Families, which
enjoyed it for a great many generations Demosthen. Orat. in Leptinem. Ejusque
Interpret.
.

(...), was a maintenance allowed such as deserved well of the Commonwealth in
the Common Hall, called Prytaneum. This Privilege was granted sometimes to
whole Families for the Services of their Ancestors, as particularly to those of
Hippocrates, Harmodius, and Aristogiton. Their common Fare was a sort of Cakes,
or Puddings called (...), upon Holy Days they had an allowance of Bread
Demosthen. loc. cit. Pollux lib. IX. cap. V. Aihenaus lib. IV. etc.
; and beside other provisions, the Tenths of all the Bellies of Animals offered
in Sacrifice were always reserved for them, which if any Man neglected to send,
he was liable to be punished by the Prytanes, as we learn from Aristophanes
Equi^ibus.
, (...),
(...)
(...).
Your Frauds I Will to the Prytanes disclose,
Since you with sacrilegious Stealth keep back
The Tithes of sacred Victims Bellies.
A great deal more might be said about the Honors conferred after Death upon
such, as had been eminently serviceable to the Commonwealth, in the
celebration of their Funerals, and the pious care of their Memories, but this I
shall leave to be spoken of in another place, I shall only add that not
themselves only, but their Posterity reaped the fruits of their Virtues, for if
any of their Children were left in a poor condition, they seldom failed of
obtaining a plentiful provision from the Public; Thus Aristides's two
Daughters were publicly married out of the Prytaneum, the City decreeing each
of them three-hundred Drachms for her Portion. Nor is it to be wondered (says
my Author) that the People of Athens should take care of those that live in the
City, since hearing that Aristogiton's Granddaughter was in a low condition in
the Isle of Lemnus, and, by means of her poverty, like to want Husband, they
sent for her to Athens, married her to a Person of considerable Quality, and
bestowed upon her a large Farm, as a Dowry. Of which Bounty, and Humanity
(says he) this City of Athens, even in this Age, has given diverse
Demonstrations, for which she is deservedly had in great Honor and Admiration
Plutarch. Aristid^.
.

CHAPTER XXV. Of the Athenian Laws.
IT was Tully's observation, that most of the Arts and Inventions, which are
necessary to the management of Human life, owe their first Original to the
Athenians, from whom they were derived into the other parts of Greece, and
thence carried into foreign Countries, for the common benefit of Mankind. But
of all the Inventions commonly ascribed to them, none has been of greater, or
more general use to the World, than that of Laws, which, as Aelian Lib. III.
cap. XXXVIII.
, and others report, were first established in Athens. Most other ingenious
contrivances respect the conveniences of Human life, but upon this depends the
very foundation of all Civil Government, and of all mutual Society amongst Men;
for by them the Magistrate is directed how to govern, and the People how far to
obey; the Magistrate by them is settled in the possession of his Authority over
the People, and the People too by them are secured from the arbitrary Power,
and unreasonable demands of the Magistrate, as well as from the Fraud,
Violence, and Oppression of each other.

The Poets tell us, that Ceres was the first, that taught the Athenians the use
of Laws; in memory of which benefit, they celebrated the Festival called (...),
in which she was Worshipped by the Name of (...), which exactly answers to the
Latin Name of Legifera in Virgil Aeneid. IV. v. 57.
, -- mactant lectas de more bidentes
Legiferae Cereri. --
To Ceres, who first showed the use of Laws,
They offer Lambs culled out of bleating Flock.
Some of the Laws of her Favorite, Triptolemus, are still extant, and I have
spoken of them in another place. But to pass by Poetical and groundless
fictions, thus much is certain, and evident, viz. That the Athenians were
governed by Laws before the dissolution of their Monarchy, as may be observed
from what Plutarch relates of Theseus, viz. That when he divested himself of
Sovereign Power, and established a Commonwealth in Athens, one of the
Prerogatives that he thought fit still to retain, was the Custody, or
Protection of the Laws.

The first, that gave Laws to the Athenians after Theseus's Time, was Draco,
who was Archon in the first Year of the thirty-ninth Olympiad. His Laws, Aelian
Var. Hist. lib. VIII. cap. X.
tells us, are properly called (...), but are remarkable for nothing but their
unreasonable severity; for by them every little offense was punished with
death, and he that stole an Apple was proceeded against with no less rigor,
than he that had betrayed his Country. But these extremities could not last
long, the People soon grew weary of them, and therefore, though they were not
abrogated, yet by a tacit consent they were laid asleep till

Solon, the next Lawgiver, repealed them all, except those that concerned
Murder, called (...); and, having received from the People Power to make what
alterations he thought necessary, new modeled the Commonwealth, and
instituted a great many useful and excellent Laws, which, to distinguish them
from Draco's (...), were called (...). And least, through the connivance of the
Magistrates, they should in time be neglected, like those of his Predecessor,
He caused the Senate, to take a solemn Oath to observe them, and every one of
the Thesmothetae vowed, that if he violated any of the Statutes, he would
dedicate a golden Statue as big as himself to the Delphian Apollo, and the
People He obliged to observe them for a hundred Years Plutarch. Solone, Diogen.
(...) Ae^ian. loc. cit.
.

But all this care was not sufficient to preserve his Laws from the innovations
of lawless, and ambitious Men; For shortly after, Pisistratus so far insinuated
himself into the People's favor, that the Democracy instituted by Solon was
dissolved, and himself invested with Sovereign Power, which at his Death he
left in the possession of his Sons, who maintained it for some Years; and though
Pisistratus himself, as Plutarch reports Solone.
, and his Sons after him, in a great measure, governed according to Solon's
directions, yet they followed them not as Laws, to which they were obliged to
conform their Actions, but rather seem to have used them as wise and prudent
Counsels, and varied from them, whenever they found them interfere with their
interest, or inclinations.

Pisistratus's Family being driven out of Attica, Clisthenes took upon him to
restore Solon's Constitutions, and enacted many new Laws Herodotus, Plutarch.
Pericle, Isocrat. Areopag
, which continued in force till the Peloponnesian War, in which the Form of
Government was changed first by the Four-hundred, and then by the Thirty
Tyrants. These storms being over, the ancient Laws were again restored in the
Archonship of Euclides, and others established at the instance of Diocles,
Aristophon, and other leading Men of the City. Last of all, Demetrius the
Phalerean, being entrusted with the Government of Athens by the Macedonians,
was the Author of a great many new, but very beneficial and laudable
Constitutions Plutarch. Aristide.
. These seem to have been the chief Legislators of Athens, before they
submitted to the Roman yoke; two others are mentioned by Suidas, viz. Thales
and Aeschylus, but are not taken notice of in other Authors.

Beside these, the Athenians had a great many other Laws, enacted upon
particular occasions, and exigencies of the Commonwealth, by the Suffrages of
the People; For I shall not in this place speak of the (...), the Decrees
enacted by the Senate, because they were not settled and constant Laws, but
only, as it were, so many Proclamations, which, being enacted by no greater
Authority than that of the Senators, whose Power was only annual, lost all
their force and obligation when their Offices expired. The manner of making a
Law was thus; When any Man had contrived any thing, that he thought might
conduce to the good of the Commonwealth, he first communicated it to the
Prytanes, who were certain Officers appointed to receive all sorts of
informations of things that concerned the Public; the Prytanes then called a
meeting of the Senate, in which the new Project being proposed, after mature
deliberation was rejected, if it appeared hurtful, or un^erviceable; if not,
was agreed to, and then called (...). Then the Prytanes took a Tablet, and
wrote upon it the matter that was to be enacted into a Law, and the time in
which ^he People were to meet in a public Assembly, and determine it, and ^his
was called (...).

No Law was to be proposed to the Assembly, except it had been written upon a
white Tablet, and fixed up some Days before the Assembly at the Statues of the
Heroes called (...)* that so all the Citizens might read what was to be
proposed at their next Meeting, and be able to give a more deliberate judgment
upon it. When the multitude was come together the Decree was read, and every
Man had liberty to speak his mind about the whole, or any clause of it, and
if, after due consultation, the Populacy thought it inconvenient, it was
rejected; if they approved of it, it passed into a (...), or (...), which, as
we learn from Demosthenes, were the same as to their obligation, but differed
in this, that (...), was a general, and everlasting Rule, whereas (...)
respected particular Times, Places, and other Circumstances Demosthen. ejusque
enarrator. Ulpi^n. in Leptin. and alibi.
.

No Man without a great deal of caution, and a thorough understanding of the
former Laws, and Constitutions durst presume to propose a new one, the Danger
being very great if it suited not with the customs and inclinations of the
People; Eudemus a Cydiathenian is said to have lost his Life on that account,
being made a Sacrifice to the rage of the Multitude. Not much unlike this
severity was the ordinance of Zaleucus, the Locrian Lawgiver, by which it was
appointed, that whosoever proposed the enacting of a new Law, or the abrogation
of an old one, should come into the Assembly, with an Halter about his Neck,
and in that dress give his reasons for what he proposed, which if they were
thought good and sufficient, his proposal was embraced; if not, he straightway
poured out his Soul under the Hang-man's hands. But the Athenians were not
quite so rigid, except upon some extraordinary occasion, when the giddy
Mul^itude was hurried on with unusual rage and vehemence, as happened in
Eudemus's case; yet if any Man established a Law, that was prejudicial to the
Commonwealth, he might be called in question, and brought to Trial for it any
time within the space of one Year, but if he was let alone any longer, the Laws
took no notice of him. In these cases especially, a writ for transgressing the
Laws, called (...), might take hold of him; First, if he had not taken care to
publish his Proposal in due time; Secondly, if he proposed it in ambiguous and
fallacious Terms; Thirdly, if he proposed any thing contrary to any of the
former and received Laws; and therefore if any of the old Laws were found to
oppose what they designed to offer, they always took care to have them repealed
beforehand Iidem.
. Because, notwithstanding all this caution, it sometimes happened that new
Laws were enacted contrary to the old, it was ordered that the Thesm^thetae
should once every Year carefully peruse the Laws, and if they found any of them
oppose another, it was to be proposed to the People, who were to proceed about
it in the method that was used in abrogating other Laws, and so one of the Laws
made void. In other cases it was unlawful for any Man to endeavor to have any
Law repealed, without preferring a new one in it is place.

Now because the change of Time, and other Circumstances might make a great
many alterations in Affairs, and Ordinances, that had formerly been useful and
necessary, by the different State of Things become unprofitable, and perhaps
inconvenient, and prejudicial; it was ordained by Solon that once every Year
the Laws should be carefully revised and examined, and if any of them were
found unsuitable to the present State of Affairs, it should be repealed; this
was called (...), from the manner of giving their Suffrages by holding up their
hands. The method of doing it was thus; On the eleventh Day of the month
Hecatombaeon, after the (...) had, according to custom, made a solemn Prayer
before the Assembly, the Laws were read over in this Order, first those, that
concerned the Senate; then those that respected the People, the nine Archons,
and then the other Magistrates in their Order. This being done, it was
demanded, Whether the Laws then in being were sufficient for the Commonwealth?
and if it seemed necessary to make any alteration in them, the consideration
was differr'd till the fourth of Metagitnion, upon which Day, was the last
Ordinary Assembly, under the first Rank of the Prytanes, as the Repetition of
the Laws had been at the first. In all this, the (...), or Laws concerning such
matters, were nicely and punctually observed, and the Prytanes, and Proedri
severely punished, if any thing was omitted. Upon the first of Metagitnion,
another Assembly was called, and the Pr^edri reported the matter to the People,
who did not proceed to the determination of it themselves, but substituted the
Nomothetae to do it; and appointed five Orators, called (...), to Patronize the
ancient Laws in the Name of the People. If the calling of this Assembly was
neglected, the Prytanes, by Solon's Command, had a Fine of a thousand Drachms
laid upon each of them, and the Proedri one of four-hundred; all which the
Thesmothetae were obliged to see paid into the Treasury of Minerva's Temple in
the Citadel, but in case they refused, the Thesmothetae were to bring an
Indictment against them at the Court of Heliaea; which if they neglected to do,
themselves were to be denied admission into the Areopagus. To return, the
Nomothetae, having heard what the Orators could say in defense of the old Law,
gave their Opinions accordingly, and their Sentence was ratified by the People
in the following Assembly Iidem.
.

Solon, and after his example, the rest of those that enacted Laws in Athens,
committed their Laws to writing, differing herein from Lycurgus, and the
Lawgivers of other Cities, who thought it better to imprint them in the minds
of their Citizens, than to ingrave them upon Tablets, where it was probable
they might lie neglected and unregarded, as Plutarch has informed us in his
Life of Numa Pompilius; It is reported (says he) that Numa's Body by his
particular command was not burned, but that he ordered two stone Coffins to be
made, in one of which he appointed his Body to be laid, and the other to be a
Repository for his sacred Books and Writings, and both of them to be interred
under the Hill Ianiculum; imitating herein the Legislators of Greece, who
having wrote their Laws in Tablets, which they called (...), did so long
inculcate the contents of them, whilst they lived, into the Minds and Hearts of
their Priests, that their Understandings became, as it were, living Libraries
of those sacred Volumes, it being esteemed a profanation of such Mysteries to
commit their secrets unto dead Letters. In some places, espely before the
invention of Letters, it was usual to sing their Laws, the better to fix them
in their memories; which custom, Aristotle tells us, was used in his Days
amongst the Agathyrsi, a people near the Scythians; and this he phansies was
the reason, why the Musical rules for keeping Time were called (...) Problem.
Sect. X. cap. XXIX.
.

But Solon was of a contrary Opinion, esteeming it the safest way to commit his
Laws to writing, which would remain entire, and impossible to be corrupted,
when the unwritten Traditions of other Lawgivers, through the negligence and
forgetfulness of some, and the cunning and knavery of others, might either
wholly perish in oblivion, or by continual forgeries and alterations be rendered
altogether useless and unprofitable to the Public, but abundantly serviceable
to the designs and innovations of treacherous and ambitious Men. The Tables in
which Solon penned his Laws, Plutarch tells us, were of wood, and called (...),
and so fashioned that they might be turned round in oblong Cases, some of them,
he says, remained till his Time, and were to be seen in the Prytaneum at
Athens, being (as Aristotle affirms) the same with the (...). But others are of
Opinion, that those are properly called (...), which contain the Laws
concerning Sacrifices, and the Rites of Religion, and all the rest, (...). Thus
Plutarch Solone.
. But Apollodorus, as he is quoted by the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Nubibus,
and Avibus.
, will have (...), to be of Stone, and to signify any Tablets, wherein Laws,
or public Edicts were written, and to have received their Name (...), because
they were erected up on high; or from the Corybantes, the first inventers of
them, as Theopompus reports in his Treatise of Piety. Aristotle adds, that they
were triangular, in his Treatise about the Republic of Athens, and is seconded
herein by Pollux Lib. VIII. cap. X.
, who farther remarks, that the (...) were quadrangular, and made of Brass.
Ammonius Lib. de Different. Voc.
, to trouble you with no more Opinions about them, will have the distinction to
consist in this, That the (...), were apiece, containing the Laws that
concerned civil Affairs; whereas the (...), where Triangular, and contained
Precepts about the public Worship. What number there was of them, it is
impossible to divine, since none of the ancient Authors have given us any light
in this particular. They were kept in the Citadel, but afterward were removed
to the Prytaneum, that all Persons might have recourse to them upon any
occasion Pollux ibid.
; though some report that only Transcripts of them were carried thither, and that
the Original, written by Solon's own hand, remained still in the Citadel.
Hence, as Pollux is of Opinion, came the Laws to be distinguished into (...),
an^ (...), the former signifying the Laws that were in the Prytaneum, which was
in the lower City; the latter, those that were kept in the Citadel, or upper
City. Others are of Opinion, that by (...), Demosthenes, whose expression it
is, meant no more, than the lower part of the Tablet, but then, without
dispute, he would have mentioned the number of the Tablets, as in other places
He, and others usually do, and not have left us in the dark which of the
Tablets he meant; Again, the lower part of the Tablet might sometimes happen to
contain the first part of the Law, which it is improper to call (...), because
that word seems to import something beneath the rest, and toward the latter
End; for one Tablet was not always large enough to contain a whole Law, as
appears from Plutarch Solone.
, in whom we find that the eighth Law was engraved in the thirteenth Tablet.
Petit will have Demosthenes to mean no more by (...), than the Law, which
beneath, or, afterward in the same Oration is cited by him. Others understand
it of the lower Line, because the Laws are said to have been written (...),
that is, as Pausanias explains it Eliac.
, when the second line is turned on the contrary side, beginning at the end of
the former, as the Husbandmen turn their Oxen in ploughing, in this manner,
(...) It was against the Law for any Man to erase a Decree out of any of the
Tablets, or to make any alterations in them; and for the greater security of
them, there were certain Persons called from their Office (...), whose business
it was to preserve them from being corrupted Pollux. lib. VIII. cap. VIII.
, and, as their Name imports, to transcribe the old, and enter the new ones
into the Tablets; they were elected by the Senate, and, to render their Office
more creditable, had several badges of Honor conferred upon them, of which in
their proper place. Thus much of the Athenian Laws in general; their particular
Laws have been with great Industry collected by Petit, and are now englished
from the Original Greek by Mr. Abell.

Attick LAWS. Laws relating to Divine Worship, Temples, Festivals, and Sports.
LET Sacrifices be perf^rm'd with fruits of the Earth.

Let it be a Law among the Athenians for ever sacred and inviolable, always to
observe due Homage in public toward their Gods, and native Heroes, according
to the usual Customs of their Country; and with all possible sincerity to
offer in private First Fruits with anniversary Cakes.

One Dram shall be the price of a Sheep, eighteen of a Medimn.

Cattle designed for Sacrifice shall be culled.

It Is ordered, that the Sacrificer car^y part of his oblation home to his
Family.

All the remains of the Sacrifice are the Priest's Fees.

Whosoever eases Nature in Apollo's Temple, shall be Indicted, and Sentenced
to Death.

All Slaves and Foreigners are permitted to come to the public Temples,
either out of curiosity of seeing, or devotion.

They, who survive the report of being Dead, are prohibited entrance into the
Furies Temple.

Let no violence be offered to any one, who flies to the Temples for succor.

While the Celebration of the monthly Festival continues at Athens, it is
ordered, that no one be defamed or affronted in Private or Public, and that no
business be carried on, which is not pertinent to this Feast.

All, who frequent the Panathenaea, are forbid the wearing of gaudy and foppish
Apparel.

It Is enacted that at the institution of Panathenaea Majora Homer's Rhapsodies
be repeated.

Sojourners are commanded to carry about at public Processions little Vessels
framed after the model of a Boat, and their Daughters Water-pots with Umbrellas.

No Forreigner is to be initiated into the Holy Mysteries.

Death shall be his penalty, who divulges the Mysteries.

The Persons initiated shall dedicate the Garments they were initiated in, at
Ceres and Proserpina's Temple.

No Woman shall go in her Chariot to Eleusis, and whoever commits Theft, during
the Feast kept at that place, shall be fined 6000 Drachms.

Let no petitionary Address be made at the Mysteries.

No one shall be Arrested, or Apprehended, during their Celebration.

An Assembly of the Senate shall convene in the Eleusinian Temple, the day
following this Festival.

The Festival called (...) is to be annual, at which time there is to be a
Jail-deliver.

Evagoras has caused it to be enacted, that when there is a Procession in the
Piraeeus to the honor of Bacchus, and likewise at the Lenaean Procession,
Comedies shall be acted, and that during the celebration of the (...) in the
Citadel, Young Men shall dance, and Tragedians with Comedians act, and that at
these times, and while the (...) continue, no suit of Law, Bailment, or
Suretyship shall be made; if trespass be made against any one of these
particulars, let the Person herein offending be prosecuted in the usual manner
at the popular Assembly held in Bacchus's Theater.

It Is established, that the Prytanes the day subsequent to these observances
call a Senate in the Theater of Bacchus, upon the (...), where the first thing
in debate shall be touching the sacred Rites, after that, the drawing up all
the Indictments to be executed on the forementioned Criminals at the Feasts.

No Arrestment shall be attempted on the (...).

Execution of condemned Prisoners shall be deferred till the (...) return from
Delos.

No oblation of Victims shall be on the (...).

He, who comes off Conqueror at the Olympic Games, shall receive as his reward
500. Drachms, at the Isthmick, an 100.

Fifteen shall go to the constitution of a Tragic Chorus.

It Is forbid that Aeschylus, Sophocles and Euripides be brought on the Stage,
wherefore License is given, that the City-clerk read them publicly.

An emulatory performance among the Tragedians is ordered to be in the Theater,
on the Feast called (...), and that he, that acts his part best, shall be
chosen Denizon.

No one under 30 Years of age shall be an Actor.

Let no Archon be exposed by any malignant aspersion in a Comedy.

If any reflections are designed, let them be palliated under a feigned Name.

Let all the different Airs, and specific kinds of Music be observed, and
each of them be made use off at it is peculiar Festival.

All spectators shall sit with due Attention and Decorum in the Theater, and
the Beadles are hereby empowered to turn him out, who shall cause any noise or
disturbance, but if any one contradict their commission, and persevere in his
rudeness, a Fine shall be his punishment.

Sports exhibited in Honor of Neptune are to be in the Piraeeus, graced with
three Dances performed in a ring, where the reward to them who come of best
shall be ten (...), to them whose performance is one degree below, eight, and
six to the third rated Victors.

One day Yearly there is to be a public Cock-fighting.

Sacrifices are required to be at the beginning of every Month.

Laws concerning them who Officiate in holy Rites.
THE (...) is to take care that the Parasites be created out of the People,
whose duty it is, each of them to reserve out of his allowance an Hecteum of
Barley without the least deceit, for the maintenance of the Genuine Citizens
Feast, to be kept in the Temple, according to the custom of the Country. The
Acharnensian Parasites are to lay up an Hecteum of their dole in Apollo's
Reservatory, to which Deity they are to Sacrifice; their Chief likewise, the
Old men, and Women who have had but one Husband, are obliged to join in the
Sacrifices.

Out of those of spurious Birth, or their Children, the Parasites s^all elect a
Priest, who shall officiate in the Monthly Sacrifices, and against him who
declines it an Action shall be entered.

Two of the sacred Ceryces must undergo Parasiteship, for the space of one Year
in Apollos's Temple at Delos.

The third part of the choicest of the Oxen is to be conferred on the Victor of
a prize, the two remaining shall be divided between the Priests and Parasites.

Let there be given a just value of Money, to be disburs'd by the Priests for
the reparation of the (...) (or Treasury) of the Temple, and the (...), or
place set apart for the Parasites Executing of their Office.

Out of the most vigorous of the Old men, there are to be created (...), i. e.
Persons to carry sprigs of Olive in the Panathenaea, in Honor of Minerva.

It is hereby appointed that the Consort of the (...) shall be a Citizen of
Athens, and never before Married.

Notthe Priests only shall give an account of their demeanor in the
Priesthood, but likewise the sacred Families.

No impure Person shall be elected into the Priesthood.

Laws ^elating to the Laws.
As for the Review of the Laws, I have purposely omitted it, as being spoken of
in the foregoing sheets.

The Decree.
TIsamenus has established with the consent, and by the Authority of the People
that Athens shall keep her ancient Form of Government, and make use of Solon's
Laws, Weights, and Measures, with Draco's Sanctions, as hitherto; if new ones
shall seem requisite, the Nomothetae created by the Senate for that purpose,
shall engross them on a Tablet, and hang 'em up at the Statues of the Eponymi,
that they may be exposed to the public view of all Passers by; The same Month
they are to be given up to the Magistrates, after they have past the Estimation
of the Senate of Five-hundred, and the delegated Nomothetae. Be it also farther
enacted, that any private Man may have free access to the Senate, and give in
his Sentiments concerning them, after their promulgation; the Senate of
Areopagus is required to take care that the Magistrates put these Laws in
Execution, which for the convenience of the Citizens are to be engraved on the
Wall, where before they had been exposed to public view.

He that propounds a Law not conducing to the common Good, shall be indicted as
a Pesterer of the Commonwealth.

The proposer of a Law after the Year's end shall be accused, if his Law be
pernicious, but yet shall be liable to no Penalty.

No Law shall be repealed, before reference be made of it to the Nomothetae,
which being done, any Athenian may endeavor it is repeal, supposing he
substitutes a new Law in it is stead. Both these the Proedri shall referr to the
Votes of the People; the first proposal shall be concerning the Old Law,
whether it be any longer conducible to the public Good, then the new one shall
be proposed; now which of the two the Nomothetae shall judge best, that shall
be in force; yet this caution must be observed, that no Law shall be enacted
which gainsays any of the rest, and the Person, who shall give in a Law
inconsistent with the former constitutions, shall be dealt with according to
the rigor of the Act against those, who promote prejudicial Laws.

He, who to abrogate an old Law promises to make a new one, and does not,
shall be Fined.

The Thesmothetae shall Yearly assemble in the Repository of the Laws, and
cautiously examine whether one Law bears any contradiction to another, whether
there be any Law unratified, or duplicates about the same thing; if any of
these shall occur in their examination, it shall be written on a Tablet, and
read at the Statues of the Eponymi. Which done, by the Epistata's Order, the
People shall vote which of them shall be made void, or ratified.

Laws referring to Decrees of the Senate, and Commonalty.
(...), or Decrees of the Senate, are to be but of one Year's continuance.

No Psephism shall pass to the Commons before the Senate's supervisal.

The Tablets, on which the Psephisms are engraved, are by no means to be
removed.

Let no Psephism, either of the Senate, or People, be of greater Authority than
the Laws.

No Sophistication is to be contained in a Psephism.

Laws concerning Native, and Enfranchised Citizens.
ALL Laws are to be alike Obligatory toward the whole Body of the People.

All Priests, and Archons are to be elected out of the Nobility, whose duty
it is to interpret all Laws both Civil, and Divine.

The (...), or those of the meaner sort, shall be capable of no Magistracy.

The (...) shall have right of Suffrage in public Assemblies, and of being
elected Judges.

Let all the Citizens have an equal share in the Government, and the Archons be
indifferently elected out of them all.

No Persons, but such as have suffered perpetual banishment, or those, who with
their whole Families come to Athens for the convenience of Trade, shall be
enrolled among the Denizons.

Let no Person, that is a Slave by birth, be made free of the City.

No one shall be admitted Citizen, unless a particular eminency of Virtue
entitle him to it, yet if the People do conferr a Citizenship on any one for
his merits, he shall not be ratified, before the Athenians, the next meeting of
the Assembly, honor him with six-thousand private Votes, the Prytanes likewise
shall give them, before the entrance of the Strangers, the Boxes with the
Calculi, and take away the Largesses, which were the Persian Bucklers. Now
these Persons after Enfranchizement shall be altogether incapable of being
Archons or Priests; as for their Children, they may officiate, if born of a
Freewoman; if the persons made Free presume the taking up of any Office, any
Freeborn Man may bring an Action against them, as Interlopers on his
Privileges.

There shall be a disquition made, whether they, who are inserted in the
Register of Citizens, be so, or no; they who shall not be found Citizens on
both sides, let them be eras'd out; the determination of this shall be by their
own Borough, by whom if they be cast, and acquiesce in their Sentence without
any farther Appeal to an higher Court, they shall be ranked among the
Sojourners; but they, that after Appeal shall be condemned by the higher Court,
shall be sold for Slaves; or, if acquitted, shall continue in their Freedom.

It Is permitted any Athenian to leave the City, and take his Family and Goods
along with him.

Laws appertaining to Children legitimate, Spurious, or Adopted.
THEY only shall be reckoned Citizens, whose Parents are both so.

He shall be looked on as a Bastard, whose Mother is not Free.

Let none of Spurious birth, whether male, or female intermedle with either
sacred, or civil Affairs from the time of Euclides being Archon.

That inheritance shall pass for good, which is given by a childless Person to
an adopted Son.

Adoption must be made by Persons living.

No one, except the Person who adopted shall have a legitimate Son, shall
relinquish the Family into which he is adopted, to return into his Natural.

Parents may give their Children what Names they will, or change those they
have for others.

Whenever Parents come to enroll their Children, whether genuine, or adopted in
the public Register, they are obliged to profess by Oath, that they were
lawfully begotten of a Freewoman.

Beasts designed at this time for the Altar are to be of a certain weight, a
Goat to weigh fifty (...), and two Sheep fourty-eight.

The Oath to be taken by the Ephebi.
I WILL never do any thing to disgrace this Armor; I Will never fly from my Post,
or revolt from my General, but I Will fight for my Country, and Religion in an
Army, or single Combat; I Will never be the Cause of weakening or endammaging my
Country, and if it be my fortune to sail on the Seas, my Country thinking fit
to send me in a Colony, I Will willingly acquiesce and enjoy that Land which is
allotted me, I Will firmly adhere to the present constitution of Affairs, and
whatsoever enactions the People shall please to pass, I Will see no body violate
or pervert them, but I Will, either singly by my self, or by joining with others,
endeavor to revenge them, I Will conform to my Country's Religion: I swear by
these following Deities, viz. the Agrauli, Enyalius, Mars, Jupiter, the Earth,
and Diana.

I Will stand so much up for the Honor of my Country, that, if occasion require,
I Will lay down my Life for it.

My endeavors to extend the Dominions of Athens shall never cease, while there
are Wheat, Barley, Vine-yards and Olive Trees without it is Limits.

Parents shall have full right to disinherit their Children.

No one shall sell his Daughter, or Sister, unless he can prove her to be a
Whore.

The first institution of Youth is to be in swimming, and the rudiments of
Literature; as for those, whose Abilities in the world are but mean, let them
learn Husbandry, Manufactures, with Trades; but they, who can afford a gentile
Education, shall learn to play on Musical Instruments, to ride the great Horse,
shall study Philosophy, learn how to Hunt, and be instructed in the Gymnical
exercises.

Let him be disfranchis'd who beats his Parents, or does not provide for them.

If any Man, being found guilty of abusing his Parents, frequent prohibited
places, the Eleven shall Fetter him, and bring him to Trial at the Heliaean
Court, where any one, who is empowered thereto, may accuse him; if he is here
cast, the Heliaean Judges shall inflict upon him what punishment they please,
and if they Fine him, let him be clapped up in Gaol till he pays the whole.

No Bastards, or such as have been brought up to no Employ, shall be obliged to
keep their Parents.

If any one's Estate after his decease shall be called in question, the enjoyer
of it is obliged to prove the Lawfulness of his Parent's getting it, according
to that Golden Precept, Honor your Parents.

He, that is undutiful to his Parents, shall be incapable of bearing any Office.

If, through the infirmity of old Age, or torture of a Disease, any Father be
found crazed and distempered in mind, a Son may forthwith have an Action
against him, wherein if he be cast, he may keep him in bonds.

Laws belonging to Sojourners.
EVery Sojourner is to choose his Patron out of the Citizens, who is to pay his
Tribute to the Collectors, and take care of all his other concerns.

Let there be an Action against them, who don't choose a Patron, or pay Tribute.

In this Action no Forreigner shall appear as a Witness.

Let them be cast into Prison before Sentence is past, without any grant of
Bailment, on whom the Action of (...) is laid, but if condemned, they shall be
sold; whoever is acquitted of this imputation may accuse his adversary of
Bribery.

Laws relating to Slaves, and Free'd-servants.
HE that beats another Man's Servant, may have an Action of Battery brought
against him.

No one may Sell a Captive for a Slave, without the consent of his former
Master, if any Captive has been sold, he shall be rescued, and let his rescuer
put in Sureties for his appearance before the Polemarchus.

If any Slave's Freedom has been unjustly asserted by another, the Asser^or
shall be liable to pay half the price of the Slave.

Any Slave unable to drudge under the Imperiousness of his Master, may compel
him to let him quit his service for one more mild and gentle.

Slaves may buy themselves out of bondage.

No Slaves are to have their Liberty given them in the Theater; the Crier, that
proclaims it, shall be (...).

All emancipated Slaves shall pay certain services, and due Homage to the
Procurers of their Liberty, choosing them only for their Patrons, and not be
wanting in the performance of those Duties, to which they are obliged by Law.

Patrons are permitted to bring an Action of (...) against such Free'd-Slaves,
as are remiss in the forementioned Duties, and reduce them to their pristine
state of Bondage, if the charge be proved against them; but if the accusation
be groundless, they shall entirely possess their Freedom.

Any, who have a mind, whether Citizens, or Strangers, may appear as Evidence
in the abovementioned Cause.

He, that redeems a Prisoner of War may claim him as his own, unless the
Prisoner himself be able to pay his own Ransom.

Maintenance is by no means to be given to a Slave careless in his Duty.

Laws concerning the Senate of Five-hundred.
NO one is to be twice an Epistat^.

The Oath of the Senate I pass by, as before treated of.
The Establishment of Phocus runs, That Senators with the rest of the Athenians
shall keep the Feast called (...), as is usual by the custom of the Country,
and that there shall be an Adjournment of the Senate, and Vacations of lesser
Courts for five-days, from the time in which the Protenthae begin to celebrate
the Solemnity.

The Crier shall pray for the good success of Affairs, and encourage all Men to
lay out their endeavors on that design.

The Crier shall curse him openly, with his Kindred, and Family, who shall
appear at the Sessions, and plead Causes for Lucre.

Let the most grave of the Senators, having decently composed their Bodies,
deliver their most prudent and wise thoughts to the People; and after them, let
such of the rest as will, do the like one by one according to seniority.

In every Assembly let there be one Tribe elected to preside, and to look after
the Laws.

The Prytanes are not to authorize the People to Vote twice for the same thing.

The Senate of Five-hundred may Fine as far as five-hundred Drachms.

Let the Senate of the Five-hundred build new Ships.

Such, as have not built any, shall be ref^^'d the donation of Crowns.

This Senate shall give account of their Administration, and they, who have
executed their Offices well, shall be rewarded with Crowns.

Laws which concern Magistrates.
NONE shall be Magistrates but they, who have competent Estates.

The Election of Magistrates shall be by Beans.

It shall be punishable with Death to pass two Suffrages for the same Candidate.

The Archons shall be created by the People.

No one shall bear the same Office twice, or enter on two several the same Year.

All Magistrates, that are elected by Suffrages, Surveyors of public Works,
and they, who have any Authority in the City upward of thirty days, with those,
who preside over the Courts of Judicature, shall not enter on their respective
Offices, till they have undergone the accustomed Examination, and after the
expiration of those Offices, they shall give an account of the discharge of
their Trust before the Scribe, and Logistae, as other Magistrates are obliged
to do.

This shall be the manner: So much I received from the Public, so much I laid
out, or in the reverse.

Such, as have not made up their accounts, shall expend none of their money in
Divine uses, nor be Patrons, or Witnesses; nor shall they have license to
travel, bear another Office, or have the honor of a Crown conferred on them.

It Is Death for any one in debt to be invested with a public Trust.

It Is also Death to attempt Usurpation.

Let him be out-lawed, who shall continue in his Magistracy after the
dissolution of Democratical government, whereupon, it shall be lawful for any
one to kill such a Person, and make seizure of his Goods.

A Psephism.
THIS Decree was made by the Senate and Athenian State, the Tribe Aeantis being
Prytanes, Cleogenes Clerk, Boethus chief President, and Demophantus it is
Ingrosser; the date of this Psephism is from the election of the Senate of
Five-hundred, and thus it runs: If any one levels at the ruin of the
Commonwealth, or after it is subversion bears any Office, let that Man be
censured as an Enemy to the State, and dispatched out of the way; let all his
Goods, saving the tenth part to be confiscated to Minerva, be exposed to Sale:
he that kills him, with all his Assistants, shall be blameless herein, and free
from the guilt of his Death; all Athenians likewise in their several Tribes are
obliged by Oath to attempt the killing of that Man, who shall in the least seem
to affect the Crimes here set down.

The Oath.
I WILL endeavor with my own hands to kill that Man, who shall dissolve the
Athenian Republic, or after it is subversion shall bear any Office, and he
shall be reputed by me wholly free from guilt, either in respect of the Gods or
Demons, who shall take away his Life, or encourage another so to do; farther,
in the distribution of his Goods, I Will pass my Vote, that the Slayer shall have
half: and He, that in the attempt shall have the misfortune to lose his own
Life, shall, with his Heirs, have due Respect and Honor from me, as Harmodius
and Aristogiton with their Posterity.

All Oaths, that shall be taken in time of War or any other Juncture, if
inconsistent with the Athenian Constitutions, shall be null and void.

No Office, imposed by the People, shall be refused by Oath before the Senate.

Whoever casts scurrilous abuses on a Magistrate while officiating, shall be
Fined.

The Examination, and interrogatory Disquisition of the Archons.
WHETHER they are Citizens by a lawful lineage of Progenitors for three
generations, and from what Family they assume their Pedigree, whether they
derive their Progeny from Paternal Apollo, and Jupiter Herceus?

Quest. Hark you, Friend, who is your Father?

Answ. What Sir, do you mean my Father? N. or N.

Quest. What Kindred can you produce to make Evidence?

Answ. Sufficient Sir, first of all these Cousins, then these Persons who have
right to the same Burying-place with us, these here of the same Phratria, and
these related to Apollo Patrius, and Jupiter Herceus, lastly, these Gentlemen
of the same Borough, who have reposed the Trust and Management of Offices in
me, and honored me with their Suffrages.

Quest. Do You hear Friend? Who Is your Mother?

Answ. What mine do you mean? N. or N.

Quest. What Kindred have you to show?

Answ. These first, and second Cousins, and those of the same Phratria, and
Borough.

Then the Case is to be put.

Whether they have Honored their Parents? Whether they have Fought for their
Country? Whether they have Possession of an Estate, and all their Limbs* sound?
The Archon's Oath.
I WILL be punctual in the observance of the Laws, and, for every default herein,
I Will forfeit a Satue of Gold, of equal Proportion with my self, to the Delphian
Apollo.

An Archon, that shall be seen overcharged with Wine, shall suffer Death.

If any one is contumeliously piquant, beats any Thesmetheta, or blasts his
reputation, a crowned Archon's, or any other's, whom the City privileges with
an Office, or confers any dignity upon, let him be (...).

The Areopagite Senate, when Vacancies fall, shall yearly be recruited out of
the Archons.

The Areopagites shall have inspection into the Deportment, and Behavior of
the Athenians.

Let no Areopagite make a Comedy.

The Senate of Areopagus shall give an Account of their Management before the
Logistae.

Let a (...) have Children lawfully begotten, and enjoy an Estate within the
Confines of Attica.

The Oath of the (...).
I WILL twice a Year make an Incursion into the Megarensian Territories.

I Will inform against such of the (...), as shall endammage the Fleet of their
Allies.

No one shall be created Syndic, or Astynomus above once.

The Quaestors shall be chosen by Suffrages.

A Quaestorship must not be kept above five Years.

It Is Death to go an Embassy without Commission from the Senate, or People.

No one shall be Secretary above once under the same Magistrate.

Laws respecting Orators.
NO one under the Age of thirty Years shall speak an Oration in the Senate, or
Popular Assembly.

An Inspection into the Orators Lives.
LET no one be a public Orator, who has struck his Parents, denied them
^aintenance, or shut them out of doors; who has refused going into the Army in
case of public Necessity, or thrown away his Shield; who has committed
whoredom, or given way to effeminacy; who has run out his Father's Estate, or
any inheritance left him by a Friend; if, notwithstanding any of these heinous
performances, any one shall dare to deliver a public Oration, let those, who
are Commissioned, bring him to the Test in open Court.

Let an Orator have Children lawfully begotten, and let him be master of an
Estate within Attica's Borders.

If an Orator, either before the Senate, or People, has not pertinently and
distinctly handled the thing propounded, or has descanted twice on the same
subject, has been piquantly censorious, and has abusively animadverted upon
any one's behavior, has spoken incoherently to the Proedri's determination,
or, has encouraged any one so to do, or if he has abused the Epistata after
the rising of the Assembly, or Senate; such an one's Insolence shall be
punished by the Proedri with a mulct of fi^ty Drachms, the (...) shall have
intelligence of his misdemeanors, and if his penalty shall seem too light for
his Crimes, besides his Fine, let him be haled to the next convention of the
Senate, or Assembly, where if condemned, the Senate passing private Votes, the
Proedri shall exact a Fine from him to be paid to the (...) for his (...), or
breach of the Laws.

Laws treating of Duties, and Offices.
THE Archons shall appoint in the Assembly by Lots a certain number of
Flute-players to be at the (...), or public Dancings.

No Stranger shall join in a Dance with a Chorus, if he do, the Choragus shall
be Fined a thousand Drachms.

Let it be lawful to inform against a Stranger to the Archon before his
entrance into the Theater.

A stranger, if indicted by a (...) for dancing, shall be Fined fifty Drachms,
and a thousand, if he persist after prohibition.

Those Dancers, who are disfranchis'd, are to be drove of the Stage.

Sixteen Men are to be chosen out of all the public Companies, to contribute
equally toward the building a Man of War, which service they are to engage in
from twenty-five years of Age to forty.

The qualification for a Trierarch is, that he be worth ten Talents, according
to which estimation he is to be chosen, but if his Estate is rated more, let
him build Ships equivalent, yet at most but three, with a Skiff; they, who are
not worth so much, shall be joined together so many of them, till their Estates
make up the sum.

The Trierarchs, and Overseers of the Navy shall be commissioned to register
their Names, who, being of the same (...), are indebted to the Commonwealth
for Ship-rigging, for which they shall sue them.

He, that owes rigging, shall either give it, or be main-priz'd.

All Trierarchs elect shall betake themselves to the Ships, they are
constituted over.

All Trierarchs are to render an account of their Administration.

There shall be yearly Appointments for the exchange of Offices, where he, that
shall be designed a (...), shall be exempted from serving, if he can produce
any vacant person richer than himself, and if the person produced confess that
he is more wealthy than the other, he shall be put in the other's place among
the Three-hundred, but if he denies it, let them change Estates.

His Lands and Tenements shall be inspected into, who shall offer himself in
the Exchange.

They, who do quit their own Estates for those of their neighbors, shall be
obliged by Oath to discover them in this Form.

I Will fairly and honestly make known the estimate of all my Possessions, except
such, as consist in those silver Mines, that the Laws exact no Duties from.

Three days shall be allowed for those, who are to make exchange of their
Estates, to produce them.

No one shall be compelled to exhibit his Estate, which lies in Mines.

Laws about the Refusal of Offices.
NO Man, except the Archons, shall be excused from the Trierarchship.

No one shall be exempted from contributing to the Assesment for the levying of
Soldiers.

Laws concerning Honors to be conferred on those, who have deserved well of
the Commonwealth.
NO Person shall make a custom of eating in the Prytaneum.

He, who shall be invited, and refuse to come, shall be Fined.

They, who are maintained in the Prytaneum, shall have Maza, and, on Festivals,
bread.

All Crowns, if presented by the People, shall be given in the popular
Assembly, if by the Senators, in the Senate, and in no other place shall any be
presented.

None, except the whole body of the Senate, and popular Assembly, with
particular Tribes, or Buroughs, shall be privileged to conferr Crowns.

No Tribe, or Borough may presume on the Authority of bestowing Crowns in the
Theater upon any of their own Members, if they do, the Crier that proclaims
them shall be disfranchis'd.

No Stranger shall have a Crown given him in the Theater without the People's
consent; when given, it shall be consecrated to Minerva.

Every Forreigner, who is honored with a Crown, shall bring Certificates of a
regular and sober Life.

No one, though never so wealthy, except he be of the kindred of Harmodius and
Aristogiton, or an Archon, shall claim Immunity from serving in public
Offices; from this time hereafter the People shall gratify no one without such
an Exemption, but he, who supplicates for it, shall be disfranchis'd, together
with all his House and Family, and shall be liable to the Actions of (...), and
(...), by which if convicted, he shall suffer the same Fate with those, who,
though indebted to the Public, officiate as Judges.

Honors conferred by the People shall stand good; but with this Proviso, that,
if the Persons so dignified prove after examination to be unworthy of them,
they shall be void.

Laws referring to the Gymnasia.
NO School shall be opened before Sunrising, or kept open after Sunset.

None, except the School-master's Sons, and Nephews, shall be permitted
entrance into School, if beyond the customary age for sending Youth thither,
but more especially if Lads frequent it at the same time; to the breach of this
Law the penalty of Death is annexed.

No Schoolmaster shall give any adult person leave to go to Mercury's
Festival; if he transgress herein, and do not thrust him out of the School, the
Master shall suffer according to the Law enacted against the corruptors of
Freeborn Children.

Let all Choragi elected by the People be above forty years of Age.

No Slave shall presume to anoint, or perform exercises in the Palaestra.

Laws relating to Physicians and Philosophers.
NO Slave, or Woman shall study, or practice Physic.

All Freeborn Women have liberty to learn, and practice Physic.

Let no one teach Philosophy. This Law was made when the thirty Tyrants had the
dominion of Athens.

No one is to keep a Philosophy-School, unless by the Senate and People's
approbation; he, that does otherwise, shall be put to Death.

Laws concerning Judges.
AFTER a Magistrate's determination, Appeal may be made to the Courts of
Justice.

They, who are degraded from the Senate, may sit as Judges in the Courts.

All the Athenians shall draw Lots for the distribution of every one into
particular Courts.

The Judges Protestation I omit, as before treated of. Of Laws relating to
Lawsuits.
LET the Bailiff, or Person that arrests be registered.

Whosoever does not appear on the Day appointed for the Trial of his Cause,
shall suffer for his remisness by an Action called (...) and be fined a
thousand Drachms, but if a just excuse be brought for his staying away, his
punishment shall be redressed by another Action called (...), or the anulling
of the former Act.

Laws respecting Preparatories to Judgments.
THE Archons shall propose Questions to both Parties, to which they shall
answer.

The Plaintiff shall promise upon Oath that he will prosecute the Action, if he
has his Evidences and all things in order, but if not, he shall demand time for
providing and preparing them.

The Archons shall summon the contesting Parties to make their Appearance, and
introduce them into the Court.

Let the Judges be elected by Lots.

No Judge shall give Sentence twice the same Day.

A Form of the Oath taken by Judges after Election.
I WILL show Equity in all Causes, and my Judgment shall be agreeable to the
Laws, in those things, which are determined by them; in the rest my Sentence
shall, as near as may be, agree with Justice.

Laws referring to Judgments.
EVERY Judge shall put down the Heads of those Suits, he is to determine, in
his Table Book.

His Cause shall be overthrown, who runs away for fear.

Criminals have liberty of making their own defense.

No Slave shall plead in any Cause.

The Crier shall pronounce Verdict against the Party, into whose Urn the
greater number of Pebbles bored with holes are cast, and on his side, to whom
the whole ones belong.

When on both sides there shall be an equal share of Votes, the Prisoner shall
be acquitted.

Let there be a number of Urns, or Vote-boxes, equal to the number of those,
who hold the Contest.

The Judges shall propose such and such Penalties, the Defendant also shall
offer to their consideration such a punishment, as himself shall think
reasonable; after which, the whole matter shall be committed to the Judges
determination.

The Court shall not sit after Sunset.

If any one has bribed the Heliaean Court, or any other Court of Judicature
among the Athenians, or has called a Senate, or entered into conspiracy
against the State, if any Lawyer has been been greased in the Fist to carry on
any public, or private Cause, he shall be liable to be indicted before the
Thesmothetae by the Action called (...).

All private bargains, that are struck up between parties before Witnesses,
shall stand good in Law.

Don't make any Covenant, or bargain contrary to the Laws.

There shall be no after-wranglings raised concerning those things, which have
been once decided.

Any Man shall be permitted to nonsuit his Adversary, if the Action laid
against him be not lawfully entered.

They who have received damages, may prosecute within five years.

There may be Actions entered about contracts made out of Attica, or Wares
exported out of it to any other Place.

Laws concerning Arbitrators.
PEOPLE, that have any Lawsuits about private Matters, may choose any
Arbitrator, but so, as to stand to his definitive Sentence, whatsoever it is.

Such Arbitrators are to swear before Verdict be given.

The Arbitrators are to wait for the Plaintiff's appearance till Sunset, and
then, in case he don't appear, shall inflict such a Penalty, as shall be
convenient.

It Is lawful to make Appeal from Arbitrators chosen by Lots to other Courts of
Justice.

A Law about Oaths.
OATHS shall be attested by three Gods, (...), or the Supplicant's President,
(...), the Purifier, (...), the Dispeller of Dangers, or Evils.

Laws treating of Witnesses.
THEIR Evidence shall not be taken, who are (...).

No Slaves shall appear as Evidences.

No one shall be Evidence for himself, either in Judicial Actions, or in
rendering up Accounts.

Both Plaintiff and Defendant are obliged to answer each other's Questions, but
their Answers shall not pass for Evidence.

There shall be no constraint for Friends and Acquaintance, if contrary to
their Wills, to bear Witness one against another.

Let the Penalty of the Action called (...) be in force against those, who
bear, or suborn false Witness.

Evidence shall be declared in writing.

Witnesses, being once sworn, shall by no means draw back from what they are to
attest.

Eyewitnesses shall write down what they know, and read it.

His Evidence shall suffice, that can give his (...), or what he heard from a
Person deceased; or (...), or an attestation received from one gone to Travel,
supposing the Traveller has no possibility of returning.

That Witness, who declines his Evidence, shall be Fined a Dram.

One cited for a Witness shall either give in his Evidence, swear he knows
nothing of it, or incurr a mulct of a thousand Drachms to be paid to the
public Exchequer.

Let contesting Parties, if they will, make use of the (...).

False Witnesses shall be prosecuted with the Action called (...), He that
suborned them with (...).

Laws touching Judgments already past.
THERE shall be no renewing of any thing dispatched by Judges either in the
public, or more private Courts, or by the People, according to the Enactions
of their Decrees; there shall be likewise no suffraging and impeaching any one
contrary to the prescription of the Laws.

All Judgments, or Verdicts whatsoever delivered by the Judges in the popular
State, shall stand good, but all Acts and Decrees, that are made under the
T^irty Tyrants, shall be void.

Laws concerning Punishments.
THE Judges are not to proceed so strictly to the rigor of their Sentence, as
that Corporal, and Pecuniary Punishments shall be inflicted at one and the same
time.

They, who run into errors unwittingly, shall not be called in Question, but
some adhortatory Lessons of their Duty are to be privately inculcated.

The most sufficient and wealthiest of the Athenians shall be exiled by
Ostracism for ten Years, least they should rise up and rebel.

No one is to harbor an Exile, he, that does, is to participate of the same
Fate with him.

Let both Delinquent, and Abettor receive punishments alike.

He, that professes himself guilty before arraignment, shall be condemned.

Debtors, who have been found to owe money, shall be obliged to pay from the
very day the debt was due, whether they are registered in the Debt-book, or no;
and he that does not make payment within the ninth Prytanie, shall be obliged
to pay double.

No one indebted to the City shall enter on any Office.

That Debtor, who has been convicted of making an Oration to the People, shall
be put into the Court of the Eleven.

Debtors, till they have cleared off all, shall be disfranchis'd; but if they
die, not having fully discharged the Debts, their Heirs shall be di^franchis'd,
till they make satisfaction.

After payment is made, the Debtor's Name shall be eras'd out of the Debt-book.

The Thirds of the Debtor's Goods, which are forefeited to the Exchequer, shall
fall to any private Person, that informs against him.

Let those, who are Debtors to the Public, and have not their Names enrolled,
be sued by the Action called (...).

They, who have been unjustly registered as Debtors, shall be struck out, and
their Names, who registered them, be put in their place.

If any Debtor shall be blotted out of the Albe, or Register, before he has
discharged his Debt, let the Action called (...) be brought against him in the
Court of the Thesmothetae.

Whosoever has been branded with Infamy before Solon's Archon-ship, shall be
reprivileg'd, except those, whom the Areopagites, Ephetae, or Prytanes have
banished, by the appeal of the (...), for Murder, Burglary, or Treason, when
this Law was promulg'd.

No intercession shall be made for any disfranchis'd Person, nor for any one
indebted to the public Exchequer, or the Gods, toward the investing the
former with his Privileges, and erasing the latter's Name out of the Debt-book,
unless the Athenian People by six-thousand private Votes permit it. If any one
puts up an address to the Senate, or People for them, whom the Judges, Senate,
or People have already cast, or the Debtor supplicate for himself before
payment be made; let the Writ called (...) be issued out against him after the
same manner, as against those, who, though indebted, presume to act as Judges; if
any other body, before restitution of the Debt be made, intercede for the
Debtor, let all his Goods be exposed to Sale, and if a P^oedrus give a Debtor,
or any Person on his account leave to propose the petition to be voted before
Accounts are made up, he shall be (...).

Laws referring to Receivers of public Revenues, the Exchequer, and Money for
Shows.
THE Senate of Five-hundred shall put such, as farm the public Revenues, and
are negligent to pay their Rent, in the Stocks.

If the above mentioned Officers don't bring in their Rents before the ninth
Prytanie, they shall pay double.

They, who are entrusted with Money for the carrying on of Religious Affairs,
shall render it up in the Senate; which if they neglect, they shall be
proceeded against according to the Laws enacted for Public Revenues.

They, who employ the public Stock a whole Year for their own use, shall be
obliged to restore double, and they, who continue thus sqandring another Year,
shall be clapped into Gaol until payment be made.

A thousand Talents are yearly to be laid by for the defending of Attica
against foreign Invasions, which Money if any Person propose to lay out on any
other design, he shall suffer Death.

At the eruption of a sudden War, Soldiers shall be paid out of the remainder
of the Money designed for Civil uses.

If any one proposes that the Soldiers pay should be taken out of the Money
designed for the exhibition of Shows, he shall be put to Death.

Laws about Limits, and Landmarks.
IF there be a public Well within the space of an Hippicum, any one may make
use of that; but otherwise, every Person shall dig one of his own.

If any one digs a Well near another Man's ground, he must leave the space of
an (...) betwixt it, and his neighbor's enclosure.

He, that digs a Well ten (...) deep, and finds no spring, may draw twice a day
out of his neighbor's six Vessels of Water, called (...).

Let him, who digs a Ditch, or makes a Trench nigh another's Land, leave so
much distance from his neighbor, as the Ditch, or Trench is deep.

If any one makes an Hedge near his neighbor's ground, let him not pass his
neighbor's Landmark; if he builds a Wall, he is to leave one foot betwixt him
and his neighbor; if an House, two.

He, that builds an House in a Field, shall place it a Bow-shoot from his
neighbor.

He, who keeps an Hive of Bees, must place them three-hundred Feet from his
neighbor's.

Olive, and Fig Trees must be planted nine Feet from another's ground, but
other Trees, five.

If any one plucks up the sacred Olive Trees at Athens, besides the two yearly
allowed to be used at the public Festivals, or Funerals, he shall pay an
hundred Drachms for every one unlawfully pulled up, the tenth part of which
Fine shall be due to Minerva. The same Offender shall also pay an hundred to
any private Person who shall prosecute him; the Action shall be brought before
the Archons, where the prosecutor shall deposite (...). The Fine laid on the
convicted Criminal the Archons, before whom the Action is brought, shall give
an Account of to the (...), and of that part, which is to be reposited in
Minerva's Treasury, to her Quaestors, which if they don't, themselves shall be
liable to pay it.

Laws respecting Lands, Herds, and Flocks.
MEN shall not be permitted to purchase as much Land, as they desire.

All wild Extravagants, and Spend-thrifts, who lavishly run out the Estates
left them by their Fathers, or others, shall be (...).

Any one, who brings an He-Wolf, shall have five Drachms, and for a She-Wolf,
one.

No one shall kill an Ox which labors at the Plough, neither shall any one
kill a Lamb of a Year old.

Hurt not living Creatures.

Laws relating to Buying and Selling.
IF any Person sues for the title of Land, he shall prosecute the Possessor,
with the Action called (...), if of an House, with a (...).

There shall be no cheating among the Market-folks.

That Fish-monger shall incurr imprisonment, who shall over-rate his Fish, and
take less than he first proferr'd them for.

Fish-mongers shall not lay their stinking Fish in water, thereby to make it
more vendible.

Laws appertaining to Usury, and Money.
A Banker shall demand no more Interest-money, than what he agreed for at
first.

Let Usurers Interest-money be moderate.

No body, who has put in surety for any thing, may sue for it, He, or his
Heirs.

Pledges, and Sureties shall stand but for one Year.

No one to clear his debt shall make himself a Slave.

He, who sets an appointed time for the sealing of Contracts, or making good of
Promises, and sneaks away when the time is out, shall have his House rifled.

The Fine ensuing the Action called (...), shall go to the Public.

An hundred Drachms shall go to a (...).

All Coun^erf^iters, Debasers, and Diminishers of the current Coin shall lose
their Lives.

Let no Athenian, or Sojourner lend money to be exported, unless for Corn, or
some such commodity allowable by Law.

He, who sends out Money for other uses, shall be brought before the Masters of
the Custom-House, and prosecuted by an Action called (...), after the manner of
them who are caught transporting Corn unlawfully; let such an one have no Writ
or Warrant permitted him against the Person to whom he lent Money, neither
shall the Archons let him enter any Trial in the Judicial Courts.

Laws about Wares to be imported to, or exported from Athens.
ALL Olives are exportable, but other things are not; so that the Archon shall
openly curse the Persons that export them, or else be amerc'd an Hundred
Drachms.

Figs are restrained by Law from exportation.

If any Athenian Factor, or Merchant convey Corn any where else than to Athens,
the Action called (...) is to be brought against him, and the Informer shall
claim half the Loading designed for illegal exportation.

He, who impleads a Merchant on slight grounds, shall have both the Actions of
(...), and (...), brought against him.

He shall be Fined a thousand Drachms, and wholly debarred from issuing out the
Actions of (...), and (...), who shall desist from the prosecution of any Man
accused by him, or does not acquire the fifth part of the Suffrages.

Let no Inhabitant of Athens buy more Corn than fifty Phormi will contain.

No one shall export Wood, or Pitch.

All Controversies and compacts made by Bonds between Mariners, either sailing
for Athens, or bound elsewhere, shall be brought under the Cognizance of the
Thesmothetae; if any Mariners, in any of the Marts, bound to Athens, or for any
other Place, are found guilty of injustice, they shall be clapped into Custody
till the Fine, which shall be imposed on them, is paid; any of them may
nonsuit his Adversary, if he be illegally prosecuted.

No Watermen, and Masters of Ships shall carry Passengers any where else, than
they agreed at first.

Laws respecting Arts.
ANY one may accuse another of Idleness.

No Man shall have two Trades.

No Man shall sell Perfumes.

Foreigners shall not be privileged to sell Wares in the Market, or profess
any Calling,

Any one may bring an Action of Slander against him, who disparages, or
ridicules any Man, or Woman for being of a Trade.

He, who by his Profession gets best repute, and is reckoned the most ingenious
in his way, shall have his Diet in the Prytaneum, and be honored with the
highest Seat.

That Ferry-man shall be prohibited the exercise of his employ, who overturns
his Boat, though unwillingly, in wasting over to Salamis.

Laws concerning Societies, with their Agreements.
IF Fellow-Burgesses, those of the same (...), those who are occupied in the
same Sacerdotial Function, viz. the (...), or they who diet together, have
equal claim to the same Burying-place, travel together for the buying of Corn
and other Traffic, if any of these Persons make any Bargains not inconsistent
with the Laws, they shall stand good.

If any one recedes from a promise made to the Commons, Senate, or Judges, he
shall be proceeded against with the Action called (...), and, if found guilty,
be punished with Death.

He, that does not stand to an engage^ent made publicly, shall be
disfranchiz'd.

He, His Heirs, and all who belong to him shall be (...), who has received
bribes himself, tampered others with them, or used any insinuating Artifice to
the prejudice of the State.

He, who being in a public Office receives bribes, shall either loose his
Life, or make retribution of the bribes ten-fold.

Laws belonging to Marriages.
NO Man shall have above one Wife.

No Athenian is to marry any other than a Citizen.

If an Heiress is contracted lawfully in full Marriage by a Father, Brother by
Father's side, or Grand-sire, it is lawful to procreate with her Freeborn
Children; but if she be not betrothed, these Relations being dead, and she
consequently an Orphan, let her have a Guardian to join her in Wedlock to the
next of kin; but supposing she is no Heiress, and but low in the world, let her
choose what Guardian she please, and he shall be obliged to the performance of
his Trust.

If any one marry a Stranger, as his Kins-woman, to an Athenian Citizen, he
shall be (...), his Goods published to Sale, the Thirds of which shall fall to
the Impeacher, who shall make him appear before the Thesmothetae, after the
manner of those, who are prosecuted with the Action of (...).

A Stranger, that settles with a Citizen-Woman, may be sued by any one
empowered thereto, in the Court of the Thesmothetae, where if the Law goes
against him, he shall be sold, and the third part of what he is sold for, and
of his Estate be given to the accuser; in the same manner Forreign-women shall
be dealt with, who marry Free'd-men, and beside that, the Man shall forfeit a
thousand Drachms.

No Athenian Woman shall marry her self into an exotic Family.

Any one may make a Sister by Father's side his Wife.

No Heiress must marry out of her Kindred, but shall resign up her self, and
Fortune to her nearest Relation.

Every Month, except in that called (...), the Judges shall meet to inspect
into those who are designed for Heiresses Husbands, and shall put them by as
incapacitated, who cannot give sufficient credentials of their alliance by
Blood.

If any one sues another by a claim to the Heiress, he must deposite (...), or
the tenth part of her Portion, and he, who enjoys her, shall lay his Case open
to the Archon, but in case he makes no Appeal, his right of inheritance shall
be cut off; if the Heiresse's Husband, against whom the Action is brought, be
dead, the other, within such a time as the nature of the Thing does require,
shall make an Appeal to the Archon, whose business it is to take Cognizance of
the Action.

If a Father bury all his Sons, he may entail his Estate on his married
Daughters.

If an Heiress cannot conceive Children by her Husband, she may seek aid
amongst the nearest of her Husband's Relations.

All Men are obliged to lie with their Wives, if Heiresses, three nights, at
least, in a Month.

He, that ravishes a Virgin shall be obliged to marry her.

A Guardian shall not marry the Mother of those Orphans, with whose Estate he
is entrusted.

Slaves are allowed the Familiarity of Women.

When a New-marri'd Woman is brought to her Husband's House, she must carry
with her a (...) in token of good House-wifery.

Let a Bride, at the first bedding with her Bridegroom, eat a Quince.

Laws touching Dowries.
A Bride shall not carry with her to her Husband above three Garments, and
Vessels of small value.

They, who are the next in Blood to an Orphan-Virgin that has no Fortune,
shall marry her themselves, or settle a Portion on her according as they are in
Quality, if of the (...), five-hundred Drachms; if of the (...), three-hundred;
if of the (...), one hundred and fifty: but if she has many Kindred equally
allied, all of them severally shall put in a contribution, till they make up
the respective sum; if there be many Orphan-virgins, their nearest Relation
shall either give in Marriage, or take one of them to Wife, but if he does
neither, the Archon shall compel him; but if the Archon does connive at the
neglect, he himself shall be Fined a thousand Drachms, to be consecrated to
Juno. Whoever breaks this Law may be indicted by any Person before the Archon.

That Woman, who brings her Husband a Fortune, and lives in the same House with
her Children, may keep their Estates in her own hand without paying
Interest-money.

An Heiress's Son, when come to man's Estate, shall enjoy his Mother's Fortune,
and keep Her.

He, that promises to settle an Estate on a Woman, shall not be forced to stand
to it, if she dies without Heirs.

Laws referring to Divorces.
HE, who divorceth his Wife, must make restitution of her Portion, or pay in
lieu of it nine Oboli every Month, her Guardian otherwise may prosecute him in
the Odeum with the Action called (...) for her maintenance.

If a Woman forsake her Husband, or He put away his Wife, He, who gave her in
Marriage, shall exact the Dowry given with her, and no more.

That Woman, who has a mind to leave her Husband, must give in a
separation-bill to the Archon with her own hand, and not by a Proxy.

Laws belonging to Adulteries.
HE, that deflowrs a Freewoman by force, shall be Fined an hundred Drachms.

He, who in the same manner violates a young Maiden's Chastity, shall be Fined
a thousand Drachms*

He, that catches an Adulterer in the Fact, may impose any Arbitrary punishment.

If any one is injuriously clapped up on suspicion of Adultery, He shall make his
complaint by Appeal to the Thesmothetae, which if they find justifiable, He
shall be acquitted, and his Sureties discharged from their Bail; but in case he
be brought in Guilty, the Judges shall lay on him, death only excepted, what
punishments they will, and he be forced to get Friends to pass their word for
his future Chastity.

If any one commit a Rape, he shall be amerc'd twice as much as is usual
otherwise.

No Husband shall have to do with his Wife any more after she has defiled his
Bed, and her Gallant convicted; and, if he does not put her away, he shall be
esteemed (...); hereupon she is prohibited coming to public Temples, where if
she does but enter, she is liable to any Penalty, except Death.

No Adulteress shall be permitted to adorn her self, she, that does, shall have
her Garments cut or torn off her back by any that meets her, and likewise be
beaten, though not so as to be killed, or disabled.

No Woman of innocent conversation shall appear abroad in an immodest or
affected Garb, she, that does, shall forfeit a thousand Drachms.

Women are forbid to travel with above three Gowns, or more meat and drink than
they can purchase for an Obolus, neither shall they carry with them above an
Hand-basket, or go out any where by nigh^ but in a Chariot, with a Lamp or
Torch carried before it.

Laws relating to the Love of Boys; Procurers, and Strumpets.
NO Slave shall Caress, or be Enamored with a Freeborn Youth, he who is,
shall receive publicly fifty stripes.

If any one, whether Father, Brother, Uncle, or Guardian, or any other who has
Jurisdiction over a Boy, take hire for him to be effeminately embraced; the
catamited Boy shall have no Action issued out against him, but the Chap-man,
and Pander only, who are both to be punished after the same manner; the Child,
when grown up to maturity of Age, shall not be obliged to keep his Father so
offending, only, when dead, He shall bury him with decency suitable to a
Parent's Obsequies.

If any one prostitute a Boy, or Woman, He shall be prosecuted with the Action
called (...), and, if convicted, punished with Death.

Any Athenian empowered so to do, may bring an Action against him who has
vitiated a Boy, Woman, or Man Freeborn, or in Service, for the determination
of which the Thesmothe^ae are to create Judges to sit in the Heliaea, within
thirty days after the complaint has been brought before them, or, suppose any
public concern hinders, as soon as occasion will permit; if the Offender is
cast, He shall immediately undergo the punishment, whether Corporal, or
Pecuniary, annexed to his Offense; if he be sentenced to die let him be
delivered to the (...), and suffer Death the same Day; if the vitiated Servant,
or Woman belong to the Prosecutor, and he lets the Action fall, or does not get
the fifth part of the Suffrages, He shall be fined a thousand Drachms; if the
Criminal be only fined, let him pay within eleven Days, at the farthest, after
Sentence is past; if it be a Freeborn Person he has vitiated, let him be kept
in bonds till payment thereof.

He, that has prostituted himself for a Catamite, shall not be elected an
Archon, Priest, or Syndic, shall execute no Office, either within, or out of
Attica's boundaries, conferred by Lot, or Suffrage; he shall not be sent on an
Embassy, pass Verdict, set footing within the public Temples, be crowned on
solemnary Days, or enter the Forum's purified Precincts; if any one convicted
of the abovementioned lasciviousness be caught offending in any one of these
points, he shall suffer Death.

Persons, who keep company with common Strumpets, shall not be accounted
Adulterers, for such shall be in common for the satiating of Lust.

Whores shall wear, as a Badge of distinction, flowered Garments.

Laws appointed for the drawing up of Wills, and right Constitution of Heirs
and Successors.
THE Right of Inheritance shall remain in the same Family.

Boys, or Women are to receive for their Inheritance no more than a Medimn of
Barley.

All Genuine Citizens, whose Estates were impaired by litigious Suits when
Solon entered the Praetor-ship, shall have permission of leaving their Estates
to whom they will, admit they have no Male-children alive, or themselves be not
crazed through the infirmities of old Age, the misery of a distemper, or the
enchantments of Witchcraft, or if they be not hen-peckt, or forced to it by
some unavoidable necessity.

The Wills of such as having Children, yet dispose of their Estates, shall
stand good, if the Children die before they arrive to Maturity.

Any one, though he has Daughters alive, may give his Estate to another body, on
this proviso, that the Person enjoying it shall marry a Daughter.

Adopted Persons shall make no Will, but as soon as they have Children lawfully
begotten, let them return into the Family, whence they were adopted; or if they
continue in it to their Death, then they shall return back the Estates to the
Relations of the Person that adopted.

All legitimate Sons shall have an equal claim to their Father's Inheritance.

He, that, after he has adopted a Son, begets legitimate Children, shall share
his Estate among the legitimate, and adopted.

The Estate of him, that dies intestate, and leaves Daughters, shall come to
those, who marry them; but if there are no Daughters, these shall enjoy it,
viz. His Brothers by the Father's side and their Sons; if he has neither
Brothers nor Nephews, then Males descended from them, though very far distant in
Kindred; but if none of the Grandchildren remain down to the second Cousins by
the Man's side, the Wife's Relations shall put in for the Inheritance; admit
there are none living of either side, they, who have the nearest pretense to
Kindred, shall enjoy it; as for Bastards, from Euclides's Archon-ship, they
shall pretend no right to Kindred; if there is a lawfully begotten Daughter,
and an illegitimate Son, the Daughter shall have preference in Right to the
Estate, both in respect of Divine and Civil Affairs.

No Bastard shall have left him above five (...).

All the Year round, except in the Month (...), Legacies shall be examined by
Law, so that no one shall enjoy any, unless lawfully devolved on him.

He, that issues a Writ against one settled in an Inheritance shall bring him
before the Archon, and deposite (...), as is usual in other Actions, for unless
he prosecutes the Enjoyer he shall have no Title to the Estate; and if the
immediate Successor, against whom the Action is brought, be dead, the other,
within such a time as the nature of the Action does require, shall make an
Appeal to the Archon, whose business it is to take Cognizance of this Action, as
also it was of the former Action of the Man in possession of the Estate.

Five Years being expired after the Death of the immediate Successor, the
Estate is to remain secure to the deceased Person's Heirs, without being liable
to Lawsuits.

Laws appertaining to Guardianship.
NO one can be another's Guardian, who is to enjoy the Estate after his Death.

Guardians shall let out their Pupils Houses.

The Archon shall be obliged to take care of Orphans, Heiress^^, decayed
Families, Women, that remain in the Houses of their deceased Husbands,
pretending to be with Child; and to protect them from Violence and Abuses; if
any one is injurious or contumelious, the Archo^ shall fine him as far as the
limits of his Power extend; if the Offender herein transgress beyond his
commission of punishing, the Archon, having first imposed him as he thinks fit,
shall compel him at five days warning to make appearance at the Court of
Heliaea, where if he be convicted, that Court shall impose on him arbitrarily
either pecuniary, or corporal Penalty.

No Pupil after five Years space, shall sue a Guardian for the mis-management
of his Trust.

Laws about Sepulcres, and Funerals.
LET the dead be interred.

No Tomb is to consist of more work, than ten Men can finish in three days,
neither is it to be erected arch-wise, or adorned with Statues.

No Grave is to have over it, or by it, Pillars above three cubits high, it is
Table, and Labellum or (or little Vessel to contain Victuals for the Ghost's
maintenance) are to be of the same height.

He, that defaceth a Sepulcre, or lays one of a different Family in that of
another, breaks it, eraseth the Inscription, or beats down the Pillar, shall
suffer condign Punishment.

No one shall come near another's Grave, unless at the Celebration of Obsequies.

The Corpse shall be laid out at the Relations pleasure, the next day following
before Daylight shall be the Funeral Procession; the Men shall proceed first,
the Women after them; it is unlawful hereby for any Woman, if under threescore
and no Relation, to go where the mournful Solemnity is kept, or after the
Burial is solemnized.

Too great a concourse of People is prohibited at Funerals.

Let not the Corpse be buried with above three Garments.

Let not Women tear their Faces, or make Lamentations, or Dirges at Funerals.

At every one's Death there shall be paid to the Preistess of Minerva, who is
placed in the Citadel, a Choenix of Barley, the like of Wheat, and an Obolus.

No Ox shall be offered to atone for, or appease the Ghost of the deceased.

Children and Heirs shall perform the accustomed Rites of Parentation.

Slaves, when Dead, shall not be embalmed, or honored with a Funeral Banquet.

Let there be no Panegyricks, unless at Funerals publicly Solemnized, and then
not spoken by Kindred, but one appointed by the Public for that purpose.

They, who fall in the Field, are to have their Obsequies celebrated at the
public Charge.

Let the Father have the privilege of giving that Son a Funeral Encomium, who
died valiantly in the Fight.

He shall have an annual Harangue spoken in his Honor on the day he fell, who
receives his Death with undaunted Prowess in the Battel's Front.

Let him, who accidentally lights on an unburied Carkase, cast earth upon it,
and let all Bodies be buried Westward.

Don't speak evil of the Dead, no not, though their Children provoke you.

Laws against Ruffians, and Assassins.
THE Areopagite Senate shall sit in Judgment over Cases of wilful Murder, of
Wounds given wilfully, Setting Houses on Fire, or killing by Poison.

The Assassin's Council shall not make any preliminary Apology, use any motives
for the gaining of Compassion, or speak any thing foreign to the Cause.

The Thesmothetae shall condemn Murderers, who fly after the Fact.

The Assassin shall suffer Death in the Murdered Person's Country; and, being
haled away to the Thesmothetae according to the appointment of the Law, he
shall be liable to no other violence or ill usage, besides what his Capital
punishment includes; no body shall take Money for his Pardon; he that does,
shall pay double the Money he received of the Criminal, his Name likewise by
any body shall be carried in to the Archons, but the Heliastick Court alone
shall pass Judgment upon him.

If any one kills, or assists in killing a Murderer that abstains from the
Forum, Consecrated places, public Sports, and the Amphictyonick Festivals, he
shall undergo the severity of the Law as much as if he had killed a Citizen of
Athens. The Ephetae are to take Cognizance of this Matter.

One accused of Murder shall have nothing to do with City-Privileges.

He, that puts him in trouble, who was forced to make flight out of Attica for
Chance-medley, shall undergo the same penalty with him, who does the like to
one within Athens.

He, who commits Chance-medley, shall fly his Country for a Year, till
satisfaction be made to the dead Person's Kindred; then he shall return,
sacrifice, and be purified.

He, shall not have an Action of Murder brought against him, who binds him
over to his appearance before the Magistrate, that returned from banishment
before his limited time is completed.

If any one has unadvisedly given his Antagonist in the Exercises his Death,
or killed by chance a Man lying in Ambuscade, or being in the brunt of an
engagement in War, or one debauching his Wife, Mother, Sister, Daughter, Miss,
or the Nurse of his legitimate Children, let not such an one be banished.

It shall be lawful to kill that Person, who shall make an assault on the
Innocent.

If any one, being banished for Chance-medley, shall have an Indictment of
wilful Murder laid to his charge, before he has made up the difference with
those who banished him, He shall make his defense before the Court (...), in a
little Vessel, which shall not be permitted to come to shore, but his Judges
shall give Sentence on the Land; if he is cast, he shall answer Justice for
wilful Murder; but if absolved, shall only undergo the former Sentence of
banishment for Chance-medley.

If any Archon, or Man in a private capacity is instrumental in the
depravation, or repeal of these Statutes, let him, and his Children be (...),
and his Goods be sold.

It shall be lawful to hale a Murderer, if found in any religious Places, or
the Forum, to Gaol, and if he prove guilty, to put him to Death; but if the
committer of him to Gaol do not procure the fifth part of the Votes, he shall
be fined a thousand Drachms.

If any one comes to an untimely End, his nearest Relations may bring the
Action of (...) against those People they suspect, either to be Abettors of the
Murder, or Protectors of the Felon, and till such time as these either make
satisfaction, or surrender the Delinquent, the Murdered Man's Relations are
privileged to seize three Men of their Body.

The Right of the prosecution of Murderers belongs to the Kindred of the
Murdered, Kins-folks Children, their Sons in Law, Fathers in Law, Sisters
Children, and those of the same (...); the Murderers have liberty granted of
imploring the Father of the Murdered to be mild and favorable; but if he is
not alive, then his Brother, or Sons all together shall be entreated, for
without the joint consent of them all, nothing shall prevail; if these
forementioned Persons are all dead, and the Death of the Person came by
Chance-medley, according to the determination of the fifty Ephetae, ten of the
same (...) may, if they think fit, convene, and delegate one and fifty out of
the Nobility to the Ephetae * * All they, who were Murderers before the making
of this Law, shall be subject to it is obligation. If any one has been Murdered
in any of the Buroughs, and no body removes him, the Demarchus shall give
orders to his Friends to take him away, bury him, and perform the Duty of
Lustration toward the Borough that very day on which he was killed; when a
Slave is Murdered, He shall inform the Master; when a Freeman, the succeeding
Heirs; but if the Person Murdered, was not a moneyed Man, or had no
Possessions, the Demarchus shall acquaint the Relations, and supposing they
give no heed, and neglect to take him away, the Demarchus himself shall see him
taken away, and buried, and take care the Borough be lustrated, but all this
with as little charges as may be, which if He neglect, He shall be Fined a
thousand Drachms, to be paid to the public Exchequer. He shall take of the
Murdered Person's Debtors double the money he expended for the Funeral, which
if he neglect, he shall pay it himself to those of his Tribe.

He, who is Felo de se, shall have the Hand cut off, that did the Murder, which
shall be buried in a place separate from the Body.

No Murderer shall be permitted to be within the City.

Inanimate Things, which have been instrumental to People's Deaths, shall be
cast out of Attica.

He, who strikes the first blow in a Quarrel, shall have the Peace sworn
against him.

He, who has maliciously hurt another's body, head, face, hands, or feet,
shall be proscribed the City of that Man to whom he offered the detriment; if
he returns, he shall suffer Death, and his Goods be sold by Auction.

A Law relating to Accusations.
ANY one is permitted to Inform against another, that has done an Injury to a
third Person.

Laws concerning Damages.
HE, who out of design infers Damage, shall suffer twice as much as an
unwilling Offender.

His Eyes shall be both plucked out, who has blinded any one-ey'd Person.

That Dog shall be tied up with a Chain four cubits long, which has bit any
body.

Laws belonging to Theft.
HE, who Steals, shall pay double the Value of the thing he stole to the Owner,
and as much to the public Exchequer.

If any body has had any thing stolen from him, and has it restored, the Thief
with the Abettor shall pay double the value; but in case the Thief does not
make restitution, ten-fold, and be set in the Stocks five days, and as many
nights, if the Heliasts so order it; this Order shall then be made, when they
consider what punishment to inflict upon him.

If any one has filcht away any thing by day worth above fifty Drachms, let
the Action called (...) be put in execution against him before the Eleven; but
if in the night, any one has liberty to kill him, or, upon his making away, to
wound him, and to issue the same Action out against him; by which if he be
cast, he shall die without any concession for Sureties to put in Bail for the
restitution of the stolen Goods. He, further, that shall pilfer out of the
Lyceum, Academia, Cynosarges, or any of the Gymnasia any thing of the least
value, as a Garment, Oylvial, etc. or above ten Drachms, out of the Baths, or
Ports, shall suffer Death.

He, that puts a Man in Prison for Theevery, and cannot prove it upon him,
shall be fined a thousand Drachms.

All Cut-purses, Burglars, and Kid-nappers, if convicted, shall suffer Death.

He, who makes search for Thieves in another's House, must have only a thin
Garment hanging loose about him.

He, that takes away that which is not his own, shall be liable to die for it.

It Is a Capital Crime to break into a Man's Orchard, and steal his Figs.

It Is punishable to rob a Dunghill*

Laws restraining Reproaches.
NO one shall calumniate, or defame any Person while alive, in the Temples,
Judicial Courts, Treasuries, or Places where Games are celebrated, the
Delinquent herein, shall pay three Drachms to the injured Man, and two to the
public Treasury.

He shall be fined, who slanders any Man.

He shall incurr a mulct of five-hundred Drachms, who twits any one with
committing some heinous Offense against the Laws.

No one shall call another Cutthroat, or Murderer.

He, that upbraids another for casting away his Buckler, shall be ^in'd.

Laws about the management of Affairs.
THEY, who have been negligent in carrying on any Business, shall answer for
that neglect.

No Woman shall have any farther to do in Affairs, than a Medimn of Barley will
satisfy for Performance.

Laws referring to Entertainments.
NO Entertainment is to consist of above thirty Guests.

All Cooks hired to dress up Dishes for Entertainments, are to carry in their
Names to the Gynaeconomi.

None but mixed Wines shall be drunk at Banquets.

Let pure and unmixed Wines be reserved till afterward, for a relishing Taste
to the honor of the good Genius.

The Areopagites shall take Cognizance of all Drunkards.

A Law relating to Accusations concerning Mines.
IF any one has prohibited another from working in the Mines, or has carried
Fire into them, carried away another's Utensils, or Tools, or if he has dug
beyond his Limits, such an one may be prosecuted with the Action called (...).

A Law appertaining to the Action (...).
TImocrates has enacted, that whatsoever Athenian is cast by the Action (...)
before the Senate, and shall be secured by imprisonment before, or after the
Indictment, his Name not being inserted according to Law by the Scribe of that
Prytanie in the Accusation-note, and carried up to the Thesmothetae, the
Thesmothetae within thirty days after the receipt of the Bill, unless some
great emergency of State intervene, shall appoint the Eleven to sit in Judgment
over it, before whom any Athenian may accuse him; if he be convicted, the
Heliaea shall inflict upon him Punishment, either corporal, or pecuniary; if
the latter, he shall be clapped into Gaol till he pay it.

Military Laws.
THE time for Military Service shall be from eighteen Years to forty; till
twenty, Men shall remain within Attica to be ready in Arms, after that they
shall serve in the Army without Attica.

He shall be (...), who offers to serve in the Horse, before he has undergone
the accustomed Probation.

The Chivalry shall be detacht out of the most Puissant and wealthy Athenians.

Soldiers shall not observe the punctilios of Spruceness and Foppery, in their
Hair, etc.

None shall pawn their Arms.

He shall suffer Death, who has betrayed a Garrison, Ship, or Army.

All Revolters to the Enemy shall undergo the same Penalty.

There shall be no Marching before the seventh of the Month.

The Ceremony for proclaiming of War shall be by putting a Lamb into the
Enemies Territories.

The Polemarch shall lead up the right wing of the Army.

All public Revenue-keepers, and Dancers at the (...), shall be exempted from
serving in the Army.

Of Military Punishments and Rewards.
THEY, who have maintained their Post with Courage, shall be advanced, and
others degraded.

All Refusers to go into the Army, Cowards, and Run-aways shall be expelled the
Forum, shall not be crowned, or go to the public Temples; He, who offends
against this Law, shall be put into bonds by the Eleven, and carried before the
Heliastae, where any one empowered may accuse him; if he is proved guilty, the
Heliastae shall pronounce Sentence, and inflict upon him, as the nature of his
Crime requires, a mulct, or corporal penance; if the former, he shall lie in
Gaol till he pays it.

Let him be (...), who casts away his Arms.

He, who during a War by Sea runs away from his Ship, and he, who being Pressed
for Sea does not go, shall be (...).

All disabled and wounded Soldiers shall be maintained out of the public Fund.

Their Parents, and Children shall be taken care for, that are cut off in War;
if Parents are killed, their Children shall be put to School at the public
Charge, and when come to maturity of Age, shall be presented with a whole suit
of Armor, settled every one in his respective Calling, and honored with first
Seats in all public Places.

Miscellany Laws.
THEY shall be prosecuted for Ingratitude, who do not retaliate kindnesses.

The Borough, and name of every one's Father shall be written down in all
Deeds, Compacts, Suits, and other concerns.

A Discoverer, who alleges Truth, shall be secure; but if falsehood, shall
suffer Death.

He shall be (...), who stands Neuter in any public Sedition.

He shall Die, who leaves the City for residence in the Piraeeus.

He shall be fined, who is seen to walk the City-streets with a Sword by his
side, or having about him other Armor, unless in case of Exigency.

He shall be denied buryal within Attica, and his Goods exposed to Sale, who
has been convicted of perfidious behavior toward the State, or of Sacrilege.

He, that has betrayed his Country, shall not enter into Attica's Borders; if
he do, he shall expiate his Crime by the same Law, as they, who, though condemned
by the Areopagites to banishment, return.

Those Compacts shall stand good, which have been approved of by the Judges.

Let there be an Amnesty of all former dissentions, and no one be liable to be
called in Question, or reproached for any thing done formerly.

This Law was made after the Thirty Tyrant 's expulsion to reconcile all former
Quarrels, and was sworn to by the Archons, Senate of Five-hundred, and all the
Commonalty of Athens.

When any Person is accused contrary to this Oath, use may be made of the Plea
called (...), the Archons shall have Cognizance of this matter, and he that
makes the Plea, shall make his defense first; the Party, that is cast, shall
have the Fine called (...), imposed upon him.

No Stranger shall be wronged or injured.

Put the bewildred Traveller in his way, and be hospitable to Strangers.

No seller of Rings shall keep by him the Signature of a Ring, when sold.

Archaeologiae Graecae, OR, THE ANTIQUITIES OF GREECE. BOOK II.
CHAPTER I. Of the first Authors of Religious Worship in Greece.
HERODOTUS in the second Book of his History is of Opinion, that the Greeks
derived their Religion from the Egyptians: but Plutarch peremptorily denies it
De Herod^t. malevol.
, as being neither mentioned by Homer, nor any of the Ancients. ^^istophanes
R^ni^.
, and Euripides Rheso.
say, that Orpheus was the first that instructed the Grecians in all the Rites
and Ceremonies of their Worship; He was a Thracian, and therefore, says Nonnus
(...). in Stell. I.
, Devotion was called (...) q. (...), because it was invented by a Thracian.

These, I think, were neither altogether in the right, nor yet wholly mistaken,
for as the exact agreement betwixt some of the Grecian Ceremonies and the
religious Worship of Thrace makes it probable that one was derived from the
other; so on the other side, the conformity of some other parts of the Grecian
Religion to that of the Egyptians does plainly argue that they were fetched
from Egypt: but that the whole System of the Grecian Religion should be
borrowed from either Thrace, or Egypt, or any one Country is improbable, if
not impossible; as will evidently appear to every one that considers the great
variety of Religions in Greece, where almost every City had different Gods, and
different modes of Worship. It Is much more probable, that Greece, being
inhabited by Colonies from diverse Nations, did borrow from every one of these,
some part of their religious Ceremonies; Thus the Thebans, being descended from
the Phoenicians, retained a great part of their Worship, and the Argives are
thought to have been instructed in the Egyptian Religion by Danaus, and his
Followers. Add to this, that the Grecians in general, and the Athenians in
particular, were so excessively superstitious, that they would not be content
to Worship their ancient Deities, but frequently consecrated new ones of their
own making; and beside these, assumed into the number of their own, the Gods of
all the Nations with whom they had any Commerce; insomuch, that even in Homer's
time they were (...), thirty thousand; and though, as Isocrates informs us Orat.
Areopag.
, the ancient Athenians thought their Religion consisted chiefly in the
observation of the Rites and Ceremonies delivered to them by their Ancestors,
yet there was a Custom that obliged them to entertain a great many strange
Gods, whence it was that they religiously observed the (...), or Feast of all
the strange Gods; which was also celebrated at Delphi, as Athenaeus witnesses
Deipn. l. IX. c. III.
. Nay, so fearful were the Athenians of omitting any, that, as Pausanias Atticu.
tells us, they erected Altars to unknown Gods. It may be objected, that they
condemned Socrates for no other crime than Worshipping strange Gods, for that
this was his accusation Laertius witnesses in his Life. But to this it is
replied, that though they were so desirous of new Deities, yet none were
worshipped till they had been approved, and admitted by the Areopagites, as
Harpocration has observed; and thence was it, that when St. Paul preached
amongst them Jesus and the Resurrection, he was summoned to appear before this
Council, to give an account of his new Doctrine.

CHAPTER II. Of their Temples, Altars, Images, and Asyla.
THE first Generations of Men had neither Temples, nor Statues for their Gods,
but worshipped toward Heaven in the open Air. And it is generally thought by
learned Men, that Temples owe their first Original to the superstitious
reverence and devotion paid by the Ancients to the memory of their deceased
Friends, Relations, and Benefactors Eusebius, Lactantius, Clemens A^exandr.
Protrept.
; and as most of the Gods were Men consecrated upon the account of some public
benefit conferred on Mankind, so most of the Heathen Temples are thought to
have been at first only stately Monuments erected in honor of the Dead. Thus
the Temple of Pallas in the Tower of the City Larissa was the Sepulcre of
Acrisius; Cecrops lies interred in the Acropolis of Athens, and Ericthonius in
the Temple of Minerva Polias, to mention no more. A farther confirmation of
this, is, that those words which in their proper acceptance signify no more
then a Tomb, or Sepulcre, are by ancient Writers applied to the Temples of the
Gods, and thus Lycophron, a noted affecter of obsolete words, has used
Cassandr. v. 613.
(...), -- (...)
(...).
'Twas now, when quite fatigued with toil of War
With eager haste the Greek did home repair,
That from the treacherous Fate for him designed
Great Juno's Temple saved. --
(Mr. Hutchin.) Where he speaks of Diomedes, who, at his return from Troy, was
laid in wait for by his Wife Aegialea, and forced to take sanctuary in the
Temple of Juno. I will but give you one instance more, and that out of Virgil
Aeneid. II. v. 742.
, -- tumulum antiquae Cereris, sedemque sacratam
Venimus. --
The Temple and the hallowed Seat
Of ancient Ceres we approached. --
Nor is it any wonder that Monuments should at length be converted into
Temples, when at every common Sepulcre it was usual to offer Prayers,
Sacrifices, and Libations, of which more hereafter.

Temples were built and adorned with all possible Splendour and Magnificence, no
Pains, no Charge was spared upon them, or any part of divine Worship. This they
did, partly out of the great Respect they had for the Gods, to whom they
thought nothing more acceptable than costly Ornaments; and partly, that they
might create a Reverence of the Deities in those that came to pay their
Devotions there. The Lacedaemonians only had a Law amongst them, that every one
should serve the Gods with as little expense as he could, herein differing from
all other Grecians; and Lycurgus being asked for what reason he made this
Institution, so disagreeable to the sentiments of all other Men; answered,
Least at any time the service of the Gods should be intermitted; for he feared,
that if Religion should be as expensive as in the other parts of Greece, it
might some time or other happen, that the divine Worship out of the
Covetousness of some, and Poverty of others might be neglected: and wisely
considered, that magnificent Edifices, and costly Sacrifices were not so
pleasing to the Gods, as the true Piety, and unfeigned Devotion of their
Worshippers. This Opinion of his was confirmed by the Oracle of Hammon Plato
Alcib. II.
; for the Athenians, being worsted by the Lacedaemonians in many Encounters
both at Land and Sea, sent to Jupiter Hammon to enquire what means they had
best use to obtain Victory over their Enemies; and withal to ask him, why the
Athenians, who (said they) serve the Gods with more Pomp and Splendour than all
the Grecians beside, should undergo so many misfortunes; whilst the
Lacedaemonians, whose Worship is very mean and slovenly, were always crowned
with Success and Victory? The Oracle made them no other answer, than that the
honest, unaffected Service of the Lacedaemonians was more acceptable to the
Gods, than all the splendid and costly Devotions of other People. The Reader
will pardon this digression, since it does so fully and clearly set forth the
temper of two of the most flourishing States of Greece.

To return therefore, the Temples were built after that manner, which they
thought most agreeable to the Gods, to whom they designed they should be
dedicated; for as Trees, Birds, and other Animals were thought sacred to
particular Deities, so also almost every God had a form of Building peculiar to
himself, and which they thought more acceptable to him than any other. For
instance, the Dorick Pillars were sacred to Jupiter, Mars, and Hercules; the
Ionick, to Bacchus, Apollo, and Diana; the Corinthian, to Vesta the Virgin. I
deny not but that sometimes all these were made use off in the same Temple, but
this was either in those Temples which were sacred to more Gods than one, of
which there might be produced several Instances, or to some of those Gods, who
were thought to preside over several Things; for the Ancients, believing that
the world was governed by divine Providence, ascribed the management of every
particular Affair to this, or that Deity; thus Mars was thought to preside over
War, Venus over Love; and to some of their Gods they assigned the care over
diverse Things, so Mercury was the God of Merchants, Orators, and Thieves;
Minerva was the Goddess of Warriors, Scholars, and Artificers, etc. and
therefore it is no wonder, that in some of the Temples dedicated to her, there
were three Rows of Pillars, the first of the Dorick, the second of the
Corinthian, the third of the Ionick Order.

As to the places of Temples, those in the Country were generally surrounded
with Groves sacred to the Tutelar Deity of the place, where, before the
invention of Temples, it is reported the Gods were worshipped; but where those
could not be had, as in Cities, and large Towns, they were built amongst, and
even adjoining to the Common Houses, only the Tanagreans thought this
inconsistent with the Reverence due to those holy Mansions of the Gods, and
therefore took care to have their Temples founded in places free from the noise
and hurry of Business; for which Boeoticis.
Pausanias commends them. Wherever they stood, if the Situation of the place
would permit, it was contrived, that the Windows being opened, they might
receive the Rays of the rising Sun Vitruv. lib. IV. cap. V.
. The Frontis-piece was placed toward the West, and the Altars and Statues
toward the other end, that so they, who came to worship, might have their
Faces toward them, because it was an ancient custom among the Heathens to
worship with their Faces toward the East, of which hereafter. If the Temples
were built by the fide of a River, they were to look toward the Banks of it
Ibidem.
; if near the Highway, they were to be so ordered, that Travelers might have
a fair prospect of them, and pay their devotions to the God as they passed by.

Temples were divided into two parts, the Sacred, and Profane; the latter they
called (...), the other (...). Now this (...), was a Vessel (usually of Stone,
or Brass) filled with Holy Water Suidas, Phavorin.
, with which all those that were admitted to the Sacrifices were besprinkled,
and beyond which it was not lawful for any one that was (...), or Profane, to
pass. Some say, it was placed in the entrance of the (...), which was the
inmost recess of the Temple, into which none might enter but the Priests,
called also (...), says Pollux, whence (...), is by Phavorinus said to be so
called in opposition to this Adytum. But Casaubon In The^ph. Charact.
tells us, that the (...) was placed at the door of the Temple, and this
opinion seems the more probable, because all persons that were (...), or
unpolluted, were permitted to pass beyond it, which they could not have done,
had it been placed at the entrance of the Adytum.

The word (...), is variously used, Ammonius De verborum Diff. and Simil.
, and Pollux Onom. lib. I.
say, that it properly signifies a Temple dedicated to an Hero, or Demi-god;
by Hesychius, and Suidas it is expounded, (...), so that it should seem to have
been the same with (...). As for the exposition of Ammonius, and Pollux, it is
evidently false, as might be proved by innumerable instances if there was
occasion. The word in it is most proper acceptance is used for a sheepfold,
and because the Images of the Gods were according to most ancient custom placed
in the middle of the Temple, and close railed in on every side, this place,
from the likeness it has to a sheepfold, was called (...), which in time came
to signify the whole Temple, the part being put for the whole. In the same
manner was (...), i. e. the Fireplace, or Hearth, used for the whole House.

Furthermore, belonging to Temples there was a kind of Vestry, in Greek (...),
by some translated summum templum, as if it were at the upper-end. This seems
to have been a Treasury both for the Church, and any one who had a mind to
secure his wealth there, as was done by Xenophon, who committed his Treasure to
the Custody of the Priest of Diana at Ephesus. Hence are those Epithets given
it by Pollux Ibidem.
, when he calls it (...), etc.

The old Scholia upon Sophocles Oedip. T^r. v. 15.
, and out of them Phavorinus thus describe the Temples; (...), and (...), or,
the whole Edifice, in which are contained, (...), the Altar, on which they
offered their oblations; (...), the Porch, in which usually stood an Altar, or
Image; and (...), the place upon which the Image of the Chief God was erected.

This Idol was at first only a rude Stock, or Table, whence it is called (...)
by St. Clemens of Alexandria Protrept
; such an one was that of Juno Samia, which was afterward in the Magistracy of
Procles turned into a Statue. This Pausanias Ach^icis.
seems to confirm, when he tells us that in Achaia there were kept very
religiously thirty square Stones, on which were engraven the names of so many
Gods, but without any Picture, or Effigies. In another place he speaks of a
very ancient Statue of Venus at Delos, which instead of Feet had only a square
Stone. And Themistius Orat. XV.
has told us, that all the Images till Daedalus's time were formed after the
same manner; He it was, that first made two separate Feet, whereas before they
were but one piece, whence it was reported (says Palaephatus) that Daedalus
formed moving and walking Statues; at the first therefore, they were only
called Cl^m^^s Protrept.
(...), because they were shaven; and this word properly denotes an Idol, that
is (...), or shaved out of wood, or stone, says Hesychius Voce (...).
. In after-ages, when the Art of graving and carving was invented, they changed
these rude Lumps into Figures resembling living Creatures, generally Men, and
then an Image was called (...), or (...), because it was like a Man.

The matter of which these Statues were made, was, amongst the ancient Greeks,
generally wood, as Plutarch, and Pausanias inform us; the latter of which
reports, that he has observed these Trees for the most part to be made use of
for this purpose, viz. the Eben, Cypress, Cedar, Oak, Yew, and Box-trees. To
these Theophrastus lib. de Pl^nt.
adds the root of the Olive Tree, of which he says the lesser Images were
usually composed; it is also observed that those Trees, which were sacred to
any God, were generally thought most acceptable to him, and therefore Jupiter's
Statue they made of Oak, Venus's of Myrtle, Hercules's of Poplar, Minerva's of
the Olive Tree etc. These observations are (I think) for the most part true,
but not so universally, as that they should never fail. Sometimes they were
made of Stone, and not only of common, but also of Precious Stones; sometimes
of black Stone, whereby was signified the Invisibility of the Gods. Marble and
Ivory were frequently made use of, and sometimes also Clay and Chalk; and last
of all, Gold, Silver, Brass, and all other Metals were put to this use. As to
the Forms of these Statues, and all their antique Postures, because they
generally depend upon Fables, and Poetical fictions, I remit you to the
Mythologists, and the Treatises of Chartarius, and Verderius on this sabject,
where they are largely described.

The place of the Images was in the middle of the Temple, where they stood on
Pedestals raised above the height of the Altar, and were enclosed with Rails,
whence this place was called (...). And that the Images were placed thus,
Virgil bears me witness, when He ^aith, Tum foribus Divae, media testudine
templi.
Then at the Chancell door, where Juno stands.
Where by the fores Divae, you must understand the entrance of the (...). And
another of the Poets, where he talks of erecting a Temple, says, In medio mihi
Caesar erit --
I Will Caesar's Statue in the midst erect.
More instances might be produced, were not this custom too well known, to
stand in need of any farther confirmation.

(...) among the Greeks is a word of larger extent, than Altar among the
Latins, for this in it is proper signification only denotes the place, on which
they sacrificed to the Celestial Gods, being raised up high from the ground,
and therefore called Altar ab altitudine, from it is height; but (...) is used
to signify not only this high Altar, but those lower ones called in Latin
Arae. These Altars differed according to the diversity o^ the Gods to whom they
were consecrated, for the (...), or Gods above, had their Altars raised up a
great height from the ground, insomuch that Pausanias Eliac. (...).
tells us, the Altar of Olympian Jupiter was almost twenty-two Feet high;
Porphyry makes no distinction betwixt these, and the Altars of the (...), or
Terrestrial Gods; but though they are both signified by the same word, yet they
seem not to have been of equal height, for Vitruvius Lib. IV. cap. VIII.
reports, that the Altars of Jupiter, and all the Celestial Gods were very
high, but those of Vesta, the Earth, and the Sea were low. To the Heroes they
sacrificed upon Altars close to the ground, which the Greeks call (...), being
only one step high Eurip. Schol. in Phoeniss.
. The Subterranean, or Infernal Gods, called (...), had instead of Altars
little Ditches, or Trenches dug, or plowed up for that purpose; these the
Greeks called (...), and (...). Porphyry adds a fifth, telling us that the
World, the Nymphs, and such like Deities, instead of Altars, had (...), or
Caves, where religious worship was paid to them.

The Altars were all placed toward the East, says Vitruvius Lib. IV. cap.
VIII.
, and those in Temples were always lower than the Statues of the Gods. They
were made commonly of Earth heaped together, sometimes of Ashes, as was that of
Olympian Jupiter before mentioned, which Pausanias Eliac. (...).
says, was made of the Ashes of burned Sacrifices. Before Temples were in use,
Altars were sometimes erected in Groves, sometimes in other Places; and
Eustathius Page 171. Edit. Basil.
upon the second Iliad tells us, that they were often erected in the Highways,
for the convenience of Travelers. The Terrestrial Gods had their Altars in low
places, but the Celestial were worshipped on the tops of Mountains, whence
every Mountain was esteemed sacred to Jupiter, as we are told by Melanthes
Libro de Sacrificiis, and (...). Schol. Trach.
. Now as for want of Temples, they built their Altars in the open Air, so for
want of Altars they anciently used to sacrifice upon the Lil. Gyrald. de Diis
Syntagma XVII.
bare ground, and sometimes upon a Turf of green Earth.

The manner of consecrating Altars and Images was the same, and is thus
described by the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Pluto Act. V. Scen. III.
; A Woman dressed in a Garment of diverse Colors brought upon her head a Pot of
sodden Pulse, as Beans, Pease, or the like, which they gratefully offered to
the Gods, in remembrance of their ancient Diet. But this custom seems to have
been more especially practiced at the Consecration of the (...), or Statues of
Mercury, and then only by the poorer sort, as the Comedian intimates, when He
speaks of the consecration of another Image in his Play entitled Peace, (...);
(...);
(...);
(...);
CHAPTER What other expedient still requires dispatch?
TR. Naught; but that you consecrate with these Pots
The Goddess Peace:
CHAPTER How, with these Pots? what like
Those Pygmy Statues of God Mercury?
TR. What if this Goddess we should consecrate
With a fat Ox?
(Mr. Hutchin.) Where the Scholiast observes, that sometimes their
Consecrations were more expensive, being performed with more sumptuous
Offerings, and Ceremonies. But these, like the other parts of Divine worship,
were varied according to the condition of the Worshippers, and the Nature, or
Humor of the Deities; to give you one instance, Athenaeus in the IXth Book of
his Deipnosophists tells us, that Jupiter Ctesias's Statue was consecrated in
this manner; they took a new Vessel with two ears, upon each of which they
bound a Chaplet of white wool, and another of yellow upon the forepart of it,
and covered the Vessel; then they poured out before it a Libation called
Ambrosia, which was a mixture of Water, Honey, and all sorts of Fruit. But the
most usual manner of consecration was performed by putting a Crown upon them,
anointing them with Oil, and then offering Prayers and Oblations to them,
sometimes they would add an Execration against all that should presume to
profane them, and inscribe upon them the Name of the Deity, and the cause of
their dedication. In this manner the Spartan Virgins, in Theocritus's
eighteenth Idyllium, promise to consecrate a Tree to Helena, for it was
customary to dedicate Trees, or Plants after the same manner with Altars, and
Statues, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
We'll search the Meads where humble Lotus grows,
Then Chaplets weave, and twine them on the Bows;
On checkered Grass beneath the shady Bower
From costli'st Vials sweetest Oils we'll pour;
And then in spreading Letters this indite,
I Am Helen's Plant, and worship is my right.
Mr. Hutchin. Ovid likewise in the eighth Book of his Metamorphoses, speaks of
adorning them with Ribbands, Stabat in his ingens annoso robore quercus,
Una nemus; vittae mediam, memoresque tabellae,
Sertaque cingebant, voti argumenta potentis.
In these a well-grown Oak Majestic stood
Whose spreading Arms alone composed a wood,
With Ribbands graced, and Crowns th'undoubted proof
Of vows obtained. --
Mr. Hutchin.

These Temples, Statues, and Altars were accounted so sacred, that to many of
them the privilege of protecting Offenders was granted, so that, if any
Malefactor fled to them, it was counted a piece of Sacrilege to force him
thence, and they thought his blood would be upon them that should do it;
insomuch, that those who killed the followers of Cylon, who had plundered the
Temple of Minerva, because they executed them hanging on the Altars, were ever
after called (...), profane, and impious villains. Some of these were public
Asyla, and free for all Men, others were appropriated to certain Persons, or
Crimes; thus the Temple of Diana at Ephesus was a refuge for Debtors; the Tomb,
or Temple of Theseus was a Sanctuary for Slaves, and all those of mean
condition, that fled from the Severities and hard Usage of their Masters, and
Men in Power; in memory that Theseus was an Assister and Protector of the
distressed, and never rejected the petitions of the afflicted, that fled to him
for succor and defense, as Plutarch Theseo.
reports; Nor was this honor only granted to the Gods, but also to the
Statues, or Monuments of Princes, and other great Persons Strabo lib. III.
. So the Sepulcre of Achilles on the Sigean shore was in a^ter-ages made an
Asylum, and Ajax had the like honor paid his Tomb on the Rhoetean.

The first Asylum, some say, was built at Athens by the Heraclidae, and was a
refuge for those that fled from the oppression of their Fathers; others with
more probability affirm that the first was erected at the building of Thebes by
Cadmus, where the privilege of Sanctuary was granted to all sorts of Criminals,
and in imitation of these they say the Asylum at Rome was opened by Romulus
Alex. ab Alex. lib. III. cap. XX.
. The sacredness of these places was held entire till the reign of Tiberius
Caesar, who, upon consideration of the many inconveniences, that must
necessarily be the effect of tolerating so many Villains, as were always
harbored in them, dissolved them all, preserving only to Juno Samia, and one
of Aesculapius's Temples their ancient privileges.

CHAPTER III. Of the Grecian Priests, and their Offices.
IT has been the Custom of all Nations to pay a peculiar honor and deference
to their Priests; which was either done out of respect to the Gods, whose
servants they were; or (as Plutarch in his Morals tells us) because they did
not pray for a blessing on Themselves, their own Families, and Friends only,
but on whole Communities, on the whole state of Mankind. Nor were they only
obliged to offer Prayers and Sacrifices to the Gods for others, but it was
their duty to instruct them how to pray for themselves, what it was most
expedient to ask, what Sacrifices, what Vows, what Gifts would be most
acceptable to the Gods, and, in short, to teach them all the Ceremonies used in
the Divine worship, as Plato informs us Dialog. de Regno.
. Another part of their Office, was to ^ore-tell things to come, and to
interpret the Oracles of the Gods; and as they conveyed the will of the Gods to
men, so did they also convey the Piety and Devotion of Men to the Gods, by
offering Sacrifices for them, though the ancient Greeks did sometimes offer their
own Sacrifices, and perform all those Rites which in later ages were only
executed by the Priests. Thus Eumaeus in Homer is said to have offered
Sacrifices, and the same does every where appear to have been done by all the
Princes, and Heroes, the most honorable person in the company always taking
upon him to perform the religious Ceremonies: for in those days this holy
Office was had in so great credit and reputation, that the Priests generally
wore the same Habit with their Kings, and were honored with the next places to
them; so great a veneration did these Heathens think due to all those that bore
any relation to the Gods. Nay, it was then no unusual thing for the Kings
themselves to take upon them the Priesthood; I shall only give you two
instances, the one of Anius, who was King of Delos, and Priest of Apollo, as
Virgil tells us Aen. III. v. 80.
, Rex Anius, Rex idem hominum, Phoebique Sacerdos.
Anius supreme of men often vails his Crown
Without a blush, to put the Vervain on.
Mr. Hutchin. The other instance I shall take from Laccdaemon Alex. ab Alex.
Genesis Dier. lib. III. cap. VII.
, where the Kings, immediately upon their promotion to the Kingdom, took upon
them the Priesthood of the Celestial, and Lacedaemonian Jupiter, and this was
so far from being thought below their dignity, that it was accounted an
especial privilege, and an addition to the rest of their Honors Ibidem.
. I need not tell you that among the Athenians, and in most other Cities of
Greece the care and administration of the religious Ceremonies was committed to
the chief Magistrates.

It was required that whoever was admitted to this Office, should be sound and
perfect in all his members, it being thought a dishonor to the Gods to be
served by any one, that was lame, maimed, or any other way imperfect; and
therefore before their consecration they were examined, whether they were
(...), which word, as Hesychius expounds it, signifies one that is perfect and
entire, that neither has any defect, nor any thing superfluous.

Nor ought they to be perfect in body only, but upright in mind, nothing ought
to approach the Gods, but what was pure and incorrupt; therefore the Priests
lived temperately and chastely, abstaining even from those pleasures which were
lawful and allowable to other Men; insomuch, that Euripides tells us, that in
Crete the Prophets of Jupiter did not only deny themselves the use of
Flesh-meat, but forbore to eat any thing that was boiled. And they were such
rigid Observers of the rules of chastity, that the Priests of the Mother of the
Gods at Samos are said to have dismembered themselves, and the Hierophantae at
Athens, after their admission, enfeebled themselves by a draught of the juice
of Hemlock; in short, 'twas very customary for those, that attended on the more
sacred and mysterious Rites, by using certain Herbs and Medicaments to unman
themselves, that they might worship the Gods with greater chastity, and purity.
They also generally retired from the world, to the end, that being free from
business and cares, they might have the more leisure to attend on the service
of the Gods, and wholly devote themselves to Piety, and the exercise of
Religion. One of the Herbs commonly made use of by them was the Agnus-castus,
in Greek (...), or (...), so called from being (...), an enemy to generation;
this they were wont to strew under their Bed-cloaths, believing that it had a
certain natural virtue, whereby it was able to preserve their Chastity, as
Eustathius Il. (...). page* 768. Edit. Basil.
, besides many others, has observed. But though most of them were obliged to
strict Chastity and Temperance, and some to practice these severities upon
themselves, yet were others allowed to marry, and Eustathius Ibidem page 503.
tells us, that it was but an institution of later Ages, that the Priestesses
should be Virgins: to confirm which Homer gives us an instance in Theano, who
was Priestess of Minerva, and Wife of Antenor the Trojan, -- (...)
(...).
(...) Il. (...) v. 298.
.
-- beauteous Theano,
Daughter to Cisseus, but Antenor's Bride,
Antenor skilled the wanton Steed to guide,
For Trojans her had made with joint Consent
Minerva's Priestess. --
(Mr. Hutchin.)

Of the different Orders of Priests nothing exact can be delivered, for not
only every God had a different Order of Priests consecrated to him, but even
the Priests of the same Gods were very different, according to the diversity of
Place, and other Circumstances. I shall therefore not trouble the Reader with
an account of the particular Priests belonging to every Deity in the many
Cities of Greece, which would be both unpleasant, and not very useful, but
shall briefly point out to you the general Orders, and Offices of them. First,
in every place they seem to have had an (...), or High Priest, whose Office it
was to superintend over the rest, and execute the more sacred Rites and
Mysteries of Religion. Amongst the Opuntians Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dierum lib.
II. cap. VII.
there were two Chief-priests, one of which belonged to the Chief and Celestial
Gods, the other to the (...), or Demigods. At Athens they had a great many,
every God almost having a Chief-priest, that presided over the rest; for
instance, the Dadouchus over the Priests of Hercules, and the Stephanophorus
over those of Pallas. The Delphians had sive Chief-priests, who helped to
perform the Holy Rites with the Prophets, and had the chief management of all
parts of divine Worship; these were called (...), i. e. Holy, and the Chief of
them that presided at Sacrifices, (...), i. e. Purifier, one that makes Holy:
and another, that had the care of the Oracle, called (...), which is a Surname
of Apollo, given him by Homer, and signifies one that gives Oracles.

Another holy Order was that of the Parasiti Athenaus Deipnosoph lib. VI.
, which word (says Clearchus the Solensian, one of Aristotle's Scholars) in
it is first acceptance signified (...), a Man quick and expeditio^s, but was
afterward taken for a Table-companion; though Polemon is of opinion that this
was it is ancient signification, and they were so called, because they were
allowed part of the Sacrifices, together with the Priests, as is evident from
an inscription on a Pillar in the Anaceum, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
That of the Oxen one part should be reserved for the Games, and of the other
two, one should be given to the Priests, another to the Parasiti. It was at the
first an Office of great honor, for by the ancient Law the Parasiti were
reckoned among the chief Magistrates. Their Office was to gather of the
Husbandmen the Corn allotted for public Sacrifices, which they called (...),
the great Income, and is by Avibus.
Aristophanes put for the great Sacrifices, which, as the Scholiast tells us,
were usually called so, because the Charges of them were defrayed by these
public Revenues. The public Storehouse, where they kept these First Fruits,
was called (...), in (...).
Diodorus the Sinopensian in Athenaeus tells us, that in every Village of the
Athenians, they maintained at the public Charge certain Parasiti in honor of
Hercules, but afterward, to ease the Commonwealth of this burden, the
Magistrates obliged some of the wealthier sort to take them to their own
tables, and entertain them at their own cost; whence this word seems in later
ages to have signified a Trencher-friend, a Flatterer, or one, that for the
sake of a dinner conforms himself to every Body's Humor.

The (...) also, or public Cryers, assisted at Sacrifices, and seem to have
had the same Office, with the Popae, and Victimarii among the Latins; for in
Athenaeus Lib. X. and XIV.
one Clidemnus tells us, they were instead of (...), and (...), Cooks, and
Butchers, and adds, that a long time the Cryer's Office was to kill the
Offering, prepare things necessary for the Sacrifices, and to serve instead of
a Cup Bearer at the Feast; He also tells us that the ministering at Sacrifices
did of old belong to the Cryers; the same is confirmed by Eustathius on this
verse of Homer Odyss. (...).
, (...)
(...). --
Along the Streets the sacred Hecatomb
The Cryers dragged. --
Phavorinus, and Coelius Rhodiginus give this reason for their being called
(...) by Homer, viz. because they assisted at the Sacrifices of the Gods, and
(as the former adds) (...), they gave public notice of the Times wherein the
Festivals were to be celebrated. To this purpose I might bring hundreds of
Instances out of the Ancient Poets, and especially Homer. These (...), indeed,
were a kind of public Servants employed on all occasions; they were instead of
Ambassadors, Cooks, and Cryers; and, in short, there was scarce any Office,
except such as was servile and base, that they were not put to; but their name
was given them (...), says Athenaeus, from the best, and most proper part of
their Office, which was (...), to proclaim, which they did as well in time of
Divine Service, as in civil Affairs; for at the beginning of the holy Rites
they commanded Silence and Attention in these, or such like words, (...) when
the religious Mysteries were ended, they dismissed the Congregation with these
words, (...), of which more afterward. At Athens there was a Family named
(...) from (...), the Son of Mercury and Pandrosia, which was accounted sacred,
whence Suidas (...).
calls them (...), a holy Family, beloved by the Gods; such also were the
Eumolpidae, who enjoyed a P^iest-hood at Athens by inheritance, being either
descended from King Eumolpus, or instituted in memory of him. The Ceryces, as
Anthemio the Comedian in Athenaeus Lib. XIV.
tells us, were the first that taught Men to boil their victuals, as the flesh
of Sheep, and Oxen, whereas before they devoured it raw. They were had in great
honor at Athens, insomuch that Athenaeus endeavors to prove that the trade of
a Cook was a creditable Calling, from the respect paid to these Ceryces, who
were Cooks at Sacrifices, and likewise seem to have performed those other holy
Offices that belonged to the (...) in other places. Diodorus Siculus Lib. I.
resembles them to the Egyptian Pastophori, and thinks they had their Original
from them; indeed some parts of their Office were much alike, for both of them
killed the Victim, and attended on the Sacrificers. But these Offices did not
belong to all the Ceryces, this Family being divided into several Branches,
every one of which had a different Function, as appears by the Edict of Solon
cited out of Aristophanes by Athenaeus, wherein it is ordered, That two of that
Family of the Ceryces, which was devoted to Divine service, should undergo the
Office of the Parasiti in the Temple of Apollo, called Delium, for a Year.

(...), called by Nicander (...) Alexipharm.
, so named from (...), which signifies to keep neat and clean, or to adorn; for
it was their duty to adorn the Temples, and look after the Furniture of them,
but they submitted not to such mean Offices, as the sweeping of them, as Suidas
In voce (...).
would have it, for herein he contradicts Euripides In Ione. v. 121.
, who brings in Ion, the (...), or Aedituus of Apollo, telling Mercury, that he
swept the Temple with a beasom of Laurel. These were also (...), whose Charge
it was to take care of the holy Utensils, and see that nothing was wanting, and
to repair what went to decay, says Aristotle In Politic.
. Sometimes also the Parasiti are said to have been entrusted with the
reparation of the Temples; and there was a Law enacted at Athens, that whatever
they expended this way should be repaid them.

There were also other Priests, one of which Aristophanes Pluto Act. III. Scen.
II.
calls (...), which is a general name for any Servant, and therefore to
restrain it he adds (...), calling him (...). These were Priests waiting always
on the Gods, whose Prayers the People desired at Sacrifices, at which these
seem to have performed all other Rites, and Ceremonies, beside those that
belonged to the Ceryces; their share in the Sacrifices was the Skin and Feet;
the Tongues were the Fees of the Ceryces. Indeed, all that served the Gods were
maintained by the Sacrifices, and other holy Offerings. These are the most
general Orders of Priests, the rest were, most of them, appropriated to certain
Gods, and sometimes certain Feasts, of which I shall have occasion to speak
hereafter, as likewise of those that attended the Oracles, and those who were
any way concerned in the Art of Divination.

CHAPTER IV. Of the Grecian Sacrifices.
DIDYMUS in his Annotations upon Pindar Coel. Rhod. lib. XII. cap. I.
, writes that one Melisseus, a King of Crete, was the first that offered
Sacrifice to the Gods, and invented religious Rites and Ceremonies, and that
Amalthea and Melissa, who nursed Jupiter, and fed him with Goats-milk and
Honey, were his Daughters. But I shall pass by this, and such like fabulous
Narrations, and endeavor to describe the customs in use amongst the ancient
Greeks at their solemn Sacrifices: In doing which I shall first treat of the
Occasion and End of them. 2. Of the Matter of them. 3. Of the Preparations
required before them, with all the Ornaments both of the Sacrificers, Victims,
and Altars. 4. Of the sacred Rites used at, and after their Celebration.

As to the Causes and Occasions of them, they seem to have been chiefly Four;
for the Sacrifices were,

1. (...), or (...), Vows, or Free Will Offerings; such were those the
Sacrificers promised to the Gods before, and paid after a Victory; such also
were the First Fruits offered by the Husbandmen after Harvest, being grateful
acknowledgments to the Gods, by whose Blessing they had received a plentiful
Reward for their Labor and Toil in tilling the ground; these Suidas In voce
(...).
calls (...), because they were Free-gifts; and (...), because thereby they
fulfilled some Vow made to the Gods; but because they were both the effects of
Gratitude, I have therefore reduced them under one head.

2. (...), propitiatory Offerings, to avert the anger of some offended Deity;
such were all the Sacrifices used in Expiations.

3. (...), petitionary Sacrifices, for success in any Enterprise; for so
religious were the Heathens, that they would not undertake any thing of moment,
without having first asked the Advice, and implored Assistance of the Gods.

4. (...), such as were imposed and commanded by an Oracle, or Prophet. I am
not ignorant that some others have been added, but those I have purposely
omitted, as being reducible to some of these Four.

I come now in the second place to treat of the Matter of their Oblations. In
the most ancient Sacrifices, there were neither Living-creatures, nor any thing
costly, or magnificent; no Myrrh, Frankincense, or Cassia was made use of; but
instead of them all, Coel. Rhod. lib. XII. cap. I.
Herbs and Plants, which they plucked up by the Roots, were burnt whole with
their Leaves and Fruit before the Gods, and this they thought a very acceptable
and meritorious Oblation; which appears, as from other Monuments of Antiquity,
so more especially from one of Triptolemus's Laws, whereby he strictly commands
the Athenians to abstain from Living-creatures Porphyr. de Abstinent. ab Animal.
. And even to Draco's Time the Attick Oblations consisted of nothing else but
the Earth's beneficence; but this frugality and simplicity had in other places
been laid aside before his time, and here not long after; for no sooner did
they leave their ancient Diet of Herbs and Roots, and begin to use
Living-creatures for food, (which the ancients thought altogether unlawful) but
they also changed their Sacrifices* it being always usual for their own Feasts,
and the Feasts of the Gods, (for such they thought the Sacrifices) to consist
of the same materials.

The Sacrifices of later ages consisted of these three things, (...), and
(...), as Hesiod (...). v. 3*34. (...).
seems to have intimated in these verses, (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Offer to Jove with an untainted mind,
Offer the best, if you would have him prove kind:
Let lulling Sleep n'ere seal your drowzy Eyes,
Nor purple Morn gild over the Eastern Skies,
Till you accost the Gods with Sacrifice.
Mr. Hutchin. Where you may observe that, though the more solemn Sacrifices
consisted of all these three parts, yet at other times it was lawful to use any
of them by themselves; whence Eustathius Il. (...). page 102. Edit. Basil.
tells us, it was not only usual to offer Drink Offerings of Wine at
Sacrifices, but also at the beginning of a Journey by Land, or Sea, before they
went to sleep, when they entertained a Stranger, and at any other Time. In
short, in all the smaller Affairs of Life they seem to have desired Protection
and Favor of the Gods by Oblations of Incense, or Drink Offerings; whereas the
more solemn Sacrifices were only used upon more weighty Occasions, both because
of the Expensiveness, and Trouble of them.

(...), and (...), amongst the Greeks have the same signification, as
Hesychius, and Phavorinus have observed, and imply no more than to pour forth,
which is also the proper sense of the Latin word libare, says Isidorus Origin.
lib. VI. cap. XIX.
; but because of their constant use at the Drink Offerings of the Gods, they
came at length to be appropriated to them. The same you may observe of their
derivatives (...), and libatio, which words differ not at all from one another.
The matter in these (...) was generally Wine; now of Wine there were two sorts,
the one (...), the other (...), the former was so called, because it was
lawful, the latter, because it was unlawful to make use of it in these
Libations; such they accounted all Wine mixed with Water; whence (...), i. e.
pure and unmixed Wine, is so often made mention of by ancient Writers; and though
sometimes you may find mixed Wine to have been used at Sacrifices, yet, if we
may believe Eustathius, this mixture was not made of Wine and Water, but of
different sorts of Wine. Pliny Not. Hist. lib. XIV. cap. XIX.
also tells us, that it was unlawful to make an oblation of Wine, that had
proceeded from grapes cut, pared round, or polluted with a fall on the ground;
or such as came out of a Winepress trodden with bloody and wounded Feet, or
from a Vine unprun'd, blasted, or that had a Man hanged upon it. He speaks also
of a certain grape called Aspendia Not. Histor. lib. XIV. cap. XVIII.
, whose Wine it was unlawful to offer upon the Altars. But though these Libations
generally consisted of Wine, yet they were sometimes made of other ingredients,
and called (...), from being sober. Such as these were offered to the
Eumenides, for which Suidas Voce (...).
gives this reason, viz. That Divine justice ought always to be vigilant. He
likewise adds, that at Athens such like Oblations were made to the Nymphs, to
Venus Urania, Mnemosyne, the Morning, the Moon, and the Sun, and there seems to
have been a particular reason, why every one of these were honored with such
like Oblations. For instance, Eustathius Odyss. (...).
tells us, that Honey was offered to the Sun, but Wine was never used upon any
Altar dedicated to him; because He, by whom all things are encompassed, and
held together, ought to be temperate; and Plutarch De Sanitate.
says, that these (...) were often performed to Bacchus, for no other reason,
than that Men might not be always accustomed to strong, and unmixed Wines.
Pausanias affirms, that the Eleans never offered Wine to the (...), i. e. Ceres
and Proserpina, nor at the Altar dedicated to All the Gods. To Pluto instead of
Wine, Oil was offered, as Virgil Aen. VI. v. 254.
witnesses, and Homer Odyss. XI. v. 25.
brings in Ulysses telling Alcinous, That he had made an Oblation to the
Infernal Gods, in which he first poured forth Wine mixed with Honey, then pure
Wine, and after all, Water; his Words are these; -- (...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Straight from my side I drew my sharp'n'd Blade,
A Trench a Cubit every way I made,
Then these Libations poured around the Brim,
To th'Ghosts that shoot along the Stygian stream,
First Wine with Honey mixed, then Wine alone,
Next Water, presently when this was done
With finest Flower besprinkl'd all around.
Mr. Hutchin.

There were also other Gods, to whom in certain places they sacrificed without
Wine; such was Jupiter (...), i. e. the Supreme, upon whose Altar the Athenians
never offered Wine, or Living-creatures. But of these enough.

The second Thing to be considered in the Sacrifices is the Suffitus, in Greek
called (...), which word does not originally signify the Victim, but (...), i.
e. broken Fruits, Leaves, or Acorns, the only Sacrifices of the Ancients;
whence in Suidas (...), are expounded (...), or Incense. In like manner the
Verb (...) is never used by Homer to signify the killing of the Victim, (for
in this sense he has made use of (...), and (...)) but denotes the offering of
these (...), says Athenaeus Deipn. lib. XIV.
; which signification was afterward changed. The Matter was generally
Frankincense, or some odoriferous Perfume; but it was a long time before
Frankincense came to be in use; for in the times of the Trojan War there was no
such thing, but instead thereof they offered Cedar and Citron-wood, says Pliny
Not. Hist. lib. XIII. cap. I.
; and the Grecian Fables tell us, That Frankincense was first used, after the
change of a devout Youth called Libanus into that Tree, which has taken it is
name from him. Hither also you may referr the (...), or molae salsae, which
were Cakes of Salt and Barley; at first the Barley was offered whole and
unbroken, till the invention of Mills and Grinding, whence they were called
(...) q. (...), says Eustathius In Il. (...). p. 99 Edit. Basil.
. Of this kind also were the (...), being round, broad, and thin Cakes; and
another sort, called (...), of which there were several kinds, as those three
reckoned by Phavorinus, which he calls (...), and (...). There were Cakes also
called (...), from their Figure, for they were broad, and horned in imitation
of the new Moon. There was another sort of Cakes with horns, called also from
their Figure (...), which were usually offered to Apollo, Diana, Hecate, and
the Moon. In Sacrifices to the Moon they used after six of the (...) to offer
one of these, which for that reason they called (...); it was also sometimes
offered after a Sacrifice of six Animals, says Suidas; and hence (...),
because it was a lump without life, is proverbially used for a stupid Fellow.
Other offerings there were of this sort, which were peculiar to certain Gods,
as the Obeliophori to Bacchus, the (...) to Trophonius, with others, which for
brevitie's sake I purposely omit. You may here take notice that no Oblation was
thought acceptable to the Gods without a mixture of Salt; which was so much
esteemed, because it was reckoned a token of Friendship, (of which hereafter)
and because it gives a relish and savor to all other Victuals. Barley was
offered in memory of the great Benefit received from the Gods, when by their
advice Men changed their Diet of Acorns, for Corn; whence (...) is by some
derived from (...), signifying to discern, because by this sort of food Men
were distinguished from brute Animals; thus Eustathius Ibidem.
. Here may be also added the sacred Herbs burned on the Altars in the time of
Sacrifice, which were all called by one general name verbenae.

The third, and chief part of the Sacrifice was the (...), or Victim;
concerning which you are to know in the first place, that it ought to be whole,
perfect, and sound in all it is members, without spot or blemish; otherwise, it
was thought unacceptable to the Gods, who must be served with the very best of
all the Flocks and Herds; to which end Solon in his Laws commanded the
Athenians to offer (...), chosen and select Sacrifices; and it was an ancient
Custom to cull out of the Flocks the goodliest of all the Cattle, and put
certain marks upon them, whereby they might be distinguished from the rest.
Virgil Ibidem.
tells us, their Herds were wont to be divided into three parts, one of
Phav^rin. and Aristoph. Schol,
Georg. III. v. 157.
which they designed for Propagation, another for Sacrifice, and the third for
Labor; his words are these, Post parium, cura in vitulos traducitur omnis,
Continuoque notas, and nomina gentis inurunt:
Et quos aut pecori malint submittere habendo,
Aut aris servare sacros, aut scindere terram.
As soon as e're brought forth great care's enjoined
To brand each one for what he is designed:
Whether for breeding this be set apart,
For The Altar that, a third for Plough, or Cart.
Mr. Hutchin. And Apollonius Rhodius hints as much in the second Book of his
Argonauticks V. 355.
.

Notwithstanding all this care in the choice of Victims, yet it was thought
unlawful to offer them, till the Priests had by diverse experiments made trial
of them, of which I shall speak hereafter. The Sacrifice, if it was approved by
the Priest, was called (...), whence comes the frequent mention of (...), etc.
If not, it was immediately rejected, and another brought to the Trial, till one
every way perfect was found.

As to the kinds of Animals offered in Sacrifice, they differed according to
the variety of the Gods to whom, and the Persons by whom they were offered; a
Shepherd would sacrifice a Sheep, a Neatherd an Ox, a Goat-herd a Goat, and a
Fisher after a plentiful draught would offer a Tunny, says Athenaeus, to
Neptune; and so the rest according to every Man's Employment. They differed
also according to the diversity of the Gods, for to the Infernal and Evil Gods
they offered black Victims; to the Good, white; to the Barren, barren ones; to
the Fruitful, pregnant ones; lastly, to the Masculine Gods, Males; to the
Feminine, Females were for the most part thought acceptable; for the most part,
(I say) there being several particular instances, in which these general Rules
seem to fail. Almost every God had some of the Animals consecrated to him, and
out of these were the Sacrifices often chosen; for instance, to Hecate they
sacrificed a Dog, to Venus a Dove, or Pigeon. Choice was also made of Animals,
according to the dispositions of the Gods, to whom the Sacrifice was to be
offered; for Mars was thought to be pleased with no Creatures, but such as were
furious and warlike, as the Bull; the He-goat was offered to Bacchus, as being
a Creature that spoils the Vine-yards, etc.

Animals generally made use off, were the Bull, Ox, Cow, Sheep, or Lamb, the
Goat and the Boar; and amongst the Birds, the Cock, Hen, and such like.
Athenaeus Deipn. lib. VII.
tells us out of Agatharcides, that the Boeotians were wont to sacrifice
certain Eels of an unusual bigness, taken in Copais, a Lake of that Country,
and about these they performed all the Ceremonies usual at other Sacrifices. It
will be difficult to guess the reason of this Custom, for my Athen^^us loco
citato.
Author tells us, that when a Stranger once happened to be present at these
Sacrifices, and inquired what might be the cause of them, the Boeotians made
him no other answer, than that they were obliged to observe the customs of
their Ancestors, but thought themselves not bound to give Foreigners any
reason for them. The only Animal almost, unlawful to be sacrificed, was the
Ploughing and Laboring Ox, and from him the Athenians abstained, because he
assisted them in tilling the ground, and was, as it were, Man's
Fellow Laborer, says Aelian Var. Hist. lib. V. cap. XIV.
. Nor did the Athenians only, but almost all other Nations think that Person
highly Criminal, who killed this Creature with a design either to eat, or
sacrifice it; insomuch, that the Offender was thought to deserve death, says
Varro De Re Rustic. lib. II.
; Aelian De Animal. lib. XII. cap. XIV.
in particular, witnesses as much of the Phrygians; and Pliny Lib. VIII cap.
XLV.
in his Natural History mentions a Person banished Rome, for being guilty of
this Crime; but in later Times they were not so cautious, for Plutarch De Esu
Animal. lib. II.
tells us, they used them at Feasts, and then 'twas no wonder if they ventured
also to sacrifice them, and that they did so Lucian Dialog. de Sacrific.
assures us.

Human Victims were seldom used among the Greeks, or any other civilized
Nation, it being thought a barbarous piece of Cruelty, to butcher Men and
Women, and burn them on the Altars; yet some few instances there are of this
Inhumanity, as that of Themistocles, who, to obtain success against the
Persians, sacrificed some Captives of that Nation; the Story you may read at
large in Plutarch Vita Themistoclis.
. It Is also said, that Bacchus had an Altar in Arcadia, upon which a great many
young Damsels were beaten to death with bundels of Rods; something like to
which was practiced by the Lacedaemonians, who scourged their Children
(sometimes to death) in Honor of Diana Orthia To the Manes, and Infernal Gods
such Sacrifices were more usually offered; for so we read of Polyxena's being
sacrificed to Achilles, and Homer relates how that Hero butchered twelve
Trojan Captives at the Funeral of Patroclus.

You may here observe, that all Sacrifices were to be answerable to every man's
Condition; for as it was thought a contempt of the Gods for a rich Man to bring
a poor, sordid Offering; so on the other hand, from a poor Man the smallest
Oblations were acceptable; if his Estate was not able to reach the price of a
living Ox, instead thereof, it was lawful for him to sacrifice one made of
Bread-corn, says Suidas In voce (...).
. And on other accounts when they were not able to provide the accustomed
Sacrifices, they had liberty to offer what the Place, or Time would afford;
according to this Rule, when the Cyzicenians were closely besieged, and could
not find a black Ox, (for such an one they were obliged to offer upon a certain
anniversary Festival) they made one of Corn, and so performed the usual
Ceremonies: and Ulysses's Companions in Homer, for want of Barley, made use of
Oak-leaves; and instead of Wine, made a Libation to the Gods of Water. But from
those that were able more costly Offerings were required; and the wealthier
sort, especially when they had received, or desired any great Favor of the
Gods, offered great numbers of Animals at once: whence there is so frequent
mention of Hecatombs, which consisted of an hundred Living-creatures, and of
Chiliombs too, in which were sacrificed a thousand. An Hecatomb, says
Eustathius Iliad. (...). page 36 Edit. Bas.
, properly signifies a Sacrifice of an hundred Oxen, and such an one was
offered by Clisthenes in Herodotus; but it is generally taken for such
Sacrifices, as consist of an hundred Animals of any sort; however because the
Ox was the principal and most valuable of all the Living creatures used at
Sacrifices, it has it is name from containing (...), an hundred Oxen; others
derive it, (says my Author) from (...), i. e. an hundred Feet, and then it
must have consisted only of twenty-five Animals; others say that a finite
number is here put for an indefinite, by a figure very usual among the Poets;
and then an Hecatomb amounts to no more than a Sacrifice consisting of many
Animals; others there are, who will have this Name derived not from the number
of the Creatures offered, but of the Persons present at the Sacrifice; lastly,
Julius Capitolinus In Maximo, and Balbin^.
tells us, that an Hecatomb was offered after this manner; they erected an
hundred Altars of Turf, and then killed an hundred Sows, or Sheep, etc. Suidas
In voce (...).
mentions another Sacrifice, which consisted of seven Offerings, viz. a Sheep,
Sow, Goat, Ox, Hen, Goose, and after all an Ox of Meal, whence some derive the
Proverb, (...), of which before. Another Sacrifice there was in which were
offered only three Animals, whence it was called (...), or (...), this
consisted, says Odyss. (...). page 423. Edit. Basil.
Eustathius, of two Sheep, and an Ox, according to Epicharmus; or, of an Ox,
Goat, and Sheep; or, of a Boar, Ramm, and Bull; or, of a Sow, He-goat, and
Ramm, for such an one you may find in Aristophanes. Sometimes the Sacrifice
consisted of twelve Animals, and then says my Ibidem.
Author, it was called (...), and the rest in like manner. Thus much concerning
the matter of Sacrifices.

The next things to be considered are the preparatory Rites required before,
and the Ornaments used in the Time of Sacrifice. No man was admitted to the
solemn Sacrifices, except he had purified himself certain Days before, in which
he was to abstain from all carnal Pleasures; to this purpose Tibullus, --
Discedite ab aris,
Queis tulit hesterna gaudia nocte Venus.
You, who to Venus paid devoir last night,
Pleasing with lustful heats your appetite,
From the chaste Altars of the Gods absent.
Mr. Abell. So severe were they in observing this Custom, that at some of their
Solemnities, the Priests and Priestesses were forced to take an Oath, that they
were duly purified: such an one was imposed upon the Priestesses of Bacchus at
Athens in this Form Demost^. ^rat. in Near.
; (...). I am pure, undefiled, and free from all sorts of Pollution, and
particularly that, which is contracted by lying with a Man; and do celebrate
the Festival of Bacchus at the usual Time, and according to the received Custom
of my Country. This seems to be meant not only of Adultery and Fornication,
but also of the lawful pleasures of the Marriage Bed; for at the celebration of
the Divine solemnities, they thought more than ordinary Purity and Sanctity was
required of them, and therefore abstained from delights, which at other times
they might lawfully enjoy: yet by some of them this sort of purification was
thought unnecessary, for Theano, an Athenian Priestess, being asked, when it
might be lawful for a Woman to go from the company of a Man to Sacrifice;
answered, From her own at any time, from a stranger never.

Another thing required of every Person that came to the solemn Sacrifices,
was, that he should be purified by Water; to which end, at the entrance of the
Holy-place, there was a Vessel full of Holy Water, in which sometimes was put a
branch of Laurel, says Pliny Not. Hist. lib. XV. c. XXX.
, with which the Priest besprinkled all that entered; whence the Vessel was
called (...), from besprinkling. Spondanus tells us, that before the Sacrifices
of the Celestial Gods, the Worshippers had their whole Bodies washed, or, if
that could not be, at least, their Hands; but for those that performed the
sacred Rites to the Infernal Gods, a small sprinkling was sufficient. Sometimes
they washed their Feet, as well as Hands; whence come the Proverbs, (...), and
(...), in Latin, illotis manibus, and illo^is pedibus, which are usually
applied to Men that undertake any thing without due Care and Preparation.
Porphyry De Victim.
tells us, there was a Programma six'd up, that no Man should go beyond the
(...), till he had washed his Hands: and so great a crime was it accounted to
omit this Ceremony, that Timarchides Libro de Coronis.
has related a Story of one Asterius, that was struck dead with Thunder,
because he had approached the Altar of Jupiter with unwash'd Hands. Nor was
this custom only used at solemn Sacrifices, but also at the smallest parts of
their Worship; Hector tells us, he was afraid to make so much as a Libation to
Jupiter before he had washed, (...)
(...). -- Il. (...) v. 266.

I dread with unwash'd hands to bring
My incensed Wine to Jove an Offering.
(Mr. Abell.) And Telemachus is said in Homer's Odysses to have washed his
hands, before he durst venture to pray to the Gods. This they did, out of a
conceit that thereby they were purified from their Sins; and withal
signifying, that nothing impure, or any way polluted must approach the Deities.
On the same account they were sometimes so superstitious as to wash their
Clothes, as Homer relates of Penelope before she offered Prayers to the Gods.

Whoever had committed any notorious Crime, as Murder, Incest, or Adultery, was
forbidden to be present at these holy Rites, till he had been purified; and
Pausanias Achaici^.
speaks of a Temple dedicated by Orestes to the Eumenides, into which if any
such person entered, though with a design only to see it, he was immediately
seized by the Furies, and lost the use of his Reason. Nay, even one, that had
returned from a Victory over his lawful Enemies, might not sacrifice, or pray
to the Gods before purification, and therefore Hector in the place
before-cited, adds -- (...)
(...).
It Is impious while I Am thus besmeared with gore
To pay my Vows, and mighty Jove adore.
Mr. Abell.

All that were allowed to be present, they called (...), etc. the rest were
(...), etc. such were Servants at some places; Captives, unmarried Women, and
all Bastards within the City of Athens Is^us.
, except in the Temple of Hercules at Cynosarges; because Hercules himself, was
under some illegitimacy, being not one of the great Immortal Gods, but having a
Mortal Woman for his Mother.

It was also unlawful for the (...), or (...) to enter into the Temple of the
Eumenides, says Hesychius Voce (...), item Plutarch: Quaest. Romans
, and after him Phavorinus. Now those are so called, that had been thought
dead, and, after the celebration o^ their Funeral Rites, unexspectedly
recovered; or, those that after a long absence in foreign Countries, where it
was believed they were dead, returned safe home. Such Persons at Athens were
purified by being let through the lap of a Woman's Gown, that so they might seem
to be new born, and were then admitted to the holy Rites; it would be very
tedious to mention all those that were accounted profane at particular
Sacrisices, or Places; I shall only therefore in general add, that before the
Ceremonies were begun, the (...), or sometimes the Priest with a loud voice
commanded them all to be gone, as in Callimachus Hymn. in Apollin.
, -- (...). Which saying Virgil Aen. VI. v. 258.
has imitated, -- procul, o procul este, profani,
Conclamat Vates, totoque absistite luco.
Distance, away, cries out the Priest aloud,
Ye profane miscreants, and unhallowed Crowd,
Set not one Foot within this sacred Grove.
Mr. Abell. Orpheus commands the doors to be shut against them, (...)
(...). --
I Will sacred Oracles to them proclaim,
Whom Virtue does with quickening heat inflame,
But the Profane, let them be all shut out.
Mr. Abell. Sometimes the sacred part of the Temple was divided from the
unhallowed by a Cord, beyond which the (...) were not permitted to pass; this
Cord is called in Greek (...), and therefore they, that were not admitted to
the holy Rites, are called by Demosthenes Orat. in Aristogit
(...), separated by a Cord.

It remains that I speak something of the manner of Purifying themselves; the
most usual was by washing with Water, of which before. They had sometimes the
Water carried round them, and sprinkled on them with a branch of Laurel, or
Olive; after this manner were Ch^rinaeus's Companions purified in Virgil
Aeneid. VI. v. 229.
, Idem ter socios pura circumtulit unda,
Spargens rore levi, and ramo foelicis Olivae.
Then carry'ng Water thrice about his Mates,
And sprinkling with an Olive sprig, their Fates
Good Chorinaeus wisely expiates.
This manner of surrounding was used in almost all sorts of Purification,
whence it is, that most of the words that signify any kind of it, are
compounded with the Proposition (...), as (...), etc. And amongst the Romans
this Custom was so universal, that the word lustro, which properly signifie^ to
purify, or expiate, in Virgil Aeneid. I. v. 611.
signifies to surround, or, go about, -- dum montibus umbrae
Lustrabunt convexa. --
-- while shades of Trees
Shall circuit Mountains round. --
Mr. Abell. They sometimes used Brimstone, mixing it with Salt Water; this
done, the Priest took a branch of Laurel, or a lighted Torch, and sprinkled the
Person on all sides; whence the Greek word (...), to purify, from (...),
Brimstone; of this Custom Iuvenal Sat. II. v. 157.
makes mention, -- cup^rent lustrari, siqua darentur
Sulphura cum taedis, and si foret humida laurus.
Oh! how they would wish their misery to redress,
And expiate their direful wickedness
With Torches, Sulphur, and wet Laurel.
Mr. Abell. Ovid Met* lib. VII. Fab. II.
tells us this was done three times, Terque senem flamma, ter aqua, ter
sulphur lustrat.
Thrice sev'rally with Water, Sulphur, Torch,
Medea purified old Aeson. --
There was another way of purifying also, by Fanning the Persons in the Air, as
Grangaeus In locum Iuvenalis citatum.
has observed.

I shall but mention two sorts more, spoken of by Theophrastus Eth. Charact.
, the first was by drawing round the body of the Person to be purified a
Squill, or Sea-on^^n, of which Custom Lucian In (...).
has taken notice. The other was by drawing round the Person a Whelp; and this
was used by almost all the Greeks, says Plutarch Quaest. Romans
; who also tells us, that it was called (...), from (...), i. e. a Whelp.

The Ornaments used in the time of Sacrifice were as follow; The Priests, as at
other times, were richly attired, their Garments being usually the same, at
least not much differing from Royal Robes. At Athens they sometimes used the
costly and magnificent Garment invented by Aeschylus for the Tragedians, as we
learn from Athenaeus Deipn. lib. I. cap. XVIII.
. At Sparta their Garments were suitable to the other parts of their Worship,
being neither costly, nor splendid, and they always prayed and sacrificed with
their Feet bare.

In all holy Worship, their Clothes were to be without spots, or stains, loose,
and unbound; but if they had been polluted by the touch of a dead body, or
struck by Thunder, or Lightning, it was unlawful for the Priest to Officiate in
them.

Various Habits also were used according to the diversity of the Gods, in whose
honor the Solemnities were celebrated. They that sacrificed to the Celestial
Gods were clothed with Purple; to the Infernal Gods they sacrificed in Black,
to Ceres in White Garments. They had also Crowns upon their Heads, which were
generally made of the leaves of the Tree, that was accounted Sacred to the God,
to whom they then paid their Devotions; thus in the Sacrifices of Apollo Apoll.
Rhod. Arg. (...). 159.
, they were crowned with Laurel; in those of Hercules, with Poplar; and after
the same manner in the rest.

Beside this Crown, the Priest sometimes wore upon his Head a sacred Infula, or
Mitre, from which on each side hung a Ribband, as we learn from Virgil Aen. X.
v. 538.
; the Infulae were generally made of wool, and were not only worn by the
Priest, but were put upon the Horns of the Victim, and upon the Temple, and
Altar; in like manner also were the Crowns used by them all. The Victims had
the Infula, and the Ribbands tied to their Horns, the Crowns and Garlands upon
their necks. Upon any extraordinary occasion, as the Reception, and Petition of
any signal Benefit, they overlay'd the Victims Horns with Gold; thus Diomedes
in Homer promises Minerva, (...) Il. (...).
.
This Cow, whose Horns o're-tipt with Gold look bright,
You shall have offered, Pallas, as your Right.
Mr. Abell. Alluding to this Custom, Porphyry calls the Oxen designed for
Sacrifice (...). Pliny Lib. XXXIII. cap. III.
has observed, that the larger Sacrifices only, such as Oxen, were thus
adorned; but the contrary appears out of a Decree of the Roman Senate, cited by
Macrobius Saturnal. lib. I.
, in which the Decem-viri are commanded to sacrifice to Apollo, after the
Grecian manner, an Ox, and two She-goats with gilded Horns; unless, as some
think, Goats were also numbered amongst the hostiae majores, or greater Victims;
as the Sheep were counted maximae, or the greatest, not for their bigness, but
value, and acceptableness to the Gods.

The Altars were decked with sacred Herbs, called by the Romans Verbenae; which
is a general name for all those Herbs that were used at Sacrifices; and here
also, as at other times, every God had his peculiar Herb, in which he was
thought to delight.

All things being prepared, the Mola salsa, with the Knife, or other Instrument
to kill the Victims, and the Crowns were brought in a Basket called (...),
whence the Athenian Virgins, whose Office it was to carry this Basket at the
Panathenaea, and some other Solemnities, were called (...).

The Victim, if it was a Sheep, or any of the smaller Animals, was driven loose
to the Altar; but the larger Sacrifices were brought by the Horns, as appears
from the words of Homer, where he describes the Sacrifices of Nestor, (...).
Stratius and Echephron dragged by the Horns
An Ox. --
Sometimes, as Iuvenal Sat. XII. v. 5.
witnesses, it was led by a Rope; but then it was a long one, and not close,
or strait, least the Victim should seem to be brought by force to the Altar.
Sometimes there were certain Persons appointed to fetch the Sacrifice with
musical Instruments, and other solemnities; but this was seldom practiced, save
at the larger Sacrifices, such as Hecatombs.

After this, they stood about the Altar, and Aristoph. ejusque Schol. in Pace.
the Priest turning toward the right hand, went round it, and sprinkled it
with Meal and holy Water; He besprinkled also those that were present, taking a
Torch or Firebrand from the Altar, or a branch of Laurel. This water, they
called (...), being the same they washed their hands with at Purification;
whence the Poets sometime use (...), instead of (...), to offer Sacrifice. The
Vessels also they purified with Onyons, Water, Brimstone, and Eggs.

This done, the Crier proclaimed with a loud voice, (...); Who is here? To
which the People replied, (...), Many and good; after this they prayed, and the
Priest (in later Ages) exhorted them to join with him, saying, (...), Let us
pray. Their requests were generally, that the Gods would vouchsafe to accept
their Oblations, and send them Health and Happiness, they added at their (...),
or petitionary Sacrifices, a Petition for some particular Favor. They seem to
have had a general Form of prayer, used on all such occasions, which though it
might vary in words, was usually to the same purpose. One of these you may see
in Aristophanes Loco citato.
, another in Athenaeus Deipn. lib. XIV.
, out of Menander's Flatterer. At this time also the Crier commanded silence in
these, or such like words, (...). The same Custom was observed by the Romans in
their Sacrifices, where they proclaimed, Favete Linguis, which words answer to
the Greek (...), by which the People seem not to have been commanded to remain
in a deep and uninterrupted Silence, but rather to abstain from all profane
Speeches, and ominous Words, and so Horace has interpreted it, -- male ominatis
Parcite verbis.
Let no ill-boding words your Lips profane.
Prayer being ended, the Priest examined all the members of the Victim, to see
if it had any Blemish, or other Defect; nor were they satisfied with this, but
they also examined, whether it was sound with in; which they did by setting
meat before it, as Barley-meal before Bulls, Vetches before Goats; which, if
they refused to eat, they were judged unsound. They also besprinkled the Goats
with cold water, which if they endured without shrinking, they were thought to
be some way indisposed; thus Libro de Defect. Orac.
Plutarch. This being done, they made trial whether the Victim was willing to
be sacrificed to the Gods, by drawing a Knife from it is Forehead to the Tail,
as Servius has observed In Aeneid. XII. v. 173.
, at which if the Victim struggled, it was rejected, as not acceptable to the
Gods; but if it stood quiet at the Altar, then they thought the Gods were
pleased with it; yet a bare non-resistance was not thought sufficient, except
it would also give it is consent, as it were, by a gracious Nod, (which was the
ancient manner of granting, or approving, whence the word (...) among the
Greeks, and annuere among the Romans, signify to give assent to any thing) and
to this end, they poured Water into it is Ear, and sometimes Barley, which they
called (...), says the Scholiast upon Apollonius Rhodius Argon. lib. v. 425.
.

After this, they prayed again; which being done, the Priest took a Cup of
Wine, and having tasted it himself, caused the company to do the like; and then
poured forth the remainder between the Horns of the Victim, as we learn from
Ovid Metam. Lib. VII. v. 593.
, -- dum vota sacerdos
Concipit, and fundit purum inter cornua vinum.
While the muttering Priest prays at the hallowed Shrine,
And pours between the Horns the unmixed Wine.
Mr. Hutchin. The same Custom is every where mentioned in Authors; I will give
you only one example more out of Furius Evenus, an ancient Greek Poet, who was
the Master of Philistus the Historian, and flourished about the ninety second
Olympiad, from whom we have this Epigram, in which the Vine speaks to the Goat,
(...)
(...).
Though, leach'rous Goat, you on my Cyons browze,
And tear the swelling clusters off my Boughs,
Luxuriant Sprouts will shoot out fresh supplies,
To pour betwixt your Horns at your own Sacrifice.
Mr. Hutchin. After this, they cast Frankincense and other Perfumes upon the
Altar, and, as some say, upon the Forehead of the Victim, taking them out off
the Censer, called in Greek (...), with three Fingers, as Ovid Fast. lib. II.
has informed us, Et digitis tria thura tribus sub limine ponit.
Thrice Frankincense beneath the Threshold laid,
Which thither with three Fingers she conveyed.
Mr. Hutchin. Whence it is, that the Pythia in Porphyry says, that the whole
Hecatombs of the Thessalians, were not more acceptable to the Gods, than the
(...), which a certain Hermionian offered with his three Fingers. Then they
poured forth part of the (...) on the back of the Victim, which was upon that
account bedewed with a small sprinkling of water. This being done they prayed
again, and then offered the remainder of the (...) upon the Altar; all these
they called (...), because they were offered before the Victim.

Then the Priest, or the (...), or sometimes the most honorable Person present
killed the Beast, by striking him down, or cutting his throat. If the Sacrifice
was in honor of the Celestial Gods, the Throat was bended up toward Heaven,
and this it is, that Homer calls (...), or in one word (...): but if the
Sacrifice was made to the Heroes, or Infernal Gods, it was killed with it is
Throat toward the Ground, says Eustathius Il. (...).
. If by any chance the Beast had escaped the stroke, leaped up after it,
bellowed, did not fall prone upon the ground, after the fall kicked and
stamped, was restless as though it expired with pain and difficulty, did not
bleed freely, and was a long time a dying, it was thought unacceptable to the
Gods; for all these were unlucky Omens, as their contraries were tokens of
Divine Favor, and good Will. The (...) did then help to flay the Beast, light
the Wood, and do other inferior Offices, while the Priest, or Soothsayer with
a long Knife turned over the Bowels to observe, and make Predictions from them,
for it was not lawful to touch them with his Hands. As to the Blood, they
reserved it in a Vessel called (...), or, according to Lycophron, (...), and
offered it on the Altar to the Celestial Gods: if the Sacrifice belonged to the
Gods of the Sea, they poured it into Salt Water; but if they were by the
Seaside, they slew not the Victim over the (...), but over the Water, into
which they sometimes threw the Victim; an Instance whereof you may have in
Apollonius Rhodius Argon. IV. v. 1601.
, (...),
(...). --
Then praying to the blew-ey'd Deity,
Over the curled Surface stabbed the Sacrifice,
And cast it over Deck. --
Mr. Hutchin. In the Sacrifices of the Infernal Gods, the Beast was either
slain over a Ditch, or the Blood poured out of the (...) into it. This done,
they poured Wine, together with Frankincense, into the Fire, to increase the
Flame; then they laid the Sacrifice upon the Altar, which in former Ages was
burned whole to the Gods, and thence was called (...): Prometheus, as the Poets
feign, was the first that laid aside this Custom, for considering that the
poorer sort had not wherewith to defray the Expenses of a whole Burnt-offering,
he obtained leave from Jupiter, that one part only might be offered to the
Gods, and the remainder reserved for themselves. The Parts belonging to the
Gods were the (...), these they covered with Fat, called in Greek (...), to the
end, they might consume altogether in a Flame; for except they were all burned,
they thought they did not (...), or litare, i. e. that their sacrifice was not
accepted by the Gods. Upon these (...), they cast small pieces of flesh, cut
from every part of the Beast, as the (...), or First Fruits of the whole; the
doing this they called (...), either because they first cut the Shoulder (which
is in Greek called (...)) or because they did (...), put these raw Pieces of
flesh upon the other Parts. The (...), or Thighs, were appropriated to the
Gods, because of the honor due to these Parts, as the principal Members
inserving to Generation, and Walking. Thus Eustathius Il. (...).
; but Casaubon In Theophrast.
tells us, they sometimes offered the Entrails, herein contradicting
Eustathius, who informs us that these were divided among those, that were
present at the Sacrifice, and Homer in the Descriptions of his Sacrifices
usually tells us, that they feasted upon them, (...). By this word (...), though
it properly signifies the Bowels, you are to understand, says my Author In Il.
(...).
, the Spleen, Liver, and Heart; and that it is sometimes taken for the Heart,
will appear by the signification of it is Compounds, for by (...), is meant a
pusillanimous Fellow, as on the contrary (...) denotes a Man of Courage, says
the Scholiast In Ajace.
upon Sophocles.

Whilst the Sacrifice was burning, the Priest, and the Person that gave the
Victim, did jointly make their Prayers to the God, with their hands upon the
Altar, which was the usual posture in Praying, as shall be shown hereafter.
Sometimes they played upon Musical Instruments in the time of Sacrifice,
thinking hereby to charm the God into a propitious Humor, as appears by a
Story related in Plutarch Symposiac. lib. I^. Q. 1.
, of Ismenias, who played upon a Pipe at a Sacrifice, and when no lucky Omens
appeared, the Man by whom he was hired, snatched the Pipe, and played very
ridiculously himself, and when all the company found fault with him, he said,
To play satisfactorily is the gift of Heaven; Ismenias with a smile replied,
Whilst I played, the Gods were so ravished with the Music, that they were
careless of the Sacrifice, but to be rid of thy Noise they presently accepted
it. This Custom was most in use at the Sacrifices of the Aerial Deities, for
they were thought to delight in Musical Instruments, and Harmonious Songs.

They also danced round the Altars, whilst they Sung the sacred Hymns, which
consisted of three Stanzas, or Parts; the first of which, called Strophe, was
Sung in turning from East to West; the other, named Antistrophe, in returning
from West to East; then they stood before the Altar, and sung the Epode, which
was the last part of the Song. These Hymns were generally composed in honor of
the Gods, and contained an account of their famous Actions, their Clemency, and
Liberality, and the Benefits conferred by them upon Mankind, and concluded with
a petition for the continuation of their Favors. They were all called by a
general name (...), but there was also a particular name belonging to the Hymns
of almost every God, says Pollux; for instance, the Hymn of Venus, was called
(...), that of Apollo was peculiarly named (...), and both of them were styled
(...), the Hymns of Bacchus were called (...), etc. Of all Musical Instruments,
the Flute seems to have been most used at Sacrifices, whence comes the Proverb
(...), applied to those that live upon other Men's Charges, because the (...),
or Flute-players, used to attend on Sacrifices, and partake of them, and so
lived on Free-cost, as Suidas Voce (...).
informs us.

The Sacrifice being ended, the Priest had his share, of which I have already
spoken, a tenth part also was due to the Magistrates called (...), at Athens.
At Sparta the Kings had the first share in all public Sacrifices, and the
skins of the Victim allotted to them. It was usual also to carry home some part
of the Offering, for good Luck's sake; and this they called (...), thinking it
conduced to their Welfare, and the preservation of their Health. The Athenians
were commanded by a Law to observe this Custom; and those that were niggardly,
did sometime so strain the courtesy of the Gods, that they would sell what
remained, and make a gain of their Devotion. Sometimes they sent the remaining
parts of the Sacrifice to their absent Friends; which Custom Idyll. V. v. 139.
Theocritus has taken notice of, -- (...)
(...).
Go Swain, go offer to the tunefull Nine,
And send a part to Morson. --
Mr. Hutchin.

But for the most part, especially if they had received any lucky Omen, or
Token of Divine Favor, the Sacrifice being ended, they made a Feast; for which
purpose there were Tables provided in all the Temples. Athenaeus Deipn. lib.
III. cap. III.
tells us, that amongst the Ancients, they never indulged themselves with any
Dainties, nor drunk any quantity of Wine, but at such Times; and thence a
Banquet is called (...), because they thought they were obliged (...), to be
drunk in honor of the Gods; and to be dr^nk they called (...), because they
did it (...), after Sacrifice. All the time the Banquet lasted, they continued
singing the praises of the God, as Homer witnesses in his account of the
Sacrifice, celebrated by Chryses and the Grecians to Apollo, (...),
(...),
(...). -- Il. (...). v. 473.

All day in moving sounds the Grecians sing,
And Ecchoing woods with Io Paeans ring,
To win the God t'accept their Offering.
Mr. Hutchin. When they offered Sacrifice to Vesta, it was usual to eat up
whatsoever was left, and to send any part of it abroad was thought a Crime;
whence the Proverb (...), and among the Romans, Lari Sacrificare, is applied to
Gluttons, that eat up all that is set before them; to this Goddess also they
offered the first part of all their Libations, at least of all those that were
paid to the Household Gods, whence comes the Proverb, (...), to begin at home.
This Custom the old Scholiast upon Aristophanes In (...). p. 491. Edit. Aurel.
Allobrogum.
tells us, was founded upon a Grant of Jupiter to Vesta, for after he had
suppressed the Sons of Titan, he promised Vesta to grant whatever she would
request; whereupon she first desired that she might enjoy a perpetual
Virginity; and in the next place, that she might have the first part in all
Sacrifices. But, as some say, not only the first, but the last part of the
Sacrifices was offered to her; the reason they give for which Custom, is, that
Vesta is the same with the Earth, to which the first and last parts belong,
because all things are produced out of that Element, and again resolved into
it. To return, The Banquet in some places was to be ended before Sunset, as
Athenaeus Deipn. I. IV.
informs us, and was not to exceed an appointed time in any Place. After the
Banquet, they sometimes played at Dice, as Saubertus has observed out of
Plato. The Entertainment, and Recreations being ended, they returned to the
Altar, and offered a Libation to Jupiter (...), or, the Perfect. The Primitive
Greeks were wont to offer the Tongues together with a Libation of Wine to
Mercury, as Athenaeus Deipn. lib. I. cap. XIV.
reports, Apollonius Argon. lib. I. v. 517.
also witnesses the same, (...)
(...)
(...).
Then, as the Custom of their Country was,
On the burning Tongues the mixed Libation flows;
This done, they haste unto their soft repose.
Mr. Hutchin. These Tongues they offered at the end of the Feast, either with a
design to make an Expiation for any undecent Language that had been spoken; or
in token that they committed to the Gods as witnesses, what Discourse had past
at the Table; or to signify that what had been spoken there, should by no
means be taken notice of afterward, or divulged. They were offered to Mercury,
because he was the God of Eloquence, and thefore took a particular delight in
that Member.

After all, they returned thanks to the God for the honor and advantage of
sharing with him in the Victim, and then were dismissed by the (...) in this
Form, (...).

CHAPTER V. Of the Grecian Prayers and Supplications.
THE Piety of the ancient Grecians, and the honorable Opinion they had
conceived of their Deities, does in nothing more manifestly appear, than in the
continual Prayers and Supplications they made to them; for no man amongst them,
that was endued with the smallest Prudence, says Plato Timaeo.
, would undertake any thing of greater or lesser Moment, without having first
asked the Advice and Assistance of the Gods; for this they thought the surest
means to have all their Enterprises crowned with Success.

The Lacedaemonians had a peculiar Form of Prayer, for they never used, either
in their public, or private Devotions, to make any other request, than that
the Gods would grant what was honorable and good for them, as Plato Alcib. II.
witnesses; but Plutarch Institut. Laconic.
tells us, they added one Petition more, viz. That they might be able to suffer
Injuries. The Athenians Alexand. ab Alex. Genesis Diet. lib. V. cap. XXVII.
used in their public Prayers, to desire Prosperity for themselves, and the
Chians; and at the Panathenaea, a Solemnity, which was celebrated once in five
Years, the public Crier used to implore the blessing of the Gods upon the
Athenians and Plataeans.

It is my principal design in this place to describe the manner of Supplicating
the Gods, but because they made their Supplications to Men, for the most part,
after the same manner, I shall treat of them both together. Petitioners both to
the Gods and Men, used to supplicate with green Boughs in their Hands, and
Crowns upon their Heads, or Garlands upon their Necks, which they did with a
design to beg^t Respect in those to whom they made their Supplications, as
Triclinius Oed. Tyr. v. 3.
in his Commentary upon Sophocles teaches us. These Boughs are called by
several Names, as (...), or (...), and (...), they were either of Laurel, or
Olive, whence Statius Theb. lib. XII.
, Mite nemus circa, --
Vittatae Laurus, and supplicis arbor Olivae.
About this Grove the peaceful Olive grows
And sprightly Laurel, on whose verdant Boughs
Wreathed Garlands hang. --
Mr. Hutchin. These Trees were made use of at such times, first, because they
were (...), always green, and flourishing, and therefore Euripides In Ion^ v.
1436.
gives the latter the Epithete of (...), never fading. Secondly, because the
Laurel was a sign of Victory, Success, and Joy; the Olive of Peace, and good
Will. In these Boughs they put Wool, which was not tied to them, but wrapped
about them; for which reason the Tragedian In (...). v. 31.
seems to have called it (...), the Tie without a Knot. This Wool, because it
was wrapped round, was called by the Romans Vitta, or Infula, whence Virgil
Aeneid, VII. v. 236.
, -- ne temne, quod ultro
Praeferimus manibus vittas, ac verba precantum.
Let not the King despise us, 'cause we bear
This Wreath, the badge of Suppliants. --
Mr. Hutchin. With these Boughs, and sometimes with their Hands, if they were
doubtful, whether they should prevail or not, it was usual to touch the Knees
of the Statue, or Man, to whom they addressed themselves; if they had Hopes,
they touched his right Hand, but never the Left, for that they thought ominous;
if they were confident of Success, they rose as high as his Chin, or Cheeks;
they touched the Head, because it is the principal and most honorable Member
in a Man's Body, as Eustathius In Il. (...). page 97. Edit. Basil.
thinks, or because they would have the Person give his consent to their
Petitions annuendo, by a Nod, for this was the manner of granting requests;
whence Jupiter in Homer Il. (...). v. 524.
having granted Thetis's Petition, adds, (...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
But least you doubt, if you can doubt a God,
I Will clear all scruples by a solemn Nod,
For that is with me a never failing Sign,
And does performance to my Vows enjoin.
Mr. Hutchin. The Hand they touched Eustath. ibidem.
, as being the instrument of Action; the Knees, because they desired the Soul
of the Person should bend, as it were, and incline to their requests, for that
the joints in that place are more flexible than in any other Part; or because
they are the Instruments of Motion, as if they requested the Person to bestirr
himself, and walk about to effect their desires. Sometimes they touched the
Knees with one hand, and the Head, or Hands with the other, for so did Thetis
by Jupiter, (...),
(...)
(...).
(...)
(...).
Just had the blushing Goddess heaved her head
From off the Pillow of her Saffron Bed,
When azure Thetis Heav'n-ward winged her flight,
And on the steep Olympus did alight;
Where she All-seeing Jove found seated high,
Remote from each Inferior Deity;
Straight at his Feet her self she prostrate cast,
And with her Right Hand seized with eager haste
His bristly Beard; her Left his Knee embraced.
Mr. Hutchin.

Sometimes they kissed the Hands, and Knees; but if the Petitioners were very
fearful, and the Persons, to whom they addressed themselves, of very great
Quality, they bowed so low, as to kiss their Feet: this kiss the Romans called
Labratum, and the old Gloss renders it (...), a kiss of a King. Sometimes they
kissed their own Hands, and with them touched the Person. Another sort of
Salutation there was, whereby they did Homage to the Gods, viz. by putting the
Forefinger over the Thumb (perhaps upon the middle joint, which they used in
counting the number ten) and then giving a turn on their right Hand, as it is
in Plautus Circul. Act. I. Scen. I.
, Ph. quod si non affert, quo me vortam nescio.
Pa. Si Deos salutas, dextro vorsum censeo.
Ph. But if he fail me, I known't which way to turn.
Pa. Turn! -- why you must turn to th'Right-hand I conceive,
If you would reverence the Gods. --
Mr. Hutchin. So generally was this Custom of kissing practiced by Supplicants,
that Eustathius Ad Odyss. (...).
thinks the word (...), to adore, was derived from (...), which signifies to
kiss.

Another manner they had of Supplicating, by pulling the Hairs off their Head,
and offering them to the Person, to whom they prayed; after this manner did
Agamemnon present himself before Jupiter, when Hector had given the Grecians an
Overthrow Iliad. (...).
, (...)
(...). --
But he Celestial Jove presents with Hairs,
Which from his mangled Head with eager force he tears.
Mr. Hutchin.

They often clothed themselves with filthy Rags, or put on the Habit of
Mourners, that they might move Pity and Compassion.

The Postures they used, were different, for sometimes they prayed standing,
sometimes sitting, but generally kneeling, because that seems to bear the
greatest show of Humility; whence the words (...) and such like, signify to
pray, or make Supplication. The Greek Scholiast upon Pindar tells us, they were
wont to turn their Faces toward the East, when they prayed to the Gods; and to
the West, when to the Heroes, or Demigods. Others Coelius Rhod. lib. XII. cap.
II.
say, they always kept their Faces toward the Sun, for in the morning they
turned themselves to the East, at noon to the South, and in the evening to the
West.

The safest Place for a Petitioner either to Gods, or Men (next to the Temples
and Altars) was the Hearth, or Fireplace, whither they presently ran, when
they came to any strange Place in Travel, or Banishment, as being the Altar of
Vesta, and the Household Gods. When they had once seated themselves there, in
the Ashes, in a mournful Posture, and with a dejected Countenance, they needed
not to open their Mouths, neither was it the Custom so to do; for those Actions
spoke loud enough, and told the want and calamity of the Supplicant more
movingly-than a thousand Orations; and this we learn from Apollonius Rhodius
Argonaut. lib. IV.
, (...)
(...).
As soon as over the Threshold they can get,
At Vesta's shrine in humblest sort they sit;
For there they are safe, and of want nothing know,
Such Privilege our Laws the Poor allow.
Mr. Hutchin. The Molossians had a peculiar manner of supplicating, different
from that of all other Countries; which was practiced by Themistocles, when he
was pursued by the Athenians and Lacedaemonians, and forced to cast himself on
the Protection of Admetus, King of that Country; He held the young Prince (who
was then a Child) in his Arms, and in that posture, prostrated himself before
the King's Household Gods; this being the most sacred manner of Supplication
among the Molossians, and which was not to be rejected, as Plutarch reports In
Themistocle.
.

They that fled to the Gods for Resuge, or Help, used first to crown the Altars
with Garlands, and then make known their Desires to the Deity, (...),
(...).
And when with Myrtle Garlands he had crowned
Each Altar in Admetus House, he prayed,
Mr. Hutchin. Says Euripides In Alcestide.
. It was usual also to take hold of the Altars, as Virgil Aeneid. VI.
witnesses, Talibus orabat dictis, arasque tenebat.
Laying his hands on the Altar, thus he prayed.
Whence Varro is of opinion that Altars were called arae, q. ansae, which word
is used to signify any thing that may be taken hold of. It was also an usual
Gesture in Praying to lift up their Arms toward Heaven, as Helena says in her
Prayer to Juno Euripid. Hell. v. 1100.
, -- (...)
(...).
We our extended Arms, great Goddess, heaved
Towered thy Pavilion decked with Asterisms.
Mr. Hutchin. Whence you may imagine the reason of lifting up their Hands, was,
that they might hold them toward the Gods, whose Habitation is in Heaven.
Homer every where mentions this posture, always adding (...), when he speaks of
any one that prayed to the Gods. Nay, this Custom was so universally received,
that the holding up of Hands, is sometimes used to signify Praying, as in
Horace, Coelo supinas si tuleris manus.
If to the Gods you have prayed with Hands lift up.
On the contrary, because the Infernal Gods were supposed to have their
Habitation beneath the Earth, it was usual to pray to them with Hands pointed
downwards. Prayer being ended, they lifted up their Hand to their Mouths, and
kissed it; which Custom was also practiced by the Romans, whenever they passed
by a Temple, and was accounted a sort of Veneration, as Alexander ab Alexandro
informs us Genesis Die^. lib. IV. cap. XVI.
; and Lilius Gyraldus Syntagm* de Diis Gentium.
tells us, he has observed the same in Homer, and others.

Sometimes, if they obtained their Request, and it was a matter of Consequence,
they presented to the God some rich Gift, or offered a Sacrifice in
thankfulness for the Benefit they had received; sometimes they related it to
the Priest of the Temple, that it might be registered, as a Testimony of the
goodness of the Gods, and their readiness to hear the Petitions of Mortals, and
send them relief; and for an encouragement to Men to make known their Wants,
and Desires to the Deities, and expect assistance from them; on this account,
as Eustathius has observed, there are no Prayers made in Homer, the Petitions
of which were just and reasonable, that were not rewarded with a full and
satisfactory Answer.

CHAPTER VI. Of the Grecian Oaths.
HAVING described the manner of offering Sacrifices and Prayers to the Gods, I
shall proceed in the next place to speak of the Honor paid to them, by using
their Names in solemn Contracts, Promises, and Asseverations; and calling them
to witness their Truth, and Honesty, or punish their Falsehood, and Treachery,
if they were Deceivers.

(...), the God of Oaths, is by Hesiod Theogon* v. 231.
said to be the Son of Eris, or Contention; and Fables tell us, that in the
Golden Age, when Men were nice Observers of the Laws of Truth and Justice,
there was no occasion for Oaths, nor any use made of them: But when they began
to degenerate from their Primitive Simplicity, when Truth and Justice were
banished out of the Earth, when every one began to make advantage of his
Neighbor by Cozenage and Deceit, and there was no Trust to be placed in any
Man's Word, it was high time to think of some expedient, whereby they might
secure themselves from the Fraud and Falshhood of one another. Hence had Oaths
their first Original; and though it be probable, that at first they were only
used upon weighty and momentous Occasions, yet in process of time they came to
be applied to every trivial Matter, and in common Discourse; which has given
occasion to the distinction of Oaths into that, which was called O (...), and
used only on solemn and weighty Accounts; and that which they termed O (...),
which was taken in things of the smallest Moment, and was sometimes used merely
as an expletive, to fill up a Sentence, and make a round or emphatical Period.
Some there are that tell us, the (...) was that, wherein the Gods, (...) that
wherein Creatures were called to witness; but the falsity of this distinction
does evidently appear by a great many Instances, whereof I shall only mention
one, viz. that of the Arcadians, amongst whom the most sacred and inviolable
Oath was taken by the water of a Fountain called Styx, near Nonacris a City, as
Herodotus Erato.
, or, according to others, a Mountain in Arcadiae; upon which account it was,
that Cleomenes the Lacedaemonian to secure the fidelity of the Arcadians, had a
design to carry the principal Men among them to Nonacris, and there make them
swear by this Fountain, though they had taken another Oath before, as my Author
Loc. citato.
has related. It will not be impertinent in this place to mention the great
Oath of the Gods by the Stygian Lake, for Jupiter, as Hesiod Theogonia.
reports, (...).
Ordained this Lake a solemn Oath should be
To all the Gods. --
Mr. Hutchin. Which is the reason, why some derive the word (...), an Oath,
from Orcus, Hell. This Oath, was invented by Jupiter, and prescribed by him to
the rest of the Gods, in honor of Styx; because she with her Sons came the
first of all the Gods to his assistance in the War against the Giants; or, for
that her daughter Victory was favorable to him, says Hesiod; or, because he
had quenched his thirst with her Waters in the Fight. If any God swore falsely
by these Waters, he was debarred the use of Nectar, and deprived of his
Divinity for an hundred years; these Others reduce to nine, but Servius, out of
Orpheus, enlarges them to nine thousand.

The God, that was thought more especially to preside over Oaths, was Jupiter;
more especially I say, because all the Gods seem to have been concerned in
them, for it was usual to swear by them all, or any of them; and of any
perjured Person they spoke in general, that he had offended the Gods, of which
there are innumerable Instances; but they were thought chiefly, and more
peculiarly to belong to Jupiter's care, and though perhaps this may not appear
(as some think it does) from the word Ius-jurandum, which they will have to be
so called q. Iovis jurandum, yet it will sufficiently be proved by the plain
Testimony of the Poet, that says Euripid. Medea. v. 170.
, -- (...)
(...).
And Jove, that over human Oaths presides.
The Gods, by whom Solon commanded the Athenians chiefly to swear in public
Causes, were three, viz. (...), and (...), or rather one Jupiter (...), by
three Names; but in common Discourse they usually swore by any other of their
Gods; sometimes by all the Gods in General, sometimes by the twelve great Gods,
as, (...): the Spartans usually, (...), by Castor, and Pollux. The Women's
Oaths were commonly by Juno, Diana, or Venus, or (...), i. e. by Ceres and
Proserpina, which were appropriated to the Female Sex, according to Phaevorinus
In voce (...).
, and never used by Men, except in Imitation of the Women. I do not mean that
these were the only Oaths used by Women, for the contrary does abundantly
appear, but that they were the most usual ones, though they often swore by other
Goddesses, and sometimes by the Gods, as you may find in Aristophanes.

Men generally swore by the God, to whom the Business they had in hand, or the
Place they were in, did belong; in the Market they usually swore by (...), or
Mercury; Plough-men by Ceres; those that delighted in Horses, by Neptune. The
Athenians Alex. ab Alex. lib. V. cap. X. Genesis Dier.
alone of all the Greeks used to swear by Isis, and the Thebans commonly by
Osiris.

Sometimes, either out of Haste, or Assurance of their being in the right, or
some such reason, they swore indefinitely by any of the Gods, leaving it to the
Party, to whom they swore, to chose whomsoever he pleased of the Gods to be
tried by, in this manner, (...): which Form you may find used by Plato, in his
Dialogue intitul'd Phaedrus, and in Aristaenetus's Epistle of Euxitheus to
Pyth^as. Others, thinking it unlawful to use the name of God upon every slight
Occasion, would say no more than (...), or, By etc. by a religious ellipsis
omitting the Name; thus Phaevorinus Voce (...).
. Isocrates in Stobaeus Ser. XXV.
tells us, that it was not allowable to swear by any of the Gods in any Suit of
Law about Money. Pythagoras, as Hierocles In Pythag. Aur. Carm. v. 2.
informs us, was very cautious in this Matter, for he rarely swore by the Gods
himself, or allowed his Scholars to do so: instead of them they used to swear
by (...), or the number Four, says Plutarch Libro de Placit. Philosoph.
, as thinking the perfection of the Soul consisted in this Number, there being
in every Soul, a Mind, Science, Opinion, and Sense. Socrates told his
Scholars, that Rhadamanthus, the justes^ Man that ever lived, had expressly
forbidden Men to swear by the Gods, but instead of them allowed them the use of
a Dog, Goose, Ramm, or such like Creatures; and in conformity to this Rule,
that Philosopher was wont to swear (...), or (...), by a Dog, Goose, or
Plane-tree. Zeno, the Father of the Stoics, usually swore (...), i. e. by a
Shrub that bears Capers. In Ananius, one swears by Crambe, i. e. Cole-wort,
says Coelius Antiq. Lect. lib. XXVII. cap. XXVIII.
; the same Oath you may meet with in Teleclides, Epicharmus, and Eupolis, and
it seems to have been used more especially amongst the Ionians.

Sometimes they swore by the ground they stood upon, as Hippolytus in Euripides
Verse. 1025.
, -- (...).
And by the solid Ground I swear.
Sometimes by Rivers, Fountains, Floods, the Elements, Sun, Moon, and Stars,
all which they accounted very sacred Oaths Alex. ab Alex. Genesis Dier lib. V.
cap. X.
. Sometimes they swore by any thing they made use of, as a Fisher by his Nets,
a Soldier by his Spear, and this last was a very great Oath, if you will
believe what Lib. XIII.
Justin has reported, viz. That the Ancients paid divine Worship to this
Weapon; in memory of which in later Ages it was usual for the Statues of the
Gods to hold a Spear: and Eustathius In Il. (...).
writes, that Caeneus erected a Spear, and commanded that it should be
worshipped as a God. Kings and Princes usually swore by their Scepters, as we
find every where in Homer; and this also was thought a solemn Oath, because the
Scepter is a Badge and Ensign of Regal and Judicial Power.

They swore also by Men; sometimes by the Dead, of which that of Demosthenes is
a famous Instance, when in an Oration to the People of Athens, he swore by
(...), those that valiantly lost their lives in the Battle at Marathon;
sometimes they swore by the Living, says Stuckius Libro de Sacris p. 93.
, and this was wont to be done either by their (...), Health and Safety; or
(...), their Misfortunes; or their Names; or some of their Members, as their
Eyes, Right Hand, especially their Head, for this was accounted a very solemn
Oath, -- (...).
By my good Fathers Head, to me most dear,
This binding Oath I solemnly do swear,
Mr. Edw. Dechair of Linc. Coll. Says one in Homer; and Helena, swearing to
Menelaus, calls it (...), a sacred Oath, (...).
Let your vowed Head this sacred Oath confirm.
The reason of this was, because the Head was accounted the principal and most
noble part of Man; or, as Hansenius Libro de Jurament. Veterum.
thinks, because it was the Hieroglyphick of Health.

Sometimes they swore by those who were dearest to them, as Parents, Children;
or those they had an high esteem for, so the Pythagoreans used to swear by
their master Pythagoras; nor did they this, as thinking him a God, or Hero,
but because he was a Person, whose memory they thought deserved a great
Veneration, and whose Merits had exalted him to a near affinity with the Divine
Nature.

The manner of taking Oaths, was sometimes by lifting up their hands to Heaven;
whence Apollo, in the Poet, bids Lachesis (...): though Hansenius is of Opinion
that this Custom was of later date. Sometimes in the (...), or Great and solemn
Oath, they laid their hands upon the Altar, as appears from that saying of
Pericles, who, being desired by a Friend to take a false Oath upon his account,
replied, That he was his Friend to the Altars, and no farther; as likewise from
the Story reported by Diogenes Laertius of Xenocrates, who, being a Man eminent
for a strict and virtuous Life, and summoned as a witness in a certain Cause,
where having spoken what he knew of the Matter, went to the Altar to confirm
his Evidence by Oath; but the Judges well knowing the Integrity of the Man,
with unanimous Consent bid him forbear, and gave credit to him upon his bare
Word. Instead of the Altar, says Pfeifer Antiq. Graec. lib. II. cap. XXVII.
, sometimes they made use of a Stone; for this he is beholding to Suidas, who
has taken it out of Aristotle, and Philochorus, and for a farther confirmation
of it, has cited these words out of the Oration of Demosthenes against Conon,
(...). i. e. And bringing all us that were present, one by one, to the Stone,
and there administering the Oath to us. True it is, indeed, that the Athenians
did sometimes swear (...), but what this (...) was, Pfeifer seems not to have
understood; however the Scholiast upon Aristophanes In Acharn^nsibus.
has informed us what is meant by it, in his Comment upon this verse, (...).
-- we, though depressed with Age,
With mutt'rings near Tribunals still approach.
Mr. Dechair. Where he tells us, that by (...) is meant the (...), or Tribunal,
in P^yx, or public Place where the Athenian Assemblies used to meet; the
reason why it is so called he gives us in another place, where the Comedian
calls it (...), a Stone, because it stood upon a Rock; by this you may
understand what is meant by (...), i. e. those that took, or imposed an Oath in
Pnyx. Instead of the Altar, in private Contracts, the Person swearing,
according to the Roman fashion, laid his Hand upon the Hand of the Party to
whom he swore: this Ceremony Menelaus in Euripides demands of Helen, (...).
Helen. v. 834.

T'unite our Hearts, our Hands let us friendly join.
In all compacts, and agreements it was usual to take each other by the
Right Hand, that being the manner of plighting Faith; and this was done, either
out of the respect they had to the number Ten, as some say, there being ten
Fingers in the two Hands: or because such a Conjunction was a token of Amity
and Concord; whence at all friendly Meetings they joined Hands, as a sign of
the Union of their Souls. The Right Hand seems to have been used rather than
the Left, because it was more honorable, as being the Instrument by which
Superiors give commands to those below them; whence Crinagoras in an Epigram,
says, 'Twas impossible that all the Enemies in the World should ever prevail
against Rome, -- (...)
(...).
While God-like Caesar shall a Right Hand have
Fit for Command. --
Mr. Dechair.

Beside this, in all solemn Leagues, and Covenants they made a Sacrifice, in
honor of the Gods by whom they swore, in which they offered, for the most
part, either a Boar, Ramm, or Goat; sometimes all three; sometimes they used
Bulls, or Lambs instead of any of them. Sometimes, when they killed the Boar,
etc: they cut out the Stones, and took the Oath standing upon them. A Ramm, or
Boar thus used is properly called (...). The manner of the Ceremonies was thus;
They first cut some of the Hair off the Head of the Victim, and gave part of it
to all that were present, that all might share in the Oath Il. (...).
, (...)
(...).
Next from the Victim's Head he cut some Hair,
Which to the ruling Chiefs the Cryers bear.
Mr. Dechair. The reason of this Custom Eustathius gives us out of Sophocles,
as it is explained in these verses, (...),
(...)
(...).
Curses attend you, if e're false you prove,
Your days in bitter sorrows may you live,
And when Fate calls, (but may that lingering come)
May your dead Corpse no fit Interment find:
Yet now I favors wish; may your whole Race
Plagues heaped on Plagues vex, and at last cut off,
As I these Locks cut from the sacred Head.
Mr. Dechair. After this, they prayed to the Gods to bear witness of their
Agreement, and punish the Person, that should first violate his Oath. This
done, they killed the Victims by cutting their throats; -- (...).
Then with his piercing Sword their Throats he stabbed.
For (...) did originally signify a Throat, as Eustathius observes upon that
Place. Hence comes the Phrase (...), in Latin, ferire foedus, i. e. to make a
Covenant. This done, they repeated the Form of words, which both Parties were
to confirm by mutual Oath, as appears from Homer's Description of the Truce
made between the Grecians and Trojans.

After this, they made a Libation of Wine, which was at this time mixed, to
signify the Conjunction and Concord that was between the Parties: then praying
again to the Gods, they poured it forth, requesting that whoever should first
break his Oath, might have his Blood, or Brains poured out in the same manner,
as Homer Iliad. citat.
reports, (...),
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Others to Heaven send up their ^ervent Prayers,
And to the Immortal Beings, who th'Affairs
Of Mankind rule, an awful Worship pay,
While streams of poured out Wine dye all the Way.
Thus they address the Gods.
Great, mighty Jove, and all ye Powers divine,
Whose Justice suffers no unpunished Sin,
Bear witness to the solemn Vows we make,
And grant, the Party, which them first shall break,
Whether it be, as now the ground Wine-stains,
May so over spread it with their dashed out Brains.
This light on them, and their Posterity,
And may their Wifes to all Men common be.
Mr. Dechair.

It was very usual in all Oaths, to add a solemn Imprecation, wishing that some
Evil might befall them, if they swore falsely: which was done, for the most
part, upon one of these Accounts, viz. either for the satisfaction of the other
Person, that he might give more credit to them; such an one was that of
Demosthenes; (...), If what I swear be true, (says he) may I enjoy much
happiness; if not, may I perish utterly. Sometimes they did it, to lay a
stricter and more inviolable Obligation upon themselves, least they should at
any time repent of their purpose, and take contrary Measures to what they then
resolved upon. Upon which account it was, that the Phocensians H^rod^t. lib. I.
and Strabo. lib. IV.
, who afterward built the City Massilia in Gallia Narbonensis, obliged
themselves by an Oath, backed with terrible Imprecations, never to think of
returning home; whence came the Proverb (...), applied to Men under the
Obligation of a strict Oath.

To return, the Flesh on which they feasted at other Sacrifices, was in this
thought unlawful to be eaten; and therefore, says Eustathius Il. (...).
, if the Person concerned was at home, it was buried; for so Priam seems to
have done with his Victims in the Sacrifice before mentioned: but if the Party
was a Stranger, they threw it into the Sea, as Talthybius did the Sow, which
was sacrificed at one of Agamemnon's Oaths, or disposed of it some such way.
Here you may observe, that if any unlucky or ominous Accident happened at the
time of Sacrifice, they usually differr'd, or wholly refused to take the Oath,
of which we have an instance in Plutarch Vita Pyrrhi.
, who reports, that when Pyrrhus, Lysimachus, and Cassander had concluded a
Peace, and met to confirm it by solemn Oath, and Sacrifice; a Goat, Bull, and
Ramm being brought out, the Ramm on a sudden ^ell dead; which some only laughed
at, but Theodotus the Priest forbad Pyrrhus to swear, declaring, that Heaven by
that omen, portended the Death of one of the three Kings, whereupon he re^us'd
to ratify the Peace.

Alexander ab Alexandro Lib. V. cap. X.
, has given us another manner of Swearing, which was thus; They took hold of
their Garments, and pointing a Sword toward their Throats, invoked the
Heavens, Earth, Sun, and Furies to bear witness to what they were about to do;
then they Sacrificed a Boar-pig, which they cast into the Sea, and, this being
done, took the Oath.

The solemn way of taking an Oath amongst the Molossians, was by cutting an Ox
into small pieces, and then swearing: whence any thing divided into small
Parcels, was proverbially called (...), as Suidas Voce (...).
, and Zenodotus In Proverb. in (...).
witness; you may here by the way take notice of the mistake of Erasmus In
Adagi^^^
, who instead of Bos Molottorum, writes Bos Homolottorum, reading, I suppose,
in the forementioned Authors (...), instead of (...).

Another manner of Swearing was that described by Plutarch Vita Ar^stidis.
, who reports, that when the Grecians had overthrown, and utterly routed all
the Forces of Xerxes, being flushed with Victory, they entered upon a design of
making a common Invasion upon Persia; whereupon, to keep them firm to their
resolutions, Aristides made them all swear to keep the League, and himself took
the Oath in the Name of the Athenians, and after Curses pronounced against him
that should break the Vow, threw Wedges of red-hot Iron into the Sea; by which
was signified, that the Oath should remain inviolable, as long as the Irons
should abide in the Sea without swimming; which Custom is also mentioned by
Callimachus, who, as he is cited by the Scholiast upon So^h^cles Antigon. v.
270.
, speaks thus of the Phocensians, (...).
While these plunged Irons the Sea's sure bottom keep.


There was also another manner of Swearing mentioned by Plutarch in the Life of
Dion, which Dion's Wife and Sister imposed upon Calippus the Athenian, being
moved thereto by a suspicion that he was privy to a conspiracy against Dion's
Life. It was thus; The Juror went into the Temple of Ceres and Proserpina, or,
as some say, of Ceres Thesmophora, or, the Lawgiver; where after the
performance of certain Ceremonies, he was clothed in the purple Vestment of
the Goddess, and holding a lighted Torch in his Hand, as being in the presence
of the Deity, took the Oath by all the Gods in the World; this the Syracusians
accounted the most solemn and sacred Oath that could be.

Another Test the Sicilians generally made use of at Palice, a City of Sicily,
where was a Fountain named Acadinus, to which the Jurors came, and having
written the Oath in a Tablet, threw it into the water, which if it could
endure, and swim, the Person accused was believed Honest; but if it sunk, He
was to be cast into the Flames immediately, as a perjured Villain; thus
Aristotle Lib. de Mirabilibus.
, and Stephanus the Byzantian In (...).
.

Other ways also they had of clearing themselves from the imputation of Crimes;
for instance, the Person accused sometimes took an Oath that he was innocent,
creeping upon his Hands through the Fire; or holding in his Hands a red-hot Iron,
called in Greek (...), as the Scholiast upon Sophocles reports; hereby those
that were not guilty of the Crime laid to their charge, were sensible of no
pain. Thus the Fellow in Sophocles Antigon^. v. 270.
tells Creon, that all the Guards were ready to take upon Oath, that they
neither buried Polynices themselves, nor knew who they were, that had done it;
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...).
There, Sir, we stood ready for all Commands,
Either hot Bars to take up with our Hands,
Or pass through Fires, or by the Gods to swear,
That neither we the Body did interr,
Nor privy to the wicked Action to were.
Mr. Dechair. A Custom not much differing from these, was practiced in this
Island by our Saxon Ancestors upon the same account, and was therefore called
the Fire-Ordeal, for Ordeal in Saxon signifies Purgation. The manner of
undergoing this Test was thus; The Person accused passed blindfold, with bare
Feet, over certain Plough-shares made red-hot, and placed at an unequal
distance from one another; this Ordalium, Edward the Confessor forced his
Mother Emma to undergo, to vindicate her Honor from the Scandal of
incontinency with Alwyn Bishop of Winchester; and by this Trial she gave a
sufficient Demonstration of her innocence, for having passed over the Irons
before she was aware of it, she cried out, When shall I come to the place of my
Purgation. And Kunigund the Wife of the Emperor Henry the Second, upon the
like imputation, held a red-hot Iron in her Hand, and received no harm thereby.
Thus much by way of Digression.

I shall beg the Reader's leave to mention but one sort more of these
Purgation-oaths, which is described by Achilles Tatius in his eighth Book, Of
the Loves of Clitophon and Leucippe. It is this; When a Woman was accused of
Incontinency, she was to clear her self from this Charge by Oath, which was
written in a Tablet, and hung about her Neck, then she went into the Water up
to the mid-leg; where, if she was innocent, all things remained in the same
manner as they were before; but if guilty, the very Water, says he, swelled as
it were with rage, mounted up as high as her neck, and covered the Tablet;
least so horrid and detestable a sight, as a false Oath, should be exposed to
the view of the Sun, and the World. Some other sorts of Oaths there were, of
which I might give you a large account, had I not already transgressed too far
upon the Reader's patience, I shall therefore only add something concerning
their religious observance of Oaths, and so conclude this Chapter.

What a religious Regard they had for Oaths, does appear from this, that (...),
or one that keep his Oaths, is commonly used for (...), a pious Person, as in
Hesiod, (...).
Nor Just, nor pious Souls shall Favor have.
Aristophanes Plut^*
also has taken it in the same sense, -- (...).
If you're with Justice pleased.
On the contrary, when they would express a wicked, forlorn wretch, ^hey called
him (...), perjurious; which was the worst, and most ^nfamous Title they could
fix upon him; and therefore Aristophanes Nubibus.
^peaking of Jupiter's Lightning and Thunderbolts, which, as some ^hought,
were chiefly levelled against the wicked, says, (...), If perjured Villains
are indeed so liable to the stroke, how comes it to ^ass that Cleonymus, and
Theodorus escape so well? or that the poor ^ak is so often shattered to pieces,
(...), Since it can never be ^erjur'd? Such as were common and customary
swearers the Athenians ^randed with the name of Ardetti, from (...), (says
Hesychius, and out of him Phavorinus) the name of the Place wherein Oaths were
^equired of them, before their admission to public Offices.

Those, that had sworn falsely, were, in some places, punished with Death; ^n
others, suffered the same punishment that was due to the Crime, ^ith which they
charged an innocent Person; in others only a pecunia^y Mulct was imposed on
them. But though they might sometimes escape ^umane punishments, yet it was
thought the Divine Vengeance would not fail to overtake them, and the Demons
were always so cunning, as to ^retend an utter Abhorrence, and Detestation of
such enormous Crimes, of which I shall give you one remarkable instance out of
Herodotus E^^to.
: There was at Sparta a Man named Glaucus, famed over all Greece for his
Justice, and Integrity; into his hands a certain Milesian, fearing some Danger
at Home, and being encouraged by the Character of the Man, deposited a large
sum of Money; after some time, the Sons of this Milesian came to Sparta, and
showing Glaucus the Bill, demanded the Money; Glaucus pretended he was wholly
ignorant of the Matter, yet promised to recollect with himself, and if he found
any thing due to them, to pay it; to do this he took four Months time, and
having gained this delay, immediately took a Journey to Delphi, on purpose to
ask Apollo's opinion, Whether it was lawful to perjure himself, thereby to
secure the money? The God moved with indignation at the impudence of the Man,
returned him this answer, (...)
(...).
(...):
(...),
(...)
(...).
No, Glaucus, no, I think you need not fear
To bilk your easy Creditor, and swear
He lent you no such sum; you will gain thereby,
And this considered, you may Death defy,
Death of the Just alike an Enemy.
But know, that Orcus has a Monster Son
Ghastly of shape, who ever hastens on
To overtake Perjuries; He Will n'ere forget
Your heinous Crime, but with revengeful Hate
Send Losses, racking Pangs, destructive Woe,
Till He your self with your whole Race undo.
Mr. Decha^^. This prediction was fully accomplished in Glaucus,
notwithstanding he afterward restored the money; for his whole Family was in a
fe^ Generations utterly extinct, and so became a memorable example of Divine
Vengeance. But though all the other Gods took upon them sometimes to punish this
Crime, yet it was thought in a more peculiar manner to be the care of Jupiter,
sirnam'd (...): and Pausanias reports, that in the (...), or Council-Hall, at
Olympia, there was a St^tue of Jupiter with a Thunderbolt in each Hand, and a
plate of (...) at his Feet, on which were engraven certain Elegiacal verses,
composed on purpose to terrify Men from invoking that God to witness an^
Untruth. Beside this, the perjured Persons were thought to be haunted and
distracted by the Furies, who every fifth day in the Month made a Visitation,
and walked their Rounds for that purpose, according to Hesiod, (...)
(...) (...) v. 4^.
.
All other Days the Furies quiet rest,
Only on Fifths the Perjured they molest,
Revenging Orcus, Orcus the sure Bane
Of all that dare his Deity profane.
Mr. Dechair. Therefore Agamemnon swearing that he had never known Briseis,
called the Furies to bear witness, -- (...)
(...).
The Infernal Furies I to witness call,
By whose Distractions perjured Villains fall.
Mr. Dechair. Though the punishment here meant by Homer, seems to have been
inflicted after Death, because he says (...) etc. or, the Men under the Earth;
and that this is the meaning of that place does appear from another Oath in
Homer, where the Infernal Gods are invoked after this manner, -- (...)
(...).
-- witness, ye Infernal Powers,
Who Souls below torment for breach of Oaths.
Mr. Dechair. Yet some in that place read (...), and then the meaning of it
will be, That the Souls of deceased Persons are employed in torturing perjured
Villains.

In some places, even insensible Creatures were reported to take Revenge for
this Crime, for it was generally believed in Arcadia, that no Man could
forswear himself by the Waters of Styx, without undergoing some severe and
remarkable Punishment; and it is reported of the subterranean Cavern sacred to
Palaemon at Corinth, that no perjured person could so much as enter into it,
without being made a memorable and terrible example of Divine Justice. In
Sicily, at the Temple of the Palici in the City Palice, there were certain
Crateres, Fonts, or Lakes, (for so sometimes they are called) named Delli, out
of which there continually issued Flames, and Balls of Fire, with boiling, and
stinking water; and thither People used to resort from all Quarters for the
deciding of Controversies: if any one swore falsely near these Fonts, he was
presen^ly struck either Blind, Lame, or Dead in the place; or was swallowed up,
and drowned in the Lakes.

Notwithstanding these, and other Instances of the Divine displeasure at this
Crime, and the Scandal and Infamy of it, yet was it so much practiced by the
Grecians, that they could never avoid the imputation of Treachery, and
Perfidiousness; insomuch that Graeca fides, came to be proverbially applied to
Men, that were wavering, inconsistent, and unfit to be trusted, or relied upon;
Plautus, in his Play called Asinaria, by Graeca fide mercari, means to buy with
ready money, as though without that a Grecian was not to be meddled with; his
Words are these, Diem, aquam, Solemn, Lunam, noctem, haec argento non emo,
Caetera, quae volumus uti, Graeca mercamur fide.
I buy not Day, nor Water, nor the Night,
Nor will my Gold the Sun, or Moon procure;
All other things, yet first I pay it down,
Right Grecian like, for Money I can have.
Mr. Dechair. Tully likewise, in his Oration sor Flaccus, speaks after the same
manner; That Nation, (says he) never made any conscience of observing their
Oaths. And their own Countryman Euripides assents to him herein, (...).
No sparks of Honesty Greece ever had.
And Polybius yet more fully in the sixth Book of his History, Amongst the
Greeks, (says he) if you lend only one Talent, and for security have ten Bonds,
with as many Seals, and double the number of Witnesses, yet all these
obligations can scarce force them to be honest. Yet Ausonius had a better
Opinion of them, unless his words were Ironie and ridi^ule, when he said to
Paulus, Nobiscum invenies (...), si lib^t uti
Non Poena, sed Graeca fide. --
At my House too, promise you will honest be,
A wanton Mufe's Trifles you may see.
Mr. Dechair. The Thessalians, in particular, were infamous for this Vice;
whence, as Zenodotus has informed us, by (...), is meant Fraud and Deceit; and
the other Proverb, viz. (...), seems to have had it is rise from the treacherous
and double Dealing of the Thessalians with their Confederates; a memorable
instance of which we have in the Peloponnesian War, where in the the midst of a
Battle they turned Sides, and deserting the Athenians, went over to the
Lacedaemonians: which reason seems more probable than that mentioned by
Zenodotus, viz. Their solemn Vow of an Hecatomb of Men, made every Year to
Apollo, without any design of ever paying it; which they did in imitation of
their Fore-father Thessalus, who made such a Vow to Apollo, but considering how
impious and unpleasing to the God it was like to be, neglected the performance
of it. The Locrians were not much less infamous on the same account, whence
those Proverbial Sayings, (...), and, (...), do usually denote fraudulent
Persons, and Practices, as we learn from Zenodotus. I shall forbear to
enumerate any more particulars, only I cannot pass by the Lacedaemonians, who,
as they were the most renowned of all the Grecians for their Valor,
Temperance, and other Virtues, so were the most scandalous for their Treachery,
and Contempt of Oaths; whence they are by Lycophron Cassandr. v. 1124.
called (...), which the Scholiast upon that place expounds, (...), i. e.
liars, and deceitful; Euripides A^dromach. v. 445.
bearing him witness herein, when he says, (...).
Spartans, famed ever for base Treacheries.
Aristophanes speaks yet more plainly and fully, when he tells us, They neither
accounted Altars, Promises, nor Oaths sacred; his words are these, (...).
Who neither Altars, Oaths, nor Trust revere.
And that this was not altogether a Calumny, the Aphorism of Lysander, one of
their most eminent Generals, does sufficiently evidence, viz. (...) Boys, ^aith
he, are to be deceived with Dice, or Nine-pins, but Enemies with Oaths. Others
there are, that will have this to be the Saying of Dionysius the Tyrant Alex.
ab A^ex. lib. V. ^ap. X.
. However that be, it is certain the La^edaemonians, though perhaps more just and
punctual in private Affairs, had very small regard for an Oath in public
Business; for even their Great Agesilaus seems to have thought it but a weak
Obligation, whenever it stood in competition with the Public good, that great
Mark, and ultimate End, to which they though^ all their Actions were to be
directed; insomuch that it was accounted lawful to promote it by the most
unjust Means in the World; for, as Plutarch Vita Agesilai.
affirms, to serve their Country was the Principle and Spring of all their
Actions, nor did they account any thing just or unjust, by any measures but
that.

The Athenians seem to have had some few grains more of honesty, as the story
of Themistocles in Plutarch does evidence; for He telling the People He had
formed a Design, which, if accomplished, would be very advantageous to the
Commonwealth, but might not, at that time, be communicated to the whole
Assembly; they ordered him to impart it to Aristides in private, who having
heard the Matter, came and reported to the People, that it was indeed a very
beneficial Contrivance, but withal the most unjust in the World; whereupon they
immediately commanded Themistocles to desist from his Intention. Diogenian, in
his Book of Collections, tells us that (...), was taken for a sincere, and
incorrupt Witness; as also (...), for a true, honest, and untainted Faith: and
though some would have this Proverb taken from the Goddess Fides, who had a
Temple at Athens mentioned by Plautus In Aulul.
; and others not from the Manners of the People, but the nature of their Soil,
which was so unfruitful, that it brought forth just as much as was sown, and no
more, whence Attica fides, is applied to any Man that restores all that he was
entrusted with; yet Velleius Paterculus Histor. lib. I.
assures us, it was taken from their Faithfulness, and unshaken Loyalty to the
Romans; whence Attica fides, is by Flaccus Argon. lib. IV.
called certa; by Horace Lib. III. Od. XVI.
impolluta; and by Silius Bell. Punic. lib. XIII.
Pura; and many other specious Epithets you may find given to it by the Poets.
Notwithstanding all this, their Honesty was not so firm and unmovable, but
that it might sometimes be shaken by the alluring and specious Temptation of
the Public good; I will conclude this Chapter with an instance of it, taken
out of Plutarch Vit. Aristidis.
, which is the more remarkable, and more clearly evidences the Disposition and
Temper of that State, because it was approved by the Consent of the People, and
put in Execution by Aristides, a Man of greater renown for Justice and upright
Dealing, than any that City ever brought forth. He, when the Grecians (after
they had utterly routed all the remainders of Xerxes's numerous Army) designed
a common Invasion upon Persia, took a solemn Oath in the Name of the Athenians
to observe the League; but afterward, when things were brought to such a pass,
as constrained them to govern with a stronger Hand, than was consistent with
it, advised them to throw the Perjurie upon him, and manage Affairs, as their
convenience required. Upon the whole matter, Theophrastus tells us, (says
Plutarch) that this Person was in his own private Affairs, and those of his
Fellow-Citizens nicely just, but in public Matters did many things according
to the State, and Condition of his Country, for whose sake He frequently
committed Acts of Injustice. Then he adds, that it was reported of him, that to
one who was in debate, Whether he should convey a certain treasure from Delos
to Athens, contrary to the League, at the persuasion of the Samians, He should
say, That the thing was not just, but expedient.

CHAPTER VII. Of the Grecian Divination, and Oracles, in general.
MANTIKH, is a general Name for all sorts of Divination, and signifies the
knowledge of Things obscure, or future, which cannot be attained by any
Ordinary, or Natural Means. It is divided by Plato Phadro.
, (who is followed herein by Aristotle, Plutarch, and Cicero) into two Species,
one of which is called (...), and naturalis, i. e. unartificial, or natural
Divination, as not being attained by any Rules, Precepts, or Observations, but
inspired into the Diviner, without his taking any farther Care or Trouble about
it, than to purify and prepare himself to receive the Divine Afflatus. With
this sort were all those endued, that delivered Oracles, and foretold future
Events by Inspiration, without observing any external Signs, or Accidents; such
were the Sybils, and other Enthusiasts. Some there are, that reduce Divination
by Dreams under this Species, because in them Revelations were made without any
Pains, or Art of the Dreamers; but herein lies the mistake of this Argument,
that not the Dreamers, but the Interpreters of Dreams were the Diviners; and
that their skill was the effect of Art and Observation, is evident from the
many Books written upon that Subject, and the various Signs delivered in them
to make Conjectures by; in like manner, it was not so much the business of an
Augur to see the Birds of Divination, which might casually happen to any rude
and unskilful Fellow, but after he had seen them, to interpret what was
portended by them.

These therefore, with others of the like Nature, are to be referred to the
second Species of Divination, called (...), or Artificial, because it was not
obtained by immediate Inspiration, but was the effect of long Experience, and
Observation; as Sooth-saying: or depended chiefly upon humane Art, Invention,
or Imposition, which nevertheless was not supposed to be altogether destitute
of divine Direction and Concurrence; such was Divination by Lots.

I shall begin with the first sort of Divination, as having a more immediate
dependence on the Gods; and first with the noblest part of it, I mean Oracles,
which are called in Greek (...), etc. The Interpreters, or Revealers of
Oracles, (...), etc. The Consulters, (...), etc. The Places, in which they were
delivered, (...), etc. Though I am not ignorant that some of these Names were
sometimes applied to other sorts of Divination.

Of all the sorts of Divination, Oracles had always the greatest Repute, as
being thought to proceed in a more immediate manner from the Gods; whereas
others were delivered by Men, and had a greater dependence on them, who might
either out of Ignorance mistake, or out of Fear, Hopes, or other unlawful and
base Ends conceal, or betray the Truth; whereas they thought the Gods, who were
neither obnoxious to the Anger, nor stood in need of the Rewards, nor cared for
the Promises of Mortals, could not sure be prevailed upon to do either of them.
Upon this account, Oracles obtained so great Credit, and Esteem, that in all
Doubts and Disputes their Determinations were held sacred and inviolable;
whence as Strabo Lib. XVI.
reports, vast numbers flocked to them to be resolved in all manner of Doubts,
and ask Counsel about the management of their Affairs: insomuch, that no
Business of great Consequence and Moment was undertaken, scarce any Peace
concluded, any War waged, any new Form of Government instituted, or new Laws
enacted, without the advice and approbation of an Oracle; Croesus Herodot. Lib.
I.
, before he durst venture to declare War against the Persians, consulted not
only all the most famous Oracles in Greece, but sent Ambassadors as far as
Libya, to ask advice of Jupiter Hammon. Minos Strabo loc. cit.
, the Cretan Lawgiver, conversed with Jupiter, and received instructions from
him, how he might new model his Government. Lycurgus also made frequent Visits
to the Delphian Apollo, and received from him that Platform, which afterward
he communicated to the Lacedaemonians. Nor does it matter whether these things
were really true or not, since it is certain they were believed to be so; for
hence appears what great Esteem Oracles were in, at least amongst the Vulgar
sort, when Lawgivers, and Men of the greatest Authority were forced to make
use of these Methods to win them into Compliance. My Author goes yet higher,
and tells us, that inspired Persons were thought worthy of the greatest Honors
and Trusts; insomuch, that sometimes we find them advanced to the Throne, and
invested with Regal Power; for that being admitted to the Counsels of the Gods,
they were best able to provide for the Safety and Welfare of Mankind.

This reputation stood the Priests, that had their dependence on the Oracles,
in no small stead; for finding their Credit thus thoroughly established, they
allowed no Man to consult the Gods, before he had offered costly Sacrifices,
and made rich Presents to them: whereby it came to pass, that none but great
and wealthy Men were admitted to ask their Advice, they alone being able to
defray the charges required on that account; which contributed very much to
raise the esteem of Oracles among the common People; Men generally being apt to
admire the things they are kept at some distance from; and, on the other hand,
to contemn what they are familiarly acquainted with. Wherefore to keep up their
Esteem with the Better sort, even they were only admitted upon a few stated
Days; at other times neither the greatest Prince could purchase, nor Persons of
the greatest Quality any ways obtain an Answer; Alexander himself was
peremptorily denied by the Pythia, till she was by downright force compelled
to ascend the Tripus, when finding her self unable to resist any longer, she
cried out (...), Thou art invincible; which words were thought a very lucky
Omen, and accepted instead of any further Oracle.

As to the causes of Oracles, it has been disputed whether they were the
revelations of Demons, or only the delusions of crafty Priests. Van Dale, a
Dutch Wit, has taken pains to write a large Treatise in defense of the later
Opinion; but his Arguments, I think, are not of such force, but that they might
without difficulty be refuted, if either my Design required, or Time permitted
me to answer them. However that be, it was the common Opinion, that Jupiter was
the first Cause of this and all other sorts of Divination, 'twas He that had
the Books of Fate, and out of them revealed either more or less, as he pleased,
to inferior Demons; for which reason he was sirnam'd (...), as Eustathius
tells us in his Comment upon this verse of Homer Iliad. (...). v. 250.
, (...).
-- then at he holy Fane
To mighty Jove was the glad Victim slain,
To Jove from whom all Divination comes,
And inspired Oracles unridle future Dooms.
Mr. Hutchin. Of the other Gods Apollo was reputed to have the greatest skill
in making Predictions, and therefore it was one of his Offices to preside over,
and inspire all sorts of Prophets, and Diviners; but this was only in
subordination to Jupiter, and by converse with, and participation from him, as
Aeschylus Sacerdotibus.
gives us to understand, when he says, (...)
(...). --
Send, quickly send, for so by Jove inspired
Phoebus commands. --
Mr. Hutchin. On the same account, in another place Eumenidibus.
, when he brings in Apollo, commanding Men to reverence his own Oracles, He
adds, They must also pay due respect to those of Jupiter, without mentioning
any of the other Prophetic Deities; His words are these, (...)
(...). --
To mine, and Jove's most sacred Oracles
Pay due Obeisance. --
Mr. Hutchin.

The manner of delivering Oracles was not in all Places, nor at all Times the
same; in some Places the Gods revealed them by Interpreters, as did Apollo at
Delphi; in others, more immediately, giving answers themselves, which they
either pronounced viva voce, or returned by Dreams, or Lots, (the former of
which were supposed to be inspired, and the latter directed by the Gods) or
some other Way. At some places, both these ways were used; for instance, those
that consulted Trophonius, after having proposed their Questions, first
received an answer in a Dream; and, if that was obscure, and hard to be
understood, had the meaning of it interpreted by Men kept for that purpose, and
instructed in that Art by the Deity: several other ways also this God used to
give answers to Enquirers, as Pausanias reports in his Description of Boeotia;
and in another place Messeni^.
, the same Author tells us, an Answer was returned by him in these Heroic
Verses, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
Let not the bloody Ensigns be displayed,
Nor least attack upon your Foes be made,
Before an ample Trophy you erect
And to my hallowed Shield pay due respect,
Which in the Temple to my growing praise
The valiant Aristomenes did raise:
Thus when you have done, you may expect that I
Will crown these toils of War with joyful Victory.
Mr. Hutchin. This answer was given to the Thebans before the Battle at
Leuctra, wherein, by the conduct of Epaminondas, they gave the Lacedaemonians,
and their Confederates a notable Overthrow.

Thus much of Oracles in general. I shall in the next place endeavor to give a
particular Description of them, especially such as were of any Note, together
with a short account of the Ceremonies required of those that consulted them,
the manner of returning Answers, with other things remarkable in each of them.
And because Jupiter was reputed to be the first Author of them; I shall begin
with those, that were thought to be more immediately delivered by Him.

CHAPTER VIII. Of the Oracles of Jupiter.
DODONA Eustath. Iliad. (...). p. 254. and Il. (...). p. 1074. Edit. Basil.
Stephanus Byzant^
, is by some thought to have been a City of Thessaly; by others it was placed
in Epirus; and others, to reconcile these two Opinions, will have two Dodona's,
one in Thessaly, and another in Epirus. They that place it in Epirus, (and that
is generally believed to have been the seat of the Oracle, whether there was
another Dodona in Thessaly, or not) are no less divided in their opinions about
it; for some of them will have it in Thesprotia, others in Chaonia, or
Molossia; but Eustathius Odyss. (...). p. 544.
has undertaken to decide the Controversy, telling us that it did indeed once
belong to the Thesprotians, but afterward fell into the hands of the
Molossians; and He is herein confirmed by Strabo Geogr. lib. X.
.

It was first built by Deucalion, who in that universal Deluge, wherein the
greatest part of Greece perished, retreated to this place, which by reason of
it is height secured him from the waters. Hither resorted to him all that had
escaped from the Inundation, with whom he peopled his new-built City, calling
it Dodona, either from a Sea-nymph of that name, or Dodon the Son, or Dodone
the Daughter of Jupiter and Europa; or from the River Dodon, or Don, for so it
is called by Stephanus; or, as some say, from Dodanim the Son of Iavan, who,
they tell us, was Captain of a Colony sent to inhabit those parts of Epirus. At
the same Time, Deucalion is said to have founded a Temple, which He consecrated
to Jupiter, who is thence called Dodonaeus. This was the first Temple in
Greece, but the Oracle seems to have been a considerable Time before it; for
Herodotus in the second Book of his History reports, that it was the most
ancient of all Oracles in Greece, which would be false, had it not been before
Deucalion's time; for He, as the Poets tell us, having escaped the Deluge,
consulted the Oracle of Themis on Mount Parnassus, what means he should use to
replenish the Country with People; and the same Oracle, they tell us, was
jointly possessed by the Earth, and Neptune, before it belonged to Themis.

The Original of it, though, like all other things of such Antiquity, wrapped up
in Fables, I will repeat to you out of the forementioned place of Herodotus,
where he has given us two accounts of it, the first of which, He tells us, he
received from the Priests of Jupiter at Thebes in Egypt; it was this: That the
Phoenicians had carried away two Priestesses from that place, one of which they
sold into Libya, the other into Greece; that each of these had erected the
first Oracle in those Nations, the one of Jupiter Hammon, the other of Jupiter
Dodonaeus. The other account was given him by the Priestesses at Dodona, and
confirmed by all those that ministered in the Temple, viz. That two black
Pigeons taking their flight from Thebes in Egypt, one of them came to Libya,
where she commanded that an Oracle should be erected to Hammon; the other to
Dodona, where she sat upon an Oak-tree, and speaking with an Humane voice,
ordered that there should be in that place an Oracle of Jupiter. Afterward
Herodotus delivers his own opinion about the matter, which was this; That if
the Phoenicians did really carry two Women from Thebes, and sell one of them in
Libya, and the other in Greece, it might be probable that she, that was
transported into Greece, was sold to the Thesprotians in that Country, which
in his time was called Hellas, but formerly named Pelasgia, where she
instituted the Oracle to Jupiter, and gave instructions after what manner he
was to be worshipped. To confirm this conjecture, he adds, that those two
Oracles have a near resemblance to each other. Moreover he tells us, the two
Women were said to be Black, because they came from Egypt; and were called
Doves, because their language was barbarous, and as unintelligible as that of
Birds; afterward when they had learned the Greek Tongue, they were said to
speak with an Humane voice. Eustathius Odyss* (...). p. 544, 545* Edit. Basil.
gives two reasons more for this appellation; the first is, That they were
called (...), or Doves, q. (...), because they made their predictions by the
observation of those Birds; as they, who made use of Crows in Divination, were
named (...). The other reason is, that in the Molossian language old Women were
called (...), and old Men (...), and that those Prophetesses being old Women,
either by a mistake of the word, or a Poetical equivocation were commonly
called Doves; and why aged Persons should be thus termed, the old Scholiast
upon Sophocles Trachin. v. 176
informs us; for, says He, the three old Prophetesses were called (...), q.
(...), because of their gray Hair. I will add in the last place Servius's
reason, which he gives us in his Comment upon Virgil's tenth Eclogue, viz. That
in the Thessalian Tongue the word (...) is used to signify a Prophetess, as
well, as a Dove; and it seems also no unusual thing amongst the ancient Greeks,
for Prophetesses to have the name of Doves, and therefore the Enigmatical Poet
calls Cassandra by that Name twice in one Sentence Cassandr. v. 357.
, (...)
(...).
As when a ravenous Vultur first espies
A trembling Pigeon, straightway sousing flies
Through liquid Air, to bear the wished for Prize,
To his Aetherial Nest; so I forlorn
Shall as a weak, and timorous Dove be born,
B' insulting Ajax to a foreign Bed.
Mr. Hutchin. Others say, that this Oracle was founded by the Pelasgians, who
were the most ancient of all the Nations that inhabited Greece; of this Opinion
is Strabo Geogr. lib. VII.
, being led hereunto by the Testimony of Homer, who calls the same Jupiter, by
the two Names of Dodonaeus and Pelasgicus, in this verse Il. (...).
, (...). --
Pelasgian Jove, that far from Greece resides
In cold Dodona. --
Hesiod, whose Testimony also Strabo makes use of, is more plain, when he
says, (...).
He to Dodona came, and the hallowed Oak,
The Seat of the Pelasgi. --
And this seems somewhat more probable; especially, if what is commonly
reported of Deucalion, deserve any Credit, viz. That he saved himself from the
Deluge, not on the Top of the Mountain at Dodona, but on Parnassus, where was
the Oracle of Themis consulted by him after his deliverance. Strabo relates
another fabulous Opinion concerning the foundation of this Oracle, out of
Suidas's Thessalica, who, (says my Author) out of a design to gratify the
Thessalians with a new invented Fable, has reported that the Oracle of Dodona
was translated into Epirus out of Pelasgia, a Country of Thessaly, being
accompanied by a great number of Women, from whom the Prophetesses in
after-ages were descended, and that Jupiter received from them the appellation
of Pelasgicus.

The Persons, that delivered the Oracles, were, at the first, Men, as Strabo
Loc. cit.
, and Eustathius Loc. citat.
have observed out of Homer, who calls them in the masculine gender (...), and
(...) Loc. cit.
, (...),
(...)
(...).
Parent of Gods, and Men, Pelasgian Jove,
King of Dodona, and it is hallowed Grove;
King of Dodona, whose intemp'rate Coast
Bleak Winds infest, and Winters chilling Frost,
Round thy Abode thy Priests with unwash'd Feet
Lie on the naked Earth. --
Mr. Hutchin. Where some, says Eustathius upon that place, read (...), making
those Priests to be called Helli; but the former Lection, he tells us, is
generally received. The Selli, are so called from Sellae, a Town in Epirus; or,
according to Eustathius, from the River called by Homer Iliad. (...). v. 531.
Selleis, (...).
Whom He from Ephyra, and Selleis brought.
But herein he contradicts Strabo, who tells us in the forementioned place,
that this River does not belong to Ephyra in Thesprotia; for that neither
there, nor yet in Molossia was ever any River of that Name, but to another
Ephyra, which is a City of E^is in Peloponnesus. The same were called Elli, or
Helli, from Ellus the Thessalian, from whom Ellopia, a Country about Dodona
received it is name; and Philochorus in Strabo is of opinion, that these Priests
were named Elli, from this Region; but Pliny will have the Selli, and the
Inhabitants of Ellopia, to have been a different People. Apollodorus in Strabo,
thinks they were called (...), from the Fens and Marshes near the Temple of
Dodona. From the two Epithets of (...), and (...), given them by Homer, Strabo
concludes they were barbarous and unciviliz'd; Eustathius Il. (...). p. 1074.
Edit. Basil.
tells us, they were named (...), because they slept upon the Ground in Skins,
and in that posture expected Prophetical Dreams from Jupiter; Others, he tells
us, would have them called (...), because they did not lie in Beds, but upon
the bare Ground; and (...), because they never went out of the Temple, and
therefore had no occasion to wash their Feet; whence Euripides in his
Erectheus, says of them, (...). --
Nor bathed their Feet in any purling Stream.
Lastly, others will have these Names to be understood in a Symbolical and
Figurative sense, thus; (...). i. e. Their Bodies indeed did lie upon the
Ground, but their Minds, by the assistance of Prophetical Philosophy, mounted
up higher, soaring above these lower Regions.

There is a report grounded upon the Testimony of Pherecydes, that before the
time of the Selli, the Temple of Dodona was inhabited by the seven Daughters of
Atlas, that were the Nurses of Bacchus, and from this Temple called Dodonides.
Their names were these; Ambrosia, Eudora, Pasithoe, Coronis, Plexaure, Pytho,
and Tyche, or Tithe. However that be, it is certain that in later Ages, the
Oracles were pronounced by three old Women; and Strabo tells us this Change was
made, when Jupiter admitted Dione to cohabit within, and receive Divine honors
in this Temple; nor was it strange or unusual that the same Temple should
belong to two Deities, for Apollo and Bacchus were worshipped in the Temple at
Delphi, Apollo and Branchus, or, as Stephanus Voce (...).
affirms, Jupiter and Apollo at Miletus.

Strabo Geogr. lib. IX.
in his Description of Boeotia tells us, that of the People consulting this
Oracle, all others received Answers from Women, but the Boeotians received
theirs from Men; and the reason of this Custom we have in the same place, which
was this; In a War between the Boeotians and Pelasgians, the Boeotians coming
to Dodona, to enquire of Jupiter the event of the War, received Answer; That
their Enterprise should have success, if they would act wickedly; upon this ^he
Boeotians suspecting that the Prophetess spoke in favor of the Pelasgians,
(for that they were the first founders of that Oracle) seized ^er, and cast her
into the fire, justifying the Law-fulness of the Fact. On the other hand, they
that ministered in the Temple thinking it impious to put to death (especially in
so sacred a place) Persons uncondemn'd, would have had them referr the matter
to the two surviving Prophetesses; but the Boeotians alleging that no Laws in
the World permitted Women to do Judgment, it was agreed that two Men should be
in joint Commission with them; when the time to pass Sentence was come, they
were condemned by the Women, and absolved by the Men; whereupon (as was usual
when the number of Voices was equal on both sides) the Boeotians were
acquitted, and dismissed: Ever after it was established, that Men only should
give Answers to the Boeotians.

The Prophets of this Temple were commonly called Tomuri, the Prophetesses
Tomurae, from Tomurus, a Mountain in Thesprotia, at the Foot of which stood the
Temple. So commonly was this word made use of, that it came a^ last to be a
general name for any Prophet; for so Hesychius expounds it, and Lycophron
Cassandr. v. 223.
has used it in this sense, applying it to Prylis the Son of Mercury, (...).
The best of Prophets, and the truest too.


Near the Temple there was a sacred Grove full of Oaks, in which the Dryades,
Fauni, and Satyri were thought to inhabit, and were frequently seen dancing and
sporting wantonly under the shade of the Trees. Before sowing was invented,
when Men made use of Acorns instead of Corn, those of this Wood were very much
esteemed; insomuch, that Virgil has mentioned them by way of eminence Georg.
v. 27.
, Liber, and alma Ceres, vestro si munere tellus
Chaonia pingui glandem mutavit arista.
Bacchus, and Ceres, taught by you the Field
Does Grain for old Chaonian Acorns yield,
And Wine for Water. --
Mr. Hutchin. And again in the same Book Verse. 146.
, Prima Ceres ferro mortales vertere terram
Instituit; cum jam glandes atque arbuta sacrae
Deficerent silvae, and victum Dodona negaret.
Acorns, and Wildings, when the Woods denied,
Nor old Dodona longer Food supplied,
Then Ceres taught to till the pregnant Earth.
Mr. Hutchin. These Oaks were endued with an Humane Voice, and Prophetical
Spirit, for which reason they were called (...), and (...), i. e. speaking, and
prophesying Oaks. And Argo, the Ship of the Argonauts, being built with the
Trees of this Wood, was endu'd with the same Power of speaking, and therefore
Ly^ophron Cassandr. v. 1319.
calls it (...), a chattering Mag-pye. The reason of which fiction some think
was this; The Prophets when they gave Answers, placed themselves in one of
these Trees, (for some will only allow this vocal Faculty to one of them) and
so the Oracle was thought to be uttered by the Oak, which was only pronounced
out of it is hollow Stock, or from amongst it is Branches.

I must not omit the other way of Prophesying used in this place, which was by
the sound of brazen Kettles, which, as Demon in Suidas reports, were so
artificially placed about the Temple, that by striking one of them the sound
was communicated to all the rest. Aristotle, (says my Author) was of another
opinion, and reports, that there were two Pillars, on one of which was placed a
Kettle, upon the other a Boy holding in his hand a Whip, with lashes of Brass,
which being by the violence of the Wind struck against the Kettle, caused a
continual sound; whence came the Proverb (...), (says he) or rather, (...),
for it was applied to talkative Persons. Another Saying we have not much
different from the former, viz. (...), which (as some are of opinion) was taken
from this Whip, which, together with the Boy, and Kettle, were all dedicated by
the Corcyreans Epitom. Strab. lib. VII.
. About what Time, or upon what Account this Oracle came to cease, is
uncertain, but Strabo Lib. VII.
, who flourished under Augustus Caesar, says, that in his time the Gods had,
in a manner, deserted that, and most other Oracles.

The same Author Lib. VIII.
, in his Description of Elis, makes mention of an Oracle of Olympian Jupiter,
which was once famous, but did not continue long in Repute; yet the Temple, in
which it stood, still preserved it is ancient Splendour, and was adorned with
magnificent Structures, and enriched with Presents from every part of Greece.
Pindar also has taken notice of an Altar dedicated to Jupiter at Pisa, where
Answers were given by the Posterity of Iamus Olymp. initio Od. VI.
.

There was another very ancient Oracle of Jupiter in Crete, mentioned also by
Strabo, from which Minos is said to have received a Platform of the Laws
afterward enacted by him; whence Homer says of him, (...).
Minos, that counsels dared with Jove to mix,
Nine years Crete's Scepter swayed. --
That is, (as Plato in Strabo expounds it) He descended into the sacred Cave of
Jupiter, (for this Oracle was under ground) and received from him those
precepts, which He afterward made public for the common benefit of Mankind.
The Will of the Gods was revealed in this place by Dreams, in which the Gods
came and conversed familiarly with the Enquirers; as we learn from the Story of
Epimenides Maximus Tyrius Diss. XXVIII.
, who lay asleep in this place many years; with him also Pythagoras descended
into this Cave to consult the Gods, as Diogenes Laertius has related in the
Life of Pythagoras. There was a Temple in the same place dedicated to Jupiter,
from which to the City Cnossus Plato de Leg* lib. I.
there was a High-road, very pleasant, and delightful. It stood upon Mount Ida,
and though Maximus Tyrius, in the forementioned place, calls it (...), yet in
his twenty-second Dis^ertation, he says it was placed on Ida, to which
Diogenes Laertius, and others agree. It was sometimes called (...), from the
word (...), which signifies to help, or defend; because the Sons of Titan,
being vanquished by Saturn, fled into this Cave, and there escaped the Fury of
their pursuing Conqueror Etymolog. Auctor.
.

CHAPTER IX. Of the Oracles of Apollo.
I Come in the next place to speak of the Oracles sacred to Apollo, who was
thought more peculiarly to preside over Prophets, and inspire into them the
knowledge of future Events; for which reason it is, that the Enigmatical Poet
calls him (...), or Gainful, from (...), which signifies Gain, because of the
profit which Mankind received by his Predictions, says Tzetzes Cassandr. v.
208.
upon that place.

The Oracles of Apollo were not only the most numerous, but of greatest Repute;
and amongst them the Delphian challenged the first place, as well for it is
Antiquity, (wherein it contended even with that of Dodona) as for the truth and
perspicuity of it is Answers, the magnificence of it is Structures, the number
and richness of the sacred (...), or Presents, dedicated to the God, and the
Multitudes which from all Parts resorted thither for Counsel; in all which
respects it surpassed, not only all the Oracles of other Gods, but even those
sacred to Apollo himself.

The place in which the Oracles were delivered was called Pythium, the
Priestess Pythia; the Sports also instituted in honor of Apollo were named
Pythian, and Apollo himself Pythius; either from Python a Serpent, or a Man for
his Cruelty so called, who possessed this place, and was overcome by Apollo: or
(...), i. e. to putrify; because the Carkase of Pytho was suffered to lie
there and putrify, and this reason is given us by Homer Hymn. in Apollinem v.
372.
: or (...) i. e. to enquire; because the Oracle was there consulted and
enquired of, and this is Strabo's Geogr. lib. IX.
opinion: or from Pytho, another name of Delphi, the place of this Oracle,
given it from Pythis the Son of Delphus, the Son of Apollo.

The City Delphi (as Strabo Lib. IX.
reports) was by some thought to be placed in the middle of the World; and the
Poets feign that Jupiter, being desirous to know the middle part of the Earth,
sent forth two Eagles, (or Crows, as Pindar, or Swans, as others relate) one
from the East, the other from the West, and that they met in this Place.
However that be, Strabo tells us, it was placed in the middle of Greece;
whence it is by the Poets commonly called (...), which word signifies a Navil,
because that is the middle part of Man's body; and therefore Sophocles calls
this Oracle (...): and in allusion to that name, Strabo and Pausanias say,
there was to be seen in the Temple the figure of a Navil, made of white Stone,
with a Ribband hanging from it, instead of the Navil-string, and upon it were
placed two Eagles, in memory of the Eagles sent forth by Jupiter. But
Lactantius, and Phurnutus are of opinion, that this Name was not derived from
the Situation of the Place, but from the divine Answers that were given there,
and are in Greek called (...).

Concerning the Original of this Oracle there are various Reports, Diodorus the
Sicilian Lib. XVI. cap. XVI.
tells us, it first belonged to Earth, by whom Daphne, one of the
Mountain-Nymphs, was constituted Priestess; the same Author afterward says,
that in a Greek Poem called Eumolpia, it is reported to have been sacred both
to Earth, and Neptune; and that Earth gave Answers her self, but Neptune had an
Interpreter named Pyrco, and that afterward Neptune resigned his part to
Earth. This Goddess was succeeded by Themis, who gave Oracles about the time of
Deucalion's Deluge, and was consulted by him: some there are, that will have
Themis to have possessed this Oracle from the beginning; and in Coelius Lect.
Ant. lib. XVI. cap. XI.
we find, that others say it belonged to Saturn. However that be, at length it
came into the hands of Apollo; nor did he long enjoy it alone, for in the War
against the Sons of Titan, Bacchus being mangled and torn in pieces by them,
was afterward restored to his Brother Apollo, who received him into his
Temple, and ordered that divine Honors should be paid him there. This Fable
you may find quoted out of Callimachus and Euphorion, by Isaac Tzetzes in his
Comment upon Lycophron Verse. 209.
, where Agamemnon is brought in sacrificing to Bacchus in the Temple of
Delphinian Apollo. Hence some say, the City Delphi was so called, q. (...),
which word signifies Brethren, because Apollo and Bacchus were both Sons of
Jupiter.

We find it related in Diodorus the Sicilian Biblioth. Hist. l. XVI.
, that this Oracle was first discovered by Goats, in memory whereof the
Delphians, when they asked Counsel of the God, for the most part offered a
Goat. The manner of the discovery was thus: Upon Mount Parnassus, where Goats
were wont to feed, there was a deep Cavern, with a small, narrow Mouth, to
which when any of the Goats approached, they began immediately to leap after an
unusual and antic manner, uttering strange and unheard of sounds; the
Goat-herd ( Plutarch calls him Coretas) observing this, and wondering what
should be the cause of it, went himself to view the Cavern, whereupon he also
was seized with a like Fit of Madness, leaping and dancing, and foretelling
things to come. This being noised abroad, vast Multitudes of People flocked to
the Place, where as many as looked in, were inspired after the same manner. At
length, when many were possessed with such a degree of Divine Phrenzy, as to
throw themselves headlong into the Vorago; there was an Edict put out, whereby
it was made unlawful for any Man to approach to it; and a Tripus was placed
upon the Mouth of it, upon which a Virgin was appointed to sit, and there
deliver the Answers of the God. This is the most common Account of the Original
of this Oracle: Pausanias has given some others, which I shall forbear to
mention, being unwilling to abuse the Reader's patience in the repetition of
any more vain and useless Fables. Thus much however is certain (if any thing at
such a distance may be called so,) viz. That this Oracle was very ancient, and
flourished above an hundred Years before the Trojan War.

Concerning the Tripus placed upon the mouth of the Cavern, there are different
Opinions: some say, it was a Pot filled with dust, through which the Afflatus
passed into the Virgin's Belly, and thence proceeded out of her Mouth. The
Scholiast upon Aristophanes Lysistrate.
says, it was a wide-mouthed Brass-Pot, filled with (...), or Pebbles, by the
leaping of which the Prophetess made her Conjectures. Others are of opinion,
that it was a large Vessel supported by three Feet, into which the Prophetess
plunged her self, when she expected an Inspiration. But, according to the more
common opinion, Coelius Lect. Antiq. lib. VIII. cap. XV.
has proved at large, that it was not a Vessel, but a Table, or Seat, on which
the Pythia leaned, or sat. The cover of the Tripus, or, as some say, the Tripus
it self, they called (...), which word properly denotes a Mortar, or round
Stone, according to Hesychius; whence Apollo is called in Sophocles, (...), and
his Prophetess, (...). And this, as some are of opinion, gave occasion to the
Proverb, (...), which is applied to those that speak prophetically; but others
derive it from a certain Diviner, called Holmus; and others (amongst whom is
Aristophanes the Grammarian, in Zenodotus) referr it to the old superstitious
Custom of sleeping in these (...), when they desired a Prophetical Dream.
Phurnutus will have the Tripus to have been sacred to Apollo, either because of
the perfection of the Number Three; or in allusion to the three celestial
Circles, two of which the Sun touches, and passes over the third in his
Annual Circuit. The Tripus, says the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Initio Pluti.
, had three Legs, by which were symbolically signified the knowledge of the
God, as distinguished by the three Parts of Time, viz Present, Past, and,
Future, (...)*
Who knew things past, and present, and to come.
The same Tripus was not always used; the first, it is probable, might be
placed there by the Inhabitants of the neighboring Country; afterward, when
Pelops married Hippodamia the Daughter of Oenomaus, King of the Eleans, he
presented to Apollo a Tripus, wrought by Vulcan, which seems to have been that
famous one made of Brass, so famous amongst the Poets. There was also another
Tripus of Gold, as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes Loco citat.
reports, dedicated to Apollo on this account: Certain Fishermen at Miletus,
having sold their next draught to some Persons that stood by, cast their Nets
into the Water, and drew up a Golden Tripus; whereupon there arose a very hot
Contention between the Fishermen and their Chap-men; the Fishermen alleging,
that they sold nothing but the Fish they were to take, and that therefore the
Tripus belonged to them; The Buyers, on the other hand, replied, that they had
bought the whole draught, and therefore laid a just claim to whatever came to
the Net; at length, when neither side would yield, they agreed to submit the
matter to Apollo's determination, whereupon they came to Delphi, and there
received this Answer, (...);
(...).
Art Thou, a Native of Miletus, come
TO enquire what must be with the Tripod done?
Give it to Him, who is wisdom claims a right
Above all others. --
Mr. Hutchin. This Oracle was given at the time when the seven Wisemen
flourished in Greece; the Tripus therefore was presented to one of them, (which
that was, is not agreed on by ancient Writers) He modestly refusing it, they
offered it to another, and so on to the rest, till it had been refused by them
all; whereupon it was determined to consecrate it to Apollo himself, as being
the Fountain of all Wisdom. The Tripus was called by the Latins Cortina, of
which appellation there are several reasons assigned, for which I referr you to
the Grammarians. Others say, Cortina was only the Cover of the Tripus, and
therefore derive it from the word corium, i. e. a Skin, because it was made, as
they say, of Python's Skin. Lastly, others more probably think it signified the
Tent, within which was kept the sacred Tripus, and that because of it is figure,
which was, like that of a Cauldron, round; upon the same account Cortina was
used to signify the Tiring-room in the Theater, or the Curtains, or Hangings,
out of which the Players used to be ushered on to the Stage; for the same
reason the celestial Hemisphere is by Ennius called Coeli cortina; and the
Tholus, or round Compass at the top of a Theater, is by another named cortina
Theatri.

The Person, that delivered the Oracles of the God, was a Woman, whom they
called Pythia, Pythonissa, and Phoebas: the most celebrated of these, says
Pausanias Ph^cicis.
, was Phoemonoe, who is remarkable, not only as being the first Priestess of
that Oracle, but more especially because she was the first (as most say,) that
clothed the Oracles with Heroic Verse. But Boeo, a Delphian Lady, in one of
her Hymns, reports that Olen, with the Hyperboreans, first instituted this
Oracle, and returned Answers in Heroic Verse, of which He was the first
Inventor; Her words we find in Pausanias to be thus, (...)
(...), etc.
Where Hyperb^reans to thy lasting praise
Eternal Oracles did consecrate.
Then she proceeds to enumerate some others of the Hyperboreans, and in the End
of the Hymn adds, (...),
(...).
No Grecian yet warmed with Poetic Fire
Could fit the unpolished Language to the Lyre,
Till the first Priest of Phoebus Olen rose,
And changed for smoother Verse, their stunning Prose.
Mr. Hutchin. But herein She contradicts (says my Author) the common opinion
of Mankind, grounded on the Testimony of ancient Writers, who unanimously agree
in this, That never any but Women were the Interpreters of this God.

Venerius De Divination. and Orac. Antiq.
is of opinion, that there were more than one Pythia at the same time; which he
gathers out of Herodotus, w^o in the sixth Book of his History reports, that
Cleomenes corrupted with bribes the Prophetess Perialla, who was vaticinantium
mulierum antistes, the President of the Prophetesses: How true this may be I
know not, but I do not remember that ever I have read of above one at the same
time; and though the words quoted by Venerius are in the Latin Version, yet no
such thing is said, or can be inferred from the Greek, where Perialla is only
called (...), which word (however it may seem to signify a Prophet superior
to the rest) according to it is common acceptance implies no more than (...),
for so Euripides Helena.
has used it, when he says (...), i. e. one that fore-telleth evils to come.
And in like manner Herodotus himself in another place has used the Verb (...):
more instances would be needless.

These Women were, at the first, Virgins, till one of them was deflowered by
Echechrates a Thessalian; and then choice was made of Women above fifty years
of Age; that so they might either be secured from the Attempts of Lust, or, if
they should be at any time forced to the violation of their chastity, having
passed the time of Childbearing they might remain undiscovered, and not bring
the Oracles, or Religion into Contempt: nevertheless they wore the habit of
Virgins, thereby to signify their Purity, and Virginal Modesty. They were
obliged to observe the strictest Laws of Temperance and Chastity; not being
allowed to wear rich and costly Apparel, or ^se fantastical Dresses; and
Plutarch Lib. de Pyth. Orac.
has told us, they neither anointed themselves, nor wore Purple Garments. The
Pythia, before she ascended the Tripus, used to wash her whole Body, especially
her Hair, in Castalis, a Fountain at the Foot of Parnassus, where the Poets,
Men inspired by the same Deity, used to wash and drink. At her first sitting
down upon the Tripus, She used to shake the Laurel-tree that grew by it, and
sometimes to take the Leaves, and eat them. Her self also, and the Tripus were
crowned with Garlands of the same Plant, as we learn from the Scholiast upon
Aristophanes In Pluto.
at this Verse, where one asks, (...);
What from the Oracle with Garlands trimmed
Has Phoebus uttered. --
Nor did the Pythia only make use of Laurel in this manner, but other Prophets
also, because it was thought to conduce to inspiration; whence it was
peculiarly called (...), the Prophetic Plant. The Pythia being placed upon the
Tripus, received the Divine Afflatus in her Belly; and she is commonly called
(...), or (...), because the Demon sometimes spoke within her. She was no
sooner inspired, but she began immediately to swell, and foam at the mouth,
running round, tearing her Hair, cutting her Flesh, and in all her other
Behavior appearing like one phrenetick and distracted. But she was not always
affected in the same manner, for if the Spirit was in a kind and gentle Humor,
Her Rage was not very violent; but if sullen and malignant, She was thrown into
extreme Fury; insomuch, that Plutarch De Defect. Orac.
speaks of one that was enraged to such a degree, that She affrighted, not only
those that consulted the Oracle, but the Priests themselves, so that they run
away and left her; and so violent was the Paroxysm, that in a little Time after
she dyed. Some say, that under the Tripus has been seen a Dragon that returned
Answers.

The Time of consulting the Oracle, was only one Month in a Year. This Month,
Plutarch Quaest. Grac. IX:
tells us, was called (...), which, as many are of Opinion, was so named q.
(...), from (...), i. e. to Spring up, because it was in the beginning of
Spring, when all things flourish and put forth buds; but this (says he) is not
the true reason, for the Delphians do not use B for PH (as the Macedonians, who
for (...), and (...), say (...), and (...)) but instead of P; for they usually
say (...), for (...), and (...), for (...) therefore is put for (...), so
called (...), because in that Month they were allowed to enquire of Apollo's
Oracle, and this is their genuine and Country-way of speaking. The seventh day
of this Month they called Apollo's Birthday, naming it (...), (not (...), as
some read it) not because they baked a sort of Cakes called (...), but because
the God did then return a great many Answers; and at the first the Pythia gave
Answers only on this Day, as Callisthenes and Anaxandridas report. To this
purpose Plutarch. And even in later ages, Oracles used only to be given once
every Month.

Whoever went to consult the Oracle, was required to make large Presents to the
God, whereby it came to pass, that this Temple in Riches, Splendour, and
Magnificence was superior to almost all others in the World. And Aphetoriae
opes (so called from (...), a name of Apollo, given him, as some say, from
sending forth Oracles) have been proverbially used for abundance of wealth.
Another thing required of those that desired Answers, was, that they should
propound their Questions in as few words as might be: this we learn from
Philostratus Lib. VI. cap. V.
, in the Life of Apollonius. It was the Custom also, to offer Sacrifice to
Apollo, in which except the Omens were favorable, the Prophetess would not
give any Answer. At these Sacrifices there were five Priests, says Plutarch
Loc. cit.
, named (...), i. e. Holy, that assisted the Prophets, and performed many other
Offices with them, being supposed to be descended from Deucalion; there was one
also that presided over these, called (...), or Purifier; though Plutarch says,
that the Sacrifice slain when any of the (...) were declared, was called by
that name; unless instead of (...), or the Sacrifice killed, we might be
allowed to read (...), or the Person that killed the Sacrifice. There was
another Priest also that assisted the Prophetess in managing the Oracle, whom
they called (...), upon the same account that Apollo was so named.

The Answer was always returned in Greek, as appears from Cicero Lib. II de
Divinatione.
, who, speaking of the Oracle, reported by Ennius to be given to Pyrrhus the
Epirote by Apollo, viz. Aio te, Aeacida, Romanos vincere posse.
Go Pyrrhus, go, engage with Warlike Rome,
Fate has decreed the irrevocable Doom,
And you the Valiant Romans shall overcome.
Mr. Hutchin. concludes it was genuine, because the Pythia never used to speak
in Latin: as also for that in Pyrrhus's time they had left off delivering
Answers in Verse, which had been the Custom in all former Ages, from the first
foundation of the Oracle, deriving (as has been said already) it is Original
from Phoemonoc, the first Pythia. And the ancient Greek^ delivered their Laws
in Verse, whence it came to pass, as Aristotle witnesses, that (...), which in
it is proper acceptance signifies a Law, is often used to signify Verses, or
Songs. The ancient Philosophers, as often as they thought fit to Communicate
their Mysteries to the World, clothed them in Verse; in short, those Ages
scarce seem to have written any thing Curious, or Excellent, nor any thing of
weight or moment, but in Verse. The Verses of the Pythia were for the most
part, says Plutarch Lib. de P^thia Orac.
, rude and unpolished, and not comparable to those of Homer, or Hesiod; yet,
says he, this is no reflection upon Apollo, the Patron of Poets, because He
only communicated the knowledge to the Pythia, which She delivered in what
Dress She pleased; the Sense therefore was his, the Words her own. In the same
Book he tells us, that some were of Opinion, that there were Poets maintained
in the Temple, to catch the Oracles as they were given, and wrap them up in
Verse. The Verses were for the most part Hexameter, insomuch that this Oracle
was thought to be none of Apollo's, because it was not Heroic enough to become
the Author, (...),
(...).
To Wisdom Sophocles makes just pretense,
Yet does to sage Euripides give place,
As he and all Men must to Socrates.
Mr. Hutchin. In later Ages, when Oracles began to grow into dis-repute, this
Custom of Versifying was left off, the reason whereof has been sufficiently
disputed already by Plutarch in a Treatise on that Subject, to which I referr
the Reader. I shall only add one thing more to be observed, That as the Custom
of giving Answers in Verse never obtained so universally, but that sometimes
they were delivered in Prose, as Plutarch has proved by a great many
instances; so neither was it ever so wholly left off, but that sometimes
Oracles were pronounced in Verse, an instance whereof he gives in his own Time.

The Delphian Oracles, if compared with some others, might justly be called
plain, and perspicuous; and, as Hermeas the Philosopher tells us, it was usual
for those that had received an obscure Answer at Dodona, to desire Apollo at
Delphi to explain the Meaning of it; He adds also, that Apollo had interpreted
a great many of them. Nevertheless, they were generally very obscure, and
ambiguous; insomuch, that Apollo, as some say, was called (...), because his
Answers were (...), i. e. crooked, as it were, and hard to be understood. And
Heraclitus in Plutarch, speaking of Apollo, says, (...), i. e. He does not
speak the Truth plainly, nor yet altogether conceal it, but only give small
Hints of it; so that if the Event happened contrary to any Man's expectation,
he might rather accuse his own ignorance and mistake in mis-interpreting the
Answer, than call in question either the Knowledge, or Honesty of Apollo.

The Veracity of this Oracle was so famous, that (...), i. e. the Responses
given from the Tripus, came to be used proverbially, for certain and infallible
Truths: and, as Cicero rightly argues, it is impossible the Delphian Oracle
should ever have gained so much Repute in the World, or have been enriched with
such vast presents from almost all Kings and Nations, had not the truth of it is
Predictions been sufficiently attested by the Experience of all Ages. But in
later Times the case was altered; and so Cicero tells us, it was a long while
before his Days; nay, Demosthenes, who flourished three-hundred Years before
him, complained the Pythia did (...), or speak as Philip the Macedonian would
have her. Another time she was said to receive a bribe of Clisthenes, to
persuade the Lacedaemonians to free the Athenians from the Tyrants, that were
imposed on them. Perialla the Pythia was deprived of her Office for being
corrupted by one of Cleomen^s's Agents, to say that Demaratus, Cleomenes's
Colleague, was not the true Son of Aristo, to the end it might be thought he
was not his lawful Successor, and upon that account be dethroned.

At what Time, or upon what Account this Oracle came to cease, is uncertain;
Strabo Lib. IX.
has told us, that in his time it had lost it is ancient Reputation; and in
Iuvenal's Sat. VI. v. 554.
time, the Gods had quite forsaken it, if any credit may be given to him, when
he says, -- Delphis Oracula cessant.
The Delphian Oracles are now no more.
Lucan Lib. V.
tells us, that it had ceased a long time before the the Battle at Pharsalia,
-- Non ullo Secula dono
Nostra carent majore Deum, quam Delphica seeds
Quod siluit. --
No greater gift can bounteous Heaven bestow,
Nor does our Age a greater Blessing want
Than silenced Delphi. --
Mr. Hutchin. But this m^st not be understood of a total Defect, or perpetual
Silence; for this Oracle, as van Dale Dissert. de Orac.
has abundantly proved, did several times loose it is prophetic faculty, and
again recover it. Lucian Al^xandr^ Pseudomant.
reports, that Answers were given in his Time, which was about the Reigns of
Marcus Aurelius, and his Son Commodus. But he is at a loss, whether those
Oracles were indeed Apollo's, or only supposititious. And farther, it is certain
that this, and those at Delos, and Dodona, with some others, continued till the
Reign of Julian the Apostate, and were consulted, says Theodoret, by him; and
at what time they were finally exstinct, is altogether uncertain: whoever
desires to be more particularly informed about their cessation, may consult
van Dale's Treatise on that Subject.

When the God forsook Delphi, he betook himself to the Hyperbore^n Scythians,
as we learn from Claudian, -- pulcher Apollo
Lustrat Hyperboreas Delphis cessantibus aras.
Ah! abject D^lphi, see thy God resides
In distant Hyporborean Climates. --
Mr. Dechai^. Abaris, a Scythian, one of Apollo's Priests, is said to have
written a Book concerning his Oracles, and removal to that Place. And the
Athenians, at a time when the Plague raged over all Greece, received an Oracle
from thence, commanding them to make Vows and Prayers in behalf of the rest;
and they continued to send Gifts and Offerings thither, as they had formerly
done to Delphi.

I might enlarge about the Magnificence and Splendour of the Delphian Temple,
but I fear I have already trespassed too far upon the Reader's patience; if any
one therefore have Curiosity and Leisure enough to employ about such Trifles,
he may have a large and exact Description of all the magnificent Structures,
rich Presents, curious pieces of Art, and other Rarities belonging to that
Place, in Pausanias.

Delos was the most celebrated of all the Cyclades, which were a Knot of
Islands in the Aegean Sea. It is famous among the Poets for having been the
Birthplace of Apollo and Diana, and was therefore accounted so sacred and
inviolable, that the Persians, when they pillaged, or destroyed almost all the
other Grecian Temples, durst not attempt any thing upon the Temple in this
Island; which was seated on the Seashore, looking toward Euboea, in the very
place, where Apollo was feigned to be born. He had in Image erected in this
place in the shape of a Dragon; and gave Answers for their Certainty, and
Perspicuity, not only not inferior to those at Delphi, but, as some report,
Alexand. ab Alex.
far exceeeding them, and all other Oracles of Apollo; being delivered in
clear, plain Terms, without any ambiguity, or obscurity. But these Answers were
not to be expected all the Year, Apollo only kept his Summer's Residence in
this Place, and in Winter retired to Pata^a, a City of Lycia, as Servius has
observed in his Comment upon these words of Virgil, Qualis ubi hybernam Lyciam,
Xanthique fluenta
Deserit, ac Delum maternam invisit Apollo Aeneid. IV. v. 143.
.
Such Pomp and Splendour God Apollo grace,
When He his Winter Lycia, or that Place
Which Xanthus Silver Streams wash kindly, leaves,
And Delos visits, whence He answers gives.
In Summer Seasons. --
Mr. D^chair. The Altar was by some reckoned amongst the seven Wonders of the
World; it was erected by Apollo at the age of four Years, and composed of the
Horns of Goats killed by Diana upon Mount Cynthus, which were compacted
together in a wonderful manner, without any visible Tie or Cement, whence Ovid
says of it, Miror and innumeris structam de cornibus aram.
-- it is strange to see
How each in the other twined the Goat-horns lie,
And make an Altar bound with n'ere a Tie.
Mr. Dechair. To Sacrifice any living Creature upon this Altar was held
unlawful, and a profanation of the Place, which it was the Gods Will to have
preserved pure from blood, and all manner of Pollution. Thucydides Lib. IV.
reports, that no Dogs were permitted to enter into the Island; and it was
unlawful for any Person to dye, or be born in it; and therefore, when the
Athenians were by the Oracle commanded to purify it, they dug up the dead
Bodies out of their Graves, and wafted them over the Sea, to be interred in one
of the adjacent Islands; this done, the better to preserve it from pollution,
they put forth an Edict, commanding that whoever lay sick of any mortal or
dangerous Disease, and all Women great with Child, should be carried over to a
little Isle called Rhena.

I must not omit in this place the annual Procession made by the Athenians to
Delos, in honor of Apollo. The first Author of this Custom was Theseus, who,
being sent with the rest of the Athenian Youths into Crete, to be devoured by
the Minotaur, made a Vow to Apollo, that if He would grant them a safe return,
they would make a solemn Voyage to his Temple at Delos every Year. This was
called (...), the Persons employed in it (...), and (...), from the name of the
Island, the Chief of them (...), and the Ship in which they went (...), or
(...), which was the very same that carrried Theseus and his Companions to
Crete; being (says Plutarch) preserved by the Athenians till Demetrius the
Phalerean's time, they restoring always what was decayed, and changing the old
and rotten Planks for those that were new and entire; insomuch, that it
furnished the Philosophers with matter of Dispute, Whether after so many
Reparations and Alterations it might still be called the same individual Ship;
and served as an Instance to illustrate the Opinion of those, that held the
body still remained the same numerical substance, notwithstanding the continual
decay of old parts, and acquisition of new ones, through the several Ages of
Life; for which reason Callimachus Hymno in Belum.
calls it is Tackle everliving, -- (...),
(...).
To great Apollo's Temple every year,
The sturdy Theoris the Athenians send,
Yet spite of envious Time, and angry Seas
The Vessel ever whole will be.
Mr. Dechair. The beginning of the Voyage was computed from the time that
Apollo's Priest first adorned the Stern of the Ship with Garlands, says Plato
In Phaedone.
; and from that time they began to cleanse and lustrate the City; and it was
held unlawful to put any Malefactor to death till it is return; which was the
reason that Socrates was reprieved thirty days after his condemnation, as we
learn from Xenophon Memorab. lib. IV.
. The Theori wore Garlands of Laurel upon their Heads, and were accompanied by
two of the Family of the (...), who were appointed to be (...) at Delos for
that Year, of which Office I have already treated. Before them went certain Men
with Axes in their Hands, in show as if they designed to clear the Ways of
Robbers; in memory, that Theseus, in his Journey from Troezen to Athens, freed
the Country from all the Robbers that infested those Parts. To this Custom
Aeschylus Eumenid. initio.
seems to allude, when he says, (...)
(...)
(...).
Moved with a Sense of Piety
To Him the Athenians do repair,
Still as they on their Journey go,
Whatever Parts infested be
With Robbers cruel Outrages,
Setting 'em free. --
Mr. Dechair. When they went thither they were said (...), to ascend; when they
returned (...), to descend. When they arrived, they offered Sacrifice, and
celebrated a Festival in Honor of Apollo: this done, they repaired to their
Ship, and sailed homewards. At their return, all the People ran forth to meet
them, opening their Doors, and making Obeisance as they passed by; the neglect
of which respect makes Theseus complain in Euripides Hippolyto.
, (...)
(...).
My scornful Citizens I find neglect,
Rushing to crow'd about the opened Doors,
And pay Me that Respect which is decreed
For one that from the Embassy returns.
Mr. Dechair.

The next Oracle I shall speak of, is that of Apollo Didymaeus, so named
Macrob. Saturnal. lib. I cap. XVII.
from the double light imparted by him to Mankind, the one directly and
immediately from his own Body, which causes the Day; the other, mediately, and
by reflection from the Moon, which enlightneth the Night. The place of it was
also called Didyma, and belonged to the Milesians. It was also called the
Oracle of the Branchidae, and Apollo himself was called Branchides, from
Branchus, who was reputed the Son of Machareus, but begotten by Apollo; for it
was no unusual thing for the ancient Heroes to be called the Sons of two
Fathers, the one Mortal, who was always their Mothers Husband; the other some
lascivious Deity, that had fallen in Love with her: so Hercules was reputed the
Son of Jupiter and Amphitryon; Hector of Priamus and Apollo, with many others.
This Branchus having on a certain time kissed Apollo, received from him a Crown
and Scepter, together with the gift of Prophesy, and presently after
disappeared. Some time after, a magnificent Temple was erected in honor of
Him, and dedicated to Him and Apollo; whence Statius says he was -- patrioque
aequalis honori.
In honor equal to his Father Phoebus.
Theb. III.
Others derive the Name from Branchus, a The^salian Youth, beloved by Apollo,
who received him into his own Temple, and commanded that Divine honors should
be paid him after Death. But Stephanus the Byzantian Voce (...).
tells us, that this Oracle was sacred to Jupiter and Apollo, and perhaps it
might belong to all three.

In the time of the Persian War Strabo lib. XIV. and Suidas in voce (...).
, this Temple was spoiled and burned, being betrayed into the Hands of the
Barbarians by the Branchidae, or Priests that had the care of it; but they,
conscious of their own wickedness, and fearing least they should meet with
condign Punishment, desired of Xerxes, that as a requital of their Service, he
would grant them a Habitation in some remote part of Asia, whence they might
never return into Greece, but live secure, being placed beyond the reach of
Justice; Xerxes granted their Request; whereupon, notwithstanding a great many
unlucky Omens appeared to them, they founded a City, and called it after their
ancient name, Branchidae. But for all this, they could not escape Divine
Vengeance, which was inflicted on their Children by Alexander the Great, who,
having conquered Darius, and possessed himself of Asia, utterly demolished
their City, and put all it is Inhabitants to the Sword, as detesting the very
Posterity of such impious Wretches.

The Persians being vanquished, and Peace restored to Greece Strab^ loc. cit.
, the Temple was rebuilt by the Milesians, with such magnificence, that it
surpassed all the other Grecian Temples in Bigness, being raised to such a
bulk, that they were forced to let it remain uncovered; for the compass of it
was no less than that of a Village, and contained, at least, four, or five
Stadia.

Another of Apollo's Oracles, we read of in Abae, a City of Phocis, mentioned
by Herodotus Lib. I* cap. XLVI.
, and Stephanus the Byzantian Voce (...). item Hesychius, and Phavorinu^.
; by the latter of which we are told, it was more ancient then the Delphiaen.
Sophocles Oedip. Tyr. v. 908.
also has taken notice of it, (...)
(...),
(...).
Hence all Religion, now I will no more
Trouble that hallowed Fane, which equally
Parts the divided Earth, no Journies make
To Abae for the Answers of a God;
In vain it is to be good.
Mr. Dechair.

The Scholiasts on this place are of opinion, that Abae was a City in Lycia,
but are sufficiently refuted by the testimonies already cited.

At Clar^s, a City of Ionia, not far from Colophon, there was another Oracle
sacred to Apollo, first instituted by Manto, the Daughter of Tiresias, who fled
thither in the second Theban War, when the Epigoni, i. e. the Sons of those
that were slain in the former War, invaded Thebes, under the conduct of
Al^maeon, in revenge of their Fathers Deaths. The Person that delivered
Answers, was a Man, who was generally chosen out of some certain Families, and
for the most part out of Miletus Coel. Rhod. Ant. Lect. lib. XXVII. cap. V.
: He was usually unlearned, and very ignorant, yet returned the Oracles in
Verses wonderfully satisfactory, and adapted to the intention of the Enquirers;
and this by the Virtue of a little Well, feigned to have sprung out of the
Tears of Manto, when she bewailed the desolation of her Country: into this He
descended when any Man came to consult him; but paid dear for his Knowledge,
for the Water was very prejudicial to his Health, and, as Pliny Not. Hist. lib.
II. cap. CIII.
has told us, a means to shorten his Life.

At Larissa, a Fort of the Argives, there was an Oracle of Apollo ^irnam'd
(...), from Diras, a Region belonging to Argos. The Answers in this place were
returned by a Woman, who was forbidden the company of Men; every Month she
sacrificed a Lamb in the Night, and then, having tasted the Blood of the
Victim, was immediately seized with a Divine Fury.

Apollo had another famous Oracle at Eutresis, a Village in Boeotia Stephanus
in voce (...).
, seated in the way between the Thespians, and Plataeans.

At Tegyrae, a City in Boeotia, there was an Oracle sacred to Tegyrean Apollo,
which was frequented till the Persian War. but after that remained for ever
filent Pausanias Boeoticis.
.

No less famous was Ptous, a Mountain in Boeotia, for the Oracles given by
Apollo sirnam'd Ptous from that Place, where was a Temple dedicated to him.
This Oracle ceased when Thebes was demolished by Alexander Plutarch. P^l^pida.
.

Apollo, sirnam'd (...), from Daphne his beloved Mistress, or ^he Laurel, into
which she was transformed, had an Oracle near the Castalian Fountain, the
Waters of which were also endu'd with a prophetic Virtue Clemens Protrept.
.

Apollo was called Ismenius, from Ismenus a River, and Mountain in Boeotia, in
which he had a Temple, and gave Answers to those that came to enquire of him.

Pausanias Pausan. Ibidem.
has told us of another place in Boeotia, where Apollo returned Answers, viz.
a Stone called (...), upon which he had an Altar, erected out of the Ashes of
Victims offered to him; whence he was called Spodius from (...); i. e. ashes;
whence for (...) in Pausanias must be read (...). He did not here, as in other
places signify his will viva voce, but by Omens, in the observation of which
He instructed Persons appointed for that purpose; for this way of Divination
also was in use amongst the Grecians, especially at Smyrna, says my Author,
where was a Temple built on the outside of the City-wall for that Purpose. Thus
much of the Oracles of Apollo.

CHAPTER X. Of the Oracle of Trophonius.
TRophonius, the Son of Eresinus, and Brother of Agamedes Suidas voce (...).
, being possessed with an immoderate Thirst of Glory, built himself a Mansion
under Ground, at Lebadea a City of Boeotia, into which when he entered, he
pretended to be inspired with an extraordinary Knowledge of future Events; but
at length, either out of Design to raise in People an Opinion, that he was
translated to the Gods, or being some way necessitated thereto, perished in his
Hole Phavorin.
. Cicero Tus^. Quaest. lib. I.
, gives us a very different account of his Death, when he tells us, that
Trophonius and Agamedes, having built Apollo's Temple at Delphi, requested of
the God, that, as a Recompense for their Labor, he would give them the best
Thing that could happen to Man; Apollo granted their Petition, and promised
them, that what they desired should be effected the third Day after;
accordingly, on that Day in the Morning they were found dead. Several other
Fables concerning him, and the manner of his Death you may find in the
Scholiast upon the Clouds of Aristophanes.

However that be, Trophonius had divine Honors paid him after Death, and was
worshipped by the name of Jupiter Trophonius Strabo lib. IX.
; nor was it a thing unusual for Men Deified to be honored with the name of a
God, I might give you several instances of the same Nature, but one shall
suffice for all, viz. that of Agamemnon, who was worshipped at Sparta by the
name of Jupiter Agamemnon, as Lycophron witnesses Cassandr. v. 1123.
, (...),
(...),
(...).
Then shall my Husband, whom a Captive Bride
I now obey as my superior Lord,
By subtle crafty Spartans Jove be called,
And worshipped so, from their Posterity
Receiving greatest Honors. --
Mr. Dechair. Which words Cassandra speaks of Agamemnon, whose Captive and
Concubine she was after the Destruction of Troy.

This Oracle came first into repute on this Account: On a time, when for the
space of two years there had been no Rain in Boeotia, all the Cities of that
Country, with a joint consent, appointed chosen Persons to go to Delphi, there
to pay their Devotions to Apollo, in the Name of their Country, and desire his
Advice and Assistance: The God accepted their Piety, but returned them no other
Answer, than that they should go home, and consult Trophonius at Lebadea. The
Ambassadors immediately obeyed, and repaired to Lebadea, still remaining as
much in the dark, as at the first; there being not the least Sign or Foot-step
of any Oracle in that place: at length, when they had searched a long time to
no purpose, and began to despair of success, one Saon an Acrephian, the Senior
of all the Ambassadors, espied a swarm of Bees, and immediately took up a
resolution to follow them; by this means he came to a Cave, into which he had
no sooner entered, but by some evident tokens perceived, that in that place was
the Oracle, Apollo had commanded them to enquire of. Upon this he paid his
Devotion to Trophonius, and received from him a well-come, and satisfactory
Answer, together with Instructions in what Manner, and with what Rites and
Ceremonies he would have those that should come for Advice, to approach him
Pa^sanias Boeoticis.
.

The Place of this Oracle was under the surface of the Earth, and therefore it
was commonly called (...), and the Persons that consulted it (...), because the
way to it was a Descent. Concerning it, there are innumerable Fables, which it
would not be worth the while to mention in this place; I shall therefore pass
them by, only giving you the Accounts Pausanias and Plutarch have left of it;
the former of which consulted it in person, and thereby had opportunity of
being an Eyewitness of what he reports. His words are thus translated by Mr.
Abel:

Whosoe're's exigencies oblige him to go into the Cave, must in the first place
make his abode for some set-time in the Chapel of Good Genius and Good
Fortune; during his stay here, he abstains from hot Baths, and employs himself
in performing other sorts of Atonements for past offenses; he is not wholly
debarred bathing, but then it must only be in the River Hercynna, having a
sufficient sustenance from the Leavings of the Sacrifices. At his going down he
sacrifices to Trophonius and his Sons, to Apollo, Saturn and Jupiter, (who
has the title of King) to Juno Heniocha, and Ceres, called Europa, reported to
be Trophonius's Nurse. There Is a Priest stands consulting the Bowels of every
Sacrifice, who according to the Victims's aspects, prophesies whether the Deity
will give an auspicious and Satisfactory Answer. The Entrails of all the
Sacrifices con^er but little toward the Revealing of Trophonius's Answer,
unless a Ram, which they offer in a Ditch, to Agamedes, with supplication for
success, that night on which they descend, presents the same Omens with the
former; on this depends the Ratification of all the rest, and without it their
former Oblations are of none effect: if so be this Ram does agree with the
former, every one forthwith descends, backed with the eagerness of good Hopes;
and thus is the Manner: Immediately they go that night along with the Priests
to the River Hercynna, where they are anointed with Oil, and washed by two
Citizen's Boys, aged about thirteen years, whom they call (...), i. e.
Mercuries; these are they, that are employed in washing whoever has a mind to
consult; neither are they remiss in their Duty, but, as much as can be expected
from Boys, carefully perform all things necessary. Having been washed, they are
not straightway conducted by the Priests to the Oracle, but are brought to the
River's Rises, which are adjacent to one another: here they must drink a dose
of the Water of it, called Lethe, or Oblivion, to deluge with oblivion all
those things, which so lately were the greatest part of their concerns. After
that, they take the Water of Mnemosyne, viz. Remembrance, to retain the
remembrance of those things, that shall be exhibited to them in their Descent;
amongst which is exposed a Statue, adorned with that admirable carving, that
it is set up by the People for Daedalus's workmanship; whereupon they never
exhibit it, unless to Descendants: to this therefore, after some venerable
obeisance, having muttered over a Prayer or two, in a linen Habit set off with
Ribbands, and wearing Pantofles, agreeable with the fashion of the Country,
they approach the Oracle, which is situated within a Mountain near a Grove, the
foundation of which is built spherical-wise, of white stone, about the size, in
circumference, of a very small Threshing-floor, but in height scarce two
cubits, supporting brazen Obeliscs, encompassed round with ligaments of brass,
between which there are doors that guide their passage into the midst of the
Floor, where there is a sort of a Cave, not the product of rude Nature, but
built with the nicest accuracy of Mechanism and Proportion; the Figure of this
Workmanship is like an Oven, it is breadth diametrically (as nigh as can be
guest) about nine cubits, it is depth eight, or thereabouts; for the guidance to
which there are no stairs, wherefore it is required that all comers bring a
narrow and light Ladder with them, by which when they are come down to the
bottom, there is a Cave between the Roof and the Pavement, being in breadth
about two (...), and in height not above one; at the mouth of this, the
Descendant having brought with him Cakes dipped in Honey, lies along on the
ground, and shoves himself Feet foremost into the Cave; then he thrusts in his
Knees, after which the rest of his Body is rolled along, by a force not unlike
that of a great and rapid River, which overpowring a Man with it is vortex,
tumbles him over Head and Ears. All that come within the approach of the
Oracle, have not their Answers revealed the same way: some gather their
Resolves from outward appearances, others by word of mouth; they all return the
same way back, with their Feet foremost. Among all that have descended, 'twas
never known that any was lost, except one of the Live-guard of Demetrius; and
besides it is credible the reason proceeds from the neglect of the Rituals in
his descent, and his ill design; for he went not out of necessity to consult,
but out of an avaricious humor, for the sacrilegious conveyance back of the
Gold and Silver, which was there religiously bestowed; wherefore it is said,
that his Carcass was thrown out some other way, and not at the Entrance of the
sacred Shrine. Among the various Reports that fly abroad concerning this Man,
I Have delivered to Posterity the most remarkable. The Priests, as soon as the
Consultant is returned, place him on Mnem^syne's Throne, which is not very far
from the Shrine; here they enquire of him, what he had seen, or heard; which
when he has related, they deliver him to others, who (as appointed for that
Office) carry him stupify'd with amazement, and forgetful of himself, and those
about him, to the Chapel of Good Genius and Good Fortune, where he had made
his former stay at his going down; here, after some time, he is restored to his
former Senses, and the cheerfulness of his Visage returns again. What I here
relate, was not received at second-hand, but either as by ocular demonstration
I have perceived in others; or what I Have proved true by my own Experience; for
all Consultants are obliged to hang up engraved on a Tablet, what they have
seen, or heard.

Thus far Pausanias. Plutarch's Relation concerns the Appearances exhibited to
Consultants; which, though they were various, and seldom the same, being it is a
remarkable Story, I will give it you, as it is translated by the same Hand.

Timarchus, being a Youth of Liberal Education, and just initiated in the
Rudiments of Philosophy, was greatly desirous of knowing the Nature and
Efficacy of Socrates's Demon; wherefore communicating his project to no Mortal
Body but Me and Cebes, after the performance of all the Rituals requisite for
Consultation, He descended Trophonius's Cave; where having stayed two nights
and one day, his return was wholly despaired of, insomuch that his Friends
bewailed Him as dead: in the Morning He came up very brisk, and in the first
place paid some venerable acknowledgments to the God; after that, having
escaped the staring Rout, He laid open to us a prodigious Relation of what he
had seen or heard, to this purpose: In his Descent, he was beset with a
caliginous Mist, upon which he prayed, lying prostrate for a long time, and not
having Sense enough to know whether he was awake, or in a dream, He surmises,
that he received a blow on his Head, with such an ecchoing violence, as
dissever'd the Sutures of his Skull, through which his Soul migrated; and being
disunited from the Body, and mixed with bright and refined Air, with a seeming
contentment, began to breath for a long time. and being dilated like a full
Sail, was wider than before. After this, having heard a small noise, whistling
in his Ears a delightsom sound; he looked up, but saw not a spot of Earth, only
Islands reflecting a glimmering flame, interchangeably receiving different
colors, according to the various degrees of Light. They seemed to be of an
infinite number, and of a stupendous size, not bearing an equal parity betwixt
one another in this, though they were all alike, viz. globular: it may be
conjectured, that the circumrotation of these moved the Ether, which
occasioned that Whistling, the gentle pleasantness of which bore an adaequate
agreement with their well-tim'd motion. Between these there was a Sea, or Lake,
which spread out a Surface, glittering with many Colors, intermixed with an
azure; some of the Islands floated in i^'s Stream, by which they were driven on
the other side of the Torrent; many others were carried to and fro, so that
they were well-night sunk. This Sea, for the most part, was very shallow and
fordable, except toward the South, where 'twas of a great depth; it very often
ebbed and flowed, but not with a high Tide; some part of it had a natural
Sea-colour, untainted with any other, as miry and muddy as any Lake.: The
rapidness of the Torrent carried back those Islands from whence they had
grounded, not situating them in the same place as at first, or bringing them
about with a circumference; but in the gentle turning of them, the Water makes
one rising Roll: betwixt these, the Sea seemed to bend inwards about (as near
as he could guess) eight parts of the whole. This Sea had two mouths, which
were Inlets to boisterous Rivers, casting out fiery foam, the flaming
brightness of which covered the best part of it is natural Azure. He was very
much pleased at this Sight, until he looked down, and saw an immense Hiatus,
resembling a hollowed Sphere, of an amazing and dreadful profundity; it had
darkness to a miracle; not still, but thickened, and agitated: here he was
seized with no small fright, by the astonishing hubbubs, and noises of all
kinds, that seemed to arise out of this hollow, from an unfathomable bottom,
viz. he heard an infinity of Yells and Howlings of Beasts, Cries and Bawlings
of Children, confused with the Groans and Outrages of Men and Women. Not long
after, he heard a voice invisibly pronounce these words...

What follows is nothing but a prolix and tedious Harangue upon various
subjects. One thing there is more especially remarkable in this account, viz.
That he makes Timarchus to return from Consultation with a brisk and cheerful
countenance, whereas it is commonly reported, that all the Consultants of this
Oracle became pensive and melancholy; that their Tempers were sowr'd, and their
Countenances, however gay and pleasant before, rendered dull and heavy; whence
of any Person dejected, melancholy, or too serious, it was usually said, (...),
i. e. He has been consulting the Oracle of Trophonius. But this is only to be
understood of the Time immediately ensuing Consultation; for, as we learn from
Pausanias, all Enquirers recovered their former cheerfulness in the Temple of
Good Genius and Good Fortune.

CHAPTER XI. Of other Grecian Oracles.
AMphiaraus was the Son of Oicleus, and married Eriphyle the Sister of
Adrastus, King of Argos; he was an excellent Soothsayer, and by his Skill
foresaw that it would prove fatal to him, if he engaged himself in the Theban
War. Wherefore, to avoid inevitable destruction, He hid himself, but was
discovered by his Wife Eriphyle, whom Polynices had corrupted with a Present of
a golden Chain. Being discovered, he was obliged by Adrastus to accompany the
Army to Thebes, where it happened to Him as He had foretold; for, together with
his Chariot and Horses, he was swallowed up by the Earth. Whence Ovid says of
him, Notus humo mersis Amphiaraus equis. Some say this Accident happened in the
way betwixt Thebes and Chalcis, and for that reason the place is called (...),
i. e. a Chariot, to this day, says Pausanias Atticis.
.

After his Death, he was honored with Divine Worship; first by the Oropians,
and afterward by all the other Grecians: And a stately Temple, with a Statue
of white Marble, was erected to him in the place where he was swallowed up,
says my Author, being about XII Stadia distant from Oropus, a City in the
confines of Attica and Boeotia, which for that reason is sometimes attributed
to both Countries. There was also a remarkable Altar, dedicated to him in the
same place; it was divided into five parts: The first of which was sacred to
Hercules, Jupiter, and Paeonian Apollo: The second to the Heroes, and their
Wives: The third to Vesta, Mercury, Amphiaraus, and the Sons of Amphilochus,
(for Alcmaeon, the Son of Amphiaraus, was not allowed to partake of any of the
Honors paid to Amphilochus, or Amphiaraus, because he slew his Mother
Eriphyle) The fourth to Venus, Panac^a, Jason, Hygia, and Paeonian Minerva. The
fifth part to the Nymphs, Pan, and the Rivers Achelous, and Cephisus.

Answers were not delivered, as those of Apollo, by a Pythonissa, but in
Dreams: Iophon the Gnosian, who published the ancient Oracles in Heroic
Verses, reports, That Amphiaraus returned an Answer to the Argives in Verse;
but my Author herein contradicts him, and reports farther, that it was the
general opinion, that only those, who were inspired by Apollo, gave Answers
after that manner; whereas all the rest made Predictions either by Dreams, or
the Flight of Birds, or the Entrails of Beasts. He adds, for a confirmation of
what he had said before, viz. that these Answers were given in Dreams, That
Amphiaraus was excellently skilled in the Interpretation of Dreams, and
Canonized for the Invention of that Art.

They that came to consult this Oracle, were first to be purified by offering
Sacrifice to Amphiaraus, and all the other Gods, whose Names were inscribed on
the Altar: Vita Apollonii Tyanaei lib. II.
Philostratus adds, they were to fast 24 hours, and abstain three days from
Wine. After all, they offered a Ram in Sacrifice to Amphiaraus; then went to
sleep, lying upon the Victim's Skin, and in that posture expected a Revelation
by Dream. In the same manner did the People of Apulia Daunia expect Answers
from Podalirius, who died there, and returned Prophetick-dreams to those that
came to enquire of him: whoever consulted him, was to sleep upon a Sheep's skin
at his Altar, as we learn from these words of Lycophr^n Cassandra v. 1050.
, (...)
(...).
They, whose aspiring Minds curious to pry
Into the Mystic Records of Events,
Ask aid of Podalirius, must sleep
Prostrate on Sheepskins at his hallowed Fane,
And thus receive the true Prophetic Dreams.
Mr. Hutchin.

To return. All Persons were admitted to this Oracle, the Th^bans only
excepted, who were to enjoy no benefit from Amphiaraus in this way: for, as
Herodotus reports lib. viii. cap. cxxxiv.
, He gave them their option of two Things, viz. His Counsel and Advice, to
direct them in time of Necessity; or his Help and Protection, to defend them in
time of Danger; telling them they must not expect both: whereupon they chose
the latter, thinking they had a greater need of Defense, than Counsel, which
they could be sufficiently furnished with by Delphian Apollo.

This Oracle was had in very great esteem: Herodotus Lib. 1. c. xlvi.
reckons it amongst the five principal ones of Greece, consulted by Croesus,
before his Expedition against Cyrus; viz. the Delphian, Dodonaean,
Amphiaraus's, Trophonius's, and the Didymaean; and Valerius Maximus Lib. VIII.
c. XV.
says, it was not inferior either to the two first of those already
mentioned, or that of Jupiter Hammon.

Near the Temple was the Fountain, out of which Amphiaraus ascended into
Heaven, when he was received into the number of the Gods, which for that reason
was called by his Name; it was held so sacred, that it was a Capital crime to
employ the Waters of it to any ordinary use, as washing the hands, or
Purification; nay it was unlawful to offer Sacrifice before it, as was usual at
other Fountains: The chief, and perhaps only use it was employed in, was this,
viz. they that by the advice of the Oracle had recovered out of any Disease,
were to cast a piece of coined Gold, or Silver into it; and this Atticis.
Pausanias tells us was an ancient Custom, and derived from the primitive Ages.

At Pharae, a City of Achaia, Answers were given by Mercurius (...), so named
from (...), i. e. the Marketplace, where was a Statue of stone erected to him,
having a Beard, which seems to have been a thing unusual in his Statues; before
it was placed a low Stone-altar, upon which stood brazen Basins soldered with
Lead. They that came for Advice, first offered Frankincense upon the Altar,
then lighted the Lamps, pouring Oil into them; after that, they offered upon
the right side of the Altar a piece of Money, stamped with their own
Countrey-impression, and called (...), then proposed the Questions they desired
to be resolved in, placing their Ear close to the Statue, and after all
departed, stopping both their Ears with their Hands, till they had passed quite
through the Marketplace; then they plucked away their Hands, and received the
first Voice that presented it self, as a Divine Oracle. The same Ceremonies
were practiced in Egypt, at the Oracle of Serapis, as Achaicis.
Pausanias has reported.

Ibidem.
At Bura in Achaia, there was an Oracle of Hercules, called from that City
Buraicus; the place of it was a Cave, wherein was Hercules's Statue:
Predictions were made by throwing Dice. They that consulted the God, first
addressed themselves to him by Prayer; then taking four Dice, out of a great
heap that lay ready there, they threw them upon the Table; all the Dice had on
them certain peculiar marks, all which were interpreted in a Book kept for that
purpose; as soon therefore as they had cast the Dice, they went to the Book,
and there found every Man his Doom.

At Patrae, Pausanias ibidem.
a City on the Seacoast of Achaia, not far from the Sacred Grove of Apollo,
there was a Temple dedicated to Ceres, in which were erected three Statues, two
to Ceres and Proserpina, standing; the third to Earth, sitting upon a Throne.
Before the Temple there was a Fountain, in which were delivered Oracles, very
famous for the truth of their Predictions. These were not given upon every
account, but concerned only the Events of Diseases. The manner of consulting
was this; They let down a Looking-glass by a small cord into the Fountain so
low that the bottom of it might just touch the surface of the Water, but not be
covered by it; this done, they offered Incense and Prayers to the Goddess; then
looked upon the Glass, and from the various Figures and Images represented in
it, made Conjectures concerning the Patient.

Pausanias.
At Troezen, a City of Peloponnesus, there was an old Altar dedicated to the
Muses and Sleep, by Ardalus, one of Vulcan's Sons; who was the first Inventor
of the Flute, and a great Favorite of the Muses, who from him were called
Ardalides. They that came for Advice, were obliged to abstain certain days from
Wine. Afterward they lay down by the Altar to sleep, where, by the secret
Inspiration of the Muses, proper Remedies for their Distempers were revealed to
them.

Idem Corinthiac.
At Epidaurus, a City of Peloponnesus, there was a Temple of Aesculapius, famed
for curing Diseases; the Remedies of which were revealed in Dreams. When the
Cure was perfected, the Names of the diseased Persons, together with the manner
of their Recovery, were registered in the Temple. This God was afterward
translated to Rome, by the Command of Delphian Apollo, who told them, that was
the only way to be freed from the Plague, which at that time raged exceedingly
amongst them: whereupon they sent Ambassadors to Epidaurus, to desire the God
of them; but the Epidaurians being unwilling to part with so beneficial a
Guest, Aesculapius of his own accord, in the shape of a great Serpent, went
straight to the Roman ship, where he reposed himself, and was with great
veneration conveyed to Rome, where he was received with great joy; and having
delivered them from the Distress they lay under, was honored with a Temple in
the little Island, encompassed by the River Tibur, and worshipped in the same
Form he had assumed. This Story is related by Pliny Lib. IV.
, and Ovid Met. XV. Phocicis.
.

At Amphiclea, called by Herodotus Ophitca, by Stephanus Amphicaea, there was a
Temple sacred to Bacchus, but no Image, at least, none exposed to public view.
To this God, says Pausanias (e), the Amphicleans ascribe both the Cure of
their Diseases, and the Foretelling of future Events; the former he effected by
revealing proper Rememedies in Dreams; the latter, by inspiring into his
Priests Divine Knowledge.

Strabo, in his Description of Corinth, tells us, Juno had an Oracle in the
Corinthian Territories, in the way between Lechaeum and Pagae.

There was also in Laconia, a Pool sacred to Juno, by which Predictions were
made after this manner: They cast into it Cakes made of Bread-corn; if these
sunk down, good; if not, something dreadful was portended.

Antiquitat. lib. XV. cap. IX.
Coelius Rhodiginus tells us out of Philostratus, that Orpheus's Head at
Lesbos, gave Oracles to all Enquirers, but more especially to the Grecians; and
told them, That Troy could not be taken without Hercules's Arrows: He adds,
that the Kings of Persia and Babylon, often sent Ambassadors to consult this
Oracle, and particularly Cyrus, who being desirous to know by what death he was
to die, received this Answer, (...) i. e. My Fate, O Cyrus, is decreed you.
Whereby it was meant he should be Beheaded; for Orpheus suffered that death in
Thrace, by the fury of the Women, because he professed an hatred and aversion
to the whole Sex: his Head being thrown into the Sea, was cast upon Lesbos,
where it returned answers in a Cavern of the Earth. There were also Persons
initiated into Orpheus's Mysteries, called (...), who assured all those that
should be admitted into their Society, of certain Felicity after Death: which
when Philip, one of that order, but miserably poor and indigent, boasted of,
Leotychidas the Spartan replied, Why do not you die then, you Fool, and put an
end to your Misfortunes, together with your Life? At their Initiation, little
else was required of them, besides an Oath of Secrecy.

In Laconia, in the way betwixt Oebylus and Thalamiae, La^^^icis.
Pausanias says, there was a Temple and Oracle of Ino, who gave Answers by
Dreams, to those that inquired of her.

Agide.
Plutarch makes mention of another famous Oracle in Laconia, at the City
Thalamiae, which was sacred to Pasiphae, who, as some say, was one of the
Daughters of Atlas, and had by Jupiter a Son called Ammon. Others are of
opinion it was Cassandra, the Daughter of King Priamus, who dying in this
place, was called Pasiphae, (...), from revealing Oracles. Others will have it,
that this was Daphne, the Daughter of Amyclas, who flying from Apollo, was
transformed into a Laurel, and honored by that God with the Gift of Prophesy.
This Oracle, when Agis, King of Sparta, endeavored to reduce the Spartans to
their ancient manner of Living, and put in force Lycurgus's old Laws, very much
countenanced and encouraged his* Undertaking, commanding the People to return
to their former State of Equality. Again, when Cleomenes made the like Attempt,
it gave the same Advice, in this manner, as my Author relates the Story
Cleomene.
: About that time, says he, one of the Ephori, sleeping in Pasiphae's Temple,
dreamed a very surprising Dream; for he thought he saw the four Chairs removed,
where the Ephori used to sit and hear Causes, and one only placed there; and
whilst he wondered, he heard a Voice out of the Temple, saying, This is best
for Sparta.

Upon the top of Cithaeron, a Mountain in Boeotia, was a Cave called
Sphragidium, where many of the Inhabitants of that Country were inspired by
the Nymphs, called Sphragitides, and thence named, (...) Pausanias Boeo^io.
, i. e. inspired by the Nymphs.

Ulysses had an Oracle amongst the Eurytanes, a Nation of Aetolia, as (...)
Polit^ a.
Aristotle is said to report by Tzetzes, in his Comment upon Lycophron, who
has these words concerning Ulysses, Verse. 799.
(...),
O, (...).
Aetolian People the dead Prophet crown.


Several other Oracles we read of in Authors, as that of Tiresia^, and Aegeus,
with others of less Repute; which for that reason I shall forbear to mention.

CHAPTER XII. Of Theomancy.
HAVING given you an Account of the most celebrated Oracles in Greece which
make the first and noblest Species of Natural Divination; I come now to the
second, called in Greek (...), which is a compound word, consisting of two
parts, by which it is distinguished from all other sorts of Divination; by the
former ( viz. (...)) it is distinguished from Artificial Divination, which,
though it may be said to be given by the Gods, yet does not immediately proceed
from them, being the effect of Experience and Observation. By the latter ( viz.
(...)) it is opposed to Oracular Divination; for though (...) be a general Name,
and sometimes signify any sort of Divination; yet it is also used in a more
strict and limited Sense, to denote those Predictions that are made by Men; and
in this acceptance it is opposed to (...), as the Scholiast upon Sophocles has
observed In Oedip. Tyr.
.

Thus much for the Name. As to the Thing, it is distinguished from Oracular
Divination, (I mean that which was delivered by Interpreters, as at Delphi, for
in others the Difference is more evident) because that was confined usually to
a fixed and stated Time, and always to a certain Place; for the Pythia could
not be inspired in any other place but Apollo's Temple, and upon the sacred
Tripous; whereas the (...) were free and unconfined, being able (after the
offering of Sacrifices, and the performance of the other usual Rites) to
prophecy at any Time, or in any Part of the World.

As to the Manner of Receiving the Divine Inspiration, that was not always
different; for not only the Pythia, but the Sibyls also, with many others, were
possessed with Divine fury, swelling with rage, like Persons distracted, and
beside themselves. Aen. lib. VI. v. 47.
Virgil describes the Sibyll in this hideous posture, -- Cui talia fanti
Ante fores subito non vultus, non color unus
Non comtae mansere comae, sed pectus anhelum,
Et rabie fera corda tument; majorque videri,
Nec mortale sonans: afflata est numine quand^
Iam propiore Dei --
Thus at the Entrance spoke the sacred Maid;
And now no settled Air, or Feature staid
Through the whole symmetry of her altered Face,
For fleeting Colors seized each other's place.
But when the headstrong God, not yet appeased,
With holy Phrensy had the Sibyl seized,
Terror froze up her grizly Hair; her Breast
Throbbing with holy Fury, still expressed
A greater horror, and She bigger seems
Swollen with the Afflatus, whilst in Holy screams
Sh' unfolds the hidden mysteries of Fate.
Mr. Hutchin. Few that pretended to Inspiration, but raged after this manner,
foaming and yelling, and making a strange, terrible noise; sometimes gnashing
with their Teeth, shivering and trembling, with a thousand other antic
Motions: and therefore some will have their Name ( viz. (...)) to be derived
(...), i. e. from being mad.

Other Customs also they had common to them, with the Pythia; I shall only
mention those about the Laurel, which was sacred to Apollo, the God of
Divination, ever since the Death and Metamorphosis of his Beloved Daphne, and
thought to conduce very much to Inspiration, and therefore called (...), the
Prophetic Plant; whence Claudian says of it, -- Venturi praescia Laurus.
The Laurel skilled in Events.
With this therefore they used to crown their Heads, as Euripides Andromache.
says of Cassandra. And Aeschylus Agamemnone v. 1273.
also agrees with him herein, when he says of her, (...).
Her Hand a Laurel-scepter grasped, her Neck
The same Prophetic Plant with Garlands graced.
Where by (...), he means a Staff of Laurel, which Prophets usually carried in
their Hands; it was called in Greek (...), as we learn from Hesychius. Farther,
it was usual for them to eat the Leaves of this Tree; and therefore Cassandr^
v. 6.
Lycophron says of Cassandra, (...).
The Mouth with Lauril-morsels often blefs'd,
In Mystic words unriddl'd future Truths.
And the Sibyll in Tibullus speaks of it, as one of her greatest Privileges,
placing it in the same rank with that of Virginity, a thing held by her very
sacred, though not always observed by other Prophets; for Cassandra was
Agam^mnon's Concubine; and though the condition of a Captive might lay some force
upon her, yet it is agreed by all, that Helenus married Andromache; and nothing
is more commonly known, than that Blind Tiresias was led up and down by his
Daughter Ma^^* But to return to the Sibyll: Her words in Tibullus are these, --
Sic usque sacras innoxia Laurus
Ve^^ar, and aeternum sit mihi Virginitas.
With holy Laurel may I e're be fed,
And live, and die an unpolluted Maid.


Thus much of these Prophets in general; I shall only add, that they, as also
other Diviners, were maintained at Athens at the public Charge, having their
Diet allowed in the (...), or Common Hall, as the Scholiast upon Aristophanes
observes.

Of the (...) there were three sorts among the Graecians, distingush'd by three
distinct manners of Receiving the Divine Afflatus.

One sort were possessed with prophesying Demons, which lodged within them,
and dictated what they should answer to those that enquired of them; or spoke
out of the Bellies, or Breasts of the possessed Persons, they all the while
remaining speechless, and not so much as moving their Tongues, or Lips; or
rather pronounced the Answe^ themselves, making use of the Members of the
Daemoniac. These were called (...), i. e. possessed with Demons; and because
the Spirits either lodged, or spoke within their Bodies, they were also named
(...), (which Name was also attributed to the Demons) (...), etc. This way of
Prophesying was practiced also in other Countries, and particularly amongst the
Jews, as also Necromancy: For the Prophet Isaiah denounces GOD's heavy
Judgments upon those that made use of either of them. Cap. VIII. v. 19.
His words, as they are translated by the Seventy, run thus, (...); And if they
say unto you, Seek unto them, whose speech is in their Belly, and those that
speak out of the Earth, those that utter vain words, that speak out of their
Belly: Shall not a Nation seek unto their God? why do they enquire of the Dead
concerning the Living? To return: These Diviners were named (...), and (...),
from Eurycles, the first that practiced this Art at Athens, as the Scholiast
upon Aristophanes has informed us, at these words, (...)
(...) Vespis.
.
Like that fantastic Divination,
Which Eurycles of old did first invent,
To enter Bellies, and from thence pronounce
Ridic'lous Whims. --
Mr. Hutchin.

They were also called (...), and (...), from (...), a Prophesying Demon, as
Hesychius and Suidas have told us: the same is mentioned in the Acts of the
Apostles Cap. XVI. v. 16.
, (...). Our Translators have rendered it thus: And it came to pass as we went
to prayer, a certain Damsel possessed with a Spirit of Divination met us. But
the Margin reads Python, instead of Divination, which is a general Name, and
may be used in that place, as more intelligible by the Vulgar. Plutarch in his
Treatise about the Cessation of Oracles, says these Familiar Spirits, were
anciently called (...), and only (...) in latter Ages: It is absurd (says he)
and childish to suppose that God himself, like the (...), which were formerly
called (...), but are now named (...), should enter into the Bodies of
Prophets, and make use of their Mouths and Voices, in pronouncing their Answers.

As to the Original of this Name ( Python) there are various Conjectures; the
most probable of which seems to be, That it was taken from Apollo Pythius, the
God that presides over all sorts of Divination, and afterward appropriated by
Custom to this species; for so we find a great many Words of a general
signification, in time made peculiar to some one part of what they signified
before. To give you an Instance, (...), among the ancient Greeks, was applied
to all Kings, as well the just and merciful, as the cruel and whom we now call
Tyrannical; but in more Modern Ages, was appropriated to that latter sort, and
became a Name of the greatest ignominy, and detestation. On the contrary, Words
of a narrow and limited Sense, have sometimes passed their bounds, and taken
upon them a more general and unconfined one: so (...), which at first signified
only that sort of Prophesying, that was inspired with Rage and Fury; being
derived (as Plato, and others after him will have it) (...), from being Mad;
and used by Homer Iliad (...).
in that sense, being set in opposition to some other ways of Divination, as
that by Dreams, and Entrails, came at length to be a general Name for all sorts
of Divination.

The second Sort of (...), were called (...), and (...), being such as
pretended to what we also call Enthusiasm; and differed from the former,
because they contained within them the Deity himself; whereas these were only
governed, acted, or inspired by him, and instructed in the knowledge of what
was to happen. Of this sort were Orpheus, Amphion, Musaeus, and several of the
Sibylls.

A third sort were the (...), or those that were cast into Trances or
Exstasies, and so lay like Men dead, or asleep, deprived of all Sense and
Motion, but after some time, (it may be Days, or Months, or Years, for
Epimenides the Cretan is reported to have lain in this posture LXXV Years)
returning to themselves, gave strange and amusing Relations of what they had
seen, and heard. For it was a vulgar Opinion, that Man's Soul might leave the
Body, and wander up and down the World; nay, and visit the place of the
Deceased too, and see what was done there, and by converse with the Gods and
Heroes, be instructed in things useful and necessary for the Conduct of Human
Life. Plato, in the tenth Book of his Politics, speaks of one Pamphilus, a
Phaerean, that lay ten Days amongst the Carcasses of slain Men, and afterward
being taken up, and placed upon the Funeral-pile, to be burned, returned to
Life, and related what places he had seen in Heaven, Earth, and Hell, and what
was done there, to the astonishment of all that heard him. Plutarch also, in
his Discourse concerning Socrates's Demon, says, it was reported of the Soul
of Hermodorus the Clazomenian, that for several Nights and Days, it would leave
his Body, travel over many Countries, and return after it had viewed things,
and discoursed with Persons at a great distance; till at last, by the treachery
of a Woman, his Body was delivered to his Enemies, who burned the House, while
the Inhabitant was abroad. Several other Stories of the same nature, are
recorded in History; which, whether true or false, it matters not much, since
they were believed, and received as such.

Thus much for Natural Divination. I come in the next place to speak something
of that, which is called Artificial: In doing which, because Divination, or
Prediction by Dreams, bears a somewhat nearer Affinity to the Natural, than the
rest, and is by some reckoned amongst the Species of it, I shall therefore in
the first place give you an Account of the Customs practiced in it.

CHAPTER XIII. Of Divination by Dreams.
I Shall not in this place trouble you with the various Divisions of Dreams,
which do not at all concern my present Purpose; my Design being only to speak
of those, by which Predictions used to be made, commonly called Divine: and of
these, there were three sorts.

The first was (...), when the Gods, or Spirits in their own, or under any
assumed Form, seemed to converse with Men in their Sleep: Such an one was
Agamemnon's Dream, at the beginning of the second Iliad; where the God of
Dreams, in the form of Nestor, advises him to give the Trojans Battle, and
encourages him thereto, with the promise of certain Success and Victory. Such
an one also was the Dream of Pindar, in which (as P^^^ticis.
Pausanias reports) Proserpina appeared to him, and complained he dealt
unkindly by her, for that he had composed Hymns in honor of all the other
Gods, and she alone was neglected by him: She added, that when he came into her
Dominions, he should celebrate her Praises also. Not many Days after, the Poet
died, and in a short time appeared to an old Woman, a Relation of his, that
used to employ a great part of her time, in reading and singing his Verses, and
repeated to her an Hymn made by him upon Proserpina.

The second is (...), which is that wherein the Ideas, or Images of Things,
that are to happen, are plainly and clearly represented; and when Things appear
in their own shape and likeness: and this is by some called (...). Such an one
was that of Alexander the Great, mentioned by Lib. I. cap. VII.
Valerius Maximus, when he dreamed that he was to be murdered by Cassander: And
that of Croesus, King of Lydia, when he dreamed that his Son Atys, whom he
designed to succeed in his Empire, should be slain by an Iron Spear, as Lib. I.
cap. XXXIV.
Herodotus ^elateth.

The third Species, called (...), is that in which future Events are revealed,
by certain Types and Figures; whence it is named (...), for an Allegory, as De
Allegor. Homericis.
Heraclides of Pontus defines it, is a Figure, by which one Thing is expressed,
and another signified. Of this sort was Hecuba's, when she dreamed, she had
conceived a Firebrand; and Caesar's, when he dreamed he lay with his Mother;
whereby was signified, he should enjoy the Empire of the Earth, the common
Mother of all living Creatures. From this Species, those, whose Prosession it
was to interpret Dreams, have desumed their Names, for they are called in Greek
(...), from Judging of Dreams; (...), from Prying and Looking into them; and
(...), because they were Conversant about them. To one of these three Sorts may
all Prophetical Dreams be reduced; but the Distinction of their Names is not
always nicely, or critically observed.

The first Author of all Dreams, as well as other Divinations, was Jupiter, as
I have already intimated, -- (...).
For Dreams too come from Jove.
says Iliad. (...).
Homer. But this must not be understood, as if Dreams were thought immediately
to proceed from Jupiter: It was below his Dignity to condescend to such mean
Offices, and therefore Inferior Deities were employed in these, and such like
Ministrations.

To omit therefore the Apparitions of the Gods, or Spirits in Dreams, upon
particular occasions, such as was that of Iliad. (...).
Patroclus's Ghost to A^hilles, to desire his Body might be interred: The Earth
was thought to be the cause of Dreams, says Euripides Hecub. v. 70.
: -- (...),
(...).
Hail reverend Earth, from whose prolifick womb
Sable-wing'd Dreams derive their Birth.
Where the Scholiast gives this Reason for it, viz. That the Earth, by
obstructing the passage of the Light of the Sun, causes the Night, in which
Dreams present themselves, and are upon that account imputed to the Earth, as
their Mother. Or, that out of the Earth proceeds Meat, Meat causes Sleep, (
Sleep being nothing but the Ligation of the exterior Senses, caused by humid
Vapors ascending from the Stomach to the Brain, and there obstructing the
Motion of the Animal Spirits, which are the Instruments of Sensation, and all
other Animal Operations) and from Sleep come Dreams; but these were esteemed
mere Chea^s, and Delusions, as Eustathius tells us, in his Comment upon the
nineteenth Book of Homer's Odys^es, not far from the end; and such as these he
says the Poet speaks of, when he makes Dreams to inhabit nigh the Ocean,
the great Receptacle of the humid Element, (...),
(...).
Near to that Place, where with impetuous force
The rolling Ocean takes his rapid course,
Near Phoebus's glittering Gates, and that dark Cell,
Which Dreams inhabit. --
Mr. Hutchin.

Others were ascribed to the Infernal Ghosts, as Virgil has told us, at the
end of his sixth Aeneid, Sed falsa ad coelum mittunt insomniae Manes.
By this the Infernal Deities conveigh
Into the upper World fantastic Dreams.
Sophocles also bears me witness herein, when he brings in Electra, saying
that Agamemnon, out of a concern for Orestes and his Designs, haunted
Clytaemnestra with fearful Dreams, Electra v. 480.
(...),
(...).
For He, solicitous of those Affairs,
In frightful Dreams does Clytaemnestra haunt.


Others were imputed to Hecate, and to the Moon, who were Go^desses of the
Night, and sometimes taken for the same Person; were supposed also to have a
particular Influence, and to preside over all the Actions, and Accidents of the
Night, and therefore invoked at Incantations, and other Night-mysteries, as I
shall show afterward.

But the chief cause of all, was the God of Sleep, whose Habitation, as Metam.
lib XI. F^b. X
Ovid describes it, was among the Cimmerii, in a Den dark as Hell, and in the
way to it; around him lay whole swarms of Dreams of all sorts and sizes, which
he sent forth when, and whither He pleased; but Virgil assigns to the false and
deluding Dreams another place, upon an Elm at the entrance of Hell, In medio
ramos annosaque brachia pandit
Ulmus opaca, ingens: quam sedem somnia vulgo
Vana tenere ferunt, foliisque sub omnibus haerent Aeneid. VI. v. 283.
.
IN the midst an ancient spreading Elm does grow
Whose clasping arms diffuse a shade below;
And here, if Fables don't the World deceive,
To every Branch, to every trembling Leaf
Clings a fantastic Dream. --
Mr. Hutchin. It may be, he supposes this to have been the Receptacle of some
part of them, and the rest to accompany the God of Sleep. Ovid tells us He had
three Attendants more ingenious than the rest, which could transform themselves
into any Shape, and assume any Form; their Names were Morpheus, Phobetor, or
Icelos, and Phantasus; the Employment of the first, was to counterfeit the
forms of Men, the second imitated the likeness of Brutes, and the last of
inanimate Creatures; Ovid. Loc. citat.
Excitat artificem, simulatoremque figurae
Morphea, non illo jussus solertior alter
Exprimit incessus. vultumque, sonumque loquendi;
Adjicit and vestes, and consuetissima cuique
Verba, sed hic solos homines imitatur. At alter
Fit sera, fit volucris, fit longo corpore serpens,
Hunc Icelon superi, mortale Phobetora vulgus
Nominat. Est etiam diversae tertius ar^is
Phantasos; ille in humum, saxumque, undamque, trabemque,
Quaeque vacant anima foeliciter omnia transit.
He roused the Antic Fiend; than whom none can
More subtly, or more lively mimick Man.
The Beaux, the Clown, he will in their Garbs express
And set his Tongue to each Man's proper Phrase,
Their Looks, though never so different, he can ape;
But He Is obliged to assume an Human shape.
The different shapes of Beasts a second bears,
And now in snaky Wreathings he appears,
A hissing Serpent; now again he seems
A timorous Bird, thus mixes all extremes.
Him Icelos the Immortal Beings call,
But Men Phobetor.
Phantasus next, but He, distinct from these,
Usurps the uncouth shapes of withered Trees,
Of Stones, or other lifeless Substances.
Mr. Hutchin.

In Virgil, the God of Sleep descended from Heaven upon Palinurus; which is not
to be understood, as if Heaven was his proper Seat; but that he was sent
thence, by some of the Etherial Gods, by whom He had been called thither: or
else He is to be supposed to rove up and down through the Heavens, or Air, to
disperse his Dreams among Men, as He sees convenient: Aeneid. V. v 838.
Virgil's words are these, -- levis aethereis delapsus Somnus ab astris
Era dimovit tenebrosum, and dispulit umbras;
Te, Palinure, petens, Tibi tristia Somnia portans.
When nimble Sleep glides through the liquid Air,
Dispells the Clouds, and makes the Skies more clear,
Laden with fearful Dreams, which He does bear
For Thee, unhappy Palinurus --
Mr. Hutchin.

There was another Deity also, to whom the care of Dreams was committed, called
Brizo, from the old Greek word (...), which signifies to sleep: Coelius says
she was worshipped in the Island Delos, and had Boats full of all sorts of
Things offered to her, except Fish. But she was thought rather to assist at the
Interpretation of Dreams, than to be the efficient cause of them; and is
therefore by Hesychius called (...). This Account Coelius has taken out of the
eighth Book of Athenaeus, who adds farther, that they used to pray to her for
the Public Safety, and Prosperity; but more particularly, that she would
vouchsafe to protect, and preserve their Ships.

Having treated of the reputed Authors of Dreams, I shall in the next place
speak something of the Ways, by which they were supposed usually to come. Now
these were two, one for delusive Dreams, which passed through a Gate of Ivory;
and another for those that were true, and they passed through a Gate of Horn.
Descriptions of these two Gates, you may find every where, both in the Greek
and Latin Poets, all which I shall therefore omit, only giving you one, in each
Tongue: the first is that of Odyss. XIX. v. 562.
Homer, where speaking of Dreams, he says, (...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
The second shall be that of Aeneid VI. v. 893.
Virgil, imitated from the former, Antiq. Lect. lib. XXVII. cap. X.
Sun: geminae Somni portae, quarum altera fertur
Cornea, qua veris facilis datur exitus Umbris:
Altera candenti perfecta nitens elephanto,
Sed falsa ad Coelum mittunt insomnia Manes.
Vain, and fantastic are the Dreams, that fly
Through the great Gate of polished Ivory,
With senceless Whims these to our Heads repair,
Gull us with golden Mountains in the Air:
But when in the Morn we wake, our drowzy Eyes
Big with the expectance of the lovely Prize,
With eager haste the giddy Phantasm flies.
But no such Whims infest our easy Pate,
When Sleep conveighs our Dreams through the other Gate,
Composed of polished Horn. For those from hence
Are true prophetic Dreams, and full of solid Sense.
Mr. Hutchin.

In allusion to these Gates, Philostratus says, they used to represent Dreams
in a white Garment, wrapped over a black one, with a Horn in his Hand. And
Eustathius, in his Comment upon the forementioned Passage of Homer, has made
several Conjectures concerning it, most of which are so frivolous and trifling,
that barely to mention them would be lost labor; and such as desire farther
satisfaction, if they think it worth their while, may consult the Author.

The Time in which true Dreams were expected, was (...), and therefore Homer
tells us, that Penelope having an auspicious Dream about her Son Telemachus,
who was traveling in search of his Father Ulysses, rejoiced the more, because
it appeared to her at that time, -- (...)
(...),
(...) Fine Odyss. IV.
.
But when Penelope awaked, her Breast
With greater Joy and Gladness was possessed,
Because at Break of Day the Dream appeared.
Mr. Hutchin. What Time that was, Grammarians do not agree; some derive it
(says Eustathius) from the privative Particle (...) and (...), to walk, or
(...), to labor and toil, as though it were (...), or (...), and by Epenthesis,
(...), as though it should signify the dead of the Night, in which People
neither labor, nor walk abroad. Others also think it may signify the middle,
or depth of the Night, but for a different reason; for (...), (say they) is the
same with (...), i. e. thick, or close compacted; and Hesiod has used the word
in this sense, when he says, (...) -- That is, as Athenaeus expounds it,
(...), a thick Cake, such as the Shepherds, and Laboring Men eat. Others allow
it the same Signification, but for a third reason; (...), (say they) according
to the Glossographers, amongst the Achaeans, is the same with (...), which
fignifies the the midst, or height of any thing, as (...), that part of Summer,
when the Heat is most violent, Midsummer; and Men are said to be (...), when
they are in their full Strength; and therefore (...), or (...), must be the
depth, or midst of the Night. But this Signification concerns not our present
purpose, for I no where read, that Dreams had any whit the more credit, because
they came in the dead of the Night. (...) therefore was used in another sense,
for the time in which they used to milk Cattle, being derived from (...), to
milk; and then (...) must signify the Morning, in opposition to (...), or the
Evening milking-time: And that it was used in this sense, is evident from
Homer's twenty-second Iliad, where he says the Dog Star (which rises a little
before the Sun) appears (...)^ His words are these, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...) Il. (...). v. 26.
.
-- Rushing he shone,
As when the Autumnal Dog Star hastening on
To seat himself before Morning in the Sky,
Darts down his blazing Beams from high;
A dazzling Luster all around is seen,
It burns the brightest in the heavenly Plain.
Mr. Dechair.

And that this was the Time, in which Dreams were thought to deserve ^reatest
regard, I. Sat. X. 31.
Horace assures us, Ast Ego quum Graecos facerem natus mare citra
Versiculos, ve^uit me tali voce Quirinus,
Post mediam noctem visus, quum somnia vera.
-- Now being a Roman born,
And Grecian Numbers once resolved to try
Quirinus kindly did my Wish deny;
Methought, the Night near spent, when Dreams are true,
'Twas at the dawn of Day, he came unto my view,
And spoke such words as these. --
Mr. Dech^ir. And Ovid was of the same opinion, when he said, Namque sub
Auroram jam dormitante lucerna,
Tempore quo cerni somnia vera solent.
Near Morn, when Lamps are dwindling out their Light,
And seem to nod for sleep, that part of Night
When Dreams are truest offered to our Sight.
Mr. Dechair. Theocritus also agrees with them, -- (...),
(...).
And now Aurora's just about to appear,
When surest Dreams do most excuse our Fear.
Mr. Dechair.

The reason of this Opinion was this, viz. They thought all the remainders of
the Meat upon their Stomachs might by that time be pretty well digested, and
gone; for till then Dreams were believed rather to proceed from the Fumes of
last-night's Supper, than any Divine, or Supernatural Cause: and therefore
Pliny tells us, a Dream is never true presently after Eating, or Drinking; and
Artemidorus goes farther yet, when he says, that there can small credit be
given to a Morning Dream, if you have eat too plentifully the Night before;
because all the Crudities cannot then be supposed to be carried off.

For that reason, they that desired a Prophetic Dream, used to take a special
Care of their Diet, so as to eat nothing hard of Digestion, as Beans, or raw
Fruit. Some, that they might be sure to be free from Fumes, and sleep with an
empty Stomach, were so superstitious as to fast one Day before, and abstain
from Wine for three. Fish is not soon, o^ eafily digested, and therefore ('it is
probable) was thought to obstruct true Dreams; which seems to have been the
reason why such quantities of them were offered in Sacrifice to the Goddess
Brizo; for it was usual to offer to the Gods the things they had an especial
kindness for, or a great aversion from; the former, because they were thought
delightful, and acceptable to them; the latter, because they had ^n Antipathie
against them, and therefore 'twas believed it afforded no small pleasure to see
them burn and perish upon their Altars. Initio Libelli de Audiendis Poetis.
Plutarch observes, that the Polypus's Head was prejudicial to those that
desired Prophetical Dreams; (...).
-- IN the Polypus's Head
Something of Ill, something of Good is bred.
because it is sweet and pleasant to the Taste, but disquieteth Men in their
Sleep, and makes them restless, causing troublesome and anxious Dreams; and
therefore he compares Poetry to it, because it contains ^any things, as well
profitable, as pleasant, to those that make a right Use of it; but to others is
very prejudicial, filling their Heads with ^ain, if not impious Notions, and
Opinions. In short, all things ^pt to burden the Stomach, to put the Blood into
a Ferment, and ^he Spirits into too quick and agitated a Motion; all things apt
to ^reate vain or strange Imaginations, to disturb Men's Rest, or any ^ay
hinder the free and ordinary Operations of the Soul, were to ^e avoided; that
so the Mind and Phantasy being pure, and without any unnatural, or external
Impressions, might be the fitter to re^eive Divine insinuations. Some choice
there was also in the co^our of their Clothes: for Suidas has told us, it was
most proper to ^eep in a white Garment, as if that could conduce to make the
Dreams and Visions the clearer.

Besides all this, (to omit those that expected Dreams from Amphia^^us, or
other Deities, in an Oracular way, of which I have spoken in another place)
before they went to Bed, they used to sacrifice to Mer^^^y; so Calasiris in
Heliodorus, after he had prayed to all the rest of the Gods, calls upon
Mercury, to give him (...), i. e. a Night ^f good Dreams. Now you must know,
Mercury was thought to be (...), the Giver of Sleep, as Eustathius tells us,
and therefore ^^hey usually carved his Image upon the Bed's-feet, which were
for that ^^ason called (...), which word Homer has made use of, when he ^ith
that Vulcan caught Mars in bed with Venus, (...) Odyss. (...). v. 278.
.
Great massy Chains on every Bed-post round,
With a resistless Force God Vulcan bound.
Again, in the twenty-third Book of his Odysses, he has the same word, -- (...)
Ver. 198.
(...) --
Then having with his Rule first shaped it out,
H' a polished Bed-post made. --
Though others will have (...) to be derived from (...), i. e. a Prop, or
Support, because by it the Bed was upheld, and supported. However that be,
certain it is that one of Mercury's Employments was, to preside over Sleep, and
Dreams, and the Night also, with all things that belongs to it ^ for so Homer
has told us in his Hymn upon this God, wherein he call^ him Ver. 14.
(...),
(...). --
A thieving God, a Cattle-stealer, one
Whose Care are Dreams, and Noises in the Night.


After all this Preparation, they went to sleep, big with expectation of
knowing whatever they were solicitous, or concerned about, be^o^^ the Morning:
But if their Fate was revealed in obscure, or Allegor^ call Terms, so that
themselves could not dive into their meaning, the^ an Interpreter must
presently be consulted. The first of this kind, ^ Pliny Lib. VII. cap. V.
reports, was Amphictyon, Deucalion's Son: Pausanias (as I have told you
before) would have it to be Amphiaraus, who, he says, ha^ Divine Honors paid
him, for the Invention of that Art: but who ever was the Author of it, it is
certain that, amongst the ancient Gr^^cians, it was had in very great Credit,
and Reputation, as appears from the number of Books written concerning it; for
Geminus Pyrius com^pos'd three Books upon this subject, Artemon the Milesian
two an^ twenty, beside Panyasis the Halicarnassean, Alexander the Myndian,
Ph^^bus the Antiochian, Demetrius the Phalerean, Nicostratus the Ephesian,
A^^tipho the Athenian; with others, whose Writings are still extant; su^^ are
Artemidorus, Astrampsychus, Philo Iudaeus, Achines the Son of S^^^rimus,
Nicephorus, etc. But for all this, it was never in so great reque^^ as the
other Species of Divination; the many false and frivol^^ Dreams that happened
to every Man, cast a suspicion upon all the re^^ and those that were nothing
but delusions, made those that were (...) (...), or Prophetical, to be called
in question; and therefo^^ when the Hero in Il. (...).
Homer advises the Graecians to enquire of so^^ Prophet, what means they might
use to appease the anger of the God he speaks boldly, and without hesitation of
(...), or the Inspired Prophet; and (...), or him that consulted the Entrails
of Victims offered in Sacrifice (for so (...) must signify in that place) but
when he comes to (...), or the Interpreter of Dreams, he is forced to make a
sort of an Apology for what he says, in this manner, (...),
(...).
But come, let us call some Prophet here, or Priest,
Or Dream-Interpreter, for sure, at least
Some Dreams are sent from Jove.
Mr. Dechair Whereby he anticipates a Question, that he foresaw might be
proposed to him thus: But why should we ask Counsel of one, whose business is
only to expound fallacious, vain Delusions? why should we trust the safety of
the whole Army in the Hands of a cunning, pretending Impostor? To this he
answers, That indeed there were a great many false, and deceitful Dreams; but
that it could not from thence be concluded, that all Dreams were so: for,
notwithstanding the many Delusions that appeared, yet for all that, some of
them were true, and came from Jupiter, the common Father of all Prophetical
Predictions, and therefore might be depended upon. After this manner Eustathius
has paraphrased the Poet's words. In later Ages Dreams came to be little
regarded, except by old doting Women, who were very superstitious in observing
them, as Lib. II. Ep. IV.
Propertius gives us to understand, when he says, Quae mea non decies somnia
versat anus?
A hundred times old Women have I told
My frightful Dreams.


In more remote Ages, the People that lived near the Gades, and Boristhenes,
and the Inhabitants of Telmissus, and Hybla Gereatis, a City belonging to the
Cataneans, in Sicily, were famed for their Skill in this Art. The Signs by
which they made Conjectures, would be too tedious to mention in this place; if
any one has leisure, and vanity enough to employ himself in such solemn and
ridiculous Fooleries, let him consult Artemidorus.

If Dreams contained in them any thing frightful and terrible, they used to
disclose their Fears to some of the Gods, offering Incense, or some other
Oblation; and praying, that, if Good was portended, it might be brought to
pass: if the contrary, that the Gods would avert whatever ill was boded by
them. This telling of Dreams was not appropriated to any particular Deity, for
some would discover them to Hercules, others to Jupiter, as one does in
Plautus; however, because the Houshold-Gods were nearest at hand, and thought
to have a particular Concern and Care for the Family, in which they were
worshipped, it was therefore usual to declare Dreams to them, and particularly
to Vesta, as you may learn from Lib. I. Ep. XXIX. (...)
Propertius; Vadit and hinc castae narratum Somnia Vestae,
Quae sibi, quaeque mihi non nocitura ^orent.
Chaste Vesta too my Dreams she went to tell,
Such Dreams, as both for You and Me were well.
Mr. Dechair.

Apollo also had a peculiar Right and Title to this Worship, under the Name of
(...), or Averruncus, so called from averting Evils, and (...), because he
presided over, and protected Houses, and therefore, as the old Scholiast upon
Sophocles informs us, had Images erected to him in the Porches. Whence, in
Sophocles's Electra, Clytemnestra having seen a terrible Dream, calls upon her
Woman thus, (...),
(...)
(...) Ver 635.
.
Here, bring the Incense, Maid, for I intend
To Phoebus strait to address my self in Prayer,
That he would free me from those aching Fears,
Which pain my troubled Breast. --
Mr. Dechair. And then she begins her Prayer, (...),
-- (...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
Great God Apollo, You who from all Harms
Our Houses guard, attend my humble Prayer,
The Visions which were to my Fancy brought
Last night in Dreams, if Good they do portend,
Let me enjoy the same; if otherwise,
My Enemies may they the Ill receive.
Mr. Dechair. But before that, she had discovered her Fears to the Sun, for
Chrysothemis tells Electra, she had come to the knowledge of her Dream by that
means, being informed by one that overheard her, Ibid. v. 435.
(...)
(...).
This I was told by one who present was,
When to the Sun her Dream she did rehearse.
Mr. Dechair. Both the Scholiasts upon that place tell us, that it was done
con^ormably to the ancient Custom of relating Dreams to the Sun; and Tric^^nius
gives this Reason for it, viz. That, because the Sun is contrary to the Night,
he might avert, or expel all the Evils that proceeded from it. The same Custom
we find also practiced by Iphigenia in Taur. v. 43.
Euripides, with this difference, that she discloses her thoughts to the
Heavens, whereas Clytemnestra had done it to the Sun alone: Her words are
these, (...),
(...).
But what new Dreams this present Night affords,
To the Sky I Will tell, if that will benefit.
The doing this they called (...), and (...), or (...), etc.

But before they were permitted to approach the Divine Altars, they were
obliged to purify themselves from all the pollutions of the Night; and
therefore in Persis.
Aeschylus one says, (...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
As first I rose, I to the Rivers went,
And washed away those foul Impurities,
Which had my Body stained; this being done,
I approached the holy Fanes, and offered up
A Sacrifice to the Deliv'ring Gods.
Mr. Dechair. Lib. VIII.
Silius also mentions the same Custom, -- sub lucem ut visa secundent
Oro coelicolas, and vivo purgor in amne.
I cleanse my self in running Streams, and pray
My Dreams may lucky prove.
For it was unlawful to worship the Gods at any time, till they had purified
themselves by Water, as I have told you before; but at this time it was more
especially required. Sat. II. ver. 16.
Persius adds farther, that it was usual amongst the Romans, to dip their Heads
five times in the Water, before Morning-prayer, Haec sancte ut poscas, Tiberino
in gurgite mergis,
Mane caput bis terque, and noctem flumine purgas.
And lest your Prayer should speak a sinful Mind,
You purge away the Filthiness you find
Procured by Night; You to the Tiber go,
And down into the Tide You flouncing bow
Five times Your Head. --
Mr. Dechair.

CHAPTER XIV. Of Divination by Sacrifices.
DIVINATION by Sacrifices was called (...), or (...), and was divided into
different kinds, according to the diversity of the Materials offered to the
Gods. For first they made Conjectures from Signs observed in the External
Parts, and Motions of the Victim; then from it is Entrails, from the Flame in
which it was consumed, from the Cakes and Flower, from the Wine and Water, and
several other Things, of which in their order.

First then, The Art, whereby Observations were made in killing, and cutting up
the Victim, was called (...) Unlucky Omens were, when the Beast was drawn by
force to the Altar, when it escaped by the way, avoided the fatal Blow, did not
fall down quietly, and without reluctance, but kicked, leaped up, or bellowed,
bled not freely, was long a dying, showed any tokens of great pain, beat upon
the ground, expired with Convulsions, or did any thing contrary to what usually
happens at the slaughter of Beasts: These were thought to be certain Signs of
the Divine Displeasure. But on the contrary, the Gods were judged to be
propitious, and kindly to receive the Devotions paid to them, when every thing
was carried on with Ease; when the Victim went voluntarily, and without
compulsion to the slaughter, endured the Blow patiently, fell down quietly,
bled freely, and expired without groaning. Somewhat also they observed in the
wagging of his Tail; whence the Poet says, -- (...).
The Victim kindly waggs his Tail.


After this, the Victim being cut open, they made Observations from its
Entrails, in which if all things were whole, and sound, had their Natural
place, Color, and Proportion, then all was well: but if any part was decayed,
or wanting, if any thing was out of Order, or not according to Nature, Evil was
portended.

The first and principal part to be observed, was the Liver; for if that was
corrupted, they thought that both the Blood, and all the rest of the Body must
be so too; and therefore if it was found very bad, they desisted immediately,
nor caring what the other Parts might promise; such Signs were for that reason
called (...), being such as hindered them from going any farther. This
observing the Liver was called (...), which also became a general Name for
Divination by Entrails, because it was the chief part of it. If the Liver had a
pleasing, and Natural Redness, if it was found, without spot, or blemish, if
its Head was large, if it had two Heads, or there were two Livers, if its
Lappets were turned inwards, then abundance of Prosperity, and Success in their
Undertakings might be expected. On the other hand, nothing but Dangers,
Disappointments, and Misfortunes were to be looked for, if there was (...), (as
they called it) too much Dryness, or (...), a tie between the parts, especially
if it was (...), without a Lappet, or the Liver it self was altogether wanting.
Bad Signs also were accounted such as these; If it had upon it any Blisters,
Wheals, or Ulcers; were parched, thin, hard, or of an ugly, blackish Color;
had any corrupt and vitiated Humors, was any way displaced; or, lastly, if in
boiling it did not conspicuously appear amongst the rest of the Entrails, was
polluted with any nasty, corrupt Matter, became very soft, and, as it were,
melted into a Jelly. The Concavous part of the Liver was called (...), i. e.
belonging to the Family, because the Signs observed there concerned themselves,
and their Friends; the Gibbous side (...), or (...), because the tokens in it
concerned their Enemies: if either of these Parts was shriveled, corrupted, or
any way changed for the worse, it boded ruin to the Person concerned in it; but
if large, and sound, or bigger than usual, it was a prosperous Omen. The Romans
also used the same Method; for Lucan tells us, Caesar's Victory over Pompey was
foretold this way: His words are these, Quodque nefas nullis impune apparuit
extis,
Ecce videt capiti Fibrarum increscere molem,
Alterius capiti pars aegra and marcida pendet,
Pars micat, and celeri venas movet improba pulsu.
Another Ill-presaging Sign was seen,
For of the Liver's Heads one overgrown,
And, as 'twere, squeezed was by the other down,
Sickish, and withered one side quiet lay,
The other leapt, and sportfully did play.
Mr. Dechair. The Place, or Seat, where all the parts of the Liver lay, was
called (...), and (...). The Place between the parts in the middle, (...), and
(...), by Hesychius (...), or (...), by Euripides (...), -- (...)
(...).


The next thing to be taken notice of, was the Heart, which if it was very
little, palpitated much, leaped, was shriveled, or wrinkled, or had no Fat at
all, portended bad Fortune; if there was no Heart to be found, it was a deadly
Omen.

Next to the Heart, they used to observe the Gall, the Spleen, the Lungs, and
the Membranes, in which the Bowels were enclosed. If there were two Galls, if
the Gall was large, and ready to burst out of its Skin; then sharp and bloody,
but yet prosperous Fights were expected. If the Spleen lay in its own place,
was clear and sound, of its natural color, without wheals, hardness, or
wrinkles, it boded nothing but Success; as the contrary Signs presaged
Misfortunes: So did also the Entrails, if they chanced to slip out of the Hands
of him that offered the Sacrifice; if they were besmeared with Blood, of a
livid color, or spotted; were full of Blisters, or Pimples, filled with
corrupt or salt Matter, broken or torn in pieces, or stunk like putrified
Bodies; lastly, if Serpents crawling, or any thing else terrible and unusual
was found in them. If the Lungs were cloven, the Business in hand was to be
deferred; if whole and entire, it was to be proceeded in with all possible
speed, and vigor.

Other Parts of the Victim did sometimes presage things to come, especially if
any thing happened extraordinary, and contrary to the common course of Nature.
For Instance, On the day that King Pyrrhus was slain at Argos, his Death was
foretold, by the Heads of the Sacrifices, which being cut off, lay licking
their own Blood, as Pliny Lib. XI. cap. XXXVII.
reports. Another unlucky Omen happened to Cimon, the Athenian General, a
little before his Death; for when the Priest had slain the Sacrifice according
to Custom, the Blood that ran down, and congealed upon the Ground, was by a
great many Pismires carried to Cimon, and placed all together at his great Toe:
they were a long Time in doing this, before any man perceived them, but Cimon
had no sooner espied them out, but the Augur brought him word, that the Liver
had no Head; and in a very short time after that famous Captain died.

Hither are to be reduced some other ways of Divination, by things made use of
at Sacrifices; as first, (...), Divination by the Fire of the Sacrifice. Good
Signs were such as these; If the Flames immediately took hold of, and consumed
the Victim, seizing at once all the parts of it; wherefore that it might do so,
they usually prepared (...), dry Sticks, that would easily take Fire; also if
the Flame was bright, and pure, and without Noise, or Smoke; if the Sparks
tended upward in the form of a Pyramid, if the Fire went not out till all was
reduced to Ashes. Contrary Signs were when it was kindled with difficulty, when
the Flame was divided, when it did not immediately spread it self over all the
parts of the Victim, but creeping along, consumed them by little and little;
when, instead of ascending in a straight Line, it whirled round, turned
sideways, or downwards, and was extinguished by Winds, Showers, or any other
unlucky Accident; when it crackled more than ordinary, was black, casting forth
Smoke, or Sparks, or died before all the Victim was consumed. All these, and
such like, were unlucky Omens, and signified the Displeasure of the Gods. Some
of these Signs old Tiresias speaks of in Antigon. ver. 1122.
Sophocles, as very fatal, and pernicious, -- (...)
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
-- At the Sacrifice
No sparkling Flames from up the Fire flew,
But a black Smoke, with cloudy Vapors mixed,
That rolled, and smothered all the Place;
Scattered abroad the mangled Entrails lay,
And Thighs defiled without their wonted Fat.
Mr. Dechair.

Sometimes, when the Entrails foretold nothing certain by Dissection, the
Priest made Satisfactory Observations from them in the Fire; and therefore they
sometimes took the Bladder, and binding the Neck of it with Wool, (for which
reason Sophocles calls the Bladders (...)) put it into the Fire, to observe in
what place it brake, and which way it darted the Urine: sometimes they took
Pitch off the Torches, and threw it into the Fire; and if there arose but one
entire Flame, it was taken for a good Omen. In matters of War, or Enmity, they
took most notice of the (...), or uppermost part in the Flame, and the Gall,
(...), for that Enemies are as bitter as the Gall they burnt.

(...), Divination by the Smoke of Sacrifices, in which they observed what
Windings, and Turnings it made, how high it ascended, and whether in a direct,
or oblique Line, or in wreaths; also how it smelled, whether of the Flesh that
was burned, or any thing else.

(...), Divination by Frankincense, which, if it presently catched Fire, and
sent forth a grateful odor, was esteemed an happy Omen; but if the Fire would
not touch it, or any nasty Smell, contrary to the Nature of Frankincense,
proceeded from it, it boded some Ill.

(...), and (...), Divination by Wine, and by Water, in which they made
Conjectures from the Color, Motion, Noise, and other Accidents of the Wine, of
which Libations were made, and the Holy Water, in which the Victims were
washed, and and some parts of them boiled. Aeneid. IV. v. 453.
Virgil has made mention of them both, in the Story of Dido, Vidit,
thuricremis cum dona imponeret aris,
Horrendum dictu! latices nigrescere sacros,
Fusaque in obscoenum se vertere vina cruorem.
Offering before the Altar, as she stood,
(Amazing Sight!) Lo, into putrid Blood
The Wine is changed, the Water, clear before,
A sudden, muddy Blackness covers over.
Mr. Dechair.

(...), and (...), Divinations by which Predictions were made from the Flower,
with which the Victim was besprinkled.

Hither also you may refer (...), Divination by the Entrails of Fishes, ^or
which Tiresias, and Polydamas are said to have been famous: as also (...),
which made Predictions by Eggs, and several others.

Who was the first Inventor of this Divination, is uncertain, by some it is
attributed to Prometheus, the great Father of most Arts. No doubt it was very
ancient: And so great Credit it had, that they would desist from the greatest,
and seemingly most advantageous Undertakings, and attempt things most
hazardous, and unlikely to be attained; if the Entrails of Victims dissuaded
them from the former, or encouraged them to the latter; take but one Instance
out of Plutarch, in the Life of Aristides: When Mardonius the Persian made an
Assault upon the Graecians, Pausanias the Lacedaemonian, at that Time General
of all the Grecian Forces, offered Sacrifice, and finding it not acceptable to
the Gods, commanded the Lacedaemonians laying down their Shields at their
Feeet, to abide quietly, and attend his Directions* making no Resistance to any
of their Enemies. Then offering a second Time, (for if the first Victim
afforded not auspicious Omens, it was usual to offer on, till they obtained
what they desired) as the Horse charged, one of the Lacedaemonians was wounded:
At this Time also Callicrates, who by report was the most comely, proper Man in
the Army, being shot with an Arrow, and upon the point of expiring, said, That
he lamented not his Death, (for he came from home to lay down his Life in the
Defense of Greece) but that he had died without Action. The cause was heard,
and wonderful was the forbearance of the Men; for they repelled not the Enemy
that charged them, but expecting their opportunity from the Gods, and their
General, suffered themselves to be wounded, and slain in their Ranks; and so
obstinate they continued in this Resolution, that though the Priests offered one
Victim after another without any Success, and the Enemy still pressed upon
them, they moved not a Foot, till the Sacrifices proved propitious, and the
Soothsayers foretold the Victory.

CHAPTER XV. Of Divination by Birds.
I Come in the next place to speak of Divination by Birds; the Invention of
which is by some ascribed to Prometheus, or Melanipus, the Son of Amythaon and
Dorippe; Lib. VII c. LV.
Pliny reports that Car, from whom Caria received its Name, was the first that
made Predictions by Birds; and Orpheus by other Animals; Phoci^i^.
Pausanias tells us, That Parnassus, after whose Name the Mountain Parnassus
was called, first observed the Flight of Birds. This Art was very much improved
by Calchas, who, as Homer tells us, was -- (...).
Of Augurs far the best.
At length it arrived at such Perfection, and gained so much Credit in the
World, that seldom any thing of moment was undertaken, either in Time of War,
or Peace, seldom any Honors conferred, any Magistrates created, without the
Approbation of Birds: Nay, other Divinations were sometimes passed by
unregarded, if not confirmed by them. At Lacedaemon, the King, and Senate had
always an Augur attending upon them, to advise with; Antiq. Lect. lib. VIII.
cap. I.
and Coelius reports, that Kings themselves used to study this Art. The Birds,
because they were continually flying about, were thought to observe, and pry
into Men's most secret Actions, and to be acquainted with all Accidents; whence
that of Avibus.
Aristophanes, (...).
None, but perhaps some Bird, knows any thing
About my Treasure. --
And the Scholiast quotes such another Saying out of him; (...).
None sees me, but the Bird that flies by.
There is a Proverb also much to the same purpose; for when they thought
themselves secure from the Knowledge of all Persons, they used to say, (...)^
None is conscious to what I have been conversing about, except perchance some
Bird. Loc. citat.
Aristophanes has introduced the Birds themselves, telling what religious
observance was paid them, (...),
(...).
For we to You instead of Hammon are,
Instead of Delphi, and Dodona's Oak,
Instead of Phoebus; for our Oracles
You first consult, then prosecute Designs.


The Omens given by Birds were by the Greeks called (...), etc. And the
Observers of them, (...), etc. But afterward, these Names were promiscuously
used for almost all the Species of Artificial Divination; as Aruspicium, and
Augurium were among the Latins. Plato is of Opinion that (...) was originally a
general Name, and written with an (...) Micron, (...), signifying any thing,
(...), by which we make Conjectures of what is to come; but now (says
Aristides) they write it with (...) Mega, (...), to give the better grace to it.

The Grecian Augurs were not, as the Latin, clothed in Purple, or Scarlet,
but in White, having a Crown of Gold upon their Heads when they made
Observations, as Genesis Dier. XV. cap. X.
Alexander ab Alexandro informs us. They had also (...), i. e. a Place, or Seat
appointed for that purpose, called sometimes by the general Names of (...), and
(...), as in Sophocles's Ver. 1115.
Antigone: (...)
(...).
For sitting in my wonted hallowed Place,
Whither all Birds of Divination flock,
says Tiresias, when he expected an Omen; and the Scholiast upon that place
tells us, this Seat was peculiarly named (...), and that Tiresias had power
to assemble the Birds from all Quarters, when he had Occasion for them. They
used also to carry with them writing Tables, as the Scholiast upon Euripides
reports, in which they wrote the Names, and Flights of the Birds, with other
things belonging thereto, least any Circumstance should slip out of their
Memory.

The Omens that appeared toward the East, were accounted fortunate by the
Graecians, Romans, and all other Nations; because the Great Principle of all
Light and Heat, Motion and Life, diffuses its first Influences from that part
of the World. On the contrary, the Western Omens were unlucky, because the Sun
declines in that Quarter.

The Grecian Augurs, when they made Observations, kept their Faces toward the
North, and then the East must needs be upon their Right Hand, and the West upon
their Le^t: and that they did so, appears from Homer, who brings in Iliad.
(...). v. 239.
Hector, telling Polydamas, that he regarded not the Birds, (...),
(...).
Whether of the Right Hand, toward the gilded East,
Or on the Left, toward the dusky West,
They take their Flight. --
For this reason, the Signs that were presented to them on the Right Hand, were
accounted fortunate; and those on the Left, unlucky. On the contrary, the
Romans, making Observations with their Faces toward the South, had the East
upon their Left Hand, and the West upon their Right; of which I might give you
innumerable Proofs, which for brevity's sake I shall pass by, remitting such as
desire farther Satisfaction, to Varro, and other Latin Authors. For this
reason, whatever was fortunate, the Graecians called (...), the Romans,
Sinistrum, on what Hand soever it appeared. And though the Roman Poets do
sometimes call things unlucky, Sinistra; yet then they speak Graec^ more: and
so does Ec^og. ^. v. 18.
Virgil, when he says, Saepe sinistra cava praedixit ab ilice cornix.
Often has the Ill-boding Crow from hollow Oaks
These miseries presaged. --
On the contrary, Statius, though the business in hand concerned the Graecians,
speaks more Romano, when he says in his Thebais, Signa feras, laevumque tones.
-- Hence it came to pass, that things awkward, and foolish were called
Sinistra; in which sense Ib. v. 16.
Virgil has used the word, Saepe malum hoc nobis (si men's non laeva fuisset)
De coelo tactas memini praedicere quercus;
That is, My Misfortunes were often presaged by the Oaks torn in pieces by
Thunder, if I had but had Wit, or Foresight enough to have understood the
Divine Prodigies. In Ajace v. 184.
Sophocles the word (...) has the same Signification, (...),
(...). --
He means, that if Ajax had been in his right Wits, he would never have
committed Actions so foolish and ridiculous; and the old Scholiast upon that
Place tells us in express Terms, that the Right Hand signified Prudence, and
the Left, Folly; (...), (says he) (...).

Birds were Fortunate, or Unfortunate, either by their own Nature, or by the
Place, and Manner of their Appearance: for the same Birds at different Times
have boded different and contrary Events. The Un^^cky Birds were called (...),
Pernicious; (...), Hated, or Ungrateful; (...), Troublesome, ab (...) priv. and
(...) cedo, q. non Sinistrae, i. e. non sinentes, because they would not permit
a Man to proceed in his Undertakings; so Sinistra (if we may believe Festus) ^s
rather derived a sinendo, than a sinistra manu. For the same Reason they were
also named (...), and (...), because they re^^rained Men from what they had
designed. Those that appeared out of their wonted Place, or in any Unlucky
Place, were called (...), and (...), which words are peculiar to the
Soothsayers, though they be ^ometimes applied to other things that are displaced;
as when Eu^ipides says, (...), i. e. Persons banished, and that had left their
own Country; and (...), a Man distracted and out of his Wits, or any thing
against Reason in Ver. 934.
Hippolytus, -- (...)
(...).
On the contrary, Lucky Birds were called (...), and (...). ^ shall give you a
brief Account of some of both sorts, and the Omens signified by them; only give
me leave first to tell you, that there were ^wo sorts of Ominous Birds: The
(...), or Alites, whose Flight was observed by the Augurs: And the (...), or
Oscines, which gave Omens by their Voices, and Singing.

First then, if a Flock of all sorts of Birds came flying about any Man, it was
an excellent Omen, and portended some extraordinary Felicity, or unexpected
Success; such as Diodorus Siculus observes hap^^ned to Gordius, who from a poor
Country Farm, was exalted to (...) Kingdom.

The Eagle, if she appeared brisk, clapping her Wings, sporting about ^n the
Air, and flying from the Right Hand to the Left, was one of ^he best Omens the
Gods could give; as De Auguriis lib. I. c IX.
Niphus tells us, out of Appion. King Priamus, designing to go to the
Grecian Fleet to re^eem Hector, begs of Jupiter that he would give him
assurance of ^is Protection, by sending his beloved Bird, the Eagle, (...)
(...),
(...),
(...).
Command, great Jove, the Eagle Your delight,
And Queen of Birds, to take her lucky Flight.
Let her upon my Right Hand straight appear,
And move with noisy Flutt'rings through the Air:
This happy Sight some cheerful hopes will give,
That from the Greeks my Son I shall receive.
Mr. Dechair. Aristander observing an Eagle to fly from their Camp to the
Enemies, foretold, that Alexander should obtain the Victory. Observations also
were made from the manner of taking their Prey: For instance, Homer. Odyss.
(...). v. 160.
when Telemachus was at Sparta in search of Ulysses, an Eagle came flying upon
his Right Hand, bearing in her Talons a tame Goose, which she had caught in her
Roost: from which Omen Helena then foretold, that Ulysses would return,
surprise all Penelope's Courtiers in his House, and inflict upon them the
Punishment they deserved. And Penelope is said to have made the same
Conjecture, from an Eagle that seized upon twenty Geese, feeding in her House.
When an Eagle dragged a Fawn by the Feet, and cast it down upon Jupiter
Panomphaeus's Altar, the Graecians, though before quite disheartened, took such
Courage, that they gave the Trojans a signal Defeat. On the contrary, when
Hector attempted to burn the Grecian Fleet, an Eagle appeared toward the Left
Hand, carrying in her Talons a Serpent, which made such Resistance, that she,
not able to convey it to her Nest, was forced to let it fall; whereupon
Polydamas presently foretold, that Hector would be constrained to desist from
his Enterprise. When Penelope's Suitors waylaid Telemachus, there appeared an
Eagle on the Left, with a Dove in her Talons; and Amphinomus concluded from
that Omen, that their Design would not succeed. When two Eagles appeared,
tearing each other with their Talons, and hovering over the Assembly wherein
the Suitors were, Halitherses foretold that they should be all slain by
Ulysses. Lastly, to mention but one Instance more, an Eagle snatching a Javelin
out of the Hand of a Soldier of Dionysius the Syracusian, portended the
Downfall, and Miseries that Tyrant was to suffer.

The Flight of Vulturs was very much observed, because (as some say) they do
but seldom appear, and their Nests are rarely, or never found; wherefore a
Sight so unusual must needs portend something extraordinary: or, (as Herodotus
thinks) because Vulturs feed only upon Carcases, not meddling with living
Creatures; and therefore he tells us, Hercules was always well pleased, when a
Vultur appeared to him at the Undertaking of any Enterprise; because he
esteemed it the most just of all the Birds of Prey. But Aristotle and Pliny
reckon them amongst the Unlucky Birds; and add, that they were usually seen two
or three Days before any great Slaughter; and it was the common Opinion, that
Vulturs, Eagles, Kites, and other Birds of Prey, if they followed an Army, or
continued for a considerable Time in any place, were certain Signs of Death,
and Bloodshed.

The Hawk is a ravenous Bird, and an unlucky Omen, portending Death (says
Niphus) if she appeared seizing upon her Prey; but if the Prey slipped from
her, or made its escape, thereby was signified, that the Man should be
delivered from all Dangers. The Buzzard, called in Greek (...), because he has
three Stones, was accounted by Phoemonoe a very Ominous Bird. The Faulcon-Hawk,
in Greek (...), as Lib. X. c. XIII.
Pliny reports, was very lucky to People that were about Marriage, or any
Money-business. This Bird was sacred to Apollo, as Odyss. ^. v. 525.
Homer tells us; and when Telemachus was solicitous, and troubled in Mind about
his Mother's Suitors, appeared in this manner, (...),
(...)
(...)
(...).
-- This said, a Faulcon-hawk
( Apollo sent it) of th Right Hand, between
The Ship and young Telemachus was seen;
Towering he flies, and bears a Dove away,
Clinch'd in his Talons for his dainty Prey;
Plucked from the Roots her Feathers all around
Fly scattered in the Air, down to the Ground.
Mr. Dechair. By which Theoclymenus foretold, that Telemachus should prevail
over ^is Enemies.

Swallows flying about, or resting upon a place, were an unlucky Omen. In
Darius's Expedition against Scythia, the Appearance of them presaged the bad
Fortune he a^terwards met with, when his Army was totally defeated by the
Scythians. The same Birds sitting upon Pyrrhus's Tent, and Antony's Ship, are
said to have signified ^he overthrow of the Armies of both those Generals.

Owls were for the most part looked upon to be unlucky Birds, ^ut at Athens
were Omens of Victory and Success, being sacred ^o Minerva, the Protectress of
that City; and therefore the Proverb (...), was usually applied to Persons,
whose Undertakings (...) with Success. Themist^cle.
Plutarch reports, that when Themistocles was con^ulting with the other
Officers, upon the uppermost Deck of the Ship, and most of them opposed him,
being unwilling to hazard a Battle, an Owl coming upon the Right side of the
Ship, and lighting upon the Mast, so animated them, that they unanimously
concurred with him, and prepared themselves for the Fight. But in other places
i^ was otherwise, as we are told by Histor. Anim. lib. XV. c. LIX.
Aelian, who says, that Owl^ were unlucky Omens, when they appeared to Men
going about any serious Business: an Instance of which we have in King Pyrrhus,
whose inglorious Death at Argos was portended by an Owl, which came and sat
upon the top of his Spear, as he held it in his Hand. And for this Reason, when
Diomedes and Ulysses went as Spies to the Trojan Camp, though it was Night, the
most proper Time for Owls to appea^ in, yet Iliad. (...).
Homer reports, that Minerva gave them a lucky Omen, by sending an (...), or
Hern, (...)
(...) --
As they were marching on, a lucky Hern
Minerva sent --
Where Eustathius says, that this Bird was a Token of Success, to Me^ that lay
in Ambush, or were engaged in any such secret Designs. Ye^ Owls were not at all
times esteemed inauspicious, as appears from Hieron, at whose first Admission
into Military Service, an Eagle came and sat upon his Shield, and an Owl upon
his Spear; by which wa^ signified, that he should be Valiant in War, and Wise
in Counsel, and at length arrive to the Dignity of a King. This Story you may
find in Justin, at the end of his Third Book.

The Dove in Homer is a lucky Bird. So also was the Swan, espe^cially to
Mariners, being an Omen of Fair Weather; for which w^ have a reason in
Aemilius, as he is cited by Niphus, Cygnus in auspiciis semper laetissimus ales,
Hunc optant Nautae, quia non se mergit in undis.
The Mariner, when tossed by angry Seas,
Straight for a Swan, the luckiest Omen, prays;
For she her self in the Waters never does drown.


Crows, and Ravens, if they appeared about an Army, were dan^gerous Omens. If
they came croaking upon the Right Hand, it wa^ a tolerable good Omen: if on the
Left, a very bad one; as also the Chattering of Magpies seems to have been.
When Alexander entere^ into Babylon, and Cicero fled from Antony, their Deaths
were for^^told by the Noise of Ravens: And these Birds alone were though^ to
have any sense of their own Predictions, because (as Lib. X. cap. XII.
Pliny writes) the worst Omens were given by them, when they made a harsh sort
of a Noise, rattling in their Throats, as if they were choked.

Cocks were also accounted Prophetical, especially in Matters of War, for they
were sacred to Mars, and therefore are called by Aristophanes (...), and were
usually offered in Sacrifice to him, and pictured with him. The Crowing of
Cocks was an auspicious Omen, and presaged Themistocles's Victory over the
Persians; in Memory whereof he instituted an Annual Feast, called (...), which
was observed by Fighting Cocks in the Theater. And that Signal Victory, wherein
the Boeotians overthrew the Lacedaemonians, was foretold by the Crowing of
Cocks some whole Nights before, which was interpreted to be an Omen of Success;
because the Cock, when he is overcome, sits silent and melancholy; but when he
obtains the Victory, struts and crows, and as it were Triumphs over his
vanquished Enemy. On the contrary, if a Hen was heard to crow, they thought
some dreadful Judgment was hanging over their Heads.

Thus I have given you a short Account of the Principal Birds, that were
esteemed Ominous; I am not ignorant that there were several others, by which
they made Predictions, and several other ways of Foretelling from those I have
already mentioned; but what I have said, is, I think, sufficient; and therefore
shall not be much farther tedious to you. Only I must not forget to tell you,
That there were some that pretended to understand the Language of Birds, and
thereby to be privy to the most secret Transactions; such an one was the famous
Magician Apollonius the Tyanean, of whom it is reported, that as he was sitting
in a Parlour with his Friends, there came a Sparrow, and chattered to a flock
of Birds that were before the Window; Apollonius having heard the noise, said,
She invited them to a Feast, at such a certain place, where a Mule laden with
Corn, had let his Burden fall: the Company, desirous to know the truth of the
Business, rose up immediately, went to the place, and found it as he had told
them. Democritus also was a pretender to this piece of Skill, and gave out,
that he could teach others the Method of attaining it; which he did by telling
them the Names of certain Birds, out of a mixture of whose Blood a Serpent
would proceed; which being eaten, would without any farther trouble, inspire
into them this Knowledge. It is also feigned of Melampus, that he arrived at
this Art, by having his Ears licked by Dragons. Such another Story Eustathius
relates of Helenus, and Cassandra, the Children of Priamus, the Trojan King;
viz. That being left in Apollo's Temple, Serpents came to them, and rounding
themselves about their Ears, made them so quick of Hearing, that they could
discover the Counsels, and Designs of the Gods. I must add one thing more, out
of Apuleius; viz. That when any Unlucky Night-Birds, as Owls, Swallows, Bats,
etc. got into a House; to avert the bad Omen, they took especial care to catch
them, and hang them before their Doors, that so the Birds themselves might
undergo, or atone for those Evils, which they had threatened to the Family.

Thus much for Birds. It will be convenient in the next place, to speak
something concerning the Predictions made by Insects, Beasts, and Signs in the
Heavens. First then, Ants were made use of in Divination, as may appear from
the Instance given in the last Chapter, where I told you, Cimon's Death was
presaged by them. Another Instance you may have in Midas, the Phrygian King;
for when he was a Boy, and fast asleep, Ants came, and dropped grains of Wheat
into his Mouth; whereupon the Southsayers being consulted, foretold, that he
would be the richest Man in the World.

Bees were esteemed an Omen of future Eloquence, as appears from the Story of
Plato; for as he lay in the Cradle, Bees are said to have come to him, and sat
upon his Lips; whereupon the Augurs foretold, that he should be famous for
Sweetness of Language, and delightful Eloquence. And Pindar is said to have
been exposed, and nourished by Bees with Honey instead of Milk. Other things
also were foretold by them: But the Romans esteemed them an Unlucky and very
dreadful Omen, as you may see in Plutarch's Life of Brutus.

There was a Locust green, and slow in Motion, called (...), which was observed
in Soothsaying, as Suidas takes notice. Toads were accounted Lucky Omens.
Snakes also, and Serpents were Ominous; as appears by the Serpent, that, in
Homer's second Iliad, devoured eight young Sparrows, with their Dam; which was
by Calchas interpreted to signify, that the Siege of Troy should continue nine
whole Years. Boars were unlucky Omens, boding an unhappy Event to all the
Designs of Persons that met them. I shall mention but one more; viz. the Hare,
a most cowardly, and timorous Animal; and therefore appearing in time of War,
it signified vanquishment, and running away: When Xerxes had prepared an
innumerable Army to invade Greece, it happened that a Mare brought forth a
Hare; which Prodigy was a Presage of Xerxes's base and cowardly Flight, after
his Fleet was destroyed by Themistocles.

I come in the last place to speak a word or two concerning Omens from Heaven.
I do not mean those, by which Philosophers and Astrologers made their
Predictions; but such as were usually observed by the common People: such were
Comets, which were always thought to portend something dreadful, according to
that trite saying, -- numquam visa est impune Cometa.

Such also were Eclipses of the Sun, or Moon, with which several Armies have
been so terrified, that they durst not engage their Enemies, though upon never so
great Advantages. Plutarch, in his Treatise of Superstition, reports, That
Nicias, the Athenian General, being surrounded on every side by his Enemies,
was struck into such a consternation by an Eclipse of the Moon, that he
commanded his Soldiers to lay down their Arms, and so, together with a
numerous Army, tamely yielded up himself to the slaughter. For the true cause
of them being unknown, they were imputed to the immediate operation of the
Gods, that were thought thereby to give notice of some signal and imminent
Danger: and so strongly were the Vulgar possessed with this Opinion, that
Anaxagoras brought himself into no small danger, by pretending to assign a
Natural reason for them.

Lightnings also were observed; and if they appeared on the Right Hand,
accounted Good Omens; but if on the Left, Unlucky: as Eustathius has observed,
in his Comment upon the second Iliad; where Nestor tells the Graecians,
earnestly desiring to return into their own Country, That Jupiter had made a
promise, that they should take Troy, and confirmed it by Lightning, (...).
By Ominous Lightning gave the lucky Sign.


Other Meteors also were observed by the Soothsayers, as the Ignis Lambens,
which was an excellent Omen, presaging future Felicity; as appears from Servius
Tullius, whose Promotion to the Kingdom of Rome was foretold by it. The
Argonauts, in their Expedition to Colchos, were overtaken by a dangerous
Tempest, near the Sigian Promontory; whereupon Orpheus made supplication to the
Gods for their Deliverance; a little after, there appeared two Lambent Flames
about the Heads of Castor and Pollux, and upon this ensued a fine gentle Gale,
the Winds ceasing, and the Sea becoming calm and still: This sudden alteration,
begot in the Company a Belief, that the two Brethren had some Divine Power and
Efficacy, by which they were able to still the raging of the Sea; insomuch that
it became a Custom for Mariners, whenever they were in any dangerous Storms, to
invoke their Assistance. If the two Flames (which from this Story are called by
the Names of the two Heroes) appeared together, they were ever after esteemed
an excellent Omen, foreboding good Weather; and therefore Theocritus, in his
Hymn upon the Dioscuri, praises them for delivering poor Seamen, ready to be
swallowed up by the Deep, (...)
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...)
(...).
And when the gaping Deep would fain devour
The tattered Ship, You hinder't with Your Power.
The stormy Winds that vex the troubled Seas,
At Your command, their roaring Blusters cease;
The pil'd up Waves are stilled, and quiet lain,
An even Calmness makes a watery Plain.
The Clouds that had before obscured the Sky,
Vanish away, and quickly dispersed fly.
The Bears, and other lucky Stars appear,
And bid the Seamen Safety not to fear.
Mr. Cre^cb. Horace speaks to the same purpose, calling these two Meteors
Stellae, or Stars, Dicam and Alciden, puerosque Ledae:
Hunc equis, illum superare pugnis
Nobilem; quorum simul alba Nautis
Stella refulsit,
Defluit saxis agitatus Humor
Concidunt Venti, fugiuntque Nubes,
Et minax (quod sic voluere) ponto
Unda recumbit Carm. lib. 1.
.
Alcides next my Muse must write,
And Leda's Sons; one famed for Horse,
And one in close, and Handy Fight
Of haughty Brav'ry, and of noble Force.
When both their Stars at once appear,
The Winds are hushed, they rage no more,
(It is their will) the Skies are clear,
And Waves roll softly by the quiet Shore.
Mr. Creech. If one Flame appeared single, it was called Helena, and was a very
dangerous Omen, portending nothing but Storms, and Shipwracks; especially if it
followed Castor and Pollux by the Heels; and, as it were, drove them away. Though
Euripides, in his Orestes, makes them all prosperous and desirable Signs, where
speaking of Helena, he says, (...),
(...)
(...).
For being sprung from Jove, she needs must be
Immortal too; and with her Brethren share
The Heavenly Regions, where her glorious Beams
Will shine alike, to help the Mariner.
Mr. Dechair.

The Winds also were thought to contain in them something Pro^hetical, and were
taken notice of in Soothsaying; as appears from Thebaid. III.
Statius, when he says, -- Ventis, aut alite visae
Bellorum proferre diem. --
And as the Birds, or boding Winds presage,
Differ the fatal day of Battle.


I might add a great many others, which I shall pass by, only ^^ntioning one
more; viz. the Thunder, the Noblest, and most ob^er^ed of all the Heavenly
Omens. It was Good, or Bad, like other Signs, according to its different
Position; for on the Right Hand, (...) was lucky; on the Left, unfortunate.
Thunder in a clear and se^ene Sky, was a happy Sign, and given by Jupiter in
Odyss. (...). v. 102.
Homer, as ^ confirmation, that he granted the Petitions made to him. The
Poet's words are these, where he speaks of Ulysses that had been sup^licating
the God for some Sign, to encourage him in his Enterprise against Penelope's
Courtiers; (...),
(...)
(...).
Thus prayed the Sire: and All-wise Jupiter
Forthwith, propitious to his earnest Prayer,
A Clap of Well-presaging Thunder sent,
From bright Olympus Crystal Firmament,
Which glads his Soul. --
Mr. Hutchin.

To avert unlucky Omens given by Thunder, it was usual to ^ake a Libation of
Wine, pouring it forth in Cups. And they ^^ood in so much fear of Lightning,
that they adored it, as Lib. XXVIII. cap. II.
Pliny ^bserves, and endeavored to avert its malignant Influences, by hissing,
and whistling at it; which they called (...), as it is evident from Vespis.
Aristophanes, when he says, (...), If I cast forth Lightning, (...), they will
hiss; where the Scholiast observes, that it was usual (...), to hiss at the
Lightning.

CHAPTER XVI. Of Divination by Lots.
OF Lots there were four sorts, viz. Political, Military, Lusorious, and
Divinatory: the three first do not at all concern my present purpose, however
treated of by some in this place. Of the Prophetical there were diverse sorts,
two of which were most in use, viz. (...), and (...).

(...), was a sort of Divination by Verses, wherein 'twas usual to take
Fatidical Verses, and writing them upon little pieces of Paper, put them into a
Vessel, and so draw them out, expecting to read their Fate in the first
Draught. This was often practiced upon the Sibylline Oracles, which were
dispersed up and down in Greece, Italy, and all the Roman Empire: whence it is,
that so frequent mention i^ made in Authors of the Sorts Sibyllinae. Sometimes
they took a Poet, and opening in one, or more places* accepted the first Ver^e
they met with, for a Prediction. This was also called (...), from the
Rhapsodies of Homer; and, as some are of Opinion, proceeded, at the first, from
the Esteem which Poets had amongst the Ancients, by whom they were reputed
Divine, and Inspired Persons. But, as Homer had of all the Poets the greatest
Name, so also the Sorts Homericae of all others were in the most Credit: Yet
Euripid^^, and other Poets were not wholly neglected, but had some share in
this Honor. Virgil also, and the Latin Poets, were made use of in this way, as
appears as well from other Instances, as that remarkable one of Severus, whose
Promotion to the Roman Empire was foretold by opening at this Verse, Tu regere
Imperio populos, Roman, memento.
Remember, Roman, with Imperial Sway
To rule the People. --


The Christians also practiced the like on the Bible, according to that of
Nicephorus, (...), i. e. He judged it necessary to dip into the Psalter, th^^
there he might find a Support, or Defense against the Distress (...) labored
under. And Heraclius is reported by Cedrenus, to have asked Counsel of the New
Testament, (...), and to have been thereby persuaded, to winter in A^bania. And
Saint Augustine himself, though he disallows this Practi^e (...) Secular Affairs,
yet seems to approve of it in Spiritual Matters, as ^^pears from his Epist.
CXIX.
Epistle to Ianuarius.

(...), was a sort of Divination, wherein they made Con^^ctures, by throwing
(...), or Lots; where you may observe, (...) Lots were called in the plural
number (...), and by the (...), sorts; to distinguish them from (...), and
sors, which in the ^^^gular number usually signified the Hint, or Occasion
given to ^^^iners, to make their Conjectures by, as the Scholiast upon (...)
reports. These (...) were usually black and white Beans; ^^ongst the Ancients
little Clods of Earth; Pebles also, Dice, or such (...) things, distinguished
by certain Characters, or Marks: these they (...) into a Vessel, and having
made Supplication to the Gods, to (...) them, drew them out, and according to
the Characters, con^^^tured what should happen to them. All Lots were sacred to
(...), whom they thought to preside over this Divination; and there^^^ the
Ancients, as Il. (...). p. 548. Ed. ^asil.
Eustathius observes, (...), i. e. for Good Luck's sake, and that Mercury might
be propitious to them, ^^d with the rest of the Lots, to put in one, which they
called (...), or Mercury's Lot, which was an Olive-leaf, and was drawn (...)
before the rest. This Divination was either invented, or at least so much
practiced by the Thriae, who were three Nymphs, that nursed Apollo, that at
length the word (...) came to be a Synonymous (...) with (...) whence the
Proverb, (...).
Crowds of your Lot-diviners every where,
But few true Prophets. --


To this Species of Divination we may reduce (...), ^^ Prophesying by Rods,
mentioned also in the Holy Writings, wherein Cap. IV. v. 12.
Hosea, amongst other abominable wickednesses committed by the Isr^^lites,
reckons this as none of the smallest, (...). Our Translation renders it thus,
My people ask counsel at their Stocks, and their Staff declares unto them; for
(...) spirit of Whoredom has caused them to err, and they have gone a whor^^^
from under their God. The Manner of it seems to have been thus; T^^y took small
Sticks, and having put certain Characters upon them, (...) them into a Vessel,
and then drew them out. Not much diffe^^^^ was (...), in which Divination was
made by Arrows, taken together in a Quiver. Others are of opinion, that the
Arrows were cast into the Air, and the Man was to steer his course the sam^
way, that the Arrow inclined in it is descent. And the like has bee^ practiced,
even in our Days, upon Sticks erected. This seems to be the Divination said to
be used by Nebuchadnezzar, in Ezechiel, where he deliberates about invading the
Israelites, and the Ammonites: The words are these, as they are rendered by our
Translators; Cap. XXI. v. 20.
(...) a way, that the sword may come to Rabbath of the Ammonites, and (...)
Juda in Jerusalem the defenced. For the King of Babylon stood at (...) parting
of the way, at the head of two ways, to use divination: he (...) his Arrows
bright, (the Septuagint Translation speaks not of (...), but (...)) he
consulted with Images, he looked into the Liver. At (...) right hand was his
Divination for Jerusalem, to appoint Captains, to (...) the mouth in the
slaughter, to lift up the voice with shouting, to appoint ^^tering Rams against
the Gates, to cast a Mount, and to build a Fort. (...) because the Prophet
speaks of making his Arrows bright, some (...) Opinion, that he divined by
looking upon the Iron-heads of the Arrows, and observing the various
appearances in them; in the same manner, as some in our Days, pretend to tell
Fortunes, by looking upon their Nails, says Clarius upon the place. Another
Method of Divination by Rods was used by the Scythians, and is described (...)
Lib. IV.
Herodotus. From the Scythians it was derived, with some alteration, to the
Germans, and is described by Lib. de Morib. German.
Tacitus. Others also you may read of in Lib. X^.
Strabo, Lib. XII.
Athenaeus, and Lib. XXIX.
Ammianus Marcelli^^^; but these, and some others, I shall pass by, as not
pertinent to my present Design.

Another way of Divination by Lots was used in Greece, and Rome, which was
this: The Person that was desirous to learn his Fortune, carried with him a
certain number of Lots, distinguished by several Characters, or Inscriptions,
and walking to and fro in the public Ways, desired the first Boy that met him,
to draw; and (...) that which came forth, agreed with what he had conceived in
(...) Mind, it was taken for an infallible Prophesy. This Divination is by
Plutarch, in his Treatise about Isis and Osiris, said to be derived from the
Egyptians, by whom the Actions and Words of Boys were carefully observed, as
containing in them something Divine, and Prophetical; and that for a reason no
less absurd, than the Practice (...) self; all the grounds they had for it
being only this, viz. That (...) having wandered up and down, in a fruitless
search after Osiris, happened at last upon a Company of Boys at Play, and was
by (...) informed about what she had so long sought for in vain. To this Custom
of Divining by Boys, as some think, Lib. I. Eleg. III.
Tibullus allude^, when he says, Illa sacras pneri sorts ter sustulit, illi
Rettulit e triviis omina certa puer.
Thrice in the Streets the sacred Lots she threw,
And thence the Boy did c^rtain Omens show.
But I am rather of Opinion, that the Poet speaks of a different kind of Lots,
which was this: In the Market, Highways, and other places of concourse, it was
usual for a Boy, or Man, whom the Greeks called (...), to stand with a little
Tablet, called in Greek (...), or (...), upon which were written cer^ain
Fatidical Verses, which, according as the Dice light upon them, told the
Consultants what Fortune they were to expect: Sometimes, instead of Tablets,
they had Pots, or Urns, into which the Lots were thrown, and thence drawn by
the Boys; and I am the rather inclined to think the Poet's Words are to be
understood in this Sense, because he says, the Woman her self, that had a mind
to ^e instructed, what was to befall her, took up the Lots; which can never be
meant of the Boy's drawing Cuts out the Woman's Hand. Artemidorus, in his
Preface, speaks of (...), i. e. Diviners in the Marketplace; and the Sorts
viales were very common at Rome: the Circus was thronged with those, and a
great many other Diviners, which the poor, silly Women used to consult, as Sat.
VI. v 851.
Iuvenal witnesses: His words are these, Si mediocris erit, spatium lustrabit
utrumque
Metarum, and sorts ducet: frontemque, manumque
Praebebit vati crebrum poppysma roganti.
Divitibus responsa dabit Phryx augur, and inde
Conductus, dabit astrorum, mundique peritus;
Atque aliquis Senior qui publica fulgura condit.
Plebeium in Circo positum est, and in ^ggere fatum;
Quae nudis longum ostendit cervicibus aurum,
Consulit ante Phalas, Delphinorumque columnas
An saga vendenti nubat caupone relicto.
The middle sort, who have not much to spare,
Into the crowded Circus straight repair,
And from the cheaper Lots their Fortunes hear.
Or else to cunning Chiromancers go,
Who clap the pretty Palm, and thence their Fortunes know.
But the rich Matron, who has more to give,
Her Answers from the Brachman will receive.
Skilled in the Globe and Sphere, he gravely stands,
And with his Compass measures Seas, and Lands.
The Poorest of the Sex have still an Itch
To know their Fortunes, equal to the Rich;
The Dairy-maid enquires if she may take
The trusty Tailor, and the Cook forsake.
Whereby it appears, that Lots had very small Credit in Iuvenal's Days, being
consulted only by the meaner sort, and such as were not able to be at the
charge of more reputable Divinations. Didymus tells us, this was done by
Jupiter, who being desirous, that Apollo should preside in chief over
Divination, brought Lots, which are said to have been invented by Minerva, into
disrepute.

CHAPTER XVII. Of Divination by Ominous Words, and Things.
ANOTHER sort of Divination there was, very different from all those I have
hitherto spoken of, which foretold things to come, not by any studied Methods,
but by certain Accidents, and Casual Occurrences, that were thought to contain
in them Presages of Good, or Evil. Of these there were three sorts: The first
was of Things Internal, by which I mean those that affected the Persons
themselves. The second, of Things External, that only appeared to Men, but did
not make any Impression upon them. The third were Ominous Words. Of these in
their order.

First of those Omens that Men received from themselves, which are
distinguished into four Kinds: 1. Marks upon the Body, as (...), Spots like
Oil. Secondly, sudden Perturbations, seizing upon the Mind; such were the
Panici terrores, Panick Fears, which were sudden Frights, and Consternations,
that seized upon Men, without any visible cause, and therefore were imputed to
the Operation of Demons, especially Pan, upon Men's Phansies. Of these there
is frequent mention in History; as when Brennus, the Gallick General, had been
defeated by the Greeks, the Night following, He, and the remainders of his
Troops were seized with such Terrors, and Distractions, that, ignorant of what
they were a doing, they fell together by the Ears, wounding, and killing one
another, till they were all utterly destroyed Such another Fright gave the
Athenians a great Advantage against the Persians, insomuch that Pan had a
Statue erected for that piece of Service; as appears from one of Simonides's
Epigrams, (...),
(...).
Grateful Miltiades raised this Monument,
That Me Arcadian Pan does represent;
Because I aided him, and Warlike Greece
Against the Powerful Medes. --
The reason why these Terrors were attributed to Pan, was, because when Osiris
was bound by Typho, Pan and the Satyrs appearing, cast him into a Fright. Or,
because he frighted the Giants, that waged war against Jupiter. In these
Terrors, whereof there was either no apparent Cause, or at least none
answerable to the greatness of the sudden Consternation; it was a good Remedy
do to something quite contrary to what the Danger would have required, had it
been such as men vainly imagined. Thus Alexander caused his Soldiers to disarm
themselves, when they were on a sudden in a great Fear of they knew not what.

All sudden and extraordinary Emotions and Perturbations, in Body, or Mind,
were looked upon as evil Omens; such was that of Penelope's Courtiers described
by Odyss. (...). v. 345
Homer, and said to have been caused by Minerva, their implacable Enemy; --
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...)
(...).
The Courtiers straight offended Pallas seized
With profuse laughter, not to be appeased;
And raving frantic thoughts, they now appear
Overwhelmed with laughter, not what first they were:
Their Eyes with briny tears o'reflow'd, their Food
Amazing Sight! seemed changed to putrid Blood.
Nothing their anxious thoughts does entertain,
But lamentable grief. --
An Augur that was present amongst them, was affrighted at so dreadful an Omen,
and presently broke out into this Exclamation, (...); --
Ah wretched Men! what Fate is this you bear?


The third sort of Internal Omens, were the (...), or (...), so called (...),
from Palpitating. Such were the Palpitations of the Heart, the Eye, or any of
the Muscles, called in Latin Salissationes; and (...), or a Ringing in the
Ears; which if it was in the Right Ear, was a lucky Omen; so also was the
Palpitation of the Right Eye, as Theocritus tells us, (...); --
My Right-Eye twinkles. --


De Augur. l. I. c. IX.
Niphus has enumerated all the Parts of the Body, with all the Omens to be
gathered from the Palpitations of each of them; whom you may consult at
leisure. Melampus, the famous Fortune Tellers, dedicated a Book upon this
subject to Ptolomee Philadelphus: Another to the same purpose was composed by
Posidonius, as Suidas reports; the Title of which was (...).

The fourth sort of Internal Omens, were the (...), or Sneezings which were so
superstitiously observed, that Divine Worship was thought due to them; though
some say this Adoration was only an Expiation of the Omen: Others are of
Opinion, as In Athen^um l. II. c. XXV.
Casaubon observes, That Sneezing was a Disease, or at least a Symptom of some
Infirmity; and therefore when any Man Sneezed, it was usual to say, (...), May
you Live; or, (...), GOD bless you. To this Custom Ammian alludes, in an
Epigram upon a Fellow with a long Nose, which he says was at so great a
distance from his Ears, that he could not hear himself Sneeze, (...)
(...).
His long-beak'd Snout, at such a distance lies
From his dull Ears, that he never hears it Sneeze;
And therefore never does he say, GOD bless.
Where you may observe, That it was not only usual for Persons that stood by,
to cry, (...), but also for Men when themselves Sneezed. However it be, it is
certain, that Sneezing was accounted sacred, as appears from Loc. ci^at.
Athenaeus, who proves that the Head was esteemed holy; because it was
customary to swear by it, and adore as holy the Sneezes that proceeded from it:
And Aristotle tell us in express Terms* That Sneezing was accounted a Deity,
(...) Casaubon also has proved the same, out of De Expedit. C^ri lib. III.
Xenophon; where he reports, that the Soldiers with one accord worshipped it
as a God. But it is scarce supposable, they could be so far immersed in
ignorance, as to think every Act of Sneezing a Deity; nor do Aristotle's words
necessarily imply they did; for no more need be understood by them, than that
there was a God of Sneezing, called (...) and Xenophon may be expounded the
same way, viz. That when the Soldiers heard a Sneeze, they worshipped the God,
i. e. the God of Sneezing: Or it may be, no more is meant, than that they
worshipped God, perhaps in the usual form of (...) or by casting up some other
short Ejaculation to any of the Gods, to avert the Omen.

However, it is certain that great regard was given to Sneezing, inso^^ch that
if a Man Sneezed at such a Time, or on such a side, it was ^^ough to persuade
them to, or discourage them from any Business of the greatest moment.
Euphrantides reports, that a Sneeze upon the Right Hand was used by
Themistocles to his Soldiers, as a prevailing Arg^ment to persuade them to
fight. Such a Sneeze happening, whilst Xenophon was making a Speech, was
thought a sufficient Reason to constitute him General. And Socrates himself,
though a great despiser of Heathen Superstitions, judged it not unreasonable, to
catch advice from another Man's Nose, and make a Sneeze serve instead of an
Admonition from the Demon, that is said to have continually at^ended upon him,
giving him Counsel how to demean himself upon all Occasions.

Sneezing was not always a lucky Omen, but varied according to the alteration
of Circumstances: for once when Xenophon was persuading ^is Soldiers to
encounter the Enemy, a Sneeze was accounted so dangerous an Omen, that they
were forced to appoint public Prayers, ^or the Expiation of it. If a Man
Sneezed in the Morning, it was a good Omen; but if in the Afternoon, a bad one;
the reason of which is accounted for by Aristotle, in his Problems. If a Man
Sneezed at the Table, while they were taking away; or if another happened to
Sneeze upon his Left Hand, it was unlucky; if on the Right Hand, fortunate. If
in the Undertaking any Business, two, or four Sneezes happened, 'twas a lucky
Omen, and gave Encouragement to ^roceed; if more than four, the Omen was
neither Good, nor Bad; if one, or three, it was unlucky, and dehorted them from
proceeding in what they had designed. If two Men were deliberating about any
Business, and both of them chanced to Sneeze together, it was a prosperous
Omen, as De Auguriis cap. VIII.
Niphus relates, in his Book of Augu^ies, where he has enumerated a great many
other Circumstances in Sneezing, and the Omens thought to be given by them.

I come in the next place to speak something concerning the Omens that appeared
to Men, but were not contained in their own Bodies; o^ which there were several
sorts: As first, The Beginnings of Things ^ere looked upon to contain something
ominous; as Ovid has observed, Rerum principiis omina inesse solent;
Ad primam vocem timidas advertimus aures,
Et primum visam consulit Augur avem.
Hither also are to be referred (...), or Omens offering themselves in the way,
of which Polis, and Hippocrates (not the Physician) are said to have written
Books.

Such as these were, the meeting of an Eunuch, a Black, an Ape, a Bitch with
whelps, a Fixon with Cubs; a Snake lying so in the Way, as to part the Company;
a Hare crossing the way. A Woman working at her Spindle, or carrying it
uncovered, was thought to be very prejudicial to any Design, and to blast
whatever Hopes they had conceived about any thing; especially about the fruits
of the Ground. A Weezle crossing the way, was a sufficient Reason to defer a
Public Assembly for that Day; it was called (...), and Artemidorus gives the
Reason, why its Running by was so much taken notice of; viz. because it is
(...) to (...), that is, (as Mr. Bogan explains it) the Letters in each word
signify the same Number, viz. 42. All these were (...), and (...), i. e.
unlucky, and abominable Sights.

Another sort of External Omens were those that happened at home, and the
Divination that observed them, was called (...), concerning which it is
reported, that Xenocrates wrote a Treatise. Such as these were the coming in of
a black Dog, a Mouse eating a (...) of Salt, the appearing of a Snake, or
Weezle upon the Housetop. This sort of Divining by Beasts, is reported by
Suidas, to have been invented by Telegonus. Such also were the Throwing down of
Salt, the Spilling of Water, Honey, or Wine, ^aking the Wine away, while any
Person was drinking, a sudden Silence, and ten thousand other Accidents. In
putting on their Clothes, the Right side must be served first; and therefore if
a Servant did but give his Master the Left Shoe first, he was sure to have it
thrown at his Head.

Hither also may be referred the various Actions that were though^ to contain
in them Good, or Bad Fortune. For Instance, At Fea^^s it was accounted lucky to
crown the Cup with a Garland, -- Pateramque Corona
Induit --
And with a Garland did the Cup surround.
says Virgil: And, Vina coronant, in imitation of Homer's Heroes, who used to
drink out of Cups, that were (...) the reason of which (says Eustathius, out
of Athenaeus) was this, viz. Because a Garland represents a Circle, which is
the most capacious, and compl^^^ of all Figures. It was usual also, to carry
home the Fragments (...) at Sacrifices, for good Luck's sake, as I have
observed in anoth^r place; and these were called (...), because they were
thought (...) contribute to the preservation of their Health Hesychius.
etc. Thus much for Ominous Actions, and Accidents, whereof I have only given
yo^ some that were most remarkable and usual; for it would be an endle^^
Undertaking, to enumerate all of them, every Day's Reading being able ^o
furnish almost infinite numbers.

In the last place, I come to speak something of Ominous Words, which as they
were Good, or Bad, were believed to presage accord^^gly. Such Words were called
(...), or (...), ^s the Latin Omen is so called, q. Oremen, quia fit ab ore, i.
e. because it proceeds from the Mouth, says Festus: You may render them
Voices, ^or Tully has called them by the Name of Voces: The Pythagoreans
(says he) used to observe the Voices of Men, as well as of the Gods. This sort
of Divination, was most in use at Smyrna (as Pausanias reports) where they had
(...), a Temple, in which Answer^ ^ere returned this way; and Apollo Spodius
gave Oracles in Thebes, ^^^er the same Manner, as I have already told you: But
the first In^ention of it is attributed to Ceres.

Words that boded Ill, were called (...), or (...) and ^e that spoke them, was
said (...), as E^^ipides terms it; where he speaks of certain Ominous Words let
^^ll by a Servant, at a Feast, just as one of the Company was going ^o drink,
(...).
Unlucky Words one of the Servants spoke.
(...) calls it obscoenare, or as some read, obscaevare; for scaeva
signi^^eth Luck, either good, or bad; and the Words Horace calls Male (...)
Verba, -- male ominatis
Parcite verbis.
Ill-boding Words forbear to name.
(...) Words as these, they had always a superstitious Care to avoid; ^^somuch
that instead of (...), i. e. a Prison, they would often (...) (...), i. e. an
House; for (...) for (...) (...) (...), or (...), and such like: For there were
(...) great many Words, which they made almost as great a Scruple to ^peak, as
the Jews their Nomen Tetragrammaton. And therefore in Time of ^^vine Worship,
as I have observed before, nothing was more strictly com^^^ded, than that they
should (...), or avoid all Ominous Ex^^e^^ions; Which, if they were spoken by a
Brother, or any other early related to the Person, whose Business was in hand,
they took the ^reater notice of them, and accounted them so much the Worse. Mr.
^ryden has excellently expressed this Custom in his Oedipus, where after (...)
Hero has been thundering a great many dreadful Imprecations upon (...)
Murderers of Laius, Iocasta is introduced, speaking thus, Jocasta. At your
Devotions? Heaven succeed your Wishes;
And bring the effect of these your pious Prayers
On You, on Me, and All.

Priest. Avert this Omen, Heaven!

Oedipus. O fatal sound! Unfortunate Jocasta!
What have thou said? an ill hour have thou chosen
For these fore-boding Words; why, we were cursing.

Jocasta. Then may that Curse fall only where You laid it.

Oedipus. Speak no more!
For all thou say is ominous: We were cursing;
And that dire Imprecation have thou fastened
On Thebes, and Thee, and Me, and All of us.

Jocasta. Are then my Blessings turned into a Curse?
O unkind Oedipus! My former Lord
Thought Me his Blessing: be thou like my Laius.

Oedipus. What yet again! the third time have thou cursed Me?
This Imprecation was for Laius's Death,
And thou have wished Me like Him.

Mr. Dryden. Which Verses I have here transcribed, because they do fully
represent the ancient Custom of catching at Ominous Expressions.

Some Words, and Proper Names there were, which imported Success, answerably to
their Natural Signification; of which take this Instance: Leotychides desiring
of a Samian his Assistance against the Persians, asked him his Name; and being
told it was (...), i. e. the Leader of an Army; replied, (...), I embrace the
Omen in the Name; (...), amongst the Greeks, importing the same with accipere
Omen amongst the Latins, which signifies the accepting of an Omen, and applying
it to the Business i^ hand: For it was thought to lie very much in the Power of
the Hearer, whether he would receive the Omen, or not; Ostentorum v^res in
eorum erant potestate, quibus ostendebantur, says Pliny, i. e. The Force and
Efficacy of Omens depended upon the Persons, to whom they appeared. For if the
Omen was immediately catched by the Hearer, or struck upon his Imagination, it
was Eff^cacious; but if it ^as neglected, or not taken notice of, it was
Invalid, and of no Force. And therefore Virgil introduces Aeneas, as it were,
snatching Asc^nius's Words from his Mouth; for the Harpyes, and Anchise^ also
in another place, having foretold, that the Trojans should suffer so dreadful a
Famine, that they should be forced to gnaw their very Tables, for want of
better Provisions, Aeneid. III. v. 255.
Sed non ante datam cingetis moenibus Urbem,
Quam Vos dira fames, nostraeque injuria caedis,
Ambesas subigat malis absumere mensas.
With Walls the City shall not bulwark'd be,
'Ere Famine shall revenge our Injury;
Sad Famine, when the once luxurious Lord,
Instead of Food, shall gnaw the sapless Board.
Mr. Hutchin. After this, they landed in Italy; and happening to dine upon the
Grass, instead of Tables, or Trenchers, which their present Circumstances did
not afford, they laid their Meat upon their Bread, which afterward they Eat up
also; at which in Jest Aeneid. VII. ver. 116.
Heus! etiam mensas consumimus, inquit Iulus.
See, says Iulus, we our Tables eat,
Aeneas presently catched the Omen, as the Poet subjoyns, -- ea Vox audita
laborum
Prima tulit finem; primamque loquentis ab Ore
Eripuit Pater, ac stupefactus Numine pressit.
The lucky sound no sooner reached their Ears,
But straight they quite dismissed their former cares.
His good old Sire with admiration struck
The boding Sentence when yet falling took,
And often rolled it in his silent Breast.
Mr. Hutchin.

For Good Luck's sake, whenever they applied themselves to any ^e^ious
Business, they took especial care to begin with such a preface a^ this, (...),
or (...), or (...); like to Persius's H^c been sit; and that old threadbare
saying of the Romans, Quod (...), faelix, f^^tunatumque sit. And all their
Works, and Speeches were begun in the Name of some God; whence Aratus, (...) --
Let us with Jove begin.
Which Theocritus has borrowed from him, in his seventeenth Eclogue, and Virgil
in his third. Lib. de Ration. ^edit.
Xenophon gives the Reason of this practice, viz. That things undertaken in the
Name of the Gods, were like to have the most prosperous Events.

It will not be improper to add in this place, that Certain Times also were
Ominous, some Days being accounted Fortunate, and causes of Success; others
Unfortunate, and causes of the miscarriage of things undertaken upon them, as
Hesi^d in his Days observes, (...).
Some Days, like rigid Step-Dames, adverse prove,
Thwart our Intentions, cross what e're we love;
Others more Fortunate, and lucky shine,
And, as a tender Mother, bless what we design.
Mr. Hutchin. Some Days were proper for one Business, others for another, and
some for none at all, as my Author relates in the forementioned Poem; where he
runs through all the Days in the Month, declaring the Virtue and Efficacy of
them.

The way to avert an Omen, was either to throw a Stone at the thing, or to kill
it outright, if it was an Ominous Animal, that so the Evil portended by it,
might fall upon its own Head: If it was an unlucky Speech, to retort it upon
the Speaker with an (...), Tibi in caput redeat, i. e. Let it fall upon thy own
Head: Which perhaps is an Expression borrowed from the (...), who, when they
espied any thing in the Victim, that seemed to portend any Mis^ortune to
themselves, or their Country, used to pray, that it might (...), be turned
upon the Victim's Head. The like Expressions are sometimes made use of in Holy
Scripture, as in the fifteenth Verse of Obadiah's Prophecy, (...): Or, as our
English Translators have rendered it, Thy Reward shall return upon thine own
Head. And again in the third Chapter of Kings Lib. III. Ver. 44.
, (...), in English thus, And the Lord has returned thy wickedness upon thine
own Head. Euterpe cap. XXXIX.
Herodotus reports, that it was an Egyptian Custom, from which it is probable
the Graecians derived theirs, They curse (says he) the Head of the Victim in
this manner, That if any Misfortune impended over themselves, or the Country of
Aegyp^, it might be turned upon that Head. Instead of these Imprecations,
sometimes they used to say, (...), or (...), Dii meliora, i. e. God forbid.
Sometimes they used to spit three times into their Bosoms, at the sight of a
Madman, or one troubled with an Epilepsie; of which Custom Theocritus has
taken Notice, -- (...).
Into my Bosom thrice I spit.
This they did in Defiance, as it were, of the Omen; for Spitting upon any Man
was always reckoned a Sign of the greatest Contempt and Aversation: whence
(...), i. e. to spit, is put for (...), i. e. to contemn, as the Scholiast of
Sophocles observes upon these words in Antigone, -- (...).
Spit on him as an Enemy.
Lastly, upon the Meeting of an unlucky Omen, they often desisted from what
they were doing, and began it afresh, as appears from Euripides, in whom a
Person, upon the Hearing of an Ominous Word as he was drinking, immediately
threw the Drink upon the Ground, and called for another Cup.

CHAPTER XVIII. Of Magic, and Incantations.
BESIDES the Methods of Foretelling future Events already mentioned, and that
Divination which is commonly called Phys^cal, because it makes Predictions
without any Supernatural Assistance, by the mere Knowledge of Physical, or
Natural Causes; there are several others, most of which are comprehended under
the Names of (...), and (...), i. e. Magic, and Incantations; between which
though some make a nice Distinction, yet they bear a near Relation to each other,
and therefore I shall treat of them conjunctly in this place. And though some of
the Species of these Divinations might be invented in later Ages, and never
practiced in Old Greece, whose Customs alone it is my chief Design to describe,
not meddling with those Innovations, that were introduced in later Times, after
the Graecians were subjected to the Roman Empire; yet since it is very
difficult to determine exactly of all, which were truly Ancient, and which
purely Modern; since also there is frequent mention of them in Writers of the
middle Ages, especially those that lived toward the Declination of the Roman
Greatness, I shall beg the Reader's Leave to give a brief Account of the most
remarkable of them: For to enumerate all, would be an Endless, as well as
Unreasonable Undertaking; and a great many of them (such as those wherein the
Incubi, and Succubi were concerned) contain in them too much of Profaness and
Horror, to be endured by any civilized Ear.

Magical Arts are said by the Graecians to have been invented in Persia, where
at the first they were had in great Honor, and Reputation; for the (...) were
those, that applied themselves to the Study of Philosophy, and the strict
Search after the most Curious Works, and hidden Mysteries of Nature: They were
usually chosen to superintend the Divine Worship, and all Religious Rites and
Ceremonies; they continually attended upon the Kings, to advise them in all
Affairs of moment, and were preferred to the highest Honors, and Places of
greatest Trust. But afterward the Case was altered, for when they left off the
Contemplation of Nature, and betook themselves to the Invocation of Demons,
and other mean Arts, their former Credit and Esteem was, in a manner, quite
lost, or, at least, very much diminished.

This Art is said to have been introduced among the Graecians by one Oethanes,
that came into Greece with Xerxes, and dispersed the Rudiments of it here and
there, as he had opportunity. It was afterward much improved, and almost
brought to Perfection by Democritus, who is said to have learned it out of the
Writings of certain Phoenicians. But I shall not trouble you with any more
Stories concerning it is Original, or Progress, it being more pertinent to my
Design, to give you a short Account of the various Species thereof.

First then, (...), was a Divination, in which Answers were given by deceased
Persons. It was sometimes performed by the Magical use of a Bone, or Vein of a
dead Body, after the manner of the Thes^alians: Or by pouring warm Blood into a
Carcass, (...) it were to renew Life in it, as Erictho does in Lucian; or by
some other Enchantments, to restore dead Men to Life; with which (...) Poet was
very well acquainted, when he said, -- Dum vocem defuncto in corpore quaerit;
Protinus adstrictus caluit cruor, atraque fovit
Vulnera. --
While he seeks Answers from the lifeless Load,
The congealed Gore grows warm with reeking Blood,
And chears each ghastly Wound. --
Sometimes they used to raise the Ghost of deceased Persons, by various
Invocations, and Ceremonies; which I will give you in the words of Mr. Dryden,
who, in his Oedipus, introduces Tiresias raising Lajus's Ghost to discover his
own Murderers; Tiresias. Choose the darkest part of the Grove;
Such as Ghosts at Noonday love.
Dig a Trench, and dig it nigh,
Where the Bones of Lajus lie.
Altars raised of Turf, or Stone,
Will the Infernal Powers have none.
Answer me, if this be done.

Priest. It Is done.

Tiresias. Is the Sacrifice made fit?
Draw her backward to the Pit:
Draw the barren Heifer back,
Barren let her be, and black.
Cut the curled Hair that grows
Full betwixt her Horns, and Brows:
And turn your Faces from the Sun:
Answer me, if this be done.

Priest. It Is done.

Tiresias. Pour in Blood, and Blood-like Wine,
To Mother Earth, and Proserpine;
Mingle Milk into the Stream;
Feast the Ghosts that love the steam.
Snatch a Brand from Funeral Pile;
Toss it in to make it boil;
And turn your Faces from the Sun;
Answer me, if this be done.

These Verses I have chosen, because they contain so Elegant a Description of
these Infernal Rites: after this he makes Tiresias's Daughter sing, to charm
the Ghosts from their Retirements. Some other Ceremonies also were practiced by
them, but differed not much from those used in Parentations, of which I shall
give a more ^^ll and exact Account afterward.

This Divination, if the Dead appeared only in Aerie Forms, like Shades, was
called (...), and (...). It might, I ^^ppose, be performed in any Place; but
some Places were appropriated to this use, and called (...), several of which
are mentioned by the Ancient Poets; but two of them were most remarkable: The
first of which was in Thesprotia, where Orpheus is said to have restored to
Life his Wife Eurydice; the other in Campania, at the Lake Avernus, celebrated
by Homer, and Virgil, in their Stories of Ulysses, and Aeneas.

(...), or Divination by Water, sometimes called (...), when it (...) done by
Fountain Water: In this they observed the various Impressions, Changes, Fluxes,
Refluxes, Swellings, Dimi^^tions, Colors, Images, etc. in the Water. Sometimes
they dipped a Looking-glass into the Water, when they had a desire to know what
would become of a Sick Person; for as he looked well or ill in the Glass,
accordingly they presumed of his future Condition. Sometimes they filled a Bowl
with Water, and let down into it a Ring, equally poised on each side, and
hanging by a Thread tied to one of their Fingers: then in a Form of Prayer
requested of the Gods to declare, or confirm the Question in dispute;
whereupon, if the thing proposed was true, the Ring of its own accord would
strike against the side of the Bowl a set number of Times. Sometimes they threw
three Stones into the Water, and observed the Turns they made in sinking.
Instead of Water, sometimes use they made of Oil, and Wine, and then the Liquor
was called (...) and instead of Stones, they sometimes used Wedges of Gold, or
Silver. This Divination was sometimes performed in a Basin; and thence called

(...): which also was sometimes practiced in a differe^^ manner, thus; They
distinguished the Stones, or Wedges with certain Characters, and then, having
invoked the Demon in a set Form, proposed the Question they had a mind to be
satisfied about; to which an Answer was returned in a small Voice, not unlike
an Hiss, proceeding ou^ of the Water. The Scholiast upon Lycophron is of
Opinion, that th^^ Method of Divination was as ancient as the Trojan War, and
practiced by Ulysses; which he thinks gave occasion to all the Poetical
Fictio^^ about his Descent into the Infernal Regions, to consult Tir^s^^'s
Ghost Alexandr. v. 813. page 84. Edit. nostrae.
. Sometimes Divination by Water was performed with a Looking-glass, and was
called

(...). Sometimes also Glasses were used, and the Imag^^ of what should happen,
represented without Water. Sometimes it wa^ performed in a Vessel of Water, the
middle part of which was called (...), and then the Divination termed

(...), the manner of which was thus: They filled certa^^ round Glasses with
fair Water, about which they placed lighted Torches; then invoked a Demon,
praying in a low, murmuring Voice, and proposed the Question to be solved: A
chaste and ^^polluted Boy, or a Woman big with Child, was appointed to obse^^^
with greatest Care, and Exactness, all the Alterations in the Glasse^, at the
same desiring time, beseeching, and also commanding an Answer, which at length
the Demon used to return, by Images in the Glasses, which by Reflection from
the Water represented what should come to pass.

(...), was performed by polished, and enchanted C^^ystals, in which future
Events were signified by certain Marks, (...) Figures.

(...), was a Divination by Rings enchanted, or ma^^ according to some position
of the Celestial Bodies. A Ring of (...) sort, they say, Gyges the King of
Lydia had, which when he turned (...) the Palm of his Hand, he became invisible
to others, but could (...) every Body: and by the help of this, he enjoyed his
Mistress, the Qu^^^ and slew his Master Candaules, whom afterward he succeeded.

(...), was performed by the Nails of an unpolluted (...) covered with Oil and
Soot, which they turned to the Sun, the Refle^i^^ (...) whose Rays was believed
to represent by certain Images, the things ^hey had a mind to be satisfied
about.

(...), foretold future Events from certain Specter, or other Appearances in
the Air: And sometimes thus; They folded their Heads in a Napkin, and having
placed a Bowl full of Water in the open Air, ^^oposed their Question, in a
small, whispering Voice; at which time (...) the Water boiled, or fermented,
they thought what they had spoken ^as approved of, and confirmed.

(...), was sometimes performed by a Precious Stone, called (...): which they
washed in Spring Water in the Night by Candlelight; the Person that consulted
it, was to be purified from all manner of pollution, and to have his Face
covered: this done, he repeated di^^rs Prayers, and placed certain Characters
in an appointed Order; and ^^en the Stone moved of its self, and in a soft,
gentle murmur, or (as some say) in a Voice like that of a Child, returned an
Answer. By a Stone of this Nature, Helenus is reported to have foretold the
Destruction of Troy.

Idyll. III. v. 28.
Theocritus has given us an Account of two sorts of Divination practiced by a
Country Swain, to try what share he had in his Mistress's Af^^^tions; his
Words are these, (...),
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...)
(...).
All this I knew, when I designed to'prove,
Whether I should be happy in my Love;
I pressed the Long-live, but in vain did press,
It gave no lucky sound of good Success:
To Agrio too I made the same Demand,
A cunning Woman she, I crossed her Hand:
She turned the Sieve, and Sheers, and told me true,
That I should love, but not be loved by You.
Mr. Creech. Where the Shepherd complains he had found his Suit was rejected
these (...) ways: First, by the Herb Telephilum, which being crushed in his
Hand, or upon his Arm, returned no sound; for it was usual to strike that, or
^^me other Herb against their Arms, and if they crackled in breaking, Good; if
not, it was an unlucky Omen. Not much unlike this, was the Divination by
Lau^el-leaves, which they threw into the Fire, and observed how they crackled
in burning; from which Noise, some say, Laurel was called (...), q. (...). The
other way of Divining, mentioned by Theocritus, was by a Sieve, which an old
Gypsy used in telling poor, silly People their Fortunes. This they called
(...), it was generally practiced to discover Thieves, or others that were
suspected of any Crime, in this manner: They tied a Thread to the Sieve, by
which it was upheld, or else placed a pair of Sheers, which they held up by two
Fingers; then prayed to the Gods to direct, and assist them; after that, they
repeated the Names of the Persons under suspicion, and he, at whose Name the
Sieve whirled round, or moved, was thought to have committed the Fact. Another
sort of Divination was commonly practiced upon the same account, which was
called

(...), from (...), i. e. an Ax, or Hatchet, which they fixed so exactly upon a
round Stake, that neither End might ou^poise, or weigh down the other; then
they prayed, and repeated the Names of those they suspected; and the Person, at
whose Name the Hatchet made any the least motion, was found guilty.

(...), was by the Head of an Ass, (as the Name i^ports) which they broyl'd on
Coals; and after having muttered a (...) Prayers, they repeated the Persons
Names as before; or the Crime, in case one was only suspected; at which, if the
Jaws made any motion, and the Teeth chattered against one another, they thought
the Villain sufficiently discovered.

(...), was a very Mysterious Divination, in which they made use of a Cock, in
discovering secret, and unknown Transactions, or future Events. It was effected
after this manner: Having wrote in the Dust the twenty-four Letters of the
Alphabet, and laid a grain of Wheat, or Barley upon every one of them, a Cock
magically prepared was let loose amongst them, and those Letters, out of which
he picked the Corns, being joined together, were thought to declare whatever
they were desirous to be certified of. This Divination the famous Magician
I^^blichus, Proclus's Master, is said to have made use of, with a Design to
find out the Person, that was to succeed Valens Caesar in the Empire; but the
Cock picking up only four of the Grains, viz. those that lay upon the Letters
(...). left it uncertain, whether Theodos^^^, Theodotus, Theodorus, or
Theodectes, was the Person designed by (...) Fates to be Emperor. However,
Valens being informed of the M^^ter, was enraged at it, put to death several
Persons, for no oth^^ reason, than that their Names began with those Letters;
and mad^ diligent search after the Magicians themselves; whereupon Iamb^^^^^^
to prevent the Emperor's cruelty, ended his Life by a Draught (...) Poison.

(...), was performed by a Red-hot Iron, upon which they laid an odd number of
Straws, and observed what Figures, Bendings, Sparklings, etc. they made in
burning.

(...), was by observing the Motions, Figures, etc. (...) ^elted Lead. The
three following Methods of Divination are by some reckoned amongst the various
sorts of Incantations.

(...), or Divination by Ashes; which was performed in this manner: They wrote
the Things they had a mind to be resolved about, in Ashes upon a Plank, or any
such thing; this they exposed to the open Air, where it was to continue for
some Time; and those Letters, that remained whole, and no ways defaced by the
Winds, or other Accidents, were thought to contain in them a Solution of the
Question.

(...), or Divination by Herbs, especially (...), or Salvia; or by Fig Leaves,
and then called (...), was practiced thus: The Persons that consulted, wrote
their own Names, and their Questions upon Leaves, which they exposed to the
Wind, and as many of the Letters as remained in their own Places, were taken
up, and being joined together, contained an Answer to the Question.

(...), or Divination by Wax, which they melted over a Vessel of Water, letting
it drop within three definite spaces, and observed the Figure, Situation,
Distance, and Concretion of the Drops. Besides these, there were infinite other
sorts of Divination; as (...), which was practiced in Socrates's Time, (...),
mentioned, with several others, by Aratus in his Prognostics, and Pliny in his
Natural History; but these I shall pass by, and only trouble you with one more,
which is so remarkable, that it cannot be omitted, viz.

(...), which was usually performed by certain medicated, and i^chanted
Compositions of Herbs, Minerals, etc. which they called (...)^ By these,
strange and wonderful things were effected: Some of them taken inwardly, caused
Blindness, Madness, Love, etc. such were the Medicaments, by which Circe
transformed Ulysses's Soldiers. Others infected by a touch; such was the
Garment which M^dea sent to Creusa. Others spread their Venom afar off, and
ope^^ted upon Persons at a great Distance. There were also (...), which were
Amulets against the former; such was the Herb Moly, which preserved Ulysses
from Circe's Enchantments; the Laurel, the Sallow-tree, the Rhamn, or
Christ-thorn, Flea-bane, the Jasper-stone, and innumerable others mentioned by
Albertus Magnus, and Orpheus (...) his Book De Lapillis; Likewise certain
Rings, which Aristophanes, in (...) Plutus, calls (...). At this Art the
Thessalians were ^ost famous of all the Graecians; Democritus, and Pythagoras
are also said to have been skilled in it. Every Story is full of the prodigious
Operations wrought by it, some of which I shall give You from a Witch's own
Mouth in Ovid; Met l. VII. Fab. 2.
-- Cum volui, ripis mirantibus, amnes
In fontes rediere suos, concussaque sisto,
Stantia concutio cantu freta; nubila pello
Nubilaque induco; ventos abigoque vocoque;
Vipereas rumpo verbis and carmine fauces;
Vivaque saxa, sua convulsaque robora terra,
Et sylvas moveo, jube^que tremiscere montes;
Te quoque, Luna, traho. --
When e're I please, the wondering Banks behold
Their Waters backwards to their Fountains rolled;
The Seas, if rough, and in vast ridges rise,
As though their angry Waves would dash the Skies,
I give the word, and they no longer roam,
But break, and glide away in silent Foam.
If plain, and calm, the Ocean's surface lie,
Smooth, like some well-spread Azure Canopy,
I rouse the unruly Waves with hid'ous Roar,
And bid their swelling heaps insult the Shore;
Then straight the watery Mountains heave their Heads,
O're-leap their bounds, and drown the enameled Meads.
Clouds Me obey, and at my Summons sent,
Infest, or quit the Etherial Firmament.
Winds too, on downy Wings attend my Will,
And as I bid, or boisterous are, or still.
I burst the Vipers by my Magic Verse,
And from their Basis rend both Rocks and Trees.
The thronging Woods I move; at my Command
The Moon shrinks back, and Mountains trembling stand.
Mr. Hutch^^* Where you may observe the last Verse, wherein the Inchantress
boa^^s, that she was able to draw the Moon from her Orb; for the Ancient really
believed, that Incantations had power to charm the Moon from Heaven; according
to that saying of Virgil, Carmina vel coelo possunt deducere Lunam Eclog. VIII.
.
The Moon my Verses from her Orb can draw.
And whenever the Moon was eclipsed, they thought it was done b^ the Power of
Magic; for which reason it was usual to beat (...)* and Kettles, to sound
Trumpets, and Haut-boys, to drown, if it (...) possible, the Voices of the
Magicians, that their Charms might (...) reach her. The Moon also was thought
to preside over this (...)* and therefore was invoked together with Hecate, to
whom the ^^^vention of it was ascribed; and therefore M^dea in Euripides says,
(...) of all the Gods, she paid the greatest Veneration to Hecate; (...)
(...),
(...). --
For by the Goddess, whom I most adore,
Infernal Hecate, whom now I choose
Co-partner of my Black Designs.


The Rites used at the Invocation of this Goddess, are given us by Argon. III.
v. 1028.
Apollonius in these words; (...)
(...),
(...)
(...)
(...),
(...).
(...),
(...).
(...).
(...)
(...),
(...).
When laboring Night has half her journey run,
Washed in some purling Stream, repair alone,
Clad in a dusky Robe, and dig a Pit,
Round let it be, and raise a Pile in it.
Then kill a tender Ewe; when this is done,
OF the new-raised Pile, unquarter'd lay her on.
And if you Perses Daughter would appease,
Pour a Libation, which the painful Bees
Have first wrought up within their waxen Hives.
Next pray the Goddess would propitious prove,
Then backwards from the flaming Altar move;
But let no Yels of Dogs, or seeming noise
Of Feet behind, turn back thy steady Eyes,
And frustrate all thy former Sacrifice.
Mr. Hu^chin. To this sort of Divination are to be referred Charms, and Amule^s
against Poison, Venom, and Diseases. Suidas reports, that the Curing of
Distempers by Sacrifices, and the repetition of certain Words, was practiced
ever since the time of Minos King of Crete; and Odyss. ^. v. 456.
Homer relates, how Autolycus's Sons stanched Ulysses's Blood, flowing from a
wound he received in hunting a Wild Boar, by a Charm; (...)
(...)
(...). --
With nicest care, the Skilful Artists bound
The Brave, Divine Ulysses's ghastly Wound;
And b' Incantations stanch'd the gushing Blood.


Hither are also to be reduced enchanted Girdles, and other Things worn about
Men's Bodies, to excite Love, or any other Passion, in those with whom they
conversed: such was the (...) in Homer's Iliads, given by Venus to Juno, for
the allurement of Jupiter to her Love, as Eustathius observes, upon the
aforementioned Verses in the Odysse^. But as conc^rning these Practices, I
shall have occasion to add something more, when I come to treat of Love-affairs.

CHAPTER XIX. Of the Grecian Festivals in general.
FESTIVALS were instituted upon four Accounts; First, in honor of the Gods, to
whom, besides the Worship every Day pa^^ them, some more Solemn Times were set
apart. Especially, if they had conferred any signal Favor upon the Public, or
upon Private Persons, had assisted them in Defending their Country, had given
the^ Victory over their Enemies, had delivered them out of any apparen^ Danger,
or blessed them with Success in any Undertaking, it was thought but reasonable
to set a part some Time for offering Sacrifices, and Praises to them, as
grateful Acknowledgments for the Benefits received at their Hands.

Secondly, in order to procure some especial Favor of the Gods; for (as you
may learn from the following Chapters) several of the Festivals were instituted
with a Design to render the Gods propitio^s, and willing to grant some
particular Blessings, as Health, Children, and such like. And in Times of
Famine, Pestilence, or other p^blick Calamities, the Oracles usually advised
their Consultants to institute Solemn Festivals, as the only Method to appease
the angry Gods, and obtain of them Deliverance from the Evils they groaned
under.

Thirdly, in Memory of Deceased Friends, of those that had done any remarkable
Service for their Country, or died valiantly in the Defense of it. This was no
small Encouragment to Men of Generous and Noble Dispositions to enter upon
honorable Designs, when they saw that the Brave Actions of the Virtuous did
not perish with them, but their Memories were ever held sacred by Succeeding
Generations.

Fourthly, Festivals were instituted, as Times of Ease, and Rest to Laborers;
that amidst all their Toil, and Sorrow, and as it were a Recompense thereof,
some Days of Refreshment might be allowed them. And for some one, or more of
these Ends, most Festivals seem to have been first instituted.

Ethic. ad Nicomach. lib. VIII. c. IX.
Aristotle reports, that amongst the Ancients they had few, or no Festivals,
besides those after Harvest, or Vintage; for then they used to meet, and make
merry with the Fruits they had gathered, Eating, and Drinking plentifully; for
they esteemed this a sort of offering their First Fruits to the Gods, whom they
thought honored by so doing; and therefore Feasts were called (...), q. (...),
i. e. because they thought they were obliged, in duty to the Gods, to be drunk.
And Seleucus, in the same Author, tells us, That the Words (...), and (...),
were derived from the same Original, (...) i. e. Banquets were called (...),
and (...), from (...), or God; because it was usual at those Times to consume
great quantities of Wine, and other Provisions in honor of the Gods.

In later Ages, when the Gods were increased almost to the number of Men, and
the old frugal way of Living was laid aside, the number of Festivals was
enlarged, and the manner of them quite altered: for whereas formerly the
Solemnities consisted in little or nothing, besides offering a Sacrifice to the
Gods, and after that making merry themselves; now a great many Games,
Processions, and ten thousand Superstitious Observances, in imitation of the
Fabulous Actions of the Gods, were introduced, and practiced, to the vast
charge of the Public.

The Athenians, as they exceeded all other People in the number of their Gods,
so they outdid them in the number of their Festivals; which, as De Repub.
Athe^iens.
Xenophon reports, were twice as many, as any other City observed: Nor did the
Number, and Frequency of them abate any thing of the Solemnity, Splendor, and
Charges at their Observation. The Shops, and Courts of Judicature were shut up,
on most of those Days; the Laborers rested from their Works, the Tradesmen
from their Employments, the Mourners intermitted their Sorrows; it was unlawful
for a Cry, a Groan, or a sorrowful Expression to be heard; and nothing but Ease
and Pleasure, Mirth and Jollity were to be found amongst them.

Most of them were celebrated at the Public Charge; and lest their Treasury
should be exhausted by so frequent Evacuations, several means were contrived to
supply and replenish them. For Instance, after Thrasybulus had deposed the
Tyrants, their Estates were confiscated for this use, as Harpocration observes
out of Philochorus: And when the State was reduced to it is old Democracy, if
any of the Citizens, through too much Wealth, became formidable to the poorer
sort, and objects of their Envy, it was customary to compel them to contribute
toward the defraying of the Expenses at Public Festivals; and so by
conferring upon them a great (though chargeable, and dear-bought) Honor, at once
sweeten the Imposition, (if not also oblige those on whom it was imposed) and
rid themselves of those Fears, and Jealousies, which the Immoderate Opulency of
private Persons might reasonably give to a Popular State.

Thus much of Festivals in General: as to the Particulars, I have omitted very
little that is material in the Tracts of Meursius, and Castellanus, upon this
Subject; and some things not taken notice of by either of them, and perhaps not
unworthy your Observation, I have added. Yet I do not pretend, that this is a
complete, or entire Collection of the Grecian Festivals; for that would be
endless, (seeing almost every Man of Repute, and that had done any Notable
Service for the Public, had his Anniversary Day) and impossible, since
hundreds of them (especially those that were observed by the less considerable
Cities) are not so much as mentioned in any Author at this Day extant; or but
barely mentioned, without any Account of the Persons, to whom they belonged, or
the Ceremonies used at their Celebration: However, as much as is necessary to
the Understanding of the Ancient Greek Writers, the following Chapters will
furnish.

CHAPTER XX. Grecian Festivals.
(...), and (...),
MEntioned by Hesychius, without any Notice of the Deity, (...) whose Honor
they were observed. It is not improbable, they might belong to Apollo, and be
(at least the latter of them) the sa^^ with the Lacedaemonian (...). This
Conjecture is grounded upon the words of Hesychius; who tells us, that (...)
was the Name of the Person consecrated to the God at the (...) and that the
Festival it self was termed (...), which Name seems to have been derived from
(...), that Festival being observed in Imitation of (...), or, the Military way
of Living, as Athenaeus Lib. IV.
, and Eustathius Iliad. (...).
have observed. It is not unlikely, the former might belong to Venus, whose
Priest (as Grammarians inform us) was called (...), in Cyprus.

(...),
Was celebrated at Argos Hesychius.
, in Memory of one of Proetus's Daughters; being, in all probability, the same
with

(...),
Which (as the same Author tells us) was observed at Argos, in Memory of a
deceased Person. It was also celebrated at Thebes with Solemn Sports.

(...),
At Athens, in Honor of Agraulus, or Aglaurus, the Daughter of Cecrops and the
Nymph Aglauris, and Priestess of Minerva, to whom she gave the Surname of
Aglaurus, and was worshipped in a Temple dedicated to her. The Cyprians also
(as Porphyry De Abstinentia lib. II.
reports) honored her by the Celebration of an Annual Festival in the Month
Aphro^isias, at which they offered Human Victims; and this Custom is said to
have continued till the Time of Diomedes.

(...),
In Honor of Bacchus, sirnam'd (...), from his Cruelty, as (...).
Plutarch is of Opinion; or because he conversed with, and was attended by
Lions, Tigers, and other Savage Animals; which procured him the other Name of
(...), which properly denotes an Eater of raw Flesh, or any Barbarous Person.
This Solemnity was observed in the Night, after this manner: The Women Plutarch
Sympos. lib. VIII. Quaest. I.
being assembled, made a strict Search after Bacchus, as if he had fled from
them; but after some time, finding their Labor to be in vain, said, that He
had retired to the Muses, and concealed Himself amongst them. This being done,
and the Ceremony ended, they regaled themselves with an Entertainment; after
which, the Time was passed away by proposing Riddles, and cramp Questions.
Large quantities of Ivy was used at this Time Idem Quaest. Roman.
, because that Plant was accounted sacred to Bacchus; and so great Excesses
were sometimes committed, that once the Daughters of Minya with Vocal Music,
in Honor of Erigone, sometimes called Aletis, the Daughter of Icarius; who,
out of an excess of Grief for the Misfortunes of her Father, hanged her self:
whence the Solemnity had the Name of (...). At her Death, she requested the
Gods, that if the Athenians did not revenge Icarius's Murder, their Virgins
might end their Lives in the same manner, that she did. Her Petition was
granted, and a great many of them, without any apparent cause of Discontent,
became their own Executioners; Whereupon, to appease Erigone, they instituted
this Festival, by the Advice of Apollo. Others report, Hesychius.
that it was observed in Honor of King Temaleus; or of Aegisthus, and
Clytaemnestra. And some are of Opinion, Etymolog. Magnum.
that it was first observed by command of an Oracle, in Memory of the Daughter
of Aegisthus and Clytaemnestra, who in company of her Grandfather Tyndarus,
took a Journey to Athens; where she prosecuted Orestes in the Court of
Areopagus; and losing her Cause, hanged her self for Grief.

(...),
A Triennial Festival, Solemnized at Actium in Epirus, with Wrestling,
Horse-racing, and a Fight, or Race of Ships, in Honor of Apollo, who had the
Surname of Actius, from that Place Stephanus Byzantinus, Cle^^^^ Protrept.
Aelianus Hist. Anim. lib XI cap. VIII.
.

(...), or (...),
To Minerva, sirnam'd Alea, at Tegea in Arcadia, where that Goddess was
honored with a Temple of great Antiquity Pausanias Arcadicis.
.

(...),
A Cock-fight at Athens, in memory of the Cocks, from whose Crowing
Themistocles received an Omen of his Success against the Persians Aelianus lib.
II. cap. XXVIII.
.

(...),
Solemn Games Pindari Scholiast. Olymp. Od. VIII.
Celebrated at Rhodes, upon the Twenty-fo^^t^ Day of the Month (...), which
answers to the Athenian (...), in Honor of the Sun, who is called in Greek
(...), and (...), and is said to have been born in the Island of Rhodes; the
Inhabitants of which were reputed his Posterity, and therefore called Heliades,
as we learn from Strabo Lib. XIV.
. The Combatants in these Game^ were not only Men, but Boys; and the Victors
were rewarded with ^ Crown of Poplar.

(...),
At Megara Pindari Scholiastes Nem. V.
, in Memory of Alcathous, the Son of Pelops; who lying under a Suspicion of
having murdered his Brother Chrysippus, fled to Megara; where having overcome a
terrible Lion, that wasted the Country, and had slain, beside many others,
King Megareus's own Son; he so far ingratiated himself, that he had in Marriage
the King's Daughter, and was declared his Successor.

(...),
At Athens, in the Month Posideon, in Honor of Ceres and Bacchus, by whose
Blessing the Husbandmen received the Recompense of their Toil, and Labor; and
therefore Demosthenes in Nearam.
their Oblations consisted of nothing but the Fruits of the Earth. Others say,
this Festival was instituted, as a Commemoration of the Primitive Greeks, who
lived (...), i. e. in Vine-yards, and Cornfieldsd Harpocration, Eustath. Iliad.
(...).
.

(...),
To Minerva, by the Arcadians; in memory of a Victory, wherein they took a
great many of the Lacedaemonians prisoners, which the Greeks call (...)
Pausanias Arcadicis.
.

(...), or (...),
A Festival celebrated with Games, in Honor of Diana, sirnam'd Amaryntbia, and
Amarysia, from a Town in Euboea. It was observed by the Euboeans, Eretrians,
Carystians, and Athmonians, who were Inhabitants of a Borough in Attica.

(...),
To Bacchus Hesiodi Scholi^st. Oper. and Dier. lib. II.
the God of Wine; in the Month Lenaeon, in most of the Cities of Greece.

(...),
A Festival, of which nothing more is recorded, than that it belonged to
Jupiter Hesychius.
.

(...),
An Athenian Festival Idem.
.

(...),
At Oropus, in Honor of Amphiaraus Pindar. Schol. O^^mp. VII.
; of whom I have given a sufficient Account in another Place.

(...),
A Festival observed by Private Families in Athens, upon the fifth Day after
the Birth of every Child. It was so called, (...), i. e. from Running round;
because it was customary to run round the Fire, with the Infant in their Arms.
Of this more hereafter.

(...),
Solemn Sacrifices Aelianus Var. Hist. lib. I. cap. XV.
to Venus, at Eryx in Sicily, where she was honored with a Magnificent Temple.
The Name of this Solemnity was derived (...), i. e. from returning; because the
Goddess was said to leave Sicily, and return to Africa at that Time.

(...),
An Athenian Festival, in Honor of the Dioscuri, who were called (...), and
honored with a Temple, called (...). The Sacrifices offered at this Time, were
named (...), because those Deities were (...), or Strangers Pindari Schol.
Olymp. III.
; and consisted of three Offerings Pa^sanias.
, which were called (...). Athenaeus Dipnos. lib. II.
also makes mention of Plays, acted in Honor of these Deities.

(...),
Solemnities observed at the (...), or Proclamation, of Kings, and Princes,
when they became of Age, to take the Government into their own Hands Polybii
Hist. XVIII. and Legate. Eclog. LXXXVIII.
.

(...),
A Festival Pausanias Phocicis.
^^ Amphiss^^, the Capital City of Locris; in Honor either of the Dioscuri, or
Curetes, or Cabiri; for Authors are not agreed in this Matter.

(...), or (...),
Annual Games Hesychius.
celebrated in the Ceramicus at Athens, by the command of Minos, King of Crete,
in memory of his Son Androgeos, otherwise called Eurygias, who was barbarously
murdered by some of the Athenians, and Megarensians Plutarch. Theseo.
.

(...),
An Athenian Festival, observed in Honor of Bacchus, upon the Eleventh,
Twelfth, and Thirteenth Days of the Month Anthesterion.

The first Day was named (...), i. e. because they then tapp'd their Barrels.
The same Day was by the Chaeroneans called (...), i. e. The Day of Good Genius;
because it was customary to make merry upon it.

The second Day was called (...), from the Measure (...), because ^^ry Man
drunk out of his own Vessel; in memory of an Acci^ent that happened in the
Reign of Pandion, or (as others say) of D^mophoon, under whom Orestes, having
slain his Mother, fled to A^hens, before he had undergone the customary
Purification for Mur^^. The Athenians were at that Time busy in Celebrating the
^estival of Bacchus, sirnam'd Lenaeus, because he had the Care of Win^^^^sses,
which are in Greek called (...). However, he was kindly ^^ceiv'd by Demophoon,
who to prevent the Contamination, which ^ight adhere to the Company, by
Drinking with a polluted Person, ^^d that Orestes might not take it unkindly to
be forced to drink ^lone, ordered, that every Man should have a distinct Vessel
of Wine, ^^d drink out of his own Cup. On the foregoing Day, they only opened
their Vessels, and tasted the Wine; but now it was customary to drink Iustily,
and the longest Liver, in token of Victory, was re^a^ded with a Crown of
Leaves, and a Vessel of Wine. It was ^^^al also to ride in Chariots, out of
which they jested upon all that passed by. The Professors of Sophistry feasted
at home, with their ^^iends upon this Day, and had Presents sent them from all
Hands; To which Custom Eubulides alludes, in these Verses, (...)
(...).
Ah! subtle Knave, you now the Sophist play,
And wish that Bounteous (...) may approach,
Whose Presents fill your Belly, and your Purse.
^^om this Day it was, that Bacchus had the Surname of (...).

The third Day was called (...), from (...), i. e. a Pot, which was brought
forth full of all sorts of Seeds, which they accounted ^^^red to Mercury, and
therefore abstained from them. Upon this Day the Comedians used to act; and at
Sparta, Lycurgus ordered, that such of them as obtained the Victory, should be
enrolled amongst the Free Denizons.

During these Days, the Slaves were allowed to make merry, drink, and revel;
and therefore, at the End of the Festival, it was usual to make proclamation in
this manner; (...), i. e. Begone you Carian Slaves, the Anthesteria are ended.

(...),
A Sicilian Festival Pollux Onom. lib. I. cap. I.
, so named (...), i. e. from carrying Flowers; because it was Instituted in
honor of Proserpi na, whom Pluto is said to have stolen, as she was gathering
Flowers.

Another Solemnity of this Name, seems to have been observed at Argos, in
honor of Juno, to whom a Temple was dedicated in that place, under the Name of
(...) Pausanias Corinthiacis.
.

(...),
Sacrifices in Honor of Antigonus Plutarch^^ Agid. and Cleomen.
.

(...),
Annual Sacrifices, and Quinquennial Games, in Memory of Antinous, the
Bithynian: They were Instituted at the Command of Adrian the Roman Emperor, at
Mantinea in Arcadia Pausanias Arcadicis.
, where Antinous was honored with a Temple, and Divine Worship.

(...),
A Festival Aristophanis Scholiast. Achar^. Hesychius, Harpocration, Suidas,
Etymologici Auctor. Idem Auctores ubique sunt in hoc toto capite citati.
first instituted at Athens, and from thence derived to the rest of the
Ionians, except those of Ephesus, and Colophon. It received its Name from
(...), which signifies Deceit; because it was first instituted in memory of a
Stratagem, by which Melanthius, the Athenian King, overcame Xanthus, King of
Boeotia. For a Controversy happening between the Athenians, and Boeotians,
about a piece of Ground situated upon the Con^ines of Attica and Boeotia;
Xanthus made a Proposal, that himself, and the Athenian King should end the
Quarrel by a single Combat. Thymoetes reigned at that Time in Athens; but
declining the Fight, was deposed: his Successor was Melanthius a Messenian,
Son of Neleus and Periclymene, who having accepted the Challenge, met his Enemy
at the appointed Place; where, as they were just going to begin the Fight,
Melanthius thinking, or pretending that he saw at Xanthus's Back, a Person
habited in a black Goat-skin, cried out, that the Articles were violated; upon
this, Xanthus looking back, was treacherously slain by Melanthius. In Memory of
this Success, Jupiter was sirnam'd (...), i. e. Deceiver; and Bacchus, (...),
i. e. clothed in a black Goat-skin, and was farther honored with a new
Temple, and the Institution of this Festival. Others are of opinion, that (...)
are so called, q. (...), ^ e. (...), because upon this Festival, Children
accompanied ^^eir Fathers, to have their Names entered into the Public
Register: ^^ter the same manner, (...) is equivalent to (...), and (...).
Others will have (...) to be so named, because the Children were till that Time
(...), i. e. without Fathers, in a Civil sense; for that it was not till then
publicly recorded, whose ^^ey were. For a like reason, Melchisedec is by some
thought to be called (...) Epistola ad Hebr^o^.
, i. e. without Father, without Mother; viz. because his Parentage was omitted
in the Public Genealogies. To ^^turn: This Festival was celebrated in the
Month Pyanepsion, and (...) three Days.

The first Day was called (...), from (...), i. e. a Supper; be^^^se on that
Day at Evening, each Tribe had a separate Meeting, ^^ereat a sumptuous
Entertainment was provided.

The second Day was named (...), because (...) this Day Victims were offered to
Jupiter (...), and (...), (...) Minerva; in whose Sacrifices (as in all that
were offered to Cele^^^l Gods) it was usual (...), i. e. to turn the Head of
the Victims upwards, toward Heaven. At this Sacrifice, the Children enrolled
amongst the Citizens, were placed close to the Al^^. It was usual also, for
Persons richly apparelled, to take lighted ^o^ches out of the Fire, and run
about, singing Hymns in praise of Vulcan, who was the first that taught Men the
use of that Element: Which Custom is by Meursius referred to this Day, though
Har^^ration, to whom we are indebted for the Mention of it, has left (...) in
the Dark as to it is Time.

The third Day was named (...), from (...), i. e. a Youth; (...) (...), i. e.
Shaving; because the young Men, who till that Time remin'd unshaved, had their
Hair cut off, before they were presented to be registered. Their Fathers at this
Time were obliged to swear, that both Themselves, and the Mothers of the young
Men, were Freeborn Athenians It was also usual to offer a Sheep in Sacrifice
to Diana, which they called (...) this Victim was to be of a ^^^tain Weight;
and because it once happened, that the Standers-by c^y'd out in jest, (...), i.
e. Too little, too little, it was ever after called (...), and the Persons that
offered it (...).

To these Hesychius adds a fourth Day, which he tells us was called (...), but
that Name is not peculiar to this Festival, but generally applied to any Day,
celebrated after the End of another Solemnity; being derived (...), i. e. from
following; because it was a sort of Appendage to the Great Festival.

(...),
The second Day in Marriages, of which I shall have Opportunity to speak in
another place.

(...),
To Apollo, at Aegialea, upon this Account: Apollo, having obtained the Victory
over Python, went to Aegialea, accompanied with his Sister Diana; but being
frighted from thence, fled into Crete. After this, the Aegialeans were infected
with an Epidemical Distemper; and being advised by the Prophets, to appease the
two offended Deities, sent seven Boys, and as many Virgins, to entreat them to
return. Apollo and Diana accepted their Piety, and came with them to the
Citadel of Aegialea; in Memory of which, a Temple was dedicated to Pi^^^, the
Goddess of Persuasion; and it became a Custom, to appoint chose^ Boys and
Virgins, to make a solemn Procession, in show as if they designed to bring back
Apollo and Diana; which Solemnity was continued till Pausanias's Time Pausanias
Corinthiacis.
.

(...),
Certain Days Hesychius.
, in which Sacrifices were offered to the Gods, called (...). Who these were, I
am not resolved: Certain it is, that (...) denotes any Person that conducts
another in his way; and therefore was applied to Mercury, who was believed to
be Pl^^^'s Gentleman Usher, and to conduct the Souls of deceased Persons to the
Shades below: whence Ajax, in Sophocles, before he stabbed himself, prayed
thus, -- (...)
(...).
-- Infernal Mercury I call
Safe to conduct me to the Shades below.
But I am rather inclined to think, these Days belonged to the Gods called
(...), i. e. (...), (for (...), is by Phavorinus expounded (...)) otherwise
named (...), and averrunci, because they were thought to avert Evils; such were
Jupiter, Hercules, and others: and therefore for (...) in Hesychius, I would
read (...), except they may be used as synonymous Terms.

(...),
A Festival at Sicyon Plutarchus Arato.
, upon the Birthday of Aratus, whom they honored with a Priest; who, for
Distinction's sake, wore a Ribband bespangl'd with white and purple spots. It
was celebrated with Music; and the Choristers of Bacchus assisted at the
Solemnity with their Harps. There was also a Solemn Procession, in which the
Public Schoolmaster, accompanied with his Scholars, went first, and the
Senators adorned with Garlands, with as many of the other Citizens as had a
mind, followed after.

(...),
Festivals at Argos, the Names of which are lost. One we find mentioned in
Parthenius Erotic. XIII.
, upon which he tells us, there was a Public Entertainment.

Another is taken notice of in Plutarch Grac. Quaest.
, upon which the Boys called one another in Jest (...), i. e. (...), by which
words are signified Persons, that throw wild Figs. Which Cu^^om perhaps was
instituted in Memory of their ancient Diet in Inachus's ^ime, when they lived
upon wild Figs.

A third we read of in Aeneas Poliorcet. cap. XVII.
, in which great numbers of the Citizens made a Solemn Procession out of the
City in Armor.

(...),
Two Festivals Plutarchus Theseo.
at Naxos, in Honor of two Women, who had ^^e common Name of Ariadne. The
former of them was thought ^o be of a Gay and Pleasant Temper, and therefore
her Festival was observed with Music, and a great many Expressions of Joy, and
Mirth.

The latter, being the same that was exposed big with Child upon that Coast by
Theseus, was supposed to be of a Melancholy Disposition, and therefore the
Solemnity dedicated to her had a show of Sorrow, and Mourning; and in Memory of
her being left by Thes^us ^ear the Time of Childbirth, it was usual for a
Young Man to (...) down, and counterfeit all the Agonies of Women in Labor.
This Festival is said to have been first instituted by Theseus, as a re^^mpence
of his Ingratitude to her.

(...),
At Athens Ha^pocrat. Suidas, Etymolog.
, in the Month Scirrophorion, in Honor of Minerva, and Ersa, one of Cecrops's
Daughters, upon which account, it is sometimes called (...), or (...). But the
former Name is derived (...), i. e. because there were some Mysterious Things
carried by four select noble Virgins, not under seven, nor above eleven Years
of Age; who were for that reason called (...). Their Apparel was white, and set
off with Ornaments of Gold. And out of them were chosen two, to weave (as the
Custom was) a (...), or Garment, for Minerva; which work they began upon the
thirtieth of Pyanepsion.

(...),
A Festival, in Honor of (...), or Diana. It was celebrated in several places
of Greece, particularly at Delphi; where they o^fer'd a Mullet to the Goddess,
as being thought to bear some so^^ of Relation to her; because Athenaus lib.
VII.
it is said to hunt, and kill the Se^hare.

Another Solemnity of this Name was observed three Days together, with
Banquets, and Sports, at Syracuse Livius lib. XXIII. Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival of Aesculapius, observed in several Parts of Greece; but no where
with so much Solemnity, as by the Epidaurians Plato (...)
, whom this God honored with his more immediate Presence, giving Answers to
them (...) an Oracular way: wherefore it was called (...), i. e. The great
Festival of Aesculapius Inscript. vet.
. One great part of the Solemnity consisted in a Musical Entertainment, wherein
the Poets, and Musicia^^ contended for Victory, and therefore was called (...),
or the Sacred Contention.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Athenian Husbandmen, in Honor of Bacchus
Phurnutus de Baccho, Aristophan. Scholiast. Pluto, Hes^c^ius.
, to whom they sacrificed a He-goat; because that Animal destroys the Vines,
and therefore was supposed to be hated by (...). Out of the Victim's Skin, it
was customary to make a Bottle, which being filled with Oil and Wine, they
endeavored to leap upon it with one Foot, and He that first fixed himself upon
it, was declared Victor, and received the Bottle as a Reward. The Doing this
they called (...), i. e. from Leaping upon a Bottle; whence this Festival has
it is Name.

(...),
Festivals in Honor of (...), or Venus; several of which were observed in
diverse Parts of Greece: The most remarkable of them was that at Cyprus Clemens
Protrept. Arnobius lib. V. Hesychius, Pindari Scholiastes.
, first instituted by Cinyras; out of whose Family certain Priests of Venus
were Elected, and for that reason named (...). At this Solemnity several
Mysterious Rites were practiced; all that were initiated into them, offered a
Piece of Money, and received, as a token of the Goddess's Favor, a Measure of
Salt, and a (...): the former, because Salt is a Concretion of Seawater, to
which Venus was thought to owe her Birth: The latter, because she was the
Goddess of Wantonness.

At Amathus, a City of Cyprus, Solemn Sacrifices were offered to Ve^^s, and
called (...) Hesychius.
; which word is derived from (...), i. e. Fruit; perhaps because this Goddess
presided over Generation.

At both the Paphi Venus's Festival was observed, being celebrated not only by
the Inhabitants of those Places, but multitudes that thronged to it out of
other Cities Strabo lib. XIV.
.

At Corinth it was celebrated by Harlots Athenaeus lib. XIII.
.

(...),
An Anniversary Festival at Sparta, in honor of Achilles Pausanias Laconicis.
.


(...),
To Bacchus Hesychius.
. See (...).

(...),
At Eleusis in Attica, to Demophoon, the Son of Celeus Athenaeus lib. IX.
Hesychius.
.

(...),
Solemn Games in Thesprotia, wherein the strongest obtained the Victory
Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival at Lebadea, in Boeotia Pindari Sch^liastes Olymp. VII.
.

(...),
A Thracian Festival Strabo lib. IX. Proclus in Tim^um, Hesy^hius.
, in honor of Diana, who was by the Thracians called (...). From Thrace it was
carried to Athens, where it was celebrated in the Piraeus, upon the nineteenth,
or twentieth of Thargelion.

(...),
An Athenian Festival Harpocration, Suidas.
, so called (...), i. e. from coming to help; because it was instituted in
memory of Ion, the Son of Xuthus, who came to the Assistance of the Athenians,
in the Reign of King Erectheus, when they were invaded by Eumolpus, the Son of
Neptune. But Plutarch Theseo.
reports, that it was observed in memory of a Victory obtained by Theseus
against the Amazons, in the Month Boedromion.

(...),
Another Athenian Festival Plato in Phaedro, Hesychius.
in honor of Boreas; who had an Altar in Attica, and was thought to bear some
relation to the Athenians, having married Orithyia, the Daughter of Erectheus:
for which reason, when in a Sea Fight a great many of their Enemies Ships we^^
destroyed by a North Wind, the Athenians imputed it to the kindness Boreas had
for his Wive's native Country, as Pausanias reports Atticis.
.

We are informed by the same Author Arcadicis.
, that Solemn Sacrifices were offered to Boreas at Megalopolis in Arcadia,
where he had a Temple, and Divine honors.

(...),
The Bottiaeans were an Athenian Colony; wherefore in memory of their Original,
they observed this Solemnity, in which the Virgins (...) to say, (...), i. e.
Let us go Athens Plutarchus Theseo, and Quaest. Graec.
.

(...),
An Anniversary Solemnity at Sparta, in memory of Brasidas, a L^^^^aemonian
Captain, famous for his Achievements at Methone, Pylos, and Amphipolis. It was
celebrated with Sacrifices, and Games, wherein none were permitted to contend,
but Freeborn Spartans Pausanias L^^^nicis, Thucydid. lib. V. Suidas.
.

(...),
To Diana, sirnam'd Brauronia, from the place in which this Festival was
observed, viz. Brauron, an Athenian Borough, in which the famous Statue of
this Goddess, brought from Scythia Taurica by Iphigen^^, remained till the
second Persian War, in which Xerxes took it away Pausanias Atticis, and
Arcadicis, Pollux lib. VIII. cap. IX. Harpocration, Suidas.
. It was celebrated once in five Years, being managed by ten Men, ^all'd, from
their Office, (...). The Victim offered in Sacrifice ^as a Goat; and it was
customary for certain Men to sing one of Homer's Iliads. The most remarkable
Persons at this Solemnity, were young Virgins habited in yellow Gowns, and
consecrated to Diana. These were usually about ten Years of Age (it being
unlawful for any of them to be above ten, or under five) and therefore to
consecrate them ^as called (...), from (...), i. e. ten: It was also called
(...), and the Virgins themselves were named (...), i. e. Bears, upon this
account: Amongst the Phlauidae, Inhabitants of a Borough in At^^^, there was a
Bear, which was so far divested of it is natural fierceness, and become so tame
and tractable, that they usually admitted it to eat, and play with them, and
received no harm thereby: But a young Maid once unluckily happening to be too
familiar with it, the Beast tore her to pieces, and was afterward killed by
the Virgin's Brethren: Upon this ensued a dreadful Pestilence, which proved
very fatal to a great many of the Inhabitants of Attica; as a remedy of which,
they were ^^vis'd by an Oracle, to appease the anger of Diana for the Bear, by
consecrating Virgins to her in memory of it: The Athenians punctually executed
the Divine Command, and enacted a Law, that no Virgin should be married, that
had not undergone this Ceremony.

G
(...),
A Festival, in which they boiled (...), i. e. a mixture of ^^^ley-pulse and
Milk Hesychius.
. Meursius is opinion that it belonged to Apollo, who, from a place in Boeotia,
was sirnam'd Galaxius Proclus Chrestomath.
.

(...),
A Solemn Sacrifice at Thebes, offered to Galinthias, one of Proetus's
Daughters, before the Festival of Hercules, by whose order it was first
^^^ituted.

(...),
Three Private Solemnities, the first whereof was observed at Mar^^^ges; the
second in memory of the Birth; the last, of the Death of any Person. But of all
these, I shall give you a more full account in one of the following Books.

(...),
This Solemnity was celebrated by Women, in honor of Genetyllis, (...) Goddess
of that Sex Hesychius.
, to whom they offered Dogs.

(...),
In honor of Neptune, at Geraestus, a Village of Euboea, where (...) was
honored with a Temple Stephanus, ^indari Schol. Olymp. XIII.
.

(...),
An Anniversary Festival in honor of Mars, at Geronthrae, where there was a
Temple dedicated to him. He had also a Grove in the same place, into which it
was unlawful for any Woman to enter* during the time of this Solemnity
Pausanias Laconicis.
.

(...),
A Solemnity mentioned by Aelian (...) An. lib. IV. cap. XLIII.
; and perhaps the same with t^^ (...) at the Festival of Ceres El^usinia, of
which afterward.

(...),
At Athens, in honor of Mother Earth, to whom a Temple w^^ dedicated in the
Citadel of that place Thucydides lib. II.
. Solemn Games also we^^ celebrated to her, as we learn from Pindar, (...)
(...). --
At the Olympic Games, and sacred Sports
Of the capacious Earth. --


(...),
A Solemn Dance ^^^^tarchus Apophthegm.
, performed by Spartan Boys.

D
(...),
A Solemnity, which lasted three Days, during all which (...) Torches (called
in Greek (...)) were burned, which gave occasion (...) the Name Lucianus
Pseudomant.
.

Upon the first Day they commemorated Latona's Labor, and (...) Birth.

The second was in memory of Glycon's, and the God's Nativity.

The third, of the Marriage of Podalirius, and the Mother of Alexa^^^^

(...),
Two Festivals in Boeotia Pausanias Boeoticis.
, one of which was observed by the (...) Pythion. lib. IX.
at Alalcomenos, where was the largest Grove of any in Boeotia; (...) this they
assembled, and exposing to the open Air pieces of sodden Flesh, carefully
observed whither the Crows, that came to prey upon them, directed their Flight;
and then hewed down all those Trees, upon which any of them alighted, and
formed them into Statues, which were by the ancient Greeks called (...), from
the ingenious Artificer D^dalus.

The other Solemnity was by far the greatest, and most remarkable, being
celebrated not only by Plataea, but all the Cities of Boeotia, once in sixty
Years; in memory, and, as it were, in Recompense for the In^^rmission of the
lesser Festival the same number of Years, during which ^ime the Plataeans lived
in exile. In order to this Solemnity, there ^ere always prepared fourteen (...)
at the other Festivals, to be ^^stributed by Lots amongst the Plataeans,
Coroneans, Thespians, Tana^eans, Chaeroneans, Orchomenians, Lebadeans, and
Thebans; because they ^^omoted a Reconciliation with the Plataeans, and were
desirous to ^^ve them recalled from Banishment, and contributed Offerings
to^ards the Celebration of the Festival, about the time that Thebes was
^^stored by Cassander the Son of Antipater. Nor did the afore-mentioned Cities
only, but others also of lesser Note, join in this Solemnity; the manner of
which was thus:

A Statue being adorned in Woman's Apparel upon the Banks of As^pus, a Woman in
the Habit of a Bride-maid, was appointed to accompany it, being followed by a
long Train of Boeotians, who had ^^^ces assigned them by Lots, to the top of
Mount Cithaeron; upon which (...) Altar of square pieces of Timber cemented
together in the manner (...) Stones, was erected. Upon this large quantities of
combustible mat^^r being laid, each of the Cities, and such Men as were
possessed of ^lentiful Estates, offered a Bull to Jupiter, and an Ox, or Heifer
to Juno, (...) plenty of Wine, and Incense; the poorer sort, and such as were
(...) of Ability to purchase more costly Oblations, contributed small ^^eep;
all which, together with the (...), being thrown in^^ one common Heap, were set
on fire, and not extinguished, till the whole Fabric, of which the Altar it
self made a part, was con^^m'd to Ashes. The first occasion of these Customs
was this: On a (...) it happened that Juno had a Quarrel with Jupiter, whereby
the Goddess was exasperated to such a degree, that she departed from him, and
retired into Euboea: The God was very much troubled at this Desertion, and
endeavored by all the Arts of Persuasion, to gain upon ^er to return; but
finding her obstinate in her Resolution, went to advise with Cithaeron, who
reigned at that time over the Plataeans, and ^ad the greatest Reputation for
Wisdom of any Man in that Age: The Expedient he advised to, was this; That
Jupiter should dress a Statue in Woman's Apparel, and place it in a Chariot,
giving out that it was Plataea, the Daughter of Asopus, and that she was
con^^^cted to him in Marriage: The God approved his Counsel, and put it in
practice; and the Report had no sooner reached Juno, but she posted with all
haste to meet the Chariot; where having discovered the Cheat, she was
wonderfully taken with the Contrivance, and returned into Favor with her
Husband.

An entire Treatise was composed by Plutarch upon this Festival, some Fragments
of which are still preserved in Eusebius De Praepar. Evangel. lib. III.
, and confirm the Substance of the Relation now given out of Pausanias; from
whom they differ only in this, that in them Cithaeron is called Alalcomenes*
and Plataea, Daedala.

(...),
A Festival, of which nothing remains, besides the Name, which is preserved by
Hesychius. If the Conjecture of Meursius deserve an^ Credit, it will not be
improbable that it belonged to one (...) who, as the same Grammarian informs
us, was worshipped by t^^ Macedonians, and thought to restore Health to sick
Persons.

(...),
A Solemnity at Argos, in which was represented the Combat of Proetus and
Acrisius.

(...),
A Novennial Festival Pausanias Boeoticis, Proclus Chrestomathi^*
, celebrated by the Boeotians, in hono^^ of Apollo. The chief Solemnity was
thus: They adorned an Olivebough with Garlands of Laurel, and various sorts of
Flowers: Upon the top of it was placed a Globe of Brass, from which hung other
lesser Globes; About the middle were fixed to it Purple Crown^, and a Globe of
smaller size than that at the top: The bottom was covered with a Garment of
Saffron-colour. The uppermost Globe was an Emblem of the Sun, by whom they
meant Apollo; that placed diametrically under it, signified the Moon; the
lesser Globe^ represented the Stars; and the Crowns, being sixty five in
number* were Types of the Sun's Annual Revolution, which is comple^^^ in about
the same number of Days. The Bough thus adorned, (...) carried in Procession;
the chief in which was a Boy of a beauti^^^ countenance, and good Parentage,
whose Father and Mother were both living: He was apparelled in a sumptuous
Garment, reaching down to his Ancles; his Hair hung loose and dishevelled; on
his Head was a Crown of Gold; and upon his Feet Shoes, called Iphicratide, from
Iphicrates an Athenian, the first Inventor of them: It was his Duty to execute
at that time the Priest's Office, and he was honored with the Title of (...),
i. e. The Lawrel-bearer. Before him we^^ one of his nearest Relations, bearing
a Rod adorned with Garlands: After the Boy followed a Choir of Virgins, with
Branches in their Hands: And in this order they proceeded as far as the Temple
of Apollo, sirnam'd Ismenius, and Galaxius, where they sung Supplica^ory Hymns
to the God. These Ceremonies were first practiced upon this account: The
Aeolians that inhabited Arne, and the adjacent Territory, being advised by an
Oracle to relinquish their old Seats, and seek their Fortunes, made an Invasion
upon the Thebans, who (...) the same Time were besieged by the Pelasgians: It
happened to be near the Time of Apollo's Festival, which was religiously
observed by both Nations; wherefore a Cessation of Arms being granted on both
sides, one Party cut down Lawrel-boughs in Helicon, the other ^ear the River
Melas; and, as the Custom was, carried them in their Hands, in honor of
Apollo. On the same Day there appeared in ^ Dream to Polematas, General of the
Boeotian Forces, a young Man, (...) presented him with a complete Suit of
Armor, and com^^nded that every ninth Year the Boeotians should make Solemn
^^ayers to Apollo, with Laurel in their Hands: About three Days ^^^er this
Vision, he made a Sally upon the Besiegers with such Suc^^ss, that they were
forced to retire, and quit their Enterprise: where^^on he caused this Festival
to be instituted.

(...),
A Festival at Aegina Pindari Schol. Olymp. VIII.
, in honor of Delphinian Apollo.

(...),
A Quinquennial Festival in the Isle of Delos Thucydides lib. III. Callimachus
Hymn. in Delum. Pl^tarchus Theseo.
, instituted by ^^eseus, at his return from Crete, in honor of Venus, whose
Statue given to him by Ariadne, he erected in that place, having by her
^^^^stance met with Success in his Expedition. The chief Ceremo^^es were these:
They crowned the Goddess's Statue with Garlands; ^^pointed a Choir of Music,
and Horse-races; and performed a re^^rkable Dance, called (...), i. e. a Crane,
wherein they imitated (...) their Motions, the various Windings of the Cretan
Labyrinth, out (...) which Theseus, who was the first Inventor of this Dance,
made his ^^ape.

Another Solemnity was every Year celebrated in this Island, in ^^nour of
Apollo, by the Athenians; but of this I have already given You an Account in
one of the foregoing Chapters.

(...),
A Solemnity in honor of Ceres, called by the Greeks (...) Pollux Onom. lib.
I. cap. I. Hesychius.
, (...) which it was customary for the Worshippers to lash themselves with
Whips, made of the Bark of Trees, and called (...).

Another Festival of this Name was observed by the Athenians Plutarchus
Demetrio, Diodorus Siculus lib. XVIII. Eustathius Il. (...).
in honor of Demetrius Poliorcetes, being the same with that which was before
called Dionysia, and celebrated upon the thirteenth of M^nychion, whose Name
was changed into Demetrion, as also the Day (...) this Solemnity was named
Demetrias.

(...),
A Solemnity at Sparta Pl^ta^c^us Lacon. Instit. and Aristide, Pausanias
Laconici^, Themistius Orat. Cicero (...). Quaest. II. Hyginus Fab. CCLXI.
, in honor of Diana Orthia, so named (...), i. e. from whipping, because it
was usual to whip Boys upon the Goddess's Altar. These Boys were, at the first,
Free-bor^ Spartans, but, in more delicate Ages, of meaner Birth, being
frequently the Offspring of Slaves; they were called (...), from the Exercise
they underwent at the Altar, which was very severe and cruel; and lest the
Officer should out of Compassion remit any thing of the rigor of it, Diana's
Priestess stood by all the Time, holding (...) her Hand the Goddess's Image,
which of it is self was very lig^^ and easy to be born, but if the Boys were
spared, became so ponderous, that the Priestess was scarce able to support it is
weight. And lest the Boys should faint under Correction, or do any thing
unworthy of Laconian Education, their Parents were usually present, to exhort
them to bear whatever was inflicted upon them with Patien^^ and Constancy. And
so great was the Bravery and Resolution o^ the Boys, that, though they were
lashed till the Blood gushed out, and sometimes to Death, yet a Cry, or Groan
was seldom, or never heard to proceed from any of them. Those of them that died
by these Means, were buried with Garlands upon their Heads, in token of Joy, or
Victory, and had the Honor of a Public Funeral.

Whence this Custom had it is Original, is not agreed by Ancien^ Writers. By
some it is said to have been one of Lycurgus's Institutions, and designed for
no other End, than to accustom the Youth to endure Pain; thereby to render them
fearless and insensible of Wounds. Others will have it to have been done, as a
Mitigation of an Oracle, whereby it was commanded that Human Blood should be
shed upon Diana's Altar. By some it is reported to have be^^ as ancient as
Orestes, who (they say) transplanted out of Scythia in^o Laconia the Image of
Diana Taurica, to whom the Scythians used to offer Human Victims: this
Barbarous piece of Cruelty the L^^^monians detested, but withal fearing the
Anger of the Goddess, made an Order, that every Year a Boy should be whipped
upon her Altar, till the Blood gushed out; that so, if nothing could satisfy
Her (...) Human Blood, She might not be altogether destitute of it. Lastly,
some assign this Cause for it; Pausanias, the Spartan General, as he wa^
^^^ering Sacrifices and Prayers, before the Fight with Mardonius, was (...)
upon by a company of Lydians, who plundered and squandered ^^road the
Sacrifice; but were at length repelled with Whips and ^^aves, which were the
only Arms the Lacedaemonians were at that (...) furnished with: In memory of
this Victory, the Whipping of ^^oys at the Altar in Sparta; and after that, the
Lydian Procession, (...) tells us, was performed till his Days.

(...),
A Festival at Sparta.

(...),
At Athens Thucydides lib. I. Aristophanis Sch^^iast. Nub. Suidas.
, in honor of Jupiter sirnam'd (...), i. e. the ^^opitious. It was so called
(...), i. e. from Jupiter, (...) Misfortune; because by making Supplications to
Jupiter, they ^^ain'd Protection, and Deliverance from Dangers, and Evils. It
(...) celebrated about the latter end of Anthesterion, without the City, ^here
was a great concourse of all the Athenians, feasting and offer^^g Sacrifices.
At the same Time there is said to have been a public ^art, in which all sorts
of Vendibles were exposed to Sale; and ^^erefore Strepsiades in Aristophanes
Nubibus.
says, he bought his Son Phi^^^^ides a little Chariot at this Festival, (...),
(...).


Plutarch ^
makes mention of another Festival, that belonged to (...), wherein a solemn
Procession was made by Men on Horseback.

(...),
An Athenian Festival Pausanias Atticis, Aelianus* Var. Hist. lib. VIII. cap.
III. Porphyrius de Abstinent. ab Animal. Hesychius, Suidas.
, celebrated upon the fourteenth of Scirr^^^^ion; so named, because it was
sacred (...), i. e. to Jupiter ^^^nam'd Polieus, or Protector of the City.
Sometimes it was called (...), from killing an Ox: For it was customary upon
this Day to place certain Cakes, of the same sort with those used at
Sacrifices, upon a Table of Brass; round this they drove a select number of
Oxen, of which he that eat any of the Cakes, was presently slaughtered. The
Person that killed the Ox, was called (...), or (...). Por^^^ry reports, that
no less than three Families were employed in this Ceremony, and received
different Names from their Offices therein: The Family, whose Duty it was to
drive the Oxen, were called (...), from (...), i. e. a Spur: Those that knocked
him down, (...), being descended from Thaulon: Those that slaughtered, and cut
him up, (...), i. e. Butchers, or Cooks. The Original o^ the Custom was thus:
On one of Jupiter's Festivals, it happened that a hungry Ox eat one of the
consecrated Cakes; whereupon the Priest (some call him Thaulon, others Diomus,
or Sopater) moved with pious Zeal, killed the profane Beast. In those Days, it
was looked upon as a capital Crime to kill an Ox; wherefore the guilty Priest
was forced to secure himself by a timely Flight, and the Athenians in his
stead, took the bloody Ax, arraigned it, and, according to Pausania^, brought
it in not guilty: But Aelian is of another Opinion, and reports, that the
Priest, and People present at the Solemnity (for they also were accused, as
being accessory to the Fact) were acquitted, but the Ax condemned; which seems
to be most probable. In memory of these Actions, it became ever after
customary, for the Priest to fly, and Judgment to be given about the Slaughter
of the Ox.

(...),
A Spartan Festival Pausanias Laconicis.
, in honor of Diana, sirnam'd Dictynna, from a City of Crete; or from a Cretan
Nymph, one of her Companions in Hunting, who was called Dictynna; being the
first invented Huntingnets, which are in Greek called (...).

(...),
At Megara, in memory of the Hero Diocles Pindari Schol. Pythion. Od. XIII.
.

(...),
In honor of Jupiter Diomeus; or of Diomus Etym^l^g. Eustath. Il. (...).
, an Athenian Hero, the Son of Colyttus, from whom the Inhabitants of one of
the Athenian Buroughs were named (...).

(...),
Solemnities in honor of (...), or Bacchus, sometimes call*d by the general
Name of (...), which word, though sometimes applied to the Mysteries of other
Gods, does more peculiarly belong to those of Bacchus. The Festivals of this
God are said to have been instituted in Egypt, and afterward taught the
Graecians by one M^^lampus Herodotus lib. II.
; and by Plutarch De Iside and Osiride.
we are informed, that the Aegyptia^ Isis was the same with Ceres, and Osiris
with Bacchus; and that the Grecian Dionysia were the same with the Egyptian
Pamylia.

They were observed at Athens with greater Splendour, and more Ceremonious
Superstition, than in any other part of Greece; for the Years were numbered by
them Suidas.
, as the chief Archon had a part in the management of them Pollux lib. VIII.
, and the Priests that officiated therein, were honored with the first Seats
at Public Shows Aristophan. Schol. Ran.
. But at first they Plutarchus (...).
were without Splendour, and Ornaments, being Days set apart for Public Mirth,
and observed only with these Ceremonies; First a Vessel of Wine, adorned with a
Vine-branch, was brought forth, after that followed a Goat, then was carried a
Basket of Figs, and after all, the Phaili.

At some of them it was usual for the Worshippers, in their Garments and
Actions, to imitate the Poetical Fictions concerning Bacchus: They put on
Fawn-skins, fine Linen, and Mitres; carried Thyrsi, Drums, Pipes, Flutes, and
Rattles; and crowned themselves with Garlands of Trees sacred to Bacchus, such
were the Ivy, Vine, Firr, etc. Some imitated Silenus, Pan, and the Satyrs,
exposing themselves in Comical Dresses, and Antic Motions; some rode upon
Asses, others drove Goats to the Slaughter. In this manner Persons of both
Sexes ran about the Hills, Deserts, and other Places, wagging their Heads,
dancing in ridiculous Postures, filling the Air with hideous Noises, and
Yellings, personating Men distracted, and crying aloud (...), or (...), or
(...), or (...).

Such were the Rites used in most of Bacchus's Festivals throughout Greece, and
particularly at Athens, where this frantic Rout was, upon one of the
Solemnities of this God, followed by Persons carrying certain Sacred Vessels;
the first of which was filled with Water; after these went a select number of
Honorable Virgins, called (...), because they Carried little Baskets of Gold,
filled with all sorts of Fruit: In these consisted the most Mysterious part of
the Solemnity; and therefore to amuse the Common People, Serpents were put into
them, which sometimes crawling out of their places, astonished the Beholders.
Next was the (...), being a company of Men carrying (...), which were Poles, to
the Ends of which were fixed things in the form of a Man's Privities: these
Persons were crowned with Violets, and Ivy, and had their Faces covered with
other Herbs; they were called (...), and the Songs repeated by them, (...).
After these followed the (...), in Women's Apparel, with Garments stripped with
white, and reaching to their Ancles, Garlands on their Heads, Gloves composed
of Flowers on their Hands, and in their Gestures imitating drunken Men. There
were also certain Persons called (...), whose Office it was to carry the (...),
or Mystical Van of Bacchus, a thing so essential to this, and other
Solemnities, and Sacrifices of this God, that few of them could be duly
celebrated without it; whence He is sometimes called (...). At this Time also
Public Shows, Plays, and Sports were frequented, and the whole City was filled
with Revelling, and Licentiousness.

The Festivals of Bacchus were almost innumerable; the Names of some of the
most remarkable of them are, as follow.

(...) Thucydid. lib. II. Hesychius, Demosthen. Orat. in Neaeram, Pollux lib.
VIII.
, celebrated upon the Twelfth of Anthesterion, at Limnae in Attica, where was a
Temple of Bacchus. The chief Persons that officiated, were fourteen Women,
appointed by the (...), who was one of the Archons, and provided necessaries
for the Solemnity: They were called (...), i. e. Venerable, and could not enter
upon their Office, till they had taken an Oath in presence of the (...), or
Wife of the (...), that they were free from all manner of Pollution.

(...), are mentioned by Thucydides Loc. citat.
, but perhaps are not distinct from some of the following.

(...) Demosthen. Orat. in Leptin.
, or the Greater, sometimes called (...), or (...), as being celebrated within
the City, in the Month Anthesterion: It is sometimes by way of Eminence called
(...), without any distinguishing Epithet, because it was the most celebrated
of all Bacchus's Festivals at Athens.

(...), or the Less, sometimes called (...), because it was observed in the
Country. It was a sort of Preparation to the former and Greater Festival, and
was celebrated in Autumn Aristophanis Scholiast. Acha^^.
: Some place it in the Month Posideon, others in Gamelion, others will have it
to be the same with (...), so named from (...), i. e. a Wine Press; and
agreeably to this Opinion Hesychius tells us, it was celebrated in the Month
Lenaeon.

(...) Idem in Pace.
, observed at Brauron, a Borough of Attica, where the Votaries gave themselves
over to all manner of Excess, and Lewdness.

(...), Pausanias Attici^.
, Mysteries unlawful to be revealed, and observed by the Athenians, in honor
of Bacchus Nyctelius, to whom also they erected a Temple.

(...), to Bacchus, sirnam'd (...), i. e. the God of Wine.

(...), to Bacchus sirnam'd (...), and (...), because Human Sacrifices were
offered to him at that Time Plutarchus Themistocle.
; or from Eating raw Flesh, which Action the Priests used to imitate upon this
Solemnity: It was also customary for them to put Serpents in their Hair, and in
all their Behavior to counterfeit Madness, and Distraction.

Several other Festivals were observed in honor of this God, as the Triennial
Solemnity, called from the Time of it is Celebration (...) Virgil. Aeneid. IV.
, which is said to have been first instituted by Bacchus himself, in memory of
his Expedition into India, in which he spent three Years. Another also is
mentioned by the Scholiast of Aristophanes In Pace.
, and said to be observed every fifth Year. And beside these we find frequent
mention of Bacchus's Festivals in most of the Ancient Authors, some of which
are described in their own places.

(...),
In honor of (...), or Castor and Pollux, who were reputed to be the Sons of
Jupiter. It was observed by the Cyreneans Pindari Schol. Pythion. Od. V.
; but more especially by the Spartans Pausanias Messenicis, Sidonius Carm. IX.
, whose Country was honored by the Birth of those Heroes. The Solemnity was
full of Mirth, being a Time wherein they shared plentifully of the Gifts of
Bacchus, and diverted themselves with Sports, of which Wrestling-matches always
made a part.

(...),
A Milesian Festival, wherein an Ox was offered to Jupiter Hesychius.
, as the Name imports.

(...),
An Anniversary Day, observed in memory of Dryops, one of Apollo's Sons, at
Asine, which was a Maritime Town of Argos, and inhabited by the Dryopians
Pausanias Messenicis.
.

(...),
A Festival so called, because it was celebrated upon the Twelfth Day of
Anthesterion Hesychius.
. See (...).

E
(...),
On the Seventh Day Suidas, Proclus in Hesiodi Dies.
of every Lunar Month, in honor of Apollo, to whom all Seventh Days were
sacred; because one of them was his Birthday; whence he was sometimes called
(...) Plutarchus Sympos. lib. VIII. Quaest. I.
; the Story we have in Hesiod Diebu^.
, -- (...),
(...).
-- The seventh Day is sacred,
'Cause Phoebus then was of Latona was born.
At this Solemnity the Athenians sung Hymns to Apollo, and carried in their
Hands Branches of Laurel, with which also they adorned their Dishes.

Another Festival there was of this Name, which Private Families observed upon
the Seventh Day after the Birth of a Child; but of this I shall give account in
it is own place.

(...),
The Day in which the Magistrates at Athens entered upon their Offices Suidas,
aliique Lexicographi.
; upon which it was customary for them to offer a Solemn Sacrifice, praying for
the Preservation, and Prosperity of the Commonwealth, in the Temple, or Hall
of Jupiter (...), and Minerva (...), i. e. the Counselors Antiph^n Orat. pro
Chor^ut.
.

(...),
To Jupiter, sirnam'd Hecalus, or Hecalesius, from Hecale, one of the
Burrough-towns of the Leontian Tribe in Attica (...) Byzantinus.
; or from an old Woman called Hecale, by whom he had a Statue erected. This
Hecale, (as Plutarch Theseo.
reports), when Theseus was upon his Expeditio^ against the Marathonian Bull,
entertained him with all possible expressions of Kindness, and Respect, making
Prayers and Vows to the Gods for his safe Return. Theseus came off with
Victory, and Hono^^* but at his Return, finding old Hecale dead, and being
thereby preven^^^ from expressing his Thankfulness to her, he ordered that her
Memo^y should be held Sacred, and honored at this Solemnity, in which she
(...) called, by a diminution of her Name, Hecalene; because she had a^costed
Theseus after that manner, calling him (...), which is ^ very usual Mode of
Speech, when Aged Persons design to exp^^^^ their Love and Tenderness to the
Younger sort: So Streps^ades in A^^stophanes Nubibus.
calls his Son Phidippides, by the diminutive Name of (...).

(...),
An Anniversary Solemnity observed in honor of Hecale, by the ^^^tonicensians,
who were wont to assemble at this Time in great n^^bers Strabo lib. XIV.
.

The Athenians also had a great Veneration for this Goddess, believing that she
was the Over-seer of their Families, and protected their Children; whence it
was customary to erect Statues to her before the Doors of their Houses, which
from the Goddess's Name were called (...) Aristophanes, ejusque Scholi^^^e^ in
Vespis.
. Every New Mood there was a Public Entertainment provided at the Charge of
the Richer sort, which was no sooner brought to the accustomed place, but the
poor People carried all off, giving out that Hecate had devoured it Idem in
Pluto.
; whence it was called (...), or Hecate's Supper. This was done in a place
where three Ways met, because this Goddess was supposed to have a threefold
Nature, or three Offices, in allusion to which she was known by three Names,
being called in the Infernal Regions, Hecate; in Heaven (...), or the Moon; and
upon Earth, (...), or Diana: whence it is, that we find a great many Names
attributed to her, derived from the number Three, or bearing some Relation to
it; as (...), Trivia, Tergemina, Tritonia, with several others.

(...),
A Festival Pindari Scholiast. Olymp. VII, VIII.
celebrated in honor of Juno, by the Argians, and Aeginensians, who were a
Colony from Argos. It was so called from (...), which signifies a Sacrifice,
consisting of an hundred Oxen; it being usual upon the first Day of this
Solemnity to offer so many (...) Juno, the Relics of all which were
distributed amongst the Citizens. There were also at this Time Public Sports,
first instituted by Archinus, one of the Kings of Argos; the Prize was a Brazen
Shield, and a Crown of Myrtle.

There was also an Anniversary Sacrifice called by this name in Laconia, and
offered for the Preservation of the hundred Cities, which flourished (...) one
time in that Country Eustathius Iliad. (...).
.

(...),
A Solemn Sacrifice to Jupiter, offered by the Messenians, when any of them
killed an hundred Enemies Pausanias Messenicis.
.

(...),
A Festival observed by the Phaestians, in honor of La^ona, upon this account,
as it is delivered by Antoninus Liberalis Metamorph. XVII*
: Galate^, the Daughter of Eurytius, was married to Lamprus, the Son of
Pan^^^n, a Citizen of Phaestus in Crete; who being of an honorable ^amily, but
wanting an Estate answerable to his Birth, and being unable to provide
competent Fortunes for Daughters, gave order to his Wife, that if she was
brought to bed of a Daughter, she should immediately put her to Death. This
done, he went to look after hi^ Flock, and before his Return Galatea was
delivered of a Daughter, but being overcome by Maternal Affection, resolved to
disobey her Husband's cruel Command; wherefore to secure the Infant, she called
it Leucippus, telling her Husband it was a Boy: At length, being no longer able
to conceal the Artifice, she fled for succor to Latona's Temple, where with
abundance of earnestness she entreated the Goddess, that, if it was possible,
her Virgin might be transformed into a Boy; Latona moved with Compassion,
granted her Request; whence she was by the Phaestians called (...), i. e.
because the Maid changed her Sex; and (...), i. e. because she put off her
Woman's Apparel.

(...),
In honor of Diana, sirnam'd (...), i. e. the Huntress, for which reason a
Cake made in the form of a Deer, and upon that account called (...), was
offered to her Athenans (...). lib. XIV.
. This Festival was instituted upon this Occasion: The Phocensians being
reduced to the la^^ extremity by the Thessalians, and disdaining to submit to
them, Daiphantus proposed that a vast pile of combustible matter should be
erected, upon which they should place their Wives, Children, and their whole
Substance; and in case they were defeated, set all on (...) together, that
nothing might come into the hands of their Enemies. But it being judged by no
means reasonable so to dispose of the Women without their consent, they
summoned them to the Public Assembly; where being met in a full Body, the
Proposal was no sooner offered to them, than with unanimous consent they gave
the^^ Approbation of it, applauding Daiphantus, and decreeing him a Crown, in
Reward of so generous and noble a Contrivance; the Boys also are said to have
met, and consented to it: Things being in this posture, they went to meet their
Enemies, whom they ^^gag'd with such Fury, and Resolution, that those, by whom
they ha^ just before been reduced to extreme Despair, were routed, and e^tirely
defeated by them Plutarchus de Virtute Mulierum.
. In memory of which Victory, this Festival was instituted, and observed with
more Solemnity, and ^^equented by greater numbers of Worshippers, than any
other in that Country. Here you may take notice of the Proverb (...)* i. e.
Phocensian Despair, which is applied to Persons lost beyond all hopes of
Recovery, and is said to have taken it is original from this Story.

(...),
A Festival instituted by the Laconians, in memory of Helena Hesychius.
, to whom they gave the honor of a Temple, and Divine Worship. It was
celebrated by Virgins riding upon Mules, or in certain Chariots composed of
Reeds, or Bull-rushes, and called (...).

(...),
At Plataeae Pausanias Boeoticis, Plutarchus Aristide.
, to Jupiter Eleutherius, or the Assertor of Liberty, by Delegates from almost
all the Cities of Greece. It was instituted upon this account: Mardonius, the
Persian General, being defeated in the Territories of Plataeae, by the Grecians
under the conduct of Pausa^^as the Spartan; the Plataeans erected an Altar, and
a Statue of white Marble to Jupiter Eleutherius, by whose Assistance they
supposed the Gre^i^ns had asserted the Liberties of Greece, against the Forces
of the Barbarians: and a general Assembly being summoned from all parts of
Greece, Aristides the Athenian proposed, that Deputies might be sent every
fifth Year from the Cities of Greece, to celebrate (...), i. e. the Games of
Liberty; which was agreed upon, and great Prizes appointed to be contended for.

The Plataeans also kept an Anniversary Solemnity, in memory of those that had
valiantly lost their Lives in Defense of their Country's Liberty; of which the
manner was thus: On the sixteenth of the Month Maemacterion, which with the
Boeotians is Alalcomenius, a Procession was made, beginning about Break of Day;
it was led by a Trumpeter, sounding a Point of War; then followed certain
Cha^^ots laden with Myrrh, Garlands, and a black Bull; after these came young
Men Freeborn, it not being permitted any Person of Servile Condition to assist
at any part of this Solemnity, because the Men, in whose memory it was
instituted, died in Defense of the Liberty of Greece; these carried Libations
of Wine, and Milk, in large two-^ar'd Vessels, and Jars of Oil, and precious
Ointments: Last of all came the Chief Magistrate, for whom though it was unlawful
at other times to touch any thing of Iron, or wear Garments of any Color but
White, yet he was then clad in a Purple Robe, and taking a Waterpot out of the
City-Chamber, proceeded with a Sword in his Hand through the middle of the
Town, to the Sepulcres: Then he drew Water out of a neighboring Spring, and
washed, and anointed the Monuments; then sacrificed the Bull upon a pile of
Wood, making Supplication to Infernal Mercury, and Jupiter, and invited the
Souls of those Valiant Heroes, that lost their Lives in the Defense of their
Country, to the Entertainment; then filling a Bowl with Wine, said, I drink to
those, that lost their Lives for the Liberty of Greece. These Solemnities,
Plutarch tells us, were observed till his Days.

Another Festival of this Name was observed by the Samians, in honor of the
God of Love Athena^s (...). lib. III.
.

It was also customary for Slaves to keep a Holy Day called by this Name, when
they obtained Liberty. To which Custom there is an Allusion in Plautus Pers.
Act. I. Scen. I.
, who introduces a Slave named Toxilus, rejoicing that his Master was gone from
Home, and promising himself as much Pleasure, as if he had obtained Freedom;
whence he makes him to say, Basilice agi^o Eleutheria --

(...),
This Solemnity was observed by the Celeans, and Phliasians every fourth Year;
by the Pheneatae also, the Lacedaemonians, Parrhas^a^^, and Cretans; but more
especially by the Athenians every fifth Year, at Eleusis a Burrough-Town of
Attica, from whence it was translated to Rome by Adrian the Emperor, and never
totally abolished till the Reign of the Elder Theodosius. It was the most
celebrated, and Mysterious Solemnity of any in Greece, whence it is often
called, by way of Eminence, (...), i. e. the Mysteries, without any other Note
of Distinction; and so superstitiously careful were they to conceal the Sacred
Rites, that if any Person divulged any part of them, he was thought to have
called down some Divine Judgment upon his Head, and it was accounted unsafe to
abide in the same Ho^^^ with him; wherefore he was apprehended as a public
offender, and suffered Death. Every thing contained some hidden Mystery, (...)
her self (to whom with her Daughter Proserpina this Solemnity was sacred) was
not called by her own Name, but by the unusual Title of (...), which seems to
be derived from (...), i. e. Grief, or Heaviness, because of her Sorrow for the
loss of her Daughter, when she was stolen by Pluto. This Secrecy was strictly
enjoined not only in Attica, but all other places of Greece, where this
Festival was observed, except Crete; insomuch that if any Person, that was not
lawfully Initiated, did but out of Ignorance, or Mista^^ chance to be present
at the Mysterious Rites, he was put to Dea^^* It is said by some to have been
first instituted by Ceres her self, wh^^ she had supplied the Athenians with
Corn, in a Time of grievo^s Famine. Others attribute both those Facts to King
Erectheus: Some will have it to have been instituted by Musaeus, the Father of
E^^^pus; others by Eumolpus himself.

Persons of both Sexes, and all Ages were Initiated at this Solemnity; nor was
it a thing indifferent whether they would be so* or no; for the Neglect of it
was looked upon as a Crime of a very heinous Nature; insomuch that it was one
part of the Accusation, for which Socrates was condemned to Death. All Persons
Initiated were thought to live in a state of greater Happiness and Security
than other Men, being under the more immediate Care, and Protection of the
Goddesses: Nor did the Benefit of it extend only to this Life, but after Death
too they enjoyed (as was believed) far greater degrees of Felicity than others,
and were honored with the first Places in the Elysian Shades; whereas others
(poor Souls!) were forced to lie, and wallow in perpetual Dirt, Stink, and
Nastiness.

But since the Benefits of Initiation were so vastly great, no wonder if they
were very cautious what Persons they admitted to it: Therefore such, as were
convicted of Witchcraft, or any other heinous Crime, or had committed Murder,
though against their Wills, were debarred from these Mysteries; and though in later
Ages all Persons, Barbarians excepted, were admitted to them, yet in the
Primitive Times the Athenians excluded all Strangers, that is, all that were
not Members of their own Commonwealth, some Eminent and Extraordinary Persons
excepted; such were Hercules, Castor, Pollux, Aesculapius, and some others. Nor
were these admitted to the (...), or Greater Mysteries, but only to the (...),
or Less, which were sacred to Pros^rpin^, and first instituted on this Account:
On a Time, when the Athenians were celebrating the accustomed Solemnity,
Hercules happening to go that way, desired he might be Initiated; but it being
unlawful for any Stranger to enjoy that Privilege, and yet Hercules being a
Person that by reason of his great Power, and the extraordinary Services he had
done for them, could not be denied; Eu^^lpus thought of an Expedient, wereby to
satisfy the Hero's Request, without violating the Laws; which he did, by
instituting another Solemnity, which was called (...), or the Lesser Mysteries;
which were afterward solemnly observed in the Month Anthesterion, at Agrae, a
Place near the River Ilissus; whereas the Greater were celebrated in the Month
Boedromion at Eleusis, an Attick Borough, from which Ceres was called
Eleusinia. In later Times the Lesser Festival was used as a Preparative to the
Greater; for no Persons were Initiated in the Greater, unless they had been
purified at the Lesser; the manner of which Purification was thus: Having kept
themselves chaft and unpolluted nine Days, they came and offered Sacrifices,
and Prayers, wearing Crowns and Garlands of Flowers, which were called (...),
or (...); they had also under their Feet (...), i. e. Jupiter's Skin, which was
the Skin of a Victim offered to that God. The Person that assisted them herein,
was called (...), from (...), i. e. Water, which was used at most
Purifications, but they were named (...), i. e. Persons Initiated.

About a Year after, having sacrificed a Sow to Ceres, they were admitted to
the Greater Mysteries, the Secret Rites of which (some few excepted, to which
none but Priests were conscious) were frankly revealed to them; whence they
were called (...), and (...), i. e. Inspectors. The manner of Initiation was
thus: The Candidates being crowned with Myrtle, had admittance by Night into a
place called (...), i. e. the Mystical Temple, which was an Edifice so vast and
capacious, that the most ample Theater did scarce exceed it. At their entrance,
they purified themselves by washing their Hands in Holy Water, and at the same
time were admonished, to present themselves with Minds pure and undefiled,
without which the external Cl^anness of the Body would by no means be accepted.
After this the Holy Mysteries were read to them out of a Book, called (...),
which word is derived from (...), i. e. a Stone, because the Book was nothing
else but two Stones fitly cemented together. Then the Priest that Initiated
them, called (...), proposed certain Questions, as, Whether they were fasting,
etc. to which they returned Answers in a set Form, as may be seen in Meursius's
Treatise on this Festival, to which I refer the Reader. This done, strange and
amazing Objects presented themselves, sometimes the place they were in, seemed
to shake round them, sometimes appeared bright and resplendent with Light, and
radiant Fire, and then again covered with black Darkness, and Horror;
sometimes Thunder, and Lightning, sometimes frightful Noises, and Bellowings,
sometimes terrible Apparitions astonished the trembling Spectators: The being
present at these Sights was called (...), i. e. Intuition. After this, they
were dismissed in these Words, (...). The Garments in which they were
Initiated, were accounted sacred, and of no less efficacy to avert Evils, than
Charms, and Incantations: wherefore they never cast them off, till they were
torn and tattered Rags; nor was it then usual to throw them away, but they made
Swadling-cloths of them for their Children, or consecrated them to Ceres, and
Proserpina.

The chief Person that attended at the Initiation, was called (...), i. e. a
Revealer of holy Things: He was always a Citizen of Athens, and held his Office
during Life (though amongst the Celeans, and Phliasians it was customary for him
to resign his Place every fourth Year, which was the Time of this Festival) he
was farther obliged to devote himself wholly to Divine Service, and to live a
chaste and single Life; to which end, it was usual for him to anoint himself
with the Juice of Hemlock, which by it is extreme Coldness is said to
extinguish, in a great measure, the Natural Heat. The Hierophantes had three
Assistants, the first of which was called from his Office (...), i. e.
Torch-bearer, and to him it was permitted to marry. The second was called
(...), of whose Office I have already given an Account. The third ministered at
the Altar, and was for that reason named (...). Hierophantes is said to have
been a Type of the Great Creator of all Things; (...), of the Sun; (...), of
Mercury; and (...), of the Moon.

There were also certain public Officers, whose business it was to take care
that all things were performed according to Custom. First, (...), i. e. The
King, who was one of the Archons, and was obliged at this Solemnity to offer
Prayers, and Sacrifices, to see that no Indecency, or Irregularity was
committed, and the Day following the Mysteries, to assemble the Senate, and
take cognizance of all Offenders in that kind. Beside the King, there were four
(...), i. e. Curators, elected by the People; one of them was appointed out of
the Sacred Family of the Eumolpidae, another out of the Ceryces, and the
remaining two out of the other Citizens. There were also ten Persons, that
assisted at this, and some other Solemnities, and were called (...), because it
was their Business to offer Sacrifices.

This Festival was celebrated in Boedromion, and continued nine Days, beginning
upon the fifteenth, and ending upon the twenty-third Day of that Month; during
which Time, it was unlawful to arrest any Man, or present any Petition; and
such as were found guilty of these Practices, were fined a thousand Drachms, or
(as others report) put to Death. It was also unlawful for those that were
Initiated, to sit upon the Covering of a Well, or to eat Beans, Mullets, or
Weazles. And if any Woman rode in a Chariot to Eleusis, she was by an Edict of
Lycurgus obliged to pay six thousand Drachms.

1. The first Day was called (...), i. e. an Assembly; because, it may be, then
the Worshippers first met together.

2. The second was named (...), i. e. to the Sea, you that are Initiated;
because (I suppose) they were commanded to purify themselves by washing in the
Sea.

3. Upon the third they offered Sacrifices, which consisted chiefly of an
Aexonian Mullet, in Greek (...), and Barley out of Rharium, a Field of Eleusis,
in which that sort of Corn was first sown. These Oblations were called (...),
and accounted so Sacred, that the Priests themselves were not (as was usual in
other Offerings) allowed to partake of them.

4. Upon the fourth they made a solemn Procession, wherein the (...), or Holy
Basket of Ceres, was carried in a consecrated Cart; Crowds of People shouting
as they went along, (...), i. e. All Happiness to Ceres. After these followed
certain Women called (...), who (as the Name implies) carried certain Baskets:
In these were contained Sesamin, carded Wool, some grains of Salt, a Serpent,
Pomegranates, Reeds, Ivy-boughs, a sort of Cakes called (...), Poppys, etc.

5. The fifth was called (...), i. e. the Torch-day; because the Night
following it, the Men, and Women ran about with Torches in their Hands. It was
also customary to dedicate Torches to Ceres, and contend who should present the
biggest; which was done in memory of Ceres's Journey, wherein she sought
Proserpina, being conducted by the light of a Torch, kindled in the Flames of
Aetna.

6. The sixth Day was called (...), from Iacchus, the Son of Jupiter and Ceres,
that accompanied the Goddess in her Search after Proserpina, with a Torch in
his Hand; whence it is, that his Statue held a Torch. This Statue was carried
from the Ceramicus to Eleusis in a solemn Procession, called, after the Hero's
Name, (...). The Persons that accompanied it, had their Heads crowned with
Myrtle, as also had the Statue, and were named (...), and all the way danced,
and sung, and beat brazen Kettles. The Way by which they issued out of the
City, was called (...), i. e. the Sacred Way: The Resting Place (...), from a
Fig Tree, which grew there, and was (like all other things concerned in this
Solemnity) accounted Sacred. It was also customary to rest upon a Bridge built
over the River Cephissus, and make themselves merry by jesting upon thos^ that
passed by; whence (...), being derived from (...), i. e. ^ Bridge, is by Suidas
expounded (...), i. e. mocking, or jeering* and (...) are by Hesychius
interpreted (...), i. e. Scoffer^. Having passed this Bridge, they went to
Eleusis, the way into which was called (...), i. e. the Mystical Entrance.

7. Upon the seventh Day were Sports, in which the Victors were rewarded with a
Measure of Barley, that Grain being first sown (...) Eleusis.

8. The eighth was called (...), because it once happened that Aesculapius,
coming from Epidaurus to Athens, and desiring to be Initiated, had the Lesser
Mysteries repeated: Whence it beca^e customary to celebrate them a second time
upon this Day, and admit to Initiation such Persons as had not before enjoyed
that Privilege.

9. The ninth, and last Day of the Festival was called (...) i. e. Earthen
Vessels: because it was usual to fill two such Vessels with Wine, one of which
being placed toward the East, and the other toward the West; after the
Repetition of certain Mystical Word^, they were both thrown down, and the Wine
being spilt upon the Ground, was offered as a Libation.

(...),
An Athenian Festival P^llux Onom. lib X cap. LIII. (...)
, so called from (...), i. e. Vessels made of Bull-rushes, with Ears of Willow,
in which certain Mysterio^^ things were carried upon this Day.

(...),
Two Festivals Hesychius, Etymologici Auctor, Ath^n^us (...). lib. XV. Pindari
Sch^li^st^^ Olympi^on. Od. XIII.
, one of which was celebrated in Crete, in honor of Europa, called (...),
which was either a Phoenician Name, or derived (...), i. e. from Europa's
ravishment by Jupiter in the form of a Bull. At this time Europa's Bones were
carried in Procession, with a Myrtle Garland called (...), or (...), which was
no less than twenty Cubits in Circumference.

The other Festival was celebrated by the Corinthians with solemn Games, and
Races, wherein young Men contended, running with lighted Torches in their
hands. It was instituted in honor of Minerva, Sirnam'd (...), i. e. from a
certain Pond in Marathon, where one of her Statues was erected: Or (...), i. e.
because by her assistance Bellerophon caught Pegasus, the winged Horse, and
brought him under command, which some take to be the first reason of the
Celebration of this Festival; others are of opinion, that this Name was given
to the Goddess from one Hellotis, a Corinthian Woman; the Story runs thus: The
Dorians, being assisted by the posterity of Hercules, made an Invasion upon
Pe^^ponnesus, where they took, and burned Corinth; most of the Women took care
to secure themselves by an early Flight, only some ^ew, amongst whom were
Hellotis, and Eurytione, betook themselves to Minerva's Temple, hoping, that
the sanctity of the Place would be sufficient protection for them: No sooner
had this reached the Dorians Ears, but they set Fire to the Temple, and all the
rest making a shift to escape, Hellotis, and Eurytione perished in the Flames.
Upon this ensued a dreadful Plague, which proved very fatal to the Dorians; and
the remedy prescribed by the Goddess, was, to appease the Ghosts of the two
deceased Sisters; whereupon they instituted this Festival in memory of them,
and erected a Temple to Min^rva, sirnam'd, from on^ of them, Hellotis.

(...),
Games in Sicily, near the River Helorus Hesychius.
.

(...),
At Athens Idem.
.

(...),
Or rather (according to Meursius's conjecture) (...), was a Festival in honor
of Enyalius Idem.
, whom some will have to be the same with Mars; Others, only one of his
Ministers.

(...),
To Ceres named (...) Plutarchus de Iside and Osiride.
, from (...), i. e. grief, in memory of her sorrow, when she had lost her
Daughter Proserpina.

(...),
Private Festivals, and Times of rejoicing, when a Friend, or Relation was
returned from a Journey Himerius in Propempt. Fla^i^
.

(...),
A Delphian Festival, in memory of a Journey of Apollo Procopius in Epistola ad
Zachariam.
.

(...),
In honor of Apollo Hesychius.
.

(...),
An Athenian Festival, in honor of Ceres Idem.
.

(...),
Another of Ceres's Festivals, observed by the Laconians Idem.
.

(...),
A Day of rejoicing after Victory.

(...),
A Rhodian Festival Idem.
.

(...),
A Spartan Festival Idem.
.

(...),
At Scira in Attica, in honor of Ceres and Proserpina Strabo Geogr. lib. IX.
Stephanus v. (...).
.

(...),
By the Thespians, in honor of (...), i. e. Cupid, the God of Lo^^ E^stathius
sub fine Iliad. (...).
.

(...),
This Festival seems to be the same with the former, for it was observed by the
Thespians in honor of Cupid Plutarchus Erotic. Pausanias Boeoticis.
; being celebrated every fifth year with Sports, and Games, wherein Musicians,
and others contended. If any Quarrels had happened amongst the People, it was
usual at this time to offer Sacrifices, and Prayers to the God, that he would
put an end to them.

(...),
A Laconian Festival, in honor of Hercules Hesychius.
; being (I suppose) in^^ituted in memory of his Labors, for Labor is by the
Greeks called (...).

(...),
I would rather call it (...), for this Festival belonged to Ceres Idem.
, whom we find sirnam'd Hercynna in Lycophron Cassandra v. 153.
; which Title ^as given her from Hercynna, the Daughter of Trophonius, and
Play-^ellow of Proserpina Pausanias Boeoticis.
.

(...),
A Festival observed in honor of (...), i. e. Mer^^^y, by the Phe^^^ae in
Arcadia Idem Arcadicis.
, and the Cyllenians in Elis Idem Eliacis.
.

Another we find observed by the Tangraeans in Boeotia Idem Boeoticis.
, where Mercury was called (...), i. e. the Ram-bearer, and represented with a
Ram upon his Shoulder, because he is said in a time of Plague to have walked
about the City in that Posture, and cured the Sick; in memory of which Action,
it was customary for one of the most beautiful Youths in the City to walk round
the City-walls with a Lamb, or Ram upon his Shoulders.

A Festival of the same Name was also observed in Crete, where it was usual for
the servants to sit down at Table, whilst their Masters stood by, and waited
Athenaeus (...). XIV.
; which custom was also practiced at the Roman Saturnalia.

Another of Mercury's Festivals was observed by Boys in the Schools of Exercise
at Athens Aeschines in Timarchum.
; at which no adult Persons were allowed to be present, beside the Gymnasiarch;
who, if convicted of having admitted any, underwent the same punishment with
those that corrupted freeborn Youth: The occasion of which Law seems to have
been the foul and not to be named Lust, and Wantonness, that were practiced in
former Times at this Solemnity.

(...),
Solemn Sacrifices to Vesta Hesychius.
, called in Greek (...), of which it was unlawful to carry away, or communicate
any part to any beside the Worshippers: whence (...), i. e. to sacrifice to
Vesta, is Proverbially applied to such as do any thing in private without
Spectators Diogenianus.
; or rather to covetous Misers, that will not part with any thing they are once
possessed of Tarrhaeus.
.

(...), or (...),
To the Furi^s Philo, Pausanias Boeotici^*
, who were by the Athenians called (...), i. e. Venerable Goddesses; by the
Sicyonians, and others, (...), i. e. Favorable, or Propitious; out of an
Opinion that their true Names were unlucky Omens. This Festival was observed
once every Year with Sacrifices, wherein pregnant Ews, Cakes made by the most
Eminent of the Young Men, and a Libation of Honey and Wine were offered to the
Goddesses, the Worshippers being decked with Flowers. At Athens none had
Admission to these Solemnities but Freeborn Denizons; and of them, those only
that were of known Virtue and Integrity, for such alone could be acceptable to
these Deities, whose peculiar Office it was to revenge and punish all sorts of
Impiety.

(...),
To Ceres Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Spartan Festival, mentioned in an old Inscription.

(...),
An Anniversary Solemnity observed by the Phigaleans in Arcaedia Pausanias
Arcadicis.
, who offered Sacrifices, both in Public, and Private, to Euryno^^, who had in
this place a Temple, that was never open, but upon this Day. This Eurynome was
(as some are of Opinion) the same with Diana; or (according to others) one of
Oceanus's Daughters, mentioned in Homer, where she is said to have assisted in
entertaining Vulcan.

(...),
Horse-races in Laconia Hesychius, and Phavorinus.
.


(...),
A Laconian Festival, in honor of Helacatus Hesychius.
, who was a Boy beloved by Hercules.

(...),
A Festival at Argos, in honor of Juno, who was the Protectress of that City,
and called in Greek (...). There were two Processions to the Goddess's Temple
without the City; One by the Men in Armor: Another, in which Juno's Priestess,
who was always a Matron of the first Quality, was drawn in a Chariot by white
Oxen: From her Priesthood the Argians accounted their Years, as the Athenians
did by the Government of their Archons: Being arrived at the Temple, they
offered an Hecatomb of Oxen, whence this Festival is named (...), that
Sacrifice is also sometimes called (...) which Name may, perhaps, be derived
from (...), i. e. a Bed, because it was Juno's Care to preside over Marriages,
Births, etc. There were also certain Games, wherein the Victory consisted in
pulling down a Shield, that was strongly fixed upon the Theater: The reward was
a Crown of Myrtle, and a brazen Shield; whence the Game was sometimes called
(...), i. e. the Brazen Contention. See (...).

Another Festival of this Name we find celebrated every fifth Year in Elis,
where sixteen Matrons were appointed to weave a Garment for the Goddess. There
were Games also, which are said to have been first instituted by Hippodamia, in
honor of Juno, by whose Assistance she was married to Pelops. The Presidents
were sixteen Matrons, every one of which was attended by a Maid: The Contenders
were Virgins, who being distinguished into several Classes, according to their
Ages, ran Races in their Orders, beginning from the youngest. The habit of all
was the same; their Hair was dishevelled, their right Shoulders bare to their
Breasts, and their Coats reached no lower than their Knees. They had a second
Race in the Olympic Stadium, which was at that time shortened about a sixth
part. Such as obtained Victory, were rewarded with Crowns of Olive, and a share
of the Ox that was offered in Sacrifice, and were permitted to dedicate their
own Pictures to the Goddess.

This Name was also given to a Solemn Day of Mourning at Corinth for Medea's
Children, who were buried in the Temple of Juno Acraea in that place, and, as
some say, slain by the Corinthians, who to remove the Scandal of so barbarous a
Murder from themselves, are said to have given Euripides a large Sum to invent
the Fable, wherein it is attributed to Medea, which before that time no Man
ever dreamed of Lycophronis Scholiastes.
.

Another Festival of this Name was celebrated by the Pellenaeans with Games,
wherein the Victor was rewarded with a rich Garment, called from the place's
Name (...).

(...),
An Athenian Festival, celebrated every fifth Year in honor of Hercules Pollux
lib. VIII. cap. IX.
.

The Thisbians also, and Thebans in Boeotia, observed a Solemn Festival in
honor of Hercules, sirnam'd (...), because (...), i. e. Apples, were offered
to him Idem lib. I. cap. I.
: The Original of which Custom was thus: It being usual in former Times to
offer a Sheep at this Solemnity, it happened once that the River Asopus had so
far overflowed it is Banks, that it could not be forded, whereby the coming of
the Victim was hindered: The word (...) is ambiguous in Greek, signifying
sometimes a Sheep, sometimes an Apple; which some of the Boys being aware of,
for want of other Employment, performed the holy Rites in Sport, offering,
instead of the Ram, an Apple, which they supported with four Sticks, in
imitation of Feet, placing two more upon the Top of it, to branch out like
Horns: Hercules was mightily taken with the ^est, and the Custom was continued
from that Time to my Author's Age, who flourished under Commodus, the Roman
Emperor.

At Sicyon Hercules was honored with a Festival, which lasted two Days, the
former of which was called (...); the latter (...).

At Lindus there was a Solemnity in honor of Hercules, at which nothing was
heard, but Execrations, and Ill-boding Words; insomuch that if any Person
happened to let fall a Lucky Speech, he was thought to have profaned the holy
Rites; the Original of which Custom is accounted for by Lactantius.

(...),
A Peloponnesian Festival, wherein the Women met together, and gathered Flowers
Hesychius.
, as the Name imports, being derived from (...)* i. e. the Spring, and (...),
i. e. a Flower.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Hesychius.

(...),
A Festival celebrated every ninth Year, by the Delphians, in honor of some
Heroine, as may be learned from the Name. We are told by Plutarch Quast. Grac.
, that there were in it a great many Mysterious Rites, wherein was a
Representation of something like Semele's Resurrection.

(...),
An Athenian Festival in honor of (...), i. e. Vulcan. At this Time there was
a Race with Torches, called (...), in the Academy; the manner of which was thus
Pausanias, Persii vetus Scholiastes, Hesychius.
: The Antagonists were three Young Men, one of which being appointed by Lots to
take his turn first, took a lighted Torch in his Hand, and began his Course; if
the Torch happened to be extinguished before he arrived to his Journey's end,
he delivered it to the second, and he in like manner to the third: The Victory
was his, that carried the Torch lighted to the Race's end, who was called
(...); but if none could perform that, the Victory was left undetermined, and
not adjudg'd to any of them. If any of the Con^^nders, for fear of
extinguishing the Torch by too violent a Motion, ^^acken'd their Course, the
Spectators used to strike them with the Palms of their Hands; for which reason
those Blows were called (...), or broad Stripes; as also (...), because they
were inflicted in the Ceramicus Aristophanes, e^usque Scholiastes in Ranis.
, of which the Academy was a part. To the successive Delivering of the Torches
from one to another, there are frequent Allusions in Authors, who usually
compare to it the Turns and Vicissitudes of Human Affairs, and the various
Changes and Successions, that happen in the World; of which I will only give
you one Instance out of Lucretius Lib. II.
; Inque brevi spatio mutantur secla animantum,
Et quasi Cursores vitai Lampada traciunt.
So things by turns increase, by turns decay,
Like Racers, bear the Lamp of Life, and live,
And their Race done, their Lamps to others give.
Mr. Cre^^h.

TH
(...),
A Sacrifice offered by the Husbandmen after Harvest (...), i. e. in Gratitude
to the Gods, by whose Blessing they enjoyed the Fruits of the Ground. The whole
Festival was called (...), of which in another place; as also (...), i. e. from
the Gathering of Fruits. Some will have it to be observed in honor of Ceres,
and Bacchus Menander Rhetor cap. (...).
, those being the two Deities, who had a peculiar Care of the Fruits of the
Earth. But Eustathius Iliad. ^.
tells us, that there was also a Solemn Procession at this Time in honor of
Neptune; and adds farther, that all the Gods had a share in the Offerings at
this Festival; as appears also from Homer's own Words, who tells us, that
Diana's Anger against Oeneus was caused by his neglect of Sacrificing to her at
this Festival, wherein all the rest of the Gods had been feasted by him; (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).
Diana, much incensed, that Oeneus had
To all the other Gods Oblations made,
And not to Her his grateful First Fruits paid,
Sent down this Evil to revenge his Crime.
Mr. Hutchin. Hence comes (...), sometimes called (...) Athenaus lib. III.
, which was the first Bread made of the New Corn. Some there are, that will
have (...) to be a general Name for all the Festivals, wherein they carried
(...), i. e. green Boughs.

(...),
An Athenian Festival, in honor of the Sun, and his Attendants the Hours; or,
as others think, of Delian Apollo, and Diana. It was celebrated upon the sixth,
and seventh Days of Thargelion; and received it is Name from (...), which is a
General Word for all the Fruits of the Earth; because one of the chief
Ceremonies was the carrying about their First Fruits in Pots called (...),
which Name was also applied to the (...), which were carried about the City at
this Time, and shall be described in the Festival, called (...). The chief
Solemnity was upon the latter Day, the former being wholly taken up in making
Preparations for it; at which time it was customary to lustrate the City, which
was done by two Persons, called by the general Name of (...), which is applied
to all that purified Cities; or the more peculiar one of (...) They were both
Men; or, according to others, a Man and Woman; one of which represented the
Male, the other the Female Sex, and offered a Sacrifice for each of them: It
was usual for the Man to bear about his Neck Figs, called (...), of a blackish
Color; and the Woman, white. The ordinary Rites in purifying Cities are thus
^escrib'd by John Tzetzes Chiliad. Histor. V. cap. XXIII.
; (...)
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...)
(...),
(...),
(...),
(...).
Thus was in Ancient Times Lustration made;
When any City groaned beneath the weight
Of Famine, Plague, or worse Calamity,
Forthwith a grateful Victim is prepared,
Which at the holy Altar when they 've placed,
They cast upon the Pile Cheese, Cakes, and Figs;
Then striking seven times it is Privities
With Sea-leeks, and wild Figs, and other Fruits,
Rude Nature's product without help of Art,
Burn it with Wood cut from unplanted Trees,
Then toward the Wind the sportive Ashes cast
Upon the Sea: Thus they the dreadful Ills,
With which the City labored, drive away.
Mr. Hutchin. Poetical Fictions tell us, that the (...) was so called from one
Pharmacus, that stole some of the consecrated Vessels of Apollo, and being
apprehended in the Fact by some of Achilles's Soldiers, suffered Death; of
which Crime, and Punishment the Athenians had always a Representation at this
Festival. The (...) was called (...), from a sort of Figs, called (...), and
used in Lustrations; whence also (...) was a Tune upon the Flute* which was
played as he went to perform his Office. It was farther customary for a Choir
of Singing-Men to contend for Victory, and the Conqueror to dedicate a Tripus
in the Pytheum, a Temple of Apollo, built by Pisistratus. At this Festival the
Athenians enrolled their Adopted Sons in the Public Register, as also they did
their Natural at the Apaturia. During the Solemnity, it was unlawful to give,
or receive Pledges, and the Offenders in this kind were arraigned at an
Assembly, held in Bacchus's Theater.

The Milesians had a Festival of the same Name, which they celebrated with a
great many Expressions of Mirth and Jollity, feasting and entertaining one
another.

(...),
I. e. The Marriage of the Gods. It was a Sicilian Festival, in honor of
Proserpina Pollux lib. I. cap I.
; and seems to have been instituted in memory of her Marriage with Pluto; the
chief part of the Solemnity being nothing else, but an imitation of the Nuptial
Rites.

(...),
See (...).

(...),
A Festival common to all the Gods Hesychius.
, and celebrated in a gre^^ many Cities of Greece, but especially at Athens.

The Pellenaeans instituted Solemn Games, called by this Name, in honor of
Apollo (...), i. e. the God of Hospitality, according to Pausanias Achaicis.
, or, as the Scholiast upon Pindar reports Olympi^n. XI.
, of Apoll^ and Mercury: The Victors, according to Pausanias, were rewarded
with a piece of Plate; according to the forementioned Scholiast, with a Garment
called (...).

The same Scholiast Olymp. III.
reports, that the Dioscuri instituted a Festival of this Name, in memory of an
honor the Gods did them, by coming to one of their Entertainments.

(...), or (...),
I. e. The Appearance of God. It was a Festival observed by the Delphians
Herodotus lib. I. Suidas.
, upon the Day, whereon Apollo first manifested himself to them.

(...),
A Laconian Festival Hes^chius.
.

(...),
A Public Festival, Mart, and Assembly of the Aetolians, held at a Town in
that Country, called Thermi Polybius lib. V.
.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Hesychius.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Ceres, sirnam'd (...), i. e. Legifera Virgilius
Aeneid. IV.
, or the Lawgiver; because she was the first that taught Mankind the use of
Laws. The first Institution of it is by some attributed to Trip^olemus, by
others to Orpheus, and by others to the Daughters of Da^aus. It was celebrated
in a great many of the Grecian Cities; By the Spartans, and Milesians, amongst
whom the Solemnity lasted three Days: By the Drymeans in Phocis, the Thebans in
Boeotia, the Megarians: By the Syracusians, where toward the end of the
Solemnity, they carried in Procession the Secrets of a Woman, composed of
Sesamin and Honey, and called in Sicily (...): By the Eretrians in Euboea,
where it was customary to roast their Meat by the Heat of the Sun: By the
Delians, who used to bake Loaves of a large size, called (...), which they
ushered in with great Solemnity, the Bearers of them crying, (...), Hence the
Festival is sometimes called (...).

But the Athenians observed this Festival with greatest Show of Devotion: The
Worshippers were Freeborn Women, (it being unlawful for any of Servile
Condition to be present) whose Husbands were ^ont to defray the Charges of the
Solemnity; and were obliged to do so, if their Wives Portion amounted to three
Talents. These Women were assisted by a Priest, called (...), because his Head
was adorned with a Crown, whilst he executed his Office: as also by certain
Virgins, who were straightly confined, and kept under severe Discipline, being
maintained at the Public Charge, in a place called (...). The Women were clad
in white Apparel, to intimate their spotless Innocence; and were obliged to the
strictest Chastity for five, or three Days before, and during the whole Time of
the Solemnity, which lasted four Days: for which end, they used to strew upon
their Beds such Herbs, as were thought to destroy all Appetite to Venereal
Pleasures: such were Agnus castus, Flea-bane, and (which were made use of by
the Milesian Women) Vine-branches, etc. It was held unlawful to eat the Kernels
of Pomegranates, or adorn themselves with Garlands; for every thing was carried
on with the greatest appearance of Seriousness, and Gravity; and nothing
tolerated, that bore the least show of Wantonness, or Immodesty; or even of
Mirth, or Jollity, the custom of jesting upon one another excepted, which was
constantly done, in memory of Iambe, that by a taunting Jest extorted a Smile
from Ceres, when she was in a pensive and melancholy Humor. Three Days, at
least, were spent in making Preparations for the Festival: Upon the eleventh of
Pyanepsion, the Women carrying Books upon their Heads, wherein the Laws were
contained, in memory of Ceres's Invention, went to Eleusis, where the Solemnity
was kept; whence this Day was called (...), i. e. the Ascent. Upon the
fourteenth the Festival began, and lasted till the seventeenth: Upon the
sixteenth they kept a Fast, sitting upon the Ground, in token of Humiliation;
whence the Day was called (...), i. e. a Fast. It was usual at this Solemnity
to pray to Ceres, Proserpina, Pluto, and Calligenia: this Calligenia some will
have to have been Ceres's Nurse, others her Priestess, others her Waiting-maid;
and some there are, who make her the same with Ceres; but these seem to be
sufficiently refuted by the Testimony of Aristophanes, who mentions her as
distinct from that Goddess Thesmoph^r.
; (...),
(...),
(...).
To the two Legislators make your Prayers,
To Ceres, and to Goddess Proserpine;
To Plutus too, and Calligenia.
And this Custom was omitted by the Eretrians alone of all the Gr^cians. There
was likewise a Mysterious Sacrifice, called (...), or (...), i. e. because all
Men were excluded, and banished from it; or, (...), i. e. because in a
dangerous War, the Women's Prayers were so prevalent with the Gods, that their
Enemies were defeated, and put to Flight as far as Chalcis; whence it is
sometimes called (...). There was another Sacrifice, called (...), i. e. a
Mulct, which was offered as an Expiation of any Irregularities that happened to
be committed during the Solemnity. At this Festival, all Prisoners committed to
Gaol for smaller Faults, were released; and upon the third Day all Courts of
Justice were shut up.

(...),
An Athenian Festival, in memory of Theseus: It was celebrated upon the eighth
Day of every Month, because he was the Reputed Son of Neptune, to whom those
Days were held Sacred; or because in his first Journey from Troezen, he arrived
at Athens upon the eighth of He^^tombaeon; or in memory of his safe Return from
Crete Plutarchus Theseo, Aristophanis Scholiastes Pluto.
, which happened upon the eighth of Pyanepsion, for which reason the Festival
was observed with greater Solemnity upon that Day, than at other Times. Some
also there are, that will have it to have been first in^tituted in memory of
Theseus's uniting the Athenians into one Body, that before lay dispersed in
little Hamlets up and down in Attica. It was celebrated with Sports and Games,
with Mirth and Banquets, and such as were poor, and unable to contribute to
them, were entertained upon free cost at the Public Tables, as we learn from
Ari^^ophanes Pluto.
. The Sacrifices were called (...), from (...), i. e. the Eighth, because they
were offered upon the eighth Day of the Month Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Apollo Idem.
. The Name seems to be de^^r'd from Apollo's three Nurses, who were called
Thriae.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Bacchus Pausanias Eliac. (...).
, observed by the Eleans, in a place distant about eight Stadia from Elis,
where it was confidently ^^ported, that the God himself was present in Person;
the Ground of which Story was this: There was a certain Chapel, into which ^^e
Priests conveyed three empty Vessels, in presence of the whole Assembly, which
consisted as well of Foreigners, as Natives; this done, they retired, and the
Doors being shut, themselves, and as many others as pleased, sealed them with
their own Signets: On the Morrow the Company returned, and after every Man had
looked upon his own Seal, and seen that it was unbroken, the Doors being
opened, the Vessels ^ere found full of Wine.

(...).
In honor of Venus Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Sacrifice so called from (...), i. e. a Tunny, which Fishermen offered to
Neptune, after a plentiful Draught Athenaeus lib. VII.
.

I
(...),
I. e. the Sacred Marriage. It was a Festival in honor of Jupiter* and Juno
Hesychius.
, being (I suppose) a Commemoration of the Marriage of those two Deities.

(...),
A Festival, wherein Musicians contended: It was celebrated in honor of
Jupiter Stephanus Byzantinus, Pausanias Messenicis.
, sirnam'd (...), from Ithome, a City in Thessaly, or Messene, where that God
is said to have been nursed by the two Nymphs Ithome, and Neda; who gave Names,
the former to a Town, the latter to a River.

(...),
One of Leucothea's Festivals in Crete, being derived from Inachus, according
to Hesychius; or rather from Ino, who is the same with Leucothea, and (...), i.
e. Grief; being, perhaps, a Commemoration of Ino's Misfortunes.

(...),
A Festival in Lemnos Hesychius.
.

(...),
Festivals in me^ory of Ino, one of which was celebrated every Year with
Sports, and Sacrifices at Corinth, being instituted by King ^^syphus Tzetzes in
Lycophronem.
.

An Anniversary Sacrifice was offered to Ino by the Megarians, whe^^ she was
first called Leucothea, being cast upon that Coast by the Waves, and interred
by Cleso, and Tauropolis Pausanias Atticis.
.

Ino had another Festival in Laconia, where there was a Pond consecrated to
her: Into this it was usual, at this Solemnity, to cast Cakes of Flower, which,
if they sunk, were Presages of Prosperity; but if they stayed upon the surface
of the Water, were Ill-boding Omens Pausanias Laconicis.
.

(...),
In honor of Bacchus sirnam'd Iobacchus, from the Exclamations used in some of
his Festivals, where they cried (...), etc. See (...).

(...),
A Theban Festival, the very same with (...), ^indari Scholiastes Olymp. VII.
; whence it appears, that it was instituted in honor of Hercules, and his
Companion Iolaus, who assisted him against Hydra.

(...),
A Solemnity observed by several Cities, in honor of Isis Diodorus Siculus
lib. I.
, who i^ said by some to have been the first, that taught Men the use of Corn;
in memory of which Benefit, it was customary, at some places, for the
Worshippers at this Festival, to carry Vessels full of Wheat, and Barley.

(...),
Anniversary Sports, celebrated at Olympia, in memory of Ischemus, the
Grandson of Mercury, and Hierea; who, in a Time of Famine, devoted himself to
be a Sacrifice for his Country, and was honored with a Monument near the
Olympian Stadium Isacius Tzetzes in Lycophronis Cassandr. v. 42.
.

K
(...),
Mysterious Observances at Thebes, and Lemnos; but more especially (...)
Imbrus, and Samothrace, which Islands were consecrated to the Ca^^^i, whom some
will have to be Phoenician Deities; others, the Sons of Vulcan; Others are of a
different Opinion from both; for nothing c^n be certainly determined concerning
the Original, Names, or Num^er of them: Such as desire farther Satisfaction,
may consult Coelius ^^^diginus, Lilius Gyraldus, and other Mythologists. All
that were In^^ated into these Mysteries, were thought effectually secured from
all Storms at Sea, and other Dangers Diodorus Siculu^ Bibl. lib. V.
: The chief Ceremony was thus: The Person that offered himself, being crowned
with Olive-branches, and girded about his Loins with a Purple Ribband, was
placed upon ^ Throne, around which the Priests, and Persons before Initiated
^^nc'd, and sported: This was called (...), or (...), i. e. en^^ronization
Plato Euthydemo, Hesychius.
.

(...),
Solemn Sports, celebrated by the Laconians, in honor of Diana Hesychius.
.

(...),
I. e. Beauty's Rewards. It was a Lesbian Festival, wherein the Women presented
themselves in Juno's Temple, and the Prize was assigned to the Fairest Homeri
Scholiastes Iliad. (...).
.

Another of these Contentions there was at the Festival of Ceres Eleusinia
amongst the Parrhasians, first instituted by Cypselus, whose Wife Herodice was
honored with the first Prize Athenaeus (...). lib. XIII.
.

Another of the same Nature we find amongst the Eleans Idem ibid.
, where the most Beautiful Man was presented with a complete Suit of Armor,
which he consecrated to Minerva, to whose Temple he walked in Procession, being
accompanied with his Friends, who adorned him with Ribbands, and crowned him
with a Garland of Myrtle.

(...),
An Athenian Festival Etymolog. Auctor.
.

(...),
A Festival observed in almost all the Cities of Greece; but especially at
Sparta, where it was first instituted about the Time of the XXVIth Olympiad, in
honor, not of Jupiter, as some are of Opinion, but of Apollo, sirnam'd
Carneus, either from one Carneus, a Trojan Aleman.
; or from a Beautiful Youth, called Carnus, who was the Son of Iupi^er and
Europa Hesychius.
, and beloved by Apollo Theocriti Scholiastes.
: Or from Carnus an Acarnanian, who was instructed by this God in the Art of
Divination, but afterward murdered by the Dorians; This Fact Apollo revenged
upon them by a dreadful Plague; to avert which, they instituted this Festival,
as Pausanias reports: Or (...), i. e. from the Cornel-tree, transposing the
Letter (...), as the same Author intimates; For it is reported by some, that
this Festival was first instituted by the Grecians, who had incurred Apollo's
Displeasure, by cutting down a number of Cornel-trees in a Grove consecrated to
him upon Mount Ida, which they used in building the Wooden-horse: Or (...), i.
e. from accomplishing the Request of Menelaus Demetrius.
, who, when he underto^k his Expedition against Troy, made a Vow to Apollo,
wherein he promised to pay him some signal Honor, if his Undertaking met with
Success. This Festival lasted nine Days, beginning upon the thirteenth of the
Month Carneus, which answered to the Athenian Metag^nion Plutarchus Nicia.
: It was an Imitation of the Method of living, and Discipline used in Camps;
for nine (...), i. e. Tents, were erected, in every one of which nine Men of
three different Tribes, three being chosen out of a Tribe, lived for the space
of nine Days, during which Time they were obedient to a public Crier, and did
nothing without express Order from him Athenaus lib. IV. Callimachi Hymn. in
Apoll. Pindarus Pythion.
. Hesychius tells us, that the Priest, whose Office it was to attend at this
Solemnity, was named (...), and adds in another place, that out of every Tribe
five other Ministers were elected, and called (...), and obliged to continue in
their Function four Years, during which Time they remained Batchelours. At this
Festival the Musical Numbers, called (...), were sung by Musicians, who
contended for Victory; the first Prize was won by Terpander.

(...), or (...),
A Festival in honor of Diana Pausanias Laconicis.
, sirnam'd Caryatis, from Caryum in Laconia, where this Solemnity was kept. It
was usual for Virgins to meet at the Celebration, and join in a certain Dance,
said to be invented by Castor and Pollux, which they called (...) Lucianu^
(...).
. In the Time of Xerxes's Invasion, when the Laconians durst not show their
Heads for Fear of the Enemy, lest the Goddess's Anger should be incurred by the
Intermission of this Solemnity, the neighboring Swains assembled in the
accustomed place, and sung Pastorals, which were called (...), from (...), i.
e. a Neat-herd. Thus, as some ^re of Opinion, Bucolicks came first to be in use.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Hebe, the Goddess of Youth Pausa^ias Corinthiacis.
.

(...), or (...),
This Festival is mentioned by Hesychius, and seems to have been solemnized at
the time, when Vines were pruned; for (...), and (...), signify Pruning Hooks.

(...),
An Anniversary Solemnity celebrated upon Mount Cnacalos, by the C^phyatae, in
honor of Diana, who had from that place the Surname of Cnacalesia Idem
Ar^adicis.
.

(...),
A Solemnity upon the Day before Theseus's Festival, in which a Ram was
sacrificed to Connidas, Theseus's Tutour Plutarchus These^
.

(...),
In honor of Proserpina, named (...) He^ychius.
, which in the Molossian Dialect, signifies a Beautiful Woman.

(...), or (...),
A Nocturnal Festival in honor of Cotys, or Cotytto, the Goddess of Wantonness
Synesius in Encomio calvitii, Su^^^, Iuvenalis Satir. II.
: It was observed by the Athenians, Corinthians, Chians, Thracians, with
others; and celebrated with such Rites as were most acceptable to the Goddess,
who was thought to be delighted with nothing so much, as Lewdness, and
Debauchery. Her Priests were called (...), which Name we find in Iuvenal; It
seems to have been derived (...), i. e. from Dying, or Painting themselves; for
they were wont to practice all sorts of effeminate, and Meretricious Arts;
whence (...), i. e. a Votary of Cotys, is Proverbially applied to Beaux, and
all Men that spend their Time in Dressing, and Perfuming themselves.

Another Festival of this Name Plutarch^s Proverb.
was celebrated in Sicily, where the Worshippers carried Boughs hung about with
Cakes, and Fruit, which it was lawful for any Person to pluck off; in memory
(as Gyraldus was of Opinion) of Proserpina's Ravishment, who is by some thought
to have been the same with Cotytto.

(...),
An Athenian Festival in honor of Saturn, who is called in Greek (...)
Aristophanis Scholiastes Nubibus, Hesychius.
. It was celebrated in the Month Hecatombaeon, which was formerly called
Cronius.

Another of Saturn's Festivals was celebrated Porphyrius apud The^doretum lib.
VII. Graec. affect.
upon the sixteenth of Metagitnion at Rhodos; where they offered in Sacrifice a
condemned Criminal.

(...),
A Festival instituted by Theseus, in memory of Nausitheus, and Phaeax, who
were his (...), i. e. Pilots, in his Voyage to Crete Plutarchus Theseo.
.

(...),
A Festival observed in Dog Days at Argos Athenaus lib. III.
, and so called (...), i. e. from killing Dogs, because it was usual upon this
Day to kill all the Dogs they met with.

L
(...),
Some Festivals there were at Lacedaemon, the Names whereof are forgotten: One
of these is mentioned by Plutarch in his Love-Stories, at which the Married
Women, Maidens, Children, and Servants, feasted all together promiscuously;
only the Ladies, whose Husbands were Magistrates, watched all Night in a large
Room by themselves.

Another we find in Athenaeus (...). lib. XIII.
, at which the Women took all the Old Batchelours, and dragged them round an
Altar, beating them all the time with their Fists; to the end that if no other
Motives would induce them to Marry, the Shame and Ignominy they were exposed to
at these Times, might compel them to it.

(...),
A Festival at Pellene Paus^nias Ach^icis.
in Achaia, in honor of Bacchus sirnam'd (...), from (...), i. e. to shine;
for this Solemnity being in the Night, the Worshippers went to Bacchus's Temple
with lighted Torches in their Hands. It was customary at this time to place
Vessels full of Wine here and there in every Street of the City.

(...),
Games at Larissa Apollonii Scholiaste^ lib. IV.
, wherein the Combatants performed their Exercises singly, before the (...), or
Combat consisting of five Exercises, was invented.

(...),
A Festival of Bacchus, celebrated at Larysium, a Mountain in Laco^ia, about
the beginning of Spring Pausanias Laconicis.
.

(...),
An anniversary Festival at Patrae in Achaia, in honor of Diana Pau^anias
Achaicis.
sirnam'd Laphria, either (...), i. e. from Spoils, which she took from wild
Beasts, because she was the Goddess of Hunting, and her Statue, which was
composed of Gold and Ivory, represented her in a Hunting posture: Or, because
she desisted from her Anger, and became every year (...), i. e. more favorable
and propitious, to Oeneus, King of the Calydonians: Or, from one Laphrius a
Phocensian, by whom her Statue was erected in Calydonia; for this Title was
first given to Diana in Calydonia, and thence, together with her Statue,
translated to Patrae. The customs at this Festival are thus described by
Pausanias: At the approach of the Festival, they made an ascent to the Altar,
heaping up soft Earth in the manner of Stairs; round the Altar they placed in
order pieces of green Wood, every one of which was in length sixteen Cubits;
upon it was laid the dryest Wood they could get. The Solemnity lasted two Days,
on the former of which there was a solemn Procession, followed by Diana's
Priestess, who was a Virgin, and rode in a Chariot drawn by Bucks. On the Day
following, they assembled to offer Sacrifices, which consisted of Birds, Bears,
Bucks, Lions, Wolves, with all sorts of Animals, and Garden-Fruits, which were
cast upon the Altar, in part by private Persons, and partly at the public
Charge; then the fire being kindled, it sometimes happened, that the wild
Beasts having their Fetters loosed by the Flames, leaped off the Altar, which
happened when my Author was present; yet neither then, nor at any time before
did any Person receive the least harm thereby.

(...),
An anniversary Day at Sparta Idem Laconicis.
, in memory of Leonidas King of that City, who with a small Number of Men put a
stop to the whole Army of Xerxes at Thermopylae, and maintained the passage of
those Straights two whole Days together. Upon this Day there was an Oration
pronounced on the Hero, and Sports, in which none were allowed to contend, but
Freeborn Spartans.

(...),
Who was the Author, what the Occasion of this Festival, is not known; thus
much however we find of it in Porphyry De Antro Nympharum.
; That all that were admitted to it, washed their Hands with Honey, which was
poured upon them instead of Water; in token that they were pure from all things
hurtful, malicious, and detestable.

(...),
A Festival at Lerna, instituted by Philammon Pausanias Corinthia^. Arcad.
Inscriptio Vetus.
in honor of Bacchus, Proserpine, and Ceres. In the primitive Times the
Argives used to carry Fire to this Solemnity from a Temple upon Mount Crathis,
dedicated to Diana, sirnam'd (perhaps from (...), i. e. fire) (...).

(...),
A Festival of Bacchus Aristophanis Scholiastes Equitibus, Diogenes La^rtius
Platone.
sirnam'd Lenaeus from (...), i. e. a Winepress. It was celebrated in the Month
Lenaeon with several Ceremonies usual at other Festivals of this God; but what
more especially recommended it, were the Poetical contention, wherein Poets
strove for Victory, and the Tragedies acted at this Time.

(...),
I. e. Lapidation. This Festival was celebrated by the Trazenians in ^emory of
Lamia and Auxesia, who were two Virgins, that coming ^^om Crete to Troezen in a
Time of Tumult and Sedition, became a ^^crifice to the Fury of the People, by
whom they were stoned to ^eath Pausanias Corinthiacis.
.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Diana Idem Achaicis.
, sirnam'd Limnatis from Li^^^e, a School of Exercise at Troezen, in which she
was worshipped; (...), according to Artemidorus, from (...), i. e. Ponds,
because she (...) the care of Fishermen.

(...),
An Arcadian Plutarchus Caesare, Pausa^in Arcadicis, Porphyrius (...). Hyginus
Fab. CLXXIII.
Festival something resembling the Roman Lupercaliae: (...) was celebrated with
Games, in which the Conqueror was rewarded ^ith a Suit of brazen Armor; and
an Human Sacrifice was offered in (...). The first Institutor of it was Lycaon,
who observed it in honor (...) Jupiter, sirnam'd Lycaeus, either from Lycaon's
own Name, or the Arcadian Mountain Ly^aeus, which the Arcadians pretend is the
true ^lympus, whence they call it (...), i. e. the sacred Hill, be^^^se Jupiter
was feigned to have had his Education there; in memory (...) which there was an
Altar, where certain Mysterious Worship was ^^id to that God, and a Plot of
Ground consecrated to him, upon which it was unlawful for any Person so much as
to set his Foot.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Spartans in memory of Lycurgus their ^aw-giver
Plutarch. ^^^go, Strabo lib. VIII.
, whom they honored with a Temple, and an anniver^^^y Sacrifice.

(...),
A Samian Festival celebrated Plutarchus Lysandro, Hesychius.
with Sacrifices and Games in ho^our of Lysander, the Lacedaemonian Admiral. It
was anciently called (...), which name was abolished by a Decree of the Samians.


(...),
Solemn Sacrifices offered by the Athenians in Maemacterion, which ^as a
Winter-month, to Jupiter (...), to induce him to send ^ild and temperate
Weather, because He was usually taken for the Air, or Heavens, and therefore
thought to preside over the Seasons. There are various reasons assigned for
this Surname, for (...) is by Harpocration expounded (...), i. e. outrageous,
and furious; being derived from (...), that is, according to Suidas, (...), i.
e. to trouble, or raise commotions. But Hesychius affixeth a quite different
signification to it, for according to him, (...) is the same with (...), i. e.
favorable and propitious; and herein Plutarch agree's with him, who tells us
Libro (...).
, That 'twas his Opinion, that by the Name of (...), which was given by the
Athenians to the King of the Gods, was meant (...). Neither of these
significations are at all disagreeable to the design of this Festival; for
since it was to procure good Weather, it might either be instituted as a means
to appease the Deity, that was the cause of Storms, and intemperate Seafons; or
to entreat the same Person, as being of a mild and gentle Disposition, and
willing to grant the requests of his Votaries.

(...),
See (...).

(...),
A Festival in honor of Menelaus Isocrates in Helenae Encomio, Pausanias
Laconici^.
, at Therapnae in Laconia, where a Temple was consecrated to him, in which he
was worshipped, together with Helena, not as an Hero, or petty Deity, but as
one of the supreme Gods.

(...),
Certain Days upon which the Lesbians offered public Sacrifices Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival in the Month Metagitnion Plutarchus de Exilio, Harpocration, Suidas.
, in honor of Apollo (...), being celebrated by the Inhabitants of Melite,
that left their habitations, and settled among the Diomeans in Attica; whence
these Names seem to have been derived, for they import a removal from one
Neighborhood to another.

(...),
Sacrifices, with Horse-races, and other Games celebrated by the Chesonesians
in memory of Miltiades, the Athenian General Herod^tus lib. VI.
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Orchomenians Pindari Scholiastes Isthm. Od. I.
, who were called Minyae, and the River, upon which the City was founded,
Minya, from Minyas, ^ing of that Place, in memory of whom, it may be, this
solemnity was instituted.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by all the Inhabitants of Mitylene, in a place without
the City, in honor of Apollo (...) Thucydides initio lib. III.
, which surname ^e find mentioned also in Hesychius.

(...),
An anniversary Solemnity at Athens Plutarch. de Gloria Atheniens.
Harpocration, Etymologici Auctor, Suidas, Eustathius Il. (...).
upon the sixteenth of Muny^ion, in honor of Diana sirnam'd Munychia from King
Munychus, the Son of Pentacleus; or from a part of the Piraeeus, called
Munychia, where this Goddess had a Temple, to which the Athenians allowed the
Privilege of being a Sanctuary to such as fled to it for refuge. At this
Solemnity they offered certain Cakes called (...), which name is derived (...),
i. e. from shining on every side, either because lighted Torches hung round
them, when they were carried into the Temple; or because they were offered at
Full Moon; that being the Time of this Festival, for it was instituted in
honor of Diana, who was reputed to be the same with the Moon, because it was
Full Moon, when Themistocles overthrew the Persian Fleet (...) Salamis.

(...),
Festivals Pollux lib. I. cap. I. Aeschines in Timarchum, Pausanias Boeoticis,
Diodorus Sic. lib. XVII. Plutarchus Erotico.
in honor of the Muses at several places of Greece, especially amongst the
Thespians, where Solemn Games were celebrated every Fifth year.

The Macedonians had also a Festival in honor of Jupiter and the Muses, which
was first instituted by King Archelaus, was celebrated with Stage Plays, and
Games, and lasted nine Days, according to the Number of the Muses.

(...),
A Festival Pausanias fine Achaicorum.
in honor of Ceres, sirnam'd Mysia, from Mysius an Ar^ian, who dedicated a
Temple to her in a place about X. Stadia distant from Pellene in Achaia; or,
according to Phurnutus, from (...), i. e. to cloy, to satisfy, or to be well
fed, because Ceres was the first that taught Men how to use Corn. This Festival
continued seven Days, upon the third of which all the Men and Dogs being shut
out of the Temple, the Women, together with the Bitches, remained within, and
having that Night performed the accustomed Rites, on the Day following returned
to the Men, with whom they past away the Time in jesting, and laughing at one
another.

(...),
An Arcadian Apollonii Rhodii Scholiastes lib. I. v. 164.
Festival, so named from (...), i. e. a fight; for it was instituted in memory
of a Battle, wherein Lycurgus slew Ereuthalion.

N
(...),
In memory of deceased Persons. Of this, and the following Solemnities I shall
give a more full account, when I come to treat of the Honors paid to the Dead.

(...), or (...),
A Solemnity in memory of deceased Persons Suidas.
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated to Bacchus Hesychius.
, when the new Wine was first tasted, as the Name signifies.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Delphians Heliodorus Aethiopic. initio lib. III.
with a great deal of Pomp and Splendor, in memory of Neoptolemus, the Son of
Achilles, who was slain in an Attempt to sack Apollo's Temple, which he
undertook in revenge of his Father's Death, to which that God was accessory.

(...),
A Milesian Festival Plutarchus de Virtut. Mulierum.
in honor of Diana, sirnam'd Neleis, from N^leus, an inhabitant of Miletus
Lycophr^n Cassandra.
.

(...),
An anniversary Solemnity observed by the Athenians upon the sixth of
Boedromion, in memory of that famous Victory, which Miltiades ob^^in'd against
the Persians at Marathon Plutarchus de Gloria Atheniensium.
.

(...),
An Athenian Solemnity in memory of Minerva's Victory over Ne^^une, when they
contended which of them should have the honor of giving a Name to the City
afterward called Athens Proclus in Timaeum Comment. I.
.

(...), or (...),
A Festival observed at the beginning of every Lunar Month Homeri Scholiastes
Od. (...). Eustathius Od. (...) and (...). Demosthenes in A^istogit.
T^eophrastus Ethic. Charact. Etymologici Auctor, Hesychius, Herodotus lib.
VIII. and Vit. H^meri.
, which ^as (as the Name imports) upon the New Moon, in honor of all the Gods,
but especially Apollo, who was called (...), because the Sun is the first
Author of all Light, and whatever distinction of Time^ and Seasons may be taken
from other Planets, yet they are all owing ^o him, as the Original and Fountain
of all those borrowed Rays, which the rest have only by participation from him.
To observe this Festival was called (...), certain Cakes offered therein (...),
and the Worshippers (...). It was observed with Games, and Public
Entertainments, which were made by the richer Sort, to whose Tables the Poor
flocked in great Numbers. The Athe^^ans at these times offered solemn Prayers,
and Sacrifices for the prosperity of their Commonwealth the ensuing Month, in
Erectheus's Temple in the Citadel, which was kept by a Dragon, to which they
gave (as was usual in Trophonius's Cave) a Honey-cake called (...). These
Sacrifices, because they were offered every Month, were called (...), or (...),
and those that performed them (...), and (...).

X
(...),
A Macedonian Festival Hesychius, Livius lib. XL. Curtius lib. X*
, so called because it was observed in the Month Xanthus, which, as Suidas
tells us, was the same with April. At this Time the Army was purified by solemn
Lustration, the manner of which was thus: They divided a Bitch into two halves,
one of which, together with the Entrails, was placed upon the Right hand, the
other upon the Left; between these the Army marched in this Order: After the
Arms of all the Macedonian Kings, came the first part of the Army, consisting
(I suppose) of Horse; these were followed by the King, and his Children, after
whom went the Life-Guards; th^n followed the rest of the Army: This done, the
Army was divided into two parts, one of which being set in array against the
other, there followed a short Encounter in imitation of a Fight.

(...), or (...),
An anniversary Day observed by the Athenians Thucydides lib. II. Plutarchus
Theseo.
to Minerva, upon the sixteenth of Hecatombaeon, in memory that by the
persuasion of Theseus they left their Countrey-seats, in which they lay
dispersed here and there in Attica, and united together in one Body.

O
(...),
A Boeotian Festival Pausanias Boeoticis.
in honor of Neptune, sirnam'd Onchestius from Onchestus, a Town in Boeotia.

(...),
A Festival celebrated in honor of Olympian Jupiter, by the Athenians,
Smyrnaeans, Macedonians, but especially by the Eleans, of whose Solemnity I
shall give an account afterward.

(...),
A Theban Festival in honor of Jupiter Homoloius, or Ceres Homoloia The^crit^
Scholiastes Idyll. VII.
, who were so called from Homole in Boeotia, or the Prophetess Homoloia, or
from (...), which in the Aeolian dialect signifies peaceable.

(...), or (...),
An Athenian Festival so called (...), i. e. from carrying Boughs hung with
Grapes, etc. which were called (...) Harpocration, Hesychius.
. The Institution, and Manner of it are described at large by Plutarch in the
Life of Theseus; his words run thus: Theseus at his return from Crete forgot to
hang out the white Sail, which should have been the token of their Safety to
Aegeus, who knowing nothing of their Success, for grief threw himself headlong
from a Rock, and perished in the Sea. But Theseus being arrived at the Port
Phalerus, paid there the Sacrifices, which he had vowed to the Gods at his
setting out to Sea, and sent a Herald to the City to carry the news of his safe
return. At his entrance into the City the Herald found the People for the most
part full of grief for the loss of their King; others, as may be well believed,
as full of joy for the Message that he brought, and wholly bent to make much of
him, and crown him with Garlands for so acceptable News; these he indeed
accepted of, but hung them upon his Herald's Staff, and thus returning to the
Seaside before Theseus had finished his Libation to the Gods, stayed without
for fear of disturbing the Holy Rites; but as soon as the Sacrifice was ended,
he entered and related the whole Story of the King's Death; upon the hearing of
which, with great lamentations, and a confused tumult of grief, they ran with
all haste to the City: Whence, they say, it comes that at this Day in the Feast
Oschophoria, not the Herald, but his Staff is crowned; and that the People then
present still break out at the Sacrifice into this Shout, (...), of which
confused sounds the first was wont to be used by Men in haste, or at a Triumph;
the other is proper to those that are in great trouble, or consternation.

A little after my Author proceeds thus: The Festival called Oschophoria, which
to this Day the Athenians celebrate, was then first instituted by Theseus; for
he took not with him the full number of Virgins, which were chosen by Lots to
be carried away, but selected two Youths, with whom he had an intimate
familiarity, of fair and Womanish Faces, but of Manly and Courageous Spirits,
and having by frequent Bathings, and avoiding the heat and scorching of the
Sun, with a constant use of all the Ointments, Washes, and Dresses, that serve
to adorn the Head, smooth the Skin, or improve the Complexion, changed them, in
a manner, from what they were before; and having taught them further to
counterfeit the very Voice, Gesture, and Gate of Virgins, so that there could
not be the least difference perceived; he, undiscovered by any, put them into
the number of the Athenian Maids designed for Crete. At his return He and these
two Youths led up a solemn Procession with Boughs and Vine-branches in their
hands, in the same habit that is now worn at the celebration of the
Oschophoria: These Branches they carried in honor of Bacchus and Ariadne, in
memory of the Fable related of them; or rather, because they happened to return
in Autumn, the time of gathering Grapes. The Women called (...), i. e.
Supper-carryers, were taken into these Ceremonies, and assist at the Sacrifice,
in remembrance and imitation of the Mothers of the young Men and Virgins, upon
whom the Lot fell; for thus busily did they run about, bringing Banquets and
Refreshments to their Children; and because the good Women then told their Sons
and Daughters a great many fine Tales and Stories, to comfort and encourage
them under the Danger they were going upon, it has therefore still continued a
Custom, that at this Festival old Tales and Fables should be the chief
Discourse. For all these particularities we are beholding to the history of
Demon. Besides the Rites already described out of Plutarch, there was always a
Race at this Festival ^ausanias Atticis, A^he^aeus lib. XI. Hesychius, Nicandri
Schol. Alexiph^rmacis.
; the contenders were certain Young Men elected out of every Tribe, whose
Parents were both living; they ran from Bacchus's Temple, to that of Minerva
Sciras in the Phalerian Haven; the place where the Race ended, was called
(...), from the (...), or Boughs, which the Runners carried in their Hands, and
deposited there. The Conqueror's Reward was a Cup called (...), or (...), i. e.
Five-fold, because it contained a mixture of five things, viz. Wine, Honey,
Cheese, Meal, and a little Oil.

P
(...),
A Festival so called (...), i. e. from all sorts of Boughs: It was celebrated
by the Rhodians, when they pruned their Vines Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated (as the Name imports) by all the Boeotians Strabo lib.
IX. Pausanias Boeoticis.
, who assembled near Coronea, at the Temple of Minerva, sirnam'd Itonia, from
Itonius, the Son of Amphictyon.

(...),
An Athenian Festival in honor of Minerva, the Protectress of Athens. It was
first instituted by Ericthonius, or Orpheus, and called (...), but afterward
renewed and amplify'd by Theseus, when he had united into one City the whole
Athenian Nation, and called (...). Some are of Opinion, that it was much what
the same with the Roman Quinquatria, whence it is usual to call it by that Name
in Latin. At the first it continued only one Day, but afterward was prolonged
several Days, and celebrated with greater Preparations, and Magnificence than
was usual in the Primitive Times.

There were two Solemnities of this Name, one of which was called (...), i. e.
the Great Panathenaea, which was celebrated once in five Years, beginning upon
the XXIId of Hecatombaeon. The other was called (...), i. e. the Lesser
Panathenaea, and was kept every third Year; or rather, as some think, every
Year, beginning upon the XXIst, or XXth of Thargelion. In the latter of these,
there were three Games, managed by ten Presidents, elected out of all the ten
Tribes of Athens, who continued in Office four Years. On the first Day at Even,
there was a Race with Torches, wherein first Footmen, and afterward Horsemen
contended: The same Custom was likewise observed in the Greater Festival. The
second Contention was (...), i. e. a Gymnical exercise, so called because the
Combatants therein gave a proof of their Strength, or Manhood: the place of
these Games was near the River, and called from this Festival (...), the
Stadium being decayed by Time, was rebuilt of white Pentelick Marble by
Herodes, a Native of Athens, with such Splendor, and Magnificence, that the
most stately Theaters could not compare with it. The last was a Musical
Contention, first instituted by Pericles; in the Songs used at this Time, they
rehearsed the generous Undertakings of Harmodius, and Aristogiton, who opposed
the Tyranny of Pisistratus's Sons; as of Thrasybulus also, who delivered the
Athenians from the Thirty Tyrants, imposed on them by the Lacedaemonians. The
first that obtained the Victory by playing upon the Harp, was Phrynis a
Mitylenaean: Other Musical Instruments were also made use of, especially
Flutes, on which they played in Consort: There was also a Dance performed by a
Circular Chorus, of which hereafter: And the Poets contended in four Plays, the
last whereof was Satyr, and all together were named from their number (...):
Beside these, there was a Contention at Sunium, in imitation of a Sea Fight:
The Conqueror in any of these Games was rewarded with a Vessel of Oil, which
he was permitted to dispose of, how, and whither he pleased, whereas it was
unlawful for any other to transport that Commodity: Farther he received a Crown
of those Olives, which grew in the Academy, and were sacred to Minerva, and
called (...), from (...), i. e. Death, in remembrance of the Misfortune of
Halirrothius, the Son of Neptune, who, in a rage at his Father's Defeat by
Minerva, in their Contention about the Name of Athens, offering to cut down the
Olive Tree, by the Production of which Minerva obtained the Victory, missing
his Aim, gave himself a fatal Blow: Others derive the Name from (...), i. e. a
part, because, according to some, these Olives were given by Contribution, all
Persons that possessed Olive Trees being obliged to contribute their
proportions toward the Celebration of this Festival. Beside these, there was a
certain Dance called Pyrrhichia, performed by young Boys in Armor, in
imitation of Minerva, who, in Triumph over the Vanquished Sons of Titan, danced
in that manner. It was usual also after that Athens was brought under the
Dominion of the Romans, for Gladiators to contend after the Roman fashion. No
Man was permitted to be present at any of these Games in died Garments, and the
Punishment of such Offenders was left to the Discretion of the (...), or
President of the Games. Lastly, they offered a Sumptuous Sacrifice, toward
which every one of the Athenian Buroughs contributed an Ox; and of the Flesh
that remained, a public Entertainment was made for the whole Assembly.

In the Greater Festival most of the same Rites, and Ceremonies were practiced,
but were (I suppose) performed with greater Splendor, and Magnificence, and
the Addition of some others, not observed in the Lesser, as particularly the
Procession, in which Minerva's Sacred (...), or Garment, was carried: This
(...) was woven by a select number of Virgins, called (...), from (...), i. e.
Work; these were superintended by two of the (...), (of whom I have spoken
before) and entered upon their Employ at the Festival called (...), which was
upon the thirtieth Day of Pyanepsion: It was of a white color, without
Sleeves, and embroidered with Gold: Upon it were described the Achievements of
Minerva, especially those against the Giants; Jupiter also, and the Heroes,
with all such as were famous for Valiant and Noble Exploits, had their Effigies
in it; whence Men of true Courage and Bravery are said to be (...), i. e.
worthy to be portrayed in Minerva's Sacred Garment, as in Aristophanes
Equitibus.
, (...)
(...).
We will our Fathers treat with high Esteem,
Whose brave Exploits are worthy Attica,
Fit to be portrayed in Minerva's Vest.
With this (...) they made a solemn Procession, the Ceremonies of which were
thus: In the Ceramicus without the City there was an Engine built in the form
of a Ship, on purpose for this Solemnity; upon this the (...) was hung in the
manner of a Sail, and the whole was conveyed, not by Beasts, as some have
imagined, but by Subterraneous Machines, to the Temple of Ceres Eleusinia, and
from thence to the Citadel, where the (...) was put upon Minerva's Statue,
which seems to have been laid upon a Bed straw'd with, or rather composed of
Flowers, and called (...). This Procession was made by Persons of all Ages,
Sexes, and Qualities; It was led up by Old Men, together (as some say) with Old
Women, carrying Olive-branches in their Hands; whence they are called (...), i.
e. Bearers of Green Boughs: After these came the Men of full Age with Shields
and Spears, being attended by the (...), or Sojourners, who carried Spades, and
were upon that account called (...), i. e. Spade-bearers: Then followed the
Women, attended by the Sojourners Wives, who were named (...), from bearing
Waterpots: These were followed by young Men singing Hymns to the Goddess; they
were crowned with Millet, and habited in Mourning-cloaks, in memory of one of
the (...), who was slain as he attempted to force the Posterity of Hercules
from the Altar: Next to these came select Virgins of the first Quality, called
(...), i. e. Basket-bearers, because they carried certain Baskets, which
contained some necessaries for the Celebration of the holy Rites, which (as
also other Utensils required at the Solemnity) were in the custody of one, who,
because he was Chief manager of the public Pomps, Processions, or Embassies to
the Gods, was called (...), and were distributed by him as occasion required;
these Virgins were attended by the Sojourners Daughters, who carried
Umbrella's, and little Seats, whence they were called (...), i. e.
Seat-carryers: Lastly, it is probable that the Boys bore up the Rear, walking
in a peculiar sort of Coats worn at Processions, and called (...). The
Necessaries for this, as for all other Processions, were prepared in a public
Hall erected for that use between the Piraeean Gate, and Ceres's Temple; and
the management and care of the whole Business belonged to the (...), which name
denotes Officers appointed to see that the Laws, ancient Rites, and Customs be
observed. It was farther usual at this Solemnity to make a Jail-deliver, to
present golden Crowns to such as had done any remarkable Service for the
Commonwealth, and appoint Men to sing some of Homer's Poems, which Custom was
first introduced by Hipparchus, the Son of Pisistratus. Lastly, in the
Sacrifices at this, and other Quinquennial Solemnities, it was customary to
pray for the prosperity of the Plataeans, on the account of the signal Service
they had done the Athenians at the Battle of Marathon, wherein they behaved
themselves with extraordinary Courage and Resolution.

(...),
In Honor of Panace Theodoretus VII. Therap.
.

(...),
The same with (...), and (...) Suidas.
, and so called from the great concourse of People, that used to meet at the
Solemnity.

(...),
An Athenian Festival Etymologici Auctor, Suidas.
, so called from Pandion, by whom it was first instituted; or because it was
celebrated in honor of Jupiter, who does (...), i. e. move and turn all things
which way he pleases. Others are of Opinion, that it belonged to the Moon, and
received it is Name, because she does (...), i. e. move incessantly, for that
the Moon appears both in the Night, and Day; whereas the Sun shows himself by
Day only, and was supposed to rest all Night. It was celebrated after the
(...), or Festival of Bacchus, because that God is sometimes put for the Sun,
or Apollo, and was by some reputed to be the Brother, by others the Son of the
Moon.

(...),
An Athenian Athenagoras in Apologia, Hesychius.
Festival in memory of Pandrosus, the Daughter of King Cecrops.

(...),
Public rejoycings Aeneas Tacticus Poliorcet. cap. XVII. Pr^clus in Hesiod.
(...).
when the Season through it is coldness, and intemperance forced the Mariners to
stay at Home.

(...),
A public Festival celebrated (as the Name imports) by an Assembly of People
from all the parts of Greece Eustathius Iliad. (...).
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated (as the Name signifies) by a concourse of People from
all the Cities of Ionia Herodotus lib. I. Strabo lib. V. Eustathius Iliad.
(...).
. The Place, or Temple, in which it was kept, was called (...). It was
instituted in honor of Neptune, sirnam'd Heliconius from Helice, a City of
Achaia, which afterward perished by an Earthquake. One thing there was
remarkable in this Festival, viz. That, if the Bull offered in Sacrifice
happened to bellow, it was accounted an Omen of Divine Favor, because that
sound was thought to be acceptable to Neptune: To this Homer is thought to
allude in these Verses Il. XX.
, (...)
(...).
Dying he roared, as when a Bull is drawn
About the King of sacred Helice.


(...),
An anniversary Solemnity Herodotus lib. VI. cap. CVI.
in honor of Pan at Athens, where he had a Temple near the Acropolis, the
Dedication of which, and the Institution of this Festival were upon this
account: When Darius the Persian invaded Attica, Phidippides was forthwith
dispatched on an Embassy to the Spartans, to desire their Assistance; and as
he was in his Journey, about Mount Parthenius near Tegea, Pan met him, and
calling him by his Name, bid him to ask the Athenians, What was the reason, why
they had no regard of him, who was their Friend, and had often been serviceable
to them, and should go on so to be? Phidippides at his return to Athens,
related this Vision, which obtained so great credit with the Athenians, that
they made a Decree that Divine Honors should be paid to that God also.

Pan had likewise a Festival in Arcadia Theocriti Scholiastes Idyll: VII.
, the Country he was believed most to frequent, and delight in, at which they
used to beat his Statue with (...), i. e. Sea-onyons; as was usual also, when
they missed of their Prey in Hunting, in anger (as should seem) against the
God, whom they reputed to be President of that Sport; to which custom
Theocritus seems to allude in these Verses, (...)
(...)
(...).
Kind Pan, if you propitious to my Prayer
Grant these my wishes, you no more shall fear
The rig'rous usage of Arcadian Boys,
When disappointed of their lovely prize.
Mr. Hutchin.

Farther, it was customary to offer a scanty Sacrifice, the Relics of which
were not sufficient to entertain those that were present; because, perhaps,
they thought the God had frustrated their hopes of Prey in Hunting; on the
contrary, when they had good Success, they were more liberal in paying Honors
to him.

(...),
See (...).

(...),
A Commemoration-day in honor of an ancient Hero, whose Name was Paralus
Eustathius Odyss. (...).
.

(...),
A Festival, in which were solemn Games, wherein freeborn Spartant only
contended, with an Oration in praise of Pausanias, the Spartan General, under
whose Conduct the Grecians overcame Mardonius in the famous Battle at Plataeae
Pausanias La^^nici^.
.

(...),
A Thessalian Festival, not unlike the Roman Saturnalia: It is thus described
by Athenaeus Lib. XIV.
:

Baton, the Sinopensian Rhetorician, in his description of Thessaly and
Haemonia, declares that the Saturnalia are a Grecian Festival, and called by
the Thessalians Peloria; his words are these: On a time when the Pelasgians
were offering public Sacrifices, one Pelorus came in, and told one of them,
That the Mountains of Tempe in Haemonia were torn asunder by an Earthquake,
and the Lake, which had before covered the adjacent Valley, making it is way
through* the Breach, and falling into the Stream of Peneus, had left behind a
vast, but most pleasant and delightful Plain: The Pelasgian hugged Pelorus for
his News, and invited him to an Entertainment, where he was treated with all
sorts of Dainties; The rest of the Pelasgians also brought the best Provisions
they had, and presented them to him; and his Landlord, with others of the best
Quality, waited on him by turns: In memory of this, when the Pelasgians had
seated themselves in the new discovered Country, they instituted a Festival,
wherein they offered Sacrifices to Jupiter, sirnam'd Pelor, and made sumptuous
Entertainments, whereto they invited not only all the Foreigners amongst them,
but Prisoners also, whom they released from Bonds and Confinement, and Slaves,
all whom they permitted to sit down, and waited upon them: This Festival is to
this Day observed with great Solemnity by the Thessalians, and called (...).

(...),
A Macedonian Solemnity Hesychius.
.

(...),
The same with (...), being derived from (...), of which see more in (...).

(...),
Gymnical Exercises at Pitana Idem.
.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Aglaurus, King Cecrops's Daughter; or rather of
Minerva, who had, from that Lady, the name of Aglaurus Hesychius, Plutarchus
Alcibiade, Athenaeus lib. III. Pollux lib. VIII. cap. XII.
; At this Time they undressed Minerva's Statue, and washed it, whence the
Solemnity was called (...), from (...), which signifies to wash. It was
accounted an unfortunate, or inauspicious Day, and therefore the Temples (as
upon all such Days) were surrounded with Ropes, so that no Man could have
admission; The reason of which custom, with a farther account of this Solemnity
we have in Plutarch's Al^ibiades; The Festival (says he) of the Goddess
Minerva, called (...), was celebrated on the 26th of Thargelion, with certain
Mysterious observances unlawful to be revealed, which were performed by
Persons called (...), who divested the Goddess's Image of all it is Ornaments,
and kept it close covered: Whence it is, that the Athenians esteem this Day
most inauspicious, and never go about any thing of importance upon it: And
therefore it falling out that Alcibiades's return from Exile happened upon this
Day, many were much concerned at it, looking upon the time of his arrival to be
a dangerous Omen, and imagining that the Goddess did not graciously receive
him, but, in token of displeasure, hid her Face from him; But for all this,
Things went on prosperously and succeeded according to his wish. Farther, it
was customary at this Festival, to bear in Procession a Cluster of Figgs, which
was called (...), or (...), from (...), which signifies to lead the Way,
because Figgs were (...), i. e. leaders to Humanity, and a civilized course of
Life, for when Men left off their ancient and barbarous Diet of Acorns, the
next thing they used for Food, was Figgs.

(...),
A Solemnity at Thebes Pausanias Boeoticis.
in honor of Apollo, sirnam'd (...), i. e. Gray, because he was represented in
this City (contrary to the constant custom of all other places) with gray
Hairs. The Victim was a Bull, but it once happening that no Bulls could be
procured, an Ox was taken from the Cart and Sacrificed; whence the custom of
killing laboring Oxen, which till that time was looked on as a Capital Crime,
first commenced.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Hesychius. There was an Image at this Solemnity,
called by a peculiar Name (...).

(...), or (...),
In honor of (...), i. e. Neptune, to whom also they offered a solemn
Sacrifice called (...) Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Priapus.

(...), or (...),
Sacrifices Hesychius, Suidas, Aristophanis Schol. Equitibus.
offered (...), i. e. before Seed-time, to Ceres, who was hence sirnam'd (...).
They were called by the Common People (...), from (...), which sometimes
signifies the same with (...), i. e. Bread-corn; whence comes (...), i. e.
Ceres's Corn, in Homer Vide Annotationes nostras in Plutarchum De Audiendis
Poetis.
. The first Institution of these Sacrifices was by the Command of one Authias a
Prophet, who gave out that this was the only Method to appease the incensed
Goddess, who had at that Time afflicted not Athens only, where this Solemnity
was observed, but all the other parts of Greece, with a grievous Famine.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Inhabitants of Laconia, before they gathered
their Fruits Hesyc^ius.
.

(...),
A Festival, in which the Lacedaemonians crowned themselves with Reeds
Athenaeu^ lib. XV.
.

(...),
An Athenian Solemnity celebrated in honor of Prometheus Aristophanis
Scholiastes Ranis.
with Torch-races, in remembrance that he was the first that taught Men the use
of Fire.

(...),
A Day of Rejoicing, when a New-marry'd Wife went to cohabit with her Husband
Harpocration, Suidas.
.

(...),
A Solemnity before Marriage, of which afterward.

(...),
A Festival in honor of Neptune, and of Bacchus Hesychius.
sirnam'd (...), or (...), i. e. from new Wine.

(...),
A Festival so called (...), from preventing, or coming before. It was observed
by the Clazomenians, in remembrance that they made themselves Masters of Leuca,
by coming to the Celebration of a Sacrifice before the Cumaeans Di^dorus
Siculus lib. XV.
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Chersonesians, and Thessalians Pindari
Scholiastes Isthm. Od. I. Lucianus Deor. Council.
, in memory of Protesilaus, who was the first Grecian slain by Hector.

(...),
An Athenian Harpocration, ^lutarchus Theseo, Hesychius.
Festival, sometimes called (...), or (...), i. e. because Theseus and his
Compa^ions were entertained with all manner of Fruits; the former, and more
^sual Name is derived (...), i. e. from boiling Pulse, (...) was usual upon
that Day; the reason of which Custom, with a ^^rther Account of this Solemnity,
I will give you in the Words of Plu^^rch:

Theseus, after the Funeral of his Father, paid his Vows to Apollo upon the
seventh of Pyanepsion; for on that Day the Youths that returned with him safe
from Crete, made their Entry into the City. They say also, that the Custom of
boiling Pulse was derived from hence, because the Young Men that escaped, put
all that was left of their Provision together, and boiling it in one common
Pot, feasted themselves with it, and with great Rejoicing did eat all together.
Hence also they carry about an Olive Branch bound about with Wool (such as
they then made use of in their Supplications) which was called (...), (from
(...), i. e. Wool) and crowned with all sorts of First Fruits, to signify that
Scarcity and Barrenness were ceased, singing in their Procession this Song,
(...),
(...),
(...).
Eiresione, Figs produce,
And wholesome Bread, and cheerful Oil,
And Honey, laboring Bees sweet Toil,
But above all Wine's noble Juice;
Then Cares thou in the Cup shall steep,
And full of Joy receive soft Sleep.
Mr. Duke. Though some are of Opinion, that this Custom is retained in memory of
the Heraclidae, who were thus entertained, and brought up by the Athenians; but
the former Account is more generally received. ^t may be added farther, that
the (...), when it was carried about ^n honor of Apollo, was of Laurel; when
of Minerva, of Olive; because those Trees were believed to be most acceptable
to these Deities: When the Solemnity was ended, it was customary for them to
erect it before their House-doors, thinking it an Amulet, whereby Scarcity and
Want were prevented.

(...),
A Festival at Pylae Strabo lib. IX.
, otherwise called Thermopylae, in honor of Ceres, sirnam'd from that place
Pylaea.

(...),
I. e. The Festival of Torches: It was observed at Argos, and instituted in
memory of the Torches lighted by Lynceus, and Hypermnestra, to signify to each
other, that they had both escaped out of Danger Pausanias Corinthiacis.
.

P
(...),
I. e. The Reception, or Elevation of the Rod. It was an Anniversary Day at the
Island of Cos, at which the Priests carried a Cypress-tree Hippocratis Epistola
ad S. P. Q. Abderitan.
.

(...),
A part of the (...), or Festival of Bacchus, at which they repeated Scraps of
Songs, or Poems, as they walked by the God's Statue Athenaeus init. lib. VII.
.

S
(...),
Nocturnal Mysteries in honor of Jupiter Sabazius Clemens Protrept. Arnobius
lib. V.
, into which all that were Initiated, had a golden Serpent put in at their
Breasts, and taken out at the lower part of their Garments; in memory of
Jupiter's ravishing Proserpina, in the form of a Serpent. Others Diodorus
Siculus lib. IV. Aristophanis Scholiastes Vespis, Harpocration.
are of Opinion that this Solemnity was in honor of Bacchus sirnam'd Sabazius,
from the Sabae, who were a People of Thrace; and it is probable this Festival
was not first instituted by the Grecians, but derived to them from the
Barbarians (such were the Thracians reputed) amongst whom Suidas tells us (...)
was the same with (...), i. e. to shout (...), as was usual in the Festival of
Bacchus: Add to this, that Bacchus's Priests were by the Thracians called (...).

(...),
A Festival in honor of Diana Pausanias Corinthiacis.
sirnam'd Saronia, from Saro the ^hird King of Troezen, by whom a Temple was
erected, and this Fe^tival instituted to Her.

(...),
I. e. A shaking off the Burden. It was a Public Sacrifice at Athens, ^n
memory of Solon's Ordinance, whereby the Debts of poor People ^ere either
entirely remitted; or, at least, the Interest due upon them ^essen'd, and the
Creditors hindered from seizing upon the Persons of their Debtors, as had been
customary before that Time Pluta^chus Solone.
.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Hesychius; and observed, it may be, in me^ory of
Semele, Bacchus's Mother.

(...),
A Delphian Festival, celebrated every ninth Year, in memory of Apollo's
Victory over Python. The chief part of the Solemnity was ^ Representation of
Python pursued by Apollo Plutarchus Graec. Quaest.
.

(...),
At Argos He^ychius.
. It might perhaps be celebrated in honor of Minerva, sirnam'd (...), from
(...), i. e. Strength.

(...), or (...), or (...),
An Anniversary Solemnity at Athens Aristophanis Scholi^stes Concionat.
Harpocration, Suidas.
, upon the twelfth Day of S^irrophorion, in honor of Minerva, or, as some say,
of Ceres and Pro^opina. The Name is derived from Sciras, a Borough between
Athens and Eleusis, where there was a Temple dedicated to Minerva, sir^am'd
Sciras, from that place: Or from one Scirus, an Inhabitant of Eleusis; or from
Sciron of Salamis; or from (...), i. e. Chalk, or white Plaster, of which the
Statue dedicated to Minerva by Theseus when he returned from Crete, was
composed; Or from (...), i. e. an Umbrella, which was at this Time carried in
Procession by Erectheus's Priest, or some of the Sacred Family of Butas, who,
to distinguish them from others that made false Pretensions to that Kindred,
were called (...), i. e. the genuine Offspring of Butas: Those that ordered
this Procession, were wont to make use of (...), i. e. the Skins of Beasts
sacrificed to Jupiter, sirnam'd (...), and (...), of which Titles I have spoken
before. Farther, there was at this Festival a Race called (...), because the
young Men that contended therein, did (...), i. e. carry in their Hands
Vine-branches full of Grapes.

(...), or (...),
At Alea in Arcadia Pausanias Arcadicis, Pollux lib. VIII. cap. XXXIII.
, in honor of Bacchus, whose Image was exposed (...), i. e. under an Umbrella,
whence it is probable the Name of this Festival was derived. At this Time the
Women were beaten with Scourges, in the same manner with the Spartan Boys at
the Altar of Diana Orthia, which they underwent in obedience to a Command of
the Delphian Oracle.

(...),
I. e. The Festival of Sea-onyons. It was observed in Sicily; the chief part of
it was a Combat, wherein Youths beat one another with Sea-onyons: He that
obtained the Victory was rewarded by the Gymnasiarch with a Bull Theocriti
Scholiastes Idyl. VII.
.

(...),
Mentioned by Hesychius.

(...),
An Athenian Solemnity Hesychius, Suidas.
, wherein the Women made Jests, and Lampoons upon one another; whence (...)
signifies to abuse, ridicule, or speak evil of another.

(...),
At Eretria, in honor of Diana Stophea Athen^us lib. VI.
.

(...),
At Stymphalus in Arcadia, in honor of Diana, named from that place Stymphalia
Pausanias Arcadicis.
.

(...),
See (...).

(...),
See (...).

(...),
Syracusian Festivals, one of which Plato Epistola ad Dionis propinquos.
mentions; it continued ten Days, during which Time the Women were employed in
offering Sacrifices.

Another we read of in Tully Orat. in Verrem IV.
, which was celebrated every Year by vast numbers of Men and Women, at a Lake
near Syracuse, through which Pluto was said to have descended with Proserpina.

(...),
Games at Sparta Hes^chius.
, the Prize in which was (...), i. e. a mixture of Fat and Honey.

(...),
Sacrifices, and Thanksgivings for Deliverances out of Dangers.

T
(...),
In honor of Neptune sirnam'd Taenarius from Taenarus, a Promontory in
Laconia, where was a Temple dedicated to him. The Worshippers were called (...)
Idem.
.

(...),
Gymnical Exercises, in honor of Jupiter (...), as Meurs^us conjectures from
the Words of Hesychius.

(...),
In honor of Neptune, as Hesychius reports: Perhaps it was the same with that
mentioned by Athenaeus Lib. X.
, and celebrated at Ephesus, wherein the Cup-bearers were young Men, and called
(...).

(...),
In honor of Diana (...), Hesychius.
, of which Surname there are various accounts; the most probable is that, which
derives it from Sc^thia Taurica, where this Goddess was worshipped.

(...),
At Cyzicum Idem.
.

(...),
The fourtieth Day after Childbirth, upon which the Women went to the Temples,
and paid some grateful Acknowledgments for their safe Delivery; of which
Custom I shall give a farther acccount in one of the following Books.

(...),
A Spartan Festival Athenaeus lib. IV. Hesychius.
, in which the (...), or Nurses, conveyed the Male Infants committed to their
Charge to the Temple of Diana Corythallia, which was at some distance from the
City, being seated not ^ar from that part of the River Tiassa, which was near
Cle^a; here they offered young Pigs in Sacrifice, during the Time of which some
of them danced, and were called (...), others exposed themselves in antic and
ridiculous Postures, and were named (...). They had likewise a Public
Entertainment at this, and some other Times, which was called (...), and to
partake of it (...): The manner of it was thus: Tents being erected near the
Temple, and Beds furnished therein, and covered with Tapestry, all the Guests,
as well Foreigners, as Natives of Laconia, were invited to Supper, where every
Man had his portion allotted, which was distributed to him together with a
small Loaf of Bread called (...); farther also each of them received a piece of
new Cheese, part of the Belly and Tripes; and (instead of Sweetmeats) Figs,
Beans, and green Vetches.

(...),
In memory of the Titanes Moschopulus Collect. Dict. Attic.
.

(...),
Games celebrated Pindari Scholiastes Olymp. Od. VII.
at Rhodes, in memory of T^epolemus, upon the twenty-fourth Day of the Month
Gorpiaeus, wherein not Men only, but Boys were permitted to contend, and the
Victors were crowned with Poplar.

(...).
The Institution, and Manner of this Solemnity are described in Athenaeus Lib.
XV.
; who tells us it was kept at Samos: The chief Ceremony consisted in carrying
Juno's Image to the Seashore, and offering Cakes to it, and then restoring it
to it is former place; which was done in memory of it is being stolen by the
Tyrrhenians, and (when their Ships were stayed in the Haven by an invisible
Force, which hindered them from making away) exposed upon the Shore. The name
of this Festival is derived (...), i. e. from the Image's being fast bound by
those that first found it, because they imagined it was going to leave them.

(...),
At Athens Lucianus Scytha.
, in memory of Toxaris, a Scythian Hero, who died there, and went under the
name of (...), i. e. the foreign Physician.

(...),
An anniversary Festival Pausanias Achaicis.
celebrated by the Ionians that inhabited Aroe, Anthea, and Mesatis, in honor
of Diana Triclaria, to appease whose anger for the Adultery committed in her
Temple by Menalippus and Comaetho the Priestess, they were commanded by the
Delphian Oracle to Sacrifice a Boy and a Virgin, which inhuman Custom continued
till after the Trojan War.

(...),
A Solemnity, in which Etymologici Auctor.
it was usual to pray for Children to the (...), or Gods of Generation, who
were sometimes called (...): But of these I shall have occasion to speak
afterward.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Hesychius.

(...),
Solemn Games celebrated every year at Lebadea, in honor of Trophonius Pindari
Scholiastes Olymp. Od. VII.
.

(...),
Mentioned in Hesychius.

(...),
Celebrated by the Achaeans, in honor of Bacchus Pausanias Corinthiacis.
.

Y
(...),
An anniversary Solemnity Idem Laconicis, Hesychius.
at Amyclae in Laconia, in the Month Hecatombaeon, in memory of the beautiful
Youth Hyacinthus, with Games in honor of Apollo. It is thus described by
Athenaeus Lib. IV.
: Polycrates reports in his Laconicks, That the Laconians celebrate a Festival
called Hyacinthia, three Days together; during which time their Grief for the
death of Hyacinthus is so excessive, that they neither adorn themselves with
Crowns at their Entertainments, nor eat Bread, but Sweetmeats only, and such
like Things; nor sing Paeans in honor of the God, nor practice any of the
Customs, that are usual at other Sacrifices; but having supped with Gravity,
and an orderly Composedness, depart. Upon the second Day there is variety of
Spectacles, frequented by a vast concourse of People; The Boys, having their
Coats girt about them, play sometimes upon the Harp, sometimes upon the Flute,
sometimes strike at once upon all their Strings, and sing Hymns in honor of
the God ( Apollo) in Anapaestick Numbers, and shrill, acute sounds. Others pass
over the Theater upon Horses richly accoutred; at the same time enter Choirs of
young Men, singing some of their own Country-songs, and, amongst them, Persons
appointed to dance according to the ancient Form, to the Flute, and Vocal
Music. Of the Virgins, some are ushered in riding in Chariots made of Wood,
covered at the Top, and magnificently adorned; Others in Race-Chariots. The
whole City is filled with Joy at this Time, they offer multitudes of Victims,
and entertain all their Acquaintance, and Slaves; and so eager are they to be
present at the Games, that no Man stays at Home, but the City is left empty and
desolate.

(...),
At Argos Plutarchus de Virt. Mulier. Polyaenus lib. VIII.
upon the sixteenth, or rather upon the New Moon of the Month called by the
Argives Hermeas. The chief Ceremony was, that, the Men and Women exchanged
habits, in memory of the generous achievement of Telesilla, who, when Argos
was besieged by Cleomenes, having listed a sufficient number of Women, made a
brave and vigorous defense against the whole Spartan Army.

(...),
A Solemnity so called (...), i. e. from bearing Water; and kept at Athens in
memory of those that perished in the Deluge Etymologici Auctor, Suidas.
.

Another Festival was celebrated at Aegina, to Apollo, in the Month Delphinius
Pindari Scholiastes Nemeon. Od. V.
.

(...),
At Orchomenos, and Mantinea, in honor of Diana Hymnia.

(...),
A Festival at Argos, in honor of Venus Athenaeus lib. III.
. The Name is derived from (...), i. e. a Sow, because Sows were sacrificed to
this Goddess.

PH
(...),
(...), or (...), or (...), or (...), was a Festival so called from (...), and
(...), i. e. to eat, and drink, because it was a Time of good Living Idem lib.
VII.
.

(...),
A Festival mentioned by Eustathius Odyss. (...).
, and (as the Name imports) of the same Nature with the former.

(...),
Mentioned by Hesychius.

(...),
A Festival of Bacchus Suidas.
, being a preparative to the (...) Aristophanis Scholiastes Nubibus.
.

(...),
A Festival at Cyzicum, wherein a black Heifer was sacrificed to Phorephatta,
or Proserpina Plutarchus Lucullo.
.

(...),
In honor of Phosphorus, or Lucifer Plutarchus in Colotem, Hesychius.
.


(...),
So called from (...), i. e. Brass, because it was celebrated in memory of the
first Invention of working that Metal, which is owing to Athens Eustathius
Iliad. (...). Suidas, Harpocration, Etymologici Auctor.
. It was called (...), because (...), i. e. the whole Athenian Nation,
assembled to celebrate it. Sometimes also this Festival was called (...),
because it was kept in honor of (...), or Minerva, who was the Goddess of all
sorts of Arts, and Inventions, and upon that account named (...), from (...),
i. e. work. Afterward it was only kept by Mechanics, and Handy-craftsmen,
especially those concerned in Brass-work, and that in honor of Vulcan, who was
the God of Smiths, and the first that taught the Athenians the use of Brass.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the Chaonians in Epirus Parthenius Erot. XXXII.
.

(...),
A Festival observed once in nine years by the Delphians, whereof we have this
account in Plutarch Graec. Quaest.
: A great Drought having brought a Famine upon the Delphians, they went with
their Wives and Children as supplicants to the King's Gate, who distributed
Meal and Pulse to the more noted of them, not having enough to supply the
necessities of all: But a little Orphan Girl coming and importuning him, he
beat her with his Shoe, and threw it in her Face; she indeed was a poor,
vagrant Beggar, but of a Disposition no ways mean, or ignoble, wherefore unable
to bear the Affront, she withdrew, and untying her Girdle, hanged her self
therewith. The Famine hereupon increasing, and many Diseases accompanying it,
the Pythia was consulted by the King, and answered, that the Death of the
Virgin Charila, who slew her self, must be expiated: The Delphians after a long
search discovered at length, that the Maid, who had been beaten with the Shoe,
was called by that Name, and instituted certain Sacrifices mixed with expiatory
Rites, which are religiously observed every ninth year to this Day: The King
presides at them, and distributes Meal and Pulse to all persons, as well
Strangers, as Citizens; and Charila's Effigies, being brought in, when all have
received their Dole, the King smites it with his Shoe; then the Governess of
the Thyades conveys it to some lonesom and desolate place, where a Halter being
put about it is Neck, they bury it in the same spot of Ground, where Charila was
interred.

(...),
A Festival celebrated Eustathius Odyss. (...).
in honor of the Charites, or Graces, with Dances, which continued all Night;
he that was awake the longest, was rewarded with a Cake called (...).

(...),
A Thansgiving-Day at Athens Pl^tarchus de Gloria Atheniens.
upon the twelfth of Boedromio^, which was the Day, whereon Thrasybulus
expelled the Thirty Tyrants, and restored to the Athenians their Liberty.

(...),
At Athens Hesychius.
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated by the (...), or Handy-crafts-men Idem.
.

(...),
A Festival at Rhodos Athenaeus lib. VIII.
in the month Boedromion, wherein the Boys rent from door to door begging, and
singing a certain Song, the doing which they called (...), and the Song it self
was named (...), because it was begun with an invocation of the (...), or
Swallow; it is set down at large in Athenaeus, and begins thus, (...)
(...) etc. --
It Is said to have been composed by Cleobulus the Lindian, as an artifice (...)
get Money in a Time of public Calamity. In like manner, to sing ^^e Song,
wherein a Raven, in Greek (...), was invoked, they called (...). And it seems
to have been customary for poor Beggars, to go about, and sing for Wages; so
Homer is said to have done, earning his Living by singing a Song, called (...).

(...),
An anniversary Day kept by the Hermionians in honor of Ceres, sir^am'd
Chthonia, either because she was Goddess of the Earth, which is ^all'd in Greek
(...), or from a Damsel of that Name, whom Ceres carried from Argolis to
Hermione, where she dedicated a Temple to the Goddess. The manner of this
Festival is thus described by Pausanias Corinthiacis.
: Ceres her self is named Chthonia, and under that Title is honored with a
Festival, celebrated every Summer in this Method; A Procession is led up by the
Priests of the Gods, and the Magi^trates that year in Office, who are followed
by a crowd of Men and Women: The Boys also make a solemn Procession in honor
of the Goddess, being in white Apparel, and having upon their Heads Crowns
composed of a Flower, which is by them called (...), but seems to be the same
with Hyacinth, as appears as well by the bigness and color, as from the
Letters inscribed upon it in memory of the untimely Death of Hyacinthus. This
Procession is followed by Persons that drag an Heifer untamed, and newly taken
from the Herd, fast bound to the Temple, where they let her loose; which being
done, the Doorkeepers, who till then had kept the Temple-gates open, make all
fast, and four old Women being left within, and armed with Sithes, they pursue
the Heifer, and dispatch her, as soon as they are able, by cutting her Throat.
Then the Doors being opened, certain appointed Persons put a second Heifer into
the Temple, afterward a third, and then a fourth, all which the old Women kill
in the forementioned manner; and it is observable, that all fall on the same
side.

(...),
In honor of Diana sirnam'd Chitonia from Chitone, a Borough in Attica, where
this Festival was celebrated Callimachi Scholiastes Hymn. in Dian. Athena^us
lib. XIV.
.

Another Festival of this Name was celebrated at Syracuse with Songs and Dances
proper to the Day Stephanus Byzantinus v. (...).
.

(...),
A Festival celebrated at Athens upon the sixth of Thargelion Hesychius,
Eustathius I^. ^. Pausanias Articis.
with Sports, and Mirth, and Sacrificing a Ram to Ceres, worshipped in a Temple,
in, or near the Acropolis of Athens, under the Title of (...) which Name though
Pausanias thought to bear a hidden, and mystical Sense, understood by none but
the Priests themselves, yet perhaps it may be derived from (...), i. e. Grass,
because Ceres was Goddess of the Earth, and all the Fruits thereof; and is the
same with the Epithet of (...), or fertile, which is applied to her by
Soph^cles Oedip. Colon.
, (...)
(...). --
Where this Conjecture seems to be approved by the Scholiast, who tells us,
that Ceres, sirnam'd (...), was worshipped in a Temple near the Acropolis, which
can be no other than that already mentioned. Add to this, that Gyraldus is of
Opinion that Ceres is called (...) amongst the Greeks, for the same reason that
amongst the Latins she is named Flava, the cause of which Title is too well
known, to be accounted for in this place.

(...),
See (...).

(...),
In honor of Bacchus Hesychius.
.

(...),
See (...).

O
(...),
A Festival Clemens Protrept. Arnobius lib. V.
in honor of Bacchus (...), i. e. Eater of raw Flesh, of which Name I have
spoken in the former part of this Chapter. This Solemnity was celebrated in the
same manner with the other Festivals of Bacchus, wherein they counterfeited
phrenzy, and madness; what was peculiar to it, was that the Worshippers used to
eat the Entrails of Goats raw, and bloody, which was done in imitation of the
God, to whom the Surname by which he was adored at this Solemnity, was given
for the like Actions.

(...),
Solemn Sacrifices Hesychius.
, consisting of Fruits, and offered in Spring, Summer, Autumn, and Winter, that
Heaven might grant mild and temperate Weather. These, according to Meursius,
were offered to the Goddesses, called (...), i. e. Hours, who were three in
number, attended upon the Sun, presided over the four Seasons of the Year, and
and were honored with Divine Worship at Athens Athenaus lib XIV.
.

CHAPTER XXI. Of the Public Games in Greece, and the Principal Exercises used
in them.
I COME in the next place to the four Public, and Solemn Games, which were
peculiarly termed (...), i. e. Sacred; partly from the Esteem they had all over
Greece, from every part of which vast multitudes of Spectators flocked to them;
and partly because they were instituted in honor of the Gods, or Deify'd
Heroes, and always begun with Sacrificing to them, and concluded in the same
religious manner.

Their Names, together with the Persons to whom they were dedicated, and the
Prizes in each of them, are elegantly comprised by Archias in the two following
Distichs, (...),
(...)
(...),
(...).


Such as obtained Victories in any of these Games, especially the Olympicks
Plutarchus Sympos. lib. II. Quaest. VI. Vitruvius Praefar. in Architect. lib.
IX.
, were universally honored, nay almost adored: At their Return home, they rode
in a Triumphal Chariot into the City, the Walls being broken down to give them
Entrance; which was done (as Plutarch is of opinion) to signify, that walls are
of small use to a City, that is inhabited by Men of Courage, and Ability to
defend it. At Sparta they had an honorable Post in the Army, being placed near
the King's Person. At some places, they had Presents made to them by their
Native City, were honored with first places at all Shows and Games, and ever
after maintained at the Public Charge Xenophanes Colophonius in Epigram.
. Cicero Orat. pro Flacco.
reports, that a Victory in the Olympic Games was not much less honorable
than a Triumph at Rome. Happy was that Man thought, that could but obtain a
single Victory: If any Person merited repeated Rewards, he was thought to have
attained to the utmost* Felicity that Human Nature is capable of: But if He
came off Conqueror in all the Exercises, He was elevated above the Condition
of Men, and His Actions styled Wonderful Victories Plutarchus Lucullo.
. Nor did their Honors terminate in themselves, but were extended to all about
them; the City that gave them Birth and Education, was esteemed more Honorable
and August; Happy were their Relations, and thrice happy their Parents. It is a
remarkable Story, which Plutarch Pelopida.
relates of a Spartan, who meeting Diagoras, that had himself been crowned in
the Olympian Games, and seen his Sons, and Grandchildren Victors, embraced
him, and said, Die, Diagoras, for thou can not be a God.

There were certain Persons appointed to take care that all things were
performed according to Custom, to decide Controversies that happened amongst
the Antagonists, and adjudge the Prizes to those that merited them: These were
called (...), though betwixt these two Phavorinus makes a Distinction, for (...),
he tells us, was peculiar to Gymnical Exercises; whereas the former was
sometimes applied to Musical Contentions: They were likewise called (...), and
(...) from (...), i. e. a Rod, or Scepter, which these Judges, and, in general,
all Kings, and great Magistrates carried in their Hands.

After the Judges had passed Sentence, a public Herald proclaimed the Name of
the Victor, whence (...) in Greek, and praedicare in Latin, signify to
commend, or proclaim any man's praises. The token of Victory was, in most
places, a Palm-branch, which was presented to the Conquerours, and carried by
them in their Hands; which custom was first introduced by Theseus, at the
Institution of the Delian Games Plutarchus Theseo.
, though others will have it to be much ancienter: Hence pal^am dare, to yield
the Victory; and plurium palmarum homo in Tully, a Man that has won a great
many Prizes.

Before I proceed to give a particular Description of the Grecian Games, it
will be necessary to present you with a brief account of the principal
Exercises used in them, which were as follow;

(...), or Quinquertium, which consisted of the five Exercises contained in
this Verse, (...). ^. e. Leaping, Running, Throwing, Darting, and Wrestling;
but instead of Darting, others mention Boxing. In all of them there were some
customs that deserve our observation.

(...), or the Exercise of Running, was in great Esteem amongst the ancient
Grecians, insomuch that such as prepared themselves for it, ^hought it worth
their while to use means to burn, or parch their Spleen, because it was
believed to be an hindrance to them, and retard them in their course. Homer
tells us, that swiftness is one of the most excellent Endowments a Man can be
blessed withal Odyss. (...). v. 1^7.
, (...),
(...).
No greater honor has e're been attained,
Than what strong Hands, or nimble Feet have gained.
^ndeed all those Exercises, that conduced to fit Men for War, were more
especially valued; now swiftness was looked upon as an excellent qua^ification
in a Warrior, both because it serves for a sudden Assault and Onset, and
likewise for a nimble Retreat; and therefore it is not ^o be wondered that the
constant Character, which Homer gives of Achilles, is, that he was (...), or
swift of Foot: And in the ho^y Scriptures, David, in his Poetical Lamentation
over those two great Captains, Saul and Jonathan, takes particular notice of
this warlike quality of theirs; They were (says he) swifter than Eagles,
stronger than Lions. To return; The Course was called (...), being of the same
^^tent with the measure of that name, which contains CXXV. paces, whence the
Runners were termed (...). Sometimes the length of it was enlarged more or
less, and then it was named (...), and the Contenders (...), whence comes the
Proverb (...), i. e. Search not for a greater thing in a less. Sometimes they
ran back again to the place whence they had first set out, and then the Course
was called (...), and the Runners (...). Sometimes they ran in Armor, and were
termed (...).

(...), or the Exercise of Leaping, they sometimes performed with weights upon
their Heads, or Shoulders, sometimes carrying them in their Hands; these were
called (...), which, though now and then of different Figures, yet, as Pausanias
reports, were usually of an Oval Form, and made with holes, or else covered
with Thongs, through which the Contenders put their Fingers. (...) were also
sometimes used in throwing. The place from which they leaped, was called (...)
Pollux.
; that to which they leaped, (...), because it was marked by digging up the
Earth; whence (...) is applied to Persons that overleap, or exceed their Bounds.

(...), or the Exercise of Throwing, or Darting, was performed several ways;
sometimes with a Javelin, Rod, or other Instrument of a large size, which they
threw out of their naked Hands, or by the help of a Thong tied about the middle
of it; the doing this was termed (...): sometimes with an Arrow, or little
Javeling, which was either shot out of a Bow, or cast out of a Sling, and the
Art of doing this was called (...).

(...), was a Quoit of Stone, Brass, or Iron, which they threw by the help of a
Thong put through a hole in the middle of it Eustathius Odyss. (...).
, but in a manner quite different from that of throwing Darts; for there the
Hands were lifted up, and extended, whereas the Discus was hurled in the manner
of a Bowl. It was of different Figures, and Sizes, being sometimes apiece,
but usually broad and like a Lentil, whence that Herb is by Dioscorides called
(...). The same Exercise was sometimes performed with an Instrument called
(...), which some will have to be distinguished from (...), because that was of
Iron, this of Stone: But others with more reason report that the difference
consisted in this, viz. That (...) was of a Sphaerical Figure, whereas (...)
was broad.

(...), or the Exercise of Boxing, was sometimes performed by Combatants having
in their Hands Balls of Stone, or Lead, called (...), and then it was termed
(...). At first, their Hands and Arms were naked and unguarded, but afterward
surrounded with Thongs of Leather called Cestus, which at the first were short,
reaching no higher than the Wrists, but were afterward enlarged, and carried
up to the Elbow, and sometimes as high as the Shoulder; and in time they came
to be used not only as defensive Arms, but to annoy (...) Enemy, being filled
with plummets of Lead, and Iron, to add (...) to the Blows. Those that prepared
themselves for this Exercise, us^^ all the means they could contrive to render
themselves Fat and Fleshy, that so they might be better able to endure Blows,
whence corpulent Men, or Women were usually called pugiles, according to
Terence Eunuch. Act. II. Sc III.
, Siqua est habitior paullo, pugilem esse aiunt. --

(...), or the Exercise of Wrestling, was sometimes called (...), because the
Combatants endeavored to throw each other down, to do which they called (...).
They never encountered till all their Joints, and Members had been soundly
rubbed, ^omented, and suppled with Oil, whereby all Streins were prevented. The
Victory was adjudg'd to him that gave his Antagonist three Falls; whence (...),
and (...) signify to conquer; and (...), or (...), to be conquered; and by
(...) in Aeschylus is meant an insuperable Evil; others make the proper
signification of these words to belong only to Victors in all the Exercises of
the (...) Pollux Ono^^st. lib. III. cap. XXX.
; however, the forementioned Custom is sufficiently attested by the Epigram
upon Milo, who having challenged the whole Assembly, and finding none that
durst encounter him, claimed the Crown, but as he was going to receive it,
unfortunately fell down, whereat the People cried out, that he had forfeited
the Prize, then Milo (...),
(...).
Arose, and standing in the midst, thus cried,
One single Fall cannot the Prize decide,
And who is here can throw me the other two?


But of Wrestling there were two sorts, viz. one called (...), and (...), which
is that already described; And another called (...), because the Combatants
used voluntarily to throw themselves down, and continue the Fight upon the
Ground, by pinching, biting, scratching, and all manner of ways annoying their
Adversary; whereby it often came to pass, that the weaker Combatant, and who
would never have been able to throw his Antagonist, obtained the Victory, and
forced him to yield; for in this Exercise, as in Boxing also, the Victory was
never adjudg'd, till one party had fairly yielded; this was sometimes done by
words, and often by li^ting up a Finger, whence (...) signifies to yield the
Victory; for which reason, we are told by Plutarch, that the Lacedaemonians
would not permit any of those Exercises to be practiced in their City, wherein
those that were conquered did (...), i. e. confess themselves overcome by
holding up their Finger, because they thought it would derogate from the Temper
and Spirit of the Spartans, to have any of them tamely yield to any Adversary;
though that place has been hitherto mistaken by most Interpreters. Martial has
taken notice of this Exercise; Hunc amo, qui vincit, sed qui succumbere novit,
Et melius didicit (...).
It is the very same with what is more commonly called (...), which consists of
the two Exercises of Wrestling, and Boxing; from the former it borrows the
custom of throwing down; from the latter, that of beating Adversaries; for
Wrestlers never struck, nor did Boxers ever attempt to throw down one another;
but the (...) were permitted to do both, and it was customary for the weaker
Party, when he found himself sore pressed by his Adversary, to fall down, and
fight rolling on the Ground, whence these Combatants were called (...), which
gave occasion to the mistake of Hieronymus Mercurialis, who phansy'd there were
two Pancratia, one in which the Combatants stood erect; the other, in which
they rolled in the Gravel. This Exercise is sometimes called (...), and the
Combatants (...).

Horse-races were either performed by single Horses, which were called (...),
or (...): Or, by two Horses, on one of which they performed the Race, and
leaped upon the other at the Goal; these Men were called (...), and if it was a
Mare they leaped upon, she was named (...): Or, by Horses coupled together in
Chariots, which were sometimes drawn by two, three, four, etc. Horses, whence
we read of (...) etc. How great soever the number of Horses might be, they were
all placed not as now, but in one Front, being coupled together by pairs;
afterward Clisthenes the Sicyonian brought up a Custom of coupling the two
middle Horses only, which are for that reason called (...), and governing the
rest by Reins, whence they are usually termed (...), (...), etc. Sometimes we
find Mules used instead of Horses, and the Chariots drawn by them called (...).
The principal part of the Charioteer's Art and Skill consisted in avoiding the
(...), or Goals, in which if he failed, the over-turning of his Chariot, which
was a necessary consequence of it, brought him into great Danger, as well as
Disgrace.

CHAPTER XXII. Of the Olympian Games.
THE Olympian Games were so called from Olympia, a City in the Territory of the
Pisaeans; or, according to Stephanus, the same with Pisa. The first Institution
of them is by some referred to Jupiter, after his Victory over the Sons of
Titan Aristophanes, ejusque Scholiastes in Pl^to.
; at which time Mars is said to have been crowned for Boxing, and Apollo to
have been superior to Mercury at Running.

Others will have the first Author of them to be one of the Dactyli, named
Hercules, not the Son of Al^mena, but another of far greater Antiquity, that
with his four Brethren, Paeoneus, Ida, Iasius, and Epimedes, left their ancient
Seat in Ida, a Mountain of ^re^e, and settled in Elis, where he instituted this
Solemnity; the Original of which was only a Race, wherein the four younger
Brothers contending for Diversion, the Victor was crowned by Hercules with an
Olivegarland, which was not composed of the common Olive-branches, nor the
natural Production of that Country Aristote^es, and ex eo Aristophani^
Scholiastes.
, but brought by Hercules (so Fables will have it) from the Hyperborean
Scythians, and planted in the Pantheum near Olympia, where it flourished, though
not after the manner of other Olive Trees, but spreading out it is Boughs more
like a Myrtle; it was called (...), i. e. fit for Crowns, the Garlands given to
Victors in these Games, were always composed of it, and it was forbidden under
a great Penalty to cut it for any other use: These Dactyli were five in number,
whence it is that the Olympian Games were celebrated once in five Years, though
others make them to be solemnized once in four; wherefore according to the
sormer, an Olympiad must consist of five; according to the latter, of sour: But
neither of these Accounts are exact, for this Solemnity was held indeed every
fifth Year, yet not after the term of five Years was quite past, but every
fiftieth Month, which is the second Month after the completion of four Years
Isaacius Tzetzes in Lycophronem, and Johannes Tzetzes Chiliad. I. Histor. XXL
: And as these Games were celebrated every fifth Year, so they lasted five
Days, for they began upon the eleventh, and ended upon the fifteenth Day of the
Lunar Month, when the Moon was at the full.

Others (if we may believe Julius Scaliger) report, that these Games were
instituted by Pelops to the honor of Neptune, by whose Assistance he had
vanquished Oenomaus, and married his Daughter Hippodamia.

Others say, they were first celebrated by Hercules, the Son of Alcmena, to the
honor of Pelops, from whom he was descended by the Mother's side Solinus
Polyhist. and Statius Theb. VI.
; but being after that discontinu'd for some Time, they were revived by
Iphitus, or Iphiclus, one of Hercules's Sons.

The most common Opinion is, that the Olympian Games were first instituted by
this Hercules, to the honor of Olympian Jupiter, out of the Spoils taken from
Augeas King of Elis, whom he had dethroned, and plundered, being defrauded of
the reward he had promised him for cleansing his Stables, as Pindar reports
Olympion* initio Od. II.
: Diodorus the Sicilian Bibliothec* Histor. lib. IV.
gives the same Relation, and adds that Hercules proposed no other Reward to
the Victors, but a Crown, in memory of his own Labors, all which he
accomplished for the Benefit of Mankind, without designing any Reward to
himself, beside the Praise of doing well: At this Institution, it is reported
that Hercules himself came off Conqueror in all the Exercises, except
Wrestling, to which when he had challenged all the Field, and could find no Man
that durst grapple with him, at length Jupiter, having assumed an Human shape,
entered the Lists; and when the Contention had remained doubtful for a
considerable Time, neither party having the Advantage, or being willing to
submit, the God discovered himself to his Son, and from this Action got the
Surname of (...), or Wrestler, by which He is known in Lycophron Cassandra v.
41.
.

All these Stories are rejected by Strabo, in his Description of Elis, where he
reports, that an Aetolian Colony, together with some of Hercules's Posterity,
subdued a great many of the Pisaean Towns, and amongst them Olympia, where they
first instituted, or, at least, revived, enlarged, and augmented these Games,
which (as my Author thinks) could not have been omitted by Homer, who takes
every opportunity to adorn his Poems with Descriptions of such Solemnities, had
they been of any Note before the Trojan War.

The Care and Management of these Games, belonged sometimes to the Pisaeans,
but for the most part to the Eleans, by whom the Pisaeans were destroyed, and
their very Name extinguished. Sometimes it happened that the Eleans could not
take Care of them, for the CIVth Olympiad was celebrated by order of the
Arcadians, by whom the Eleans were at that Time reduced to a very low
Condition; but this, and all those managed by the Inhabitans of Pisa, the
Eleans called (...), i. e. unlawful Olympiads, and left them out of their
Annals, wherein the Names of the Victors, and all Occurrences at these Games
were recorded. Till the fiftieth Olympiad, a single Person superintended, but
then two were appointed to perform that Office. In the CIIId Olympiad that
number was increased to twelve, according to the number of the Elean Tribes,
out of every one of which one President was elected: But in the following
Olympiad, the Eleans having suffered great Losses by a War with the Arcadians,
and being reduced to eight Tribes, the Presidents were also lessened to that
number: In the CVth Olympiad they were increased by the addition of one more;
and in the CVIth another was joined to them, whereby they were made Ten, which
number continued till the Reign of Adrian, the Roman Emperor. These Persons
were called (...), and assembled together in a place named (...), in the Elean
Forum, where they were obliged to reside ten Months before the Celebration of
the Games, to take care that such as offered themselves to contend, performed
their (...), or Preparatory Exercises, and to be instructed in all the Laws of
the Games by certain Men called (...), i. e. Keepers of the Laws: Farther, to
prevent all unjust Practices, they were obliged to take an Oath, that they
would act impartially, would take no Bribes, nor discover the Reason, for which
they disliked, or approved of any of the Contenders: At the Solemnity they sat
naked, having before them the Victorial Crown till the Exercises were finished,
and then it was presented to whomsoever they adjudg'd it.

Women were not allowed to be present at these Games; nay, so severe were the
Elean Laws, that if any Woman was found so much as to have passed the River
Alpheus during the time of the Solemnity, she was to be tumbled headlong from a
Rock Pausanias.
: But it is reported, that none was ever taken thus offending, except
Callipatera, whom others call Pherenice, who ventured to usher her Son
Pisidorus, called by some Eucleus, into the Exercises, and being discovered,
was apprehended, and brought before the Presidents, who, notwithstanding the
severity of the Laws, acquitted her, out of respect to her Father, Brethren,
and Son, who had all won Prizes in the Olympian Games. But my Author reports in
another place Lac^icis.
, that Cynisea, the Daughter of Archidamus, with manly Courage, and Bravery,
contended in the Olympian Games, and was the first of her Sex, that kept
Horses, and won a Prize there; but that afterward several others; especially
some of the Macedonian Women imitated her Example, and were crowned at Olympia.
Perhaps neither of these Reports may be altogether groundless, since
innumerable alterations were made in these Games, according to the Exigencies
of Times, and change of Circumstances, all which are set down at large in
Pausanias, Natalis Comes, and other Mythologists.

All such as designed to contend, were obliged to repair to the public
Gymnasium at Elis ten Months before the Solemnity, where they prepared
themselves by continual Exercises; we are told indeed by Phavorinus, that the
Preparatory Exercises were only performed thirty Days before the Games; but
this must be understood of the Performance of the whole and entire Exercises in
the same manner they were practiced at the Games, which seems to have been only
enjoined in the last Month, whereas the nine antecedent Months were spent in
more light and easy Preparations. No Man that had omitted to present himself in
this manner, was allowed to put in for any of the Prizes; nor were the
accustomed Rewards of Victory given to such Persons, if by any means they
insinuated themselves, and overcame their Antagonists: Nor would any Apology,
though never so seemingly reasonable, serve to excuse their Absence; For in the
CCXVIIIth Olympiad Apollonius was rejected, and not suffered to contend,
because he had not presented himself in due time, though he was detained by
contrary Winds in the Islands called Cyclades, but the Crown was given to
Heraclides without performing any Exercise, because no just and duly qualified
Adversary appeared to oppose him. No Person that was himself a notorious
Criminal, or nearly related to any such, was permitted to contend. Farther, to
prevent un^erhand Dealings, if any Person was convicted of bribing his
Adversary, a severe Fine was laid upon him: Nor was this alone thought a
sufficient Guard against evil and dishonorable Contracts, and unjust
Practices, but the Contenders were obliged to swear, they had spent ten whole
Months in Preparatory Exercises: and farther yet, both they, their Fathers, and
Brethren took a solemn Oath, that they would not by any sinister, or unlawful
means endeavor to stop the fair and just Proceedings of the Games.

The Order of Wrestlers was appointed by Lots, in this manner: A Silver Urn,
called (...), being placed, into it were put little Pellets, in size about the
bigness of Beans, upon every one of which was inscribed a Letter, and the same
Letter belonged to every pair; now those, whose Fortune it was to have the same
Letters, wrestled together; if the number of the Wrestlers was not even, he
that happened to light upon the odd Pellet, wrestled last of all with him that
had the Mastery; wherefore he was called (...), as coming after the rest: This
was accounted the most fortunate Chance that could be, because the Person that
obtained it, was to encounter one already wearied, and spent with conquering
his former Antagonist, himself being fresh, and in full Strength Coelius
Rhodiginus Antiq. Lect. lib. XXII. cap. XVII. Alexander ab Alexandr^ Genial.
Dier. lib. V. cap. VIII.
.

The most successful in his Undertakings, and magnificent in his Expenses of
all that ever contended in these Games, was Alcibiades the Athenian, as
Plutarch reports in his Life; His Expenses (says he) in Horses kept for the
public Games, and in the number of his Chariots were very magnificent; for
never any one beside, either private Person, or King, sent seven Chariots to
the Olympian Games. He obtained at one Solemnity the first, second, and fourth
Prizes, as Thucydides, or third, as Euripides reports; wherein he surpassed all
that ever pretended in that kind.

CHAPTER XXIII. Of the Pythian Games.
THE Pythian Games were celebrated near Delphi, and are by some thought to have
been first instituted by Amphictyon, the Son of Deucalion, or by the Council of
Amphictyones. Others referr the first Institution of them to Agamemnon
Etymologici Auctor, Phavorinus.
; Pausanias Corinthi^cis.
. to Diomedes; the Son of Tydeus, who having escaped a dangerous Tempest as he
returned from Troy, dedicated a Temple at Troezen to Apollo sirnam'd (...), and
instituted the Pythian Games to his honor: But the most common Opinion is,
that Apollo himself was the first Author of them, when he had overcome Python,
a Serpent, or cruel Tyrant: Thus Ovid Metam. I.
, Neve operis famam possit delere vetustas,
Instituit sacros celebri certamine ludos,
Pythia perdomitae Serpentis nomine dictos.
Then to preserve the Fame of such a Deed,
For Python slain* He Pythian Games decreed.
Mr. Dryden*

At their first Institution, they were only celebrated once in nine Years, but
afterward every fifth Year, according to the number of the Parnassian Nymphs,
that came to congratulate Apollo, and brought him Presents after his Victory.

The Rewards were certain Apples consecrated to Apollo, according to Ister
Libro de Coronis.
, and the forecited Epigram of Archias, in which he has enumerated the Prizes
in this, and the other three Sacred Games, (...).
Where Brodaeus will have (...) to signify the Delphian Laurel, which, he tells
us, brought forth Berries streaked with red and green, and almost as large as
Apples; but this Interpretation is by no means genuine, or natural, since the
word (...) is never used in that sense: However that be, it is certain the
Victors were rewarded with Garlands of Laurel, as appears from the express
words of Pindar, who tells us, that Aristomenes was crowned with (...), or
Laurel that flourished upon Mount Parnassus Pythion. Od. VIII. v. 28.
: Whence some imagine that the Reward was double, consisting both of the sacred
Apples, and Garlands of Laurel. But at the first Institution of these Games,
the Victors were crowned with Garlands of Palm, or (according to some) of
Beech-leaves, as Ovid reports, who immediately after the Verses beforecited,
adds, His juvenum quicumque manu, pedibusve, rotave
Vicerat, esculeae capiebat frondis honorem,
Nondum Laurus erat. --
Here Noble Youths for Mastership did strive
To Box, to Run, and Steeds, and Chariots drive,
The Prize was Fame; in witness of Renown,
A Beechen Garland did the Victor crown,
The Laurel was not yet for Triumph born.


Others there are Natali^ Comes Mythol. lib. V. Cap. II.
who report, that in the first Pythiad the Gods contended, Castor obtained the
Victory by Race-horses, Pollux at Boxing, Calais at Running, Zetes at Fighting
in Armor, Peleus at throwing the Discus, Telamon at Wrestling, Hercules at the
Pancratium, and that all of them were honored by Apollo with Crowns of Laurel.
But others again are of a different Opinion Strabo lib. IX. Pausanias Phocici^,
, and tell us, that at the first there was nothing but a Musical Contention,
wherein he that Sung best the Praises of Apollo, obtained the Prize, which at
first was either Silver, or Gold, or something of value, but afterward changed
into a Crown; Here you may observe the different Names given to Games from the
diversity of the Prizes; for where the Prize was Money, the Games were called
(...); where only a Crown, (...), etc. The first that obtained Victory by
Singing, was Chrysothemis a Cretan, by whom Apollo was purified, after he had
killed Python: The next Prize was won by Philammon; the next after that by his
Son Thamyris. Orpheus having raised himself to a pitch of honor almost equal
to the Gods by instructing the profane and ignorant World in all the Mysteries
of Religion, and Ceremonies of Divine Worship, and Musaeus, who took Orpheus
for his example, thought it too great a Condescension, and inconsistent with
the high Characters they bore, to enter into the Contention. Eleutherus is
reported to have gained a Victory purely upon the account of his Voice, his
Song being the composition of another person: Hesiod was repulsed, because he
could not play upon the Harp, which all the Candidates were obliged to do.

There was likewise another Song, called (...), consisting of these five parts,
wherein the Fight of Apollo and Python was delineated; 1. (...), which
contained the preparation to the Fight. 2. (...), or the first Essay toward
it. 3. (...), which was the Action it self, and the God's exhortation to
himself to stand out with Courage. 4. (...), or the insulting Sarcasins of
Apollo over vanquished Python. 5. (...), which was an imitation of the Serpents
hissing, when he ended his Life. Others make this Song to consist of the six
following parts: 1. (...), or the preparation. 2. (...), wherein Apollo dared
Python to engage him by reproaches, for (...) signifies to reproach, and
Iambick Verses were the common Form of Invectives. 3. (...), which was to the
honor of Bacchus, to whom those Numbers were thought most acceptable; this
part belonged to him, because he had (as some say) a share in the Delphian
Oracle, or possessed it before Apollo. 4. (...), to the honor of Jupiter,
because he was Apollo's Father, and thought to delight most in such Feet, as
being educated in Crete, where they were used. 5. (...), to the honor of
Mother Earth, because the Delphian Oracle belonged to her, before it came into
Apollo's hands. 6. (...), or the Serpent's hissing.

There was likewise a solemn Dance consisting of five parts, which are by some
thus described Julius Scaliger Poetices lib. I. cap. XXIII.
; 1. (...), an imitation of Apollo, preparing himself for the Fight with all
the circumspection of a prudent and cautious Warrior. 2. (...), a Challenge
given to the Enemy. 3. (...), a representation of the Fight, during which the
Trumpets sounded a point of War; it was so called from Iambick Verses, which
are the most proper to express Passion, and Rage. 4. (...), so called from the
Feet of that name, or from (...), i. e. to offer a Libation, because it was the
celebration of Victory; now after a Victory, it was always customary to return
Thanks to the Gods, and offer Sacrifices. 5. (...), a representation of of
Apollo's Dancing after his Victory.

Afterward in the third year of the XLVIIIth Olympiad, the Amphictyones, who
were Presidents of these Games, introduced Flutes, which till that time had not
been used at this Solemnity; the first that won the Prize, was Sacadas of
Argos; but because they were more proper for Funeral Songs, and Lamentations,
than the merry and jocund Airs at Festivals, they were in a short Time laid
aside. They added likewise all the Gymnical Exercises used in the Olympian
Games, and made a Law, that none should contend in running, but Boys. At, or
near, the same time they changed the Prizes, which had before been of value,
into Crowns, or Garlands; and gave these Games the name of Pythia, from Pythian
Apollo, whereas till that time (as some say) they had either another Name, or
no peculiar Name at all. Horse-races also, or Chariot-races were introduced
about the Time of Clisthenes, King of Argos, who obtained the first Victory in
them, riding in a Chariot drawn by four Horses; and several other changes were
by degrees made in these Games, which I shall not trouble you with.

CHAPTER XXIV. Of the Nemean Games.
THE Nemean Games Strabo lib. VIII. Pausanias Corinth. Eliac. (...). Pindari
Schol. Nemeon.
were so called from Nemea, a Village, and Grove between the Cities Cleonae and
Phlius, where they were celebrated every third year upon the twelfth of the
Corinthian Month (...), called sometimes (...), which is the same with the
Athenian Boedromion. The Exercises were Chariot-races, and all the parts of the
Pentathlum. The Presidents were elected out of Corinth, Argos, and Cleonae, and
apparelled in black Clothes, the habit of Mourners, because th^se Games were a
Funeral-solemnity instituted in memory of Opheltes, otherwise called Archemorus
from (...), i. e. a beginning, and (...), i. e. Fate, or Death, because
Amphiaraus foretold his Death soon after he began to live: Or, according to
Sta^ius Thebaid. lib. V.
, because that Misfortune was a Prelude to all the bad Success* that befell the
Theban Champions; for Archemorus was the Son of Euphetes and Creusa, or
Lycurgus, a King of Nemea, or Thrace, and Eurydice, and nursed by Hypsipyle,
who leaving the Child in a Meadow whilst she went to show the besiegers of
Thebes a Fountain, at her return found him dead, and a Serpent folded about his
Neck; whence the Fountain before called Langia, was named Archemorus; and the
Captains to comfort Hipsipyle for her Loss, instituted these Games Statius
Thebaid. lib IV.
, Una tamen tacitas, sed jussu Numinis, unda^
Haec quoque secreta nutrit Langia sub umbra,
Nondum illi raptus dederat lacrymabile nomen
Archemorus, nec fama Deae; tamen avia servat
Et nemus, and fluvium; manet ingens gloria Nympham,
Cum tristem Hypsipylem ducibus sudatus Achaeis
Ludus, and atra sacrum recolit Trieteris Opheltem.
Langia alone, and she securely hid
Lurck'd in a dark, and unfrequented shade,
Her silent streams by some Divine command
To feed the circumjacent pools retained.
Before Hypsipyle was known to Fame
Before the Serpent had Archem'rus slain,
And to the Spring bequeathed his dreadful name;
Yet in the lonesome Desert though it lies,
A Grove, and Riv'let it alone supplies;
Whilst endless Glory on the Nymph shall wait,
And Grecian Cheifs shall eternize her Fate,
When they shall sad Triennial Games ordain
To after-ages to transmit her Name,
And dismal story of Opheltes slain.
Mr. Hutchin. Others are of opinion, that these Games were instituted by
Hercules after his Victory over the Nemean Lion Pindari Schol.
, in honor of Jupiter, who, as Pausanias tells us, had a magnificent Temple at
Nemea, where he was honored with solemn Games, in which Men ran Races in
Armor; but perhaps these might be distinct from the solemnity, I am now
speaking of. Lastly, others grant indeed, they were first instituted in memory
of Archemorus, but will have them to have been intermitted, and revived again
by Hercules, and consecrated to Jupiter.

The Victors were crowned with Parsley, which was an Herb used at Funerals, and
feigned to have sprung out of Archemorus's Blood; Concerning it, Plutarch
relates a remarkable Story Timoleonte.
, with which it will not be improper to conclude this Chapter; As Timoleon
(says he) was marching up an Ascent, from the Top of which they might take a
view of the Army and Strength of the Carthaginians, there met him by chance a
company of Mules load^n with Parsley, which his Soldiers conceived to be an
ill-boding Omen, because this is the very Herb wherewith we adorn the Sepulcres
of the dead, which custom gave birth to that despairing Proverb, when we
pronounce of one that is dangerously sick, that he does (...), i. e. need
nothing but Parsley, which is in effect to say, he is a dead Man, just dropping
into the Grave: Now, that Timoleon might ease their minds, and free them from
those superstitious thoughts, and such a fearful Expectation, he put a stop to
his March, and, having alleged many other things in a discourse suitable to
the occasion, he concluded it by saying, that a Garland of Triumph had luckily
fallen into their hands of it is own accord, as an anticipation of Victory;
inasmuch as the Corinthians do crown those that get the better in their
Isthmian Games with Chaplets of Parsley, accounting it a sacred Wreath, and
proper to their Country; for Parsley was ever the conquering Ornament of the
Isthmian Sports, as it is now also of the Nemean; it is not very long since
Branches of the Pine Tree came to succeed, and to be made use of for that
purpose: Timoleon therefore, having thus bespoken his Soldiers, took part of
the Parsley, wherewith he first made himself a Chaplet, and then his Captains
with their Companies did all crown themselves with it in imitation of their
General.

CHAPTER. XXV. Of the Isthmian Games.
THE Isthmian Games were so called from the place where they were celebrated
viz. the Corinthian Isthmus, a neck of Land by which Peloponnesus is joined to
the Continent; they were instituted in honor of Palaemon, or Melicerta, the
Son of Athamas King of Thebes, and Ino, who, for fear of her Husband (who had
killed her other Son Learchus in a Fit of madness) cast her self, with
Melicerta in her Arms, into the Sea, where they were received by Neptune into
the number of the Divinities of his Train, out of compliment to Bacchus nursed
by Ino. At the change of their condition, they altered their Names, Ino was
called Leucothea, and her Son, Palaemon; however Palaemon's Divinity could not
preserve his Boby from being tossed about the Sea, till at length it was taken
up by a Dolphin, and carried to the Corinthian Shore, where it was found by
Sisyphus at that time King of Corinth, who gave it an honorable interrment, and
instituted these Funeral Games to his honor; thus Pausanias Initio Corin^hia^.
. Others report that Melicerta's Body was cast upon the Isthmus, and lay there
some time unburied, whereupon a grievous Pestilence began to rage in those
parts, and the Oracles gave out, that the only remedy for it, was to interr the
Body with the usual solemnities, and celebrate Games in memory of the Boy; upon
the performance of these Commands the Distemper ceased, but afterward when the
Games were neglected, broke out again, and the Oracles being consulted, gave
Answer, that they must pay perpetual Honors to Melicerta's memory, which they
did accordingly, erecting an Altar to him, and enacting a Law for the perpetual
celebration of these Games.

Others report that they were instituted by Theseus in honor of Neptune;
others are of opinion that there were two distinct Solemnities observed in the
Isthmus, one to Melicerta, and another to Neptune; which report is grounded
upon the authority of Musaeus, who wrote a Treatise about the Isthmian Games.
Phavorinus reports that these Games were first instituted in honor of Neptune,
and afterward celebrated in memory of Palaemon. Plutarch on the contrary tells
us, that the first institution of them was in honor of Melicerta, but
afterward they were altered, enlarged, and re-instituted to Neptune by
Theseus; he gives also several other Opinions concerning the Original of them;
his words are these in the Life of Theseus; Theseus instituted Games in
emulation of Hercules, being ambitious that as the Greeks by that Hero's
appointment celebrated the Olympian Games to the honor of Jupiter, so by his
institution they should celebrate the Isthmian Games to the honor of Neptune;
for those that were before dedicated to Melicerta, were celebrated privately in
the Night, and consisted rather of religious Ceremonies, than of any open
spectacle, or public Festival. But some there are, who say that the Isthmian
Games were first instituted in memory of Sciron, at the Expiation which Theseus
made for his Murder, upon the account of the nearness of Kindred between them,
Sciron being the Son of Canethus and Heniocha, the Daughter of Pittheus: though
others write that Sinnis, and not Sciron, was their Son, and that to his
honor, and not to Sciron's, these Games were ordained by Theseus. Hellanicus
and Andro of Halicarnassus write, that at the same time he made an agreement
with the Corinthians, that they should allow them that came from Athens to the
celebration of the Isthmian Games, as much space to behold the Spectacle in, as
the Sail of the Ship that brought them thither, stretched to it is full extent
could cover, and that in the first and most honorable place: thus Plutarch.

The Eleans were the only people of Greece that absented themselves from this
solemnity, which they did for this reason, as Pausanias Eliac. (...).
relates; The Corinthians having appointed the Isthmian Games, the Sons of
Actor came to the celebration of them, but were surpised and slain by
Hercules, near the City Cleonae: The Author of the Murder was at the first
unknown, but being at length discovered by the industry of Molione the Wife of
Actor, the Eleans went to Argos and demanded satisfaction, because Hercules at
that time dwell'd at Tiryns, a Village in the Argian Territories: Being
repulsed at Argos they applied themselves to the Corinthians, desiring of them,
that all the Inhabitants and Subjects of Argos might be forbidden the Isthmian
Games, as disturbers of the public Peace; but meeting with no better success
in this place, than they had done at Argos, Molione forbad them to go to the
Isthmian Games, and denounced a dreadful execration against any of the Eleans
that should ever be present at the celebration of them; which command was so
religiously observed, that none of the Eleans dare venture to go to the
Isthmian Games to this Day, (says my Author) for fear Molione's Curses should
fall heavy upon them.

These Games Alex. ab Alexandro Genesis Dier. lib. V. cap. VIII.
were observed every fifth year, and held so sacred and inviolable, that when
they had been intermitted for some time through the Oppression and Tyranny of
Cypselus, King of Corinth, after the Tyrant's Death the Corinthians, to renew
the memory of them which was almost decayed, employed the utmost Power and
Industry they were able in reviving them, and celebrated them with such
splendour and magnificence as was never practiced in former Ages. When Corinth
was sacked and totally demolished by Mummius, the Roman General, these Games
were not discontinu'd, but the care of them committed to the Sicyonians till
the rebuilding of Corinth, and then restored to the Inhabitants of that City,
as Pausanias reports Initio Corinthiac.
.

The Victors were rewarded with Garlands of Pine-leaves; afterward Parsley was
given them, which was also the Reward of the Nemean Conquerours, but with this
difference, that there it was fresh and green, whereas in the Isthmian Games it
was dry and withered. Afterward the use of Parsley was left off, and the
Pine Tree came again into request, which alterations Plutarch has accounted
for in the Fifth of his Symposiacks.

Quaest. 111.
INDEX. Numeri priores ad Paginas, posteriores ad Lineas referuntur.
A
(...) 176, 29. (...) 42, 3. (...), tribus Atheniensis 49, 34. (...) 285, 22.
Achaei unde dicti 4, 12. (...) 369, 16. (...) 337, 19. Achilles cur ab Homero
toties dictus (...) 409, 32. (...) 277, 9. (...) 288, 9. (...) vinum 189, 22.
(...), tribus Atheniensis 8, 10. unde dicta 48, 6. cur postea (...) ib. 15.
deinde (...) Ibid. 21. (...) ibid. 25.49, 11. (...) 394, 3. (...) 328, 17.
(...) 113, 1. (...) 328, 24. (...) ib. 35. (...) 34, 38. (...) 176, 24. (...)
ib. 25. (...) aves infelices 293, 8. (...) 319, 3. (...) 326, 35.374, 38.
(...), sacerdos Veneris 327, 6. (...) ibid. 30. (...) ib. ib. (...) 216, 25.
(...) 183, 32. (...) 365, 8. (...) 297, 9. (...) 408, 32. (...) 110, 31. (...)
ib. 33. (...) 407, 24. (...) 330, 27. (...) 408, 32. (...) ib. ib. (...) 387,
37. (...) 86, 40. (...) 38, 23. (...) ib. 29. (...) ib. ib. (...) ib. 32. (...)
ib. 37. (...) 38, 18.86, 43. (...) 80, 12. (...) 86, 43. (...) 327, 7. (...)
ib. 14. Agraulus Minerva 33, 14. (...) 383, 25. (...) 327, 10. (...) ib. 22.
(...) 328, 7. (...) Diana 73, 31. (...) 328, 21. (...) 35^, 23. (...) 305, 8.
(...) ib. 9. (...) ib. ib. (...) 327, 15. (...) ib. 18. (...), tribus
Atheniensis 49, 35.327, 25. (...) 64, 12.118, 13. (...) 49, 11. (...) tribus
Atheniensis 48, 25. (...) 327, 24. (...), tribus Atheniensis 49, 34. (...)
Lacedaemonii 227, 19. (...) 327, 43. (...) magistratus 70, 10. (...) 291, 2.
(...), aves fortunatae 293, 22.408, 42. (...) 408, 32. (...) 188, 2.201, 6.
(...) 133, 1. (...) 111, 14. (...) 357, 25. (...) 328, 31. (...) 329, 1. (...),
vide (...). (...) 320, 24. (...) 297, 9.328, 23. (...) 288, 34. (...) Dii 334,
31. (...) 216, 19. (...) 328, 28. (...) somnium 272, 3. (...) 410, 9. (...)
329, 8. (...) jecur, malum omen 285, 33. (...) 333, 3. (...) 68, 38. (...) 329,
15. (...) 410, 11. Amalthea capra 111, 43. (...) 329, 19. (...) ib. ib.
Ambrosia, qualis libatio 180, 14. (...) festum 329, 24. (...) ib. 27. (...) ib.
30. (...) 277, 15. (...) quid 19, 10. (...) 203, 17. (...) 419, 13. (...) 319,
32. (...) 85, 23. (...) 330, 1. (...) 58, 19. (...) 119, 38. (...) 381, 16.
(...) 412, 34. (...) 332, 10. (...) 330, 20. (...) ib. 19, (...) 411, 37. (...)
107, 8.71, 27. (...) 419, 12. (...) 330, 23. (...) 330, 7. (...) 99, 19. (...)
ib. 20. (...) 91, 41. (...) 333, 15. (...) 241, 3. (...) 68, 25. (...) 330, 27.
(...) 117, 35. (...) ib. ib. (...) 195, 36. (...) 90, 27. (...) 370, 8. (...)
135, 26. (...) 332, 1. (...) 331, 1. (...) 332, 8. (...), tribus Atheniensis
49, 39. cur postea (...) nuncupata 50, 1. (...) 108, 24.120, 3. (...) 78, 13.
(...) 79, 17. (...) 94, 7. (...) 108, 6. antiqui (...) dicti 2, 10. (...) 332,
10. (...) tribus Athen. 39, 34. (...) 285, 42. Antistrophe 204, 39. (...) 108,
31. (...) Nympharum, etc. altaria 179, 9. (...) 413, 1. (...) 117, 30. (...)
204, 4. (...) 111, 42. (...) liberi dicti 333, 5. (...) 332, 15. (...) 334, 1.
(...) 413, 2. (...) 197, 30. (...) 206, 16. (...) 183, 11. (...) 121, 18. (...)
sacerdos, and cognomen Apollinis 184, 28.247, 8. Aphetoriae opes 247, 7. (...),
idem quod Graeci recentiores (...) vocant 121, 17. (...) ib. 16. (...) 337, 1.
(...) 89, 36. (...) 78, 5. (...) 370, 26. (...) 117, 1. (...) 118, 27. Apollo
(...) 184, 28.247, 8. (...) 240, 25. Pythius 241, 9. Delphinius 242, 10.102,
25. (...) 243, 7. (...) 248, 35. Didymaeus 253, 18. Branchides 253, 24. (...)
255, 17. Tegyraeus ib. 24. Ptous ib. 27. (...) ib. 31. Ismenius ib. 35.343, 3.
Spodius ib. 41. Pythius 269, 36. (...) 393, 17. (...) 383, 10. (...) 417, 18.
(...) 282, 13. (...) ib. ib. Averruncus ib. ib. (...) ib. 14. Galaxius 339, 24.
(...) 349, 33. (...) 41, 30. (...) 334, 4. (...) 283, 24. (...) 117, 8. (...),
vide (...). (...) Dii 334, 30. (...) ib. 17. (...) 118, 25. (...) 55, 12.66,
14.121, 13. (...), aves minus felices 293, 7. (...) 411, 11. (...) ib. ib.
(...) 115, 11. (...) 283, 25. (...) 121, 11. Arae unde 211, 31. (...) 335, 1.
Arcades (...) 1, 9. (...) 191, 41. (...) 177, 4. (...) ib. 9. Archemori fatum
420, 28. (...) 184, 16. (...) 389, 1. (...), and aliquando (...) 72, 36. Archon
qui primus 13, 3. Archontes Medontidae dicti ib. 5. qui fuerunt 12, 42. ratio
hujus constitutionis, horum auctoritas ibid. (...) 339, 7. (...), Virgins
Dianae ib. 8. (...) 105, 27.323, 28. (...) 100, 1. (...) 94, 24. (...) 100, 4.
(...), i. e. galli 297, 6. (...) tribus Athen. 48, 25. (...) 335, 10. hoc
tempore pueri sese vocabant (...) ib. 14. (...) ib. 20. (...) nomen non
impositum vernis 59, 20. (...) 335, 34. (...) 336, 1. (...) virgins ib. 5.
(...) ib. 9. (...) 336, 17. (...) ib. 21. (...) ib. 24. (...) 336, 26. (...)
ib. 34. (...) 204, 18. (...) 189, 20. (...) 80, 43. (...) ib. 38. (...) 45,
34.56, 19.128, 36. (...) 327, 11. (...), tribus Athen. 48, 20. (...) 30, 11.
(...) 31, 30. (...) ib. ib. (...) 32, 10. (...) ib. 11. (...) 33, 13. Agraulus
ib. 14. (...) 328, 8. Alea ib. 22. Athenienses Iaones, and Jones dicti 3, 21.
(...) 2, 5.48, 5. (...) 2, 12. cur cicadas in crinibus gestabant ib. 13. in
quot tribus a Cecrope distributi 8, 7. in quot ordines a Theseo divisi 12, 14.
Regum tabula 19, 18. genuini qui habiti 46, 37. in unam urbem coeunt 10,
40.386, 21. (...) 72, 11. (...) 48, 14. cur postea (...) ib. 20. (...) ib. 25.
(...) 122, 1. (...) 109, 35. (...) 411, 21. (...), trib. Athen. 50, 1. Attica
dicta Ogygia 4, 44. Act 5, 36. quomodo divisa a Cecrope 9, 8. (...) 228, 18.
(...) ib. 17. Atticae cum Ionica dialecto affinitas 3, 34. aves fortunatae,
(...), dextrae, (...) 293, 22. aves male ominatae, (...), sinistrae, (...) 293,
7, etc. (...) 203, 4. (...) 205, 8. (...) quid 61, 32. (...) 356, 23. (...)
320, 13. (...) qui 388, 8. (...) 134, 45. quomodo differunt a (...) 135, 3.
B
(...) 337, 21. Bacchus (...) 327, 23. (...) ib. 26. Lenaeus 331.14. (...) ib.
33. (...) 332, 32. (...) 348, 3. (...) ib. 36. (...) ib. 37. pro Sole 389, 34.
(...) 394, 26. Sabazius 396, 25. ejus sacerdotes dicti (...) ib. 31. (...) 335,
14. (...) 337, 23. (...) 376, 5. (...) 127, 21. (...) ib. 23. cur barathronem
Latini hominem voracem appellant ib. 25. (...) 337, 25. (...) ib. 28. (...) 75,
15. aliquando (...) ib. ib. (...) 71, 36. (...) 72, 23. ejus officium 73,
7.357, 3. (...) 209, 32. (...) 73, 18. (...) 410, 16. (...) 121, 5. (...) 176,
25. (...) 303, 38. (...) 337, 30. (...), vel (...) 118, 17. (...) 118, 19.
(...) 311, 16. (...) 338, 4. (...) mazae vocatae 191, 11. (...) 307, 34. (...)
334, 11. (...) 177, 12.178, 27. (...) 338, 12. (...) 179, 7. (...) 321, 9.
(...) 338, 22. boves ad sacrificium designati (...) 200, 2. (...) 90, 27. (...)
91, 2. (...) ib. 16. hujus potestas 93, 13. (...) 94, 24. numerus Senatorum 95,
11. horum jusjurandum 93, 35. (...) 375, 15. (...) 91, 1. (...) 39, 3. (...),
191, 15.194, 30. (...) 221, 11. (...) scribere 135, 42. (...) 346, 2. (...)
408, 32. Branchidae 254, 7. (...) 338, 26. (...) ib. 31. (...) 177, 34. Brizo
275, 15. (...) 125, 40. (...) 44, 18. Buraici Herculis oraculum 263, 31. (...)
mensis 246, 27.
C
(...) 373, 12. Cabiri ib. 14. (...), i. e. (...) 311, 15. (...) 118, 11.
(...), vel (...) ibid. 31. (...) 121, 22. (...) 111, 18. (...) Lacedaemoniensis
127, 36. (...) 357, 35. (...) 373, 27. (...) 204, 1. (...) 373, 29. (...) 374,
8. (...) 353, 5. (...) 200, 8.347, 28.388, 36. (...) 200, 16. (...) 288, 11.
(...) 375, 1. (...) 374, 10. (...) 375, 4. Carneus Apollo 374, 14. (...) 120,
36. (...) 337, 13. (...) 375, 6. (...) ib. 10. Caryatis Diana ib. 7. Castalis
245, 39. castella (...) dicta 31, 6. (...) 68, 33. (...), vel (...) 186, 34.
(...) 115, 15. (...) 88, 20. (...) quis, and unde dictus ibid. 22. (...)
sacrificium 327, 2. (...) 30, 30. (...) 318, 19. (...) 135, 25. a Cecrope ad
Theseum regum dignitas, and officium 6, 32. Cecropia ubi 8, 4.30, 24. (...) ib.
30. Acropolis 8, 6.30, 30. (...) ib. 7. Athenae ibid. (...) 8, 10.49, 34. unde
dicta 47, 44. Cecrops unde ortus 5, 33. quare (...) dictus ibid. celeres in
honor habiti 409, 22. (...) qui 29, 8. (...) 111, 19. (...) 346, 1. (...) 320,
4. (...) 321, 15. (...), Ostracismus 125, 29. (...) 365, 22. Ceramicus 38, 11.
(...) 239, 24. Ceres Amphyctionis 83, 26. (...) 130, 20.221, 34.369, 4. Europa
257, 44. Homoloia 384, 17. (...) 394, 1. Pylaea 405, 20. (...) 405, 20. (...)
406, 16. (...) 343, 38. (...) 360, 4. Hercynna 361, 13. (...) 185, 17. (...)
ib. 31. familia Athen. 186.6. (...) ib. 8. (...) 409, 1. (...) 82, 37. cestus
411, 3. (...), vide (...) (...) 363, 19. (...) 370, 30. (...) 263, 23. (...)
404, 7. (...) 404, 9. Charilae fatum ibid. (...) ib. 32. (...) 187, 27. (...)
ib. 32. (...) 404, 36. (...) 405* 1. (...) 122, 36. (...) 212, 8. (...) 405, 3.
(...) 70, 4. (...), and (...) 89, 35. (...) 405, 5. (...) ib. 8. (...) ib. ib.
(...) 200, 36. (...), i. e. (...) ibid. 37. (...) 195, 36. (...) 389, 6. (...)
406, 8. Chitonia Diana ib. 9. civitate donandi mos 46, 27. (...) 368, 28. (...)
406, 13. (...), Cereris cognomen 406, 16. (...) 331, 8.406, 32. (...) 123, 21.
(...) 111, 1. (...) 406, 34. columnae lecti (...) 279, 35. compromissarii
arbitri 115, 5. (...) 81, 42. (...) 120, 36. (...) ibid. (...) 148, 8. cortina
244, 21. (...) 79, 1. (...) 271, 12. (...) 229, 7. (...) ib. 6. (...) 229, 6.
(...) ib. 8. (...) 229, 10. (...), boves ad sacrificium designati 200, 2. (...)
405, 19. (...), Cereris epitheton ibid. 20. (...) 331, 34. (...) 318, 5. (...)
107, 20. (...) 30, 42. (...) 337, 6. (...) 295, 12. (...) 375, 17. (...) 357,
38. (...), vel (...) 375, 19. (...) 208, 1. (...) 311, 5. (...) ib. 11. (...)
qualis Atheniensium 110, 13. (...) 303, 5. (...) 302, 5.303, 3. (...) 114,
19.70, 8. (...) 107, 1. (...) ib. 4. (...) 109, 29. (...) 118, 28. Cnacalesia
Diana 375, 26. (...) ib. 25. (...) 203, 40. (...) 397, 34. (...) 356, 24. (...)
44, 1. ib. 32. (...) 78, 27. (...), aves minus fortunatae 293, 12. (...) 405,
31. (...), vel (...) 40, 13. (...) 400, 15. (...) ib. ib. (...) 375, 27. (...)
234, 42. (...) Proserpina 375, 37. (...) 375, 36. (...) 40, 14. (...) 405, 16.
Corythallia, Dianae epitheton 400, 8. (...) 320, 4. (...) 18, 44. (...), vel
(...) 375, 39. (...) 376, 8. (...) 333, 27. (...) 368, 1. (...) dictus 367, 37.
(...) 100, 28. (...) 126, 37. (...) 80, 42. (...), unde 191, 26. (...) 288, 34.
(...) 376, 16. (...), lex 67, 9. (...) 318, 32. (...), Jovis epith. 398, 1.
(...) 111, 8. (...) 111, 13. (...) 376, 23. (...) 38, 28. (...) 412, 26. (...)
43, 19. (...) 42, 40. (...) 122, 41. (...) 123, 2. (...) ib. 1. (...) 134, 26.
(...) 85, 32. (...), vel (...) ib. 34. (...) 400, 13. cursus exercitium 409,
18.
D
Dactyli Idaei 413, 15. (...) 318, 35. (...) 412, 7. (...) 184, 22.356, 40.
(...) 340, 29. (...) ib. 22. (...) 184, 20. (...) 268, 32. (...) 346, 3. (...)
342, 17. (...) 320, 2. (...) 268, 5. (...) 342, 9. Davi servi dicti 59, 30.
(...) ib. 15. (...) 339, 7. (...) 312, 26. (...), vel (...), cur imago dicta
177, 34. (...) 50, 13. (...) ib. 14. (...) ib. 15. (...) Apollo 255, 17. (...)
343, 23. (...) 252, 1. (...) 251, 35. Delli 226, 1. Delos 250, 27. Delphi 241,
18. (...) ib. 24. (...) ibid. 26. (...) 343, 21. (...) tribunal 102, 24. (...)
75, 19. (...), oppida (...) ib. 24. (...) 394, 3. (...) 343, 37. (...) tribus
Atheniensis 48, 15. (...) 12, 14. (...) 50, 16. (...) ib. 39. (...) ib. ib.
horum tabula pro tribubus 51, 1. etc. (...) 12, 23. (...) 208, 15. (...) 122,
22.285, 32. (...), i. e. Ceres and Proserpina 190, 5. (...), praeconii formula
12, 7. (...), vel (...) 197, 1. (...) prospera dicebantur 292, 14. (...) 286,
15. (...), tribus Athen. 48, 15. (...) 119, 25. (...) 115, 12. (...) 114, 18.
(...) 115, 11. (...) ib. 5. (...) 108, 19.120, 6. (...) 344, 6. (...) 110, 12.
Diana (...) 73, 32. (...) 338, 1. Brauronia ib. 32. Orthia 344, 7. Dictynna
346, 18. Delphinia 102, 25. (...) 351, 16. (...) 399, 26. Triclaria 401, 11.
Hymnia 402, 38. (...) 406, 9. Corythallia 410, 8. (...), trib. Athen. 48, 20.
(...) 345, 10. (...) ib. 14. (...) 410, 7. (...) ib. 6. (...) 345, 8. (...)
115, 17. (...) 107, 36. (...) ib. 30.108, 13. (...) 55, 12. (...) 108, 4. (...)
240, 15. (...) 346, 17. (...) 89, 33. Didyma 253, 22. (...) aves 293, 14.
dignitas and officium regum Atheniensium a Cecrope ad Theseum 6, 32. (...) 79,
1. (...) 346, 22. (...) 112, 36. (...) 346, 24. (...) 108, 33. (...) 73, 3.346,
27. (...) ibid. (...) 348, 8. (...) ib. (...) 349, 5. (...), ludi scenici 43,
23. (...) ibid. (...) 185, 31. (...) 397, 32. (...) 344, 20. Dioscuri (...)
dicti 330, 13.349, 12. (...) ib. ib. (...) 88, 8. (...) 389, 4. (...), Cecrops
dictus 5, 34. (...) 285, 31. disci exercitium 410, 26. (...) ib. ib. (...) 205,
6. (...) 286, 15. (...) 70, 34.71, 27.93, 32.116, 24. (...) 349, 27. Dodona
233, 15. (...), vel (...) 239, 21. Dodonides Nymphae 277, 22. (...) 410, 2.
(...) ib. 3. donandi aliquem civitate mos 46, 27. (...) 116, 20. (...) 333, 12.
(...) qui dicti 75, 38. (...) in quos infligitur 122, 9. (...) 45, 2. qui servi
ita dicti 65, 38. Draconis leges (...) dictae 131, 2. (...) 239, 4. (...) 349,
23. (...) 310, 10.
E
(...) 90, 27. (...) 349, 30. (...) 350, 34. (...) 351, 5. (...) ib. 9. (...)
350, 11. (...) 194, 11.351, 20. (...) 351, 17.363, 13. (...) 351, 32. (...)
113, 6. (...) 85, 28. (...) 109, 28. (...) 351, 32. (...) 108, 36. (...) 77,
34. (...) 109, 42. (...) 94, 7. (...) 274, 21. (...), vide (...). (...) 107,
36. (...) 393, 11. (...) ib. ib. (...) 268, 32. (...) ib. ib. (...) ib. ib.
(...) 32, 28. (...) honor 128, 26. (...), aves infelices 293, 12. (...) 395,
20.405, 18. (...) 119, 22. (...) 121, 7. (...) 314, 13. (...) 314, 25. (...)
107, 29. (...) 117, 40. (...) 72, 45.86, 3. (...) 115, 1. (...) 107, 30. (...)
ibid. (...) 359, 11.71, 17. (...) 77, 130. (...) 82, 7. (...) 363, 1. (...)
306, 17. (...) 413, 27. (...) 387, 21. (...) 40, 15. (...) 352, 15. (...) 113,
1. (...) 321, 9. (...) 358, 38. (...) 353, 1. (...) 358, 37. (...) 354, 10.
(...) ibid. (...) 353, 6. (...) 105, 28. (...) 415, 15. (...) 78, 17. (...) ib.
ib. Elli, vide Helli. (...), vel (...) 359, 6. (...) ib. 1. (...) 359, 30.
(...) 110, 12. (...) 85, 34. (...), vel (...) 383, 24. (...) 359, 32. (...) 80,
20. empti de lapide 68, 29. (...) 359, 34. (...) 103, 8. hujus tribunalis
judices, and mos eligendi ib. 23. (...) 74, 30. (...) ib. 33. (...) 72, 39.117,
24. (...) 120, 11. (...), vide (...). (...) 31, 17. (...) 309, 40. (...) 120,
33. (...) 189, 19. (...) 270, 15. (...) ib. ib. Enyalius 73, 30. (...) 327, 43.
(...) 360, 1. (...) 285, 24. (...) 365, 7. (...) 40, 10. (...) 117, 34. (...)
ib. ib. Ephetae 95, 8.101, 35. (...) 362, 33. (...) 356, 11. (...), vel (...)
110, 17. (...) 101, 12. (...) 102, 24. (...) ib. 33. (...), Apollinis epitheton
417, 18. (...) 333, 38. (...) 285, 4. (...) 133, 30. (...) 360, 13. (...) 119,
34. (...) 360, 15. (...) 358, 25. (...) 360, 6. (...) ib. 9. (...) 119, 29.
(...) ib. 34. (...) 82, 14. (...) 78, 1. (...) 92, 18. (...) 73, 2.357, 7.
(...) 75, 6. (...) 383, 24. (...) ib. ib. (...) 201, 37. (...) 360, 17. (...)
ib. ib. (...) 119, 36. (...) 89, 33. (...) 360, 19. (...) 44, 21. (...) 120, 9.
(...) 360, 23. (...) ib. ib. (...) 360, 21. (...) 80, 40. (...) ibid. (...) 77,
23.87, 31.92, 4. (...) 310, 33. (...) 360, 11. (...) 120, 30. (...) 66, 21.120,
17. (...) 109, 15. (...) 315, 16. epode 204, 40. (...) heroes 49, 30. (...)
356, 11. (...) 223, 20. equi quo modo in curribus jungi solebant 412, 38. (...)
363, 4. (...) 364, 6. (...) 361, 12. Erecthei filiae (...) dictae 31, 40. (...)
32, 7.49, 34. (...), Minervae epith. 404, 2. (...) 387, 46. (...) 49, 10. (...)
361, 8. (...) 179, 31. (...) 301, 17. (...) 258, 14. (...) 34, 28. (...),
columnae lecti 279, 35. (...) 280, 7. (...) 303, 19. (...) 364, 36. (...) 365,
1. (...) 364, 32. (...) 361, 1. (...) 360, 25. (...), vide (...). (...), vide
ibid. (...) 410, 16, 17. (...), Inferorum altaria 179, 4. (...) 206, 9.361, 4.
(...) 362, 1. (...) 285, 40. (...) 206, 16. (...) 82, 3. (...) 397, 31. (...)
58, 34. (...) 386, 37. (...) 187, 27. (...) 327, 43. (...) 303, 16. (...) 362,
8. Eumenides 58, 34.362, 9. Eumolpidae 186, 9. (...) 223, 12. (...) 12, 14.75,
12. (...) 201, 11. Europa (...) 359, 3. (...) 362, 21. (...) 369, 10. (...)
ibid. (...) 362, 25. (...) ib. 21. (...) 204, 19. (...) 108, 27. (...) ib. 28.
(...) 71, 3.116, 36. (...) 74, 23. (...) 32, 30. (...) 107, 43. (...) 121, 9.
(...) 293, 15. exercitus lustrandi forma apud Macedones 383, 30. (...) 74, 27.
(...) aves quae 293, 7. (...) 217, 21. (...) 121.3.
F
Favete linguis 201, 13. ficus veterum diaeta 393, 12. apud Athenas pretio
habitae 113, 42. in divinatione adhibitae 321, 10. Furiae quibus nominibus
dictae 362, 9, 10. vox ominosa ibid.
G
(...) 339, 21. (...) ib. 25. (...) ib. 29. (...) 318, 22. (...) ib. 23. (...)
antiqui dicti 2, 10. (...), tribus Atheniensis 48, 25. (...), vide (...). (...)
339, 29. (...) 401, 18. (...) 339, 34. (...) 12, 14. (...) 49, 11. (...) 340,
9, 11. (...), i. e. (...) 358, 17. (...), chorea 343, 30. (...) 348, 12. (...)
340, 1. (...) ibid. 4. (...) ib. 12. (...), fistulae dictae 327, 1. (...)
Proverb. 295, 40. (...) 210, 24. (...) 328, 30. (...) 210, 24. Graeca fides,
prove. 226, 10. (...), qualis actio, and in quos affligitur 115, 25. (...) 136,
9. (...) 74, 32. gymnasia 39, 42. (...) 82, 1. (...) 340, 20. (...) ib. ib.
(...) 81, 12. (...) 81, 15.
H
Harmodii nomen non imponendum vernis 59, 23. Hecate, (...) 251, 12. (...) 351,
15. hecatombe 194, 11. Helli, and Elli, vide (...) Hellotis 359, 21. Hellotis,
Minervae cognomen ib. 30. Helotae, unde dicti 66, 40. Hercules (...) 364, 10.
Homoloius Jupiter, and Homoloia Ceres 384, 19. Horae Deae 407, 17. Hymnia Diana
402, 40.
I
(...) 358, 10. (...) ib. 4. (...) 419, 19, 34. Jaones Athenienses dicti 3,
33.4, 5. (...) 288, 36. (...) theatra dicta 43, 28. (...) 35, 8.358, 13. (...)
358, 12. (...) 191, 21. (...) ib. 36. (...) 281, 2. (...) 407, 24. (...) 284,
21. (...) 177, 11. (...) 356, 13. (...) 357, 12. (...) 284, 21. (...) 371, 34.
ignis lambens 299, 20. (...) 187, 36. (...), vide (...). (...) 372, 9. infulae
199, 32. (...) 372, 14. (...) ib. ib. (...) 372, 27. Iobacchus, cognomen Bacchi
ib. 28. (...) ib. 31. Jones unde dicti 4, 12. Ionica vetus dialectus Atticae
affinis 3, 24. Iphicratidae calcei 342, 36. (...) 14, 43. (...) 42, 38. (...)
87, 15. (...) 412, 42.413, 1. (...), tribus Atheniensis 49, 35. (...) 367, 4.
(...) 373, 7. (...) ib. 1. (...) 355, 39. (...) 56, 17. (...) ib. ib. (...)
372, 3. (...), Jovis cognomen ib. 5. Ithuphalli 347, 37. Juno Samia 181, 34.
Jupiter, (...) 7, 25. (...) 32, 31.33, 13. Herceus 71, 31. (...) 190, 24. (...)
206, 28. (...) 214, 32. (...) 231, 28. Pelasgicus 236, 9. (...) 332, 31. (...)
345, 11. Polieus ibid. Diomeus 346, 25. (...) 350, 15. Eleutherius 353, 7.
Olympius 384, 14. Homoloius ib. 17. Sabazius 396, 23. (...) 397, 33. (...) 398,
1. (...) 399, 19. (...) 414, 29. (...) 379, 32. juramentum a sacerdotibus
antequam solemnia praestabant susceptum 195, 9. jusjurandum 214, 24.
jusjurandum mulierum ibid. 36.
L
Labellum 164, 8. labratum apud Romanos quid 209, 32. (...) 179, 7.
Lacedaemonii reges in die coronationis consecrati Jovis (...) sacerdotes 182,
32. foedifragi 227, 16. (...) 376, 30. (...) 108, 5. (...) 365, 16. (...) 357,
42. lampadum contentio 365, 9. (...), Bacchi cognomen 377, 7. (...) ib. 6.
(...) ib. 19. Laphria Diana ib. 20. (...) 207, 10. lapidationis poena 128, 1.
(...) 377, 12. (...) ib. 16. laurus cur (...), and (...) dicta 208, 10. (...)
246, 11.267, 32. (...) dicta 418, 8. (...) 318, 8. lecti columnae (...) 279,
35. legum inventio 130, 8, 17. Solonis leges (...), Dra^^nis (...) dictae 131,
2. etc. (...) 189, 12. (...) 121, 23. (...) 81, 19. (...) 378, 27. Lenaeus
Bacchus ib. 28. (...) 378, 9. (...) ib. 16. (...), trib. Athen. 49, 35. (...)
378, 22. (...) 67, 3. (...) proverb. 111, 14. (...) 75, 27. (...) 76, 5. (...)
288, 16. libatio 189, 17. (...) 347, 41. (...) ib. ib. Limnae 95, 36. (...)
379, 5. Limnatis, Dianae cognomen ib. 6. (...) 128, 1.378, 33. (...) 319, 9.
(...) 217, 34. (...), i. e. (...) ib. 30. Locrorum perfidia 227, 11. (...)
prove. 227, 13. (...) prove. ib. ib. (...) 74, 28. (...) 189, 17. (...) 379, 10.
(...) Apollo 41, 30. (...) 105, 9. (...) proverb. ib. 12. (...) 379, 22. luctae
exercitium 411, 14. (...) 183, 32. (...) 379, 22. (...) Dii 336, 31.
lustrationum genera 197, 34. lustrandi urbes mos 367, 5. lustrandi exercitus
forma apud Macedones 383, 30. Lyceum ubi situm, and hujus nominis ratio 41, 29.
Lycaeus, Jovis cognomen 379, 15.
M
(...), jurandi formula 215, 20. Macedones quomodo exercitum lustrabant 383,
30. (...) 33, 23. (...) ib. 25. magica ars 315, 17. (...) ib. 16. magi 316, 1.
(...) 379, 30. (...) Jupiter 379, 32.380, 2. (...) 288, 5. (...) Apollo 381, 8.
(...) 229, 10.270, 8. (...) 188, 6. (...) 229, 7. (...) 239, 4. (...) 229, 9.
(...) ib. 13. (...) ib. 32. (...) 267, 27. (...) 109, 41. (...) 62, 24. (...)
129, 5. (...) 410, 3. (...) 380, 17. (...), vide (...). (...) 333, 33. (...),
Jovis epitheton 397, 32. (...) 333, 33. (...) 383, 22. (...) 191, 19. (...)
380, 19. Mercurius (...) 215, 9.263, 15. (...) 279, 33. (...) 122, 38. (...)
334, 20. (...) 361, 20. (...) 203, 39. (...), trib. Ath. 48, 15. (...) postea
ib. 21. (...) 380, 24. (...) ib. 26. (...) Apollo ib. 27. (...) 107, 17. (...)
325, 18. (...) 205, 35. (...) 105, 14. (...) 11, 24. (...) tributum 55, 24.
(...) forum ib. 39. (...) 45, 2. (...) 80, 17. (...) 389, 33. Minerva (...) 33,
13. Agraulus ibid. (...) 328, 8. Alea 328, 22. (...) 350, 16. (...) 359, 10.
387, 45. Aglaurus 392, 24. (...) 404, 2. hujus (...) 387, 45. (...) 381, 1.
(...) 120, 19. (...) 381, 6. (...) 156, 30. moenia (...) dicta 31, 6. molae
salsae 191, 3. (...) 382, 8. (...) 320, 46. (...) 412, 32. (...) 325, 29. (...)
387, 21. Morpheus 274, 13. (...) 387, 21. (...) 343, 4. (...) 381, 10. (...)
34, 3. (...) 381, 24. (...) 37, 38. (...) 222, 9. (...) 63, 8. (...) ibid.
Musae Ardalides dictae 264, 10. (...) 381, 32. (...) 355, 42. (...) 356, 4.
Mysia Ceres 381, 33.
N
(...) 186, 34. (...) 177, 11. (...), vel (...) 80, 26. (...) 214, 37. (...)
316, 21. (...) 317, 30. (...) 382, 12. (...) ib. 26. (...), vel (...) ib. 16.
(...) 186, 29. (...) ibid. (...) ib. 34. (...) 382, 18. (...) ib. 21. (...)
189, 35. Neptunus Onchestius 384, 11. Taenarius 399, 14. Erectheus 32, 5. (...)
383, 3. (...), epitheton Minervae 31, 30. (...) 382.29. (...) 76, 6.389, 9.
(...) 122, 35. (...) quomodo differt a (...) 132, 28. (...) ^ur musicam
significat 134, 35.247, 38. (...) 176, 16. (...), vel (...) 383, 7. (...) 383,
15. (...) 383, 16. (...) 276, 23.
O
(...) 127, 23. obeliophori, sacrificia Bacchi 191, 19. obolus 109, 18. (...)
37, 43. (...) aves 293, 26. (...), aves felices ib. 22. (...) 80, 39. officium
and dignitas Regum 6, 32. (...) 384, 10. (...) 371, 12. (...) 5, 16. (...),
quicquid vetus vocabant antiqui 5, 8. (...) ib. 17. Ogyges 4, 33. (...) 74, 30.
(...) ib. 33. (...) cur carcer dictus 122, 24. (...) qui servi dicti 65, 37.
(...) 32, 15. (...), trib. Ath. 49, 35. (...) 288, 21. (...) 81, 9. (...) 291,
2. (...) ib. 3. (...) ib. 15. (...) ib. 6. (...) ib. 2. (...) ib. 3. (...) ib.
ib. (...) 243, 8. (...) tripos dictus ib. 5. (...) 203, 34. (...) 384, 13.
Olympius Jupiter ib. 14. (...) 47, 36. idem dicti (...) ib. 39. (...) 384, 17.
(...) 407, 4. (...), Bacchi epith. ib. 5. (...) 204, 5. (...) 241, 34.
Onchestius Neptunus 384, 11. Onchestus, Boeotiae oppidum ib. 12. (...) 393, 29.
(...) 272, 10. (...) ib 12. (...), cur (...) dictus ibid. 1. (...) ib. 11.
(...) 318, 41. (...) 288, 39. (...) 32, 23. (...), trib. Athen. 48, 25.49, 10.
(...) 410, 8. (...), Deae 407, 16. (...), ib. 13. (...) 271, 27. (...) 44, 27.
(...) 219, 17. (...) 213, 7. (...) ib. 25.214, 7.217, 6. (...) 213, 26,
ordalium 222, 28. (...) 47, 41. (...) 291, 1. (...) ib. 3. (...) ib. 1. (...)
ib. 3. (...) ib. ib. (...) 265, 11. Orthia, Dianae cognomen 344, 7. (...) 411,
35. (...) 127, 23. (...) 384, 24. (...) 384, 22.398, 2. (...) 386, 4. (...),
Pontifices Delphici 184, 26. (...) ib. 27. (...) 124, 12. quomodo differt a
(...) ib. 8. quomodo a Syracusanorum petalismo 125, 32. quomodo fiebat ib. 19.
(...) dictus ib. 29. (...) proverb. 329, 8. oves cur victimae maximae habentur
200, 8. (...) 191, 2. (...) 120, 4.
P
(...) 386, 9. (...) 412, 23. (...) ib. 19. (...) 205, 5. (...) ib. 2. (...),
Jovis epith. 414, 29. (...) 40, 19. (...) 411, 34. palmam dare 409, 6. palmarum
plurium homo ib. 7. (...) 307, 31. (...) ib. ib. (...) 386, 13. (...) 412, 30.
(...) 412, 31. (...) 389, 20. Panathenaea 11, 22.112, 2.207, 25.327, 11.386,
17. (...) ib. 28. (...) ib. 30. (...) 387, 1. (...) 389, 6. (...) ib. 22. (...)
ib. 25. (...), trib Athen. 49, 34. (...) 32, 11.389, 36. (...) 390, 1. (...)
ib. 4. Panici terrores 306, 19. (...) ib. 7. (...) 391, 19. (...) 390, 21.
(...) 105, 1. (...), vel (...) ib. 4. (...) 109, 8.119, 39.159, 19. (...) 119,
11. (...) 108, 12. (...), tribus Athen. 8, 13.48, 11.391, 21. (...) 108, 12.
(...) 133, 8. (...) 413, 1. (...) ib. ib. (...) 44, 24. parasiti 184, 30. (...)
138, 41.185, 8. (...) 109, 13.114, 29. (...) 73, 41. (...) dicta laurus 418, 8.
(...), templum Minervae 31, 38. (...) cur dictum ib. 40. (...), Erechthei
filiae (...) 31, 39. Pa^iphae unde 265, 25. (...) 391, 24. (...), vide (...).
(...) 37, 30. (...) 191, 7. (...) 31, 9. (...), vel (...) 31, 7. Pelasgi, unde
Graeci dicti ibid. (...) servi quales 56, 36. (...) 234, 40. (...) 364, 5.
(...) 391, 29. (...) 17, 28. (...) 14, 42.78, 24. (...) 409, 12. (...) 377, 14.
(...) Minervae 336, 7.387, 45. (...) qui 388, 8. (...) 35, 15. (...) 401, 44.
(...) 392, 17. (...) 347, 32.392, 19. (...) 176, 20. (...) 199, 8. (...) 198,
21. (...) 125, 35. (...) Syracus. quomodo differt ab ostracismo ib. 32. (...)
356, 10. (...) 403, 4. (...) ib. 5. (...) ibid. (...) ibid. (...) ib. 8. (...)
74, 8. (...) 392, 19. (...) ib. ib. (...) 403, 12. (...) 321.24. (...)
lustratores 366, 36. (...) 126, 26. (...) 72, 39. (...) 350, 32. (...) 393, 13.
(...) dicta Proserpina ibid. 16. (...) ib. 15. (...) 112, 37. (...) 352, 38.
(...) 220, 27. (...) 403, 8. (...) 75, 16. (...) 47, 33. (...) 333, 33. (...)
287, 17. (...) 311, 16. (...) 257, 40. (...) quomodo ab ostracismo differat
124, 8. (...) 75, 3. (...) ib. 6. (...) ib. 10. (...) 400, 20. (...) 91, 6.
(...) 305, 8. (...) 392, 21. (...) 331, 4. (...) 365, 22. (...) 358, 31. (...)
392, 23. Plutus alatus 32, 31. (...) quid 87, 2. (...) 86, 44. (...) 409, 33.
(...) 123, 28. (...) ib. ib. (...) ib. ib. (...) 395, 5. (...) 203, 18.
(...)72, 25. hujus officium 73, 27. (...) 55, 40. (...) 77, 28. (...) 303, 16.
(...), Apollinis epith. 393, 17. (...), Cecropia (...) dicta 30, 7. (...) 45,
1. (...) 246, 38. (...) 334, 19. (...) Mercurius ib. 20. (...) 35, 23. (...)
393, 24. (...) 291, 6. (...) 301, 34. (...) 393, 27. (...), Erectheus 32, 5.
Onchestius 384, 11. Heliconius 390, 10. Taenarius 399, 14. (...), tribus
Atheniensis 48, 21. (...) 393, 27. (...) prove. 195, 36. praeconii formula 12,
7. praedicare 409, 1. (...) 78, 19. (...) 68, 27. (...) 393.1. (...) 393, 32.
(...) 82, 27. (...) ib. 30. (...) 394, 2. (...) 93, 6.132, 16. (...) 89, 3.
(...) 201, 39. (...) 128, 24. (...) 87, 24.91, 9. (...), Cereris epitheton 394,
1. (...) 393, 32. (...) 139, 19. (...) 415, 18. (...) 394, 10. (...) ib. 12.
(...) 245, 19. (...) 394, 15. (...) 177, 13. (...) 108, 31. (...) 394, 27.
(...), and (...) 187, 1. (...) 68, 38. (...) 217, 21. (...) 394, 19. (...) 44,
26. (...) 210, 9. (...) 239, 4. (...) Arcades 1, 9. Proserpina, (...) dicta
403, 16. a Plutone rapta 399, 7. (...) 185, 4. (...) 205, 5. (...) 55, 9. (...)
394, 22. (...) 395, 1. (...) 202, 32. (...) 394, 25. (...), and (...), Bacchi
epitheta ibid. 26. (...) 92, 1. (...) 108, 42. (...) 86, 18. Prytaneum 92,
24.11, 19. Prytanum officium 92, 19. (...) 202, 28. (...), and (...) differunt
132, 28. (...) 121, 21. (...) 317, 28. (...) 308, 7. (...), Deus ib. 28. (...),
trib. Athen. 5, 1. (...), i. e. (...) 315, 1. (...) 395, 4. pugilatus
exercitium 410, 38. (...) ib. ib. (...) 83, 32. (...) 396, 4. Pylaea Ceres ib.
6. (...) 83, 32. (...) 287, 12. (...) Diana 378, 26. (...) 396, 7. (...) 419,
10. (...) 269, 19. (...) ib. ib. Pythia 241, 8.245, 3^. (...) 243, 7.
Pythonissa, Phoebas 244, 26. (...), vel (...) 246, 13. Pythium 241, 7. Python
269, 34.
Q
Quinquertium 409, 12. Quinquatria 386, 24.
R
(...) 113, 25. (...) 303, 27. (...) 396, 12. (...) 408, 36. (...) 302, 14.
(...) 396, 16. regum veterum dignitas and officium 6, 32. religio (...) dicta
172, 8. reo tria (...) proposita, and responsa 99, 23. (...) 82, 22. (...), and
stipendium (...) dictum ib. 25. (...) 411, 16.
S
(...) 396, 29. (...) ib. 20. Sabazius Jupiter ib. 21. (...), Bacchi sacerdotes
ibid. 31. sacerdotes erant reges ^, 25. sacra facere reges solebant ib. 23.
sacrificia ex quibus olim constabant 188, 28. saltandi exercitium 410, 9. (...)
123, 30.177, 17. (...) 397, 1. Saturnalia 391, 31. (...) vel (...) 55, 20.
(...) 397, 19. (...) 33, 25. (...) 44, 1. versatilis, and ductilis ib. 7.
sceptra qui gestabant 408, 37. (...) 268, 1. (...) 374, 3^. (...) 398, 5. (...)
ib. ib. (...) 91, 3. (...) 398, 12. (...) 317, 28. (...) 397* 19. (...) ib. 27.
(...) ib. 19. (...) ib. 25. (...) 176, 31.178, 16. (...) 412, 42. (...) ib. ib.
(...) 122, 29* 397, 5. (...) mazae quaedam dictae 191, 9. (...) 236, 12. (...)
397, 11. (...) 99, 5.362, 9. (...) 362, 8. sententiam ferendi apud Areopagum
mos 100, 8. (...) 397, 14. (...) 320, 43. (...) 128, 42. (...), sive (...) 80,
9. (...) 79, ^5. (...) 80, 6. (...) 120, 13. Solonis leges (...) dictae 131,
13. (...) 410, 33. (...) 81, 4. (...) 255, 39. (...) 122, 32. sorts Homericae
302, 20. -- viales ib. 18. (...) 216, 19.399, 11. (...) 189, 12. (...) 203, 17.
(...) 410, 38. (...) 40, 26. (...) 411, 1. Sphragidium 265, 42. Sphragitides
Nymphae ibid. 43. Sphettus 9, 14. (...) 204, 14. (...) 189, 17. (...) 111, 7.
(...) 398, 17. (...) 409, 37. (...) 410, 1. stadium 41, 7. statuae Deorum
antiquitus (...) dictae 177, 28. (...) 127, 13. (...) 122, 17. (...) ib. 20.
(...) ib. ib. (...) 393, 26. (...) 398, 19. (...) ib. 21. (...) 128, 31.
Stephanophorus 184, 23.^69, 25. (...), vide (...). (...) 397, 18. (...) Minerva
ib. 20. (...) 302, 5. (...) 122, 14. (...), vel (...), cur dicti attagae,
inscripti, and litterati 63, 24. (...) 40, 7. (...) 37, 34. (...) 219, 16.
Stophea, Dianae epitheton 398, 24. (...) 398, 23. (...) 27, 30. (...) ib. 32.
(...) 79, 1. strophe 204, 38. (...) 398, 25. (...) 321, 10. (...) 113, 42. sues
Veneri sacrificabantur 403, 3. (...) 398, 28. (...) 86, 24. (...) 366, 37.
(...) 119, 14. (...) 77, 43.82, 19.134, 2. (...), aves fortunatae 293, 22.
(...) 110, 9. (...), rhetoris stipendium 82, 25. (...) ib. ib. 74, 27. (...)
397, 30. (...) 119, 16. (...) 399, 1. (...) ib. 8. (...) 399, 9. (...) 419, 16.
(...) ib. 29.
T
(...) 188, 6. (...) 249, 3. Taenarius Neptunus 399, 14. Taenarus, Laconiae
promontorium ibid. (...) ib. 13. (...) ib. 17. (...), Jovis epith. ibid. (...)
78, ^1., (...) 79, 11. (...) ibid. (...) ib. 20. (...), vel (...) ib. 21. (...)
aves quae 293, 25. (...) 399, 20. (...) ib. 25. (...) dicti (...) ib. 24. (...)
399, 25. (...), Dianae cognomen ib. 26. (...) 76, 30. (...) 192, 16. (...) 77,
36. (...) 177, 14. templum (...) 174, 14. (...) 321, 3. (...) 114, 10. (...)
400, 1. (...) 387, 15. (...) Athenienses dicti, cur hos in comis gestabant ^,
12. (...) and (...), vide (...)* (...) 325, 27. (...) 208, 1. (...) qui, and ex
quibus electi 139, 1. (...) 365, 34. (...) 366, 2. (...) ibid. (...) 366, 20.
(...) 1^5, 37. (...) 73, 4.366, 24. (...) 368, 13. (...), horumque altaria 178,
34. (...), horumque altaria ib. 37. (...) 368, 18. (...) 266, 12. (...), vel
(...) 368, 32. (...) 270, 6. (...) 229, 7. (...) 229, 9. (...) 271, 30. (...)
251, 34. (...) 79, 1. (...) 252, 1. (...) 22, 9.251, 35. (...) Apollo 368, 24.
(...) 37, 5.173, 26.368, 20. Theramenes dictus (...) 18, 44. (...) 368, 36.
(...) ib. 38. Thermopylae, sive Pylae 83, 29. (...) 369, 1. (...) 370, 35.
(...) 350, 29. (...), colonus carceris 36, 19. (...) 369, 29. (...) ib. 3.
(...) 72, 28. horum officium 74, 4. (...) 230, 7. (...) ib. ib. (...) 226, 39.
(...) 227, 1. (...) 14, 46.56, 36.140, 26. (...) 325, 14. (...) 205, 33. (...)
371, 15. (...) 58, 15. (...), vel (...) 373, 25. (...) 357, 31. (...) 333, 33.
(...), cur dictum ib. 36. (...) 371, 17. (...) ib. 29. (...) 202, 21. (...)
371, 31. (...) ib. 32. (...) 190, 28. (...) 331, 42. (...), vide (...). (...)
187, 28. (...) 284, 29. (...) 77, 17. (...) 400, 23. (...) ib. 7. (...) ib. 6.
(...) ib. 25. (...) 105, 9. (...) 104, 14. (...) 110, 25. (...) 218, 24. (...)
Tomurae 238, 12. (...) 400, 30. (...) 401, 5. Toxaris quis ibid. (...) dictus
ibid. (...) 75, 32. (...) 75, 38. (...) ib. 39. (...) ib. 41. (...) 99, 23.
(...) 47, 35. (...) 411, 20. (...) ib. 19. tribu^m nomina 47, 44. numerus a
Clisthene constitutus 49, 33. quomodo dividuntur 50, 6. (...) 58, 16. (...)
401, 9. (...) 82, 5. (...) 105, 7. (...) 78, 30. (...) 295, 1^. (...) 401, 16.
(...) ib. 20. Tripo^ 242, 39. (...) 243, 5. cortina 244, 13. (...) 401, 18.
(...) 330, 17. (...) 75, 15. (...), tertia pars tribus 47, 33. (...),
sacrificium quale 194, 32. Trium literarum homo 63, 30. (...) 401, 22. (...)
261, 4. Trophonius 256, 6. Jupiter ibid. 23. hujus oraculum (...) dictum, and
(...) consulentes 257, 27. (...) templum 174, 14. (...) idem quod (...) 127, 3.
(...) 127, 1. (...) 127, 3. (...) 401, 25. (...) 270, 2. (...) 401, 27. (...)
castella dicta 301, 6. Tyndaridae, (...) 36* ^7.
U
(...) 401, 29. (...) 64, 12. (...) 99, 18. (...) 402, 26. (...) 355, 40. (...)
55, 20.388, 31. (...) 288, 21.317, 36. (...) 402, 32. Veneri sacrificantur sues
403, 3. Venus (...) 33, 17. vide (...). verbenae 191, 30, 200, 11. vernis non
imponenda nomina Harmodii, and Aristogitonis 59, 23. quo nomine dicti ibid.
(...) 205, 17. (...) 310, 38. victores in sacris ludis praedicari solebant 409,
1. victoriae insigne ib. 3. (...) 402, 38. (...), Dianae cognomen ib. 39. (...)
205, 4. (...) 108, 20. (...) 236, 12. (...) 44, 30. (...) 403, 3. (...) 403, 1
(...) 197, 1.
X
(...) 383, 26. (...) 332, 15. (...) 125, 39. (...) Deorum effigies olim dictae
177, 28. (...) 123, 6. (...), vel (...) 384, 5. (...) 40, 35. (...) ibid. 38.
(...) ib. ib.
Z
(...) 370, 31. (...) 14, 46. (...), vide Jupiter.
FINIS.
ERRATA
Page 13. Lin. 17. read sixteen years. p. 29. l. 12. r. Antony. p. 86. l. 24.
r. (...). p. 130. l. 1. r. XXVI. p. 186. l. 33. r. (...) herein. p. 220. l. 22.
r. Or to ^ay. p. 238. l. 29. r. Chaoniam. p. 243. l. 21. r. (...). p. 247. l*
33. r. was not. p. 274. l. 29. r. Beau. p. 280. l. 10. r. belo^^. p. 285. l.
21. r. not. p. 300. l. 13. r. Mr. Dechair. p. 328. l. 20. read (...).

Some BOOKS lately Printed for Abel Swall, at the Unicorn in St. Paul's
Churchyard, LONDON.
ROmae Antiquae Notitia: Or the Antiquities of Rome: I. A short History of the
Rise, Progress and Decay of the Commonwealth. II. A Description of the City:
An Account of the Religion, Civil Government, and Art of War; with the
remarkable Customs and Ceremonies, Public and Private, illustrated with Copper
Cuts. To which are prefixed two Essays concerning the Roman Learning, and the
Roman Education. By Mr. Basil Kennet of C. C. C* Oxon. 8o.

Justi-Lipsii Roma illustrata, sive Antiqui^atum Romanarum Breviarium, and
Geor. Fabricii Veteris Romae cum nova collatio. Edit, nova, qua accesserunt
Justi Lipsii Tractatus peculiares de Scriptura, Pecunia, Nominibus, Conviviis,
Censu and Anno Veterum Romanorum, 8o.

The English Historical Library: Or a short View and Characters of most of the
Writers now extant, either in Print or Manuscript, which may be serviceable to
the Undertakers of a General History of this Kingdom. By Will. Nicolson M. A.
Archdeacon of Carlisle, 8o.

Travels through Germany, Bohemia, Swisserland, Holland, and other parts of
Europe; describing the most considerable Cities, and Palaces of Princes:
together with Historical Relations, and Critical Observations upon ancient
Medals and Inscriptions. By Charles Patin M. D. of the Faculty of Paris: Made
English, and illustrated with Copper Cuts, and a Map.

Eutropii Historiae Romanae Brevarium, Notis and Emendationibus illustravit
Anna, Tanaquilli Fabri filia, in usum Delphini, 8o.

P. Ovidis Nasonis Metamorphoseon Lib. XV. Intepretatione and Notis illustravit
Daniel Crispinus, ad usum Delphini; recensuit Joh. Friend ex Aede Christi Oxon.
8o.

P. Virgilii Maronis Opera, Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Carolus
Ruaeus in usum Delphini, Editio novissima prioribus correctior, 8o.

C. Julii Caesaris quae extant, Interpretatione and Notis illustravit Johannes
Godvinus, ad usum Delphini, 8o.

Now in the Press, and will be published this Trinity Term 1697.
C. Crispi Sallustii Opera quae extant, D. Crispinus No^tis and Interpretatione
illustravit, ad usum Delphini, 8o.

The Lives and Characters of the Ancient Greek Poets by Mr. Basil Kennet of
C.C. C. Oxon. adorned with their Heads in Sculpture, 8o.

The Second Part of the English Historical Library, giving a Catalogue of most
of our Ecclesiastical Historians, and some Critical Reflections upon the Chief
of them; with a Preface, correcting the Errors, and supplying the Defect^ of
the former Part^ by Will. Nicolson M. A.


