THE Imposture Defeated: OR, A Trick to Cheat the DEVIL. A COMEDY. As it was
Acted by His MAJESTY'S Servants, AT THE THEATER in Drury Lane.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Lute, in St. Paul's
Churchyard, MDCXCVIII.

ADVERTISEMENT.
There is newly published, A new and easy Method to understand the Roman
History. With an Exact Chronology of the Reigns of the Emperors; an Account of
the most Eminent Anthors, when they flourished; and an Abridgment of the Roman
Antiquities and Customs. By way of Dialogue, for the use of the Duke of
Burgundy. Done out of French, with very Large Additions and Amendments, by Tho.
Brown. Very use^ul and proper to be red in Schools.

The Innocent Mistress. Next Week will be published a New Play called the
Unnatural Mother.

TO THE READER.
AS this triffle of a Comedy, was only a slight piece of Scribble, purely
designed for the Introduction of a little Music, being no more than a short
weeks work, to serve the wants of a thin Playhouse, and Long Vacation; under
those little circumstances it needs no Apology for either the Plot or the
Writing part of it: It neither sets up for a Play, nor the Author for a Poet:
Such as it is, it has served a present Exigence, and so gained the Point. I
have no Appeal therefore to the Mercy either of the Auditors, or the Reader.
It Is true, I thrust it into the World; for it is the fashion to be in Print. A
Play that sees not three Days, however shall meet with some kind Bookseller,
that in spite of the Paper Tax, shall take the naked thing into Mercy, and
this hasty Brat is however a little longer lived, had the Honor of keeping the
Stage for five Days Reign, and is not yet under the Fear of Abdication.

Yet as indifferent as I am to the merit of the Comedy (and my Reader I suppose
as indifferent) it has one Capital Argument lies against it; for I stand
impeacht (at least the Public Cry is loud upon that Subject) that I have
stolen a Character from a Comedy of Mrs. P -- to s, being the Humor of Bondi
the pretended blind Man. -- I would not willingly be thought so poor a
Plagiary, and am far from being guilty of this accusation. For, in the first
place, I had that hint from a Novel, and that Play of here is that has such a
Character I declare I never Read. It Is true, such a one she brought into the
House, and made me a Solicitor to the Company to get it Acted, which when I had
obtained, she very mannerly carried the Play to the other House; and had I
really taken the Character from her, I had done her no more than a piece of
Justice.

PROLOGUE,
Spoken by Mr. POWELL. TO this poor Treat, these Honored Guests t'i^vite,
I come my own Ambassador to Night,
To tell the truth, your Bill of Fare is small,
It is a little Humble Comedy, that is all:
For standard Sense, mine is too course Allay,
Alas, that Talent does not lie my way:
But though this Play in Wit be not so strong,
'Thas that will do as well, it trouls along,
With a whole train of Fiddles, Dance and Song.
And tho to other heights, my Pen cannot rise,
What the Dish wants, the Garna^ure supplies;
Then Gentlemen be kind for once at least,
And take the running Banquet for a Feast:
Besides, ill nature now is quite out of door,
The Bloody Flag should now hang out no more:
Critics, their whole Hostilities should cease,
'Twere hard to exclude the Stage out of the Peace:
But if your spite will needs my Fate decree,
And my poor Comedy and I, both damned must be,
I shall not Cheat the Devil, he will cheat me.
EPILOGUE, Spoke by Mr. Mills, ascending from under the Stage.
THis Scribbling Fop has given me no small trouble
To think how he has made the Devil a bubble,
To be thus Cheated is some pain, it is true,
But I Am afraid, to give the Devil his due,
He end his Devil both has cheated you.
Ay, That Is all Hell indeed -- for if you are shamm'd,
We Are even in a fair way of being damned,
But ben't so cruel, for this once for bear
Your Damning hands and a poor sinner spare;
Besides, consider, for some small excuse
To this poor-Off-spring of his starvling Muse,
It wanted Wine and Wit, for Inspiration,
Being the Lean Brat of a poor long Vacation;
Let him, for my sake, some small Mercy find,
Yes, Critick's, my dear Brothers, pray be kind,
Strain a small point of courtesy; ay do,
And in my turn I Will be as kind to you,
You Will find the old black Gentleman so Civil
You Will fear no Sprights, but the white charming Devil.
Drammatis Personae.
Duke of Venice Mr. Thomas Hernando Mr. Powell Gusman Senior Mr. Ben. Johnson
Gusman Junior Mr. Evans Pedro Mr. Pinkethman Artan Mr. Mills Alonza Mr. Horden
Bond Mr. Cibber Delay Mr. Smeaton Peter Mr. Smith Senator Mr. Rogers
WOMEN.
Marcella Mrs. Temple Serena Mrs. Andrews Lucy Mrs. Powel
ACT. I.
The Scene a very Pleasant Valley. Enter Hernando and Pedro. Hernando. A Very
Pleasant place this, Pedro.


Ped. Ay, Sir, and a very Pleasant Journey you are undertaking, never a Penny
of Money in your Pocket, and Heaven knows how far you have to Travel.


Her. Nay, the Truth is I am like a single Man, set a float in the bare hulk of
a Vessel; and have no other Pilot than Providence to Guide me.


Ped. It Is a hopeful Condition indeed you have brought your self to, a Plague
of the Dice, I say, here have you cast away 500 l. a Year, only for the foolish
diversion of shaking your Elbow, and putting your self out of Humor every
Night.


Her. What the Devil shall I do now Pedro?


Ped. Do! hang your self: For you have made Venice too hot to hold you; I never
knew you rise in a morning of late, but your Levy was more crowded with Dunns
than a rising Favourite's with Solicitors for Preferment.


Her. I would very fain know now, what Course I would not undertake, to Live by
Robbing is quite out of Fashion, for those that are worthy Money now travel
with so little, that the Employment of a Thief here brings as small Gains, as
that of a Clipper does in England.


Artan, a Spirit rises in the Habit of a Scholar. Art. Good Morrow, Sir.


Her. The like to you, Sir.
What a Pox did he come here Invisible?
I Am sure two minutes ago I saw no body within two Miles of me.

Ped. It Is a Sign he is no Creditor, Sir, If he were you would have spied him
sooner.


Art. Pray, Sir, which way do you Travel?


Her. To the Devil for ought I know.


Ped. Ay, Sir, If you will be pleased to bear his Charges, he is in the right road,
he needs no Guide, Sir.


Her. No Faith, I Am in as Direct a way as I could wish, for I have Poverty and
Despair to lead me to his Worship, and in my Opinion they are as sufficient
Guides as any man can desire.


Art. Are you in want, Sir?


Ped. Yes, to my certain knowledge, Sir?


Her. What Is that to you, Sir.


Art. May be I would assist you, Sir.


Ped. Comprehend me in the Treaty, I beseech you, Sir.


Art. Gentlemen, it was always my temper to assist men in Distress, as I
suppose you are.


Ped. By my troth your supposition is right, Sir: For my Master has been so
very much obliged to the Bitch Fortune, that out of 500 Pounds a Year, he has
not one poor Groat left.


Art. And yet he seems to have a Noble Spirit.
Why do you not attempt to take Revenge on those that have undone you.

Ped. Revenge, O'ons, a fellow without two pence in his Pocket, pretend to take
Revenge of a Lawyer and a Userer.


Her. How can I take Revenge?


Art. You may with Ease.


Her. Impossible.
There are not two such Crafty Villains Living.
I defy the Devil himself to be too hard for 'em.

Art. I would not have you think so, take my Council, you shall your self have
Power to serve your Friends, and plague your Enemies.


Ped. Gads-bud, take him at his Word Master, and if he keeps it, we'll Cut out
the Lawyers Tongue, and Plunder the Usurer, that is the best way to be revenged
on them.


Her. Pray Sir, what am I to do to deserve this mighty Favor?


Art. A triffle, if you will consider it.
You shall have Power and Wealth at your Command, the Choicest Beauties shall
obey your Will, fresh Honors every hour shall Rain Down on you: And in return,
I Will ask no more than this, give me your Friendship.


Her. Is that all you ask?


Art. No, one thing more, but mark me ever you grant it, Here is a Paper, it
Contains few Words, sign that, and the Great Duke himself shall be Slave to thy
Command.


Ped. S'life, Sign it, Sign it Master, be it what it will, it is not the first
Bond you have set your Hand to, that you never designed to Pay.


Her. Let me Consider, I believe I have Guest what his business is. No Money,
no Friends, nor no Credit, nor no way of getting Money, unless it be upon the
Highway, which if I undertake, I may very Decently be taken and Committed
without Ceremony, Tried without Dispute, and Condemned without Favor, Hanged
without Mercy, Die without Repentance, and Damned, without Profit: No Gad,
since my Condition is so, that I must go. to the Devil, I Will get something by it
I Am resolved on it.

Well, Sir, before I enter into my League with you, you shall grant me these
Demands.

First, I will want no Wealth, but lest I should be Questioned how I gather up
my Riches, I will have Power to Cure the Feeble Wretches of all Diseases they
linger under, so by my knowledge in that wondrous Art, none will suspect, nor
envy me my Fortune; Consent to this, and I Will sign my Papers.


Art. I Cannot.


Her. How!


Art. It is not in my Power:
But thus far I Will Comply with your request, tho'we cannot Control the
Destinies, and give those Life who fated are to Die, yet shall your Art extend
thus far, to give immediate Health to those who are to Live.


Her. Hum, why that is something truly, but with your Favor, how shall I know
who is designed for this World, or who must take a Journey into your Large
Dominions.


Art. Search in your Pocket, you will find a Herb, and in your Man's another,
by their Virtue I appear visible to both, but they, who want'em cannot view my
airy form: If at the Bed's head you behold me stand, the Patient Lives; if at
the feet, he Dies.


Ped. Hold, Sir, let me have one word with you, I beseech you, since my Master
has packed up in order for the taking of a Journey to Hell, and that I as his
Faithful and Dutiful Servant must needs follow, I think it is but reasonable we
should know what Company we are to keep there, and be acquainted with their
Manners and Religion, that we may avoid the Scandal of having but a short
acquaintance with the Devil.


Her. And withal to satisfy me whether or not you have the Power to make good
this large Agreement.


Art. You shall be satisfied in all your scruples, and think not you will see
ought terrible. You shall have prospect of the Elessan Shades, where you shall
view the Joys of Happy Lovers; The ancient Hero's that disdained to live, after
the loss of Fame; there you shall see mad Lovers, Jealous Husbands, City Wives,
the bawling Lawyer, and the griping Userer, Courtiers, Physicians, such a Tribe
of Knaves, our Consines are scarce large enough to hold'em.


He waves his Hand, a Simphony of Music, as it is playing the Scene Changes to
a Beautified Garden with Orange Trees of Each Side, and at the end little
Cyprus Trees, Several Figures rise up, just as he Describes in his last
Speeches. After the Symphony is Played a Man and a Woman Representing two happy
Lovers come forward, and sing this Song. Man. HOW Calm Elisa are these Groves,
How sweet to Entertain our Loves
Free from Sorrow, free from Care.
Jealousies and black Despair,
In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly, we Enjoy our Loves.

Both. In these sweet Elesian Groves,
Calmly we enjoy our Loves.

Elis. Here no busy Noise of State,
Comes to Interrupt our Joys,
No Ambition to be Great
Does our Halcyon Peace destroy.

Both. In these sweet Elesian Groves
Calmly we Enjoy our Loves.

Her. Pray, what were these when living.

Art. Two young Lovers,
Crossed by unnatural Parents in their Wishes,
Who when they found they could not live together,
Took the last Cordial Death, and now are Happy.

Her. But pray, Sir, what is he?

Art. A City Husband,
That broke his Wives Heart with his Causeless Jealousy,
And thinking she'ad too little Plague on Earth,
He followed her to be her Torment here:
See they Come toward us.

A SONG.
Wife Sings. Why, ah why, does Fate Decree
That I still must Wretched be?
Must my Torments never Cease?
Can the Grave afford no Peace?
Must I, must I ever be,
Plagued with Causless Jealousy?
Pray now Husband Pray be gone.

Husb. What You Would fain be left alone,
You thought your self safe when you Quitted your Breath,
But Spouse you and I must not part;
As I watched you in Life, I Will watch you in Death,
And keep Horn free in spite of Art.

Wife. Pray what have I done?

Husb. Nay, that you best know.

Wife. I never yet injured you?

Husb. But you may do;

Wife. Indeed you Provoke me,

Husb. Indeed Wife I cannot,
Old Men are too Feeble, it is young ones you want.

Ped, She Is a Fool not to make use of 'em then.

Wife. I see you intend I never shall have Rest.

Husb. I see you intend me two Horns for my Crest.
But faith Wife I will not be made such a Beast.

Wife. I will not stay, base Man farewell.

Husb. I Will follow thoughthou Lead'st to Hell,

Her. But Pray, Sir, what is he that Looks so pensive?

Art. His Story, I am sure must move your Pity:
There was a Lady, whom he long had Loved
And she returned it with an equal Ardor:
The Parents were agreed, the Lovers pleased;
But on the very Day they should have joined,
Crossing the River, to her Longing Bridegroom,
Was by an accident over turned and drowned;
Upon the News, his Senses quite forfook him,
And in few days his Life.

Her. Unhappy Pair!

A SIMPHONY.
Sforsa Comes forward Softly in a Mad Posture and Sings. Sfor. PEace, Peace, no
Noise, you will wake my Love,
Oh! softly, softly, Let us Move.
Yet I Am afraid
The Charming Maid,
Forgets it is her Bridal-Day,
Or sure she would have to come Away,
Oh! Sleep, thou Envied Rival hence,
Resign to me this Beauteous Excellence*
Orpheus haste, Employ thy Charms,
Wake her softly to my Arms,
Bring thy Sweetest tenderest Strains,
Love will pay thee for thy Pains.

A Symphony of soft Music here. Mean time Sforza stands fixed as if he Looked
on some Body. No more, no more, it is all in vain,
For poor Arena never must wake again,
Her pretty Soul is Fled before
On Wings of Angels Moved,
To tell how Sforza did Adore,
And how Arena Loved.
But I in Gloomy Shades alone
Must live, 'till he return:
Yes, yes Arena, since you are gone
Sforza shall ever Mourn,
In Caves filled full of Dead Men's Bones
Henceforth I will remain,
Where I will end my Life in Groans,
For Peace and I must never meet again.
Here follows a Dance between a Lawyer and a Poor Clyent, a Courtier and a Lame
Soldier, a Userer and a Prodigal, a Physician and a Fool. After the Dance,
Simphony of Pleasant Music: And then the two Happy Lovers come from their
Bower and Sing. Damon and Eliza AH! How blessed, how sweet it is,
Thus to Live in Endless Bliss,
Whilst poor Mortals, Sweat and Toil
All our Care's to Love and smile.
Here we rest secure from Fear,
Whilst on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!

Grand Cho. Here we Rest secure from Fear,
Whilst on Earth all pains they Bear,
Ah! how Happy then are we,
Who from all those pains are Free!



After the Grand Chorus, the Singers and Dancers go off, and the Scene Changes
to the Grove that stood at the beginning of the Play. Art. Now, Sir, what think
you? Now?

Her. Why I think it is wonderful: And I Am amazed why men should fear to Die,
when after Death they do enjoy such Pleasures.


Ped. Hark you, Sir, if you have ever a Blank about you, here is a poor Friend
of yours has another Soul at your Worship's Service.


Art. Well, Sir, some other time I Will talk with you; Now hasten to the City,
there we'll fix the Agreement, and before the set o'th* Sun, Riches shall flow
into you; you need but name the man you would have Sick, and Health shall
quickly leave him: Lets away.


Her. But, Sir, if I should at my Entrance be assaulted with Dunns, I hope you
will not be backward in making Patients of 'em.


Art. Fear not, but follow me.


Her. Now I shall once again appear in Splendour: View the bright dazzling
Beauties of the Court, and laugh at them who made my fall their Sport.


Ped. But don't forget to the Devil for it.


[Exeunt. The End of the First ACT.
ACT II. SCENE I.
Enter Gusman Senior, and Gusman Junior. Gusm. Sen. Singing TEll me no more
there must be something in it, Sirrah, Sirrah, I say you do Love her, Sigh for
her, Whine for her, Pine for her, Die for her, Lie for her, and all that
Sirrah; what a Pox you Rogue, do you think your old Father, that has been a
Whore-master from his Cradle, does not understand the Language of the Eyes, you
Ogling Rogue you.


Gus. Iun. Well then, suppose I do, sir.


Gus. Sen. Why then, if I were worth one Groat in the world I Would disinherit you,
you Dog^ o^: But you know I Am poor Sirrah, my Poverty and Indulgence is the
occasion of your Saucy Disobedience.


Gus. Iun. Sir, you ^ my Father, and I know so well, the Reverence I owe your
Sacred Name, That the North Star shall sooner fail the Sailer; The Pelican
forget to feed her young ones, than I forget the Duty of a Son.


Gus. Sen. Why look you now, Sirrah, you will persuade me after all this, that
you are not in Love; What the Devil, but that Damnable Distemper could have
provoked a Man to the making so many Similies. But Iemmy, prithee Iemmy tell me
truth, are not you Damnably in Love with this Old fellow's Daughter.


Gus. Iun. Sir, I would Scorn to tell a Lie to any one, much more to my Father,
therefore in few words, I Love her so I cannot live without her.


Gus. Sen. Well, but you must not Marry her Iemmy.


Gus. Iun. How, Sir, not Marry her.


Gus. Sen. No, no, by no means Iemmy, what Marry the Daughter of a Muck-worm, a
Rogue that has ruined your Poor Old Daddy, and swallowed as much Land in a
Twelvemonths time as has kept our Family these 300 Years.


Gus. Iun. Sir, might I'speak my mind without offense, 'twas not the fault of
his Frugality, but your Extravagance that ruined you.


Gus. Sen. Why you Cursed Cons med Hellhound, dare you call your own Fathers
Management in Question? But hark Iemmy, suppose I should be such a kind tender
hearted Fool to Comply with you in this business, how are you sure her Father
will be willing?


Gus. Iun. What need of his Consent, since we are agreed? His rigid Nature cannot
call for Duty; by Heaven, the difference 'twixt her Soul, and his, would almost
make me think she is not his Daughter.


Gus. Sen. Why then thy Mistresses Mother was a Whore Iemmy; Ha! and if the
Daughter provea Chip of the old Block, thou may be a Cuckold, my little
Iemmy Boy: But that is no great matter Child, here are things of more moment to
be considered on, if the old Hedghog do not consent, how will you come by her
Portion, you little Matrimonial Prig you?


Gus. Iun. I have her Love, that is all the Wealth I Covet.


Gus. Sen. Her Love with a Pox, must your Father and your Friend have her Love
too instead of Board-wages, what an ungracious Rogue have I unthinkingly begot
here! Sirrah I Command you upon my Blessing, unless you can get her Money as
well as her Love, never to think of her.


Gus. Iun. No, Sir.


Gus. Iun. No, Sir, no, Sir, what a Pox, I Will see who is Father you or I.


Gus. Iun. Sir, I have been born to many great misfortunes,
But none e're touch^d me like your fall from Virtue.
If Wealth can win you, sir, take all I have,
The little Fortune that my Uncle left me.
Give me but your Consent to Wed Serena;
(For I will Dye rather then Wed without it)
If not I Will wander to some Distant Cli^^e,
Where I will Curse my own Unhappy Fate,
But Bless my Mistress, and my Cruel Father.

[Offers to go. Gus. Sen. Hold, hold, come back, Iemmy.
Come back my dear, dear, Iemmy, thou have melted my stubborn heart; thou have
thawed these frozen Fountains mine Eyes, and the spring of my Tears shall water
thy youthful Checks, thou ^halt not go, thou staff of my Age, I will lean a
little longer upon thee, thou shall marry her (Crying) Thou shall lie with her,
(a little louder) and thou shall beget what thou can upon her Body. (Crying
very loud) But when thou have married, shall that 300 l. a Year thy Uncle left
thee be all bestowed upon old Iemmy,


Gus. Iun. With greater Joy than e're I did receive it.


Gus. Sen. Ah thou tender Lamb, thou shall have a Wife my Dear Iemmy, so
farewell, farewell, thou Flower of thy Age, thou faithful Lover and obedient Son.

(Going, Turn back Crying a little. But Iemmy, my poor Boy, my darling Child,
what ready Money have thou about thee Iemmy.?


Gus. Iun. Faith, Sir, but very little.


Gus. Sen. Well said Iemmy, a little with Content is a Feast for thee and me
Boy, how much is it my Precious?


Gus. Iun. About Ten Pieces, Sir.


Gus. Sen. Poor little Rogue, and shall we spend it all to day Titte, ^all poor
Daddy put five pieces of it in his Pocket, to make a show with my little
Pig^nye.


Gus. Iun. Ay, Sir, I Am happy you Command me.


Gus. Sen. Shall my little Iemmy, by my Jewel, thou shall have her, b^ my
Tit-mouse, thou shall be married to morrow-day Sirrah, by my Lovee.

Sings. Young Jemmy is a Lad,
My only Joy and Honey,
He Loves his Poor old Dad,
And lets him want no Money.
Toll, Doll, Toll, Doll, etc.
[Exit Singing.
Gus. Iun. Was ever Man so wretched in a Parent, he that should teach me the
true Rules of Honor, and guide my youth in the strict Paths of Virtue holds to
my weak and unexperienced Eyes, the cursed mirror of destroying Vice. Ah! poor
Serena, Partner in Affliction, whose Father's sordidness affects thee more than
the Extravagance of mine does me.

Enter Hernando, Pedro and Artan Invisible. My dear Hernando, I Have been seeking
thee, they told me at thy Lodging thou were gone, with a resolve n^'er to
return to Venice.


Her. Why truly my Friend Gusman, I was so determined, but fortune has been
pleased to turn her Wheel once more to my Advantage, and tho I am returned to
Venice as poor as I went out, viz. without one Farthing in my Pocket, yet
before many hours are past, my Gusman, thou shall behold me in that prosperous
Station all Venice, shall admire and enjoy me.


Gus. Iun. You may assure your self I Am pleased to hear any thing that relates
to your good Fortune; I will not ask you how your Fortune's changed, but must
rejoice it is turned to your advantage.


Ped. Sir, Sir, stand upon your Guard, here is the Usurer with a whole tribe of
Rogues at his Heels; Mercy upon me, if the Devil should fail us, what an
excellent Physician will my Master make cooped up in the Beggars Hospital!


Enter Bond and Delay, with Officers. Bond. Gone from his Lodging, say you?


First Offic. Yes, Sir, this morning early, and they told me he took his leave
of them, with a design to return no more to Venice.


Bond. Bless me, what an unfortunate Man am I, I tell you what, Mr. Delay, I
lent 300 l. upon his bare Bond, besides what I had lent upon his Estate.


Delay, Well, Sir, but the Estate no doubt is sufficient to make it up, and
leave you a Considerable Gainer too.


Bond. Ay, that is right Mr. Delay, but if I had been so discreet as not to have
lent that 300l there still had been so much more in my Pocket, my Wise Lawyer.


Ped. Ah plague of your Conscience, you hear Master?


Her. What think you of this Fellow.


Gus. Iun. I should think him a Villain, were he not Serena's Father.


Her. Friend, let me beg you will leave me here a little, I know his meaning, but
have a way to frustrate all his Malice; prithee leave me.


Gus. Iun. You must excuse me, I Am too well acquainted, with his pernicious
Temper to Expose you to what his Avarice leads him, I will stay with you.


Her. Well, do what you think fit. Save you Mr. Bond.


Bond. Ha! Mr. Hernando, bless me what a lying Messenger is this report! why it
has been all the mornings talk on the Rialto, that you had left your native
Country, and wandered to seek your Fortune in foreign Parts.


Her. You have done your best endeavor, Sir, to force me: Thou slave to Muck,
thou sordid ^ump of Earth, thou Cannibal that swallow'st up Mankind, when will
the Widows Cries, and the Orphans Tears, the Mourning Heirs thy villainy has
stripped naked, find softness in thy barbarous Flinty Bosom.


Bond. Why how now, how now Mr. Hernando? in my opinion you give your Tongue a
greater privilege than your wants can bear, to justify it in: marry come up,
you have great cause to complain indeed, is this the thanks you render me for
my Civility, in being so long out of my Money to do you service?


Her. To do me Service, no thou Cormorant, it was to Glut thy own in Insatiate
Maw: Thou do a Service! Thou Relieve Mankind! yes thou will feed 'em as the
Indians do, to make 'em fatter for thy own devouring.


Gus. Iun. Be Calm Hernando.


Her. How, be Calm my Friend Gusman; no, while I have a Tongue, I will Employ
it, in Curses on this Mis^reant, this Catiff, Diseases gnaw thee to the very
Bones, Blindness and Lameness, with the want of Hearing, Gout, Stone and
Ptissick, all at once assault thee, and when thy hated Life must have an end;
the Gibbet and Hangman bring it to thee.


Ped. What a vain of Cursing my Master's got into, it is a sign he has sold his
Soul to the Devil.


Bond. Why really, Sir, your Tongue runs on at a wonderful rate, and I cannot
tell when that is weary, but your Hands and Feet may be in the same Humor,
therefore it behooves me in what in me lies to prevent it. Officers, do your
Duty.


First Offic. We Arrest you, Sir, at the Suit of Mr. Gabirel Bond.


Her. Why you eternal Bloodhound, will not my Estate make good all that I owe you?


Bond. Officers, you know your business, Bail, Jayle, or Money, that's all I Will
hear of at present.


Gus. Iun. Hold, Sir, I Will be his Surety.


Bond. With all my Heart, I desire no better, if he wants three Hundred Pound
more, upon your Bond, he shall Command it within this half hour; would I could
get him in my Clutches once, I Would hamper him so fast he should never have power
to Court my Daughter. Well, Sir, you will pass your word for his Appearance.


(Aside. Gus. Iun. I will, Sir.


Bond. Well then Officers, you are discharged.

(Exit Officers. Artan Striks him with his Wand. Bless me, what is that Mr.
Delay, did you see any one Strike me?


Dela. Not I upon my word, Sir.


Bond. Mercy on me, I felt something come as cold cross my Stomach, as if Death
had laid his Hand upon me.


Ped. So, so, they say the Devil's a Liar, but I find he keeps his word with my
Master.


Bond. O help me, help me, Mr. Delay, I faint, my breath's gone, I Am Dying,
that Rogues Curses I Am afraid has had power over me; Mr. Delay, Draw up a Bill
of Indictment against him, and if I do Die, see him hanged I beseech you.


Dela. Bless me! what a sudden alteration's here, how do you Mr. Bond? Alas
he is Speechless, pray Gentlemen come hither, sure he is Dying.


Her. Hold, let me look upon him, hold him up, and if it is possible to recover
him, spite of the Injur^es he has done me, I Will do tha^ (...) Office.


Del^. Now Blessing on you, (...).


Her. Let me see, oh, he is at the Head, all is safe, (Aside*) Open his mouth and
pour this Cordial down, now give him Air, see, he begins to stir.


Dela. How do you Mr. Bond?


Bond. Who Is there Mr. Delay? O Lord I have been a Dead Man, How in the name of
Goodness came I thus recovered, so well, so lusty.


Dela. Really, Sir, you are beholden to Mr. Hernando for it, you were stone
Dead till he with a Rich Cordial he drew out of his Pocket recovered you.


Bond. How, Mr. Hernando, forgive me that I should harbor so Inhumane a
thought of him as I did: Dear Seignior Hernando, forgive me I beseech you, and
Pray, Sir, accept of my thanks; you know Money's a scarce Commodity, and I have
had many losses of late, but upon my word I will withdraw my Action, and every
Tenant of mine that salls sick and does not Employ you, I Will seize upon his
Goods, and put you into Possession of 'em.


Ped. A very honest and charitable reward, I must needs say.


Her. Sir, I expect not a reward from you, take but this thought with you, and
I am satisfied, think but how poor a benefit is Wealth, a thing most vile and
useless without Health: and by your last misfortune you may find, you toil for
that which you must leave behind.

(Her. Ped. Gus. Exit.
Bond. T^at's right, but by his favor I shall make bold to reap the bene^it of
it while I do stay, and not like such young Prodigals as himself, live to see
other men's Sheep devour my Pasture.


Enter two Senators. First Senate. Seignior Gabriel, Save you.


Bond. Your Lordships humble Servant, I come this morning on the Rialto,
according as your Lordship ordered by your Messenger, but was not so happy as
to see your Lordship there to receive your Commands.


First Senate. Sir, I suppose you have heard the Duke's Decree, the Governor of
Dalmatia being Dead, you as the Worthiest for that great Employment, are by the
Senate and the Duke thought fit to take that Trouble upon you.


Bond. Trouble, Sir, I should be mighty willing to undertake the trouble, but
mercy on me, does his Grace consider the Charge 'twill put me to, 4000 pounds a
year expense at least; Bless me where does the Duke imagine I shall pick it up.


Second Senate. How Seignior can you call your self of Venice, and stop at any
thing to serve your Country? your great Abilities are too well known to be put
off with frivolous Excuses, here is your Commission, if you dare refuse it, you
forfeit your Estate, that is all the Penalty.

(Exit. Senate.
Bond. All in the Devil's name, harke'e Lawyer, is there no way to avoid
swallowing this damnable Choke Pear.


Dela. You know it is impossible, if the Duke and Senate think you sufficient to
bear the Charge of the Employment, you have no Remedy.


Bond. Prithee good Mr. Delay, go home, turn over your Law Books, find me out
any Cranny that can afford me room enough to Creep out of this damnable
business.


Dela. I will do all I can, Sir, but I Am afraid it is to bery little purpose.

(Exit Dela.
Bond. Why what an unlucky man am I, who the Devil would take pains to get
Money, that must be imployd for other peoples uses: but hold, let me Consider,
the Law, if I mistake not, says, the Government of Dalmatia, shall be conferred
on one that has Wealth and Health, but he that is Defective shall be incapable
of bearing that Office.

Defective, O that I had been born without a Leg or an Arm, what a deal of
Money might I have saved: But hold, I have it, I will be Blind, 4000l. a Year
is worth any Man's shutting his Eyes for.

But then, if I should chance to be discovered, my Estates forfeited, but who
the Devil shall discover it, unless I tell tales my self? no, I Will be hanged
first, tho I get by the Government, I Will take care the Government shall never
get by me.

Let others Sweat, and Fret, and take much pains
And Toil for Honor, while I reap the Gains.

The End of the Second ACT.
ACT III.
Scene the First.
Enter Hernando and Pedro, and Artan. WHY faith, new acquaintance, this
Employment was worth any ones taking notice of, I have cured more Patients
within this two days, than an English Quack Kills in a twelvemonth.


Ped. Faith, Sir, and that is no inconsiderable quantity, I have known, when I
was there, the Bell tol'd thirty times in three days, for only one man's
handiwork.


Her. But, Sir, what Rumour's this, of the Dukes illness?


Art. He Is Sick beyond the Po^^^ of Art to help him, you will be sent for to
the Court with Speed, and great Rewards will be offered you to save him, but
it is impossible, his time's expired, and at his Feet you will behold me
standing; you can do nothing but pronounce his Death.


Her. I know my Duty, and I shall observe it.


Ped. But, Sir, have you heard the News of Seignior Gabriel Bond?


Her. No Pedro, prithee what is it?


Ped. Sir, he has lost his Peepers.


Her. His Peepers, prithee what do thou mean?


Ped. Mean, Sir, why he is taken stone Blind.


Her. How, Blind!


Art. So he reports himself, but it is all false, the Government of Dalmatia
being offered him, he takes on that Defect to save his Money: But see here
comes the Messenger from Court.


Enter Alonza with others. Alon. Seignior Hernando, we have been seeking you,
the Duke and all the Court commend 'em to you. The Duke who stands in need of
your Assistance, hearing the wondrous Cures your skill Performs, does by the
advice of the drooping Senate, Implore your kind ass^stance.


Her. My good Lord, I should be happy if my little Art coa'd serve to help his
Grace; but this I will assure you, if his Distemper will admit of Cure, he
shall not want it long, but if the Fates have Decreed his Death, we must submit
with Patience.


Alon. We know we must submit to Destiny, but Art must be applied.


Her. I Will try my utmost.


(Exeunt Omnes. Enter Mrs. Lucy and Serena. Lucy. Come my Child, comfort thy
self, don't Weep for what cannot be avoided, it is a Great Misfortune it is true,
to lose that precious Jewel sight, but since Providence has left Life and
Health, time may wear off the other unhappiness: Here my dear Child go to the
Dukes Neice, deliver her this Commissi^n, and beg her to acquaint her Uncle and
Senate, with your Father's sudden misfortune.


S^ren. I will obey you, Madam.

(Exit Serena.
Lucy. Well, I am a very wicked Woman, for I cannot avoid rejoicing at this
accident, now shall I have the opportunity of entertaining my dear Monsieur,
without the fear of being seen by that Argus that was. Oh! here he comes, now
must I be teased with his nauseous Company day after day, for I am certain
he will never let me be from him, but it is no matter, since he cannot see what I
do, I Will take care his Sense of Learning shall go but a small way toward a
discovery of any of my Actions.


Enter Mr. Bond led by a Servant. Bond. Where is my Wife? pray lead me to my
Chicken, the only comfort left me is to hear her talk, I was once delighted to
look on her, but that Blessing's taken from me, where art thou Honey?


Lucy. Here my poor unfortunate Love.


Bond. Have you sent to the Dukes Neice, as I instructed you.


Lucy. Yes my Life, your Daughter's gone.


Bond. That Is well, reach some Chairs Peter, come sit down my dear. Peter.


Pet. Sir.


Bond. You may go Peter.
(Exit Peter. Oh my dear Child, this is a great misfortune, but we must bear
with patience, trouble and vexations must be expected while we live in this
transitory World.


Lucy. Indeed my dear, I cannot choose but rejoice to see you bear so great an
Affliction with so much Christian Patience: I have sent for a Famous Physician,
and Oculist, that has not been long from France, an Admirable Man, and if there
be any remedy I Am certain he will apply it to you.


Bond. Ah Lord Child, Doctors Art will signify Little to me, mine is a just
Judgment, for my wicked Extortions, and Cruelty to the Poor.


Lucy. But my Dear, we ought to use our utmost endeavor, and not rely all upon
Providence.


En^er Peter. Pet. Madam, there is a French Gentleman below enquires for you*


Lucy. Wait on him Peter, come my Dear, comfort your self, I can assure you,
he^^ a very able Man.


Bond. If he should discover my rognery, I were in a very sine condition: But
hanged, if I swear I cannot see, who the Devil can say any thing to the
contrary, let 'em guess and be Poxt, I Will be wicked before I Will part with my
Money.


Enter Monsieur and Peter. Lucy. Monsieur, you're welcome, Peter go down, and
shut the door after you, here is a cold wind comes in.

(Exit Peter. Come Monsieur, pray be pleased to sit, I writ you word this
morning of my Husband's misfortune, and hope you will use your utmost endeavor
to recover him.


(All this Speech after Peter's going off, the Monsieur is kissing her hand
very Eagerly. Mons. Madam, you sall command me, hold up your Head Monsieur,
Garzoon, he be very much Blind.


Bond. That Is a Lie, a Plague of your skill, I find my Wife has a greater need
of this Physician than I have.


Mons. Hark ye Madam, you must put him presently to Bed, and me vil clap
someting to his Head sall do him ver much good.


Bond. Yes, a plague on you, I do believe you will clap something to my Head
with a Vengeance to you, I shall be made a Cuckold before my Face.


Lucy. You hear Husband what this good man says.


Bond. Yes, yes, (and see what he does too, make me thankful, I don't much
care, with the Gentleman's Favor, to tamper much, but as Providence sent it
me; even let Providence take it from me, I Will make use of no other Physician I
assure you.


Lucy. Nay pray, my Lamb, be ruled by the Gentleman, indeed you must, if you
know the Affliction I suffer to see you thus, you would not be so obstinate.


(Cries. Bond. Ah this dissembling Limb of Lucifer, how concerned she is that I
will not like a good natured Husband, give her a private opportunity to make me a
Cuckold!


(Aside. Lucy. Will you go and lie down my Buddy.


Bond. If I do I suppose you will not be long after me Buddy.


(Aside. Lucy. What say thou my dear Heart?


Bond. Why, I do say I will have nothing to do with your Oculists and your
French Connundrums, I am very well satisfied, no Art can relieve me, and I will
not be at an unnecessary Charge: The Devil set his Foot between you, how the
Serpents twine about one another!


Mons. Garzoon vat do see Monsieur a moy, to believe me vil take a de muck de
money.


Bond. I see in you; what the devil can I see in you, that cannot see whether it
be day or no.


Lucy. You must excuse him, his affliction and pain together makes him talk
something extravagantly. Who Is within there, Peter?

Enter Peter. Bring in a Flask of white Florence, I must beg you to drink one
glass to my poor Husband's recovery before you go.


Exit Peter. Mons. Madam, vid all mine art, and but dat you are de very good
Lady, me would let him walk vid de Dog and de Bell all his Life time, but for
your sake, me vil take care to make him de Grand Cuckold be garr:


(Aside. Enter Peter with Wine. Lucy. Set it down Peter, will you drink a glass
my dear, it may perhaps cheer your Spirits?


(Exit Peter. Bond. Ay, ay, with all my heart, give it me Wife, give it me,
since I pay the Reckoning, it is but necessary I should drink in my turn.


(aside. Lucy. Come Monsieur, pray be pleased to pledge my Husband, it is right
O palatable.


(Puts a handful of Gold into the Glass. Bond. O Lord! O Lord! I shall run mad,
I shall forget my self, and discover my falacy, what an Extravagant Generous
Strumpet is this Buxom Wife of mine to her Stallion, a whole handful of Gold,
by the Curses of Matrimony.


(Aside Mons. Madam, Avousante Monsieur, to your good recovery.


Bond. Ah the Devil set his Foot after it, choke him, what a chargeable spic'd
Cup has he swallowed for a mornings Draught!


Lucy. Indeed Monsieur I Am infinitely obliged to you for this Care you take of
my Husband, pray see him often, and try what Art can do to help him.


(gives him a Gold Watch. Bond. Oh Death and Furies, I shall be ruined, why
this is a very hard case now, that I must be obliged to be Dumb as well as
Blind.

(Aside. Hark Wife, I think you may as well dispatch the Gentleman, that you
and I may have some discourse in private


Lucy. I will my dearest: Monsieur you see my Husband is uneasy under his
unhappiness, therefore for this time we'll take our leaves, but pray come and
see how he does in the Evening, I beseech you.


(Gives him a Diamond Ring. Bond. Hell and the Devil! I cannot bear it, why at
this rate she will give all I Am worth in a days time, I had better by half stood
Governor of Dalmatia, it would have cost me but sixty thousand Crowns, and I
could have cheated the poor of half the Money, like an unthinking Blockhead as
I was. O Blood and Fire! I cannot, will not bear it, come what will on it.


(They are kissing all this wh^^e, stamp^. Lucy. Bless me, what is the matter
Husband?


Bond. Oh Wife! I have such a miserable pain about my head, that I am not able
to bear it, lead me in, and lay me down, that I may have nothing to do but die,
and wish you at the Devil.


(Aside. Lucy. Well my Dear, I Will go with you; Mo^sieur, your Servant, you will be
sure to give us the happiness of your Company in the Evening.


Mons. Ouy Madam, me sall be sure to wait upon you.


Bond. Nay, prithee Wife come away, come away, for this pain is intolerable, I
cannot bear it.


(As he is going off, hitting his stick upon the Ground, he hits Monsieur over
the Head, who is making love in dumb show to Mrs. Bond, she squeaks. Lucy. Ah.


Mr. Bond. Hah! what is the matter Chickin, what do thou cry out for, has any
thing frighted my Buddy?


Lucy. O Lord Husband, you have almost knoc'd the poor Monsieur of the Head.


Bond. Marry Heaven forbid, oh dear, Sir, excuse me, my miserable pain made me
strike any where, but I hope you will not take any thing i^l of a poor old Man,
who has neither Sight nor ^ences.


Mons. But you have de very good feeling for all dat.


(...) Pray Monsieur excuse this misfortune, and be assured, nothing shall be
wanting on my side to make amends for this accident.


(Gives him another Purse. Bond. Oh the Devil! why I had better not break his
head, since I find I must pay so much for a Plaster.


Mons. Madam, me am your ver humble Servant, and me am satisfied.


Bond. A plague confound you, well you may, since you have had such a plentiful
parcel of s^^art-money.

( Exit Bond and Lucy.
Mons. So, begar dis be de ver good salve for mine broken Pate, but garzoon's
me must make o my market quick for fear she shange her inclination, derefore if
me can persuade her to Rob her Husband, and entrust me vid de money, Jerny me
vil ver fairly make a Journey to France, and leave her and her Cuckold to starve
togedar.

(Exit.
Scene Changes to the Dukes Bedchamber, the Duke lying a Bed with several
Nobles by him. First Nob* How fairs your Grace?


Duke. Near to my Journeys end. Say, is that man of skill yet come to Court.


First Nob. Not yet my Liege, but we expect him hourly.


Duke. It matters not, for Art will prove but in vain, no bars can stop where
Death resolves to enter; I feel him like an honest just Physician, who when he
finds all remedies are useless, he shakes his head over the lingering Patient,
advising him to mind his better part.


Enter Mercella. First Nob. See, Sir, your Neice.


Duke. Come hither my Marcella, nay, prithee do not weep my deaest Child, death
cannot say he makes a Conquest over me, for he has seized on (...) ^atter'd
Fort, that was at first designed to be his own.


Marc. O! can I think what I must lose and live, the careful Guardian of my
tender years, whose Pious Counsels and Indulgent Care instructed me in all the
Rules of Virtue.


Duke. Thou need'st no guide, thou art thy self a Pilot able to steer all our
Venetian Dames through every Coast of Honor.


First Nob. Look up my Lord, the man of Art is come.


Enter Hernando, Pedro and Alonza, Artan unsec^. Mar. He is most welcome. O,
Sir, if your Art can reach so far to this Noble Life, all Honors that
Ambitious minds can covet, and Wealth as much as Greedy Minds can covet, shall
all be yours, with thousand, thousand Prayers for your desired Success.


Ped. Prayers! Oo'ns what a F^e has she found out for a Physician.


Duke. Come hither, Sir, I will add one reward, but I unst first ask your
Consent Marcella; say, will you give it?


Marc. Tho it were to Die, this moment to Expire before your fee^, I Would fall
most willingly.


Duke. My Child, I thank thee, not that I ^ear dying, but for my Countries fake
I fain would live, therefore restore me once more to my Health; and beside all
that Wealth and Honor promised, I give this Jewel to you.


Her. What said he? ay, there is a reward indeed, what Wealth what Honor can he
equal to it? his Dukedom, were the Universe in Balance? By Heaven, Swear her
Beauty would outweigh it.


Marc. Good, Sir, speak Comfort to us.


Her. O my Fortune, why is this wondrous blessing offered me, or why have I not
power to make it mine! it is impossible, he is rooted there; Ha! I have found
the means, by Heaven I Will dot: Now Madam, you shall see a poor man's Art, save
the Dukes Life in spite of Destiny.


Marc. O happy sound.


Her. Stand all clear from the Bed: no, I am going to pronounce his death, (to
Ped. aside) but if you should not keep your stand I am ruined.


Art. I swear by -- and all the Destinys, by Earth, by Air, by Water and by
Fire, I will not stir, go boldly speak his doom.


Her. Come hither Pedro.


Ped. Ay, Sir.


Her. Take hold here, and when I stamp turn round as quick as thought:


Ped. What the Bed, Sir.


Her. Ay, the Bed, Sir.


Ped. What the Devil does my Master mean?


Her. Now Pedro.


(They turn the Bed. Art. Night, Earth and Hell, what has the Villain done?


Her. Nay, nay, keep your place friend of mine, you are sworn to it.


Art. By Hell, and all the Fates the Slave has fooled me, and fixed me by an
Oath against my self, to cross the Destinies, and save the Duke: Go doting
fool, thou sha'^ a while keep Life, to end thy aged days in Blood and Sorrow:
And wise Physician look you are Guarded well,

For by Death's sl^shy Scull, and Sable Dert,
When ^e meet next, we never more will part.

(Sinks. Ped. So, so, I ^ind my Master's a piece of a Lawyer as well as a
Physician, for he has tricks enough to cheat the Devil.


Her. Fill me a Glass of Wine, here my Liege, take, this drink it off. How
fayres your Grace?


Duke. Like one waked from a Trance, I cannot think I Am perfectly a^ake,
methinks I feel new Heal^h and vigorous Strength, my Pulse beats strong, and
with a lively motion; sure I could walk, pray raise me from my Bed: O my
Marcella, what a Change is this, snatched from the Grave to Life and perfect
Health.


Marc. O! it is a happy Change indeed, happy for Venice, but for me, most happy
I Am doubly Blessed, my Souls brim-ful of Joy; O! let this day forever be
remembered, nothing but mirth be seen through all the Court: Rejoice you
Senators, your Duke's restored, the Father of his Country Lives again.


Duke. Hold my dear Child, we first must pay our thanks, to this Great Builder,
who repaired the ruins: Here, Sir, receive the Great reward we promised, and
with her all the Wealth you can desire, and all the Honors that the State can
give.


Her. O! don't talk of Wealth or Honor, Sir, you have given me all the Riches
I could with for.


Duke. To morrow then the Priest shall join your Hands, and Heaven send showers
of Blessings on your Heads, this night shall be devoted all to Mirth, for
Sorrow has too long poss^ss'd the Co^^t.

Come my dear Neph^w, none will sure repine
At your Content, since you were cause of mine.

(Exeunt omnes. SCENE a TOWN. Enter Gus. Iun. and Serena. Gus. Iun. You tell me
Wonders, that so suddenly such an affliction should befall your Father: I have
delivered the Commission safe into the Senate, and it is b^stow'd on Old
Corvina, the Rich Florentine.


Ser. I thank you, but I have yet another grief, which I must tell you, for
alas my Love, I have no Friend but you I can complain to.


Gus. Iun. If thou have anything that troubles thee, it were unkind not to make
me thy Partner: what is it that disturbs my dear Serena?


Seren. My Mother!


Gus. Iun. What of her.


Seren I blush to name her: Takes this advantage of my Father's Blindness, to
entertain a Gaudy Fluttering Frenchman. I formerly knew they had private
meetings, but now she brings him home to her own House; I stood co^ceal'd,
after she had sent me forth, and saw her give before my Father's face so many
kisses, and such Sums of Gold; I thought him happy that he wanted sight, for
had he seen, 'twou'd have distracted him.


Gus. Iun. I knew the Slave in France, he was a Lacky, and forced to fly for
robbing his Master: We must be careful, since this Stepmother can entertain a
wretch so vile and sordid. I know, my dear, thy Father seeks my Ruin, yet
(since 'twas he gave Life to my Serena) I will not rest till I have preve^^ed
this.

Enter Pedro. How now Pedro, where is my Friend thy Master?


Ped. My high and Mighty Master is with the High and Mighty Duke, where he is
high and mightily entertained, and I am sent in mighty have, to desire you to
come to him, for he longs mightily to see you.


Gus. Iun. Do you know the business Pedro?


Ped. Mighty well, it is known to most men, that about some three hours since,
the Duke was in a fair way to be made Worm's meat of, But my Master being a
good Cook, as well as a Phisician, has now dressed him up, and made him sit to
appear again at a Court Table.


Gus. Iun. Is then the Duke recovered, and my Friend the happy man, that
wrought the wondrous Cure?


Ped. Look ye, Sir, your Friend with some of my help, has set the Duke upon his
Legs again, let that satisfy you, my Master for his reward, is to Marry the
Dukes Neice, and I have petitioned my gratification may be, to be overseer of
the Kitchen, during the Wedding Festivals.


Gus. Iun. A very reasonable request I must needs say P^dro.


Ped. Truly, Sir, I love to bear a Conscience in all things, but, Sir, my
Master desires you forthwith to come with me to Court, where there is to be
such Singing, Dancing, and then he has such things to say to you, that mercy on
me, if you don't make haste you will not have time to hear the tenth part of 'em.


Gus. Iun. Well, I Will but wait upon this Lady home, and then go with you (...):
Come my Love, early ^'th' morning I will visit thee, mean time my busy
thoughts shall be employed on methods to prevent thy Father's ruin.

And for reward, from all his mighty store,
Let him but grant me thee, I Will ask no more.

(Exeunt. Scene Changes to a Magnificent Palace, where is discovered the Duke
Sitting in State, on his Right hand Marcella, on his Left Hernando, Several
Lords and Ladies on each side, while a Simphony of Trumpets, etc. is Playing.
Gus. Junior, Enters: Hernando rises, and after a Complement, Seats him by him.
After the Simphony, Fame ^omes Down from the top of the Stage to the front and
Sings. Eame. HAVE Quickly, take the Wings of Fame,
Through all the Universe Proclaim,
This Happy, happy day,
Which has Restored,
Your drooping Lord,
And filled your hearts with Joy.
Come, Come you Nimphs, come all you Swains,
Leave, leave your Solitary Plains,
Come Damon and Phillis
With Coy Amarellis,
Come Corydon, with thy Brown Dame,
Come Bacchus resort
To this Happy, happy Court
And bring here thy jolly, jolly Train.

Enter on one side Corydon, with Country Men and Maids, on the other several
Nymphs and Shepherds, and in the middle Bacchus with his Train. Bac. WE come
old Fame, what news have thou to tell us,
I Am here with all my Jolly, Jolly Fellows,
Who rise with the Sun, and Ransack the Vine,
And when we no longer can stand Sir,
For fear we profanely should leave any Wine,
We agree to take Six in a hand Sir.

Cor. And here is poor Corydon, with Margery and Jone Sir,
With Hobbee Bristleface, to know what you would have done Sir,
We cannot boast of tippling off good Wine Sir,
Because you know there is but little Coin Sir,
But if this Drunken God will please to pay the Shot Sir,
Here Is Hob and Little Corydon, will make him a mere Sot Sir,
And when old Tunbelly lies Snoring in his Bed Sir,
We'll sober be Enough to get a Maidenhead Sir,
Chorus of Clowns. And when old Tunbelly, etc.

A Dance of Clowns and Country Maids. A Dialogue between Phillis and Amarelli^
Phill. PRithee tell me Amarellis,
Why each night you Sigh and Groan.

Ama. If you would know the Truth my Phillis,
It Is because I Lie alone:
Damon he falls off from Wooing,
And I Am very much afraid
Spite of all we have been doing,
I shall Live and Die a Maid.

Phill. My Alexis too grows Cold,
That was once so full of Fire,

Ama. Surely Phillis we grow Old
Or they Longer would Admire.

Phil. Old Amarellis, pray what do you mean,
You know your own self, I am not Thirteen:
If he looks for a younger Wife, even let him find one,
And if he proves surly, I Will seek out a kind one:
I Will not sigh for Men in a place where there is Plenty,
'Twill be hard if I find not One Lover in Twenty.

Am. It Is bravely resolved, I Will follow that Rule.
And let silly Damon alone,

Phil. Nor shall Coy Alexis find me such a Fool,
To Love when I find he has done,

Am. Therefore we'll Resolve no longer to Pine,

Phil. Not I by my troth Amarellis;

Am: If Strephon Loves better then Damon, he is mine;


Phil. And he that Loves me shall have Phillis.


A Simphony of Flutes.
A Shepherdess comes forward and Sings. Sheph. HAppy we who Free from Love,
Have no cares to break our Sleep,
Who these Pleasant Medows rove
Watching our harmless Sheep;
When we feel the Evenings Air,
And the Night invites us home:
To our Cottage we repair,
Where Content delights to come,

Here follows a Dance of Shepherds and Shepherdesses. Fame. HAppy Days,
Pleasant Nights,
Wait upon this Royal Train
Endless Ioys, and Sweet Delights,
May that Lovely Pair obtain:
Jealousy be far Removed,
Sweet Content rest over there,
May they Love and be Beloved,
And be Happy as they are Fair.

Cho. Happy Days, etc.

Duke. It Is well performed, now let us to the Banquet, then every one prepare
to think of rest, only the Lovers, Joy will keep them waking, and expectation
of a future Bliss will shut out sleep to night.


Her. My Liege, I beg your Favor, to this Gentleman my Friend.


Duke. A Friend of yours need never doubt my Favor:
He that has given me Life must sure receive
All Favor he can ask or I can give.

(Exeunt omnes. The End of the Third ACT.
ACT IV. SCENE I.
Enter Hernando, Gusman Junior and Pedro. Her. I Tell you naught but Truth,
upon my Honor he is no more Blind than thee or I, 'twas policy to save his
money made him turn Imposture.


Gus. Iun. I Am glad to hear it, and with your assistance I Will make his folly
turn to my advantage, you know the Story of his Amorous Wife; I must prevent
the mischiefs threaten there too; But you must lend me Pedro, he will be useful.


Her. With all my heart, but you will excuse me Gusman, I stay too long from my
approaching Bliss: Lovers you know are restless, froward Creatures, when
expectation burns 'em; O! the transports this happy night will yield me! ha,
what is this, a sudden damp struck cold upon my heart: What need I fear, the
Demon has no power over me yet, my time's not yet expired, or if it were,
Repentance may prolong it.

That Sovereign Clam will heal the greatest Sore.
And Cure the Wounds my Crimes had made before.
Exit Her.
Gus. Iun. Well Pedro, as thou have been an honest and just Servant to thy
Master, so I hope thou wilt prove a trusty Friend to me, and be assured your
Service shall not go unrewarded.


Ped. I Will warrant you, Sir, if there be any Pimping in the Case, let me alone,
I had once an excellent hand at it, my Master knows it, but since he turned
Physician, he has been so taken up with Practice another way, that I have
almost lost my abilities, in that honorable, genteel Courtlike Science.


Gus. Iun. Well Pedro, I shall have no occasion to employ your Talent that way
at present; the occupation you must undertake to serve me, must be that of a
Physician.


Ped. A Physician! there you hit me to a Hair, for a neat turn of a Bed let me
alone.


Gus. Iun. Turn of Bed, what do mean Pedro?


^^^d. A Term of Art my Master and I use, when we have a mind to set ^ck people
upon their Legs; the Duke has found the benefit of it.


Gus. Iun. Well, Sir, I Will not dispute your Terms of Art, only giv you some few
directions, and leave the rest to your own management.


Ped. Well, Sir, what you think fit.


Gus. Iun. I need not tell you, that old Bond only Counterfeits Blindness, for
that you knew before me; but I would have you take on the Grave habit of a
Doctor, I have it already prepared for you, by that means to make him confess
himself really an Imposture.


Ped. Let me alone, Sir, I Will make him Confess he can see, or I Will make him
Blind in Earnest.


Gus. Iun. But hark'e Pedro, it is ten to one but you find a French fellow
there, that pretends to be an Oculist, but is indeed a Scoundrel, prithee take
care to keep him in discourse till I come, for I Will be there within less than
an hour; and let it be your care to deliver this Letter to the Daughter.


Ped. Why look you now, did not I tell you there would be something of Pimping
in the End of this business: Well, Sir, let me alone for the performance of all.


Gus. Iun. Go make haste about it then; you will find your Equipage at my Lodging.


Ped. I go, Sir, your humble Servant Pimp and Physician.

(Exit Ped.
Gus. Iun. Now Fortune, if thou would befriend a Lover, smile on this just
design, to make me happy: Ha! who comes here? by Heaven my Father, there is no
avoiding him, bless me how he reels!


Enter Gus. Sen. Drunk. Gus. Sen. And he, he that is given to dote
On Woman's inconstancy,
I would not be in his Coat
For a great deal of ready Money.
Well said, old Iemmy, merry be thy Heart old Boy, who the Devil can pretend to
be happier than thou art? Now have I a Head as full as any Plotter's and a
Pocket as Empty.


Gus. Iun. So, so, I Am like to have a very fine time on it, s'life, I must find
some way to get from him, I shall ruin my whole design else.


Gus. Sen. Who comes there, what are you a Turk or a Christian? are you for
Bacchus or Mahomet, ye Dog you?


Gus. Iun. I am for any thing that you are for, Sir.


Gus. Sen. Who Is there Iemmy, my nown Boy Iemmy, come hither sirrah.


Gus. Iun. Yes, Sir.


Gus. Sen. Look'e, I am your Father, sirrah, and you my Son, sirrah, and when
you are married to old Bond's Daughter, I shall have 300 l. a Year, and you
never a Groat, sirrah.


Gus. Iun. No faith, nor you neither in half a Year's time, at this rate -- How
the Devil shall I get him home?


(Aside. Gus. Sen. O Iemmy, I have been very unfortunate to day, I picked up a
couple of Grave F^iars, thinking to have spent the day so sober, and as Gad
shall save me, one borrowed my Money, and the other left me in pawn for the
Reckoning.


Gus. Iun. Really Sir, I am very sorry for your misfortune, and wish I could
persuade you to go home and sleep.


Gus. Sen. Sleep! why you Whelp and Bacon, do you take your Father for a Sot,
Sirrah? I Would have you to know Rogue, I understand better things than to go to
Bed before the taste of my Wine be out of my mouth: Besides, who gave you
Authority to give me Rules to walk by, i^ you go to that, Hangdog.


Gus. Ius. I hope you are not angry, Sir.


Gus. Sen. You Malapert Rascal, how dare you take the Privilege of hoping any
thing: I say, I am angry, damnable angry, and he that dare say to the contrary,
is a Son of a Whore, though born of my own Mother.


Gus. Iun. I am very sorry for it, Sir, if you are Angry.


Gus. Sen. That Is as I shall think fit too, Sir, for I will have none sorry
when I am glad, nor no Man glad when, I am Joyful.


Gus. Sen. Good Sir, go home.


Gus. Sen. Ay, into your Guts if you pretend to give me Council any longer,
Sirrah: Get you gone out of my sight, you young Phlegmatic ^uppy, get you gone.


Gus. Iun. I should be loath to disobey you, Sir.


(Offers to go. Gus. Sen. Hold, Jackanapes, come back again, did not I tell you
Jackadandy, that I was left in Pawn at the Tavern, and did not I give you to
understand, that I had not one souse in my Pocket? there is five Crowns to pay,
Sirrah, how the Devil do you think I shall be able to pay it?


Gus. Iun. How would you have done, Sir, if you had not lit of me?


Gus. Sen. Why Sirrah, I would have gone back again and drank 'till some
Soldier under Bacchus Banner had come to my relief, you Scoundrel.


Gus. Iun. Well, Sir, there is ten Crowns, and I hope you will be so Careful of
your Reputation, as to go back immediately and pay it. I have a little earnest
business, or I would wait upon you thither.


Gus. Sen. No, no, it is no great matter Iemmy, I can go very well my self:
Well, I swear Iemmy, thou win'st my heart more and more every hour: Bu'y Iemmy,
go about thy business Child, be sure don't stay out late, and pray my Child
come home sober, for there is nothing recommends a Man more than a good
Reputation among. his Neighbors.


Gus. Iun. I shall take care to follow your instructions in that point, I
assure you, Sir.

( Exit Gus. Iun.
Gus. Sen. So, now am I pretty well stocked for to morrow, but how the Devil
shall I dispose of my self, it is too soon to go home, and besides, I shall
never Sleep well, if I go to Bed sober: Let me see, I have not done a Pious
Charitable act this great while, I will begin just now, and go visit this blind
Puppy that has lapt up my Estate, if I should chance to find him making his
Will, who knows but -- Lamentable Condition, it may pierce like a Spear through
the tough hide of his Conscience, and make him leave me something to drink to
his good Passage: But for fear the dismal Object should make me Melancholy, I
will Sing all the way, to keep my self in good Humor.

(Sings.) There was two Cats sat on a Well,
The one Cat she fell in,
But the Cat that sat by,
Wept bitterly
Because that Cat was the the other Cats Cousin Germin.
(Exit.
SCENE a Chamber, Chairs and a Table. Enter Bond and Peter. Bond. So Peter, set
me down, give me the Keys, you are sure all the Chambers are locked up.


Pet. Yes, Sir, and there are all the Keys except my young Mistresses.


Bond. Where is she?


Pet. In her Chamber, Sir.


Bond. Bid her come down to me.


Pet. She cannot go out, Sir.


Bond. Not out, Sir, why so, Sir?


Pet. I cannot tell the reason, Sir, but my Lady locked her in, and took the Key
with her while you were asleep, and went out to fetch the French Doctor to you.


Bond. What the Devil, have not I Servants enough in the House, but she must
needs go her self?


Pet. Sir, she had sent them out of several Errants before, there is none left
in the House but me.


Bond. O Lord, O Lord, here is some damned design or other hatching, I shall be
robbed: Peter, take this Key, and bring that Cabinet in that stands in the next
Chamber.


Pet. Yes, Sir,

( Exit. Peter.
Bond. I Will take care to prevent her making you any more Presents, I have sent
my Gold to the Bankers, that is safe enough I Will warrant her; why what a
miserable Condition have I brought my self too, I dare not pretend to see them,
for if I do, they will discover me to the Duke, and then all I have is forfeited,
besides five Years Imprisonment, and the cunning Devils are so subtle in their
Discourse, that there is nothing to be gathered from that: If it were possible I
could but any ways make an Interest now with Seignior Hernando, my business
were done, but that can never be, for a Pox on him he is my sworn Enemy -- and
then too, he will expect his own Mortgage back again, which is almost as bad as
t'other^

Enter Peter with a Cabinet. Who Is there, Peter?

Pet. Yes, Sir, it is I.

Bo^d. Have thou brought the Casket, Peter?


Pet. Yes.


Bond. Set it down there then: Well I Am resolved here will I sleep, will I can
find some way or other to secure my self. (Knocks at the door. Peter, Peter, go
see who knocks.


Pet. It Is my Lady I suppose, Sir.


Bond. Pray go let her Ladyship in then.


( Exit Peter. Re-enter with Ped. Pet. Sir, here is one come from the Duke to
speak with you.


Bond. How, from the Duke, bless me, what can his Message mean.


Ped. Save you, Sir.


Bond. And you, Sir.


Ped. I have something to say to you in private, Sir.


Bond. Peter, go down and look after the door.
(P. Exit. Now, Sir, your business.

Ped. Do you know me, Sir.


Bond. Not by your voice, Sir.


Ped. Do you know me by sight, Sir.


Bond. I Don't know what I might do if I could see, Sir.


Ped. See me, Sir, why, what the Devil are you blind?


Bond. Blind! why, Sir, are you come of a Message from the Duke, and yet ask
that Question.


Ped. Look ye Seignior, I am very well satisfied, that his Grace does believe
you cannot see, but then again he has nothing but your bare word for it: I that
have made the business of the Eyes my study, have obtained a Commission from
the Duke, to make an Experiment upon you, and by that means satisfy him
whether you can see or no.


Bond. See or no, why, does his Grace imagine I take a Pleasure in walking in
the Dark, when I have had the Blessing of light so many Years?


Ped. That you best know, but in the mean time I must follow my Commission.


Bond. Why what do you intend to do with me?


Ped. I am ordered to take out both Eyes, and dessect'em, if you cannot see
they will be no loss to you, if you can, you deserve to be so served for offering
to trick the Duke and State.


Bond. Bless me, Sir, both my Eyes?


Ped. So my Commission runs, but because I Will save you a great deal of pain,
and my self a great deal of trouble, I Will be contented at present with one,
only for an Experiment.


Bond. Mercy on me, an Eye.


Ped. An Eye, ay, a Nose, if I thought there was any defect in it* Come, Sir,
are you ready?


Bond. Ready, Sir, I Will not part with my Eyes as bad as they are, I cannot find
by what Law the Duke can send for my Eyes out of my head.


Ped. What, Sir, will you dispute the Duke's Commands?


Bond. Ay marry will I, in this case, Sir; What a pox, at this rate I shall
have the Duke send for my Teeth out of my Head, and so starve me. (Knocks at
the door) Ha, Heaven be praised, some body's come to my relief, I hope: S'heart
the French Doctor's an Angel to this Fellow.


Enter Lucy, Mounsieur, and Peter. Lucy. Bless me, Mouns. what shall we do,
this Fellow will certainly spoil our design.


Mons. Me vil cut his Trote first.


Lucy. Who have you got with you there Husband?


Bond. The Devil I believe, my dear, prithee look if he has not got Cloven Feet
and Sawcer Eyes.


Mons. The Diable! Hark ye Monsieur, vat are you?


Ped. A Physician.


Mons. And dat be next kin to de Diable; but come, vat is your businss here vid
mine Patient, Monsieur Diable Physician?


Pedro. Sir, I am sent from the Duke.


Bond. He lies, he lies, don't mind one word he says, he would have cut my
Throat and Robbed me.


Lucy. O wicked Villain, lay hands on him, Peter.


Ped. Lay hands of me, you Scoundrels, (Peter and Mouns. seize Pedro) What
seize the Duke's Physician? Harkye Rogue's, you will all be hanged, that is
certain.


Mons. Come, come, bind him fast.


Ped. Help, help, murder, murder.


Mons. O by gar me vil stop your dam bawling presant: Here put dis into his
Mout.


(They gag him. Ped. Aw, aw, aw.


Bond. Aw, aw: The Devil aw you, he is put me into such a trembling, I shall not
recover it this Twelvemonth.


Lucy. Come, my dear, will you lie down upon the Couch, the Mouns. is come to
apply something to your Eyes?


Bond. Prithee my dear, don't talk on it, I have been frighted so terribly with
that damnable Fellow there, that the very naming of Eyes, goes to the Heart of
me.


Lucy. Indeed my dear, it must be done. Peter, go you to the Rialto, tell the
Senator Mountano, I Will wait upon him immediately, and do you here, stay with him
till I come.


Pet. I will, Madam.

(Exit.
Bond. What the Devil is my Wife's damnable design in clearing the House at
this rate.


Lucy. That Is the Casket where his Jewels are, there is to the value of 60000
Crowns, his Gold is all in his Bankers hands, but there is enough to do our
business, while I hold him in discourse, do you slip away with that, I Will meet
you in less than an hour at the Ship, and then hoist Sails to a new Plantation.


Mons. Let a me alone, and by gar when we have got from your sight, de gran
Daible take me ven you see me next.


(Aside. Lucy. Well, my Chicken, I have persuaded the Mouns. to forbear you
till to morrow, seeing you are not in a Condition to have any thing done to you
to day, he is gone away, but very sullen to see his Art so neglected.


(While this is speaking Mouns. gets the Cabinet and is going off. Bond. O
bless me, deliver me, I can hold no longer, Help, Murder, Murder.


As the Mouns, is just at the door, Peter rushes in and throws him down, being
followed by Gus. Sen. with his Sword. Lucy. Mercy on me, what is the matter?


Pet. Why, Madam, just as I opened the door to go to the Rialto as you had
ordered me, that Drunken Russian rush'd-in, and if I had not been nimbler than
he, I believe he would have stuck me.


Lucy. But what made you cry out so Husband?


Bond. O my dear, I had something of a sudden so offensive to my Eyes, that I
was not able to bear it. Heaven be praised Providence is of my side, and has
sent fresh succor to my relief.


Lucy. Well, Mr. Royster, what is your business here?


Gus. Sings. I have a Mistress that is Fair
And as sweet as Sugarcandy,
Had I ten thousand pounds a Year,
I Would give her half a Pint of Brandy.

Gus. Sen. And let me tell you, Madam, King David could not have made a better
Present to the Queen of Barsheba.


Lucy. 'S life, Monsiuer, we must serve him as we have done the the other, or we
shall never accomplish our designs.


Mons. Let me alone, Monsieur pray put up your Sword, be gar it be noa like the
Cavalier to fright de fair Lady.


Gus. Sen. Put up my Sword, well, Sir, so I will, what a Pox I hope I
understand when to sheath my Weapon as well as another man, as old as I am. But
where is old Cupid, where is that little notable blind Archer?

Sings. Little Boy, Pretty Boy, what is thy name termed,
That thou do wear a Bow and go so Armed?

Mons. Monsieur, me must beg your Pardon, me must entreat your absence for some
time.


Gus. Sen. You entreat my absence, what are you, you French Puppy you? Sirrah,
you are one of those bloody-minded Rogues, that murder poor Protestants, and
put'em into Powdering tubbs, you Bitch you. But hark'e old Sophister, how the
Devil came you in this pickle, like the Picture of Hom^r.


Bond. Ah Seignior, this is barbarous to triumph over my misfortunes.


Gus. Sen. Why this is all along of your Roguery, if you had not given your
mind to cheating such honest fellows as my self, you might have had the
pleasure of seeing your Money still, for that is all the use you made of it,


Bond. Ah, Seignior, I know, I have been to blame, but for pitties sake, let me
hear no more of it.


Lucy. Peter, you may go where I ordered you, I find this old Fellow has more
Drink than Harm in him.


(Exit Pet. Gus. Sen. Well old Beetle, I will spare thee, and to show thee that
I have a heart full of Compassion, since thou have neither Eyes nor Moisture, I
will Mourn and Weep for thee.


(Mourns. Lucy. Now Monsieur.


(Monsieur trips him up, and binds his hands behind him. Gus. Sen. Hey day,
what is the matter? What the Devil am I enchanted, I came in with two hands I Am
sure, what ever is become of 'em? Well, it is no great matter, I Will even go to
sleep, that I main't think of my loss.


(lies down. Mons. Garzoon, now be my very good time.


Bond. O Lord, he is going, he is going, I Will hang rather than lose a 100000
Crowns: Stay thou Villain, thou Miscreant, thou common Highway-robber.


(Stops him. Lucy. What I find you can see then Husband?


Bond. Yes, thou eternal she Devil, I can see, as you shall find to your sorrow.


Lucy. Alas, I knew it, and made use of this way on purpose to try your
Patience.


Bond. No, no, thou entire piece of Whores-flesh, that shall not serve your turn;
the Law makes it Death for an intention to Steal, and I Will take care to hang
you, whatever becomes of me.


Mons. Nay begar, if you proclaim open War, have at you, garzoon.


(Throws him down. Bond. O help, help.


Lucy. Stop his mouth, stop his mouth, Mons.


Bond. O dear Wife, save my Life, and take all I have.


Lucy. Bind him fast Monsieur, bind him fast.


Mons. Ah, Jerny, let me alone.


Enter Peter hastily. Pet. O Madam, undone, undone.


Lucy. What Is the matter?


Pet. I had no sooner opened the Door, but there rushed in a Gentleman, with a
whole train of the Dukes Officers, and are just coming up Stairs: See they are
here already.


Enter Guz. Iun. with Officers. Gus. Iun. Seize on 'em Officers.


Lucy. Oh Monsieur, we are undone.


Mons. By gar me have de Halter about my Neck, O Morblew, vat a sad spectacle
sal I make.


Ped. Aw, aw, aw.


Gus. Iun. Bless me, what is here to do, unbind 'em quickly; who is this that
sleeps so sound, by all that is good, my Father, how in the name of Goodness
came he here?


Ped. Ah you French Dog, let me come at him, let me come at him.


Gun. Iun. Hold, hold a little Pedro*


Ped. A rogue, I Will talk with you presently Sirrah, and here is another old
Rascal too, that pretended himself blind, and can see as well as I can.


Gus. Iun. How! can you see, Sir?


Lucy. Yes, that he can, he owned it to us ^ll just now, I Am resolved I will
have some revenge however.


Bond. Indeed, Sir, I cannot deny but I lost my Eyes to save some Money, and if
I had not found 'em again, I had lost all.


Gus. Iun. Nay, that you will however, you are not ignorant what punishment the
State has provided for Impostures.


Bond. Ay, Sir, I am too sensible of it, but, Sir, pray one word in Private,
you have often pretended Love to my Daughter, and I have as often rejected it;
I know you have an Interest in Seignior Hernando, and he can do what he pleases
with the Duke, do but contrive that I may obtain Pardon for this offense, and I
will not only give you my Daughter, with the Portion her Grandfather left her,
but I will freely surrender back to your Father the Mortgage of his Estate.


Gus. Iun. I must confess you have touched me now indeed, where is your Daughter.


Bond. Peter, run, break open my Daughters Chamber door, bid her come hither
presently. (Exit Peter.) That admirable Mother-in-Law locked her up, I suppose
with a design to rob me, murder her, and so march off with her charming
Monsieur there.


Enter Serena. Ser. O my dear Gusman!


Gus. Iun. My beloved Serena: now, Sir, your promise; give this Jewel to me,
and I Will engage your Pardon from the Duke.


Bond. I do it with more pleasure than I shall take to see those two I^satiate
Devils walk to the Gallows together.


Seren. My Dear, let me entreat my Mother's Pardon, tho she be ill, she is kin
to me.


Gu^. Iun. Can thou ask any thing, and be deny'd^ she shall not suffer, but
must be contented, to end her days in some Religious House.


Lucy. Where I will spend my time in Cursing you.


Gus. Iun. But for this fellow, he shall have pleasure, to tug an Oar, the
Galleys want such Vermin, look to him Officers.

(Exit led off.
Ped. Pray, Sir, let me have the Charge of him, I Will hang for him if he escapes
me.


Gus. Iun. Sir, Sir, how can you sleep midst so much Joy, Sir, Sir.


Gus. Se^. Let me alone, I am resolved never to wake till you give me my Lands
again.


Gus. Iun. You have 'em, Sir, pray wake.


G^s. Sen. Cud's me, and so I have, who is there Iemmy, prithee how came thou
here, and such a Crow'd about thee? Heyday, with thy Mi^^ress too, what art
thou Married Iemmy?


Gus. Iun. We are joined by Heaven, and by her Father, Sir, and now desire your
Blessing.


Gus. Sen. Heaven bless thee: But don't forget the 200 l. a year Iemmy?


Gus. Iun. You will have no occasion for it, Sir, your own Estate will be
surrendered you.


Gus. Sen. How! my own Estate, what my 1500 a year?


Bond. Ay marry shall it, Sir, here is my hand for it.


Gus. Sen. Why then Heaven send thee thy Eyes again.


Bond. I never was without 'em make me thankful.


Gus. Sen. Nay, nay, thou were always a cheating Rogue, that I must needs say
for thee.


Gus. Iun. Come my Serena, now I Am truly Blessed, let us to the Priest, and when
our hands are joined, I Will to my Friend, and get thy Father's Pardon. This is
the happiest day of all my Life.


Bond. And mine thank Heaven, for I have lost my Wife.


(Ex. omnes. The End of the Fourth ACT.
ACT V. SCENE I.
SCENE, a Garden: Enter Hernando. Her. THe Court is full of Joy, Mirth flows
about, Masks are prepared, and every one seems Happy, but I who ought to have
the largest share, sit like a sullen Fiend amongst Choirs of Angels, as if I
envied 'em their vast delight, what can this mean, my Soul is on the Rack, and
yet I cannot give a reason for it. Where are those mighty pleasures I proposed
in the Embraces of the Charming Bride? they are vanished, I have lost the
glittering dream, and walk to Horror and Eternal Darkness.

Lightning from under the Stage, and a Fiery Figure ^lies up. Ha! what was
that, something went glazing by me, it had the Form of Artan wrapped in Fire?
Oh, that cursed Fiend, it is he disturbs my Joys, that fatal Contract ruins soul
and body; what have I done, why, why did I marry, why have I made the Innocent
Mercella a wretched partner in my World of woes? see where she comes, that
pretty blooming Flower, whom I plucked untimely from the stalk, and now 'twill
drop and perish.


Enter Marcella. Marc. My dear Love, why have you le^t the Company so
strangely? why when the Court seems nothing but delight, when every one is
wrapped in Joy and Pleasure, do you, the happy cause of all our Transports, fly
thence as if you envied us the blessing?


Her. Why do thou wrong me? by my Love I swear, I have no Content, but what
is placed in the^, and sure hereafter I shall find no pleasure greater then I
possess in these dear Arms.


Marc. Pray do not flatter me, you cannot Love me and be thus sad upon your
Wedding day; may be you are troubled that you are matched so high, and think
perhaps my birth will make me proud, indeed I Will be a very humble Wife, or if
you think I marry not for Love but only in Obedience to my Uncle, I will
convince you by such tender proofs, you shall acknowledge none can Love beyond
me.


Her. Otender Innocence, I do not doubt thee, I know thy Beauty cannot shroud a
falsehood, where is my Royal Uncle?


Marc. In the Garden, viewing the Fountains that are newly made, and waits for
you to see 'em.


Her. I Will go with you: O my Marcella, prithee do not chide me. There Is
something troubles me, a heavy load lies on my heart, but by thy Charming self,
I cannot guess from whence the cause proceeds, unless the sudden Joy I find in
thee, has overpowered my Spirits.


(As they are going off, Artan rises in a horrid shape, Her. starts back) Marc.
Why do you start my Love and tremble thus? What is it your Eyes are fixed on?


Her. I had forgot; I cannot go with you, it is near the hour I am to make a
great account with Heaven, and sollitude is fittest for Devotion, that done,
you shall behold me full of Joy, or everlasting Sorrow, prithee leave me.


Marc. I know my duty and I will obey you. But stay not long.

(Exit Marc.
Her. Not long, unless for ever. Tell me thou Gorgeon, that has made me stone,
whence or what art thou?


Art. Artan.


Her. No.


Art. The same.


Her. Why come thou?


Art. To inform thee, this moment is thy last: You must with me.


Her. My time's not yet expired.


Art. Deluded Fool, thou had no time but what was in my Will, I might have
cut thy Brittle-Thread of Life the very moment that this deed was signed; look
there and see what time's allowed thee, and Curse thy self for thy unthinking
folly.


Her. May I believe my Eyes, O wretched Fool, how have thou plunged thy self
into perdition, this was the fatal blow my heart presaged, and this the
wretched end of all my Joys! O dismal Marriage night! Unhappy Bridegroom! must
then thy Bridal Bed be Sulphurous flames, and Fiends perform thy Hymencial
rites? instead of my Marcella's soft Embraces, must I ashing Furies Clasp me in
their Arms? O thou great injured power I have Offended, strike, strike me to
the Center, and make my Soul as Mortal as my Body.


Art. Leave off your Idle Prayers, or by that power I serve, and you are tied
to Worship, thou shall not tread the Earth a moment longer.


Her. Fiend thou li'st, thou that not dare to touch me, what power had thou
to Buy or I to Sell, that which was none of my own, I had no Soul at my
dispose, for it was bought before, bought, at a Rate so high, that the whole
World weighs not a Grain of the vast price was paid for it.


Art. This will not save you, since you have free will, and by that free will
thus, as'twas signed to me. I do expect performance of the Deed.


Her. Shall the bare setting of my name condemn me? how many Wretches, in their
Lust and Riots, have made a gift, sealed firm with Imprications? Wretches for
Perjury, and foul Extoration, make by their Crimes a Deed as strong as mine:
Nay even the murderer, whose purple stains fix to his Soul, and mark it with.
Damnation, and true Penitent Tears, it is Cleansed and Whitened for a brighter
Being.


Art. Fool, I Will not give thee Leisure to Repent, nor shall thou have a moment
more to breath, by all the Ashy Treasuries of death, I have not power to stir,
what can this mean, he bears some holy relick sure about him, or he is fixed on
Consectared ground. Come from that place.


Her. No infernal, never, perhaps the ground is Sacred that I tread on, if so,
I will not stir, but rooted fast, I Will stand a Monument of true Devotion, and
here exprie in prayers.


Art. Slave, I Will blast thee.


Her. Thou art the Slave, not I. A Sacred inspiration fills my Soul, and bids
me dare thy worst, ha! Let me think the very day, on which my Father died, his
Confessor, Physician of his Soul come to me, and delivered me a Paper, which I
have wore ever since next my heart: My Son, said he, take this, and when thou
find'st thou art upon the very brink of ruin, open that Paper and thou wilt find
enclosed that which will make thy Enemies fly from thee: now is the time, I Am
just upon the Brink, and here before me stands my greatest Enemy; thus then I
break the seal, and thus unfold the Sacred mystery.


Art. Tempest, Lightning, Thunder, Plagues seize thy Marrow, give me back the
Contract.


Her. No, I will tear it to as many pieces as thou have ruined Souls. Avaunt
cursed. Tempter, hence to thy native Hell, and howl in flames.


Art. Perdition, Furies, why am I thus fooled, I shall be made the sport of
every Fiend, and hooted through each Region, they will make me the very Owl of
Hell, to sculk in Corners, and every meager Ghost will Chatter at me. I cannot
bear the thought, Convulsions gnaw thee,

Aches contract thy Bones, that thou may know
As great a Plegue above as I shall find below.

(Thunders and sinks. Her. It Is done', the Victory's obtained at last, and I
will bravely keep the field I Have won, I Will fix to this Sacred standard on my
heart, and never fear success under this Banner.


Enter Duke, Marcella, Gusman Senior, Gusman Junior, Bond, Pedro, etc. Duke.
Nephew, have you got done your Contemplations? you look more Gay and Lively
than you did, I do suppose it was your excess of Joy, that overpowered your
Spirits.


Her. I confess, my breast is full of Joy; O my Marcella, forgive me that my
Soul could harbor sadness upon this day, but I Will convince my Fair one, that I
had than as great a cause of Sorrow as now I have for Pleasure.


Marc. My dear Lord, my Joy or Grief does all depend on you, and when you're
Pleased I Am Happy.


Duke. See Nephew, here is more visitors to see you, and one that has but newly
found his Eyes, he took a happy day to make his Peace in thee, which at the
entreaty of your Friend I have Granted.


Her. Your Goodness makes me more your humble debtor; my Friend I wish you Joy,
for I perceive a cheerfulness, that says you have gained your wishes.


Gus. Iun. I have gained all I wish.


Gus. Sen. I have got my Estate again, and now I want nothing but a longer
Lease of Life, that I might have time enough to spend it again.


Her. Seignior Bond, I hope you will live hereafter with more Justice, believe me,
it is the surest way to thrive. There Is a small reckoning betwixt you and me,
but I forgive you freely.


Bond. Sir, I thank, and will make it my whole Life's study to deserve your
Favor.


Her. Now for thee, honest Pedro.


Ped. Good lack, I was afraid you had forgot me. It Is a Plaguey trick you
Courtiers have got never to Remember past services.


Duke. Fear not Pedro, I Will see thee preferred.


Ped. I thank your Grace.


Duke. Come Nephew, seat your self, and you his Friends, the Masque has waited
for us.


Her. We attend your Grace.


(They all sit. The Sc^ne changes to a Beautiful Garden, etc. ENDIMION The Man
in the Moon. A MASQUE.
A Scene of Fountains. ENDIMION Sleeping on a Bank. Menalcas, Dorus, Damon,
Alexis with other Shepherds and some Shepherdesses are discovered, and some of
them Dancing. Men. COme Shepherds, it is Night, and our Flocks are in Fold,
Come Dorus and Damon, we'll haste from the Cold.
To Coridon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.

Do. Stay Menalcas, prithee stay,
Endimion used to come this way,
Let us for Endimion stay,

Cho. Let us for Endimion stay,

Dam. Endimion's Flocks all go astray,
Their Master strays as much as they,
For you Bright Moon Endimion sights,
For her he fondly pines and dies,
Pity poor Endimion's pain,
Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!

Cho. Poor Endimion! hopeless Swain!

Alex. Why should not a Lover
This Whining give over,
Since nothing but sorrow it yields.

Dor. Rich Egon's Brown Daughter,
Has made my Mouth Water,
But by Pan, not for her, but her Flock and her Fields.
See yonder he lies
Sleep closes his Eyes,
I Will wake him --

Alex. No Dorus, no, let him alone,
I Will wake him --
No Dorus, no let him Sleep on,
Sleep is the Lovers only Ease,
By Sleep, of quiets he pertakes,
Gay Dreams of Bliss, his Fancy please,
But when they fly, Despair awakes:
To those short Ioys the Swain we'll leave,
The only Comfort, we can give.

Chorus. To Corydon's Cottage we'll go,
There the Liquor does merrily flow.
[Exit. Cupid Descends. Sleep Shepherd, 'till thou wak'st in Joy,
I Have kindly wounded Cynthia's Heart,
Let coming Bliss thy Thoughts Employ,
She comes to Sooth, thy raging smart,
Sleep Shepherd till thou wak'st in Joy.

Endi. She comes, my Goddess come, -- I dream --
It Is not forwaking Eyes
To see such wondrous Ioys,
Ioys like my Mighty Love, extreme,
All Heaven is round me, -- O, I Dream!

Cynthia. Awake Endimion, from above
Thy Cynthia comes to Crown thy Love.

Endimion. Oh I dream!
Sleep does my wishing Soul deceive,
I would, but dare not Believe.
I Dream!

Cynthia. In thy soft Dreams true Ioys appear;
Awake, and see thy Cynthia here.

Endimion Starts and Catches her in his Arms. She Is here, I have my Goddess
here. Cynthia and Endimion come in Attended by a Train of Stars her
Concomitants. Cynthia. Here, here, we'll Regin in full Delight,
And thou Swain shall Rule the Night.

Endi. Happy Beings here concea^
All the Pleasures, which they steal,
It Is the Scandal makes the Fault,
Still she is Chaste who such is thought,
Love's delights are always sweet,
But when Secret, Sweeter yet.
Happy Being, etc.

To the Grand Chorus Cinthia's Celestial Attendants repeat the last Six Lines.
FINIS.
Books lately Printed for Richard Wellington, at the Lute in St. Pau^'s
Churchyard.
A'Mathematical (...) or the Description and Use of a new filling Rule, by
which many Useful and Necessary Questions in Arithmetic, Military Orders,
Interests, Trigonometry, Planeme^y, Sterenometry, Geography, Astronemy,
Navigation, Fortification, Gunnery, Dyalling, may be sp^el^^y resolved without
the help of Pen or Compares. By William Hunt, Philomath.

A Discourse upon the Nature and Faculties of Man, in several Essays: With some
considerations on the Occurrences or Human Life. By Tim Neurse Gent.

Familliar Letters, written by John late Earl of Rochester, to the Honorable
Henry S^vile Esquire and other Persons of Quality with Love Letters, written by the
late Ingenious Mr. Ottway, and several Letters written by Sir George Ethri^ge,
the late Duke of (...) etc. in two Volumes, each Vol. may be had singly.

Ovid Trave ^^ie: or a Bu^lesque on Ovid's Epistles by Captain Alexander
Radcliff.

The Novels, etc. of the late Ingenious Mrs. Behn, Collected into one Vol. viz.
Oroonoko, or the Royal Slave, Fair Jilt, or Prince Tarqui^. A^es de Cast, or
the force of Generous Love. The Love^s Watch, or the Art of Love. The Ladies
Looking-Glass. The Lucky Mistake: And the History or the Nun, or fair
Vow-breaker.

Reflections upon Ancient and Modern Learning. By William Wotton, B. D.
Chaplain to the Right Honorable the Earl of Nottingham. The Second Edition,
with Large Additions, With a Dissertation upon the Epistles of Phalaris,
^hemistocles, Seriates, Euripides, etc. and Aesep's Fables, by Dr. Bentley.

The Family Physician; being a choice Collection of Approved and Experinc'd
Remedies, to cure all Diseases incident to Human Bodies, useful in Families,
and serviceable to Country People, by George (...) Chymi^, Servant to Sir
Kelenin Digby, till he used.

A General Treatise of the Diseases of Infants and Children, Collected from the
most Eminent Practical Authors, by John Pechey, of the College of Physicians.

Contempla^^^s Moral and Divine, in three parts, Written by the late Lord Chief
Justice Hales, to which is added the Life of the Author, by Gi^bert Lord Bishop
of Sarum, The third part may be had singly.

Cocker's Decimal A^^thmetick, the Second Edition, very much enlarged, by John
Hawkins Schoolmaster at Sr. Gorge's Church in (...)

Vade Mecus^, or the necesary Companion, containing Sir Sam. Moreland's
Perpetual Almanac, showing the days of the Month for any year, Past, Present,
or to come; a Table of the Kings Reigns since the Conquest, compare with the
years of Christ. A Table of the Regin, wherein any numbers of Farthings,
Halfpence, Pence and Shillings are ready cast up, or great use to all Trades.
6. The Interest and Rebate of Money, the Forbearance, Discount and purchase of
Anuuities. 7. The Rates of Post-Letters, Inland and Outland. 8. Account of the
Penny-Post. 9. The Principal Roads in England, showing the distance of each
Town from London, also the Market Towns on each Road, with the days of the week
the Markets are kept on; also the Hundred and County each Town stands in. 10.
The names of the Countries, Cities and Burrough-Towns in England and Wales,
with the member of Knights, Citizens and Burgesses chosen therein, to serve in
Parliament. 11. The usual Rates and Fares of Coachmea, Ca^men and Watermen. The
Sixth Edition, much Enlarged.


