THE Beauty, Vigor and Strength OF YOUTH Bespoke for GOD: IN A SERMON Lately
Preached to YOUNG MEN.

By THOMAS POWELL Minister of the Gospel.

LONDON, Printed for Ben. Harris at the Stationers Arms in Sweetings Rents,
near the Royal Exchange in Cornhill, 1676.

TO THE READER.
Christian Reader,
THE greatest and highest Honor of the Reasonable Creature is to serve Him who
is the best Good and the last End, which is the design of this little Treatise.
The Excellency and Necessity of what is here treated, justly merits a larger
Volumn. But I studied Brevity, and that upon a twofold account.

First, Because I was desired that there might be little or no Variation from
the Sermon as it was Preached, either in Altering or Enlarging, though
something of each I have done, yet so I hope, as to please both thee the
Reader, and they who had the Opportunity of Hearing the same.

Secondly, Because I was willing that more might have a share in it, which
possibly could not have been, When a Book is of too, great a (...), the Poor
cannot purchase it.
if I had not endeavored to crowd my Meditations in a little room. Birds when
they come to a full heap of Corn, chirp and call for their fellows. Goodness
and Light are of a diffusive Nature. And now since this is Midwifed into the
World, (which was not intended by me) such as it is I offer it to thee as the
product of my sincere and cordial Love to the Souls of young Men. Let not the
Plainness of the Matter, and the Homeliness of the Style offend thee; I
designed it not for a curious Palate, being preached unto a plain
Countrey-people, I aimed at their Edification, and not at any Popular Applause.
The Treatise is useful for all that are enquiring after true Felicity,
especially the younger sort of People, being such for the most part that were
present when this Sermon was Preached. What thou (Reader) apprehendest not
Sound, carry it to the Touchstone of the Word, and if but a Mite of saving
Knowledge may be (through Gods Blessing) added to thy Understanding, let God
have the Glory, and the Author has his End, who is

Southwark, December. READER, Thy Friend and Souls servant, Thomas Powell.

ECCLES. XII. 1. Remember Now thy Creator in the Days of thy Youth, while the
Evil Days come not, nor the Years draw nigh, when thou shall say, I have no
pleasure in them.
GOD set up two great Lights in Solomon's Heart, one showing the Excellency of
Christ, Ecclesiastes, i. e. a Preacher.
in the Canticles; the other, the Vanity of the Creature, as in Ecclesiastes,
which is the second Book of Solomon; and it is called Ecclesiastes because
Solomon was so called: And that either because he speaks unto a Multitude at
once, or else because of his Wisdom, with which he was indeed (after a copious
manner) endowed. The whole Book is a declaration of Solomon's repentance written
in his old age, as may be gathered both out of the title of it, and the closure
of it in, the six last verses, and also out of the whole body of it, being
written upon a serious view of the passages and practices of his life past, and
the great and manifold experience he made and found therein. He treats chiefly
of the worlds vanity, true felicity, the maladies of old age, and the Advantage
of being good betimes. Hence it is that young men in the conclusion of all are
called upon to mind their Creator; and that whatsoever they are employed in
besides is vanity of vanities, and no wise yielding true satisfaction, but
anxiety and torment unto their souls.

Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth, while the evil days come
not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them.

The words in general do press unto a duty of the greatest moment in the world;
wherein you may take notice of these several things.

1. The Act, Remember. 2. The Object, Creator. 3. The adjunct of Time; Now, in
the days of thy youth, exegetically repeated, while the evil days come not,
nor the years draw nigh, when thou shall say I have no pleasure in them.

The words will afford us many points of Doctrine. I shall only observe two,
and so insist upon them.

Doct. 1. That above all things whatsoever, we should not forget, but Remember
our Creator.

Doct. 2. That there is great reason why we should remember our Creator in the
days of our youth, The evil days spoken of in the text, and the years wherein
we have no pleasure, is old age.
even while we are young, and before old age over-takes us.

These in order; and with the first I begin, viz. That above all things
whatsoever, we should not forget, but Remember our Creator.

The prosecution of this Point, I purpose, through Gods assistance in this wise:

1. I shall set my self to amplify it. 2. To Apply it.

The amplification will consist of Explication and confirmation.

1. Explication, and so I shall show you. 1. What this Creator is. 2. What it
is to remember our Creator. 3. What it is to remember our Creator above all
things whatsoever.

First, I am to show you, What this Creator is, whom we are called upon in the
text to mind, Remember now thy Creator in the days of thy youth.

In the Hebrews it is (Thy Creatours) alluding to the Trinity, so that by
Creator we are to understand God the Father, God the Son, and God the Holy
Ghost; for though the Creation of the world is peculiarly ascribed to God the
Father, and looked upon as his proper work, in respect of order and relation,
as he is the first person of the Trinity, yet not so as to exclude the rest;
Quoad ordinem, Patris oper andi modus est a se, per Filium, and Spiritum
Sanctum. Hinc origo rerum, nempe Creatio, proprie tribuitur Patri, qui ordine
originis est personarum prima. Deus) Hebr. Elohim, id est, unus ex Elohim,
scil. Pater, alloqui Filium and Spiritum Sanctum Synecd. integri. Non
alloquitur Angelos. Piscat. in loc.
for all the persons of the Trinity (to speak after the manner of men) had a
hand in the Creation of the world, Genesis 1. 26. And God said, Let us make man ni
our Image, after our likeness: who should the Father speak unto here; Let us,
but unto the Son and the Holy Ghost.

Secondly, What it is to Remember our Creator; It is not only a bare thinking
on him, and that now and then, but to remember our Creator implies these
several things.

First, To know him; to know that he is, and what he is. That God is, and that
he is to be worshipped, is, (...), Homo natura duplicem format syllogismum de
Deo, theoricum et practicum. Theoricus est duplex 1. Deus est: ergo debeo eum
cognoscere. 2. Deus est bonus, ergo debeo cum colere. Practicus est, in quo
conscientia format assumptionem: Deus mihi bonus est; Ergo mihi est colendus,
Alsted. Syst. Theolog.
a Law written in the heart of man, and that which the book of the Creatures
teaches as well as the book of the Scriptures. But now who This God is, and
the right mode of worshipping him, many are at a loss; and the candlelight of
Nature (without the help of the Holy Spirit in and by the Scriptures) cannot
direct us, neither can our knowledge of God by them be a comprehensive
knowledge, what God is in his Essence, in his Attributes, in his persons and in
his works, no man or Angel has, does, or ever shall know; Though we must (if
we would remember our Creator aright) know something of each, yet he must have
the wisdom of God, and so be a God, that comprehends God in his Essence,
Attributes, Persons and works, what say you now Sirs, do you remember your
Creator in this sense? such who do not experimentally know God, that he is; and
in measure, What he is, cannot properly be said to Remember him. Remember your
Creator, that is no less than the Import of knowing and acknowledging your
selves with God, whereby peace may come unto you, according unto that excellent
counsel of Eliphaz to Job, Acquaint now thy self with God, thereby Good shall
come unto thee, Job. 22. 21.

Remember your Creator: That is of no less Import than the dying words of King
David to his Son Solomon; And thou Solomon my Son, know thou the God of thy
Father, 1 Chronicles. 28. 9.

Secondly, To Remember our Creator, implies a reverent Fear of Him. Remembering
of God is fearing of God. Prove. 23. 17. Be thou in the Fear of the Lord all the
day long. How dare thou to say, that thou Remembrest God, when thou fear
him not, and have but little dread of his Greatness in thy Heart? Where the
Fear of God is, there Sin is conquered as to its reigning Power, and it shall
no more storm Walls, demolish Castles, break through Guards, beat up Quarters,
and let in Enemies.
Thou can fear Afflictions, Death, or any Evil approaching toward thee, and
for the diverting whereof, applyest thy self to the Means in order thereunto,
but how little do thou use thy Strength and Prudence against Sin that cursed
thing, and which renders thee obnoxious to the Wrath of God, which if thou
fear not here, shall hereafter to thy sorrow and eternal detriment.

Thou can reverence a Person of Quality, or any Earthly Monarch, and when
Access unto him is granted thee, how great is thy Care and Diligence in
demeaning thy self before him? and how do thou tremble lest by any uncomely
Gesture or Action thou should offend him, By the Fear of God Men do not only
depart from that which is Evil, but are also inclined to do that which is Good.
knowing that in case of Default, thou may not only meet with Repulse, but
also Penalty? And shall the Presence of Worms so awe thee, and not God, in
whose presence the blessed Saints and Angels cover their Faces, as being
unworthy of Beholding him? Prove. 16. 6.
It Is no marvel why Conscience bears so little sway now adays, Deuteronomy. 5. 29.
why Piety is so little countenanced, why Gods Glory is so little preferred,
why one Man even becomes a Devil to another, and why Young men Remember not
their Creator. The Reason of all lies here; So did not I ( said good Nehemiah)
because of the fear of God.
The Fear of God is not before their Eyes, nor his Greatness studied by them.
Our Creator is God over all Blessed for evermore, the Lord of Hosts is his
Name; all the Creatures are at his Beck and Check; he is the stronger side, and
whosoever fears the Lord, need not fear any thing else. Confidence and strong
Confidence is in the Fear of the Lord, Prove. 14. 26.
yea a Fear-freeing Fear this Fear is.

Thirdly, To Remember our Creator implies setting the Mind on work on the
Excellencies of him. Pulchra sunt omnia faciente te Domine, and ecce tu inenarr
abiliter pulchrior qui fecisti omnia. Chrysostom. All those things which thou have
made, are beautiful, but thou thy self art infinitely more beautiful.
Psalm. 104. v. 34. My Meditation of him shall be sweet. The Excellencies of God
are many, great and incommunicable: Many and wonderful are the Excellencies of
the Creature, but not to be compared with God's; because all
Creature-Excellencies are but Derivatives. Some Eyes have been dazzled too much
with the glitterings of the Creatures, so as to take the Servant for the
Master; and have been so much in admiring the Glass, as that they forgot the
glorious Beauty that is represented. What Worship and Adoration has the Sun
had? even almost as much as the great Creator of Heaven and Earth himself.
Strange! that they should see so darkly, as not to discern the Face from the
Veil that covers it. For the Sun is at best but umbra Dei, and nubecula cito
transitura, a mere spot, a cloud, if compared with so bright an Essence; and as
He says notably, the same Worshippers must needs be (...), Atheists in the
Nightime.
And what are the Streams, compared to the Fountain; the Rivers to the Ocean,
and the excellencies of the Creature to the Excellencies of the Creator? being
in him primitively and incommunicably, yea the proper subject and seat of all
Excellencies whatsoever, God is. And can thou Ovain young man set thy Heart
on these transitory Excellencies of the Creature, and yet can not look up so
high as to the Creator, and take a View of his glorious and transcendent
Excellencies that have and do ravish the Hearts of all their Contemplators?
David's Meditations of his Creators Excellencies were sweet unto him. Call back,
O young Man, all thy straggling Affections; it is high time now, they have been
long enough seeking Rest in these terrene things, and finding none. Call home
(O vain man) thy Love, thy Joy, Hope, Grief and Fear: These are to the Soul, as
the Soldiers to the Centurion; If he said to one, Go, he went; if to another,
Come, he came: These (say some) are the Messengers of the Will; these (say
others) are the Wheels, the Chariots, the Wings, the Feet of the Soul. But now
if thy Love, which is the first, and General of all the Affections, should be
set, not on God, but the World; if your Hatred should be directed, not against
Sin, but Good men, or (which is worse) against Goodness it self; if your Zeal
should not be pure Flames for Divine Glory, but a burning Rage against the
Truth of God; if your Fear should not be a flight from Evil, but an Apostasy
from Christ; if your Anger should be a Displeasure at another Eminencies, and
not at your own Exorbitances; if your Hope should not be a well-ballanced
Expectation of Happiness, but a blind and venturous Presumption of Mercy; and
if your Grief should be a trouble that you cannot be and do more evil; Ah how
vile, how irregular, how dangerous are Affections thus misplaced! When Love and
Hatred keep to their right Centres, and move toward their proper Objects, to
love nothing but Good, to hate nothing but Evil.

Fourthly, To Remember our Creator implies to recollect our selves, and return
unto him as the Fountain of our Salvation, Psalm. 22. 27.

All the Ends of the World shall remember and turn unto the Lord.

By Sin we have Apostatized from God; are we yet returned unto him? is there a
Conversion of the whole man unto God? Are Old things past away, and all things
become New? Have thou a New Heart? till then thou can not remember God with
any Affection. Have thou a New Will? till then thou can not do as thou
ought. Have thou a New Eye? till then thou can not see the difference that
there is between things Spiritual and Temporal. Have thou a new Appetite? till
then thou can not know what is bitter, or what is sweet. Every Faculty is
become the seat of Sin, and therefore a Necessity there is, of a universal
Change. The Understanding is dark, and stands in need of Divine Illumination.
The Will is contumacious, Man is defiled a capite ad calcem, from Head to Foot;
that (as the Philosopher says concerning the Soul, It is in every part; where
there is Life, there is the Soul, for the Soul is the Life; so) whatever is in
us, and comes from us, and is acted by us, receives defilement from us. Sin
is like a Leprosy, over the whole man; like a gangrene spreading over the
whole Soul.
and needs the Almighty Power of God to make it flexible. The Memory is weak,
and needs supernatural strengthening. The Affections are dull, and need
spiritual Operation. The Conscience is benumbed, and needs the beams of God's
Spirit to warm it, and quicken it, that it may no more mislead, and be as a
blind Guide. And thus our whole Life is crooked and perverse; have thou gotten
it made strait by a sincere Repentance and Reformation? The Holy Scriptures are
a Rule, have thou measured thy Life by it? The Curse of the Law hangs on thee,
why do thou not satisfy its Demands, and Appeal to the Grace of God in
Christ for freedom therefrom? Thy miseries (O Natural man) are many, great, and
intolerable, why do thou not endeavor to extricate thy self out of them?
Read this Scripture, O Graceless Prodigal: Psalm. 9. 19. The wicked shall be
turned into Hell, and all the Nations that forget God.

Recollect therefore your selves, oh Old Men, before your days are quite
concluded. Remember your Creator Oh Young Men, while the evil days come not,
nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I have no pleasure in them. Is it
not better to live than die, turn than burn? O Sirs, persist not till it be too
late, but choose God your chiefest Good, only Good, suitable Good, and
everlasting Good.

Fifthly, To Remember our Creator, implies a due Considering what may Please or
Displease him.

Col. 1. 10. That ye might walk worthy of the Lord unto all pleasing.

But how few are there that make this their work, studying how to please God?
Does not the Course of their Lives rather tend to the contrary? Who lives to
please God, but rather to displease him? How little is Gods Favor now adays
esteemed of? Most of us are ambitious of doing things that may please Persons
highly dignified in this World, but the pleasing of God is looked upon as a
superfluity, and that which may be as well omitted as performed; as if Gods
good word would not honor us so much as a Mortals, and His Favor do us more
good than the Favor of Man, whose breath is in his Nostrils, and must suddenly
perish. Man's Favor is good in its place, but when compared with Gods, there is
vast difference as to the Nature, In thy favor is life, Psalm. 30. 5.
Property, Effects and Perpetuity of it. Foolish therefore is he who preferres
the pleasing of Man before the pleasing of God, and chooses rather the one
than the other; that can remember what pleases the Creature, but not what
pleases the Creator. This is preferring the less before the greater, and the
Servant before the Master. How stands it therefore with us? Are Gods Smiles our
Heaven, and his Frowns our Hell? Is there nothing that we take in hand, but we
seriously pensitate and ponder it in our Minds, saying with our selves, Will
this and that make for Gods Glory? if so, I Will do it; if not, I shall forbear.
But, Oh Christians, how many are remiss in this kind of spiritual Exercise,
excusing themselves with Phrases that will not excuse them at the Day of
Judgment. This is too strict, say some; what need is there of it, say others?
and, Who can do so, is the language of many: But I wish I might have the
Opportunity of telling part of my Mind to such persons. Is there not a
Necessity of Remembering our Creator, if we would prosper? but can we remember
him aright, if we please him not? and if we please him not, can we be saved?

Sixthly, To Remember our Creator, implies a remembering his Mercies and
retaining a thank full sense thereof.

Psalm. 106. 21. They forgot God their Savior, which had done great things in
Egypt.

Do thou often think on the Mercies of God, so frequently and bountifully
conferred on thee? Do thou often revish thy Soul in calling Mercies past to
mind, living upon Mercies present, and depending upon Mercies to come? Remember
your Creator, will surely bear this Interpretation without any wrong to the
words. Remember what your Creator has done for you, his Mercies bestowed on you
in such and such a kind, at such and such a Time, in such and such a Place,
among such and such Company. It is a sign that we sincerely esteem, and
heartily remember a Friend, when we do not forget his Kindness, but do even
write them down in our Memorandum Book: And so it stands good in this Case
also; if we say, we remember God, and forget his Mercies, we lie, and the Truth
is not in us; it being that which cannot stand together. Such who have received
Mercies from the hands of God, yea such Mercies without which they could not
have subsisted, and yet are unthankful, Hostis Gratiae, inimica salutis. Bern.
forgetting both God and his Benefits too, surely such of all are most
ungrateful. Mercies above us, and beneath us, Mercies before us and behind us,
Mercies on the right hand and on the left, renders us (if still we are barren)
the most ungrateful Monsters that ever lived on Earth. To be unthankful,
where there is the greatest reason of being thankful, is Folly in the
Abstract. And where Mercy is not a Lodestone to draw to God, it will be a
Millstone to sink into Hell. Vinegar you know it is (...) Filius Vini; and the
sweetest Wine degenerates into the sharpest vinegar. And as nothing is more
cold than Lead, yet nothing more scalding than that when melted; so nothing is
more sweet than mercy, when thankfully received, yet nothing more terrible than
that when abused; Grace abused turns to fury, and Mercies forgotten turn to
sore Wrath.

Seventhly and lastly, To Remember our Creator, is to serve and obey him; and
this indeed is the sum of all, Deuteronomy. 8. 11. Beware that thou forget not the
Lord thy God, in not keeping his Commandments and his Judgments, and his
Statutes, which I command thee this day.

Many, Every wicked man carries (says one) the Devils, Pack.
nay more serve the Devil and their own Lusts, than there do serve God. God
made man for himself, but he has less from him than any other Creature. Man
should serve God, and that in the first place; but instead thereof he serves
himself first, the Devil and his Lusts first. Oh, wonderful Degeneration, and
the Cursedness of our lapsed Estate! One would think it incredible, that the
Creature should not serve the Creator; we may Wonder at it indeed, and yet
Believe it we must, because that it is, nothing is more certain; God who is
Truth it self has said so, and we by daily Experience find it so: here then is
a Mystery of Iniquity, That Man should Renounce God who made him, and Side with
the Devil who hates him, and will Eternally destroy him, if still sided with:
That Man should take more Delight in Self-destruction, than in
Self-felicitating: That Man should sell himself to sin, and take more delight
therein than in Obeying one reasonable Commandment: Why should all this be, O
vain man? Are the ways of God unequal, his Demands impossible, his Commands
intolerable? Have a care of harboring hard thoughts of God, who has said
that his Yoke is easy, and his burden is light, Matthew. 11. 29.

If thou have but a mind to be engaged in the Service of God, God's Spirit is
an assisting and supporting Spirit.
let not the Difficulties that attend it discourage thee; but know, that God
can by the sweet Discoveries of himself (whilst thou art in his Service) cheer
thy Heart, and make that which seemed hard and difficult, the very Delight of
thy Soul. Jacobs meeting with, and enjoying of Rachel, rendered his hard and
long Service easy and delightful unto him: And so a feeling of Gods Spirit
moving on thy Heart, when thou art engaged in any Religious Exercise, will make
it joyous and not grievous, a Delight and not a Burden, a Heaven, and not an
Hell.

Besides, holy Obedience is only hard and difficult to the Ignoble part of a
Saint, viz. the Flesh, not to the Noble part of a Saint, viz. the Soul. All the
Ways of God (though tending to the pulling out of right Eyes, and cutting off
of right Hands) are ways of Pleasantness to the Noble part of a Saint. So far
as every Christian is Renewed, he is best when he can serve God most, according
unto the Apostle; I delight in the Law of God after the inward Man: with my
Mind I serve the Law of God, though with my Flesh the Law of Sin.

Remember thy Creator; that is, Remember him so as to love, serve, and obey
him. And thus you have heard first and last the full Import of these words;
Remember thy Creator.

The third thing I am to speak unto by way of Explication, is this. What is it
to remember our Creator above all-things whatsoever, which may fall under these
three heads.

1. Loving God above all things whatsoever. 2. Fearing God above all things
whatsoever. 3. Obeying God above all things whatsoever.
First, Loving God above all things whatsoever. Here is Love in its highest
stature, and such a kind of Love God requires; nay, no other Love will he
acccept of; either of that kind we must give him, or none at all. The prime of
our Affections must God have; and indeed who deserves Love is due to God, not
only for the Good he has done us, and for the Good that we hope for from him,
but for the Good that is in him. Yea God is to be loved for himself. Du Moulin,
Treatise of Peace and Contentment of Mind.
them more than He? who shall have them, if not He? Verily, our selves have not
so great a right unto our selves, as He? We and our selves, and all that is
ours are Gods; yea we are more Gods than our own. How is it then, that God is
no more loved than he is, and that even some who profess Love unto him, do not
love him above all things whatsoever? Surely here lies the Reason, Ignorance,
Ignorance, Ignorance; Ignoti nulla cupido, says the old Poet; what we know
not, we love not. Did persons but know God more, they would love him more. O
who would not but love that infinite Love and Excellency, though he had no
Interest of his own in it! God is Love it self, and if we will not love Love it
self, surely we are distracted.

Do thou therefore, O my Soul, Remember thy Creator? and do thou so
Remember him as to Love him? Tota Lex Christi tribus literulis includitur: Ama.
Deum ama, and omnes leges servasti. Drexelius.
and do thou so love him, as to love him above all things whatsoever? How
many, I fear, if weighed in the Balance would be found wanting as to this,
which is the sum and substance of Christianity! And shall I here expostulate
with the Young man? What say thou? Art thou willing to give Christ the
Firstborn of every Affection in thy Soul? Do thou love God above all things
whatsoever? Do thou love him above thy Relations, Estate, and very Life?
Can thou prefer Gods Glory before all Secular Interest whatsoever, and even
deny thy very Life for him, if called thereunto? This indeed is Love like Gold
tried in the Fire. Verily, when Carnal Relations come in competition with, and
stand in opposition unto Christ, we must hate them; when our Friends would
prove Snares, and hinder us from doing our Duty, Christus inter Amicos maximus.
we must either leap over them, or tread upon them; like Galeacius Caracciolus,
that most famous Patron and Second Moses; who though he was the Son of a
Marquess, the Pope's Nephew, yet deserted Italy, and (with Moses) Pharaoh's
Court, treading upon and leaping over his Wife and Children, rather than he
would worship Idols, and so that he might be with Reverend Calvin, under his
Ministry in Geneva. So that in this case, Odium in suos, is Pietas in Deum.
Jerome likewise has an excellent passage: If my Wife (says he) should hang
about my Neck, Praecepta docent, exempla movent.
my Mother show me the Breasts that gave me suck, persuading me to deny Christ,
I would not.

Peter though a Friend and Disciple of Christ, yet when he proved a Tempter,
Christ says unto him, Get thee behind me, Satan. I cannot omit that excellent
Passage of Mr. Swinnock, Treatise of making Religion ones Business, page 333.
that Laborious and Pious Divine, concerning Love to God, being as follows: I
wish (since Love is the greatest thing my Savior can give, for God is Love,
and the greatest which I can give my Savior,) that his love to me may be
reflected back again; that my chiefest Love may be as a Fountain sealed up to
all others, and broached only for him who is altogether lovely, that I may
hate Father, Mother, Wife, Child, House and Land, out of Love to him; that many
Waters of Affliction may not quench this Love, but rather like snuffers make
this Lamp to burn the brighter.

Again, Do thou love Christ (O Young man) above thy Estate or this present
World? Have thou put thy Love to Christ in one Balance, and thy Love to the
World in another; Mr. Francis Xavarias counseled John the Third, King of
Portugal, to meditate every day, a quarter of an hour upon this Text: What
shall it profit a man to gain the whole World, and lose his own Soul, Mark 8.
36?
and does thy Love to Christ weigh down thy Love to the World? or is not thy
Case like the young Man in the Gospel, who was Christ's Hearer, but not his
Follower: When Christ said unto him, Sell all and give to the Poor; it is said,
Abiit tristis, he went away sorrowful, Mat. 19. 22. Does the World lie nearer
thy heart than Christ? How then do thou love Christ above all things
whatsoever?

Again, The Apostle Paul carried the Image of Christ in his heart as a Saint,
the Message of Christ in his mouth as a Minister, and the Mark of Christ in his
body as a Martyr.
Is Christ (O young Man) of more esteem unto thee than thy Life? can thou lay
it down for his sake? His Love to thee was stronger than Death, is thy Love to
him stronger than Life? Can wicked Men be content to suffer for their Lusts,
and will not ye suffer for Christ?

Heroic Luther has an Expression, and indeed it is like himself: I would
rather (says he) be a Martyr than a Monarch. And the same said again, Disce
mori ut vivat Christi Gloria: Learn to die that the Glory of Christ may live.

Such who do prefer Christ, The way to Paradise is by a flaming Sword, the
way to Canaan is through a howling Wilderness, and the way to Heaven is by the
Gates of Hell.
think not much to die for him; and that it is so, see it confirmed in this
Cloud of Witnesses. The Prophet Isaiah was killed with a Saw, Jeremiah with
Stones, Amos with an Iron-barre, and St. Luke was hanged on an Olive Tree: So
that this is clear, he who preferres his Life before Christ, is not worthy of
him. He that with Judas and Spira will rather sin than suffer, must with them
suffer a Hell on this side of Hell.

Secondly, Fearing God above all things whatsoever. Thou fear thy Father and
Mother, thy Master, and such who have the Rule over thee; but do thou fear
thy Maker? How many, I fear, (especially Young men) may I find tardy in this?
Why now to remember thy Creator above all things whatsoever, is to fear him;
and to fear him above all things whatsoever, is to fear him in an otherguise
manner than one Mortal fears another. Civil or Natural Difference among us here
below, commands proportionable Reverence, and if such Reverence be due from
one Creature to another, when they are all made of the same coarse earthly
Mould, and must all be buried in the bowels of their common Mother, the Earth;
when there is no Essential, but only an Extrinsecal difference between them:
What Fear and Reverence then is due from us poor dust and ashes to the God of
the Spirits of all Flesh, the King of Kings, and the Lord of Lords, between
whom and his Creatures there is an infinite distance! O be persuaded (above all
things) to fear that glorious and fearful Name, The Lord thy God. That Name
which is the greatest prop of thine Affiance, commands thy Fear and
Reverence, when thou hear: In the fear of God give Audience to his Word;
Constantine the Great, when hearing a Sermon, would ever and anon start out of
his Chair of State, and stand up for a while, being affected, and (it may be)
terrified with the Word, insomuch that his Courtiers were amazed, because such
a posture did not become so high a place. Eusebius. de vit. Constant. l. 3. c. 17.
Acts 13. 16. Poor Peasants should tremble when this Prince is speaking. It
becomes the greatest Person to be awful in Gods Presence, more than in the
presence of any other. Abraham, who had the honor and favor to be Gods
Friend, yet when God spoke to him, fell on his face, Genesis 17. 3. Moses, though
high in the Heart of God, yet is humble when he hears from God; He bowed his
Head toward the Earth and worships, Exodus 34. 8.

And so when thou prayest, put up thy Petitions to God with a great deal of
Trepidation, knowing that though thou take upon thee to speak unto the great
God of Heaven and Earth, yet still thou art but Dust and Ashes. Luther prayed
with Confidence as to a Father, Tanta reverentia ut si Deo, and tanta fiducia
ut si amico.
but with Reverence as to a God. Thou art at best but a Beggar, and a proud
heart will not suit a Beggars purse. The Eastern Christians when they called on
God, threw themselves on the ground.

The Lord will give Grace and Glory; no good thing will he withhold from them
that walk uprightly, Psalm. 84. 11.

God resists the proud, (...).
but gives Grace to the humble.

God sets himself in battel-array against a proud man, as the Greek word
emphatically signifies: To this man will I look, Deus propitius est illis qui
dolent quod ipsum peccatis suic offenderunt, ac proinde trepidant, quum
cogitant se damnationem aeternam esse meritos. Piscat. in loc.
even to him that is poor, and of a contrite spirit, and trembles at my Word,
Isa. 66. 2.

Again, when thou approachest to the Lords Supper, is another special time when
God should be more than ordinarily reverenced and feared. This is Mysterium
tremendum, a Mystery to be trembled at. Read that excellent Scripture. (...),
v. 28. (...), v. 29.
Let us have Grace whereby we may serve him acceptably with reverence and godly
fear, for our God is a consuming fire, Heb. 12. 28, 29.

This holy Fear and Trembling it is that graceth all our performances, and
makes them acceptable unto God.

Thirdly, Obeying God above all things whatsoever. All Service must be denied,
rather than Gods must be neglected: Not that I would hereby encourage Servants
unto Neglect in their Masters Employ, that is not my drift; that which I would
have Servants and all do, is serving and obeying God in a right manner. And now
God is obeyed and served in a right manner, and above all things whatsoever,

First, (...), Esau mourned, Judas confessed, Ahab humbled himself in dust, and
Cain sacrificed, but none of these were accepted with God, because the root of
the matter was not in them.
When he is served sincerely and without the mixtures of hypocrisy. A little
leaven leaveneth the whole lump, 1 Cor. 5. 6.

My Son give me thy Heart, Prove. 23. 26.

It Is the Heart that God looks at, the Heart that God requires, and the Heart
it is that makes the Service acceptable, and shows the sincerity of him that
performs it. My Son give me thy heart; not lend me thy Ear, or afford me thy
Tongue. A Sacrifice unto God without the Heart, is an abomination unto him. I
hate your Burnt-Offerings, my Soul nauseates your solemn Assemblies. Odi
Dianos, and dona ^erentes. Bring me no more vain Oblations; (...). Hypocrisy
spoils every Prayer, Hypocritae cupit se videri justum.
soyls every Ordinance, stains and discolours every Duty, invenoms every Mercy.
If such an one Pray, it is esteemed Howling; if he Mourn, it is hanging down the
head like a Bulrush; if he Sacrifice, it is cutting off a Dogs Neck; if he
Rejoice, it is but a Blaze, a crackling of Thorns under the Pot.

Secondly, When he is served, not with a servile, but with a filial Fear; when
he is served, not with constraint, but willingly and cheerfully. God loves a
willing Servant. Thy people shall be willing in the day of thy power, Psalm.
110. 3. Hebr. Willingnesses, the Abstract, and in the Plural Number. See Psalm.
68. 10. As if the Holy Ghost could not speak enough how willing they are, to
note exceeding great willingness to submit to every Commandment of the Lord; or
it may signify Free Will Offerings, voluntary Oblations. Jun. and alii.
Religion should be full of Alacrity. Heavenly Duties and spiritual
Performances are to flow freely from the Soul, like those voluntary drops that
come sweating from the Honeycomb of its own accord, without any pressing or
crushing. It is only the Dregs of Obedience that will not come forth without
squeezing and wringing. The better any thing is, the more freely does it
diffuse it self. If therefore you would serve God as you should do, serve him
with a cheerful Fear; because Cheerfulness puts a gloss and luster upon
Religion, and makes it amiable even in the eyes of the world.

Thirdly, When he is served universally, in all respects, in Holiness toward
God, in Righteousness toward man.

Then shall I not be ashamed, when I have respect unto all thy Commandments,
Psalm. 119. 6.

How many are there that pick and cull their Duties, and so indeed serve not
the will of God, but their own Choice? That answer the Lord with
half-Obedience, like the Echo, which makes not a perfect Respondence of the
Voice, but of some part thereof? Many make such a difference amongst the
Tables, Our Obedience must be complete.
as if only one side, or one part were of Gods writing; The Man that (like
Agrippa) does but almost Believe, almost Repent, almost Obey, that man shall be
saved proportionably, almost.

Fourthly, When he is served constantly; not now and then admitting Cessations,
but all the days of our Life, We must not only begin well but end well.
constantly in all Estates, unto the End, Col. 1. 10. I have done with
Explication, and so have showed you the Import of Remembering your Creator,
Finit coronat Opus.
as it lies before you in the Text and Doctrine. The Second part of the
Amplification will be Confirmation, which shall consist of several
Scripture-Reasons.

First, Rea. 1.
Above all things whatsoever, we must not forget, but Remember our Creator,
because He has commanded us: Remember thy Creator. Does it become a Child when
commanded, to dispute his Fathers Command? Is it not his Father that commands
him, and therefore he must do it? Why, is not God the Father of us all by
Creation, and are we not obliged to Obey him? The Wind and Seas do obey him,
and shall We turn Rebels? All Creatures pay Homage unto him, and shall Man
refuse? Does the Ox know his Owner, and the Ass his Masters Crib; Isa. 1. 3.
And shall not we whom God has endowed with Reason, and made capaces
Religionis, capable of Religion? Are all the Creatures at Gods beck, and ready
to obey him whenever he desires it, and yet shall we spurn against him,
provoking him to wrath, and grieving his holy Spirit? Why cannot we find in our
hearts to obey our Father, Creator and Lord? Is he not our Sovereign, and have
any gone on in a course of Rebellion against him, that did ever prosper? Is it
not a vain thing to stand it out with God, or contend with the Almighty? Would
it not be more advantageous to lay down the Weapons, and cry peccavi, than to
wrestle and be foiled, fight and be killed? Is it not better to remember our
Friend, that he may remember us, when the proudest and most ambitious shall
e're long see their need of him.

Secondly, Rea. 2.
We must not forget, but above all things Remember our Creator, Religion that
was first in Gods intention, is now become last in man's execution.
because it is the End of our Creation. Man was made to love, serve and obey
his Maker, and God has made him capable, though now by Sin degenerated.

Thirdly, Rea. 3.
God who made us, can destroy us; our Creator is our Preserver; God can easily
look us into the Grave, and frown us into Hell.
as we had our Being from God, so on him does our Being depend. The same Power
that made the World, upholds the World; the same God that made us out of
nothing, can make us into nothing: It concerns us therefore that all of us do
see to this main thing, Remember thy Creator. Are we not in Gods hands, as the
Clay is in the hands of the Potter; we are his Creatures, and he may do with us
what he pleases, and who shall gainsay or oppose him in the least? Let us now
therefore defer no longer, but remember and call to mind our Holy Creator,
lest he becomes so angry as not to be pacified, but to destroy us for evermore.

Fourthly, God is a bountiful Benefactor, he feeds us, clothes us, and gives
us House-room, and therefore not to remember him, is double Ingratitude. God
showed Mercy unto thee before thou could understand it; he prevented thee
with Blessings, before thou could desire them. He is a beast in the shape of
a Man, that will not serve that God at whose Mercy he lies every moment.
When thou wast in the Womb, his Bounty embraced thee; when thou hangedst on
thy Mothers Breast, he did care for thee. How many years are past, in which
thou wast not? yet God erected this House of thy Body for thee; gave thee a
Reasonable Soul, made thee a Man and not a Stone or a Serpent; And yet will thou not love this God, take delight in this God, fear this God, serve and obey
this God? Is it not in and by him that thou live, movest and have thy being?
Is not the Air which thou breathest in, his? Is not the Night and Day his,
whose Intercourses serve for thy Labor and Rest? Is not the Earth his, whose
Fruits do nourish thee most plentifully? Yea does not this Benefactor
wonderfully form, furnish and conserve all the Creatures for thy sake, some
whereof serve to obey thee, some to nourish thee, some to cloth thee, some to
cure thee, some to chastise thee; but all of them to teach and inform thee?
What say thou now, will thou resolve to think now and then on this precious
Creator of ours? Muzzle not, I beseech you, the mouth of Conscience, but give
it leave to speak its mind freely.

Fifthly, We should not forget, but above all things remember our Creator,
because he is our Redeemer also. We do not only owe unto God our Creation,
Sustentation, but Redemption likewise. So that thou may say, The work of
Redemption is many ways to be admired more than Creation.
I was in the jaws of Hell, but thou O God did pluck me out by the Blood of
thy Son; I was the slave of Satan, but thy Grace has delivered me out of his
power: I owe unto thee more than I can perform for my Creation, how then shall
I do to repay thee for my Redemption? The lost Sheep thou have delivered out of
the Claws of the infernal Wolf. The fugitive Slave thou have brought out of the
Prison of Hell. The lost Groat thou have sought out with great carefulness. In
Adam I fell, and thou have erected me. In Adam I was captivated, but thou have
set me at liberty. In Adam I was lost, and again thou have saved me.

Sixthly and lastly, we must not forget, but above all things whatwhatsoever
Remember our Creator, God is Centrum quietativum (as the Schools speak) the
proper, quieting resting Center of the Soul, and in him alone can it truly
rest.
because our chiefest Happiness and Felicity consists therein. God is the
summum bonum, and if we would be happy, it must be by resting in him, settling
and staying the heart on him, not the Creature but the Creator is the Souls
Center: The Soul is immortal, and nothing can satisfy it but God who is
immortal.

Thy Soul nothing can satiate
But God who did thy Soul create.
The Needle of the Compass trembles till it turns to the North Pole. There is
in Man a Natural Pulse that beats after Happiness. Noah's Dove could find no
rest for the sole of her foot, till she came to the Ark. Return unto thy Rest,
In h^c peccabam quod non in Deo, sed in creaturis ejus, me atque caeteras
voluptates quarebam, atque ita irruebamin dolores, confusiones and errores
animae. Aug.
O my Soul, Psalm. 116. 7. There is an impossibility of finding true Rest,
Solace, and Satisfaction of Soul any where but in God, and with God alone. You
may as soon find Life in Death, or Light in Darkness, as Rest for your Souls
any where but in God alone. On the transitory things of this world the Soul
often seeks for Rest, but finds it not, why? Because the Soul is more worthy
than all the Creatures. God is the End whereunto the Soul was created: For it
was made after the Image of God; therefore it cannot be quiet and at rest but
in its End, that is, in God. As the Soul is the Life of the Body, so is God the
Life of the Soul. Tu bonum null* indigens bouo, semper quietus es, quoniam tua
quies tuipse es. Idem.
And where will thou go, Sinner? thou can not find Rest here below in any
thing at all. Can Sin give rest, that is the greatest Evil in the world? Can
that give rest, that is the Cause of all the Confusions and Desolations that
are in the world? Can that give Rest, that was the first and only Cause and
Founder of Hell? Can that give rest, that makes us like the Devil, that
restless Spirit? will you have recourse to the good things of this world, to
Creature Comforts and Enjoyments; to Friends, Relations, Estate, and the like?
The Creatures (says a worthy Divine) are not good; at least they are not the
Souls good; nothing (says he) but an infinite Godhead can allay your hunger
after Happiness. And so another; The understanding, Will and Affections are
such a Triangle, as that nothing but the Trinity can sill them. Dura sunt
omnia, and tu solus requies: Bonus est qui secit me, and ipse est bonum meum,
and illi exulto omnibus bonis meis.
All things (says Austin) are full of trouble and difficulty; Thou alone, He
is Good that made me (says Aug) and he is My Good, and in him do I exult and
rejoice.
O God, art the true Rest. All things on this side God have their Mixtures,
they have a dark as well as a bright side: Is not our Wine mixed with Water, our
Honey with Gall, our Sugar with Wormwood, and our Roses with Prickles? But now
God is every way a pure and immixed Good; He is all Light, Love, Sweetness and
Holiness. Deus meus, Vita mea, Dulcedo mea, etc. O my God, my Life, my
Sweetness! says Augustine. Why then should we seek Happiness in those things
that cannot give us Health, or Strength, or Ease, or a good Nights Rest, or an
Hours Sleep, or a good Stomach.

The Application of the first Doctrine.
It will be of great Use unto us by way of Reprchension, Exhortation and
Commendation.

First, Use 1.
By way of Reprehension; if this be so, then such are to be Reproved that
neither remember God or his Mercies, whose Minds are filled with Vanity, and
swell therewith, but God and his Mercies are out of their Thoughts.

Secondly, Use 2.
By way of Exhortation; we who have given God but little of our Time, Strength
and superior Powers, let us now begin; For shame let us not live longer in the
world without God and Christ; how comfortless and dangerous is it? Some of us
have lived a great while, and yet have not made choice of our chiefest Good,
but are as far from it as when we came first into the world.

Thirdly, Use 3.
You who have called upon God betimes, and do serve, love and obey him, are to
be commended; and whatsoever Reputation or Fame ye may get among men, yet know
this is your highest Dignity, that you Know God, Obey God, Love God, and Walk
with God. This Man fears God, is an Encomium indeed.

The Second Doctrine is this:

There is great Reason why we should Remember our Creator in the days of our
Youth, Doct. 2.
even while we are young, and before Old Age overtakes us.

And this I shall endeavor to make obvious in these several particulars.

First, Rea. 1.
Because your Creator requires it. Young men, God calls upon you, saying,
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth. Young men, Ministers call
upon you, saying, Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth. Young men,
Good Company calls upon you, saying, Remember your Creator in the days of your
Youth. Angels desire it, the Spirit strives; Christ's Invitation is, Come; the
Gospel cries, Now; and what, will you rather listen unto Satan? will nothing
prevail with you? Shall God call for your Youth, and will you deny it? How can
ye think then to prosper? As therefore you would tender your own safety, answer
like the Echo; Lord do thou call for my Youth? O take it then, and thank
thee too; for what is there in me that should attract God, and make him accept
of me? My Youth, is it not full of Levity, Wantonness and Vanity? Am I not all
over corrupt, from the Crown of the Head unto the sole of the Foot, full of
wounds, bruises and putrefying Sores? Iuventutis assecla est stultitia; as a
Page follows his Master, so Folly follows Youth. Nazian. orat. 46. in
Ecclesiast.
Am I not (especially considering me in my Youth) as an untamed Beast? all my
Actions being rash and rude, Vicina la^sibus est Adolescentia: Youth is the Age
whereunto men are nearest, and most ready to fall; witness the Prodigal.
and no Good in me can be found at all; my Affections being strong, are
impatient of Reproof and Correction, they will not submit their shoulders to
the Yoke of God, but like wild shee-Asses they snuff up the wind, and despise
the Hunter. Satan has Temptations suited to every Age: And the Age whereupon
he works most busily, and prevails most mightily, is Youth. The Devil he is for
the prime of our Days, and God he is for the prime of our Days, and who has
the most right, God or the Devil? surely God, thy Conscience will say: But yet
how many (notwithstanding this) are there that give their young and lusty years
unto the Prince of the Air, the God of this World, who allures them so to do,
by telling them that their old, withered and decrepit Age is good enough to
serve God. But Iniquity many times is repaired with a proportionable Plague,
that because they will not give their young Years unto the Lord, he will not
accept the service of their Old Age, but cuts them away, (yea, which is most
fearful, in their sins) and lets them never come to the Honor of a hoary
head. Will ye now Young Men, hearken unto this, and flee Youthful Lusts; God
requires the Cream of your days. In the Law he required unto himself the
First Fruits, Lev. 2. 14. Wheat beaten out of the green Ears; to signify that
he will be served with the First Fruits of our green and flourishing Age.

Secondly, Rea. 2.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, because too soon you cannot
Remember him. Nunquam sera est ad bonos mores via: The way to be Good is never
too late. I am sure the way to be Good, is never too soon; and though Divines
do say, a True Repentance is never too late, yet a late Repentance is seldom
true. True Repentance (without doubt) cannot be too late; but then, late
Repentance is very suspicious, being seldom true: Could we have served God in
our Mothers Womb, yet we could not serve him too soon. And those who shall
serve him to Eternity, cannot serve him too much. Hark, young men, hark, but
let it not amaze you; We can never serve God too soon, because he loved us from
Eternity; and we cannot serve him too much because he loves us to Eternity.
Never fear thy setting out too soon, for the sooner the welcomer, and too soon
thou can not be. The consideration of this methinks should perplex the Aged
that have lost their time, and spur on such who are in their full vigor and
strength, and tempus commodum, they have for God. Know, you who are here
present, and yet shall not put in practice what has been told you, will have
nothing to say for your selves. You cannot not serve God too soon, why then do
you not begin, run, and keep on in that way?

Thirdly, Rea. 3.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, because it is a Time that is
most Acceptable. Now is the acceptable time, Now is the day of Salvation. 2
Cor. 6. 4. Upon this Monosyllable Now, (says one) depends Eternity. As there
is a present Time, so there is a present Truth to lay hold on. The great weight
of Eternity hangs upon the small wire of Time.
The time of our Youth is the only time to lay hold on Eternal Life, and to
make a surrender of our selves unto God and Jesus Christ. When we take a far
Journey, it is requisite that we have the Morning before us. Sirs, to go from
Earth to Heaven is a great Journey, let us then be careful to set out in the
Spring and Morning of our Age; defer not till thou be Old, but walk while
thou have Light, lest the Darkness and Night of Old Age and Death overtake
thee, when no man can work. If therefore, young Men, you would ever be
serviceable to God, let it be while your strength lasts, and before it quite
fails. Give not the Devil the Prime, Bud, Blossom, Flower of your Age, and the
Cream of your days, and in your Old Age (when you can do nothing) offer your
selves to God; as if he were bound to have you then, and only then when the
Devil has done with you: And O unreasonable Creature, that have nothing for thy
Maker but the Devils Leavings, viz. Old Age, a Receptacle of all manner of
Maladies! Behold, the wrinckled Face, rotten Teeth, stinking Breath, withered
with Drieness, dimmed with Blindness, absurded with Deafness, overwhelmed with
Sickness, and bowed together with Weakness, having no use of any sense but the
sense of Pain. Therefore (said the Wiseman) Remember thy Creator in the days
of thy Youth, Dumvires annique sinunt, tolerate laborem, I am veniet tacito
curva senecta pede. Ovid.
while the evil days come not, nor the years draw nigh when thou shall say, I
have no pleasure in them; And so the Wiseman goes on, Allegorically describing
Old Age; showing the Miseries that do attend the same; a little whereof you may
take notice of, for the quickening you unto an Improvement of your Time while
ye are young. While the Sun, or the Light, or the Moon, or the Stars be not
darkened, nor the Clouds return after the Rain: Showing hereby, that in Old Age
all the Abilities of the Mind shall be decayed: The Clouds retrn after the
rain;] As in Winter, one Evil following another. In the day when the Keepers of
the House shall tremble;] The Hands and Arms prove crazy. And the strong men
shall bow themselves;] The Thighs and Legs shall bend under us. And the
Grinders cease, because they are few;] Dentes molares. Teeth cease. And those
that look out of the Windows be darkened;] The Eyes darkened and dimmed with
Blindness. And the Doors shall be shut in the streets;] Their Maladies so
noisome, that none can come to visit them. And he shall rise up at the voice of
the Bird;] That is, take little rest; the chirping of a Bird, or any little
thing shall awake and disturb him. And all the daughters of Music shall be
brought low;] This may be interpreted by comparing it with 2 Samuel 19. 35. Man
goes to his long home;] Comp. Job 30. 23. and Isa. 26. 4. Or ever the silver
Cord be loosed;] Some interpret it of the Marrow, others of the Sinews. Or the
golden Bowl be broken, or the Pitcher be broken at the Fountain;] The Liver is
the Fountain of Blood, the Heart of Spirits, these lose their drawing and
distributing Power.

These things considered, viz. the Inconveniences of Old Age, and the Fitness
of Youth for the Service of his Creator, should (methinks) prevail with young
men to live henceforth not unto themselves, but unto their Creator and
Redeemer. The time of Youth is Seed-time. Iuveni parandum, seni utendum, Sen.
The Proverb is, Youth* lays in, and Age lives upon it: The one sowes, the
other reaps. Now is your Market-time, in which, if ye be wise, ye may make a
happy Exchange of Earth for Heaven, of a Valley of Tears for a Paradise of
Delights. Young Men, consider, you are now Flowers in the bloom; your Friends
Delight, Primitiae terrae, and primitiae aetatis Deosacrae.
your Countries Hope; It lies very much in your Sphere, to be either a Crown
of Rejoyceing to them, or to bring down their Gray hairs with sorrow to the
Grave. But I dare not enlarge.

Fourthly, Rea. 4.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, because if thou think of
deferring till Old Age, it is a question whether thou may live so long;
besides the Inconveniences of Old Age, which I have told you, (as above
written,) The Best of us cannot promise our selves a day. The present Time is
only ours; the Morrow we are not sure of. Take Time therefore by the Forelock,
and cry not Cras, Cras, to Morrow, to Morrow; Manna must be gathered in the
Morning; the Orient Pearl is generated by the Morning Dew. Egregious folly it
is to procrastinate and put off to the last:

At tu dum primi floret tibi temporis aetas, Vtere.

Tib. Improve your Time while you are Young.

Fifthly, Rea. 5.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, because the Day of Grace may
have its Sunset on a sudden: Thou may live perhaps to an Old Age, but the Day
of Grace may not last so long. Now the Gospel is preached, Christ crucified set
forth, the assistance of the Spirit offered, It is observed, that the Season of
Grace is called but a Day, not a Month, Week or Year.
and the Gates of Heaven opened to entertain you; O therefore Now, The Season
of Grace (says one) is a Summers day for Clearness, but a Winters day for
Shortness.
To day if ye will hear his voice, Heb. 3. 7. If to day thou say thou will
not pray, Caesar's deferring to read his Letter before he went to the
Senate House, cost him his Life.
to morrow thou may say thou can not pray. Now therefore, now, as you would
tender the good of your own Souls, work apace; you have the Sunshine of the
Gospel, but a Cloud will come: While the Sun therefore does shine, cock your
Hay, shock your Corn; wanton not away your Summer, lest you beg in Winter:
The Night indeed is for sleeping, but the Day (especially a Sunshine Day, a
clear Day,) is for working. One being in a fit of Anger, a person said unto
him, Domine, Sol ad Occasum; The Sun is going down. If the Sun must not go down
upon our Wrath, let it not go down upon our Loytering.

Sixthly, Rea. 6.
If you have your Life prolonged, and the Means of Grace continued, yet if no
more gales of the Spirit be afforded, The Word is as the Wax, the Spirit is as
the Seal, so that the Spirit is the principal Verbal in the sentence.
what art thou the nearer? When Gods Spirit blows upon us, we shall go full
Sail to Heaven. It is good striking therefore while the Iron is hot, and
lanching out while Wind and Tide serve; open all thy Sails to every breath and
gale of Gods Spirit: Welcome every Suggestion, reverence every Dictate, cherish
every Illapse of this blessed Monitor. Let every Inspiration find thee as the
Seal does the Wax, or the Spark the Tinder.

Seventhly and lastly, Rea. 7.
Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, because the Promise is made
unto Early Seekers; Prove. 8. 17. They that seek me Early, shall find me.

Application.
Is there good Reason why we should Remember our Creator in the days of our
Youth? Then let my Message to you (O Young Men) this day be accepted. The
Reasonableness of my Message I have showed in several Respects. Did I press you
to things that might tend to your hurt, it were something; but I am only
entreating you this day to be kind unto your Souls, and make your peace with
God: While the days come not, nor the years draw nigh, when ye shall say, I
have no pleasure in them.

The Result of all therefore is; Young men, Remember your Creator, by whom it
is that you live, move, and have your Being. Forget him not, lest he forget
you, but seek him Early, and ye shall find him. Motives hereunto I think very
convenient. As,

First, If Honor will sway you, Motive 1.
know that it is the Honourablest thing in the world to Remember your Creator
in the days of your Youth. Is it commendable for a Child to obey his Earthly
Father, how much more commendable is it then for us to Obey our Heavenly
Father? Shun (O Young Men) the Worlds Ambition, and make this your Ambition
(with good Josiah) to set out betimes; with spiritual Isaac, to give your
selves to Meditation while ye are young; with heavenly Jacob, to prize and seek
the Blessing, while others in the use of their vain Sports lose it; with King
Solomon, to know the God of your Fathers; with righteous Obadiah, to fear the
Lord from your Youth; and with Ingenious Timothy* to know the Scriptures from a
Child. And what a Cloud of young Worthies are here? and are they not Honored,
Renowned and made Famous, and that for their soon beginning? The like will be
with you, Young men. Remember your Creator in the days of your Youth, and he
will Honor you. But alas, how few are the number of these young Branches!

How few are there of the Sons of Wisdom, that being enticed by Men, consent
not! But how Honorable is it (I say) for young Men, like Samuel, to minister
and serve before the Lord while he was but a Child! and how comely was the
Carriage of those Children that sang Hosanna's unto Christ! Contemplate often
(Young men) these Looking-glasses; imitate and copy out these patterns and
Presidents; Besides, King Edward the Sixth, that Phoenix of his time; that
truly Noble Prince Henry, and the young Lord Harrington; with many others, who
blossomed as the Almond-tree, betimes.

Secondly, Motive 2.
The longer you neglect, the more difficult will the setting upon your Duty be.
Much Sloth and Procrastination will at last take away the very Heart and
Desire of seeking God; but now, Youth improved, will make the Performance of
the Duty more facile. Opportunity improved, (says one) facilitates every
Action and Employment, making a work come off sweetly, smoothly and with
facility. It is as the laying of the Knife upon the Joint, when we would divide
the Bone. It is Wind and Tide to the Oars of Industry.

Thirdly, Motive 3.
The more Wrath you will treasure up unto your selves, by having more sins to
answer for. The sooner we begin, the less we shall have to answer for; but the
longer we defer, the more we shall have to answer for.

Fourthly, Motive 4.
Young Men shall come to Judgment as well as those of riper years: You think
that you have a Privilege by your Age; Youth must have its course, (say some;)
they must sow their wild Oats. But now the Counsel of the Spirit is otherwise.
In the Morning sow thy Seed, and in the Evening withhold not thy hand, for thou
know not whether shall prosper. And David does tie up your untamed Age to
the horns of the Altar, saying, That even You must cleanse your ways, by
taking heed thereto according to Gods Word. Think not (I say) because you are
Young, you shall be excused: For the dead, small and great shall stand before
the Lord, and you that now take your pleasures, know, that for all that, ye
shall come to Judgment, and your Pleasures shall have an End. Methinks that
Scripture in the 11 of Eccles. v. 9. should cool the Courage of such Young men
who go on in their Career to Hell in the midst of their Pleasures. Rejoice, O
young Man, in thy youth, and let thy Heart cheer thee in the days of thy
youth, and walk in the ways of thy heart, and in the sight of thine eyes; but
know thou, that for all these things God will bring thee into Judgment.

Fifthly, You will not Repent* that you have called God to mind so soon. But
thou shall esteem Gods Grace the more for it; rejoice in the sense of it, and
in Comfort conclude thy Life whenever God shall call thee hence.

I would fain lay down some Cautions and Exhortations unto the Young Men of
this Age, which if observed by them, I am confident would help them much in
remembering of their great Creator. But should I do this, it would make this
little Book swell too much, which for the Poor's sake I would prevent; and yet
a little too I will venture.

First more generally, have a care Young Men of laying a stress on Parentage,
Birth, Education, Civility, and your Natural Endowments: They are all but
painted shows of Righteousness, and cracked Titles to Heaven. Faith comes not
by Birth, Generation, or Education; and he who is Gifted, is not always
Believing.

But (Secondly) more particularly, I would caution you from these Vices, which
tend much to the Corruption of Youth:

First, I would caution you from Love of the World. If any man love the World,
the love of the Father is not in him, 1 John 2. 15. O let not the World lie so
near your Hearts, as it did to the Young Man's in the Gospel. You can never
Love your Creator so as to die for him, if the World get root in your Heart.
Have a care (I beseech you) of preferring the Gifts of God before God himself.
All Creatures that the Lord made, he made for Man, and Man for himself: But
this is a fearful Contempt of God and disestimation of his Majesty, when the
Creature is better loved than God; as Evah for the love of an Apple lost the
love of the Lord; and Esau for a Mess of Pottage sold his Birthright; and the
Gadarens counted their Swine more precious than the Son of God, Christ Jesus.
He that loves these bodily, worldly, and perishing Riches, cannot love the
spiritual, heavenly and eternal Riches. Love not this World, Noli (anima)
diligere ea quae sunt in mundo, peribit Mundus, and omnia quae sunt in eo
exurentur. Ger. Meditat.
because the Devil is the God of it; love not this World, because it cools thy
Affections to God and the things of God. Love not this World, because it is the
Bird-lime of spiritual Amor rerum terrenarum viscus est spiritualium poenarum.
Aug.
Punishments; Love not this World, because the Love of the World is Enmity
toward God. The Riches in this World are called Thick Clay, Hab. 2. 6. which
will sooner break the Back, than lighten the Heart. O that I could but dissuade
Young men from this peccatum peccatorum, sin of Earthly-mindedness. Consider, O
young Men, what Solomon says of this World, who knew as much as ever any did
as to the sweetness of sensual pleasures. Three Advantages Solomon had above
others to know the Vanity of the Creature. (1) In regard of his Wisdom, 1
Kings 4. 29, 30. (2) Riches, 1 King. 10. 23. (3) In that he gave himself to
make trial and Experience of the Creature: Yet, Vanity of Vanities (says the
Preacher) Vanity of Vanities, all is Vanity.

Five times Vanity. 1. Vanity, not vain only, but Vanity it self in the
Abstract. 2. Excessive Vanity; Vanity of Vanities, Hebraism, superlative, by
doubling he signifies most vain, imperfect, uncertain, transitory, void of
Content* full of Grief. 3. An heap of Vanities; Vanity of Vanities; an
Hebraism, and imports most great Vanity. 4. An universal Proposition; all is
Vanity. Fugiamus hinc ubi nihil est, ubi inane est omne quod magnificum
putatur. Let us fly from this World, wherein is nothing but Vanity. Nihil
siquidem a somni Vanitate differt rerum praesentium figura, sive illae tristes
sint, sive prosperae: The most excellent Shows of this Life are but Dreams,
which may affect for a time, but do vanish so soon as the man awaketh. And this
is the first Caution, Love not the World. The Love of the World is an Obstacle
that must be removed, where Love to Christ and to thy Soul (Young man) is to be
shown.

Secondly, I would caution you from Evil Company. I know very well, that we are
mighty apt to follow a Multitude to do Evil; I know that Youth, above all, is
apt to keep Company, especially had Company. And how many have been brought to
Ruin thereby? Wirness Thomas Savage that penitent Sinner.
Have not many at the Gallows laid their sins at the Door of bad Company,
forewarning all to shun the same, and take Example by them. Every man is as his
Company: The Heathen could say, Noscitur ex comite qui non cognoscitur ex se;
He is known by his Company, that cannot be known by himself. A Man's Company is
as it were a Commentary on his Life. A Company or Multitude (and I pray Young
Men do you especially take notice of it) is not the Rule you should walk by, as
for doing Evil, so for doing Good. He that does Good because a Multitude does
it, Non saciendum, quia Multifaciunt. sed quia Bonum ut Bon^m faciunt, aut been
satis mihi sunt pauci, satis unus, satis nullus: August.
will also do Evil because a Multitude does it. We must not (says Austin) do a
good thing because Many do it, Si potenti^res faciunt, non faciunt, sed gaudeo
quia faciunt.
but because it is Good: If others do that which is Good (says he) I will
rejoice because they do it, but I will not do it because they do it, etc. Keep
good Company we must, it is profitable, but we must not make their doing Good
as the Grounds of our doing Good. Shun Evil Company; Is it not an hard thing
for a Bird to fly away that is taken in the Lime-twigs? Why Evil Company are
the Devils Lime-twigs; And what is the Reason that many a man does continue in
Sin, who is convinced of the Evil of it, but because he is held fast in the
Bands of his wicked Company?

Thirdly, I would caution you from Pride. This is a Vice which is incident to
all more or less, but especially to young men. Converted young men, beware of
Pride, for it is that which will rankor all your Graces; know that you are vile
in Progress, Egress and Ingress. Unconverted young Men, do you also beware of
Pride, for it tends to your hurt, as well as it does to the other; for that
self-conceitedness of yours is that which helps to bar your Hearts against
Christ. Young Men, be clothed with Humility; let every one of us look with one
eye upon Grace, to keep the Heart cheerful; and with the other eye upon Sin,
to keep it humble.

Fourthly, I would have young men to beware of Lust, it being their Complexion,
Constitution, and beloved Sin; the sin that attends their Age, and therefore so
much the more diligence and pains must be taken in the Mortification thereof;
and I know not any thing that is so proper hereunto as being moderate in Diet,
keeping the Body down by frequent Fastings in private between God and thy own
Soul upon that Occasion. Flee Youthful Lusts, 2 Timothy 2. 22.

Fifthly and lastly, Beware of Hypocrisy. Perhaps the Devil may flatter you,
with telling you, That if ye can get the Shape, Figure, and Form of Godliness,
it is no matter for any thing else, thou may (says he) go for a Christian
eminent enough among men. Ah, but tell the Tempter, It is only Piety that has
the Promise of the Life to come, and though thou may go for a Christian
amongst Men, and seem well enough in their sight; yet know, in Gods sight thou
shall be discerned; God will one day pull off thy paint, discover thee, and
show thee to the world in thy proper Colors. The very Interior Intents of thy
Soul he knows, thy heart he can read without a Commentary, and those things
that are secret, which thou keep under Lock and Key, he knows; and though
thou may deceive Man, yet thou can not deceive God. Deus nee f^llere, nec
falli potest.

I should now give some Exhortation, but I cannot, because of being prevented
as to that which I spoke before. Remember your Creator in the days of your
youth: And as Helps hereunto take these, and enlarge upon them your selves.

1. View often the Creation of the World; what Man in the World can forget God,
that has himself and the whole Creation to contemplate at any time?

2. Call to mind his signal Favors vouchsafed unto you, in such a Time, at
such a Place, among such Company. Can the Beggar soon forget that hand which he
constantly receives his Alms from?

3. Study the Holy Scriptures. Who can soon forget a holy God, that may read of
him every day in the Holy Scriptures?

4. Attend upon the Ministry of the Word. You in London may hear from God every
day, and surely cannot soon forget him.

5. Keep good company, and then you cannot easily forget God, because you
converse with his Friends; and 'twill be marvel if they do not talk of him
sometimes unto you.

I shall conclude with the words of the Text.

Remember now your Creator in the days of your youth; that you may be as so
many Vessels of Gold for the Praise and Service of your Maker. Amen.

Oecolampadius de Scriptis suis. (...).
(...).
Si been quid scripsi, Christo gratate datori:
Si male quid scripsi, noveris esse meum.

FINIS.

