Long lasting NEWS: OR NEWS FOR NEWTERS.

OR, The Check Cause Cure
of Halting

With 31 Doors of Hope for the good success of the then public Cause of the
Nation.

Delivered in a Sermon, November 27. 1644. In the College of GLOUCESTER, before
that Valiant and Vigilant Governor Colonel Massy, being the day of public
Humiliation.

By WALTER POWELL, M. A. Vicar of Standish.

Est nutrale genus signans rem non animatam. See the Contents after the Epistle.

The second Impression.

LONDON, Printed by M. Simmons, in Aldersgate Street. 1655.

Ad Illustrissimum Dominum OLIVERUM CROMWELL, Angliae, Scotiae, etc.
PROTECTOREM.
Protege Tn Leges, Leges Te, Protege Tn me. Toll Malos, Extolle Pios, Attolle
Ministros.

W. P.

To the Judicious READER.
GOOd wine is not the worse, though it be old,
Nor for its age is worse, what is pure Gold.
This News the three last Parlaments did last,
And 'twill last till the fourth also be past.
Men still do halt in heart, if not in tongue,
Which makes such men these Newters fall among.
Not praise, nor profit, drew this News in Print,
But of the Authors wrong to give an Hint.
False penny News will sell, because it is new,
This not perhaps being old, though it be true.
TO THE RIGHT HONORABLE, the Lords and Commons assembled in PARLIAMENT; The
Author imploreth freedom from Halting, Wildome in discerning, Grace and Glory
for Persevering.
Right Honorable and Noble Senators,
Qui advos audent scribere, ignorant magnitudinem, qui non audent, humanitatem.
That which none are willing to own, most men have endeavored to embrace, and
practice, Hypocrisy. All men (if you will believe them) will be for God at
their death, here and there one that will stand for his cause in the time of
their life, When in these wars men were called to come forth, to the help of
the Lord against the mighty, and most meal mouthed Ministers had their lips
sealed, and fals-hearted people stood with their hands in their pockets, not
with their feet in the gap, to make up the hedge before the Lord, that he might
not destroy the land; then this Sermon in a public place, before an eminent
and public person Colonel M^ssi^, that courageous, vigilant, and faithful
Governer of Gloucester
, (once a member of this honorable House) was preached; whose eye-observing
diligent attention in hearing, public respect and thanks in the face of that
populous audience, immediately after the delivery of this Sermon, are not the
causes of the publishing hereof; but the disregard of one of Gloucester
Committee in his uncivil departure out of the Congregation, before ever he
heard me either pray or preach, pressed me to commit this to the Press: who
showed disrespect to the Sermon, for the persons sake, when as he should have
manifested respect to the person for the Sermons sake, There was no necessity
(I believe no) (I am sure no humanity) for any of that Committee to cause a
Sermon to be preached in another Congregation, at that very instant by that
very Minister, who then was sick, and desired to be eased from preaching that
turn and time, in the College of Gloucester. When this Sermon at a public
fast was preached, (how ever it may seem now unseasonable, coming so late to
the press) was welcome (I am confident) to most that heard it delivered in the
pulpit. The Sermon, I confess, was somewhat long, it was the business of the
day that then required it. But what is added in the point of Country
Committees, was not then specified; for I then imagined, that such qualified
persons were not in rerum naturae. And what is inserted touching flattering
Ministers that have betrayed the trust that God and man have committed to them,
was also unhandled; both which are proper to the subject here in discourse, as
main causes of the people halting between those two different opinions, in the
then common Cause of the Kingdom.

Omnia dat qui justa negat, he that denies that which is just, gives liberty
to speak any thing.

If I have unjustly blamed one of the said Committee (whose advice, as another
Achitophel in those parts, was so highly accounted of, as if a man had enquired
at the Oracle of God) in that censure against me, before any witnesses in that
cause were examined by me, (though many of the Commit, by the procurement of
one, certified under their hands the contrary, as gross untruths, as if they
had subscribed that there is no light in the Sun, nor heat in the fire, or
that the Pope in person sits daily in the Parliament House) to the great loss
of my livelihood, danger of my life, and dishonor of the Parliament (had I not
been relieved) let me suffer more in name, person, estate: Whosoever knows
what has happened unto me, as many thousands have heard, may guess that I am
necessitated to publish this News for Newters.

He that was once an eye-hearer of this Sermon, believed in heart, and
subscribed with hand, that I had the harder usage for the message sake, else
that Committee man could not have so posted out of the College, when he saw
me in the Pulpit, unless he had almost as much feared my message (whom he
never heard in public in his life) as he dreaded the roaring of the Cannon
when he hasted out of the City immediately before the Kings Army came to
besiege the same.

What in public I have spoken, done and suffered for the common Cause,
hundreds have, and thousands will testify: yet all praying, preaching, doing
and suffering, must be buried under the beast like skin of Scandal, to provoke
and satisfy the greedy appetites of a New Committee man, an old Hangman, and a
posted Malignant, and a professed Newter.

I attended eleven days (during part of which time this news was related) to
see these hideous November-Articles I was to answer, yet could not all that
time have a sight of them, till that quick-sighted much knowing justice,
Colonel Bromwich told the Committee it was a shame to make me wait so long for
the said Articles. Then had I December-Articles, and those concerned the
Committee themselves, because they would be sure to strike a deadly blow
against such a Traitor. Then had I January-Articles preferred, and had I not
appealed to this Honorable Assembly, I think I should have had
February-Articles, and so ad infinitum; that no months malice might be left
unattempted to ruin him, whom the Parliament had published and declared, 1643.
to honor.

I was accounted by the Plundering warrants of Malignants, at the siege of
Gloucester, an aider to the Rebels, meaning this Parliament: and by the said
warrants had my goods and Cattle taken away; That the same Parliament
Committee, after I had appealed to the Parliament it self from them, they
under their hands denying me Copies of depositions, taken against me, and
denying me to be present at the examination of witnesses, was by the testimony
of diverse members of this great Assembly, deemed unparallel.

As these things with the effects thereof, to me have proved a burden (almost)
intolerable (the scarre of discredit it being incurable) so to all men may
seem incredible, that a constant sider with the Parliament should, unheard,
out of his living be ejected, and himself and his family be to all misery
exposed, (when that right-discerning, and Parliament-promises-promoting
Justice, Mr. Anthony Clifford, opposed in my absence, the rest of my ruining
unjust Judges:) If I should forbear, the stones would cry aloud, in the eyes
and ears of the world, for justice against this matchless, malicious
abominable censure.

But the blessing of the Lord for ever be and abide on the heads and hearts of
the honorable Committee for plundered Ministers; and in particular, on Mr.
Millington, Mr. Rouse, Sir Arthur Hazelrig, Mr. Tate, who often afforded me
patience, audience, countenance. If I should repeat every member of that
Committee, I might seem to flatter: if I should not mention you, I should
surely be ungrateful: My Countryman Mr. Pury was one of the first that after
my freezing and long waiting, broke the Ice for my return: and Mr. Edward
Stephens, and others, quickly apprehended, and courageously reported the
injustice of the proceedings against me: Whereupon I had an Order of
restitution to my Privileges and Arreares, till the matter be heard;
notwithstanding which Order of Restitution, that active Committee man has been
an Instrument to place (for my supplanting) in my Chapel, to enjoy those
profits that are almost the one half of my little livelihood, a Minister that
has been taken in Arms against the Parliament, and has been ejected out of
his living in Monmouth-shire, for being contentious against his neighbors, a
common Drunkard, a Rayler against the Parliament: who also said, since he was
obtruded on my Cure, a Cavaliere I was, a Cavaliere I am, and so I will
continue. Whether such a Committee man in permitting such a Malignant Minister,
that has been so often active in Arms, to be placed and officiate within
three miles of Gloucester Garrison, has thereby promoted the honor of the
Parliament, and the safety of that City, let all men judge: If I have been
illegally proceeded against by this principal Agent in that Committee, as my
worthy, constant, free and faithful friend, Mr. Pryn, has by tongue and pen
maintained, I shall account it a great honor from this Honorable Assembly, to
have an Order and Commission to some Gentlemen, I shall nominate, to examine
all proceedings of this Committee man, and the combination of such malignant,
malicious persons, as have been unjust practizers against me, that I may
receive such reparations from them, as the merits of my cause, and their
cruelty shall require. All which is committed to the serious consideration of
this honorable Senate, for the relief of

Your faithful Servant, yet suffering supplicant, WALTER POWELL.

Doctrines deduced.
DOct. 1. It is a great sin and shame to halt between God and Baal. Truth and
Error. page 5 2. Those that are good, will show zeal for God. page 5 3. People
continue long in a lingering condition, notwithstanding long and sharp
reprehension. page 6 4. Many are yet to seek who is the true God. page 6 4. God
alone is to be followed. page 6 6. Men are often convicted before they are once
converted. page 6 The first Doctrine prosecuted. Uses. 1. Of Information. 2.
Reprehension of Newters. 3. The Causes with the cure of Halting. page 7, 8, 14
Cause 1. Because many members of the Parliament have diserted the Parliaments
cause. page 14 2. The greatest part of the Great ones have adhered to the
adverse part. page 16 3. Misprision of prerogative. page 17 4. Most of people
siding with the contrary, rather than the Kingdoms Cause. page 19 5. The great
pressure by payments. page 21 6. Fear of being plundered, page 22 7.
Selfe-seeking, with neglect of the public. page 24 8. Vndesire of change for
fear of changing for the worse. page 25 9. Estimation of Parliament-power too
great. page 27 10. Injustice and oppression by Countrey-Committees. page 28 11.
Flattery in, and divisions between Ministers. page 30 12. Doubt of the success
of the cause in hand, make men halt herein. page 35 Which last rub is removed,
in briefly opening many Doors of Hope for the good success of the Common
Cause. page 35, 36, 37, to the end.
Errata's. For 1 Kings 19. read 18.
PAGE 1. in the magent, for use 1. and use 2. read verse. p. 2. l. 5. for
pursuane, r. perseverance. p. 2. for use r. verse 4. and verse 5. p. 2. l. 27.
for Daobolum, r. Da obolum. p. 3. l. 19. for liezure, r leisure. p. 3. l. 21.
make a period between yea, and plain. p. 5. l. 3. for there r. these. p. 7. l.
23. for nor, r no p. 7. l. 35, after Pastors make no period. p. 8. l. 18. in
Margent, read use 2. p. 8. l. 22. for defendant, r defendit. p 14. l. 2. after
sharp, but very exemplary, put president. p. 15. l. 7. for strangely r.
strongly. p. 16. l. 7 for the r. this p. 20. l. 27. for belluae r. Bellua. p.
20. l. 31. ptt out they, before say p. 26. l. 23. r. an after. p 29. l. 7. for
torror r. terror. p. 29. l. 9. for have r. had. for I think some Committe-men
have bought more land since (then they sold before) they were preferred to
their Committeships. p. 31. l. 3. unto seduce strayable people, add, and
pesecute Gods zealous ministers. P. 38. l. 2. for he, r. Shammah. p, 42. l. 4.
for reign, r. rejoice. p. 47. l. l. 34. for And, r. Are these duties. p. 48.
l. 11. in stead of an evil cause, read, and will not he regard the voice, etc.

To the much Honored, Major General MASSEY, one of the Members of the
Honorable House of Commons.
Renowned Sir,
TO none does this Sermon more properly belong, now printed, then to your
self, that heard it preached. After the relation of which news against
Newters, you returned beyond my desert and expectation public thanks in the
face of that populour Congregation.

In those then siding-unsiding times, this Text at that time was seasonable I
yet believe; though the sight of my person in the Pulpit, at that time,
formidable perhaps to some there, that had never heard me preach in their whole
life. One of which departing out of the then Congregation, had he stayed, you
told me, at your Table, might have suspected himself to be like the
Hedge-bogge, I mentioned in my Sermon.

The truth of many of the particulars mentioned in my preceding Epistle, you
know to be true: but I shall manifest the whole to be so, if from the Honorable
House I obtain my conceived just request, to have liberty to examine the
combination and unjust proceedings of my malevolent, yet potent
Committee-adversary.

Sir, you believed and subscribed as much under your hand, that this Sermon was
preached with much zeal against newtralitie; and in that subscription (out of
which I transeribe your own words at this instant, having the copy now at
Oxford before me) you are pleased to approve of my (then) Doors of Hope for
the success of the Parliament cause.

In respect whereof you say further, I then had merited, and you believed, I
should find favor from this Parliament. You believed also, I had hard measure
in my business; and that this Sermon was some occasion of my harder usage,
though indeed the two points (here touched) concerning Countrey-Committees, and
flattering Ministers, were not then bandled.

If you enquire after news out of your once Gloucestershire, I believe many
that were but Newters in your time of abode there, are in heart now most strong
Malignants, perhaps it is because too much savor has been extended toward
them. The enlarged vast difference between those at home that should be
reconciled friends, to oppose the common foe, makes many continue in a balting
condition even to this day: And those that were then seeming friends, to become
now enemies to the common cause. That which was a fiction long ago, seems to
be now put in action.

The Eagle (they say) bad a nest on the top of the Tree, where she had her
young; the Bear had her Den, where she had her whelps under the bottom of the
Tres: The Cat had liberty to run from the bottom to the top, and to be a
speedy messenger between the Eagle and the Bear; tells the Eagle if she fly
from her nest, the Bear waits to devour her brood, and tells the Bear, if
she peepout of her Den, the Eagle will make a prey of her whelps. And thus
persuades them to keep close in their holes, to the starving of themselves and
their young ones, that all might become a prey to the crafty Cat. My professed
Malignants, and their Neighbor Newters (Gallemoufrean,
hotch-potch-ambo-dexters, time-serving weathercock-linsee-wolsie-turn-coats,
Jack on both sides, or rather Nick on no side) persuade the people in these
most dangerous times, that the rigid Presbyterians will keep them in more
slavery then ever Bishops Government did: and that the Independents will have
all things common amongst them. And this is the deepest policle that all the
Devils in Hell could ever invent to prevail with people to sit still, at
Marcus Cato, and Metius Suffetius, the Succoits, and the Meroshites did, that
so professed Malignants might have the more easy opportunity to make the
inhabitants of the land to be made meat for their gaping mouths.

If God ever join the faithful of the people together in a firm and sincere
union, to preserve the Kingdom from slavery and ruin, he is little better
then a Devil, I am sure no friend to the Kingdom, that endeavors to rend
peoples affections asunder.

Sir, I am in my journey, therefore make bold to break off abruptly, leaving
you to the direction of him who has been your protection. Both which shall be
the subject of the prayers of

Your much obliged SUFFERING Servant, WALTER POWELL.

News for Neuters. OR, The Check, Cause, and cure of HALTING.
1 King 19.21. And Elijah came unto all the people, and said, How long halt ye
between two opinions? If the Lord be God, follow him, but if Baal, then follow
him: and the people answered him not a word.
THE Fountain, or Wellhead is far, from whence flows my Text: It is twenty
steps off. Judges 7.


Give me leave with Gideons Soldiers to lap a mouthfull as I run along by the
stream: Before I come to my station, to view these words.

This Chapter contains a Dialogue, or Commemoration of many historical
passages.

1. Between the Lord and Eliah. Use 1.
Go show thy self to Ahab.

Mean ones must not be afraid to deliver messages to the Mighty. Doct. Use 2.
Chapter 17.2.5. Chap. 19. Doct.


2. Eliah's ready obedience to the word of the Lord.

There is a time when Eliah must fly from Ahab, and Jezabell, if the Lord
command him.

Where God has a Tongue to speak, there man must have an ear to hear.

There is a time to fly, Doct.
and a time to stay; God may be glorified sometimes more by flying, than by
staying.

When the force of the enemy may be too strong, Mat. 10.22.
and the Faith of the persecuted may be too weak. When they persecute you in
one City, fly into another.

When you may glorify God more in the place to which, then in the place from
which you fly. You may take leave to depart from men, when first its given by
God. Mat. 10.23.


And this counsel is given, Doct.
(When they persecute you into one City, fly into another.) After the command
of pursuance.

Mercies and miseries are often mixed together, Chequer work is a daily Trade in
these times. God promised rain when there was a great famine in Samaria.

Great peace may ensue these great wars. And Ahab called Obadiah who feared God
greatly.

Some raised up to be good in a general Apostasy from God; Doct.
else woe were to the Kingdom in these times.

Obadiah took a hundred Prophets, Use 4.
and hid them by fifty in a Cave. Wherein appeared his zeal and care.

This has encouraged Londoners to entertain Strangers in these times of
danger.

The names and actions of the godly shall be had in everlasting remembrance.
Doct.


A groan shall be registered.

A cup of cold water remembered.

Tears shall be botled, and shall not blood be booked?

He feeds them with Bread and Water.

Those that fear God, Doct.
he will show succor to them in time of need.

Gods dearest Saints may be brought to a morsel of bread, Doct.
to a cup of cold water.

Bellissarius a great Commander came (being blind) to stand on the high way,
with a Daobolum Bellissario. Give one halfpenny to poor blind Bellessarius.

Another wrote to his friend to send to him a Sponge, a Harp, and a loaf of
bread.

A sponge to dry up his tears; A harp to solace his mind; And a loaf of
bread to satisfy his hunger.

Ahab's command to Obadiah for the preservation of grass for the lives of the
Horses and Mules: Use 5.
Was Ahab so careful for grass? how careful should our King be for Corn and
Cattle, Laws and liberties, persons and Kingdom, Bodies and Souls of living
men, that all be not lost.

Ahab was careful to seek for sustenance though it was (upon an if so be) a
peradventure to find or not.

Ioabs resolution was, Let us be valiant for our people, 1 Samuel 10.12.
and for the Cities of our God, and let him do as seems him good. Let men
do as God commands, and let God do as he has decreed. How careful, how
earnest should men be for Grace, for heaven?

These may be sought and found, Verse 6.
upon certainties without peradventures, shows their policy and care; the King
to go one way, and Obadiah another. Policy to direct the best course, and care
to put it in execution.

Policy may be used, so piety be not suppressed. Doct.


Gods providence seen in bringing together Eliah and Obadiah. Verse 7.
Behold, Eliah was in the way.

Saul went to seek his Fathers Asses, and found a Kingdom; Obadiah went to
seek water and grass, and behold he finds a way and means to bring
salvation to people. He went in obedience to the command of a King on Earth,
and meets with an unerring command of the King of Heaven. Doct.


Gods providence overrules all actions, Text.
persons, times, things, [fell down on his face, etc.]

The Messengers of God find favor from those that are good. Doct. 1. Doct. 2.
Doct. 3


Good Christians will know one another in times of adversity. Good men desire
to be resolved of their doubts.

Obadiah thought that it was Eliah, yet labors to be assured thereof. And he
answered, Verse 8.
I am; Go tell, etc.

Eliah had no French complementall formallity in his mouth, of your humble
servant, Sir (as men now a days, who have more liezure and skill in promising
the duty of Servants, then love and will in performing the office of friends:)
but English downright reallity; he answers, yea plain discoveries are most
pleasing. Doct.
Eliah reveals the naked truth; here no equivocation is studied or practiced.

There needs no Complement with men when Commands are to be delivered from God.

He had an Errand from the God of heaven, to a King on earth. Therefore gives
him a short, quick, plain, pithy answer.

From verse. 9. to 15. we see Obadia's fear, with the many reasons of his
refusal for delivering the Message. The Spirit may be willing, when the flesh
is weak. Doct.


Eliah will show himself to Ahab come what ever will come on it. Verse 15.
The righteous are as bold as a Lion. Doct.


1. Obadiah went to meet Ahab. Verse 16.
Care of Cattle must be neglected, when Gods will is to be performed. Doct.
2. Ahabs willing journey to meet Eliah.
Gods work shall be furthered whether man will or no. Doct.
Obadiah went to further Gods work. Ahab to satisfy his own lust, and to
further the Devils work. Doct.
Man purposes, but the Lord disposes of the purposes. He can bring light out
of darkness, good out of evil; as the Be honey out of weeds.

The sharp and short salutation that Ahab gives to Eliah, Verse. 17.
Art thou he that art the troubler of Israel?

Prophets commonly censured for Authors and Fautors of Troubles. Doct.


Eliah's answer to Ahabs accusation. Verse. 18.
Where read, 1. Vindication of himself, I am not. 2. The just Taxation of the
King. It is thou and thy Fathers house.


1. Many see faults in others, not in themselves. Doct. 1.
2. Kings may be blamed. Doct. 2.
3. Man is the author of his own misery. Doct. 3.
4. Disobedience to God the cause of all misery to man. Doct. 4.
When men forsake the fountain, they dig to themselves pits that will hold no
water.
The Prophet having told the King what he had done against him, V. 19, 20
tells him what he must do for the Lord; Eliah came with a message from the
God of heaven, therefore commands Ahab, and directs him.

All Israel must appear on mount Carmel before this despised Prophet.

God can and will honor those whom the wicked of the world condemn, disgrace,
and persecute. Doct.


The 450. Prophets of Baal, must come with the 400. Chaplains of Jezabell.

All things and persons must subject themselves to heavens decree. Doct.


God can and will call to an account notwithstanding Prophets, Doct.
people go along in their sins.

Thou thoughtst I was like unto thee: Psalm. 50.
but I will set thy sins in order before thee.

Pleasure of sin may go before, when pain for sin shall follow after.

If the pain of the headache were before the pleasure of the wine, none would
be drunk.

If sins wages were foreseen, the work thereof would not be so willing.

So Ahab sent unto all the Children of Israel, Verse. 20.
and gathered the Prophets together to Mount Carmel.

Ahab executes Eliah's, or rather the Lords commands, and that speedily.

Kings hearts are in the hand of the Lord; Doct.
what he commands, they must fulfill.

The Congregation must be assembled, the King, Prophets, people, being gathered
together. Verse. 21.


Eliah proponeth his Text as the foundation for his ensuing words and Actions,
which are the words for my Text at this time, Why halt ye so long between two
opinions.

A word spoken in season (says Solomon) is like apples of gold in pictures of
silver. Prove. 25 15.


There are times of halting, and here is a Text of halting. Therefore Text and
time agree. Here you see,

1. A question propounded to the people; Why halt ye so long between two
opinions?

2. An answer framed for them in a truth supposed.

If the Lord be God, follow ye him: Argum.
but the Lord is God, should they have inferred. Therefore we ought to follow
him.

3. The obstupefaction of the people: They answered not a word.

In the first, note 1. The specification of their sin, Halting. 2. The
aggravation of it, Why halt ye so long? 3. The facillity of walking uprightly
in the way of Truth.


They were not twenty seducing mizmazing errors (as in these Realm-reeling
times) but only the rocks of two opinions, the Lord and Baal.

In the third we see the wilful obstinacy and blindness of the people: They
answered him not a word.

They had somewhat in their minds, though they had nothing in their mouths.

They were convinced by the truth of the Prophet proposed. But they were
unwilling to be converted or reformed, by reason of the example of the Princes
long customs thereto by the multitude of the people, and their seducings
through the numerosity of Baals Prophets, which were 450. and Eliah but one
against them all.

In the 2d. part we may read the rule of unerring direction prescribed, and by
all to have been observed. If the Lord be God, follow ye him: But be alone is
God. Ergo.

The first is the Check of Halting. The 2d. is the Cause. of Halting. The 3d.
is the Cure of Halting.
Or take the division, if you please, more briefly thus.

1. A Reprehension. Why halt you so long between two opinions. 2. A Caution,
Limitation, or Direction. If the Lord be God, follow him. If Baall be God,
follow ye him. 3. The non-pluse obstupefaction or obduration of the people,
who though they were convinced of, yet would not be converted to the truth.
They answered him not a word.
Its a great sin and shame to halt between God and Baal, Doct. 1.
truth and error.

Those that are good will show zeal for God; Doct. 2.
or zeal of Pastors a special help against peoples halting. Or downright
Doctrine must throw down sin and Idolatry.

People continue long in a limping condition notwithstanding long and sharp
reprehension, Why halt ye so long. Doct. 3.


Many are yet to seek and resolve which is the true God. Doct. 4.
If the Lord be God.

God alone is to be followed. Doct. 5.
Follow him.

Men are often convicted, Doct. 6.
before they are once converted.

These are some general Doctrines deduced out of this verse worthy your
serious consideration.

These are some fruits which fall from the tree of this Text, at the first
touch thereof. In the handling whereof, Had I either the open utterance of
Paul, or the eloquent tongue of Tertullus, or the well-tuned Cymballs of David,
or the shrill-sounding bells of Aaron, or the silver Trumpet of Hillary, or the
golden mouth of Chrysostom, or the mellifluous speech of Origin, or the
thundering voice of Perieles, these truths then would both find and leave you
attentive.

But I shall prosecute only the first Proposition aiming to apply it to these
halting times. Doct. 1.


Its a great sin and shame to halt between God and Baal, truth and error,
light and darkness, the word and the world, Christ and Belial.

Because there is no communion between these, Reas. 1. 2 Cor. 6.14.
and yet such halters make a communion and union between them; they join
together what God has put asunder; and they put asunder what God has in his
Word and will joined together.

They call evil good, Isa. 5.20.
and good, evil, they put darkness for light, and light for darkness, they
put bitter for sweet, and sweet for bitter. Now such sin greatly, because God
denounces woes so sharply against them, nay more woes than against other grand
workers of iniquity, because these are wise in their own conceit. Verse 21.
Reas. 2.


Because these halters will be wiser than God, give Christ the lie, set the
holy Ghost to school. Mat. 6.24.
No man can serve two Masters, for either be will hate the one, and love the
other, or else be will hold to the one, and despise the other. Te cannot serve
God and Mammon. Yes we can say these halters; we can serve God in the morning,
and the Devil in the afternoon: one Master in the Temple, another in the
Tavern. We can comply with Round heads while we are in their company, and with
Cavalliers when we are in their company; humor and sooth Papists and Puritans,
and displease neither.

Because these are most notorious hypocrices, they think they can be too hard
for, Reas. 3.
and deceive both God and Devil: they halt between God and Mammon, Christ and
Belial, purity and Popery. They have a tongue for the Court cause, and a tongue
for the Country cause. God calls for the heart, Prove. 23.26. My son give me
thy heart. Satan will be content with half the heart: 2 King. 17.33, 34.
God is herein more covetous than the Devil, he will have all or none: the
Devil will be contented with half, because he knows if he have any, God will
have none. Let such consider if it be good to seem to be rich, it is better to
be so; if good, to seem to be good, better to be so; if it be bad, to seem to
be bad, it is worse to be so. Either therefore be as thou seem to be, very
good; or seem to be as thou art indeed, very bad; If the Lord be God, follow
him; if Baal, follow him. If thy own private be to be preferred before the
public prefer it, if the public be to be preferred before the private
prefer it, else profess thy self to be an hypocrite, more woes are denounced
against such than against any sinners; eight several woes in Mat. 23.13.
denounced against them. Use 1.


In the first place this may serve to inform us touching the Cause why so many
faithful Preachers are so zealous that they lift up their voices like
Trumpets; when Trumpets lift up their voices like Preachers, the glory of God,
love of Christ, care for the Kingdoms laws, liberties, constrain them.
Obadiah disswades Eliah, ver. 10. Ahab reproves him, ver. 17. God commanded
him, v. 1. Whether it be better to obey God or man, judge ye, Acts, 4.19. Sin
labors to destroy the word in the mouths of Ministers, and Ministers labor to
destroy sin in the hearts of hearers; when fire and water meet there is great
rattling and hissing. Paint a fire on a piece of cloth, and cast it into the
water, and no noise at all, nor contraries, therefore no combat. If ministers
come with painted fire, with silken sayings, flattering words, saying all is
well, no wonder if men halt, limp, trip and fall into the downfall of
damnation, Zac.
feel hell before they fear it: Is it not therefore lawful, necessary, to
rescue men's souls as brands out of the fire? Lev. 19.17. Thou shall not hate
thy Brother in thy heart, but reprove him plainly. Were not the people here by
the zeal of Eliah first convicted, then converted, crying, The Lord is God,
the Lord is God. Can it be bad to be zealous in a canse that is good, to
preserve a plant from withering, a Beast from drowning, a sheep from wandering,
a house from siring, a ship from sinking, a City from sacking, and Kingdoms
from destroying, to save a soul to turn a sinner from the evil of his ways?
As cold often breeds an inflammation, so the lukewarm devotion of many Pastors.
People have enkindled Gods wrath, and Gods wrath has blown up these sad
combustions wherewith the Land is almost consumed, should not the Boanerges
labor to take out fire with fire, the fire of Gods wrath by the fire of the
Spirit to preserve from everlasting burnings? Jer. 6.29.
The lungs and lips of Preachers that are touched with a coal from Gods Altar,
are powerful bellows to blow up the dying fire of zeal; Is not this Gods
work? and must not they be fervent in Spirit that will serve the Lord? Romans
12.11. Isa. 63.15. and 9.7. 2 King. 19.31.
whose work can never be done while they freeze at it. It is Gods zeal that
must do all for us, and must not our zeal do all we can for him? Did Christ
sweat, that the Christian should freeze? must not all redeemed ones be zealous
of good works, Titus 2.14? Hanniball by fire made way over the Alps: so must
Ministers by zeal over the mountains of oppositions, the tops whereof will
not be climbed without great strength, violence, and vivacity.

Palms are the Emblemes of victory, but they love to grow in a hot soil. All
would have Palms, heat is the means for them.

Fervency in a Christian is the grace of every action; Ministers must persuade
to be zealous, else people cannot repent: and they must repent, else Christ
will not come in and sup with them, Rev. 3.19. And must Ministers persuade
others to be zealous, and shall they be dull, cold, lukewarm themselves?
Wisdom is justified of her children; the people, place, Text and time call
for it. Thus having with the Cock, clapped my wings on my own breast, give me
leave to crow unto others also; to show men their present sin, to prevent their
future shame.

Christ looks on all Newterallists as on enemies, Use. 2.
not as on friends; Why halt ye so long, seeing it is a great sin and shame?
Mat. 12.38. He that is not with me is against me: and he that gathers not with
me, scatters abroad. Aut mecum totum tene aut totum amitte, says Greg.
Proditor est veritatis, qui aut libere non pronuntiat aut non sufficienter eam
defendant, says Chrysostom.

Traitors are the very offspring of Judas, shamefully exposing themselves to
the scorn and hatred of all men, both good and bad; It happening to these
neutralizing middle-men, as to those that dwell in the middle rooms of some
high building; as they are smoked and smothered by those that dwell under them,
and polluted with dust and filth of those that dwell over them: so smoke and
smoother, shame and disgrace are the portion of such neutrall middle people.
They that cleave heartily to neither side, are justly suspected and abhorred of
each side; he that is neither thoroughly for God nor man, is rejected both of
God and man.

Do not therefore say (in these days of danger) as sometimes Cato the Roman
did in the Civil Wars between Caesar and Pompey. Quem sugiam video, quem
sequar non video, I discern whom to fly, but not whom to follow. Mark. 8.34.
Judge. 5.23.
Christ is to be daily followed, or the curse of Meroz to be expected, which
words I wish (as once Chrysostom did that sentence, Eccles. 2.11.) were
engraven on the door posts into which these Politicians and Neutralists do
enter, on the Tables where the sit, on the dishes out of which they did eat,
on the cups out of which they did drink, on the beds whereon they did lie, on
the walls of the house wherein they did dwell, on the garments which they did
were, on the heads of the horses on which they do ride, on the foreheads of
all those whom they do meet, that they might learn and continually remember,
that there is a bitter curse attending not only those that powerfully oppose
Christ, but those that neglect to assist him. But men should do rather as the
noble Soldier (in Erasmus) did to one that told him a most numerous Army was
against him, Answered Tanto plus gloriae referemus, quanto sunt plures, quos
superabimus; The most numerous opposers make the Christians Conquest the more
illustrious; Christ's faithful Soldiers they are all glorious Conquerours, 2 Timothy 4.8.
they have always Crowns, though sometimes they are enforced to swim to them
in streams of blood: take to thee therefore the heart and courage of Shammah,
2 Samuel 23 12.
one of David's Worthies, who stood and defended the field when all the rest
fled; He that stands not by his Master in the time of danger, is not worthy the
name of a servant; should thou help the ungodly, and love them that hate the
Lord, therefore is wrath upon thee from before the Lord, 2 Chronicles. 19.2? Such as
turn with the Weather-cocke, and field of Corn with every blast, will the
Lord account as his Servants, Friends, and Soldiers?

I have read of a Creature which they call a Hedge-hogge or Urchin, which has
two holes, the one toward the North, the other toward the South; if the wind
blows Northwards, it stops that hole, and opens the other toward the South,
if the wind blows Southward, it stops that hole, and opens the other toward
the North; So these Neuters, if the one Army comes to quarter in their Coasts,
they stop the mouth of exclamation against them, and open against the adverse
Army; if the other Army come, they stop their mouths in speaking any thing
against them, and open them wide, to rage and rail freely against their
opposites: or I may make the application thus; while the Parliament went on
smoothly in the beginning under the fair gale of probability, to land the
ship of intended reformation upon the shore of long desired and happy
success, not a mouth then was open against them, but when a Boreas blast comes
against them, an Euroclydontizinge (i) a quiet-sayling-opposing-storme, a State
staggering, a Realme-reeling tempest, under the power of Prerogative Command,
then men began to open their mouths at large, ready to cry down the very same
Parliament, by their invectives and imprecations which they had a little, yet
long before, cried up, in their desires and earnest prayers to God; so mutable
are these dissembling temporizers, when all things concur not with their
carnal contents and earthly hopes. What will these neutralizing double-minded
persons say, or how will they answer for themselves, if they live to see the
war ended? Shall I guess at their answer, and then you may guess at their
Ambodexterisme and palpable hypocrisy? I think (when these civil or rather
uncivil wars are ended) they will answer to such as heard them in speeches,
and knew them in actions to play fast and loose, to be Jacke on both sides,
they will answer, I say as the Dunsticall Doctor, or equivocating Astronomer
answered; which Story I have read in a Sermon preached at Paul's Cross, (if my
memory fail not) above forty years ago, which Pedigree of place and time, I
name for the more Authorities sake, that it may not be an occasion to move
laughter in the hearers; yet, howsoever the guilty may laugh at the hearing of
it, the innccent may weep for the laughter of the guilty: This Astronomer in
a Moone-shine-night walked up and down the streets in a populous Town, and
looked up unto the Stars, and the people flocking about him, asked him, What
weather Master Doctor? What weather? Very soul, quoth he, very soul; and
walking along into another street, and looking into the sky, the people came
to him and asked him, What weather, What weather, Sir? To whom he answered,
Very fair weather, very fair; afterward the weather proving foul, the people
that dwelled in the second street meeting the Astronomer, said to him, You
were deceived Master Doctor, you told us we should have fair weather, but it
proved otherwise; To whom he replied, I did but jest in what I spoke to you,
but ask the men that dwell in such a street, what I spoke to them, I spoke in
earnest unto them; So such linsey-wolsey-mungrill-motley-minded-men, being
hereafter told, you said such an Army was in the right, and the other in the
wrong, will reply when they see the issue, I did but jest in what I spoke in
such a Cause that I see now sunk, but I spoke in earnest touching the Cause
which I now see stand, and has prevailed. Like the man mentioned in Macrobius,
who in the wars between Anthony and Augustus, had two birds or Parrotts; He
taught one of them to say, Ave Imperator Antoni, and the other, Ave Imperator
Auguste; so that whosoever got the day, or won the victory, still he had a bird
to give him the congratulation of all hayle, or God save you Emperor, whether
it should be Augustus or Antonius; so un^^^ing persons in these siding times
have a bosome-bird in a readiness to salute either prevailing party with a
joyful acclamation of God bless and prosper you, etc. Whereby they become
guilty of the sin here reproved, namely, of balting between two opinions.
The word signifies, a lamenesse on both feet; the same word that is translated
halt, signifies lamenesse on both feet, which is used to express
Mephibosheth's lamenesse, 2 Samuel 4.4. Jacob had but one side lame, therefore
there is another word used in Genesis 32.31. And as he passed over Pennel, the
Swnne rose upon him, and be halted upon his thigh. These Neutralists are lame
on both feet, they neither serve God, King, nor Country cordially. 2 King.
17.33, 34.
God looks upon divided worship as no worship: The Idolaters feared God, and
worshipped Idells; and in the next verse it is said, they feared not God.

Those are threatened severely that sweared by the Lord and by Mal chom, Zeph.
1.5. If the Parliament be not for the weal of the Kingdome' why gave thou a
voice to choose them? If they be for the weal of the Kingdom, why do thou
not in words, judgment, and practice, adhere to them still? Consider what
infamy will befall thee, every one points with the finger, saying, There goes
an Hypocrite, Shifter, Turne-coat, neither hot nor cold, a traitor to his
Country; These Apostatizers either from Parliament, or from their Countries
good, do resemble the Devil, for what makes the Devil so black but his
Apostasy? What other are such receders? When the Lycaonians saw the miracle
that Paul wrought in curing the Creeple, they cried out, The Gods are come
down amongst us in the likeness of men, Act. 14.10, 11. But when the
Barbarians saw the Viper upon his hand, they eryed out, This man is a
Murderer, whom vengeance sussers not to live, Chap. 28.4. When at the
beginning of their sitting, the Parliament cured such as were creepled in their
Estates, and Liberties, when they took away Ship Money, Monopolies; When they
made the lame to walk, opening prison doors to such as were in bonds; when
they made the dumme to speak, opening the mouths of many frienced Ministers,
then they could say, Oh this is a blessed Parliament; but when they saw
Malignants, Flatterers, and Papists up in Arms, then men begin to change
their note, and why, O peace, peace, peace upon any terms, yet the Sun is
the Sun, though sometimes clouded; Does not the Lord command, Zach. 8.16.
Verse. 19. Heb. 12.
Love Peace and Truth, nay, Truth and Peace; must not peace and holiness be
followed of all? Have not the Parliament petitioned again and again for
peace; do not we pray daily for it? do not our Army fight for it?

Pyrrbus fought three sore battles against the Romans: in the two first he got
the victory, but with so great loss of his men in both, that it was said of
him, for the first he might gloriari magis, quam gaudere, brag of his victory,
not rejoice in it; for the second, he was heard himself to say, that if he got
such another victory, he was undone. Conditions of peace (after the first
victory) were offered by Cineus Pyrrbus his Ambassador in the Senate, and many
among the Romans were apt to incline to it, as being disheartened by Pyrrbus his
victory. Appius Claudius having notice of it, devoted to privacy for a long
time, aged and blind, caused himself in his Couch to be carried to the
Senate House, and said; Worthy Patriots, I have hitherto with sore grief
endured loss of sight, but now hearing your inclination to conclude such a
dishonorable peace with Pyrrbus, a prosessed enemy to Rome, it now troubles me
more that I am not dease also, that my ears might not heat of such an infamy
and reproach to such a tenowned City of Rome: you may make the application.

But you will say, Quest. Answ.
who are Neuters?

Est neutrale Genus, signans rem non animatam. Liselesse men.

A cursed generation of men who seem not to know their right hand from their
left, nor which way to turn. One compares these to the shadow of a man;
Another to a picture commonly seen in Flaunders, and too often, I believe in
England also. In which there is a thing they call a Christ on the left hand,
another thing they call the Virgin Mary on the right, and in the middle a third
thing called a Catholic, with this inscription before him, Cui me vertam,
nescio. Let us apply it to our times; Christ and his truth are on the right
hand, (for he has too long been set on the left hand, let us now endeavor to
set him on the right) the Devil and the Pope on the left hand; the Faith, the
Law, Religion, and Liberties of the Kingdom are on the one hand; Popery,
slavery, profaneness on the other hand, yet Cui me vertam nescio; he knows
not which side to take, is not he a Neuter? On the one hand are the great
Council of the Kingdom, who have lost much outward liberties and profits, to
procure peace for the Church, and purity for Gods worship; on the other hand
are lefthanded men, Robbers, spoylers, murderers, roaring Lions, devouring
Wolves, who labor to fight in Popery to the Church, beggary to the State, and
slavery to the Subject, yet Cui me vertam nescio, to what hand he may turn he
cannot tell.

Go, Hest. 4.16.
fast and pray for us, we will do so likewise, say Gods faithful people in
their inisery; Go feast and play, swill and swear, say Athisticall Papists,
and popishable persons. God on this day calls for fasting, the Devil calls to
feasting, Esi. 22.12, 13, 14.
to riot, sports, works of calling; God calls to weeping, mourning, baldness,
girding with sackcloth; And, Behold, (and indeed it commands admitation) joy
and gladness, slaying Oxen, killing sheep, eating flesh, drinking wine, and
saying, Let us eat and drink, for to morrow we shall dye, if we will believe
Preachers prate, yet Cui me vertam nescio, says your
meale-mouth'd-ling-medly-man, your carnal Politician. It was revealed in my
ear from the Lord of Hosts; Surely this iniquity shall not be purged till ye
dye. Ecquis mecum? 2 King. 9.32.
who is on my side who? throw down this cursed Jezabel, painted piety, Romish
Idolatry, Image Worship, false worship, who will rise up, with me against the
evil doers, who will stand for me against the workers of iniquity? Pfal.
94.16. Who will come up to the help of the Lord against the mighty, Judge.
5.23? Yet most men will stand with their hands in their pockets, and their
coin in their Coffers, and will not come forth and show themselves. I will not
undertake to propound a way to reform them, I think I can discover some cause
of their increase; pity, lenity, connivency toward them; pity showed to
enemies, is cruelty to friends; Is it not against the law of nature, that they
who are without natural affections, should enjoy the common gifts of nature,
light, air, fire, water? Is it not against the law of Nations, Armen, that
those Subjects should enjoy the privileges and immunities of Subjects, who see
with open face the enemies destroying all these; yet lay it neither to head nor
to heart?

They that are the same, and have done the same, for doing whereof others their
neighbour-Neuters have had the skin torn from their flesh, and their flesh
from their bones, these do deserve to be cast out of the land. But these
dissembling Neuters are the same, and do the same which they did in former
times that were so punished, therefore these Compounds deserve no favor, but
to be cast out of City, Country, Kingdom. The Parliament accounts such no
better than professed Malignants, (I think they are worse;) true friends to
the Parliament should not esteem them undangerous enemies to Church, and to
the Commonwealth, these get to an upper place (if not in situation, yet in
speculation) as Metius Suffetius did, spying which side is strongest and
likeliest to prevail, and then toward that side they will wheel about and
joyn^ themselves; But what reward did his carnal compound policy, his divided
heart promote him too? My Author says, that the body of Metius Suffetius (who
stood neuter in the wars between the Romans and the Fidenates, to spy which
side was strongest, that thereunto he might turn) was adjudged by a Council
of war to be tied to two teemes of horses, which halled contrary wayee, so
his body was drawn asunder, and plucked into two pieces accordingly. The
portraiture of which Teemes halling, and Metius Suffetius body so drawn
asunder, I wish were set upon the walls of the houses, where such Compound
Neuters dwell, or on the horse-heads, on which they do ride, or on the sides
of the cupsin which they drink, or on the bedsteads on which they lie, that
they might learn by other men's harms to beware of falling into the like
sin, for sear they fall into the like punishment.

You know the History of the men of Succoth and Penuel, Judge. 8.
what Gideon desired of them for his wearied Armies in the pursuit of Zeba and
Zalmunna, the Sucoothites jeered at him, You will return us our bread when you
have your enemy in your band. When will that be? Your enemies are Kings, and
Kings will help one another; they have power; you are weak, think you to
overcome two Kings with your three hundred tired Soldiers, there is a great
peradventure, disadvantage. We will see the success first cleerer, Ver. 16.
you question not the victory, its a great question to us. Are the heads, etc.
you know what follows, as Gideon threatened to deal, so he dealt with them, he
took the Elders of the City, and the thorns and briars of the wilderness,
and with them he taught the men of Succoth; he taught them? a sore teaching, a
fearful fight to see so many blondy bones to start out of the flesh: a sharp,
but very exemplary for unfiding men in these siding times; They that will not
be taught by precepts, must be taught with pain, I wish such briars and
thorns grew and were seen in the hedges that mounded in the grounds of such
Compounds, fearful, faint-hearted, cowardly, hypocritical, dissembling,
lukewarm, false-hearted, traiterous, neutralizing persons. You know the
parable of a man traveling falling among thieves and wounded; Lake 10.
that which was in parable then is in practice now, the Land is fallen among
thieves, or thieves rather have fallen upon the body of the Land; should it not
work pity, compassion in all that see it? are they Samaritans that regard it
not? woe, woe to the lookers on, and passers by. Curse ye bitterly such
Merozites, Judge. 5.23. In cursing curse, never cease to call for a curse.
Janius renders it Indesinenter, Cursed be be that does the work of the Lord
negligently, and that keeps his sword from blood, Jer. 17 3. If negligent
workers? What, no workers? that are like standing water, that neither ebs, nor
flows?

These Ambodexters who are Compounds that care not what side prevails, shall
be rewarded as Neuters, shall not have Gods protection; all left handed persons
shall be put on Christ's left hand, shall be sent away with a depart from me;
God comes to help all simple ones in their misery; and all such will help the
Lord in his misery, Mat. 25.35, 36. For I was an hungered, and ye gave me
meat: I was thirsty, and ye gave me drink: I was a stranger, and ye took
me in; naked, and ye clothed me; I was sick, and ye visited me; I was in
prison, and ye came unto me.

Having showed the sin, and shame of these Neuters, I now come to show the
Cause and Remedy of their Malady, in the third Use; Use 3.
which you may call the Solution of the Question, or satisfaction of the
Doubts, or removal of the rubs in the way, or which I call (in the Title for
these times) the Causes and the Cure of balting. These people spoke not a word
to Eliabs Question, yet they murmured in their minds, though they manifested it
not with their mouths. But now people both mutter inwardly, and mouth it
outwardly, why they halt; viz.

Many, 1 Cause.
yea, the greatest part, even of the Parliaments Members, have deserted the
Parliaments Cause: Do you not think they did it out of Conscience toward the
Kings side?

And what think you of those few that are turned from the King, Answ.
and offered their service to the Parliament again, confessed and recanted
their error, and wondered that they could be so far seduced to take up Arms
against that Parliament which they had taken the Covenant to maintain? What if
many have betrayed their trust, and deserted Parliament and Kingdom, does this
justisie their persidiousnesse, and halting condition, or condemn the
sincerity of such as go on uprightly without backsliding? Can any man have any
color to free them from never dying infamle, who made elaborate Orations,
fair promises, loud protestations, That they would live and dye with the
Parliament, to spend their lives and fortunes in the cause; confessing that to
be the cause of God, and yet either through fear, or hope of favor, have
forsaken that Cause, (which at first they then so strangely maintained) and
have been instruments of betraying much innocent blood, and bringing more cares
upon the heads of those that have continued constant. If the Kingdom stand,
doubtless such Traitors shall not long stand in credit or liberty, but shall
be brought unto condign punishment, that others may fear Apostasy, and the
sincere be cherished in their fidelity. If the Kingdom do not stand (for a
house, a City, a Kingdom divided cannot long stand) God will find them out
and reach them a rap; for cursed be he that putieth his hand to the Plough, and
looks backs, is not fit for the Kingd me of Heaven. How can it be expected
otherwise, but that Gods curse and shame with men, should overtake such
runawayes, and all other dissembling Neuters, who seem to be so high in
eminency above others, yet have discovered such base spirits, when as the
lowest peasant would hardly be persuaded to do more monstruously, nay, scarce
Heathens would have been hired to do so much: Let such dissemblers never
account hypocrisy a sin, or sincerity a grace, nor Christianity an honor
unto them.

What do they discover themselves to be in the hearts of all that know them,
but base peasantly spirited spectacles of disgrace and infamy, in betraying
their own certain proprieties, liberties, (in hope of uncertain honors and
profits in the Clouds,) yea, captivating and slaying their owns posterity and
children, together with the Inhabitants of a whole Kingdom? If the Members
departed be the greater number than those that stood sound, why did not those
continue in the House to have overvoted the rest, and so have carried on their
design with more ease and safety, with less charge, danger, discredit, to
themselves, their fortunes, and their posterity, which now they are liable to
undergo? Howsoever, many simpletones in the Country may be persuaded and
deluded that the greater part of themselves are departed to the Kings side; it
is a gross untruth, for it is reported for truth, that about (some say at
least) 248. are in or of the Commons-House, and I hope the flight of the
perfidious, gives not disanullity to the rest?

But let the number be few or many, the Cause is one and the same still as at
the first, and their Call lawful, and if many more should betray their trust,
is not the Kingdom, the people bound with person and purse to preserve the
rest that labor to preserve their Religion, Laws, Libertles, for themselves,
and their posterity?

The fewer they be that have stood permanent when so many have been Traitors,
it is so much the more honorable to the former, as it is vituperable, and
dishonorable to the latter.

Had thou not a vote in choosing them particularly? If so, why should not
thou have a heart and a hand to defend them in the general, which consisted of
so many particulars? Why baltest thou so long? Why trippest thou at the stone
of offense? Which may so easily be removed, if thou would but cast thy eye
of Reason to consider thereon.

The examples of other great ones so increasing, 2 Cau.
adhering to the King in the Kingdom.

Shall Christ be set upon the footstool, because great ones will not endure
him on the throe? Answ. Psalm. 2.
Do not the Scripture tell us, that Kings of the earth stand up, and Princes
consult together against the Lord, and his anointed, saying, Let us break
their bonds, and cast their cords away from us. Why do the Heathen rage when
God will continue his Son upon his holy hill? You know it is a truth,
Greatness is seldom accompanied with Goodness: Not many wise men after the
flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called. 1 Cor. 1.26. Psalm. Col. 3.
Their bellies are filled with the hid treasure of the earth, therefore they
seldom have appetite to hunger and thirst after that life which is hid with
Christ in God. They so mind Belly-blessings, as that they neglect the care of
spiritual mercies. Yet a Pearl is a Pearl, is precious, though many with the
Cock preserre the Barley-Corne before it. Greatness attended with goodness,
is like apples of gold in pictures of silver, (as gratior est virtus veniens e
corpore pulcro:) Piety in Majesty is most eminent, transient, Psalm. 133.2.
and communicative; it is like Aarons oil that descended from the head to the
Beard, and so to the skirts of the clothing; the Family, the Parish, the
Country shall smell more fragrantly, be animated more cheerfully, hold out the
more constantly by the good examples of the mighty. As Labans flocks increased
the better for Jacobs sake, and Potiphars affairs succeeds the more
prosperous for Joseph's sake. Act. 27.
And Paul's fellow-passengers sped the better, were landed more safely for his
sake: so mean ones, Tenants, children, families, thrive and grow the better,
are more good and constant by reason of the goodness and constancy of their
Superiors. They being as a great Oak, which standing yields shelter and
safety to them that stand under it; but falling crusheth down the underwood
near unto it. They being as fresh-fish, which if it be sweet in the head, thou
may taste of the whole body, but if the head stink, the rest of the body is
tanted; if the fountain be polluted, can the channel be clean?

Are not great ones, Landlords, Gentlemen, as fountains, as heads, as Oaks:
they being for the greatest part so corrupt, rotten, vile, is it any wonder
their Tenants, neighbors, underlings, dance after their pipe?

Jeremy went to the people to expect information, but found it not, they were
simple ones, unlettered ones, had not so much leisure, books, abilities,
opportunities: he went therefore to the great ones, looking for better things
from them, but these altogether broke the yoke, burst the bonds. Ier. 5.5.
He could not expect the common sort to be good, when the great ones were so
bad. Do any of the great ones, the chief Priests and Pharisees believe on
him? Ioh. 7.48.
How dare you move one way, when men of high place look another way?

As I read of some Master or Captain, that because be was crook backed, all
the rest of the Scholars or Soldiers stooped; as the flattering servant said,
Ait? aio; negas? nego. Does my Master say thus? so do I also; does he deny it?
so do I also. The coward ze of the Gentry have been a great bane to the
Country, because exemplum praevalet in re qualibet, they have been content to
make Kings to be Gods, that they themselves might be Kings. But consider how
God has infatuated their Cousells, and defeated their hopes, Parturiunt montes
nascetur ridiculus mus. They conceive a mischief, and brought forth a lie.
They have exposed themselves to the storm and contempt of all good men,
because they permit their greatness to bid adieu to goodness. They caught
after the shadow, and so have lost the substance too; and they have but the
bones of Promethius left, for them, the flesh being devoured. Sumble not
therefore at those bones, have not their persons in admiration, take not their
evil actions for imitation, seeing great ones are seldom good ones. Many
future generations shall call them cursed, because they came not forth to the
help of the Lord against the mighty; they had not a foot to stand up in the
gap, Ezekiel. 22.30.
they had not a hand to make up the hedge for the Land, that the Lord might not
destoy it; mighty ones shall be mightily tormented.

Because they siune against many meahes, 1 Can.
enjoyed more by them than by other men.

Because they cause many to fall through their default: 2 Can.
which if people did believe, they might be preserved from balting between two
opionions. Let people therefore for their preservation against the danger of
this stone of offense, pray often to the Lord, that he would make great ones to
be good, and good ones to be great.

Misprission or overprizing of Prerogative, has blinded the eyes, 3 Can.
and cripled the feet of many a man: the Parliament, the people, the Soldiers
(say many) oppose the Kings Prerogative, this makes many halt and stagger.

The honor of a King consists in the multitude of people. Answ. Prove.
Those that labor most to diminish people, do most dishonor a Prince. If the
Kings of this Land have not a power to contradict the Censure and Judgments of
insertions Courts, should they have power to contradict the supreme Courts or
Judicature? It Is true, the Laws of the Kingdom are called the Kings Laws;
not that either he made them, or can at his pleasure alter them, but that he is
or ought to be the Conservator of them as well as the Consenter to establish
them.

It is true, Hen. 4.
a King of this Land wrote to the Parliament, saying, Nollumus Praerogativam
nostram disputari, but they answered his nollumus with a nollumus; Nollumus
Leges Angliae mutari. Is it not just that Princes should be ruled by Laws?
otherwise their will would be a Law, and so instead of Statutes, there would be
an Arbitrary, a Tyrannical power, which might increase to infinite, to
monstrous shapes, that either ignorance, impiety, lust, or ambltion of Princes
should bring forth. If all Law and power lay in their own breasts, a Kingdom
could never promise themselves security, longer than a pious and prudent
Prince reigns: But as the King changes, the Laws and Governments of the
Kingdom must alter: And he that out-lives (as it may happen) two or thres
Kings, shall not know what is the Law of the Land, or what to call his own.
Because he must not be beholding to Law, but to the will of the King for what
are his rights and proprieties.

By whose sole permission he may say, This is mine. When Laws and Lawmakers
are suppressed, are not the Subjects (for whose sake they are made) oppressed?
When the former loose their power and privilege, the other loose their due and
propriety.

As the bead is ordained for the good of the members, and not the members for
the good of the head; so a Christian King is ordained for the good of the
people, and not the people for the good of the King; i. principally. I am the
head, you are the members; I am the Shepherd, you are the sheep; I am the
husband, you are the wife. And will any man think me a Christian King to be a
Poliganist; said King James in his speech to the Parliament March 19. 1603?

The Archbishop of Mentz wrote to Erasmus to resolve him what he thought
concerning the writings of Luther? Erasmus returned answer in writing, that
many things in the Writings of Luther were condemned as wicked and heretical,
which in the writings of Bernard and Austine are accounted as holy and sound;
so many things were of esteem as good and commendable in the days of King
James, which are condemned as wicked and abominable in the time of King
Charles. As though the over-prizing of Prerogative, should pull down all
authority of Laws, or Privileges of Parliament. I will neither profess so
much ignorance or arrogance, as to prescribe a way, as to delineate the
disproportion, to compose the differences touching Princes Prerogatives, and
Parliaments Privileges: I know this point has been pulpited and in print
Pressed by far more able heads and hands than my self.

If Kings may do whatsoever they please, what need then of any Parliament? If
there be no necessity of Parliament, what need the troubles of Subjects to
choose Knights and Burgesses, or they called, to sit being chosen? If there be
a necessity of Parliament, why should they not be consolted with? If consulted
with, why should not their Counsel be embraced? The Counsel of Basyll in the
time of Henry the sixth, decreed that as the Authority of a general Council,
is above the Pope; so the Authority of a general Assembly of a Kingdom, is
above the King, which is to be subject to Laws. All such are to be esteemed,
as flatterers, who attribute such large authority unto Kings, as that they
will not have them bound under any Laws: such talk otherwise than they
think. Christ himself (says Jewel in his Apology) at the beginning was
universally received and honored through this Realm by assent of Parliament,
and without assent of Parliament, the Pope himself was never received, no not
in the late time of Queen Mary.

Dion praised Trajan the Emperor, because when he set a Tribune over the
Praetors, and put a sword into his hand, he said; Hoe pro me utere si justa
imperavero, si injusta, contra me.

You must know, Plus vident oculi, quam oeulus, a few private spirits, may not
be conceived to discern more than the choicest wits, most learned and pious
judgments in the whole Nation, who have been brought and kept together (in the
midst of all difficulties and dangers) by Gods wonderful providence, and by
the earnest prayers of many thousands of people in the three Kingdoms.

Parliaments may err, and I think this does, if they do not redress
injuries presented, and perform the Declarations printed, and promised to be
confirmed; and may not one man, one King, much more err? Does not Solomon say,
Take away the dross from the silver, Pro. 25.4.
and a vessel of use shall be to the finer? Is not the King the silver, the
wicked Counsel as dross? Do not the next words make the Reddition, Take away
the wicked from before the King, and his Throne shall be established in
Righteousness? Will thou be preserved from this stumbling stone, this cause of
halting, consider what he said, that was a halting person, and after professed
and promised uprightness, etc. Sir Edward Deering? I said, quoth he, whilst I
was at Oxford, I did believe the King might safely go to Westminster with
forty men. I then said so, and I think it will not be well till the King does
so. Oh, that God would raise up unto his sight some upright ones, that from
halting persons (that have seduced him) they may become perswaders of him to
return in person and affection to his great Counsel.

The greatest part of the people, adhering rather to the Court, 4. Cause.
than Kingdoms Cause, make men halt, in head, hand, and heart, doubting
whether it be better to go forward, or sit still in the Common Cause.

The most men ever side with the strongest side, Answ. Exodus 23. Romans 12.
be it right or wrong. But thou must not follow a multitude to do evil.
Fashion not your selves like to this world. For the world lies in wickedness,
says S. John, and would thou desies to follow after wickedness? Whereas
the Scripture commands; Eschew the which is evil, and follow after that which
is good. Broad is the way leading to destruction, and many follow that way. Is
it not better to follow the few to salvation, than the many to destruction? The
one is of large latitude, therefore many travel in it, the other straight,
therefore few delight to find it. Men, like old sheep are apt to be seduced.
The world divided into thirty parts (as is observed) nineteen of thirty are
still overgrowne with Heatheuish Idolatry; of the other eleven, six overspread
with Mahumetisme; then but five of thirty remain for Christians, and among
them, how many are seduced Papists, Sectaries of all sorts, profane
irreligious ones, and how few Protestants iudeed? who if they have a show, 2 Timothy 3.5
yet deny the power of godliness. Of the four sorts of Seeds, one part only
fell on good ground. Look into most Cities, Towns, Congregations, Families;
little thereof looks like good ground, enclosed, manured, and planted, to
bring forth, cultu, fructu, ornatu, unto good; but like a common waste, over
grown with weeds of sin, and so are endangered to loose their God, souses,
hope, happiness.

It is true, the more the merrier, if in a good matter, in a right way, for
then Bonum quo communius ed melius, so malum quo communius, eo pejus. Will thou
be therefore as the Weather-Cocke, to be carried away with every wind, whether
of Doctrine. Discipline, or Doings? Do not you know, Quat homines, tot
sententiae; so many men, so many opinions. Do not you know, Vulgus belluae est
multorum capitum? Did not the people cry one while Hosanna; another while
Crucify? Would they not have done sacrifices unto Paul and Barnabes, Act. 14.
crying, Gods are come down unto us in the likeness of men? Another while
esteemed them as Bablers and pullers down of the goddess Dinna. Act. 28.4.
Did not they err while they say, Paul was a murderer, while the Viper was on
his hand, and while he shakt it off? Did they not suddenly change their minds
(as sudden as he cast off the Viper) and esteemed him as a God? Verse. 6.
The Field of Corn boweth it self as the wind drives it, so most men ^ur^e
and wind themselves as the Times are, and fashions go, fit their savles for
every wind, are Papists with Papists, Roundheads with Roundneads, and
Royalists with the Royalists; they will side with the strongest side, be it
right or wrong. All their Religion is taught by the Precepts of men; they will
believe men against the Lord, when they will not beat eye the Lord against men.
When as men commonly are led by sense, rather than by reason, by reason than by
faith, yet the natural man perceives not the things that are of God, neither
can he. For blind men cannot judge of colors, nor deaf men of sounds, the
multitude usually call evil good, and good evil, bitter sweet, Esa. 5.20.
and sweet bitter: but woe be to such as set a wrong estimation upon right
objects. And woe to all such as follow such blind Guides, that draw others
with themselves into the ditch of Damnation. One in the right is more safely to
be followed, than many in the wrong. When Apollo by Oracle at Delphos told the
Athenians, that one man disagreed, though all the rest of the City assented;
And they were much troubled, to know who that was: Phocion his own accord stepped
forth and said, Give over to wonder and inquire who that man is? I am he of
whom the Question is, for indeed I like of nothing that you go about. And have
not good people a better and greater matter to stand for (though singular) than
Phocion had? Christ allowed singularity, saying, What singular thing do you?
Peter also, Mat. 5.47. 1 Pet. 4.4.
where he blames all such as think it strange, that others did not run with
them to the same excess of riot.

The great pressures by payments, Cause 5.
makes men halt and weary of the Cause. If payments might cease, and Trade go
on, many would be content with any condition for matter of Religion. The
exhausted expenses makes people deem ill of the instruments of Reformation.
They had rather Laws, Liberties, Religion, and all were lost, than to be at
any cost for their preservation. With the Gadarens, they will part with a
Savior, rather than with their swine. Now consider who are the cause of
expenses, those that labor to maintain their rights, or those that endeavor
to destroy them? Can Papists, Delinquents, Traitors, Malignants, unbowell
themselves of all their treasure, to raise up and maintain an Army against
the Counsel of the Kingdom (which are the life of the whole Land) and shall
the Inhabitants that profess themselves Protestants, and free Denisons,
grumble to part with a part, that they may preserve the whole? Is it not just
that God should suffer such halting Wretches to perish together with their
money, and to give over their posterity to perpetual bondage, who will not
expose their persons and purses to stand up in the Gap, against destroying
enemies? Ezekiel. 22.30.

Is it not better smart once, than ache for ever? to endure a little lancing of
the flesh, to make way for a sound Cure; to be at charge with a Surgeon and
Physician, than to want limbs and life? And should our Coin rather be
preserved, than our Country, our persons, our purses, rather than our
posterity, rather than a Nation, the whole Church of God, and wherein the
everlasting welfare of the soul is concerned? Do not our Adversaries lay all
at stake, both purse, policy, power, yea, life, neck, and all, rather then the
Catholic Cause should come to confusion, Luke 10.8.
and so are wiser in their generation, than the children of light? Wherefore, O
Man, consider that now thy own estate, life, liberty, thy neighbor, thy
posterity, thy native Country, (...)
thy God, thy Christ, call for thy assistance, whether in person or purse, to
help the Lord against the mighty. Will thou then suffer all these to fall to
the ground through thy default? If Papists, Projectors, Malignants, Atheists,
should prevail, may not we say, Farewell Law, Liberty, Estate, Propriety,
Religion, Parliament, and Posterity? And shall any (but miserable Miscreants)
more grudge pains and charge to preserve, than they do to destroy all?

If O Man, thou murmr herein at Payments and Taxations, then thou love thy
money more than thy Maker, thy silver better than thy self, thy Gold before
thy God, thy profit more than the preservation of thy self and posterity, thy
coin more than thy Conscience, thy own lusts before the Law of the Kingdom;
thy carnal reason, before true Religion. Consider but the pressure they are
subject to, where the Anti-Parliament Army comes, and continues; All (say they)
is the Kings, and we are for the King; it is a great mercy, they think, if
they escape with their lives; the little finger of the one, is heavier than the
whole loins of the other. The husbandman adventureth great expense in
seed-time, in hope of an harvest; Prove. 3.9.
now is our seed time for the preservation of a Land, for Reformation of
Religion, therefore honor God with thy substance; let not this conceit hatched
in thy head, cause thee to halt in thy heart; but remember, Those that honor
the Lord, he will honor, 1 Samuel 2.30.

Fear of Plundering, makes many stagger in respect of part-taking with either:
6. Cause.
If they reveal themselves, they are made a prey to the will of the
adversaries, therefore so they may sleep in a whole skin, they dread not the
danger of a tattered Conscience.

Yet when these unsiding ones have used all their power and policy to escape;
Answ.
the enemy have oft-times come and been as cruel to them as to the most
upright. Many that for fear have been most unhelpfull and deceitful to their
Country, have felt the hand of their conceited friends as heavy upon them as
upon their neighbors estate; and their hypocrisy could not be a sufficient
protection to them. But why should thou fear Plundering, and so make the
fear more than the hurt? They who have been Plundered, their fear is already
past; and thou make thy self by thy tormenting fear all thy life long
subject to this fiend, as if death were approached, the King of fear? Do
thou not know, that either thou must be plundered from the world, or the world
from thee? Art thou now being deprived of estate, friends, liberty, in any
other estate, than thou wast in, when thou came into the world? or shall be,
when thou go out of the world? If thou could but plunder thy self in thy
contemplation before others do in action, it would not be so grievous unto
thee: As Anaxagoras being told of the death of his Son, I am not much
troubled therewith, said he, because I long confidered before, Mat. 6.
that he was but mortal. Did not our Savior foretell, that here thieves
should break through and steal, and cautioned us thereby to lay up Treasure
there where thieves could not break through and steal? Vilescunt temporaria,
dum recordantur aeterna. The loss of under-Moone contents, Creature Comforts,
cannot disturb, when the presence of spiritual mercies do affect us; Had not
many been miserable for ever, if they had not been miserable once? Their
present belly-blessings had prevented the comfort of their ensuing eternal
Glory. The Arch Plunderer the Devil (under whom others are but instruments)
might have snatched away their souls at their deaths, and where had they then
been? O fool, this night will they fetch away thy soul, and where then shall
these things he? Thy Executors then had not been more nimble to have carried
thy body to the grave, than this unsatiable Plunderer would have been (like a
nimble under-Sheriffe) quickly ready to take all into execution, and carry thy
soul into Hell: Fear not therefore though they have or can hurt the body, and
can do no more, Mat. 10.
(intimating that they would hurt the soul also, if they could.) It is true,
the outward condition of plundered persons, deprived of some liberty, wealth,
wife, children, comforts, has had a sad aspect to look upon by the eye of
reason. But consider (dear Christians) are you driven from the Creature, to
the Creator, what if forced from the lower, yet hasted to the upper springs,
from the stream to the fountain, from worldly, to heavenly Enjoyments;
Whether the loss in the one be greater than the gain in the other?

Before these troubles you had Ordinances common with other believers, but now
your daily food, is choicest morsells, waters of life, superlative refections,
Benjamins Mess, the love of God, the power of Christ, the Spirit of Glory, the
care of Angels, the prayers of Saints, are all upon the wing for your present
welfare, your Earth is dissolved before your body; your Heaven prevents you
before your time, your joys are immediate, you reap without sowing, you feed
on the kernel, and break not the shell, you rest from your labors in this
life; the blood of Christ, the vision of God, the joy of the Spirit, the food
of Angels, 2 Pet. 1.4.
the many great exceeding precious promises, whereby you are made partakers of
the divine nature: are not these the daily repasts of your souls? Such honor
have all Gods Saints, they have Heaven whilst they are here on Earth: and can
they then be in a miserable, distressed condition? Such are to be looked upon,
I do not know, whether with more compassion, or holy emulation, to whom it is
given, not only to believe, but to suffer for the sake of Christ, Philip. 1.29.
Whether the depth of misery, or the weight of Glory by greater in these, is
hard to distinguish; halt not therefore at this stone.

Selfe-seeking, Gau. 7.
with the neglect of the Public, makes men go in a lazy or limping pace,
when men so look to things at home, for their own private ends, as that they
neglect the Public: If men's eyes be seriously fixed on their own pleasure, or
profit, their hearts cannot be guided by a right rule. When our Savior
propounded the Parable of the husbandmen unto the Scribes and Pharisees, saying
What shall be done to these husbandmen? The Jews answered, Mat. 21.41. Luke
20.16.
He shall miserably destroy these husbandmen, Yet in another Gospel, where our
Savior said, He should miserably destroy them, the Jews answered, God forbid.
In one Gospel their answer is related to be, He shall miserably destroy them:
in the other Gospel, the Answer is related to be on the contrary, God forbid.
How can these agree? Yes, (says Chrysostom) for first they say, He will
miserably destroy these but handmen; But when they perceived Christ aimed at
them, then they said, God forbid: so helpful to halting for own ends, and
selfe-indangering-respects.

Many seerned forward for the Parliament at the beginning before the wars were
raited, but when they saw the King oppose the Parliament, then they fall off
likewise, (like Beasts that cropped the Thees that gave them shelten) being
resolved to account Kings to be Gods, that they themselves may be accounted
Kings. But truth stands in the open field, knows neither father nor mother,
house nor home, Land nor Lordship, all go down, to Church and Commonwealth
may stand, Christ and his Gospel may be set up.

But is it not reason every man should look to himself?

I answer, Object. Sol. 1.
is it not greater reason every man should look to the Public, wherein every
good man's private does consist? Pray for the Peace of the City, Ier. 29.7.
said the Prophet to the captived oner, Know thou not that in the Peace
thereof thou shall have Peace?

What place should be left for reasoning about reason, when faith should have
the predominance: Sol. 2.
Da mihi baptizatam rationem; Mortified reason, says one, this is your victory
that overcomes the world, (and all worldly reasoning) even your faith. 1 Ioh.
5.4.
Natural reason may be a drawer of water for the Officers use, but it must not
have office of Command in Gods Church and Commonwealths business; every man
knows that the Saints in Heaven are the least propriaries to their own will.
Christ himself said; I am not come to do mine own will, but the will of him
that sent me: which, were it but remembered, it would be a means that many
from halting, might be preserved. In good works doing, men must not aim at
themselves, much less in evil actions attempt to seek their own rising by
others ruin. When the whole State staggers, and the Realm reeles, must they
continue in a lazy, lame, halting estate and posture, with their hands in
their pockets, moneys in their Coffers, and tongues in their mouths, without
bringing them forth for the preservation of the Public, viz. Kingdom,
Religion, Law, Liberty, and Posterity? I said in actions good and
commendable, they must not aim at their own ends. The man that was in the
Boat where the Kings Crown was, and the Crown occasionally falling into the
water, he leaping after it and recovering it to save himself and it, putting
the Crown upon his own head, that so he might swim the better to the Boat
or Shore; though he was thanked for his adventure, yet was he blamed for his
boldness in putting the Crown upon his own head. Christ's Crown is now fallen
(as it were into the water) and is in danger of sinking, labor to preserve it,
but not for thy own praise or profit sake, much less must his Crown be set
upon the footstool, and Kings Crown, yea private men's reasons and respects
set upon the Throne. The 24. Elders ( Revel. 4.) threw down their Crowns at
the foot of Christ, the King of Kings. You know, Vriah, Nehemiah, and others,
denied their own comforts, and contentments, Court-favours, company of wife,
yea, to change their own Clothes for the Public sake. It is an undeniable
truth, he that will lift up one that is fallen, must stoop himself; He that
loves father or mother more than Christ, is not worthy of Christ. Christ still
called his Mother Woman, (as one observes) Woman what have I to do with thee?
Woman, not Mother, to show, that in matters of Religion, we are to know no
relations. Were this believed and observed, the wars by Gods mercy quickly
might be ended: think on it, and thou will halt no longer between thy private
seeming, and the public certain good.

The eighth Cause of Halting, is undesire of change, for doubt of dangerous
tumults, or of changing for the worse. 8. Cause.
The wicked fear and fly when no man pursues, but the righteous is bold as a
Lion. The fear for the present, touching what will be for the future, is more
than the hurt it self that shall be. Many will be content to abide in
darkness and slavish conditions, for fear of shadows they may meet with, in
an altered estate; Like the Israelites, punished a little with want toward
Canaan, they wished themselves in Egypt again, to enjoy their Leeks and
Onions instead of their Manna, Angels food. Men are now on their march toward
spiritual and heavenly Canaan, and will they desire to return unto Egypt
again? It is then just that they should never enter into Gods rest. Will not
men endure change of Masters, and change of servants, so it be for their
profit; change of horses, change of dogs, so it further their pleasure?
change of air, change of diet, so it tends to their health? May men desire,
new Masters, new servants, new Ministers, new Magistrates, change of apparel,
diet, houses, and shall they only dream of danger, in new reformation, in
change of manners? The Apostle commands, Fashion not your selves like to this
world, Romans 12.2.
but be you changed (inwardly in mind, and outwardly in manners) else you
cannot prove, or approve, what is the acceptable will of God, or what is the
reasonable service required in man toward God, who is a Spirit, and must be
worshipped in Spirit and in truth. Are those obstinate Jews, Ier. 44.
think you, to be followed, who said, The Word that thou have spoken unto us
we will not hear, but will do whatsoever is good in our own eyes; for then
we had peace and plenty of all things, but since we lest off to worship the
Queen of Heaven, we have had troubles, wars, dearth, and scarcity of all
things. Many desired our little great- Will (I mean Bishop Laud) to be changed
and taken out of the way, and will they desire many great little Wills to be
Hierarched, and set up in the place thereof; such a change may be from bad to
worse.

You have heard of the old Woman, I believe when all other people prayed for
the removal of a Tyrannical Prince; she only prayed for his continuation;
being asked the reason thereof, why she prayed for his continuing, when all
others prayed for his removal; She replied, such a Prince was bad, and people
desired his exchange, and the next was worse, and the next worse than he, and
this worse than that; and if this be changed, quoth she, I think the next
will be the Devil himself. So prone naturally are people to imagine, that all
changes shall be for the worse. Men know not what may be in, and after,
therefore desire an abode in the present condition. Which have occasioned many
men's halting, stumbling, falling, which might have been preventable by a
change. Is it not better to change from bad to good, than from bad to worse?
Seeing every man by every action steps nearer to Heaven, or to Hell. I believe
one of the Causes of so many sad changes in our outward condition, has been
new fangled conceits touching changeableness in Religion. For when they chose
new Gods, Judge. 5.8.
then war was in the Gates. Therefore a change from new Gods to the true God,
will procure peace in our gates. Can it be imagined any danger to have
unprofitable Trees, dregs of Popery, which God did never plant, to be removed
out of his Orchard, and his own Plants to be set in the place thereof? What
hurt has been by the change of Monks and Friars, Abbots and Pryors, Hermits
and Nuns? Shall their persons be removed, and their profession be retained?
If there has been no occasion of repentance in the Land for casting out those
Locuster, what repentance should be feared by inacting new reformation, and
abolishing old Traditions?

Ask all the Reformed Churches, whether ever they grieved, but rather daily
rejoiced, to have their Religion of Idolatry and Superstition to be banished
out of their Coasts? I know the thoughts of the change of Episcopacy, is a
great trouble, and a cause of halting to many men; but let them remember the
high Commission, and Bishops Courts, in Counties, and the strange monstrous
Concomitances attending the same, they will scarce desire or plead for the
reintertainment of them again. It cannot be denied but that Episcopacy has
been a great supporter of Papacy; where the one falls, the other cannot long
stand. Pluck up but this one weed in the Antichristian Kingdoms over Sea; let
Bishops only be removed from Italy and Spain, Germany and France, as they are
likely to be from Britain, the Pope can no more stand there hereafter, than a
head can without his body. The Maxim was false, No Bishop no King; but its
certain, No Bishop no Pope. The Bulls from Rome, bred so many Calves in
Britain, that there was a necessity of Cessation, or sacrifice of them before
Gods wrath can be expected to be pacified toward the Nation. Was not a
Reformation desired long in the Land by the Record of the very
Common-Prayer-Booke, as we read in the Presace before the Commination
appointed to be read in the beginning of Lent. Brethren in the Primitive Church
there was a godly Discipline, that at the beginning of Lent, such persons as
were notorious sinners were put to open Penance. In the stead whereof until
the said Discipline may be restored again, (which thing is much to be wished)
it is thought good at this time, etc. Was such a godly Discipline so long ago
wished to be restored, and shall it now be opposed? Either it was wished in
fincerity, or in hypocrifie; if in hypocrifie, why should it be printed? If in
sincerity, why should it not be effected? Should it ever be in wishing, and
never brought to perfection? Parliaments were only stately Pageants, if they
should only confirm, and not also reform old Laws. If thou did not halt
in the Parliaments Election, why should thou halt now, for fear what they
shall do, in persons, in Nations Reformation, that Truth may succeed in the
room of error, and Christ's Kingdom brought into the Land with more purity,
and power, both for Doctrine, and Discipline.

Disestimation of the Parliament, keeps men cold in the Common Cause, men
think their power too great over their Purses and Estates. 9 Cau.
On a time the members of the body called a Counsel of War, to consult why the
stomach devoured all; what ever the eye did see, the hand reach, the mouth
conveyed it to the stomach. Therefore they concluded to forbear their
accustomed offices and services, seeing all tended only to the benefit of the
stomach. In short time it came to pass, that the eye began to wax dim, the
hand weak, the feet feeble, and the mouth scaice able to open it self. They
quickly saw their Error, and afforded their diligence in their wonted
employments, and all was well again, and they mutined no more. I need not
spend time in making the application; If supportment should have been denied to
the Parliament, what had become ^ Laws, Liberties, Religion in the Kingdom?

We hoped the Parliament would have settled Peace long before this time, Object.
the Summer is gone, the winter come, and yet we are not delivered, our shops
are shut, or unaccustomed in the City, our grounds unstocked, all Trading
decayed in the Country?

If the Lord send not Peace, Sol.
can the Parliament procure it? Shall not they have a share in it as well as
any other? Are not their Estates as much if not more ruined than others are?
It Is true, Peace is a fine thing, a principal Blessing of God, then which
nothing can be named with more willingness, desired with more heartinesse, and
obtained with more contentedness, yet there is a certain thing, which they
call Truth, which was ready to be banished out of these Coasts; and would
outward Peace be much worth without Truth? Is not Peace of Conscience an
excellent Jewel, which who ever enjoyes, has a continual feast? Is not Peace
with God, able to keep our hearts and minds free from all fear of plundering,
and assaults of enemies? Does not this pass all understanding? Is it not a
glorious sight to see Righteousness and Peace kiss each other. Therefore the
Prophet commands; Zach. 8.19. V. 16.
Love Truth and Peace: Truth you see is put in the first place. Therefore
execute Truth and Peace in your Gates; implying the necessity of the one as
well as the other.

If it be possible have peace with all men; but that is not approved
possibility, that is opposite against piety. Heb. 12.14
Follow peace and holiness with all, else you shall not see God. What God has
joined together, Man must not put asunder. Peace with men will little profit,
whiles we profess and practice war against God.

The injustice, 10 Cause.
oppression, tyranny, and unreformation of Country Committees, cause people to
continue in a staggering estate, both for their opinions and Purses in the
Common Cause. Because those that are appointed to be isntrumental means to
relieve, do much grieve the people. Yet Preachers before the high Court of
Parliament cry out daily against their Injustice; Master Case in his Sermon
before the House of Commons, entreats them for the Lords sake, to have a care,
that none under the charge of the Parliament may be oppressed by their
inseriour Committees, least people oppressed have occasion to say, You have
pulled down one Starrechamber, and have set up an hundred. Master Cheynell
preaching before the Lords, March 27, upon the Psalm, Man being in honor,
etc. in his Epistle to the Lords, entreats their Wisdoms to have a care for
the purging of Committees in Essex, Sussex, Surrey, and Hampshire, (I think
his Petition might have extended toward all the Committees in the Kingdom)
and he said, that the spring was a fit time to give them Physic, yet people
see, none either given or taken, or working effectually upon them in
reformation. They begin to halt in their opinions, and to be cold in their
former aeale for the Cause: Which indeed reflects upon the honor of the
Parliament; as moisture in the feet strikes up into the head.

Cambyses a King caused Sycanus a Judge (that had been hired by money to
pronounce a wrong sentence) to be flead, and his skin to be hanged on the
Judgement-seate, to be a torror to succeeding Judges. I think if some
Committee Men were so used, they would have as little skin left upon their
backs, as some of them have land in the Country where they execute their
Commissions.

The Ethiopians were wont to set up a Chair of State in their Senate, and that
to be empty, as if the God of Judgment sat there to be Umpire and Moderator,
whom the Senators ought to look upon in passing sentence, that they might
immitate him in Judgment. The Lords in the upper-House have an empty Chair
now in the absence of the King, and yet not wholly empty, if they consider the
presence of the King of Kings, that observes and hears all their
Consultations. I wish that County Committees might have an empty Chair before
them, to put them in mind that there is a power above them, to wit, the
Parliament, and a power above that, the God of Heaven: If some Country
Committee-Members, were set in a lower Chair, and bound therein, and kept
without bread and water twenty-foure hours together, and had their unjust
actions and sentences writ before them in Capital Letters, with mementomori,
engraven on the upper Chair; I believe if they were left to be their own
Judges, they would pass sentence of condemnation against themselves. But this
is a Noli me tangere, because they are by Ordinance of Parliament, they think
people will dare as soon adventure to enter into a Pest house, as to endeavor
any thing against them; yet to keep people from despair of all redress
herein, some Pamphletters have written (besides what Preachers have pulpitted)
that there is as great necessity for the new moulding of Committees, as there
was of the Armies; who since they have been new molded, the wars have
prospered the better; so it is to be hoped, if there were a new moulding of
Committees, Justice would be better executed, Gods wrath sooner appeased, the
Parliament more honored, and the people more contented.

Which people let them be informed, that as the honorable House have set out an
Order that it shall be accounted an acceptable service to discover to an
appointed Committee for that purpose, what money directly or indirectly has
been received by any Members of the House for the perverting of Justice; so it
is believed that they intend to set out an Order of like acceptable services
for any man before that or some other Committee, to discover the injustice,
oppression, partiality, connivency (toward Malignants) of any Members in
County-Committees, as a special preservative against peoples halting and
railing in these Realme-reeling times.

Flattery in, 11 Cau.
and divisions between Ministers, make people to hale; Paint a fire on a piece
of cloth, and cast it into the water, you hear no noise, no hissing, because
no combat of contrary natures; but cast a burning Coal into the water, you
hear a rattling, a noise, which proceeds from the combat, or encounter of two
contraries, the one striving to destroy the other: The end of Gods Word is to
reform the judgment, and life; Gods Word is true, and every man a liar, (i)
erroneous in judgment, and life; when truth and falsehood, the word of God and
the word of men do meet, then begins the Conflict: The one labors to
destroy the other: Gods word is as fire, men's affections as water.

Paul preached at Ephesus, he scattered true fire among them; Demetrius
startles at it, and stirs up sedition among the people, there the contrary
roares and ratles; In comes the Towne-Clerke with the magnificence of Diana,
Great is Diana of the Ephesians; a false fire, a counterfeit fire, there is no
opposition, no contradiction at all made against him: It is just the case of
our times; if Preachers come (as commonly they do) now, more than ever
(because they spare men's vices to favor men's persons, and fill their own
purses) with a painted fire, sowing pillows under the arme-holes of sinners,
crying, peace, peace, take it upon any terms, you must do whatsoever the King
would have you do; will you have Bishops (whose predecessors were Martyrs for
the truth) to be suppressed? Keep up the Common-Prayer-Booke, and then without
much pains you may know how to pray as well as Ministers themselves: If
Preachers thus stroke the spleen with sugared words, and tickle the ear with
quaint phrases, and rub it with filken words, saying, Because you are
predestined, you shall go to Heaven, as men carried in a Coach, or sailing
in a Ship, without any action or motion of their own, they shall seldom be
gainsaid; but if Ministers come with a true fire, with a work out your
salvation with fear and trembling, with an yet forty days, and Niniveb shall
be destroyed; with a John Baptists cry, Now is the Axe laid to the root of the
tree; Now, instantly; is, certainly; the Axe, instrumentally; laid, orderly; to
the root, effectually; of the tree, particularly; Every tree, impartially;
that brings not forth, conditionally; good fruit, proportionably; is,
unavoydably; hewn, fearfully; down, fatally; and cast, unresistably; into the
fire, everlastingly: If Ministers cast such coals, then people begin to
murmr, because their affections are but watery; the word in the mouths of
such Ministers labor to destroy finne in the people, and the finne of the
people labors to destroy the word in the mouth of the Minister.

If flattering Ministers have seduced the King, many Nobles, many Members of
the House, have not the standing ones then great cause to look to themselves,
that they also be not mis-lead, by having men's persons in admiration, Tune tua
res agitur, etc.

It was ever the subtilty of Satan to employ flattering Prophets, Preachers for
the seducing of Princes and people. 2 Pet. 2.2.
There were false Prophets among the people, mingling noisome weeds among sweet
flowers; By reason of whom the way of truth was ill spoken of, the Gospel
reproached, and others perverted. As long as the Devil has his Kingdom here,
he sends abroad his Emissaries to seduce the people. Hence it is, 1 Timothy 4.1.
that the man of fin is come to so great a height by seducing Spirits.

The Devil and the Pope have many industrious Chaplains, boasting as if they
were inspired and sent from God; First, scruing themselves into men's
Consciences, and then picking their purses, Cheating them of their Religion and
salvation, and then of their estates, obtruding gilded errors instead of solid
and golden truths. The Lord had decreed this Kingdom to great miseries, for a
punishment of the great abuse of his mercies; and therefore suffered Satan to
seduce Princes and people, and this by the help of seducing Preachers. God
has a quarrel against Ahab, and therefore suffers him to be engaged in such a
war wherein he shall be undone. Who shall persuade Ahab? Satan is at hand, I
will persuade Ahab? How? I will be a lying Spirit in the mouth of all his
Prophets. Of all? (if there were four hundred false Prophets to one Eliah in
Ahabs time, no wonder of such great disproportion in these days.) The Devil
knew the length of their foot, that he could prevalle with them, and they with
the King. He knew Ahab and Jezabel had a company of mercenary Ministers,
Trencher Chaplains, that would say any thing; unhappy Ahab, by reason of such
flatterers; Be therefore careful to epsy and oppose, but never wonder or
think strange of the Devils policy to use flattering Preachers to seduce
straiable people.

They are the Pastors of Gods flock;

When the Shepherd is stricken, the sheep are scattered.

They are the Stewards of Gods house; When the Stewards are unfaithful, the
family will be starved.

They are the Captains of Gods Army; When the Captain falls, the Soldiers
will soon be put to flight.

They are the lights of the world; if the Lamps be extinguished, the house fits
in darkness.

They are the salt of the earth; if the salt become unsavory, the people are
in danger to become a polluted and unsavory sacrifice.

They commonly take all upon trust from their Teachers, which cause them to
halt (long too) between two opinions.

These Saim uses as an Ignis fatuus, to people in darkness, and carries them
headlong to their hurt, and halting, till they stumble and fall, and many times
break the necks of their salvation, by these stumbling blocks; Satan by his
own power, can do great feats on people, much more by the power of Princes,
and flattery of Pastors.

The Apostles therefore were winnowed as wheat, Luke 22.31 2 Cor. 12.7. 1 Kings
13 18.30.
and Paul buffeted by Satan; One Prophet may be seduced by another, if God
assist not, or do withdraw his Spirit; It Is no wonder, that green and young
Spirits are mis-lead, when old Prophets that pretend authority from God to
countenance their errors, have been seduced? Such seducing ones you see
resemble the Devil; You are of your Father the Devil, for his works ye do:
From whom can they then expect wages, but from him, for whom they work? To
prevent this danger of halting in the people, it must be the care of faithful
Pastors, to lift up their voices, to cry aloud; for my part, I know little use
of Bells without clappers, Watchmen without eyes, Soldiers without weapons,
Preachers without crying, and Cryers without courage; They are but as Idols
that have eyes, and see not, mouths and speak not, such cannot but be seduced
that put their trust in them.

Travelers need prudent and faithful Guids, especially when they pass
doubtful and dangerous ways; Safe and bold Convoyes requisite in ways beset
with many adversaries; skillful and courageous Pilotts expected when men are to
glide between Sylla and Charibdis, to encounter with multitude of Pirates. You
hear of Antinomians, who deny the Law to be the Rule of life; Of Arminians,
who undermine the Covenant of free grace, that they may gratify free will; Of
Anabaptists, who withhold Baptism, the Seal of that Covenant, from Infants,
children of those that are within that Covenant, of others that question the
truth of our Church and Ministry, in and by which so many thousands have been
newborn unto God; of others that say, that there is no need of Ministry,
flattering us with hope of new Apostles, and glorious revelations.

Have we then not need of many Eliahs, that may show skill and zeal in
crying, Why halt you so long between so many opinions? Have they not need to
warn against enemies, to direct against error by the light of the Word; Will
not Satan use all means and methods to puzzle men in the mists of new
opinions, that so they may be mis-lead, or caused to halt and fall by the many
stumbling blocks he casts in their way?

I think the late Archbishop of Canterbury in that part of his own funeral
Sermon, preached by himself to that ample open Auditorie, spoke this truth;
That the Pope had never such a harvest in England since the reformation, as he
has now by the sects and divisions that are among us; But he spoke nothing of
the hopes of the rooting out of the multiplicitie of divisions by the power of
Parliament. Who can tell, what light at length may break forth, after these
black and bloody Clouds are scattered? Master Farrell was long opposed and
threatened in the reformation of Geneva, and other Cities, yet did they then
coin money with this posie on the one side; Post tenebras Lux; and on the other
side; Deus pugnat cum nobis; I hope we once may have cause to be such coin,
notwithstanding the numerous errors, divisions, difficulties, dangers, yet
hovering over our heads; God can easily rebuke Satan (as he did when he
resisted Josuah, Zach. 3.1, 2
laboring a reformation) he knows how to consute errors, to resolve doubts,
compose differences, conquer difficulties, remove dangers, with advantage to
his own Cause, and we may have peace after so many perturbations. Esa. 62.7.
Rest after long motions, and stablishment after such quassations, and our
Church and Kingdom may be made a praise on earth; and reap the harvest of so
many prayers sown in and for the same; yet the great divisions amongst
Brethren, emulations between Ministers, Presbyterian, Independents, cause
heart-burning and judgment, halting among the people. Many people imagine some
great mystery of Atheism now broached, that was never revealed before; When
they have heard Preachers so often persuade to love and unity among people, yet
they themselves to personate and practice so much envy, hatred, and fiery
contentions, which seem to cast oil on the fire so mightily flaming in the
Kingdom.

It is good to be zealous always in a good matter; But there is a time for all
things; A word in season, etc. Should not all labor to quench a common fire,
rather than coutend who shall have the goods in the house, if it be not burned?
Should not the Mariners row hard, to bring the Ship to shore, rather than
strive about trimming the Cabinets, or dividing the fraught, in the midst of a
storm? Should not the sick man be more careful to recover from his disease,
than in the midst of his sickness to be curious for this, or that trimming on
his apparel? The whole three Kingdoms are sick, by sin, sorrows,
sufferings; Should not remedies be sought, rather than the miseries augmented?
Sheep wandering here and there, when they see the Wolf coming they run apace
and flock together. Two Mastiffs fighting, and not by men partable, yet if a
Lion or Bear approach, they part of themselves. The Turk the Pope endeavor
the Kingdoms destruction, should not Independents, Presbyterians, All good
Protestants, unite their heads, hands, hearts, tongues, pens, all, for the
conservation of themselves, and the whole Land? Men must contend for the truth,
prove all things, and hold that which is good; Is it not a good, a joyful
thing to see Brethren to dwell together in unity? It is like Aarons oil, if it
fall from these heads the Pastors, It will descend to the beards and bodies of
the people, yea to all the skirts of the Kingdom; If the Anti-Parliament Army
should approach and assault the besieging of the great City (which God forbid)
the greatest part being but Neutralls, many strong Malignants, and too many
Papists in the same, if either side of the now much divided and strong
contending Brethren, should assist so many inveterate enemies within, would it
not mightily encourage the assaulting forces and foes without? O therefore
pray, and preach, and practice for the peace of Jerusalem in general, and of
these three Nations in particular. They surely shall prosper that love so to
pray, preach, practice, because the well being of any thing, depends on the
being of the same: Should not all seek the peace of the City, Kingdom, as
knowing, that they themselves shall have peace in the peace thereof? Ministers,
People, Presbyterians, Independents, all should have peace in the peace of the
Land, and this Land and many other Nations are in more probability to have
public peace, in the private peace of these warring brethren. Do not we see
the whole three Kingdoms (in the Parliament) lie as a Traitor upon the block,
ready to have the head thereof struck off, at one bloody blow? For as the King
is head in regard of the Parliament, so the Parliament is head in relation to
the Country; and is this a time to nourish contentions amongst any of those
who should study the peace of the Public? The dog is sometime let out to
keep the sheep together; our punishments many times carry our sins in their
foreheads, our divisions, have been, still are great, contentions increase, God
punishes our divisions with divisions; The water leads to the fountain whence
it flows; God points to our sin, by our punishments; that by punishment
sin may be cured, and after the Judgments may be removed: We would separate
from Gods house, God seperates us from our own houses; We cared not for the
worth of peace, God now shows the worth by the want of it, (the price of many
things are learned carendo magis quam fruendo,) We walked contrary unto him,
he now walks contrary unto us: We brake forth, by lying, stealing, whoring,
one bloody sin touched another, and now God has had a long Controversy
against all the Inhabitants of the Land, and one bloody punishment touches
another; Men by their Hell-hastening iniquities warred, brake forth against the
Lord, and now God by Heaven-darting Judgments warreth against, and breaks in
upon men; Yea, this heighteneth men's sins, that they war against the Lord;
yea, friends against friends, whiles God and man continue their war against
them both; God in Justice, men in hatred, it is good, as from God, evil, as from
men: I have spoken so much in this point, it being a maine cause of halting in
the people, while they apprehend so much flattery in, and contention among
Ministers; Let all Eliah's labor to preserve people from halting by occasion
thereof; Let them study to keep the unity of the Spirit in the Bond of peace;
if there be any virtue, any praise, any profit, in love, in peace: Elijah you
see was bold, and it mightily prevailed; Can Ministers write after any fairer
Copy, can they walk after any more un-erring Rule.

Be strong and of a good courage, was Gods Counsel to Josuah, Josh. 1.6.
and adds in the next verse; only be strong; and the people close up their
Counsel with the same Caution to him in the last words of the same Chapter
(because things last of all spoken, Verse. 18.
commonly are best of all remembered) only be strong, and of a good courage,
verse. 18. As if courage, boldness, were the All in All, required in the
Leaders, the Shepherds of Gods flock; as if it were the Quintessence that is
most to be seen, in the essence of all their engagements, and discharge of
duties required by God and Man, may they not by this their courage, (as
Hannibal by sire over the Alps) make way over the mountains of all
obstructions, all oppositions whatsoever? Look what powder is to bullets, a
clapper to the Bell, fire to the wood, wings to a Bird, sails to a Ship, wind
to sails, wine to the spirits, an edge to a Razor, metal to a horse, the
soul to the body, vivacitie to any creature, the same is Courage to any
Christian, much more to a Minister; for his affection, motion, action.

Twelfth and last cause I mention of the Peoples halting, 12. Cause.
between the two maine opinions in these times, is, The doubt of the success
of the Cause in Question; which follows in the last, not least place to be
answered; viz. these Doors of Hope.

DOORS OF HOPE.
WHat ever the issue and success of these wars be, yet Gods people should be
of Joabs resolution; 2 Samuel 10.12.
Let us be valiant for our people, and for the Cities of our God; and let the
Lord do, as seems him good. I am no Prophet, nor the son of a Prophet,
ungainsayably to prognosticate the event; his face has never yet been seen,
nor tongue heard in a Pulpit, that can thus Divine: Therefore I will not
profess so much ignorance or arrogance peremptorily to avouch, These present
wars suddenly shall end, or that the Parliament side, without any possible
contradiction shall prevail; But this I affirm, that there may be alleged
many Arguments of probability, that God will shortly deliver this Land from
Popery and slavery, for the present and future time. These Arguments I call
Doors of Hope; Of which Doors I shall but draw the Latches, and set them a
little ashoare, and give you leave at your more leisure to go into the
several rooms in your private meditations, and view the materials therein
contained.

The first, Door 1.
I bring you to, is the Promise of God made to comfort his people; 2 Pet. 1.4.
Esa. 25.8.
These promises are said, to be Gods gifts, many, great, exceeding precious;
The Lord will wipe away tears from off all faces, and the rebuke of his people
shall he take away from off all the earth; Rev. 14.8.
for the Lord has spoken it. Babylon is fallen, Esa. 55.10.
is fallen; Doubled (as Phar: dream) for the certainty of the thing: Shall the
Lord promise, and shall he not perform? Surely, as the rain comes down, and
waters the earth, and makes it bring forth, and bud, that it may give seed
to the sower, and bread to him that eats; So shall my word be, that goes out
of my mouth; it shall not return unto me void, but it shall accomplish that
which I will, and it shall prosper in the thing, whereto I sent it. Its added
in the next verse; Verse. 11. Ios. 21.43.
Therefore shall ye go out with joy, and be led forth with peace. This
Argument courageous Josuah proposed a little before his death, to continue the
people in constancy; The Lord gave Israel all the land, which he had sworn to
give to their Fathers, and they possessed it, and dwelt therein. Verse. 44. Also
the Lord gave them rest round about, aocording to all that he had sworn unto
their Fathers; and there stood not a man of all their Enemies before them; for
the Lord delivered all their Enemies into their hand. Verse. 45. There failed
nothing of all the good things, which the Lord had said unto the house of
Israel, Verse. 45. Chapter 23.14.
but all came to pass. And in the next Chap. 14. verse, to the people; You
know in all your hearts (as certainly as if things were in your bosom) that
nothing has failed of all the good things, which the Lord your God promised
you, but all are come to pass unto you: nothing has failed thereof. The Lord
commands his Prophets, Esa. 40.1, 2
Comfort ye, comfort ye my people, speak comfortably unto Jerusalem, and cry
unto her, that her warfare is accomplished. Where you see, is a Charge and
Commission given, not only by bare affirmation, or command to Ministers, but
by Ingemination, Comfort ye, comfort ye; yea, by Triplication, speak ye
comfortably unto Jerusalem; by Quadruplication, and cry unto her, that her
warfare is accomplished: is, i. it shall as certainly be accomplished, as if it
were already effected. These comfortable promises, Calvin on Esaias.
must not be whispered softly in their ears, says Calvin, but cried out
aloud, that they may sink into their hearts. Let us make use of these promises
in our prayers, Psalm. 119.49, 50.
saying with David; Remember thy promise made to thy servant, wherein thou have
caused me to trust: It is my comfort in my trouble, for thy promise has
quickened me.

Gods Providence and Power in the Lands preservation. Door 2.
What are the Mighty, against the Almighty? The Nations of the Earth, are as
a drop hanging on the Bucket of water. What is a drop, to the Bucket? What the
Bucket, to all the water in the Well? What all the water, to the whole Sea?
What the Sea, to him, that made Sea and Land, Heaven and Hell, men and Devils?
Wind, Waters, Heaven, Earth, Men, Devils must obey him. In comparison of
whose power, all the Nations of the Earth, Esa. 40.17.
are not only, as a drop of water, but less than nothing.

The Lord has manifested his power and providence against the Spanish
Water-workes in 88. and the Papists Fire-workes, in 1605 and his hand is not
shortened now? The Kingdom, is as it were, on a light fire, but as the Bush in
Moses time, burning, yet not consumed? why and how so? Exodus 3.2.
The Angel of the Lord appeared in the flame: Where Gods presence is in a Bush,
a City, an Army, a Kingdom, though all may burn, yet can they not be
consumed. Esa. 43.2.
Fear not, O Jacob, when thou passest through the waters, I will be with thee;
the floods shall not overflow thee. When thou walk through the fire, thou
shall not be burnt, the kindled flame, shall not kindle upon thee, for I am the
Lord thy God. It is of the Lords mercies, that we are not consumed. Lam. 3.22.
Esa. 54.7.


What it added? Because his compassions fail not. For a moment, have I bid my
face from thee, in mine anger, for a little season, a little season, a moment,
the one explaining the other; but with everlasting mercy, have I had
campassion on thee, says the Lord thy Redeemer. For a little while have I
forsaken thee, but with great compassion will I gather thee. For this
(Kingdom) is unto me as the waters of Noah; for as I have sworn, that the
waters of Noah, shall no more go over the Earth, so have I sworn, etc.
Behold, the enemy shall gather himself, Verse. 15.
but without me.

Whosoever (not exempting any, be they never so potent or politic) shall
gather himself in thee, (in mustering forces, and thundering threatenings)
against thee shall fall. All the weapons that are made against thee, shall not
prosper: Why? Verse. 17. Verse. 16.
Behold, I have created the Smith, and his Instrument: I have power to order
and dispose of all men and matters, even the blowing of the coals in the fire.
Without me, they can do nothing. Ioh. 16.33.
No weapon shall prevail without my will. In the world, ye shall have
affliction, but says Christ, I have overcome the world.

The two Nations Association in the Bond or Covenant, Door 3.
for the preservation of the Laws, Liberties of the two Kingdoms. Voe soli,
woe to either, if alone; Danger to neither, if they hold firm. A threefold
cord, is not easily broken; nor a twofold, if God ties them together.
Collonell Carre, when he was assaulted to betray his Trust, answered the
Tempters; He was a Covenanter, Therefore could not break it. The Cause has
been the more successful, since the Covenant has been taken; If more had
taken (and kept being taken) the said Covenant and Vow, the Papists would have
feared it more, than the Protestants do their Popes holy water.

The undaunted Resolution of the Nobles, Door 4.
and Commons assembled in Parliament, the body of the Kingdom; they have yet
stood, maugre the malice of Atheists, Papists, and all other their opposers
whatsoever. The Philistims assembled, 2 Samuel 23.11.
at a Town, where was a piece of a field full of Lentils, and the people fled
from the Philistims; But he stood in the midst of the field, and defended it,
and slew the Philistims; for the Lord gave a great victory. It is of Gods great
mercy (notwithstanding so many revolters, that betrayed their trust) to keep
the rest so firm, as one man, with their shoulders to uphold the reeling
Realm; and to encourage one another, in Joabs words; 2 Samuel 10.12. 1 Samuel
6.10.12.
Let us be valiant for our people, Cities, etc. We read, touching the
carrying of the Arc to Bethshemesh, That they took two kine, and tied them to
the Cart, and the Kine went the straight way to Bethshemesh, and kept one path,
and lowed as they went, and turned neither to the right hand, nor to the left.
I think I need not bespeake your pardon, in the application, for the
homeliness of the comparison; The Ark of God, we hope is in transportation
from the Popish Philistims, to be restored to its ancient purity and power,
both for Doctrine and Discipline; its tied to the two honorable Houses; Those
whom God has promoted to these public places, has he endued with public
Spirits. As the Kine lowed after their calves tied at home, and much more the
calves after the Kine gone abroad; so these Peers and Patriots, have flesh and
blood about them, (as well as Spirit in them) to hanker after their pleasures
and profits, wives and children, their fresh air, their spacious houses,
specious Gardens, choice dyets, daily attendants, familiar friends and
acquaintances, from which for a long while they have been deprived; yet through
divine assistance, their spirits are overpowred, have kept one path for the
carrying home the Arc, (without turning to the right hand, or to the left,) to
maintain the Gospel of Christ, the Laws of the Kingdom, and the liberty of
the Subject, though they have been denied outward liberty or life to return to
their native habitations, wonted delights and enjoyments. Shall not our men of
Bethshemesh, rejoice more, at the approach of the Arc, than for the abundance
of their crop, in their wheat harvest? Verse. 13.
Is it not great hope, the Arc of peace and piety will be brought fully home,
to the Kingdom, when it is within kenne of the Inhabitants?

The return of some eminent persons to tender their service to the Parliament,
Door 5.
after they had been at the Oxonian Juncto, where they merely promoted their
own honor, or advanced the hopes of the Royalists. Sir Edward Deering
confessed (as I related already) under his own hand in Print, that the King
with forty men might come to Westminster, and stay there with undoubted safety
to his person; so (said he) I said while I was at Oxford, and do still
assuredly believe so, and God will bless him, if he do so.

Did not God, and his Conscience, enforce this confestion? He much wondered at
himself, how he could so long be transported to assist in a way, to destroy
that Parliament, which he had took the Protestation in Parliament to preserve.
Ponder well the speech of this Person.

The many Prayers, Fastings, Tears, Door 6.
for the success of the Common Cause. Ambrose told Monica, Augustines Mother,
that it could not be, A Woman, or Mother of so many Tears and Prayers, should
bring forth a Son to be lost. It cannot be, that an Assembly, a Parliament, a
Kingdom of so many Fasts, Prayers, Tears, brought and kept with so much
difficulty together, should miscarry. God, that has prepared Englands hearts
to pray, has prepared his ear to hear. Psalm. 10.17.
Lord, thou have heard the desire of the humble; Thou will prepare their heart;
Thou will cause thine ear to hear, to help the fatherless, and oppressed,
that the men of the Earth may no more exalt themselves. Manoah said to his
wife, We shall surely dye. Judge. 13.22, 23.
But his wife said unto him; If the Lord would kill us, he would not have
received a meat offering, and a burnt offering at our hands, neither would he
have showed, or told us all these things; that these Devile (in the likeness
of men, yet very Monsters) could no otherwise be cast forth, but by prayer and
fasting. Therefore has the Lord God made so many and precious promises, that
his people might have their spirits kept up, and they learn to trust in him
for ever.

Thus says the Lord of Hosts (who has appointed these as special weapons in
the times of war) the fast of the fourth month, Zach. 8.19.
and the fast of the fifth, and the fast of the seventh, and the fast of the
tenth month, shall be to the house of Judah, joy and gladness, and prosperous
high feasts. Therefore observe with care and conscience such feasts, as you
desire to show your love to Truth and peace. For if such Fastes of four
several months observing, have such promises, What harvest of hope shall the
seeds of twenty four months fasting bring forth, when they come to the years
of perfection? Were not the Jews fasting days, in the time of Queen Esther,
Est. 8.16, 17 and 9.22.
turned to them from sorrow to joy, and from mourning into joyful days, and
times of feasting; Wherein they had occasion to send present every man to his
neighbor, and gifts to the poor? in comemoration of Gods bounty showed to
them in their poor and low condition. The neglecters of such days of fasting,
have professed themselves Traitors to the State, and whole Kingdom.

The many Blasphemies and villainies of the enemies, Door 7.
do foretell Gods Justice approaching, and his hand ready to be reached forth,
to cast them into that pit they have dug for others. A Popish Doctor of
Physic confessed, that the Catholic Cause never suffered so much dishonor,
as by that barbarous cruelty that was showed in Ireland, in the savage
murdering of men. When the Town of Bolton was taken, Where is the Roundheads
God now, said one of them? Surely he is turned Cavalier. I give this Roundhead
one blow more, said another, to send him quickly to the Devil.

They bad William Boulton, (whom they found praying) to call on his God to save
him. Yonder lies one of the strongest Roundheads, said the murderer, that ever
I met with; For one of my Pistols discharged at his heart would not enter, but
I think, I sent him to the Devil with a vengeance, with the other. Oh Heaven,
oh Earth, oh England, oh the Judge of all, bear witness of this calamity,
cruelty, Blasphemy, when thou make inquisition after blood.

The patience of Gods people, Door 8.
notwithstanding all Soldiers Quartering, all their Payments, all their
Plunderings, Bondage, Imprisonments, Mockings, Deaths. Here is the Patience of
the Saints, not only to bear witness to the Truth, but also that they are
objects of Deliverance. Where the Precept is; Phil. 4.5.
Be ye patient; the promise is added; For the Lord is at hand; not only to
see, but also to help. When Gods servants, humble themselves under his hand,
with patient submission to his correction, saying, He has spoiled, and he will
heal us; he has wounded, and he will bind us up; Faith steps in, Hos. 6.1, 2.
to assure them, that after two days, ( i. a short time) he will revive them,
and in the third day he will raise them, and they shall live in his sight.

The Liberality of the Londoners, Door 9.
and others, for the Public Cause; Many have done much, without compulsion;
the love of Christ, Religion, Kingdom, (as well as their own liberties, lives)
constrained them. I heard some Citizens say, they had done thus, and thus, in
several Disbursements, and yet believe, they had not the less, because God
blessed the rest the better. Some said, since the loss in the West, they would
lend more than before; They that sowed so plentifully, feared not to reap
sparingly.

The Discovery of so many Plots, Door 10.
touching the whole Land, Scotland, the Parliament, London, and many other
particular places, and persons, have infallibly demonstrated, Surely the finger
of the Lord was in them; All Intelligencers in the world could not have
discovered more, than has been revealed. If the Lord would have destroyed the
Kingdom, would he have showed, Judge. 13.23
and revealed, such, and such things? Though the woman was weak in sex, yet
was she stronger in Faith herein, than was her husband.

The many successful Victories; Door 11.
when few have discomfited many, notwithstanding all the assistance by Papists,
and profane ones, secretly and openly against our Armies. The many Armies of
Gods Saints prayed marching before, and piercing the Heavens for help: Scarce
any Fast in public observed, but thereon people were mightily encouraged to
meet the Lord in prayers, that daily met them even on those days, with new
mercies, and matter of praises; the Fasts have been sweetened with figues of
feasting; which occasioned our Forces in the Field, to implore the unanimous
Intercessions of the Saints unto the Lord of Hosts for help. Zach. 4.10.
Who art thou, that despisest the Day of small things? Its hopeful, that those
that have forsaken all for God, shall never be forsaken by God; he that has
wrought so on their hearts, can and will work more by their hands. As this
County is almost cleared of rude and robbing persons, so may shortly the whole
Kingdom be delivered. He that has delivered us, 2 Cor. ^.10.
does deliver, in him we trust, that he also will deliver the whole Nation.

The great opposition by Princes, Priests, People, presage great mercies, Door
1
to ensue great miseries. When she air is sharpest, the weather is nighest
breaking; When the night is darkest, the days dawning is nearest; When the
Woman's Throubbes are thickest, her delivery is speediest. Violent things, are
not of long continuance. 1 King. 1 34. etc.
Elijah will call for water out of the four Barrells that were filled, and
caused the same, once, twice, yea the third time, to be powered on the wood, and
on the Sacrifice, and the whole Ditch also to be filled with water, and then
the fire from Heaven shall come down, and consume the burnt-offering, and the
wood, and the stones, and the dust, and licked up the water that was in the
Ditch; So powerful is God to resist the greatest resistances, that Nature,
Men, or Devils can make against the smallest number of his Saints; so that all
the people fell on their faces, and were enforced to cry, The Lord, is God, the
Lord, is God.

When the Kings of the Earth stand up, Psalm. 2.1, ^
and the Princes take Counsel together, against the Lord his Christ, his
Church; When the Heathen rage, and the people murmr, saying, Let us break
their Bonds, and cast their cords away from us, all is in vain; He that
dwells in Heaven shall laugh, etc. and break them in pieces, etc. The Ten
Kings shall have one mind, Rev. 17.1.
to yield all their might to help the monstrous Beast, that was, and is not,
and yet is; all these shall fight with the Lamb, yet the Lamb shall overcome.
The Lamb overcome? What is a Lamb to a Lion, to many Lions? The wrath of a
King is as the roaring of a Lion, and is the messenger of death: yet the Lamb
shall overcome; and a good Reason is rendered; Verse. 14.
For he is Lord of Lords, and King of Kings; and they that are on his side, are
called, and chosen, and faithful.

The Great Light of the Gospel, and the many converted thereby. Door 13
The light shines more, and more, till perfect day. Cutting of Trees, and
Stones, hewing of both, a good sign, God is about to build. Act. 7.17
When the time of the promise drew nigh for Isreal's deliverance, the people
grew, and multiplied in Egypt. Shall Gods fold be increased, to fatten the
sword of his enemies? Gods sheep may be affrighted, must not be destroyed.
Hos. 4.6.
If barrenness argues destruction, then fruitfulness signifies preservation.
Sing, O Barren, Esa. 54.1, 3, 4, 5.
that did not bear, and break forth on the right hand, and on the left, and
thy seed shall inherit the Gentiles, and make the desolate Cities to be
inhabited. Fear not, for thou shall not be ashamed; Thou shall not remember
the reproach of thy widdowhood any more. For thy maker is thy husband, Chap
60.21, 22.
the Lord of Hosts is his Name. Thy people shall be all righteous, the Branch
of my Planting, the work of my hands, that I may be glorified. A little one
shall become a thousand (a great augmentation) and a small one a strong Nation.
^say 66.9.
I the Lord will hasten it in his time. Shall I cause to travel, and not bring
forth? Shall I cause to bring forth, and shall it be barren, says thy God?
Reign with Jerusalem, etc. When plants are put into Gods Orchard, shall they
not by him be preserved? Shall the Church have many children, ^sa. 127.5.
as so many Quivers of Arrows in her hand, and shall she be ashamed of her
enemy in the gate?

Gods daily Remembrancers, Door 14.
both in private and in public, which are commanded by himself to give him no
rest, night or day, till he make Jorusalem a praise on the earth. ^say 62.7.
God will bestow a mercy when he comes to be minded of it. When the seventy
years were nigh accomplished, and deliverance fully to be wrought, ^an. 9.2.
^er. 29.
God set Daniel on praying, which was foretold by Jeremy: Are not such prayers
too precious to be lost? Shall such Watchmen be made a prey to the enemies?
Shall we imagine, that God that raises such instruments for his Church and
Commonwealth, will suffer the same to be blasted? Shall Moses and Phineas
(raised by God to stand up in the gap to save Gods people) be unsuccessfull?
When Moses hands were lift up, Israel prevailed; when let down, the Amalekites
prevailed. (...). 17.11.
If our sins blast not the blossoms of our Prayers, they shall prevail with
God for our selves and others. For has not prayer been an Engine ordained by
God himself to overcome himself? Let me alone, says God to Moses, a strength
he had promised to yield unto, an authority he had promised to obey. ^sa. 45.11.
Ask of me, nay, command ye me. The Lord did according to the saying of Moses;
that Moses should do according to the faying of the Lord, had been but equal:
But, that the Lord should do according to Moses saying, is wonderfully
comfortable. In Joshuah's time, touching Sun and Moon standing still, he
hearkened to the voice of a man. Prayer will overruled God to any thing for our
good; ^ Kings 8.44. ^sa. 145.18, 19. ^om. 8.
It will bow down his ear, It will pull his hand out of his bosom, the sword
out of his sheath against his enemies, put it up again when drawn against his
people. The Lord is at the call of his peoples prayers, will fulfill the
desires of those that fear him. It is the work of Gods own holy Spirit made in
heaven, therefore true: faithful prayer never was, never shall be lost. Though
God hide himself in a cloud, this will scatter the cloud, it will pierce the
heavens and fetch God down. If we wrestle with God by prayer, we shall
prevail. Has not much been done with God in these wars by this weapon? may
not more also be done? O pray, pray, pray.

Experience of Gods former favors showed to persons, Door 15.
families, the kingdom, which may encourage all to trust him upon trial.

David fought with a Lion, and a Bear, and God delivered him from the danger
of both, Therefore will also out of the hand of the Philistine. 1 Samuel ^.36.


This encouraged Paul for time to come to rely on Gods help, having had former
experience, and present supportment.

Lord, thou have been favorable to the Land: Ergo, wilt be. Psa. 85. Psa. 22.
Our Fathers trusted in thee, and were delivered. If we trust in him, we also
shall be delivered. But: Ergo.

What God does at one time, he can do at another: Therefore he puts out
himself in his greatness, in his goodness, that his people might trust in
him, at all times.

God in his justice may leave the land deformed; but in his mercy reforformed,
because he has given his people a taste of the first fruits already.

Men rely on a friend, that has never failed them in any extremity. Psa.
116.1.
I will love the Lord, (there is good cause) because he heard my voice, he has
inclined his ear, therefore will I call upon him while I live.

Where Beggars speed well, they will come again. Can you blame them for it?
There is no particular person but has experience that he has his proper
portion in the hope of the kingdoms public peace.

The great sufferings and oppressions of Gods people, Door 1 Psalm. 12.^
foreshewes Gods help is at hand. Now for the oppression of the poor, and
sighing of the needy, I will up, says the Lord, I will set him at liberty whom
the wicked have snared. Thou will keep and preserve him. Gods tongue has
spoken it, his hand will perform it. God is our hope and strength, and help in
troubles, ready to be found. Psalm. 46.1. Verse. 8. Verse. 9.
Come and behold the works of the Lord, what desolations he has made in the
earth. In the next words is added, He makes wars to cease unto the ends of
the world.

Wonderful desolations usher in the cessation of Wars in the world. Be
still, and know that I am God, and know how and when, Verse. 10.
to cross and cu^b, the cruelty of the enemies of my people; I am the Lord of
Hosts. Out of the deep places have I called unto thee, O Lord. Psalm. 130. Psalm.
140.12. Psa. 146.7


Man's greatest hum^^i^tion is a sign of Gods present salvation. I know that
the Lord will avenge the afflicted, and help the poor, the Lord loses the
prisoners, he executes justice for the appressed.

Though he try their patience a while, yet will not fail of his promise made
to his people, and of his justice toward his enemies.

Consider his authority, his fidelity mentioned in the former verse: Verse. 6.
He made Heaven and Earth, the Sea, and all that therein is, which keeps his
fidelity for ever. If God from time to time has relieved the oppressed, he
will do so still. But he has done so: Ergo.

Therefore, Blessed is he that has the God of Jacob for his help, Verse. ^.
whose hope is in the Lord his God.

The Aihenians in their greatest dangers by sea, cast forth sacram Anchoram,
the sacred Anchor of hope, in hope of help from some supreme power, when all
other hopes falled them.

Look unto me ye prisoners of Hope.

The Rubbish of Popery and Humane Traditions, Door 17.
begun already to be cast forth, that place may be made for Gods building.
Shall I bring to the Birth, (...) 66.9. ^ch. 4.7.
and not cause to bring forth, says the Lord? Shall I cause to bring forth,
and shut the womb? Who art thou great Mountain before Zerubbabel, Thou shall be
a plain, and be shall bring forth the head stone thereof with shouting, crying,
Grace, Grace, unto it.

Zerubbabel represented Christ, and the Jews were thought as nothing in
comparison of their adversaries, which were as a great Mountain; yet the faith
of the godly shall be able to remove this mountain, and cast it into the Sea.
^rse 9.
The hands of Zerubbabel have laid the foundation of this House, his hands also
shall finish it, the hand of the Lord of Hosts shall protect him in it. ^rse 10.
They are checked in the next verse, that despise the day of small things.

Antichrist has been put from his out works in Scotland already, and shall he
not be frighted from his in works in England too? Doctrine and Discipline have
been long desired, that there should be a reformation of them in the Land, and
why may not this be the time for it? Enemies have pretended a desire of
reformation, (as I have showed before) in the preface in the Liturgy for
Ashwednesday Service; and shall not friends to their uttermost power endeavor
it? And will not God bless, has he not already much blessed to a successful
growth, their endeavors herein?

Should such a thing as godly Discipline be almost an hundred years ago
desired, and never all that time endeavored? Shall it now be prosecuted, and
shall it not be brought to be perfection? Men pray for it, Ministers preach for
it, the Parliament pleads for it, Soldiers fight for it, and all good men (as
on this day) fast for it. May not this devil by fasting and prayer be cast
forth?

Show me any place in the whole Bible, where any people in the act of
humiliation, (...). 7.3. (...) 8.18.
were given up to be destroyed. Many places manifest, that for their
humiliation they shall escape judgments, Ahab, the Ninevites, the Jews were
preserved.

The Unity and Fervency of so many of Gods faithful Ministers, Door 18
praying and preaching with unanimous consent in affection (notwithstanding
some differences in opinions in matter of Discipline) for the peace of
Jerusalem.

We read of Prolomeus Philodelphus, King of Egypt, that he caused the seventy
Bible to be interpreted by sevnty Interpreters; which 70. were severally
disposed of in 70 several Cells, unknown to each other, and yet they did so
well agree in their several Translations, that there was no considerable
difference between them, in rendering of the Text. An argument they were acted
with one and the same Spirit.

May we not be comforted, when we call to mind, that seventy, nay, seventie
times seventy, yea seventy hundred, yea seventy thousand, which bow not the
knees to Baal, but on the bended knees of soul, do importune the God of
peace, for peace; that do lift up their voices like Trumpets, (even now,
whiles Trumpets lift up their voices like Preachers) to call upon the people
for pacifying Gods wrath, and to power forth their prayers and tears to God
with constancy, to preserve the Gospel of Christ, Laws of the Kingdom, and
Liberties of the Subject; yea though they knew not the faces, no not the names
one of another, nay have never seen, nor shall see one another, till they meet
together in Heaven; yet do they agree and center together in what they pray
for, while they are on earth, saying to God, Thou shall arise, and have mercy
upon Sion, Psa. 102.13.
for the time to favor her, yea the set time, is come; for thy servants take
pleasure in the stones thereof, and favor the dust of the same; the more Gods
Church is in misery, the more will the faithful show their love and labor for
her deliverance. Thou shall weep no more, Esa. 30.19.
God will be very gracious unto thee at the voice of thy cry; when he shall
hear it, he will answer thee.

And though the Lord give you the bread of adversity, and the water of
affliction, yet shall not thy Teachers be removed into a corner any more; But
thine eyes shall see thy Teachers, and shall hear a word behind thee, etc.
Teachers have been turned into corners, if they return home, it argues their
abode with more constancy; you have the word of the King of heaven for it, and
shall he promise, and not perform?

The persevering waiting condition of the servants of the Lord, Door 19.
in all holy and heavenly duties, seal to their souls the infallibility of
Gods pretions promises to be accomplished.

From the beginning of the world men have not heard, Esa. 64.4.
nor understood with the ear, that any God has done so as our God has done
to him that waits for him. What will he then do to a Family, a Parish, a
County, a Kingdom, that for many years have waited for him? What has he done
for such a waiter? The next words will declare; Verse 5.
Thou did meet him that rejoiced in thee, remembered thee in thy ways, that
relied on thy word, looked for thy help. I waited patiently for the Lord, and
he inclined unto me, Psalm. 40.1.
and heard my cry. He brought me also out of the horrible pit, out of the miry
clay, and set my feet upon a Rock, and ordered (...) goings; and he has put
in my mouth a new song of praise to our God. Many shall see it and fear, and
shall trust in the Lord.

See the many blessings attended on his waiting. The Lord in heaven descended
on earth, inclined to comiserate dust and ashes; his body was delivered from
incumbent horrible dangers, his feet set on a Rock, all the waves and winds
could not overturn it; his goings were ordered, men or Devils could not make
him slide, or go out of Gods paths. His tongue had occasion to trumpet out
Gods praise. The wicked that saw it, were convicted, the godly confirmed to
trust in the Lord. Who (for his patient waiting) had delivered his soul from
death, his eyes from tears, and his feet from falling: how (for all this)
could he do less than praise the Lord in the land of the living. Men shall
say in that day, Lo, this is our God, we have waited for him, he will save us.
They read over their Title to him again in the same words, This is the Lord, we
have waited for him. We have waited for thee in the way of thy judgments. Esaias
25.9. chap. 26 8. Verse 3. chap. 30.18
Ergo, Trust in the Lord for ever; for in the Lord God is strength (to deliver
his Church) for evermore: yea, the Lord waits in the beginning of the verse, to
be gracious unto man, Blessed are those that wait to receive mercy from him.

The path of Gods present proceedings, Door 20.
is a pledge of his good providence for future time in the kingdom.

His judgments seem to be judgments of expostulation with, rather than of
extirpation of the kingdom. Though these days seem to be as that day the
Prophet mentioned, Zach. 14.6, 7.
wherein was no clear light, but it was dark, it was neither (quite) day nor
night, but about the evening time it shall be light.

God will at the last (which is with the Lord but as the length of a day) send
a fair and clear evening of joy and comfort to his distressed servants.

We read, Exodus 4.24. that God being angry with Moses for not circumcising his
sons, it came to pass by the way in the Inn, the Lord met him, and sought to
kill him; Sought to kill him? It Is strange, Did God seek to kill him, and not
kill him? Speak Lord, speak to the fire, and it shall with fl^shings consume
him; to the air, and with pestilent vapors choke him; to the waters, and
with deluges it shall overwhelme him; to the earth, and with yawning chops it
shall devour him.

Well, the meaning is, God sought to kill him, that is, in some outward visible
manner, whereof Moses was apprehensive, God manifested his displeasure against
him, that so Moses might have notice, and leisure to divert his anger, by
removing the cause thereof.

He that said to us, Seek and ye shall find, does himself seek and not find:
And good reason; for he sought with an intent not to find.

Thus may we say, God for these many years sought to destroy the Kingdom,
manifesting an unwilling-willingnesse, if men in any reasonable time will take
up the matter, and compound the difference by repentance. The loving Father
shakes the Rod over the Child, not with an intent to beat him, but to make him
beg pardon. Such hitherto has been the Lords dealing with our Nation, that he
even courts and wooes us to repentance, as loath to punish us, if we would
understand the voice of the Rod, and why it is shaken over us.

At what time, the Lord threatens to pluck up, root out, Mich. 6.9. Jer. 18.8.
and to destroy it, If this Nation against whom I have pronounced, turn from
their wickedness, I will repent (appearing so to man's judgment) of the plague
I thought to bring upon them

If men wash their hands and hearts in tears of repentance, Deuteronomy. 21.7.
(as Israel in the blood of the Heifer) all the blood that has been, or shall
be shed in these wars, it shall never be laid to their charge by the Lord. If
thou make Conscience thy Castle, let Drums beat, Trumpets sound, Pikes push,
Bullets fly, Cannons roar, Death, Wars, Devils, do their worst, thy life
is hid with God, and thou shall be in safety.

Thus have I brought you to twenty several Doors, and have a little opened
them, that you looking into the rooms, might have some light of comfort (even
on this day, and in this formerly sorrowful place,) for the good success of
the kingdoms cause: I have a few more doors to lead you to, but I must be
speedy in my passage by them, and give you leave but to peep into them, whiles
your ears attend my tongue.

The Saints sorrow for the Churches miseries, Door 21.
and love for her prosperity.

Where these duties are performed, great dignities are peomiled. Isa. 66, 10,
11, 12.
Rejoice ye with Jerusalem, and be glad with her, all ye that love her. Rejoice
for joy with her, all ye that mourn for her, that ye may suck and b^ satisfied
with the breasts of her consolations, that ye may milk out, and be delighte I
with the brightness of her glory; because I will extend peace over her like a
flood.

Peace, prosperity shall come speedily, and in great abundance. Pray for the
peace of Jerusalem: They shall prosper that love thee. What Is added? Ps. 122.6,
Peace be within thy walls, and prosperity within thy palaces.

And these duties enjoined by the Lord, and practiced by his people upon his
command, and shall not he bless his own commanded means?

God bids remember those that are in bonds, as if we were bound with them, else
we cannot have a fellow feeling of their miseries.

Surely such precepts have obliged many to weep in secret, watch, fast, and
pray in public for the Churches miseries, as if they had been their own.

It Is Gods own cause; and can that ever miscarry? Door 22
Has not he maintained it with an high hand, and stretched out arm in all
ages?

Keep not silence, Psa. 83.1. Verse 5.
O God; implying, it is as easy for God to hush all wars, as it is for man to
speak. Thine enemies make a tumult, and hate thee. They have consulted in
heart, and made a league against thee.

Has not God pleaded the cause of his Saints, as if he and they were one? Psa.
35.1.
Else David would not have been so bold with him, saying, Plead my cause, O God.

In Joshuahs time the Lord fought for Israel, Ios. 10.14.
'twas his own cause, made therefore the Sun and Moon stand still until the
people avenged themselves of their enemies.

In his own cause he hearkened to the voice of a man, but in an evil cause
will regard voice of many Johs, Acts 9.4.
Samuels, Daniels, Angels. Saul, Saul, Why persecutest thou me? in my members
on earth, now I am in heaven.

Be not afraid (said the prophetical Levite unto Jehosophat and the people)
for this great multitude; 2 Chro. 20 15.
for the battle is not yours, but Gods.

The Dragon and his Angels fought against Michael and his Angels; Rev. 12.7, 8.
but the Dragon and his Angels were cast out of heaven unto the earth, because
they fought against Michael and his Angels.

Christ has overcome the World, Door 23
Death, Devil and shall these overcome him again? John 16.33. Col. 2.15. Rev.
17.14
It Is incredible, impossible. Be ye of good comfort, in me ye shall have peace,
I have over come the world. He has openly triumphed over them on his Cross.
This Lamb has overcome all Lions: Can Satan be stronger than God?

The efficacle of Christ his prayer: Door 24
He was heard on earth, and shall he not be heard in heaven, Romans 8.33 1 Pet.
3.14.
making intercession for his people? Who is he that will harm you, if ye follow
that which is good? Who harm us? wicked ones will: Yet blessed are you if ye
suffer for righteousness sake: Fear not their fear, nor be ye troubled.

The conviction and conversion of Adversaries, Door 25
God enlightening them to see what they did not see before.

It is beyond the thoughts and expectation of man, thae the Lord Inchequin,
seduced by the Jesuitical faction, should be changed from a destroyer, to
Champion for God, and a preserver of his cause.

The many cries, Door 26
prayers, tears, of Fathers, Children, Widows, for vengeance.

Does not the Lord hear their cries, and know their sorrows? The Lord heard
the voice of the Lad Ishmael, Exodus 3.7. Genesis 21.17. Psa. 146.9,
weeping before him; and will he not hear the voice of thousands of Children
for their parents, and parents for their children, wives for their husbands,
and friends for friends? He relieveth the Fatherless and Widows.

In whom can the Fatherless find mercy, but in him? Hos. 14.3. Luke 18.7
If an unrighteous Judge did the importune Widow justice against her adversary,
shall not God avenge his elect, that cry day and night unto him?

The cry of the multiplicity of the blood that has been shed. Door 27.


Shall not the blood of so many Saints call for vengeance, Genesis 4.10 Rev. 6.10
when the blood of one Abel cried unto the Lord, and he heard it. The souls of
the Saints slain cry, Do thou not avenge our blood^

Groans are registered, tears botled, and shall not blood be booked? Did God
enquire for one Abel? will he not for thousands?

The Relation of God toward his Church. Door 28.


God says, he is worse than an Infidel that provides not for his family. 1 Timothy 5.8.
Is not he a Father? And will a Father give stones to children that ask bread?
He is to his Church a Husband, a Master, a Captain, a King, Shepherd,
Creator, Redeemer, wise Builder. He is a Sun and a Shield, has his Rod and his
Staff, both for direction and preservation.

The great rage of Satan shows that his time is but short. Door 29.


When the Devil was to be cast forth out of the dumb, Rev. 12.12 Mat. 9.22.26.
he casts him into the fire, and into the water, and rent him soar, cried, and
then came out of him. Violent things continue not long in extremity, especially
such showers of blood.

The many differences between foreign nations, Door 30.
who would have joined hand in hand against the Kingdom, had they not been set
together by the ears in their own lands.

This is none of the least of Gods mercies to our nation at this time, they
having enough to do at home, have the less leisure to be employed, as the
Devils and Popes Armour-bearers abroad.

The prevention of many inconveniences which might ensue. Door 31.


1. Some godly ones might put forth their hands to wickedness, Psa, 125.3.
if the rod of the wicked should long lie on the lot of the righteous. 2. That
the wicked might not deny Gods power, providence, justice, which they see
executed here on earth. 3. Truth of the Scriptures may not be questioned,
Tribulation brings forth patience; patience, experience; experience, hope.
Romans 5.4

Now lay all these considerations together, that have been mentioned before,
and I believe they will administer joy in the times of sorrow, and keep up men's
hearts less to doubt the success of the common cause.

1. Considering God is a God of power, able to finish what he has begun. 2. It
stands with his wisdom, the foundation laid to perfect his building. 3. God is
the God of order, what confusion else would be? 4. Kindness had been
unkindnesse. Better to have had no cluster of grapes, than not to be brought
into Canaan. 5. Weak ones would suspect God used some stratagem to draw men
out, as the men of Ai, to destroy them, or as to gather Bees and to burn them.
6. They would doubt, God would not do as much for his people now, as he has
done heretofore. Our Fathers trusted in him, and were delivered; but we have
trusted in him, and are not delivered. 7. Gods friends would put forth their
hands to wickedness. 8. His enemies blasphemies, boastings, cruelties, would
be the greater. They would endeavor to build Babels to scale (if possible) the
very walts of heaven. 9. God spared the kingdom for a long season, when sin
was committed, and with greediness acted; Ezekiel. 22.30.
and will he not spare it now, when sin is confessed, lamented, and many
stand up in the gap, to turn away his wrath, and reform impieties, according to
his desire and promise? 10. The courage of the Parliament, Commanders,
Captains, Soldiers, beyond ordinary expectation, natural Relations, carrying
Gods Ark toward Bethshemesh, their wives, children, houses, lands, goods,
liberties, lives, being not dear unto them, do all confirm our hearts in the
promises of the Lord, that his help is at hand, to deliver the Nation from
slavery and Popery.
I beseech you by the many mercies of God, that have been daily manifested, and
infallibly expected, to lay out your selves, to give up your bodies, spirits,
estates, your All, for your selves, posterity, Cities, and people of God.

It was dying Joshuabs argument to the Israelites, to move them to a constant
obedience to Gods commandments, that they had experimental knowledge in their
hearts, that nothing failed of all the good things that the Lord had promised
to them, all came to pass: And have we not as great a portion, participation
in Gods promises and performances as the Israelites had?

We may say of Gods mercies to Israel, and England, as one spoke of Demosthenes
and Tully.

Cicero effecit, ne Demosthenes esses solus Orator,
Demosthenes, ne Cicero primus foret.
The Israelites were the cause, we could not be the first people whom God did
so extraordinarily bless and favor.

But we are the cause that they could not boast themselves to be the only
people in Gods love.

And if Gods mercies in any age, for height, length, depth, breadth, might be
boasted of, rejoiced in, then in our days, in this Parliament, in these
wars, where good is fetched out of evil, light out of darkness.

And if these things will be mavelous in the ears of all posterity, shall
they not in our hearts, before whose eyes the same have been accomplished?

Wherefore I conclude as I began, (being high time to take my work off the
Loome) Why halt ye so long between two opinions?

If Baal be God, then follow him; so shall you fall from sin the Suburbs, into
Hell it self, the place, portion, expectation of all cursed neutralizing
Balaaks, for whom are reserved torments which are endless, easelesse, and
remediless.

If the Lord be God, then follow him, so shall you come to see him, that is
invisible, and shall change the society of men for Angels, Earth for Heaven,
and the company of Lions for fellowship with the Lamb for ever.

Where shall be all light without any darkness, truth without error, joy
without sorrow, health without ficknesse, liberty without restraint, peace
without perturbation, eternity without end; where the Quire of Angels shall be
music to our ears, where the fight of God shall be the object to our eyes,
where the joys of heaven shall be the possession of our souls.

Unto the hearing of which Angellicall music, unto the beholding of which
beatificall vision, unto the possession of which celestial joys, the Lord
that is Author of all, vouchsafe to bring us all, and let all Gods people say,
Amen. And let the Lord Jesus Christ, whose words are Yea and Amen, put to his
hand and seal, and say, Amen, Amen.

I have now done for speaking, you have now done for hearing; his Chair and
Pulpit is in heaven that must persuade you to put in practice those things
which I have delivered in precept: which that he may do, unto him let us pray.

Soli Deo laus.
FINIS.

