A BALLAD UPON THE POPISH PLOT
Written by a Lady of Quality.
Whether you will like my song or like it not,
It is the downfall of the Popish Plot;
With Characters of Plotters here I sing,
Who would destroy our good and gracious King;
Whom God preserve, and give us cause to hope
His Foes will be rewarded with a Rope.
To the TUNE of Packington's Pound.
1.
SInce Counterfeit Plots has affected this Age,
Being acted by Fools, and contrived by the Sage:
In City, nor Suburbs, no man can be found,
But frighted with Fireballs, their heads turned round.
From Pulpit to Pot
They talked of a Plot,
Till their Brains were enslaved and each man turned Sot.
But let us to Reason and Justice repair;
And this Popish Bugbear will fly into Air.
2
A Politic Statesman, of body unsound,
Who once in a Tree with the Rabble set round;
Run Monarchy down with Fanatic Rage,
And preached up Rebellion I'that credulous Age.
He now is at work,
With the Devil and Turk;
Pretending a Plot, under which he does Lurk,
To humble the Miter, while he squints at the Crown;
Till fairly and squarely he pulls them both down.
3
He had found out an Instrument fit for the Devil;
Whose mind had been trained up to all that was evil:
His Fortune sunk low, and detested by many;
Kick't out at St. Omers, not pitty'd by any.
Some Wisperers fixed him
Upon this design;
And with promised Reward did him countermine;
Though, his Tale was ill-told, it served to give fire;
Dispis'd by the Wise, whilst Fools did admire.
4
The next that appeared, was a Foolhardy Knave,
Who had plied the Highways, and to Vice was a Slave;
Being fed out of Basket in Prison forlorn;
No wonder that money should make him forsworn.
He boldly dares swear,
What men tremble to hear;
And learns a false Lesson without any fear.
For when he is out, there is one that is in's place:
Relieves his invention, and quickens his Pace.
5
In a Country Prison another was found,
Who had cheated his Lord of One Thousand Pound;
He was freed from's Fetters, to swear and inform,
Which very courageously he did perform.
To avoid future Strife,
He take' s away Life,
To save poor Protestants from Popish Knife;
Which only has Edge to cut a Rogues Ears,
For abusing the People with needless fears
6
Another starts up and tells a false Tale,
Which strait he revoked his Courage being frail;
But to fortify one that needs his Aid,
Being tempted with money which much does persuade
He swore he knew all
That contrived the fall,
Of one, who that day was seen near to White Hall*
Where he by the Treasurers powerful Breath.
More likely by far received his Death.
7
A Gown-man most grave with Fanatical form,
With his scribbling wit does blow up this storm;
For Moth-eaten Records he worships the Devil,
Being now lodged at Court he must become civil.
He hunts all about,
And makes a great Rout,
To find some Old Prophecy to help him out;
But his Friend that was housed with him at Fox-Hall,
Being joined with his master still strengthens 'em all
8
Then com's a cracked Merchant with his shallow Brain,
Who first did lead up this stigmatized train;
He since is grown nuseless, his Skill being small,
Yet at a dead lift, he is still at their call.
He has pestered the Press,
In ridiculous dress
In this scribbling Age he could not do less;
But to so little purpose as plainly appears
With Pen he had as good sat picking his Ears.
9
To end with a Prayer as now it is my Lot,
Counfounded be Plotters, with their Popish Plot:
God bless and preserve our Gracious good King,
That he may never feel the PRESBYTERS sting;
As they brought his Father
With rage to the Block,
So would they extirpate all the whole Stock:
But with their false Plots I hope they will end,
At Tyburn where the Rabble will surely attend.
FINIS.
A BALLAD.
The Third Part, To the same Tune.
Written by a Lady of Quality.
The Plot is vanished like to a bashful Sprite,
Which with false flashes, Fools could only fright.
The wise, (whose clearer Souls can penetrate,)
Find's shadows drawn before Intrigues of State.
God bless our King, the Church, and Nation too,
Whilst perjured Villains have what is their due.
To the TUNE of Packington's Pound.
1.
THe Presbyter has bin so active of late,
To twist himself into the Mysteries of State,
Giving birth to a Plot to amuse the dark world
'Til into Confusion three Kingdom's are hurled;
It is so long since,
He Murdered his Prince,
That the unwary Rabble he hopes to convince,
With Jingling words that bears little sense,
Deluding them with Religious pretense.
2.
Their scribbling Poet is such a dull Sot,
To blame the poor Devil for hatching the Plot;
The Mutther o'th 'King, with many things more,
He falsely would put on the Jesuits score:
When all that have Eyes,
Be they foolish, or wise,
May see the sly Presbyter through his disguise;
Their brethren in Scotland has made it well known,
By Murdering their Bishop, what sins are their own.
3.
The Poet, whose senses are somewhat decayed,
Takes Joan for a Jesuit in Masquerade;
His Muse ran so fast, she never looked behind her,
Or else to a Woman she would have proved kinder.
His fury's so hot,
To Hunt out the Plot,
That fain he would find it where it is not,
Although I Have exposed it to all that are wise,
He has stifled his Reason, and blinded his Eyes.
4.
An old Ignis fatuus, who leads men astray,
And leaves them in the Ditch, but still keep's his way,
In politic head first framed this Plot,
From whence it descended to Presbyter Scot,
Who quickly took Fire,
And as soon did expire,
Having grave factious fools their zeal to admire;
Who for the same cause would freely fly out,
But Plotting's more safer to bring it about.
5.
Here Is one for Religion is ready to fight,
That believes no^ in Christ, yet swear's he is in the right:
If our English Church (as he says,) be a Whore,
We Are sure 'twas Jack Presbyter did her deflowr;
He Would fain pull her down,
As well as the Crown,
And prostitute her to every dull Clown;
To bring in Religion that is fit for the Rabble,
Whilst Atheism serve, himself that is more able.
6.
A Pestilent Peer of a levelling Spirit,
Who only the Sins of his Sire does inherit;
With an unsteady mind, and Chymerical brain,
Which his broken Fortune does weakly sustain,
He Lodged i'th'City
Like Alderman brave,
Being fed up with faction to which he is a slave;
He never durst fight, but once for his Whore,
Which his feeble courage attempted no more.
7.
Another, with Preaching and Praying wore out,
Inspired by th'Covenant is grown very stout;
The old cause to revive it is his design,
Though the fabrique of Monarchy he undermine:
He tortured his Pate,
Both early and late,
IN the Tower, where this mischief he hope to create;
But to Country dwelling he now does re^ire,
To Preach to Domestiques whilst they do admire.
8.
Another, with head both empty and light,
For the good Old cause is willing to Fight;
I'th'Choise of fit members for th'next Parliament,
He spit out his zeal to the Rabbles content,
Whilst his wife in great State
Chose a Duke for her Mate,
For whose sake a Combustion he needs would create
For since his indulgence allows her a Friend,
He Would make him as great as his wish can extend.
9.
There Is one, whose fierce courage is fallen to decay
(At Geneva inspired,) he is much led away;
He would set up a Cipher instead of a King:
From Presbyter zeal such folly does spring.
He once did betray,
A whole Town in a day;
And since did at Sea fly fairly away:
He had better spin out the rest of his Thread,
In making Pot-Guns, which disturb not his Head.
10.
Some others, of Fortunes both dispersed and Low,
With big-swelling Titles does make a great show
A flexible Prince they would willingly have,
That to Presbyter Subjects should be a mere slave;
They Would set him on's Throne,
To tumble him down,
They scorn to submit to Scepter and Crown;
And into confusion, or Commonwealth turn,
A People that hastens to be undone.
11.
If such busy heads that would us confound,
Were all advanced high, or placed underground;
We'd honor our King, and live at our ease,
And make the dull Presbyter do what we please:
Who has cheated our Eyes,
With borrowed disguise,
Till of all our Reason they would taken Excise;
But let us from their slavery strive to be free,
And no People can er'e be so happy as we.
FINIS.

