AN INTERPRETATION OF THE NUMBER 666

Wherein, not only the Manner, how this Number ought to be Interpreted, is
clearly proved and Demonstrated: but it is also showed, yt this Number is an
exquisite and perfect Character, truly, exactly, and essentially describing
that State of Government, to which all other notes of Antichrist do agree.

With all Known objections solidly, and fully answered, yt can be materially
made against it.

By Francis Potter B. D.

Dan: 12. 4. Many shall runn to and fro, and Knowledge shall be increased.

OXFORD.

Printed by Leonard Lichfield, 1642.

W. Marshall sculp
engraved title page, incorporating the coat of arms of the University of
Oxford, decorative pillars, two cities, several groups of people and a weighing
balance

Mr JOSEPH MEDE's judgment of this ensuing Treatise.
THis discourse or Tract of the number of the Beast is the happiest that ever
yet came into the world; and such as cannot be read (save of those that perhaps
will not believe it) without much admiration. The ground has been harped on
before, namely that that number was to be explicated by some (...) to the
number of the Virgin company and new Jerusalem, which type the true and
Apostolical Church, whose number is always derived from XII. But never did
any work this principle to such a wonderful discovery, as this Author has
done; namely to make this number not only to show the manner and property of
that state, which was to be that Beast, but to defigne the City wherein he
should reign, the figure and compass thereof, the number of Gates, Cardinal
titles or Churches, Saint Peter's Altar, and I know not how many more the like.
I read the book at first with as much prejudice against the numericall
speculation as might be, and almost against my will, having met with so much
vanity formerly in that kind. But by the time I had done it left me possessed,
with as much admiration as I came to it with prejudice.

JOSEPH MEDE.

TO THE READER.
CHRISTIAN Reader, Grace and wisdom be multiplied unto thee. If thou know
not to what issues the questions are driven concerning Antichrist, and the
interpretation of this number; nor have that knowledge which is requisite for
the understanding of it; then I know that that which I have here written will
seem nothing else to thee, but an intricate labyrinth of curious and
unnecessary speculations. I have therefore a double request unto thee: either
that thou would stir up thy industry, whereby thou may attain such
knowledge as is required for the understanding of it, or else that thou
would make use of thy sobriety, by leaving those things which are above thy
reach and capacity, unto those more learned Readers, who even for this very
reason, that thou do not understand it, will, or may draw a probable
argument, that this is the true interpretation. For assure thy self it is not
in any man's power, much less in mine, to make that straight, which God has
made crooked; nor to make that plain and easy unto all men, which by the
express words of the scripture is restrained only to those that have wisdom
and understanding.

But if thou art one of those other sort of Readers, of whom Caius Lucilius
dicere solebat ea quae scriberet, neque a doctissimis neque ab indoctissimis se
legi velle; quod hi nihil intelligerent, illi plus fortasse quam ipse de se.
Cicero de Orat.
Lucilius speaks, who can understand more by that which I have written, than
I my self that writ it; the^ my request unto thee is, not as his was, that
thou should abstain from reading of it; but by how much the more wise, and
more learned, and more quick of apprehension thou art, so much the more
earnestly do I desire, that thou would vouchsafe to peruse this treatise,
which with very great confidence, and yet not without due humility and
submission to thy better judgment, I do here present unto thee. I know that
all men are naturally in love, and most men ravished with their own opinions
and inventions; and I know also that the heart of man is evil and deceitful
above all things, and that the master-peice of the deceitfulness of man's heart
consists in deceiving of Anno. 1625.
it is self, and lastly, I know that he which knows all this, may have* alie
in his right hand: yet am I confident that this my confidence concerning the
truth of this interpretation, proceeds from evidence of truth and reason, and
not from the blindness of mine own mind. I have not uttered it hastily and
unadvisedly, but upon mature, or at the least upon long deliberation, and
diverse years have now passed, since some chief substantial points of it,
were publicly declared and defended in the Divinity school at Oxford; and
neither then, nor at any time since* could I ever hear, or learn any reason
that could be brought against it, which might cause me to doubt of the
probability or truth of it. Nevertheless if any man either by authority of
scripture, or evident reason, shall be able to confute and evince, the
possibility or probability of this interpretation, or of any substantial or
essential part of it, I shall be then ready* and willing, even with mine own
hands, to pull down these, then towers, of mine own imaginations, and shall
rejoice to see the ruins and rubble of them, serve to level the ground, upon
which a better building may be raised. But I am persuaded better things of this
interpretation although I thus speak* and such things as accompany the
manifestatio^ of that truth, which shall never be abolished. Let not any man
esteem it the less probable, because it proceeds from one, who is no way
eminent, either in the Church or Commonwealth, except it be for his
infirmities. Great matters may (and most usual do) proceed from mean and
unworthy beginnings. A fountain of precious water may arise out of a dry and
stony plat of ground, although it were otherwise barren and unfruitful; A late
namlesse writer speaks fitly to this purpose in these words Quod si ita est,
nec maximis ingenj is licet Sriptor anonymus de Bestia Apocalyptica. page 140,
141.
hujus inventionem numeri, sibi minus confidenter arrogare, nec diffitendum
tamen est posse Deum perexiguo ingenio rationem hujus numeri patefacere, dicit
enim numerus hominis est, id est, ^t alibi alia de re, and mensus est murum
ejus. 144. cubitorum, mensura hominis quae est Angeli. Neither let it seem
unprobable to any man, that the true meaning and interpretation of this number,
having layen hidden for so many ages, should in these times be found out and
revealed. For such happy times as these, in which Christian Princes and
Commonwealths, are able and willing to stand at defiance with the Pope, and
to maintain truth to his face, these are the fittest times (as Mr Fox notes)
for the manifestation of this mystery, In his Comment upon the Apoc.
and not heretofore, when no man in these Western Churches could affirm the
Pope to be Antichrist, without apparent danger of his life. The same namelesse
Author whose words, I have above alleged, does to this purpose also speak very
fitly in these words. Neque enim Commentarius de bestia Apocalyptica.
res hoc uno indicio vertitur; multa alia signa aperta sunt et approbata, hoc
anum adhuc occultum latet and obscurum, eorum gratia vestiguandum, qui ut
Thomas de Christo, ad vulnera; ita hijudicium suum de Antichristo, ad hujus
numeri explicationem reservant; neque enim hunc numeru^ tam insigniter nobis
commendasset Scriptura, si nunqua^ fuisset revelandus, and quamvis probabile
est revelandum esse ante exitum Antichristi, videmus tamen bestiam, and reges
terrae, et exercitus eorum aggregatos ad bellum faciendum cum Christo, and
exercitu ejus, in ultimo praelio, in quo omnes devictierunt and profligati.
Quaerant igitur omnes, vestigent and scrutentur, inventio quaerentibus non est
desperanda, non-agnitio repugnantibus est pestifera.

Concerning the interpretation itself, it supposes this number 666. to be an
image and typical representation of the whole body of Antichrist, that is, of
the whole body of his Kingdom, state and Hierarchy: and thus much is generally
acknowledged by many writers, and especially by Cotterius, who lays this as a
certain ground, by which the true interpretation of this number ought to be
tried and examined. Now if this number be an Image and type of the whole body
of Antichrist, then no man ought to imagine that the whole image of Antichrist,
is like unto any one particular member, or part of the body of Antichrist; for
as the whole image of Caesar, is not like unto the hand of Caesar, nor like
unto the head of Caesar; so neither is this number being considered wholly,
applicable to any particular Times, Names, Persons, Places, or other
individual things or circumstances belonging unto Antichrist, as diverse
interpreters have endeavored to apply it. But he that desires to know Caesar
by his image, must compare head to head, face to face, eye to eye, hand to
hand, and foot to foot, and so conclud a likeness in general from an
induction of particulars. In like manner he that desires to know Antichrist by
this number, must first find in this number (being considered as an absolute
number) such things as are most essential and remarkable in it, and such
things by which this number is distinguished from all other numbers, and these
things being found out, must be compared, with those things that are most
essential and remarkable in that state or government which is Antichrist, and
with those things, by which Antichrist is distinguished from all other states
and governments whatsoever. Now the Root and Figure of every number, are those
things which are most essential and remarkable in it; and by one or both of
these, every number is distinguished from all other numbers, in these do the
essential properties of all numbers consist, and upon these chiefly do all
those mysteries depend, which S. Augustine, and diverse other sacred and profane
writers have observed to be in numbers.

And concerning those things which are most essential and remarkable in the
Kingdom of Antichrist, to, and with which, the Root and figure of this number
being found out, is to be applied and compared; the Scriptures themselves do
infallibly guide and direct unto them, by an actual application, of the Root
and figure of an opposite number, unto such particulars, as are most remarkably
answerable and opposite unto them. As for the finding out of the Root, and
Figure of the number 666. This cannot be done, but by a kind of calculation or
computation of the number itself; wherefore it is said in the Text (...), Let
him that has understanding count the number of the Beast, that so he may find
out the Root and Figure of it, by which the root and foundation of Antichrists
Hierarchy, his original, his City state, doctrine, and many other particulars
are manifestly revealed; And this is the effect of the following
interpretation, which depends chiefly upon the extraction of the root of the
number 666, as the words of the Text do necessarily imply, that the right
interpretation should do; and I am so confident, that this is the true manner
of counting the Beasts number, that I will be bold (with addition of two words
only) to say in these times of this computation in particular, as Cotterius in
the time of King James, concerning his typical interpretation in general. --
discrepant a viris doctis precibas omnibus contendo, tum autem a tua majestate
Rex serenissime ut ij qui regno tuo doctissimi ornamento sunt, inquirant in
singula, notent quod deprehenderint, ijs veroque certa videhuntur calculum
adijciant, ut inde etc. Mat. Cotterius in Epistola ad Regem Angliae
dedicatiante commentarios in Apocalyp.
Haec sunt in quibus iudiciorum aliam experiri paratus sum, quae astrui cum
intersit si a vero non discrepant, a viris doctis precibus omnibus contendo,
tum autem a tua Majestate, Rex serenissime, ut ij qui regno tuo doctissimi
orname^to sunt, inquirant in singula, notent quod deprehenderint, ijs vero quae
certa videbuntur (ulteriorem adhuc) calculum adjiciant, ut inde ad Ecclesiam
Domini fructus aliquis accedat. As for those which shall think such a kind of
interpretation as this is, dark and intricate, and to lean too heavily upon
the props of humane arts and sciences; such when they understand these words of
the Text. Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number,
etc. may in them find a full answer to their own objections, in the mean time
they may do well to consider that S. Austin, S. Hierome, S. Gregory, and
diverse others, have used the like, and far more obscure interpretations than
this, of diverse other numbers mentioned in the Scriptures. And such their
interpretations have been commended by later Ac nos quidem ut mignopere
laudamus Ecclesiasticos doctores qui explanando sacras literas, in quibus ne
unus apex, aut Iota unum sine singulari consilio and instincta Deipasitm esse
creditur, arcanas and mysticotatas numerorum significationes non minus pie quam
a^ute prosequuntur: sic cos minime probamus qui idem facere student in
tractandis humanis disciplinis, and pro veris and propriis rerum naturalium
rationibus atque causis, nescio quae numerorum and magnitudinum mysteria nobis
obtrudunt. Pe^erius lib. 4. de Antiquis Philosophis. cap. 18.
writers, and esteemed more fitly applicable to truths in Divinity, then unto
humane arts and speculations. It may therefore be very well acknowledged, that
this interpretation is dark and obscure in some degree, especially to some men,
because it may be easily proved, that the true interpretation ought so to be.
And as it is dark and intricate, so must it also be acknowledged, to be new,
and unheard of in former times: In both which respects I may say of it, as a
late worthy writer does of his new Philosophy in a very like case. Scio
quemadmodu^ arduum Gilbertus de Magnete Magneticisque corporibus in praesatione
ad Lectorem.
est vetustis novitatem dare, obsoletis nitorem, obscuris lucem, fastiditis
gratiam, dubiis fidem; it a multo magis novis and inauditis, contra omnes
omnium opiniones, authoritatem aliquam conciliare and stabilire difficilimum.
But all truths which are now old, were once new, and have had their several
oppositions. New truths are like new friends, worthy to be tried, though not to
be trusted, and I propose these things to the wise and learned, as Si quid
Fusce vacas adhuc amari, Nam sunt hinc tibi and hinc amici. Vnum si superest
locum roga^us, Nec me quid tibi sum nonus recuses. Omnes hoc veteres tui
fueruat. Tu tantum inspice qui novas paratur, An possit steri vetus sodalis,
lib. 1. Epig. 35.
Martial proposed himself to his friend, to be tried and examined first, and
to be believed afterward: as it is always wisdom to trust an old friend, so
is it sometimes great folly, not to make an exact trial of one that is new.

As touching the method and manner of composure of this treatise, I do
willingly confess, that it is not only inartificiall, but also rude and harsh,
especially considering, how necessary a perspicuous Method, and exquisit
expressions had been, in so difficult a matter. But I hope the Logic is better
then the Rhetoric, and perhaps there will not want those, that will quickly
put my meaning into better words, and other languages, if it shall deserve
them. My only aim has been to speak so, that my meaning may be fully
understood; and yet I find, that where I have endeavored to express my self
most clearly, there have I done as Job did in his vexations, even darkened
Counsel by words without knowledge. But I hope a wise, learned, and charitable
Reader, will pick out my meaning howsoever, and pardon my unnecessary
tautologies and circumlocutions.

And to the serious and settled considerations, of such sober minded and
judicious Readers, I wholly referr that which I have written. Let such consider
what I say (not who speaks unto them) and God give them understanding in all
things, that hating neutrality of opinion (especially in a matter of so great
consequence and Next unto the Knowledge of Christ and him crucified, there is
no Knowledge more necessary for the Church of God, then the Knowledge of
Antichrist and him revealed.
necessity) they may be both able and willing, if the substance of that which I
have here written be true, to believe it: or if it be otherwise, to confute it.
In the mean time, and until I shall see reason to the contrary, I shall hope;
That among this wood, and hay, and stubble, which I have here heaped together,
there is also some Gold, and some Silver, and some Precious Stones (that is
some long sought after and desirable Of which one is, the reconciling of the
measures of the new Jerusalem, with those measures of the City mentioned in
the last Chap: of Ezechiel* a truth until these times unknown unto the Church.
truths) which being purged and refined from my errors and imperfections, by
that fire of which the Apostle speaks in the third Chap: of the first Epistle
to the Corinthians, shall continue in the Church of God, notwithstanding any
thing which has been as yet objected against it.

Kilmington in Somerset: March: 27. 1642. FRAN: POTTER.

THE CONTENTS OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. 1. The probability of the following Interpretation is briefly and
generally proposed; that opinion of numerall letters being almost wholly
rejected. CHAP. 2. That the mystery of the number 144, which is the number
opposed to 666, consists in the square root of it, which is 12; and that
therefore the mystery of 666 must be in the square Root of it also. CHAP. 3.
The manner of the Interpretation more clearly, yet cursorily proposed. An
introduction to the true Interpretation of the number 144 and the measures of
the new Jerusalem. CHAP. 4. A disquisition concerning the Interpretation of
the 16 and 17 verses of the 21 Chap: of the Revelat: and a new exposition of
the measures of the new Jerusalem. CHAP. 5. A farther confirmation of the
precedent Interpretation of the measures of the new Jerusalem. CHAP. 6. The
Interpretation of the measure of the wall of the new Jerusalem, or of the 144
Cubits. CHAP. 7. A farther confirmation of the solid and square measures above
mentioned, showing that the like measures are used in other places of
Scripture. CHAP. 8. The reason why the new Jerusalem is measured by the solid
and square measures only, that the measure and structure of the wall, and the
number by which it is expressed, do both typically represent the Hierarchy of
the Church of Christ. The conclusion of this digression concerning the measures
and numbers of the new Jerusalem. CHAP. 9. That those writers who make the
mystery of the number 144 to consist in the Root of it, ought also to have
extracted the square Root of the number 666. That the extraction of the square
Root is an ancient and useful invention by which many famous mysteries have
been found out. CHAP. 10. What the counting of the number is. What is meant by
the first Beast, the second Beast, and the image of the Beast mentioned Rev.
13. cap. That by counting the Beasts number some other number ought to be found
out besider the number 666. CHAP. 11. What it is to extract the square Root of
a number. That 25 is the number that is the Root of 666, and remarkably opposed
unto 12. Some objections answered concerning the fractions of the root of 666.
CHAP. 12. That the number 25 has been conceived to be a fatal and unfortunate
number, by such as knew no relation that it had to Antichrist, or to the number
666. CHAP. 13. Of the nature and quality of those particulars, in which the
Root and the Figure of the Beasts number, is to be applied to the Papocie.
CHAP. 14. That Rome is answerable to Jerusalem, and the Popes Cardinals to
Christ's Apostles. CHAP. 15. That the first number of Cardinals, according to
their first institution and foundation, is chiefly to be considered, as that
which does most remarkably characterize Antichrist in his original. CHAP. 16.
A disquisition concerning other particulars, to which the number 12 is applied
in the description of the new Jerusalem, and particularly of the 12 Gates, 12
Tribes, and 12 Angels. CHAP. 17. Of such particulars in the mystical Babylon,
as are (...) to the Gates, Tribes, Angels, and Foundations of the new
Jerusalem. CHAP. 18. Of such things as are answerable to the measure of 12000
furlongs, and the 12 manner of fruits growing on the tree of life. The
conclusion of all that has been said concerning the Antithesis of Things in
general, as it is distinguished from that Antithesis of Numbers which is next
to be proved. CHAP. 19. That the first decreed and limited number of Cardinals,
and Parish Priests in Rome was 25. And that the first number of Churches for
Baptism, and Parishes was 25 also. CHAP. 20. That the number of the Gates of
Rome was 25. CHAP. 21. That as 12000 furlongs are the solid measure of a Cube,
whose perimeter is equal to the compass of the new Jerusalem: so 25000
furlongs are the solid measure of a Cube, whose perimeter is equal in compass
to the City of Rome. CHAP. 22. That the Popish Creed consists of 25 Articles,
as the Apostles does of 12. CHAP. 23. The conclusion which follows upon the
chief part of the application above proved, and some necessary and remarkable
Observations concerning it. CHAP. 24. A brief and cursory recital of some
other less remarkable particulars, in which the number 25 is remarkably
applicable to the City and Church of Rome. CHAP. 25. That the number 25 is
remarkable in diverse things pertaining to S. Peter's Church in Rome. Of the
measures of S. Peter's Altar, and the Characters imprinted upon it and other
Popish Altars. CHAP. 26. That the number 25 is an affected symbolicall device
among the Papists: Of the Mass of Christ's five wounds, five times multiplied
and repeated. Of their Jubelies, and affectation of the twenty fifth day of
the month. CHAP. 27. Objections answered concerning the fractions of the Root
of 666. That the Root of 666 is more exactly applicable to the Papacy, then
the Root of any square number could have been. CHAP. 28. A farther and a full
answer to all objections about the To tof 666, drawn from the consideration of
the figure of that numb^r, by which the figure of the City of Rome is exactly
expressed. CHAP. 29. Objections answered, and difficulties cleared, (even to
such as have no knowledge in Arithmetic) concerning those solid figures and
numbers, by which the several measures of the compass of Rome, and the new
Jerusalem may be found out. Also some other objections briefly answered.
Corrigenda.
Page 24. l. 8. for, 18000 22500, read: 8000 to 22500. page 25. l. 26. for,
measure, read, measured. p. 52. l. 4. for Papist, read, Papists. p. 53. l. 8.
for Funains, read, Funccius. p. 53 l. 11 for, Pipina, read, Pipino. p. 65. l.
10. for, which is, or can be contained in, read, by which we can truly
express. p. 65. l. 14 for, which is or can be contained in, r by which we can
truly express, p. 85. l. 20. for, Papist, read, Papists. p. 97. l. 7. for,
consist, read, consists. p. 112. l. 27. for, 121, read, 122. p. 128. l. 25.
for, Muscomus, read, Moscomus. p. 130. l. 22. for, with, read, which. p. 133.
l. 9. for, coemesterium, read, coemeterium. p. 135. in the marginall note, for,
Azur, hoc, read. Azur nominibus etc --) hoc. p. 138. blot out the last words of
the marginall note, beginning at these words, As perhaps it is intimated etc.
p. 146. l 25 for, speaking either of his own time, or of that time in which
Georgius Braunius writ his etc. read speaking either his own words, or the
words of Georgius Braunius in his etc p. 147. l 3 for, saperesunt, read,
supersunt. p. 156. l. 19. for, promised, read, pr^mised* p. 149. l. 12. for,
milliarum. read, milliarium.

AN INTERPRETATION OF THE NUMBER 666.
CHAP. 1. The probability of the following interpretation is briefly and
generally proposed; that opinion of numerall letters being almost wholly
rejected.
AMONGST those many and sundry opinions which diverse men of different
judgments and apprehensions have uttered concerning this number 666. there is
not any one which either seems more probable, or is more true in it self, then
the opinion of those Interpreters, who well considering that, Oppositorum eadem
est ratio, have therefore endeavored to find out the true interpretation of
this number by comparing it with the number144, to which this number of the
beast is evidently opposed. And this ground of theirs, for the manner of the
interpretation, is to be esteemed so much the more probable, by how much the
less success they found in it. For if this manner of interpretation seemed
probable to them, to whom the truth of its application was unknown; how much
more would they have stuck unto it, had they but known how many and how great
mysteries their farther prosecution of it might have revealed both to
themselves and others.

As for that opinion concerning the numerall letters of the Valde a scopo
aberrant, meo judicio, qui putant Sp. Sanctum his verbis de numero NOMINIS
Antichristi age^e. Alchasar in 13. cap. Apocalyp. Si quis habet sapientiam,
computet Numerum; nullam de NOMINE facit mentionem, sed tantummodo, computet
NVMERVM Bestiae. At deinde, Et NVMERVS ejus (a^sque ulla NOMINIS
interpositione) ^st 666. Petrus Bongus de numcrorum mysterus. page 156,
name (...), although it have some clearenesse and evidence in respect of the
truth of its application, yet it is most uncertain and obscure inrespect of the
manner of the interpretation; there being no example in the Scriptures of any
number so counted, or any name so characterized* and also the words of the text
seem plainly to cross all such interpretations of any name whatsoever, in that
it is expressly said, Let him that has Understanding count the number of the
beast. It is not said (as it is observed by many) let him count the name of the
beast, or the numerall letters in his name: but this manner of speaking is
rather purposely avoided by S. John, as Cotterius affirms saying, quemadmodum
loqui, NOLUISSE Johannem certissimum est. Besides it is observed, that the
number of the Beast, and the name of the Beast, are two things plainly
distinguished in the text; and therefore it is not likely the counting of the
number, and the counting of the name should be all one; much less, that the
name ought to be counted, and not the number: whereas they that have
understanding are advised by express words of the text to count the number,
not the name. Wherefore, although I will not deny but that the holy Ghost may
in a second sense (as it were) indirectly and obliquely glance at the name of
the Beast by this number; yet that this should be the chief and maine mystery
which is to be found out by this number, there is no probability at all, as
Quia ut Hieronymus in ea Christi verba, Mat. 24 Qui legit, intelligat,
sapienter ait, Quando ad intelligendum provocamur, mysticu monstratur esse quod
scriptum est. Similiter ergo in praesenti, verba illa, Hic sapientia est, non
patiuntur, sensus Antichristi nomen resp^^iat. Alchasar in 13. c. Apo. Et
quiden: revera non tam nominis Bestiae, quam Bestiae ipsius numerus est:
quomod^ etiam statim vocatur. Numerus autem nominis ide^ tantum dicitur, quod
nominis Bestiae li^e^is in numeros relatis (Deoita disponen^e) contineatur. Com
Apocal. Cantabrigrae nup^r editus. Nomen (...) numerum conficit a Sp sancto
notatum; numerum autem mysticum quo indicatur cusus prosapiae si^ Bestia, Idem
page 216.
diverse learned Interpreters do willingly acknowledge.

But as touching the chief and principal meaning, that there may be found out
such a kind of interpretation as may be warranted by an express Example in
the holy Scriptures; And such an Interpretation, as the precedent and
subsequent words of the text, may, not only seem to admit of, but necessarily
to enforce; and such an interpretation, as does essentially and accurately
describe that state of government, to which all other notes of Antichrist
agree; there is no way more probable, or more agreeable to reason, nor any way
less repugnant to the writings of the chiefest interpreters, then to prosecute
the grounds already laid by those, who have endeavored to find out the
mystery contained in this number, by comparing it with the number 144, to which
this number 666, is (as it were) the anti-numerus, and must therefore be
interpreted after the same manner, and in the same particulars applied to the
Synagogue of Antichrist, as the number 144 ought to be interpreted, and as it
is in the Scriptures applied to the Church of Christ.

CAP. 2. That the mystery of the number 144, which is the number opposed to
666, consists in the square root of it, which is 12; and that therefore the
mystery of 666 must be in the square root of it also.
ANd now concerning the manner how this number 144 ought to be interpreted, it
is already agreed upon, as it were, by a general consent as well of the ancient
as of the later interpreters, that the only, or at least, the chief cause why
this number was chosen rather then any other to be the measure of the wall of
the celestial Jerusalem, is, because this number is raised, and built upon the
number 12, which being multiplied into it self, produces this square number
144. For as this number 144 is raised and built upon the number of 12 only,
and cannot possibly admit of any other number to be the root and basis of it
(as is evidently known to all that have skill in Arithmetic to count numbers,
and extract the roots of them) so neither can the Church of Christ admit of any
other foundation then that which is already laid by the 12 Apostles. As
therefore this number 144 is built upon 12 unities, so is the Church of Christ
upon the 12 Apostles. And as the number of 12 is more conspicuous and
remarkable in this number 144, then any other number, because it measures not
only the bottom or root, but the sides and ranks of it also, as will plainly
appear to any one that considers and counts the sides and unities of this
square figure following, where the number 144 is set down in due order, the
unities being placed according to right angles and equal distances one from
another.



I say therefore, as the number of 12 is more conspicuous and remarkable in
this figurated number consisting of 144 unities, then any other number: so it
is evident, that the number of 12 is more conspicuous and remarkable in the
Church of God, then any other number whatsoever. And hence it is that this
number 12 is rehearsed and repeated above one hundred forty and four times in
the Scriptures, and is in them so often used, and in so many and so diverse
particulars applied by the spirit to things pertaining to the Church, that we
cannot but acknowledge this number to be chosen, and as it were affected by the
Holy Ghost rather then any other. And although the number 144, may truly be
said to be Gods number in a more particular manner, then many other numbers
used in the Scriptures, because it represents the figure of the City, and in
general, the form and structure of the Church, and Hierarchy thereof, (as
shall be showed) yet it cannot so properly be called Gods number, as the number
12, which almost in all material respects is applicable to the Church, and is
used in the Scriptures always, as numerus certus pro certo, and not as numerus
certus proincerto: in which sense it must needs be granted that the number 144
does signify and represent the Church in general. For, it is not, in it self,
being wholly considered, applicable, as the number 12 is, to any particular
times, persons, or places, or other particular things, mentioned in the
Scriptures; but only in respect of the root or basis of it, which is 12. For
there were 12 Tribes, not 144; and 12 gates in Jerusalem, not 144; and 12
Apostles, not 144. And so it may be said of many other things. And, whereas the
number 144 is no where mentioned in the Scriptures, but only in the 21 of the
Revelation, it must needs be granted, that it is not there said to be the
measure of the Wall (which does in that place signify the spiritual building
of Gods Church) because there then were, or, at any time should be precisely so
many, and no more faithful Christians, or living stones built upon the 12
foundations there named; but that we might thence learn, that how great or how
little soever the number of faithful Christians should be, yet they must be
all built upon the foundation of the 12 Apostles, as the number 144 is built
upon 12 unities. And hence, that is evident, which most interpreters grant,
that this number 144 was chosen to be the measure of the wall of the new
Jerusalem for this reason only, or for this reason chiefly, because it is the
only square number which can be raised and built upon 12 unities, as is clearly
known to all those that have understanding to extract the roots of numbers.

CHAP. 3. The manner of the interpretation more clearly, yet cursorily
proposed. An introduction to the true interpretation of the number 144 and the
measures of the new Jerusalem.
AND now, although I may take this for granted, (for the reasons above
rehearsed,) that this number 144 is not in it self any way particularly to be
applied to Gods Church and people, but only in respect of the number 12, which
is the root and basis of it; and so might accordingly proceed, showing, that
the number 666, is not in it self applicable to any Times, Names, Persons,
Places, or other circumstances belonging to Antichrist (as many vainly and
fruitlessely have endeavored to find out) but only, that the root of this
number 666 (whatsoever number it be) must be the number, which is, in many
particular respects, applicable to the kingdom of Antichrist; and that, as the
number 12, which is the square root of 144, is more properly said to be Gods
number then the number 144, because it is a number which God would have
conspicuous and remarkable in the founding of his Church, and diverse other
respects, both above that and all other numbers: so in like manner that number
which is the square root of the number 666, must more properly belong to
Antichrist, then the number 666, as a number which Antichrist would have
conspicuous and remarkable both in the founding of his Kingdom, and also in
diverse other respects, above any other number whatsoever: although, I say, I
might proceed to prosecute these grounds already laid, and taken for granted by
learned interpreters, to show what number is the root of the number 666, and
how it does accurately and essentially describe, and characterize the City,
State, and Hierarchy of Antichrist; yet least J might seem to some to build
that, which I am fully persuaded and resolved to be a certain and infallible
truth, upon weak and unsure grounds; I will therefore yet farther clear the
manner of this interpretation, before J touch the truth of its application.

And first, that I may not rely upon the bare authority of others, concerning
the true and natural exposition of the number 144, which in the 21 of the
Revelation (in which place only it is named) is said to be the measure of the
wall of the new Jerusalem; J will endeavor to make it manifest to such as have
understanding, and to such as will not shut their eyes against it, that,
howsoever the number 144 is there expressed, yet the number 12 is chiefly
intended.

And that I may make this to appear, it is necessary that I say something of
the Vision it self in general, pointing at that which this glorious structure
of the new Jerusalem does shadow forth unto us. Concerning which, although I am
not ignorant, that many ancient interpreters have affirmed, that the glorious
and happy estate of the Church triumphant in heaven is here set forth unto us*
yet as Mr Forbes and very R^pertus in Apoc. Victorinus. Pictaviensis qui
scripsit Comme^taria in Apoc. vixit anno 300. B. B. 1. 2. 10. Tom. 3. page 142.
Andreas Episcop Caesariae in his Comme^taries on the R^vel* says, that this
vision is typus p^aesen^is Ecclesiae.
many other writers both ancient and modern have observed all things in this
Vision mentioned,, are so exactly applicable to the Church militant here on
earth, that, almost from every line and word, there may be an argument drawn to
prove that the Church militant, and not the Church triumphant, is chiefly by
this description to be understood. J should digress too far if I should stay
to make this truth evident, by such particular instances, as might be brought
out of the text. And because J suppose it is sufficiently known to all those
who have seriously studied to find out the true meaning of this Vision, I will
therefore instance only in the measures and numbers (which as they seem most to
disagree from this my interpretation, so are they most to my purpose)
endeavoring to find out such a true and natural exposition of them, as shall
not only be agreeable to the scope of the Vision in general, but also
necessarily enforced by the words of the text immediately going before and
following after. And although I know that this exposition which I shall bring,
will not seem probable to many that read it, yet will I set it down howsoever,
lest upon their second and better consideration of such reasons and
probabilities as are brought for it, they should judge it rather to be received
then any other. Especially, being, all other interpretations, which are usually
given of these measures, are for the most part frivolous, and frigid, and such
as carry such a kind of emptiness with them, as is not agreeable to that
weight of matter which seems to balance the other parts of this Vision.

CHAP. 4. A disquisition concerning the Interpretation of the 16, and 17 verses
of the 21 Chapter of the Revelation, and a new exposition of the measures of
the new Jerusalem.
THE words of the Text, in which these measures of the City and Wall are
expressed, are these which follow in the 21 of the Revelation.

16. And the City lies four square, and the length is as large as the
breadth: and he measured the City with the reed, twelve thousand furlongs: the
length, and the breadth, and the height of it are equal.

17. And he measured the wall thereof, an hundred and forty and four Cubits,
according to the measure of a man, that is, of the Angel.

First, it is to be considered, that the furlongs and cubits, here used by the
Angel, are, in the last words, said to be the measure of a man. Wherefore it
is diligently to be considered, and enquired, how many kinds of measuring by
furlongs and cubits are used by men. For, there can no other cause be imagined*
why these words, mensura hominis quae est angeli, should have been added, but
that they should be an exposition to the former, and as it were an answer to
such doubts and objections as might arise from them. It is likely therefore
that the true interpretation of these words, will be as a key to open all that
is spoken concerning the measures above named. Now, if it had been said, the
cubits are the cubits of a man; or, the furlongs are the furlongs of a man;
then it had been probable that these words were added, lest the just length of
the furlongs or cubits should have been mistaken; but forasmuch as it is said,
(...), it is the Measure of a man which the Angel uses. The words seem to
intimate, that the danger of mistaking lies rather in misunderstanding the
manner of measuring by furlongs and cubits, then in mistaking the true length
of the measures which are named. And if so; then that manner of measuring which
is here meant, is not that which is most commonly used among men, or in the
scriptures. For then there had been no danger of mistaking it, or cause why
this exposition should have been added. It seems therefore, that, this kind of
measuring by furlongs and cubits, which the Angel does in this place use, does
properly belong to a man; and yet so, that it is not that kind of measuring
which is most commonly and most ordinarily used, either by men, or in the
scriptures. And now to find out, what this not so usual, although most proper
kind of measuring is; it is diligently to be enquired, how many kinds of
measuring by furlongs, or cubits, or by any other such like measures, are at
all used among men. And upon this inquiry there are three kinds of measures,
and three only, which will offer themselves to our consideration. For as there
are only three several kinds of quantities, which are commonly called,
linea, superficies, and corpus, that is, Length, Breadth, and Thickness: so
there are three kinds of measures, used by men, which are properly answerable
to these three kinds of quantities, and are called Lineall measure, Square
measure, and Solid measure; and without these measures, the quantities above
named, can neither be truly expressed nor rightly understood.

And now, being there are but these three ways by which a man may measure such
a solid figure as this City is here described to be, it must needs be granted,
that this measure of 12000 furlongs, is either the Lineall, or the Superficial,
or the Solid measure of this City: and if that measure of these three, which
is most commonly used among men and in the Scriptures, must be rejected in this
place, for the reason above said, then in all probability Lineal measure, the
first of these three above named, which is far more commonly used in the
Scriptures and among men then either of the other, must not be understood in
this place; and so by consequence these 12000 furlongs can neither be the
measure of one of the sides of this City, nor of the compass of it.

But supposing that the holy Ghost speaks properly, in setting down the
measures of this City, and after the manner of men, (as the words of the text
last above recited do intimate and evince) it is no hard matter, even by the
words themselves to determine, not only which of these three measures is not,
but which of them is, here to be understood. For first, it is diligently to be
considered, what kind of quantity that is, which is here said to be measured
by the Angel. And secondly, it is accuratly to be observed, that the measure
of 12000 furlongs, is not here said to be the measure of the Length, nor of the
Breadth, nor of the compass, nor of the ground-plat or Area, nor of the sides
of the City; but only of the City it self, which is here set down plainly
to be a solid Cubicall figure, containing three dimensions. This measure
therefore of 12000 furlongs, is the measure of a solid Cubicall figure, and
therefore in propriety of speech, and according to the manner of men, it must
of necessity be understood to be a solid measure. If the measure of the length,
or of the breadth, or of the compass of this City, had been said to have been
12000 furlongs, then who would, or who could have understood it of any other
measure but lineall measure only? so likewise being the City it self is said
to be measured 12000 furlongs, or as the Rhemists translation has it, for
twelve thousand furlongs; who will, or who can, especially according to the
manner of men, understand the measure of a solid figure to be any other then a
solid measure? And although it may seem unprobable, that an Angel should
express the magnitude of this City, by a phrase and a measure borrowed rather
from the schools of geometry (which has taught men to measure plain and
solid figures with square and solid measures) then from the book of the
Scriptures, wherein this kind of measuring is seldom or obscurely used; yet
for this very cause, is this interpretation the rather to be embraced. For the
holy Ghost would never have vouchsafed to have answered this objection so
appositely by these words following, mensura hominis quae est Angeli, except
humane reason might with probability have urged it.

From the words of the text therefore, and from that manner of measuring which
properly belongs to men, and is commonly used by them, it follows that the
measure of 12000 furlongs here named, must needs be understood of solid
furlongs, there being no other manner of measuring solid figures, either
possible or usual among men, but only by solid measures. For it is not
possible for a man to find out, and to know the true quantity of a solid body,
either intuitive, as Angels do; or, applicative, as in lineall measures, but
only discursive, and per ratiocinium, by the discursive faculty, and by
counting and calculating numbers, which as it is the proper Act of man's reason
only, so is it here, for this reason only, or for this reason chiefly said to
be the measure of a man.

CAP. 5. A farther confirmation of the precedent interpretation of the Measures
of the new Jerusalem.
AND this interpretation of these 12000 furlongs, may farther and evidently be
confirmed, because according to this interpretation, the compass of this new
Jerusalem, does in all probability, and for all that can be showed to the
contrary, exactly agree with the compass of the ancient and literal
Jerusalem; and also with the compass of that City, which is by the Prophet
Ezekiel in his last Chapter measured and described. Of which City, as also of
the heavenly Jerusalem, the words of Villalpandus, lib. 2. cap. 21. page 118.
upon the 48. chap. of Ezekiel are very probable and remarkable, where, speaking
of that City described by Ezekiel, he says as follows, quo loco nulli
dubium esse debet, nove Hierosolymae mentionem fieri, ex latere Christi olim
fundandae, nunc vero fundatae, super fundamentum Apostolorum and Prophetarum,
ipso summo angulari lapide Jesu Christo; at in omnibus antiquae urbis,
respexisse dispositionem, parts, earumque nomina and Mensuras, nulli vel
mediocriter ea perpendenti, dubium esse ulla ratione poterit. Jn which words
Villalpand confidently affirms two things. First, that that City, described
by the Prophet Ezekiel, is the same with this new Jerusalem of which Saint
John speaks. And this is also affirmed by Ad Prophetiam Ezechiclis quod
attinet, de novo templo and novo Jerusalem omnes contextus circu^stantiae
loquuntur, Prophetam non de materiali aedificio, sed de mystico templo agere.
-- Deinde Apocalypsis Johannis ubi hane Ezechielis Prophetiam imitatur and ex
professo explicat, apertissime dicit hanc novam Jerusalem a Deo ex coelis
descendere paratam, ut sponsam ornatam viro suo. -- Nomen Civitatis ab
Ezechicle dicitur Jehovah ibi non quod talis urbs aliquando futura sit, quae
vulgo sic appelletur; sed quod prophetice indicetur Deum Opt. Max. in aeterna
illa Jerusalem Ecclesiae suae semper praesto futurum; sive ut Johannes noster
in Apocal. hoc recte exponat and explicet, ' Deum and Agnum in ea: hronum
habiturum. Quod etiam Thargum Jonathan in praedicto Ezechielis loco agnoscit.
Gracerus in 9. cap Danielis.
Gracerus, by In Commentariis fuse ostendimus templum and Civitatem Ezechielis
non ad materialem illam Hyerosolymorum, sed ad Ecclesiam in Christo in terris
fundatam pertinere, atque adeo non mystice sed secundum literam omnia quae de
ejusmodi aedificiis a Propheta describuntur, de Ecclesia esse intelligenda,
quod sufficiat ut certum posuisse. Blasius Viegas in 12. Cap Apocal.
Viegas, Urbem hanc sanctam and Catholicam Ecclesiam figurasse docuit B.
Johannes Apoc. 21. ea quae hic Propheta praedixerat testificando: quod
argumento irrefragabili est, quae de templo, possessionibus, urbe, imo omnia
quae in hoc Propheta continentur ad Ecclesiae aedisicationem and amplitudinem
Sp sancto suggerente, spectasle: and ita de sua Ecclesia Dominus loquens ad
hanc urbem allasit dicens, Non potest civitas abscondi supra montem posita.
Quod etiam quae de ipsa ^ic tradit manifestant. Nam quorsum tam accurata
mensura laterum? quorsum annumeratio Pertarum, and ingredientium? quorsum nova
civitatis nomenclatura? -- proculdubio haec novam civitatem, Ecclesiam nempe
Catholicam, ut novam Jerusalem illustratione coelestium virtutum descendentem
de coelo adumbrarunt. Pet. Serranus in ult cap Ezechiclis p. 288.
Serranus, Hic est murus ille de quo ait D. Johannes in cap. 21. Apo^ Ubi
Ecclesiae militantis civitatem describit, (etiamsi nonnulla interdum misceat ad
Ecclesium triumphantem pertinentia) and habebat civitas haec murum magnum and
altum. Sed dices fortasse, Qui sieri potest ut hi duo loci Iohannis and
Ezechielis cohaereant? cum Johannes unum tantum murum describat, Ezechiel tres?
Hector Pintus in 40. Cap. Ezechiclis.
Hector Pintus, Unde Alchasar in Apoc. cap. 3. v. 12. notatione secund. page
318. censet Iudaeam hic esse Ecclesiam U^^em quam in illa vidit Ezechiel esse
Romam non Jerusalem. Unde ejus nomen est Dominus ibidem, scilicet in suo
Vicario Romano Pontisice; Templum esse monasteria virosa; religiosos. Cor. a
Lapide in 40 cap. Ezech. But Alchasar else where in cap. 21 Apoc. interprets
the new Jerusalem to be Rome, and therefore these two Cities in his opinion
are all one.
Cornelius a Lapide, Gaspar a Melo, and diverse others, as a certain and
undoubted truth. Secondly, (which does also follow out of this former
assertion) he observes that the Angel in the description of this heavenly
Jerusalem, has not only respect unto the figure, names, and parts of the
ancient literal Jerusalem, but also to the measures of it. For, if the
reason, why S. John and the Prophet Ezekiel do describe this heavenly
Jerusalem to have been of a square figure, and to have had twelve gates, and
twelve Tribes, and twelve names of twelve Apostles, be, because these things,
had sometimes a real and actual existence in the literal Jerusalem; then
why should there not be the like reason, and foundation of truth why this
measure of 12000 furlongs, should be fetched and derived from such measures, as
had sometime actual existence in the ancient and literal Jerusalem? I say
therefore if that City described by Ezekiel by the same with this new
Jerusalem, then this new Jerusalem must agree with that description, not
only in figure, and in the number of the gates and tribes, but also in the
measure, and compass of it. And ^orasmuch as the compass of that City in the
last of Ezekiel, is in the text expressly said to be 8000 cubits, it is evident
that the measure of 12000 furlongs cannot be understood to be the lineall
measure, either of one side, or of the whole compass of the new Jerusalem.
For supposing that this measure of Ezekiel (which is but a Cubit and an hand
breadth (as shall be showed) were five foot long, yet 18000 of these measures
would make but 144 furlongs, which is not the 84 part of 12000 furlongs.
Wherefore there is no possibility that 12000 furlongs ought to be understood to
be the measure, either of one side, or of the whole compass of the new
Jerusalem.

In like manner, if any one were willing, (as some interpreters have
endeavored) to understand this measure of 12000 furlongs, to be the square
measure of the Area or plat-forme of the new Jerusalem; he must then grant
that the perimeter or compass of such an Area must be 436 furlongs lat the
least, as may be plainly proved by extracting the square root of 12000: but
the compass of the same City, as Ezekiel describes it, cannot exceed 144
furlongs as it is above showed. Therefore neither can these 12000 furlongs be
the square or superficial measure, either of all, or of any one of the sides
of this new Jerusalem.

It remains then that if this City do agree in measures (as of necessity it
must) with that City measured by Ezekiel, that this measure of 12000 furlongs,
must needs be understood, of solid furlongs. For according to this measure only
it is possible to reconcile these two diverse measures of the same City. It must
needs be therefore, that that Cube, whose content or solid measure is 12000
furlongs, must be in compass 18000 Cubits, according as it is set down by
Ezekiel.

And that this may appear, something must be said of the true length of
Ezekiels Cubits, and S. John's furlongs; Concerning the Cubit used by Ezekiel in
the description of his last Vision, it is evident out of the 40 chap. and 5.
verse. and out of the 41. chap. 8. verse. and out of the 43. chap. and 13. verse.
that his Cubit is longer then other Cubits ordinarily used in the Scriptures by
one spanne or hand breadth, which is the 4 part of the usual Cubit, as
Villalpandus and Tomo 3. apparatus urbis Page 68, 69.
other interpreters, upon this place of Ezekiel, not without good reason, do
affirm. But the common and usual Cubit mentioned in the Scriptures was about
two foot and an half. And therefore in some of our English translations, the
marginall note equalleth 2000 Cubits to a mile, And so does Villalpand also in
his map of Jerusalem, entitled, vera Hierosolymae veteris imago, Romae
superiorum permissu, cum privilegio Summi Pontificis, Imperatoris, Regis
Catholici, ac senatus veneti etc: edita. And a mile contains 1000 Paces, every
Pace being five foot. If therefore this Cubit of Ezekiel be bigger by one
fourth part then other Cubits, it follows then, that 22500 true or ordinary
cubits are equal unto 18000 of these great Cubits; for as 4 are to 5, so are
18000* 22500. If then 22500 cubits, every cubit being two foot and an half,
be the true compass of the new Jerusalem, as by Ezekiel it is measured, it
must be granted, that if 625 foot make one furlong, then the compass of this
City, reduced to such furlongs must be 90 furlongs. Which measure, how near it
comes to agree with the solid measure set down by S. John, may easily be
demonstrated by extracting the solid root of 12000: which if I have rightly
performed, the compass of this Cubicall City, by necessary consequence, must
needs be between 91 and 92 furlongs. And although it 91. stad. 71. pass. 2.
ped. 11. un.
does not exactly and precisely agree with the former, yet one or two furlongs
are not to be regarded in so large a compass; yet not therefore not to be
regarded, because a difference, if it could be proved, were not to be regarded,
but because it is beyond all comparison far more probable that these two
measures do exactly agree because the Cities are both one, then that any
writer can now exactly set down the just length both of the Jewish Cubit, and
of the Roman furlongs. For I suppose it were great ignorance for any man to
affirm that the just lengths of both these measures can be now proved by any
unquestionable monument of antiquity, or undeniable authority. For being there
is nothing in this sublunarie world immortal and unchangeable, but only words
written that can be without alteration transmitted to posterity; it has been
therefore accounted a thing unpossible until this age to find out any means
demonstrative, how the exact length of any known measure, may without sensible
error be exactly and infallibly transmitted to all succeeding generations. But
howsoever the just length of the Jewish Cubit be uncertain and utterly lost,
yet the Roman furlongs and the Roman foot are not yet so forgotten, but that
we may come very near unto the truth, as Snellius in his book de terrae ambitu
has probably defined it. And supposing 22500 Cubits, which is the measure of
the City measurd by Ezechiel, to be equal unto 57233 Roman feet, which is
near unto the Compass of the new Jerusalem, if I have cast it right, we may
know the true length of the Jewish Cubit to have been near about two foot
and an half, and half an inch, and one and one quarter of a quarter of an
inch, and a little more, and by this means I believe the true length of the
Jews Cubits many be better known then by any other. Wherefore I suppose that
these reasons above alleged, and rightly understood, are abundantly sufficient
to show, not only a probability, that this measure of 12000 furlongs may, but
a necessity, that it must be understood to be the Solid measure of this City;
and therefore such a measure, which, Fo^tassis per 12 Apostolorum numerum ^^cta
quadam Calculatione and resolutione quod quaeritur inve^^tur. And a little
after he says, ^2000 st^d^orum Civitatis ^or san magnitudinem d^notant*
Andreas Episcopus C^sa^ae Cappadociae in Apocal.
Andreas Caesariensis rightly conjectures, is not lineally applicable to the
compass or height of it, before man's reason by the discursive faculty, as by
its proper act, do resolve this number into some other numbers, as in the
extracting of the solid root is necessarily required. And thus much of the
measure of the City.

CHAP. 6 The interpretation of the measure of the wall of the new Jerusalem;
or of the 144 Cubits.
THE measure of the Wall now follows, which is in the next words said to be
144 cubits: which measure cannot be understood of the length of the wall,
because it is not possible that 144 cubits should compass that City, whose
compass is above 91 furlongs as has been showed. Besides, if it were
possible, yet it were a kind of tautologie, to set down again in the next
words that measure of the wall, which may be evidently and certainly known by
the measure of the City before declared. This measure then must be understood,
either of the height of this wall, or of the thicknes of this wall, or of both:
and the meaning must be, that either the wall was 144 cubits high or 144 cubits
broad, or else that, according to both these dimentions of height and breadth,
the wall was 144 cubits of square measure. And this last kind of
interpretation of these words howsoever it may seem intricate an^ unusual to
those that either are not acquainted with this kind of measure; or else have
not observed* that the same kind of measure is evidently and expressly spoken
of in other places of Scripture, yet according to this measure only, are walls
usually measured by such as make them. And that this kind of square measure is
to be understood in this place, I take it to be more then probable for these
reasons.

First, that measure of the wall ( caeteris paribus, other respects being
equal) is to be received before any other, by which the unknown quantity of
the wall may be most perfectly, and according to most dimentions, made known
and discerned* but supposing that 144 cubits are the square measure of this
wall according to its height and thickness, it will follow, that not the
height only, nor the thickness only, but that all the unknown dimentions of
this wall may be found out by this number. Whereas contrariwise, if we
understand this measure of 144 cubits to be the thickness of the wall, then
the height of the wall remains unknown, and if we understand it of the height
of the wall, then the thickness remains unknown. And although it were
certain, that it were meant of one of these measures only, yet it is
ambiguous, and unpossible to be known by the words of the text, which of them
is here intended. And although it were known which of these two measures is
here meant, yet the figure and proportion of the wall would still be unknown.
But if, as it is above said, this measure be understood of square cubits, then
all these uncertainties and ambiguities are avoided and extinguished; and it
must be granted that this one number does represent the figure of the wall, and
is the measure of both these, otherways unknown, dimentions. For, as this
number is a square number, having 4 equal sides, each of them consisting of 12
unities* so this wall must be conceived to be of a square figure, each side
being 12 cubits. The foundation then of this wall was 12 cubits broad, the
height of the wall on the inside next unto the City was 12 cubits, and the
height of the wall on the outside was 12 cubits, and the breadth of the wall on
the top was 12 cubits, so these four lines contained and terminated the figure
of the wall; Or, to speak more properly, these 4 lines contained and
terminated that continuating superficies and imaginary plain, which did cut
the length of the wall according to right Angles: and in respect of the figure
and capacity of this plain, the measure of the wall it self (according to
all dimentions not hitherto expressed) may be most truly, most properly, and
most significantly said to be 144 cubits.

And after this manner Villalpand understands and interprets this measure, as
may be gathered out of his words part 1. Apparatus vrbis and Templi, libro 2.
cap. 20. where he says, Muri Jerusalem crassitudo magna ex part 12
cubitorum, ad quem numerum respexisse videtur Angelus, Apoc. 21. and Mensus est
murum 144 cubitorum, qui numerus ex duodenario in se ducto efficitur. That is
to say; the thickness of the wall of Jerusalem was for the most part 12
cubits, unto which number the Angel seems to allude in the 21. cap. of the
Revelation. and he measured the wall 144 Cubits, which number is made by
multiplying the number of 12 into itself. And a little after he says plainly,
assumpt^ veteris urbis tanquam linearibus numeris, eos insuperficiales redegit,
that is, and taking, as it were, the lineal numbers of the old Jerusalem, he
reduced them into superficial in the new. If then according to the opinion of
Villalpand, and for the reasons above alleged, the number of 144 cubits be a
Superficial measure, and therefore such a measure as is not lineally
applicable to the wall of the new Jerusalem, then it follows, that man's reason
by the discursive faculty must first count and extract the root of this number,
before he can know and understand what the lineal measure of the thickness
and height of the wall is. And this is the reason that the next words are
added, (...), that is, mensura hominis quae est Angeli, it is the measure of a
man which the Angel uses. For so these words ought to be translated, and so
does Villalpand rightly interpret them out of Ribera upon the Revelation; for
they are (as it must needs be granted) an exposition of those measures of the
City and wall set down by the Angel in the words before. Neither do they
import any thing concerning the shape of the Angel, or any other meaning; but
only this, that although the measurer were an Angel, yet he measured the City
and the wall, after the same manner that men use to measure such quantities,
and by such measures as have been invented by men, and are commonly used among
them. Now if there be no other way invented by men, by which men usually do,
or truly can measure quanties containing three dimentions, but only by solid
measure; nor no other way by which men either usually do, or possibly can,
measure quantities containing only two dimentions, but only by superficial or
square measure; then it must needs follow, that the measure of the City must be
understood to be a solid measure, because it is the measure of a solid figure
containing three dimentions, as it is above proved: and the measure of the
wall, must be understood to be a superficial, or square measure, because it is
the measure of two dimentions only, it being above showed, that it is
altogether unprobable, that it ought to be understood of one dimention only,
and absolutely unpossible to understand it of three.

CHAP. 7. A farther confirmation of the solid and square measures above
mentioned, showing that the like measures are used in other places of Scripture.
THere remains one thing yet for the farther clearing of these measures, and
that is to show, that in other places of the holy Scriptures, the like phrases
and measures are used by the holy Ghost. And first for the solid measure, J see
not how it can be answered or avoided but that the same measure and phrase is
used in the 7 chapter of the first book of Kings, where the stones with which
the wall of the Court was built, are said to be stones of 8 cubits, and stones
of 10 cubits. It is certain that these stones were squared stones, cut (as it
is said in the text) according to the measures of hewed stones. And it is
certain also that the cubit was about two foot and an half long. If therefore
10 cubits be the measure of the length, or of the breadth, or of the thicknes
of one of these stones: it must be granted that one of these stones, if he were
every way square was 25 foot long, and 25 foot broad, and 25 foot high, and
therefore did contain 15625 solid foot of stone, which is above 240 waine
loads. But it is incredible and against reason, and the truth of the story,
that these stones were so exceeding great. And it must also follow, that the
wall which was built with 3 rows of such stones, was 20 foot thick and more,
and 60 foot high and upward, all which is so far from the truth of the story,
and so disagreeing to reason, that there is no man (as I am persuaded) so
vainly credulous, as to believe it. It remains therefore that this measure
is to be understood of solid measure, by which measure stone and timber are
commonly and usually measured. According to which measure, a squared stone of 8
cubits, is but two cubits long, and two cubits broad and two cubits in height:
and 3 ranks of such stones, with one rank of Cedar beams, will make a wall of
such a probable and convenient height and thickness as was requisite for the
walls which are mentioned in the first book of Kings cap. 6. and the 36 verse,
and in the 10, 11, and 12 verse of the chapter next following. I say therefore
that as in this place of Scripture the measure of 8 or 10 cubits must in all
probability be understood of solid measure* so likewise the measure of 12000
furlongs, mentioned in the 21 chap. of the Revelation, may be understood after
the same manner, especially being the phrase is not unlike, and that as in the
one place, 8 or 10 cubits are said to be the measure of the stone it self, and
not of the length or breadth, or thickness* or compass of it* so also in the
other place, 12000 furlongs are said to be the measure of the City it self;
and not of the length or breadth, or thicknes, or compass of it.

As concerning square and superficial measure invented and used by men, it is
evident that the holy Ghost in the Scriptures vouchsafes to allude unto this
also, and as it were directly and plainly to point at it. And this may in some
sort appear out of the 43 chap. and 16 V. of Ezekiel, but most evidently out
of the 20 V. of the last chap. of Ezekiel, where it said, all the oblation
shall be 25 thousand by 25 thousand, etc. Concerning which place of Scripture,
I will here set down the words of Haffenrefferus in his Commentaries upon
Ezekiel, page 102, and 103. where he says as follows; Notanda est phrasis
geometrica quam demonstrator Prophetae ex mediis Mathematicorum scholis huic
suae descriptioni adhibuit, and Spiritus Sanctus phrasi Geometrica ex media
schola Mathematicorum desumpta express loquitur, [Area 25000 Cubitorum Per
25000 Cubitorum quadrata,] quae res and Mathematicas disciplinas commendat, and
quod Theologiae studiosus earundem non prorsus ignarus esse debeat non obscure
demonstrat, that is, the Geometrical phrase is to be noted, which is taken out
of the midst of the Schools of the Mathematitians, andin this description used
by him that showed this vision to the Prophet; and the holy Ghost speaks
expressly by such a Geometrical phrase as is taken out of the midst of the
Mathematick Schools, [an Area of 25000 Cubits, squared by 25 thousand Cubits]
which as it does much commend the Mathematical sciences, so does it not
obscurely intimate, that a student in divinity ought not to be altogether
ignorant of them. If in this place of Ezekiel, the holy Ghost uses a
circumlocution, that he might by a geometrical phrase, and by a number
multiplied by it self, express and intimate the square and plain measure of a
piece of ground; why may he not then in another place set down the square
measure it self, by one number, without any circumlocution at all? If in the
first place the sides of a square number be given, and yet the square number be
not expressed, but left to be found by him that will multiply the sides into
themselves, as S. Hierome has done on this place, why may not then the square
number it self be given in another place of Scripture, and yet the sides of it
be left unexpressed, to be found out by him that will extract the root of it?
As therefore it was needless that the square number it self should be
expressed to Ezekiel* because by multiplying 25000 by it self we may certainly
know that the square measure of the holy oblation was 625 Millions of square
cubits, or 667 miles as S Hierome counts it: so it was needless that the
lineall measures of the wall should be expressed by the Angel to S. John,
because by extracting the square root of 144, we may certainly know that the
lineall measure of the wall, according to its thickness and height was
precisely 12 cubits.

CHAP. 8. The reason why the new Jerusalem is measured by the sollid and
square measures only; That the measure and structure of the wall and the
number by which it is expressed, do both typically represent the Hierarchy of
the Church of Christ. The conclusion of this digression concerning the measures
and numbers of the new Jerusalem.
IF a reason be demanded, why the Angel did not set down the lineall measures
only of this new Jerusalem, as the manner is, in Ezekiels visions, and in
other places of Scripture, where the like descriptions are used; I answer,
that although the same quantity might have as perfectly (and in respect of the
ignorance of many men, more perspicuously) been made known by the lineall
measures; yet then it had not been possible to have retained the same numbers.
For being the holy Ghost affects (as it were) this number of 12 more then any
other, (as it is above showed;) and keeps this number constantly through the
whole description of this new Jerusalem; as if nothing were pleasing and
acceptable unto him (as indeed it is not) but that which is either numbered with
this number of 12, or built upon it; it was therefore convenient that the same
number should be retained (if it were posible) in the measures also. But it was
not possible to set down the true, and yet the same length, or breadth, or
compass of this City, by the number of 12; either in unities, Tens, Hundreds,
Thousands, or Millions: either by Reeds, Cubits, furlongs, handbreadthes,
spans, or any other measure named in the Scriptures. For neither 12 furlongs,
nor 12 hundred furlongs, nor 12000 furlongs, are equal either to one side of
this City, or to the compass, or to the Area, but only 12000 furlongs to the
solid content. So likewise neither are 12 cubits, nor 1200 cubits, nor 12000
cubits, nor 120000, nor 1200000, nor 12000000 of cubits, or the same numbers of
any other measures named in the Scriptures, equal to any measures of this City
above named, excepting only the solid measure, as is above said. As therefore
there was a necessity that the Solid measure should be set down, because that
only could be expressed by the number of 12 having thousands added to it; so
was it necessary also that of all other solid measures, furlongs should be
taken for the same reason. For as no other number with this measure, so is it
certain that no other measure with this number could express the just
quantity of this City.

A second reason (and perhaps the chief reason) why the holy Ghost would have
the magnitude of this new Jerusalem expressed by the solid measure, is, that
there might be an express and evident example in the Scriptures, how to count
and apply the number of the beast; that so having found out that number which
is opposed unto 12, and having added thousands and furlongs to it, we might
have the solid measure and content of that Cube given, whose perimeter is
equal to the compass of the Romish Babylon: as 12000 furlongs are the solid
measure of that Cube, whose perimeter is equal to the compass of the new
Jerusalem. But of this in its due place.

As concerning the reason why the measure of the wall is not expressed by
lineall measures, it may be answered, that although the number of 12 might have
been retained, and by it the true, and the same lineall measures of this wall
described, yet it cannot be denied, but that the true measures of the wall, and
the number of 12 are both necessarily, although mystically implied, and as
purposely intended by the holy Ghost in the number 144, as if they had been
many times expressly named. For this number is so significantly applicable, not
only to the measures and structure of the wall here described, but also to that
which is by the wall signified; that it may be truly said, that this number
considered absolutely in it self, (and not as it does by Cubits here in this
place show the square measure of the wall,) is (as it were) an idaea of the
hierarchy of the Church: the wisdom of God having purposely linked two types
together, that the one might unfold the other: the one being an imaginary
structure of a material building; the other an intelligible form of an
immateriall number: both of them signifying, that as the number 12 was the
measure, number, and foundation of the City, Gates, and wall of the ancient
and literal Jerusalem; and was, in respect of the 12 Patriarks, the root from
whence the 12 Tribes had their original according to the flesh; so the same
number of 12 should be the only conspicuous and remarkable number in the
foundation and structure of the spiritual and new Jerusalem: in which the 12
Apostles^are 12 spiritual fathers answereable to the 12 Patriarks: and are 12
foundation-stones laid by our Savior Christ, upon which foundation, and
according to which foundation, (that is, by multiplying the doctrine of the
Apostles by it self only,) all the spiritual builders of Gods Church in the
times to come, ought to erect and square their buildings. And they are also
placed as 12 Angels at the 12 gates, to keep out (as it were) with a two edged
sword every thing that defiles; and to admit into this City by the gates of
Baptism, committed first and originally unto them, and prefigured by the 12
oxen under the brazen Sea, 12000 of every tribe; that is all those faithful
Christians and true Jsraelites which can derive their spiritual genealogy from
the faith and doctrine of the 12 Apostles. And this is without all question,
the true and natural interpretation of the numbers and measures of this new
Jerusalem.

Concerning which it is to be observed, that those interpreters which did not
understand the measures and proportion of the wall, and therefore could not
discern how exactly that ecclesiastical state and Hierarchy, which our
Sav^our Christ built on the 12 Apostles, was typed out by it; yet by the only
contemplation, and computation of this number 144, they have discerned, that
the number of 12 was not only mystically and virtually contained in it, but
also chiefly intended by it, and so they attained unto the same truth in
effect, which by the structure and measures of the wall, being rightly
understood, ought first to have been apprehended by them.

And thus having been willing to build my opinion, as well upon reason, as upon
the authority of others, J have long labored (although by a tedious and
intricate digression) to find out and to prove by the Scriptures, what is the
true manner of the interpretation of that number, which is opposed to the
number of the Beast. And herein J have but followed the advice and counsel of
Rupertus, who writing of the number 666 has these words, Quia sapiens ad
computandum citatur, forte in numero problema est, sanctam igitur Scripturam
consulamus, sine qua nihil constans aut certum sive de numero Dei, sive de
numero Bestiae: nam sicutille Sampson veraciter dicere potuit, Si non arassetis
in vitula mea, non invenissetis propositionem meam: sic Dom: noster Jesus
Christus, cujus propositiones sive problematasunt omnia, quae in hoc libro
continentur, profunda mysteria, veraciter nobis dicat: Si non araveritis in
alia Scriptur a non invenietis solutionem numeri huius, quem praesens signavit
Scriptura. The effect of which words is, that except the true meaning and
interpretation of Gods number, be found out by diligent search of other places
of Scripture, there is little hope o^ possibility to find out the mystery
contained in the number of the Beast.

CHAP. 9. That those writers who make the mystery of the number 144 to consist
in the root of it, ought also to have extracted the square Root of the number
666. That the Extraction of the square root is an ancient and useful invention
by which many famous mysteries have been found out.
WHat has been hitherto said, differs little from the grounds which the
latest interpreters have laid for the finding out of the mystery. J have as
yet but beaten and made plain the same path, which Mr Forbes and other
commentators upon the Revelation have trodden out before me, but I am now come
to that place, where they either stood still, or turned out of the way. It is
true Mr Forbes and others affirm, that the number 144 is the number which is
opposed to the number of the Beast; and that, as it is a square and perfect
number, built and raised upon the number 12 only, which is the root of it; so
the Church of Christ is a square and perfect building, built upon the doctrine
of the 12 Apostles. It is also true, that as the number 666 is neither a square
nor perfect number, nor built upon the number 12: so neither is the Romish
Hierarchy a square and perfect building, neither is it built upon the doctrine
of the 12 Apostles. All this is true, but this is not all that is true; nor the
tenth part of that which may be found out by this number. All this is but a
negative description, showing rather, what Antichrist is not, then truly
defining what he is. And those interpreters which rest satisfied with so
imperfect a description, must confess that they know no more of Antichrist by
this number then what is plain and evident by many places of the Sriptures.
Why do they not therefore upon the grounds, which they themselves have laid,
farther prosecute their own interpretations? Why do they not seek out the
root of the beasts number, as well as the root of Gods number, that so they
may know, not only negatively, what is not the foundation of the Romish
Hierarchy, but also positively, what it is? Were they so unaquainted in
Arithmetic, that they knew not what the square root of a number is, nor how
it ought to be extracted? I dare not accuse such learned men of this nescience,
much less of their ignorance in this kind. Perhaps some of them through
incogitancy, not rightly considering these words in the text, numerus enim
hominis est, did think it unbeseeming the wisdom of God, and the majesty of
the scriptures, to wrap up such divine mysteries in humane and heathenish
inventions. True it is indeed, The extraction of the roots of numbers is an
humane, and perhaps an heathenish invention; but it is a lawful, a profitable
and an useful invention. It is the very ground, and foundation of Arithmeticke
and Geometry, and so necessary, and essential a part of these Sciences, that
neither of them can well subsist without it. By it was found out that famous
invention, for which it is said, that Pythagoras sacrificed an Hecatombe unto
the Gods; and why may not Christians find out as great a mystery by it as ever
Heathens did? Certainly if the wisdom of God will at any time vouchsafe to
unlock this numbers mystery by any humane invention, (as the words themselves
seem to intimate) there is none in respect of it self more probable, then
this, by which so many, and so famous mysteryes have been, and daily are
revealed. I say therefore, why do not those later writers, which in part have
rightly discerned wherein the mystery of Gods number does consist, extract the
root of 666 also? For had they extracted the square root of this number of
the beast, then had they truly endeavored to interpret this number, after the
same manner, that they themselves do interpret that number, which is opposed
unto it; then had they found out that number, which is mystically implied in
666, as 12 is in 144; then had they found out that number, which is chiefly
intended by 666, as 12 is by 144; then had they found out that nmber, which is
the measure, number, and foundation, as well of that material City, wherein
Antichrist does reside, as also of that state and government, by which he
rules in it. For as the number 12 is not only exquisitely applicable to that
ecclesiastical government, and Hierarchy, which Christ did first institute in
Jerusalem, but does also describe, and measure the material City it self, as
is partly above showed: so the root of the Beasts number, which is the number
opposed to 12, is not only exquisitely and miraculously applicable to that
government, and Hierarchy, which was by Antichrist first instituted, but does
also describe, and characterize that material City, in which this government
was first erected. And all this, by that which follows shall be clearly and
evidently proved.

But first, for as much as this opinion, which I shall here set down, does
differ from all other in this respect, namely, in that it affirms, that the
chief mystery does not consist in the application of the number 666 unto
Antichrist, but in finding out another number, by counting of this number,
which other number is most properly, and most remarkably applicable unto him; I
think it therefore necessary not to pass over such proofs as the text it
self affords for the full confirmation of this point, wherein the difference
consists. For although it cannot be denied, but that the like interpretation
of the opposite number (as it is above showed) is a strong, and
violentpresumption, why the Beasts number should be thus interpreted; yet the
words of the text are so apposite, and do so necessarily enforce this
interpretation, that I see not how it can be possibly avoided, although there
were no example in the Scripture for it.

CHAP. 10. What the counting of the number is. What is meant by the first
Beast, the second Beast, and the Image of the Beast mentioned, Revel. 13. That
by counting the Beasts number some other number ought to be found out besides
the number 666.
THE words are these in the 13 chap. of the Revel.

Here, is wisdom, let him that has understanding count the number of the
beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is six hundred sixty six.

It is expressly said in these words, that the number 666 must be counted; now
after what manner should this number be counted, but, after some such manner,
as is commonly used among men? And least any man should understand it of a
merely speculative, or angelical, or of any intricate and unusual kind of
computation, therefore it is added, Numerus enim hominis est, for it is the
number of a man, or of Man, that is, as Hic sapientia denotat ingenij acrimonia
and perspi^acitate opus esse, ad ea quae sequuntur percipienda* Conveniniens
est Richardi constructio, videlicet, Numerum hominis appella^i eum numerum, qui
ab homine observari possit; quasi dicatur ejusmodi esse enumerandi ratio and
computatio qu^m humani ingenij vis assequi and ini^e possit. Qua ratione nec
phrasis est insolens, nec inepta ratio: immo aptissima est (...), Qui ^^bet
sapienti^^^, computet numerum Bestiae, humani enim ingenij viribus haec fieri
valet computatio -- Numerus eni^ hominis est (1) quia ejusmodi supputatio est
quam possit humano more (...) (...) in 13 cap Apoc.
Alchazar, Coterius, Numerus (...) est (1), ut Areta^ ait consu^^us est
calculus and inter homines cognitus; vel aliter, Qui habet intellectum computet
ben^* n^m proprium est hominis intellectum h^ben^is, numerare. Gasper (...) in
21 cap. Ap.
Gasper a Melo, and many Dicit enim numerus hominis est, id est, ut alibi alia
de re, and mensus est murum ejus 144 cubitorum. Mensura hominis que est Angeli.
-- Sic quando ait simpliciter Numerus hominis est, intelligi^ Hu^es numeri and
^ecipiendi and intelligendi hominem esse capacem. Scripter Anonimus in
Commentari^s de Bestia Apocalyptica page, 140 and 141. Bibliotheca B^d. Oxon. M.
12, 16. Tho.
others expound it, not only such a number, but such a computation, and
counting, as is known unto men, and such as is commonly used among them. And
that these words were not added to signify, that Antichrist should be a man,
and one individual person, as the Papists would have it, not only Cotteriu^,
but even Alchazar the Jesuit does very well reason out of the words of the
text. His words are these, Constructio illa non aptum videtur reddere sensum,
sienimideo dictumfuit, [NUMERUS HOMINIS EST] ut Antichristus verus homo futurus
affirmaretur, connexio literae haec erit; Qui habet sapientiam computet numerum
nominis bestiae, quia Antichristus erit homo, atque adeo numerus eius erit
numerus hominis, quae ratio minime videtur apta. Nam quod Antichristus sit homo
futurus, nil deservit ad hoc, ut computetur, vel non computetur numerus eius.
That is, that manner of construction seems not agreeable to reason; for if it
were therefore said, it is the number of a man, that it might be affirmed that
Antichrist was a very man, then the coherence, and sense must be this, Let him
that has wisdom, count the number of the name of the beast, because
Antichrist shall be a man, and so his number shall be a man's number. Which
kind of reasoning seems not at all to be probable; for that Antichrist shall
be a man, it conduces nothing either to the counting, or to the not counting
of his number. Thus much Alchasa^ in 13 cap. Apoc. By whose words it may be
observed, that the evidence of truth made him so bold, as to confute that
interpretation of th^se words which most Papists would have generally to be
received. And here with all submission to better judgments, J hope I may
without offense to any man, set down cursorily, that opinion which I suppose
most probable, concerning the two Beasts, and the image of the Beast, mentioned
in this 13 cap. of the Revelation. I conceive the first Beast with the wounded
head, not to be that temporal power of the Roman Emperors, which they have
exercised since the time of Constantine the great: but to be that temporal
power of the Roman Emperors, which since that time has been usurped by the
Popes. For I believe that the Bishop and clergy of Rome shortly after the days
of Constantine the great, did either by his donation, or by their own
usurpation, when the Emperor was absent and taken out of the way, hold and
usurp, for a short time at the least, even a temporal principality in and
over the city of Rome, and the territories adjoining; and this temporal
principality, wealth, and riches which the Popes and clergy of Rome then had,
was the beginning of their greatness. And by this temperall greatness, I do
not mean such subordinate Titles, Dignities, and maintenance, as were in those
times by Emperors and Kings bestowed upon many other Christian Bishops, but
such dominion and principality as is incompatible with the ministers of the
Gospel, and such as Bellarmine speaks of, when he says, that the same
Ecclesiastical person may be both an Ecclesiastical and a temporal Prince.
Many reasons and Rab Abraham Levita, dicit Constantinum Roma c^ssisse camque
Sacerdotibus E l^mcorum reliquisse* Et Ab^n Ezrain Dan. dicit, Constantinus
dec^ravit lo^ii Romae quae erat seeds ejus and reliquit cum iniquitati quae
voca^ur Petrus, etc. Angel: Rocca in Bib. Vatic. page 183. E piscopatus Romanus
non aliter atque Alexandrinus quasi extra Sa cerdotii sines egr^ssus, ad
secularem principa^um erat jam ante delapsus. Socrat Histor. Eccles. lib. 7.
cap. 11.
probabilities may be alleged to prove that the Bishops of Rome had such
temporal dominion before the Goths and Vandals did overrunne Italy. Most
Papistsdoe willingly acknowledge it, and it is easily proved against all those
that do acknowledge the donation of Constantine. And although the donation of
Constantine be forged in many things, yet not perhaps in all. And if it be
wholly forged, yet it is an argument that the Bishops of Rome had possession of
some such temporal power in those ancienter times: for why else was it forged,
but to prove that their ancesters had right to such things, as it was then
undeniable, that they did formerly possess?

This temporal power and principality over the city of Rome, did succeed the
government of the Roman Emperors in Rome (who were the sixth head, that was in
the time of S. John) and did receive a deadly wound, perhaps partly by some
Emperors, and perhaps partly by some seditious tumults of the Citizens, but
chiefly by the incursions of the Goths and Vandals, who endeavored to erect a
new form of government in Rome, and did so far effect it, as was necessary for
the deadly wounding of the Popes dominion, but yet could not so utterly abolish
it, but that it revived again afterward. This temporal dominion being
revived and having the Exarchie of Ravenna, and many other things added unto
it, became formidable to all other temporal Princes, and to the Emperor
himself, whom I account one of those ten Kings which was to give his power to
this Beast. Of this temporal power Funecius speaks where he says, Ex hoc
tempore Papae in Italia domini, subinde quaesiverunt, quo modo potentiam suam
stabilirent: donec tandem a Pipino, maximam Italiae partem, quam vi subegerant,
dono acceperint. After which time the Bishop and clergy of Rome usurping and
enjoying without controlement this temporal principality, and being assisted
with the obedience of other temporal Princes (some of whom they forced to obey
them by their dragon-like power, and some they deceaved by working miracles,
and by the efficacy of error) began now to seek out some better title then
his own usurpation and the donation of Princes, by which he might now establish
himself and the Sea of Rome in his temporal principality. And considering
that some of his predec^ssors having mouths speaking great things, did begin
to clay me to themselves universal Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over the whole
world, he resolved that it was his only way actually to settle such universal
Ecclesiastical power on himself, as was rather claymed then possessed by his
predecessors. And seeing that he could have no good title to such an universal
Ecclesiastical power as he aimed at, either as he was a Bishop, or as he was
an Archbishop, or as he was a Patriarch, he was therefore necessitated to make
the people believe that he was the Vicar of Christ, and that in this he
succeeded S. Peter, who derived from Christ this great authority peculiar to
himself and his successors. And now having derived this great power to
himself by authority of the holy Scriptures and by divine right, (as he makes
the world believe,) he is now become a Beast having two horns like the Lamb,
that is, two powers both Temporal, and Ecclesiastical; Ecclesiastical
direct, and Temporal indirecte over all kingdoms in the world. First
therefore, this unlawful temporal power which the Bishop of Rome first
usurped I conceive to be the first Beast whose head was wounded, and I believe
that the Bishops of Rome were even in those times, before they usurped any
unlawful Ecclesiastical power, the Antichrist, not in respect of their
Ecclesiastical or Episcopal power, but in respect of that their unlawful
temporal power above mentioned. Secondly, I conceive the second Beast
mentioned, Revel. 13. 11. to be that unlawful universal Ecclesiastical power
which these latter times have settled upon the Pope; and I believe that he is
the Antichrist, not as Bishop, or as Archbishop, or Patriarch, but as he
pretends himself to be Pope and Vicar of Christ having such a transcendent
Ecclesiastical power as is incommunicable to any other upon earth. This
Ecclesiastical power does now include in it efficaciter although indirecte,
all that temporal power which the first Beast had, and all other temporal
power besides it. And for this reason the second Beast is said to exercise all
the power of the first Beast in his presence. For so the Pope continuing still
a temporal Prince and Bishop of Rome, holds now all that temporal power and
dominion, by virtue of his unlawful Ecclesiastical power, which for diverse
hundreds of years, the Bishops his predecessors were formerly content to hold,
only by the pretended and perhaps forged donations of Constantine and other
Princes.

Now lastly, as touching the Image of the Beast, I suppose that to be the
person of the Pope for the time being: especially he being considered as he is
Vicarius Christi; for in this respect the Cardinals and others his followers
do flatly adore him when he is elected, and do teach such Adoration to be due
unto him. And this worship and adoration which is given unto him, although it
be not sufficient to Qui singit sacros auro vel marmore vultus Non facit ille
deos, Qui regat ille facit.
transform him really and truly into such a Vicar of Christ as they pretend
him to be: yet it is sufficient to transform him really and truly into such
an Jmage and such an Idol as is in the text described. These things J have set
down Obiter, and briefly to show that these two Beasts, and the Image of the
Beast do all concur to the making up of that one great Antichrist, whose
city, State, and Kingdom are described by the Beasts number, and to show how
unprobable it is that all these things should be meant of one particular man as
the papists would have Antichrist to be.

It were an easy thing to confirm the same truth by many testimonies, both of
protestants, and papists. But because it is certain and evidently proved by
many learned writers that the great and chief Antichrist should not be one
person only, but a state of government, or body politic, I will therefore
recite here the words of Cotterius only, a late writer, who as J
conceivereasoneth unanswerably to the same purpose in his commentaries upon the
13 cap. of the Apoc. where he speaks in these words, Numerus enim hominis
est: (...), non (...) quasi hic appellatio hominis Antichristo tribueretur; De
bestia agitur, cui appellationem bominis competere repugnat; vult igitur
Scriptura numerum bestiae ejusdem esse speciei cum nostrate; numeri enim ratio
una non est: nos res nostras ad decadum, and centuriarum, and chiliadum, and
myriadum rations exigimus, quid ni vero angeli alias numerorum contabulationes
sequantur? That is, for it is the number of a man, or of Man, not of this man,
or that man, or any particular man, as if the name of a man were here
attributed to Antichrist. The Prophet speaks of the Beast, to whom the name
and appellation of a man cannot agree. The meaning therefore is, that this
number of the Beast is of the same kind, that other numbers are, which are
used by us, that are men, and inhabitants of this world. For all numbering is
not after the same manner; we that are men number our things by tens, and by
hundreds, and by thousands, and by tens of thousands; but why may not Angels
rank and dispose unities according to other progressions and proportions? For
as much then, as this number is the number of a man, that is, a number of the
same kind that other numbers are, that are Used by men, therefore we cannot
doubt, but the computation, and counting of this number is such a kind of
computation, as is usual among men*

I ask therefore what it is, to count a number after the manner of men? And,
what literal and grammatical sense can be given of these words, except they
be understood of such a kind of computation, as is both usual among men, and
proper to numbers only? but there is no other way whereby men usually do, or
properly can be said to count numbers, but by such a kind of computation,
which either is, or is reducible unto one of these following; namely either by
Addition, or Substraction, or Multiplication, or Division, or by the extraction
of Roots: and therefore it is absolutely necessary, that the number of the
Beast must be counted according to one of these kinds of computation. But in
all these kinds of computation, and in every one of them, the end and scope is,
by one or more numbers given, to find out one other number, which was not known
nor could be expressed before the computation was performed. And hence it
follows necessarily, that if the number of the Beast must be counted, then
there must be some other number found out by it, beside the number it self,
which is named and expressed. And this inference is so evident, and necessary,
that some learned interpreters (although they aimed not at Ia^s B^^c^rd*
any particular application) have by the words of the text, and by their own
well grounded conjectures, and great sagacity fore* seen, and foretold, that
there was some other number beside the number 666 to be understood in this
place, by the number of the Beast. And this may appear by the words of
Rupertus upon this place, where he writes thus, Hic sapientia est, qui habet
intellectum computet, etc. Quid hoc est, quod and numerum praescribit ipse, and
tamen dicit, qui h^bet sapientiam computet numerum bestiae? qualem numerum? vel
quare computet numerum Bestiae? numerus enim, inquit, hominis est, and numerus
eius 666* quid hoc est quod and numerum praescribit ipse, and tamen dicit, qui
habet sapi^ntiam computet numerum Bestiae? Number hoc intendit, ut computando
sapienter hoc totum perquiras, quot in isto numero fint monades, aut certe
decades, etc. And a little after this anxious disquisition about counting this
number, he concludes in these words, Duos ergo numeros hic intelligi oportet,
alterum nominis eius, five Dei: alterum Bestiae, five hominis. That is, Two
numbers therefore must be understood in this place, one being the number of the
Beasts name, or of God; the other of the Beast, or of man, for Gods number is
not the same with man's number. By which words I know not what else can be
understood, but this; That the number 666 is not only the number of the Beasts
name, but also the number of God, that is, it is a number which God has
pleased to name, and reveal to men, that by counting of this number, they
might find out that other number, which it pleased not God, expressly to name
in this place, but rather mystically to conceal, because it is more properly
the number of the Beast, then this, which is the number of his name. To these
words of Rupertus may be added the like testimony of Pet. Bongus in his book
de numerorum mysteriis, where writing of the same place of Scripture, and of
the number 666 he has the like words, Duos ergo numeros hic intelligi oportet,
etc. two numbers therefore must here be understood, etc.

Now therefore it being evident, that by counting of this number there ought
some other number to be found out, the next thing to be inquired after, is,
what kind of computation ought here to be used. For although it be granted,
that this number must be counted, and that it cannot be counted, but that there
must some other number be found out by it, yet for as much as numbers may be
counted diverse ways, (as is above said) and there may be diverse numbers found
out by them, a reason may well be demanded, why this counting of the number
should be restrained to the extraction of the root only, rather then to any
other kind of computation? To which I might answer, that the example of the
opposite number (which is to be counted after this manner) is a sufficient
reason; but I do rather answer that this restriction is not only probable, but
absolutely necessary, because there is only one number named and expressed in
the text. For if any other kind of computation had been intended, two numbers
at the least ought to have been expressed. For neither Addition, nor
Substraction, nor Multiplication, nor Division can be performed, but there must
be two numbers at the least given; that by them a third, that is, either a
Totum, or a Remainder, or a Product, or a Quotient may be found out; but in the
extraction of Roots, one number only ought to be expressed whose root is to be
extracted: and for this cause it is flatly against the literal, and the
grammatical sense of the words of the text, to understand any other immediate
computation or calculation by them. It were an imperfect speech to say, here is
wisdom, let him that has understanding add the number of the Beast, for it
is the number of a man, and his number is 666, and yet not to declare what
number it is to which this should be added. So likewise if it had been said,
Let him that has understanding subtract the number of the Beast, for it is the
number of a man, and his number is 666; it would be demanded from what number
it should be subtracted: or if it had been said, Here is wisdom, let him that
has understanding multiply the number of the Beast, or divide the number of
the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number is 666; who seeeth not
how ambiguous, and imperfect the speech is; because there is no number
expressed or intimated by which it should be multiplied or divided? But if it
had been said, Here is wisdom, let him that has understanding extract the
root of the number of the Beast, for it is the number of a man, and his number
is 666, this is an entire and perfect speech of it self, and such as must of
necessity be understood in this place: because there is no other way by which
men either properly can, or usually do count one number only, but only by
the extraction of the root of it.

CHAP. 11. What it is to extract the square root of a number? That 25 is the
number that is the root of 666; and remarkablely opposed unto 12. Some
objections answered concerning the fractions of the root of 666.
AND thus having hitherto proved by the example of the opposite number, and by
the words of the text, that the root of this number ought to be extracted; I
come now from quod fit, to quid fit, from proving that is to be extracted, to
show what it is to extract it.

To extract the square root of a number given, is to find out the greatest
number, which being multiplied into it self and having the fractions added to
the product, (if there be any fraction remaining) makes the first number. And
how this is to be performed I need not here relate; it is sufficiently declared
by such as have written of Arithmeticke. And although many learned, and worthy
Divines (whose books I account my self not worthy to bear) are perhaps
ignorant of it: yet is this kind of Mathematical learning called wisdom in
Moses was learned in all the wisdom of the Egyptians, Act. 7. 22.
the Scriptures, and in this may consist one part of that wisdom and
understanding, which is in the words of the text required for the finding out
of this mystery. Let him therefore that has this skill in humane Arts, and
Sciences, and let him that has understanding to extract the roots of numbers,
extract the root of the Beasts number, and he shall find that fatal number to
be 25, and that the fractions remaining are 41: and that this is proved by
multiplying 25 by it self, which makes 625, and by adding the fractions which
are 41 unto 625, both which numbers added together, make the just sum 666.
And although the root of this number, not being a simple root, as the root
of 144 is, must in strictness of speech be expressed by more of which the
first i^ Cardinal number, and the fractions are expresse^ by an ordinall
number.
numbers then one, yet there can be no doubt or question which of those numbers
must be the number answerable and opposite to 12. The root of 666 may be said
to be 25 41 / 51 or else, to express it more exactly, it may be said to be 25
25 / 31: or it may be said to be 25 806 / 1000 or 25 8069758 / 10000000 nay any
number whatsoever may be made one of those numbers by which the fractions may
be expressed. But howsoever the number of the fractions be variable, yet the
number ^5 is always constant and the same, as 12 is in the opposite root. And
as 12 is the greatest number, and the least number, and the only number of
unities of the same denomination with the number 144, (which is or can be
contained in) the root of 144: so 25 is the greatest number, and the least
number, and the only number of unities of the same denomination with the number
666, (which is or can be contained in) the root of the number 666. And this
sicut similitudinis is sufficient to establish an evident antithesis between
the two great Cardinal numbers of these two roots, although in respect of the
fractions there be no sicut aequalitatis between them. And whether the
fractions be added or not added to 25, yet they can neither augment, nor
diminish the root, no not so much as by one unite, as it is sufficiently
known to those that know what fractions are. It is no good argument to say
that 25 is not opposed to 12, because 2^ has fractions appendant to it, and 12
has not; for, Omne simile est etiam dissimile, and by the same reason it might
be said, that the 12 Apostles are not answerable to the 12 Patriarchs, because
the Apostles had some privileges or defects which the Patriarchs had not. Or
that the Cardinals are not answerable to the Apostles in the Romish Hierarchy,
because they have red hats, which Jbelieve the Apostles had not. Besides, it is
often times an usual and ordinary thing, etiam praxi mathematica, in many
arithmeticall operations, to cast away, and not to regard the fractions of
roots, because the root or Cardinal number it self is of sufficient
exactness to prove or effect the conclusion, which is desired; nay sometimes
and in some cases, when roots of numbers are to be extracted, they cannot make
the fractions to be useful to their purposes, though they would. For suppose a
captain have 666 men under his command, and would reduce them to a square
figure of equal sides and ranks: to effect his purpose he must extract the
root of 666, which he would find to be 25 41 / 51, and by that he would
conclude that he must of necessity take the number 25 to be the number of
ranks, and the number of men in every rank, and no other number would serve
his turn. As for the 41 odd men he must reject them as unusefull, if he will
have his army exactly square. The number 50 is no equilaterall square number,
and yet S. Augustine upon the 150 Psalm and else where makes the mystery of
this number to consist in the root of it which is 7 without any scruple of any
fraction: and it were easy to set down many authors which interpret the same
and other numbers after the same manner. Seeing therefore it is usual among
men in many cases, and necessary in some, not to regard the fractions, but
only the Cardinal number in the extraction of roots; why then may we not do
likewise in extracting the root of 666? why may we not consider the number 25
first by it self, and as it is the only Cardinal number opposed to 12, by
which the root of 666 can be truly expressed; and afterward as it has
relation to the fractions, especially being the unities of the root of this
number are sometimes to be applied to Persons, who are things indivisible into
parts or fractions, as are also the unities of numbers essentially and
absolutely considered. And the truth is, that no number of fractions, as
fractions, is properly a part of any root essentially considered: for
howsoever it be true that fractions, being reduced to some certain
denomination, do more exactly show the side of a ^quare figure as it is
quantitas continua, yet it cannot be proved that they are any proper essential
part of the root it self as it is quantitas discreta. For the fractions of a
root do suppose every unity in the root to be divided into many parts, and
the number it self, whose root is to be extracted, to be resolved into
another number far greater then it self. And the fractions (if it be well
considered) are rather part of the root of the second number into which the
first is supposed to be resolved, then of the root of the first number which
was to be extracted. As for example the root of 666 is 25 806 / 1000 which
fractions do suppose every unity of 666, to be multiplied into one million;
and every unite of the root 25 to be multiplied into one thousand: for if the
figures of the root and of the fractions be joined together they do make
25806. which number is the true root of 666000000 so that 806, (being now
unities of the same denomination with the number 666000000,) are more properly
a part of the root of 666 millions, then of the root of 666 unities. And by
this it may be observed and understood, that while w^ do ^e^ke after Ordinall
numbers, more exactly to express that root whose Cardinal number we have
already found out, we do nothing else in effect (although many times we
consider it not) but seek after the Cardinal number of another root whose
fractions, being now the fractions of a greater number, are not at all, or not
so much to be regarded. By these considerations it may sufficiently appear,
that that Cardinal number which is the exact root of the greatest square
number contained in any number given, whose root is to be extracted, is the
number which is most remarkable and chiefly sought after in the extr^ction of
every root; for this number is, and is to be reputed, not only the root of
the greatest square number contained in the number given, but al^o of diverse
other numbers which do exceed it, but yet with this difference, that it is
the root of the square number without fractions, and o^ o^he^ numbers with
fractions added to it. And that the same Cardinal number with a little
difference of fractious, should be the ro^t^ o^ ^^^ numbers then one and of any
nu^be^s* (...) i^ a thingth ^^ose which are not (...) ver^^^ in the ^^t^action
of roots, do neith^^ co^^^^^r nor well understand: and this ^^^s them (...),
that because 25 is the ^oo^^ o^ (...) that therefore it i^ not the root of
666. But such should consider that one reason why these kinds of numbers are
called roots, is, because every such number, is in this respect like unto the
root of a tree; for as one root has many branches growing upon it, and
issuing from it, although some grow nearer the root then others: so the same
number may be the root of diverse other numbers, which have all a real, and yet
a differing dependence upon it. And although ascending upward, there be no
infallible direction from the root to any one particular branch, yet
descending from the top of any one branch, there is certain and infallible
direction to the same root: and so whosoever shall go to extract the root of
any number greater then 624 and less then 676, according to such rules of art
as are, and have hitherto been commonly taught, and generally received, shall
be infallibly directed, not to the number 26, but to the number 25, and to that
number only, as unto the only Cardinal number first sought after in the
extraction of all roots; and this number either by it self, or having some
fractions appendant to it, is the true root of all such numbers as are included
between those two numbers above mentioned Neither is it usual or possible truly
to express any root that has fractions, by any other Cardinal number, but
only by that number which being multiplied into it self produces the greatest
square number contained in that number, whose root is to be extracted. And
although there be diverse other numbers besides this number 666, by any one of
which we might have been infallibly directed to this number 25, as unto the
only Cardinal number by which their roots could have been expressed: yet there
is no one of those numbers but only the number 666, whose most perfect figure
does represent the figure of Rome, as the most perfect figure of the number 144
does represent the figure of Jerusalem: and for this reason chiefly, and for
diverse others (as shall be showed abundantly in due place) it was both
convenient, and necessary, that this number 666 should be chosen rather then
any other. But if it be objected, that the root of 666 is nearer to 26, then
25; yet I answer that it cannot be truly said to be 26, but is truly said to
be 25: and that not only because 25 is contained in this root, as are also all
other numbers less then 25, but because 25 is the greatest number of unities
of the same denomination with the number 666, contained in this root. And that
I may express this the more clearly I will make it plain by an instance, and
because there is only a threefold ambiguity incident to the expression of such
roots as have fractions, I will therefore suppose the same question to be
proposed to three several men concerning the length of one side of an exactly
square figure containing precisely 666 foot of square measure. The first being
asked how many foot in length one side of this figure must be, would perhaps
say 25, because that is the greatest number of feet contained in it. The second
being asked how many foot in length one side of this figure must be, would
perhaps say 26, because the exact length is nee^est unto it. The third being
asked the same question, would perhaps say, that it was neither 25 foot long
nor 26, but that it was nine or ten inches more then 25, and two or three
inches less then 26. The first of these three answers is clearly and evidently
true, for 25 is the greatest number and the least number, and the only number
of feet by which that length can be expressed. The second answer is clearly
and evidently false, for if that length, which wants above two inches of 26
foot, had lacked but one inch or one small part of an inch, it could not then
have been ^ruly said to have been 26 foot long, and who^oever takes proximum
vero, pro vero, in this kind, it is plain that he takes falsum pro vero,
falsehood for truth. The third answer is impertinent, and not to the purpose,
for the question propounded, was not how many inches, but how many foot long
one side of that figure was. Neither ought the question to have been any other
ways propounded; because in the extraction of all roots, the first number
sought after, is a Cardinal number, and not an ordinall number, a number of
such parts of which every one may be said to be an integrum, and not a number
of fractions, which result of themselves without seeking after, when this first
number is found out. And as ^for the fractions, I have already showed, that
they cannot darken the remarkablenesse of the number 25, nor disanull that
antithesis, which is and ought to be between this number and that number, which
is opposite unto it. Yet if any number, by which the fractions of this root may
be expressed, be more remarkable and rather to be chosen then another: then
without question it is that number, by which the fractions may be most exactly
expressed by fewest figures, and by such numbers as do leave fewest fractions
of fractions remaining. And certainly it seems strange and wonderful to me,
neither do J think it merely accidental, that the number 25, should so
exactly express the fractions of the root of 666, as that no other number
less then it or near unto it, can so perfectly express them. For neither 41
/ ^1 nor 806 / 1000 do so exactly express the fractions of the root of 666 as
25. 25 / 31 nay although those 25. 25 / ^1. ^^ / 60.
numbers be infinite by which the fractions of this root may be expressed, yet
I believe there is not any one of them which leaves so small a number of
fractions, as this number does. And although numbers and their roots be
infinite in number, yet that there should be any other number besides this
number 666, the fractions of whose root may be so exactly expressed by the
Cardinal number of its own root with any denominator whatsoever, as the
fractions of the root of 666, are by 25; this is such a thing as I conceive to
be (...), a thing that cannot happen to be found out, although I will not say
it is absolutely unpossible. But in the mean time until some such number shall
be produced, whose root may be after the same manner, and with the like
exactuesse expressed, shall be far from thinking that this happens ca^ually
and accidentally; but shall believe rather, that as the doubling of Pharaohs
dream was an argument of the certainty of that which was signified by it: so
because this number 25 is in a double respect remarkable in the root of 666,
(first, in that it is the only Cardinal number of the prime or Cardinal
unities: and secondly, in that it is the only number of ordinall unities or
fractions, by which that root can be by fewest figures most exactly expressed)
I do therefore conclude, that it is a certain and established truth, that
this number twenty five is that fatal and unfortunate number of Antichrist
opposed to the number 12, and that in an higher nature, and in a greater degree
of opposition then 666 is opposed to 144, it being that very number which as it
is most apparently and remarkably applicable to the City and Hierarchy of
Antichrist, so is it also chiefly intended by the number 666: although it
pleased the wisdom of God to seal it up in a mystery, and as it were to lock
it up in the cabinet of a greater number, until that time came which God had
appointed for man's reason to unlock this cabinet, by the key of computation,
and so to take out this so long hidden number, by which Antichrist is (as it
shall be showed) most evidently, and miraculously described. For if this number
had been expressly named in this place to have been the number of the Beast,
or if that mystical Babylon, in which Antichrist reigns, had been measured
in the Scriptures by this number 25, as the new Jerusalem is by the number 12,
then there had been no mystery at all contained in it; then it had been so
plainly set down, that Antichrist would have prevented it. For as it is not
probable that ever any Pope will now choose such a name, whose numerall letters
shall make the just ^umme 666, (because some men suppose that this number is so
to be applied:) so neither is it likely that Antichrist would ever have chosen
and affected this number 25 above, and before any other number, to be the only
conspicuous, and remarkable number in the foundation of his Hierarchy, except
the wisdom of God, who takes the wise in their own craftiness, had sealed it
up in a mystery in such sort that they should not understand it, as long as
they had any possibility either to alter it or to deny it. For even so has it
come to pass in the Hierarchy of the Romish Clergy, that their ancesters have
fatally, and unwittingly laid the foundation of the Papacy upon this number 25,
and have made this number so particularly applicable to their City, and to
themselves in all those material circumstances, in which the number 12 is
applicable either literally to the city Jerusalem, or spiritually to the Church
of God, and Hierarchy thereof; that no policy is now sufficient to cover it,
nor their own impudence (with any show of probability) to deny it.

CHAP. 12. That the number 25 has been conceived to be a fatal and
^nfortunate number, by such, as knew no relation that it h^d to Antichrist, or
to the number 666.
AND now that I may come nearer to (...) this number to the Papacy, I will
first show that as 12 is a good, and perfect number alw^ies taken in a good
sense, in the Scriptu^es: ^o 25 is an unfortunate number in it ^^lfe, and that
it has been branded for an evil and unluckie number both by profane, and
sacred writers, although they knew no relation that it had either to
Antichrist, or the number 666. It is observed by Vince^tius that this number 25
is impariter impar ^^^rus qui impari numero imparite^ mensuratur, that is, an
odly uneven number, which is unevenly measured by an odd number. Others have
observed, and proved both by reason and authority that the number of five is a
fatal number, and that all numbers either ending in five, or made by it are
evil, and unhappy also. Petrus Bongus, in his book de numerorum mysteriis,
observes and shows that this number 25, which does not only end in five, but
is made by the multiplication of five by five, is mysteriously evil. His words
are these, Hinc factum est, ut hoc numero 25 Hieroglyphice notarentur qui
illecebris, and voluptatibus hujus vitae dediti semetipsos rebus creatis
manciparunt: -- porro, constat hic numerus de quinario, qui neque tetragonus,
neque triangulus, neque cubus, neque perfectus est. And in another place he
says, numerus 25 duas duntaxat habet parts aliquotas nempe 1, and 5: pari
modo quinarius cum sit primus incompositus sola numerabilis est unitate. Sic
etiam ex diametro distans a perfectione, unde in vinea domini infructuosos
significat. But it is yet more remarkable which S. Hierome observes out of the
Scriptures, concerning this number 25, in his commentaries upon the 11 cap. of
Ezekiel, where speaking of this number he says, Et quantum non subterfugit
memoriam meam, nunquam in bonam partem potui hunc numerum reperire; licet in
numeris ad sacerdotale ministerium a 25 annis eligantur; In Hebraeoenim non
habent hunc numerum, sedtricenarium. And not S. Hierome only, but diverse other
interpreters upon the 8 and 11 cap. of Ezekiel, have made the like observations
of this number. Lyra of the 25 men their mentioned, says, Per quos
significantur Apostatae a fide, vel a religione, maxim quando sunt in sua
maliti a firmati, quae significatur per numerum 25, qui numerus est quadratus,
quia resultat ex ductu quinarii in seipsum. And Petrus Serranus, in his
commentaries upon the same vision of Ezekiel, writes after this manner; Ita ut
potestati libidinum and cupiditatum vita omnis permissa sit: hoc autem malum
signat sacer Propheta cum 25 viros in porta orientali se vidisse asserit.
Numerum enim quinarium, quo sensus hominis clauduntur, nunquam in bonam partem
accipi legitur in Scriptur a, ut Divus Hieronymus testatu^; etsi pluries
indifferenter inveniatur, unde totius populi lapsus vigesimoquinto numero hoc
l^co significatur. If it be demanded what universal defection and what
Apostasy this is from faith and religion by men confirmed in their own malice,
which ^yra, and Serranus acknowledge to be typed out by this number 25, it may
be well answered that there is none more probable then that defection, and
universal Apostasy which was to come upon the Church of Christ at that time,
when Antichrist was to sit in it. For because this vision was not literally
fulfilled, or not fully terminated in the Jewish Church (as it cannot but
appear to those that seriously consider it) therefore S. Hierome (as in this
following treatise shall be showed) and many others do not only understand it
of some defection, and Apostasy, which was to be among Christians, but do also
apply it even particularly to the Synagogue of Rome. John Husse, in his book de
revelatione Christi and Antichristi, says of this vision after this manner:
Mysticam meretricem Scriptura describens, eius excessum notificat, Ezekiel. 8.
cap. de viris in templo qui stabant ante picturas. And Ecolampadius, after a
particular application of the chief things contained in this vision, to the
Monks, Friars, and Nuns of the Romish Church, has these words, Et quid sibi
vult haec visio, quam quod in Episcopis and doctoribus abominationes maximas
ultimo cernat? And of those words, Et sunt circiter viginti quinque, he says,
-- Quid aliud his doce^ur, quam nihilillos perfecto animo agere? understanding
by the word illos, those Prelates of the Church of Rome, of whom he had before
spoken. I might here add the words of Gaspar Sanctius, and others concerning
this number upon the same occasion; but, as I conceive, these are sufficient to
make it evident, that this number Twenty five is not only (even by the
testimony of the Scriptures) an Hieroglyphicall character of some unhappy,
desperate, and deplored estate of God's Church, but also has been conceived by
religious, wise, and learned men, mystically and typically to foreshew that
quintessence of impiety and malice, which these latter times have discovered
in the Church of Rome. Now therefore for as much as it is agreeable to other
places of Scripture that this number 25 should be in some special manner
applicable, both to Antichrist, and the Church of Rome: I may with the greater
confidence proceed to the particular application, hoping by it, and upon the
grounds above proved, to find out such an accurate and essential description
of the Papacy, as shall not seem unprobable to have been intended by the holy
Ghost: much less shall it be prejudicial to any man's wisdom to believe it.

CHAP. 13. Of the nature, and quality, of those particulars, in which the root
and the figure of the Beasts number is to be applied to the Papacy.
AND now concerning those particulars in which this number is to be applied to
the Papacy; it is to be remembered what is above said of the number 12, and of
those things to which it is applied. For as Antichrist is opposed to Christ,
and as 666 is opposed to 144; so is 25 opposed to 12, and so must those things
which are chiefly to be measured or numbered by this number 25 be (...), ex
adverso respondentia, that is correspondent, answerable on the other side, and
in some sort opposed to, or set over against those things which are measured,
numbered, or described by the number 12. And (as I am persuaded) for this Cause
partly is the Church militant, in the 21 Chapter of the Revel: measured,
numbered, and described by these two numbers only 144 and 12, that there might
be an express example in the Scriptures not only showing in general how the
number 666, ought to be interpreted; but also leading us (as it were) by the
hand to those particulars, in which the root of this number ought principally
to be applied. And although perhaps it were a sufficient application, and as
much as some Readers would expect, and more then any Papist can confute, to
heap together a greater number of particulars, in which this number 25 is
rather applicable unto the Romanists, then it is to any other estate, Church,
or sect; or then any other number is to themselves, and to their state: yet
this is far short of that most exact and exquisite application, which seems
chiefly to be intended by the Holy Ghost. Indeed the frequent occurring of this
number in things pertaining to the state, and Religion of the Romanists (as
shall be showed in the second place, after I have proved the first, and chief
application) may well be an argument, that either some secret destiny, which is
in it; or their affectation of it, has made it more proper to them, and more
common among them, then any other number. Yet, if it were applicable to them in
no more, nor in no other particulars, but in those only which are (...) to
those things, which are measured, numbered, or described by the number 12 in the
21 Chap. of the Revel. those only are abundantly and superabundantly
sufficient, not only for an evident description, but for a remarkable,
essential, and incommunicable definition as well of their City, as of their
state and Hierarchy. For what can be either said, or imagined to be more
essential, or remarkable either to, or in any city then the figure of it, the
circuit of the walls, or compass of it, the number of the Gates, the number of
the Churches, the number of Tribes, Wards, or Parishes into which it was first
divided? And concerning the form of government (which is more properly a City,
then the material structures) what can be said, or imagined, to be more
essential to it, or remarkable in it: then the number, time, place, office,
and in some sort the very name also of those persons, who are the very Basis
and foundation of it, and the very hinges (as they themselves confess) on
which their whole Hierarchy depends, and moves it self? As therefore the
number 12 in the 21 Chap. of the Revel. is applied to the Church and Hierarchy
thereof in such things as are most essential to it, and in such circumstances,
as are most apparently remarkable in it: so the number 25 in like manner must
be applied to the Papacy, and Pseudo-Hierarchy thereof, in such things, as are
most essential to it, and in such circumstances, as are most apparently
remarkable in it.

And as the number 12 is in that chapter after such an admirable and wonderful
manner applied to the spiritual Jerusalem, that is to the Church and
Hierarchy thereof, that the literal and material City, in which that
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy was first established, is also by the same number
plainly measured, and manifestly described: so ought also the number 25 to be
in such sort applied to the mystical and spiritual Babylon; that the
material City it self, in which that Pseudo-apostolicall Hierarchy has been
long since established, may be by the same number both truly measured, and
evidently described. And for this cause it is absolutely necessary, that the
Beast mentioned in the 13 Chap: of the Revel: which is Antichrist, must not be
one person only (as the Papistsfalsly teach) but (as the latest Although
certain of the Scholasticall Divines do say, that Antichrist shall be borne of
the nation of the Jews, and of the tribe of Dan etc. yet great learned men
which with deep judgments have read the Scriptures, do write, that he shall
not be one personal man only, but that under the name of Antichrist is meant
and comprehended the whole kingdom of false teachers, bearing rule in the
temple of God, and that in a great City which has rule and dominion over the
kings of the earth, Rapsodiae G. A. Bishop. of Exeter. pagina 287. Mis^ellan 25.
and best writers do agree) must essentially consist of a certain number of
such persons, as may be fitly answerable, Antichristus habitu^us est suos
Pseudo-apoilolos. Anselmus in 13. cap. Apoc.
and opposite to Christ's Apostles, residing in some City answerable and
opposite to Jerusalem. For how is it otherwise possible to interpret this
number of the Beast, after the same manner, that that number which is opposed
unto it is, and ought to be interpreted? How can we by counting the Beast's
number find out the number of his Apostles, and the number of his Tribes, and
the number both of the spiritual and material gates of his Church and City,
and the figure and compass of it; except Antichrist shall have some City
answerable to Jerusalem, and some Persons answerable to the Apostles, and
essential to his Hierarchy ruling, and residing in it?

CHAP. 14. That Rome is answerable to Jerusalem, and the Popes Cardinals to
Christ's Apostles.
AND as this assertion must necessarily follow out of that which is above said,
concerning the manner how this number ought to be interpreted, so is it
evidently and apparently verified in the Papacy. Alchasar upon the 21 cap. of
the Rev. says, Totam hujus prophetiae summam devolui ad Romae comparationem
theologicam cum JERUSALEM; nomen Jerusalem hoc loco Romanae Ecclesiae
attribui, veterem Hierusolimam nomen suum amisisse, illudque novam ROMAM, id
est, Romanam Ecclesiam comparasse, utpote quae antiquae successit Hierysolimae,
in eo quod fidelium omnium CAPUT and METROPOLIS sit effecta. Alchasar in
disputat. de argumento 21. cap.
For as Jerusalem truly was Caput, matter, gremium and ostium omnium
Ecclesiarum, Ex quo univers^ (...) secunda Jerusalem ^^uit appellati, apud
quam and Dominus (ad illius Robur sider) in Petro iterum crucifigi voluit,
ubique unius Dei veneratio ac fides indeficiens, and Domini precibus and Petri
favore ad ultimum usque judicantis Domini adventum, in urbe sublimi and
valente, ac in de veriore Jerusalem creditur permansura. O^^phrius Panvinius
de praecipuis Urbis Romae basi^eis, pagina 265. Coloniae, 1584. And the same
Onuphrius says, page 138. that at Rome supra perist^^^ extetiotis Basilicae
Lateranensis porticus hi versus sunt, Dogmate Papali datur ac simul Imperiali,
Quod sim cunctarum ma^er, Caput Ecclesiarum.

so does Rome falsely pretend her self to be, and so Rome really, and truly is
the mother of all spiritual whoredom, and abominations in respect of all
those Churches which have been seduced by her.

And as there is a clear and eminent Antithesis between Jerusalem and Rome,
Isidorus Moseonius lib. 1^ de Cardinalibus (ubi enumerat appellationes
Cardinalium magis proprias,) Cardinales, inquit, primo^n loco appellantur vi^^m
gerentes Apostolorum.
so is there also between Christ's Apostles, and the Popes Cardinals; there
being no persons in the whole world, of what rank, order, or degree soever
stiling themselves (...) vicem gerentes Apostolorum, as they do. They are the
very substance, Soul, and Essence of the Papacy, and so nearly united to the
Pope, that he accounts them as parts of his own body, De donatis Papae
Cardinales debent habere d^midium; Et Papa dimidium little quae dantur
Cardinalibus. Jacobatius de Concilijs, number. 173. Non possunt testari sine
licentia Papae, and quia sunt pars corporis Papae non praestant juramentum
fidelitatis, tanquam invis^^rati Papae. Jdem ibid. Item Papa habet singular em
diligentiam de salute corporali Cardinalium: unde si Cardinalis infirmetur, non
minuitur ei sanguis sine speciali Papae licentia. Idem, Numero 176. Cardinales
in Ecclesia Romana unum corpus mysticum effecti sunt, and unum Collegium satro
sanctum cum summo Pontifice constituunt. Hieronimus Manfredus de Cardinalibus
cap. 5. Ecce illud Collegium, (...) Apostolorum, Actuum 15, cujus in locum
sacer Cardinalium Senatus submissus est, utroque consiliative and deliberativo
munere praefultum. Alexander a Turre. lib 2o, 2ae. Partis. page 82. Collegium
Cardinalium dicitur Sacrosanctum Collegium Apostolorum, Ecclesiae gremium.
Iacobatius de concilijs. Number. 170.
and they together with him make one complete College and Corporation, and one
mystical Body, actually and eminently containing, upholding, and representing
all power, and Ecclesiastical jurisdiction. They were instituted in the first
most remarkable foundation of the Papacy by the Pope in the City of Rome,
about the time of Constantine the great, in Institutio Cardinalium figuraliter
habuit ortam ab institutione divina, exemplariter autem a Christo; expressa
autem fuit facta tempore Pontiani and Marcelli Romans Pont. propter baptisma.
Gondisalvus Villadeigo tausarum olim Palatij Auditoris, in initio libelli de
Origin Cardinalatus.
imitation of our Savior Christ, who did in the first most remarkable
foundation of his Church, erect the College of Apostles at Jerusalem, giving
them a The name which Christ gave to his Disciples was to be called Apostles,
Luc. 6. 13. And the name which the Pope gives to his best beloved disciples,
is to be called Cardinals. For as Christ in his Church gave some to be
Apostles, some Teachers, some Prophets, etc. 1. Cor. 12. 28. And, Ephesians. 4. 11.
So the Pope in the Romish Church has given some to be called Cardinals, some
Jesuits, some Abbats; some Monks, some Friars, some Exorcists, some Acol^uts,
etc.
name, prefining their The first limited number which Christ gave to his
Apostles, was according to the number of the gates, and Tribes of Jerusalem;
so the first limited and prefined number of the Cardinal^s was according to the
number of the gates of ROME, and according to the number of those Divisions of
the City and People of Rome, which the Popes have made answerable to the tribes
of JERUSALEM, as shall be proved in due place.
number, and declaring their The Offi^^, and Commission, which Christ gave to
his Apostles consisted in three things. First, The Administration of Baptism
was committed chiefly and originally unto them. And although they did afterward
commit this function unto others, yet they were first commanded to go and
Baptize all nations, and as it were by the 12 gates of their Baptism to bring
all true Israelites into the spiritual Jerusalem. So at the first institution
of the Cardinals, their Office, and Commi^sion was chiefly to baptize, and
they were affixed to certain chief Churches in ROME, in which, and in which
only baptism was to be celebrated. Secondly, the Apostles were to preach
Christ, and to propagate and plant Christian Religion in all the world. So the
Cardinals having quickly committed the celebration of Baptism unto others,
employed themselves wholly to preach the Pope, and to plant and propagate
Popery in all kingdoms of the world. Thirdly, Christ gave unto the Apostles
the chief power to forgive and to detain sins; so likewise the Pope
commits the chief ^are and dispensation of his selling of pardons and
indulgences unto the Cardinals, saying unto them as Christ to his Apostles,
Whosesoever sins ye remitt, they are remi^tted, and whosesoever sins ye
retain they are retained.
office, as the Pope has since done to his Cardinals at Rome. As the Apostles
truly were, and are the root and foundation of the Christian Church and of all
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction: so the Cardinals For the order of Cardinals is a
confessed innovation, as B. Morton shows. And Antonius de Pratis affirms,
CARDINALATUS non dicitur gradus nec Ordo Ecclesiasticae Hirarchiae a Christo
institutae, nec gradui Apostolo^um succedens sicut Episcopatus and saccrdotium.
De jurisdictione Episcopali, Number. 3o. Tom 3o Part 2^. page 36^.
falslypretend themselves to be, and so they truly are, and do in express
words declare themselves to be the very Cardinales sunt Bases Ecclesiae Gabriel
Paleottus de descriptione Consistorii. Cardinales vniversi orbis regendi
pondera sustinent, and super little humeros totius Ecclesiae machin^ imponitur
Hieronymus Albanus de Cardinalibus, Questione ^^.
Basis and Alchasar in his Commentaries on the Revel: says, The Pope uses to
s^nd a Sapphire stone to every new made Cardinal, to put him in mind that he is
now one of those f^un^ation-stones which are mentioned in the description of
the new JERUSALEM.
foundation of the Romish Hierarchy. And therefore the Root and foundation of
all that Superstition and Impiety, which being derived originally from Rome,
has been transfused through the whole body of the Christian Church. As it is
the Privilege of the Apostles, to be as it were 12 stars set in that Crown,
which is mentioned in the 12 Chapter of the Revelation; so is it an especial
Privilege belonging to the Cardinals, to have their names written in the Crown
of their Prince, as witnesses Cardinales sunt patrici^ scripti in diade mate
Principis. Iacobatius.
Iacobatius de council. number. 153. There was a two fold state and Condition of
the Apostles, first they were Apostoli vrbis, affixed as it were to the City
Jerusalem, where they were to abide until they were endowed with power from
above: but afterward they were Apostoli orbis, and were sent from thence into
all kingdoms of the world: So likewise the Cardinals in imitation and
affectation of the like honor are styled Cardinales Vrbis, and Orbis, and they
remain, as it were affixed to the City of Rome, until they are indewed with
power from above, that is, until they are sent by the Pope as his Nuntio's and
legates into all kingdoms of the world. As the Apostles in respect of their
spiritual fatherhood are fitly answerable to the 12 Patriarchs, who are the
fathers of all the Israelites according to the flesh: so the Cardinals are
likewise called Patres Spirituales, affecting the like honor. As the Apostles,
having supreme Authority in the Church, may in some sense be said to be the
judges of the world, and to sit upon 12 Thrones to judge the 12 tribes of
Israel; so the Cardinals make their Cardinal. dicit Papa, Esto srater noster,
and mua^i princeps -- Consist orium enim Christi and Papae idem est censendum.
Alexand* a Turte lib 1o 2 ae Partis. page 35. Honor Regius human^s;
Pontificius certe divinus: Regum, terrestre de cus; Pontificum coeleste*
Maiest^s R^g^s minime completa; Pontificis, numeris omnibus expleta: illa
civilis and politica, haec super coelestis and sancta* Al^x. a Tur^e lib. 4o.
page 272. Idem page 36. visionem throni Apo. 4o. Papae and Cardinalibus appheat,
and coelesti Cherub. S^raphin.
Consistory of their Apostolical Sea to admit of no appeal, but to be of such
a celestial sublimity, that it is equal to the tribunal seat of God. And
therefore they are styled Judices Orbis, and they do exercise all civil, and
Ecclesiastical power over the city, and people of Rome: which either the
Patriarchs and Princes of the Tribes did in the literal, or the Apostles in
the spiritual Jerusalem. Many other things might here be alleged to show how
exact, and exquisite an Antythesis and Contra position there is between the
Apostles, and Cardinals. It might be observed, that there is not one of those
proper Appellations and Titles, which are usually attributed to the Cardinals:
such as are these following.

Patres Spirituales Vicem-gerentes Apostolorum. Senatores Papae Patres
Purpurati. Patricij Mundi Principes Iudices Orbis Cardinales Vrbis and Orbis,
and the like:
There is not, I say any one of these Titles but the Cardinals may by it be
proved either to be emulous of the like honor, which the Apostles had, or else
to be the Image of such a kind of government, as was before their lives
remarkable in the City of Rome. Both which Considerations (as by the way may be
observed) are necessarily incident to the right discerning of that great
Antichrist, who is not only to resemble some ancient government of Rome, but
also To be, or to be like that Synagogue of Satan as some interpreters
conceive, Revel: 2, 2. 3. 9.
to be that Synagogue of Satan mentioned in the Revel: which say they are
Apostles, and are not. For as much therefore as there has not been in any City
answerable to Jerusalem, or in any other place, at any time since the Apostles
lived, any state, Hierarthy, sect, or society of men, so confidently and yet so
falsely, pretending, and arrogating themselves to have all fulness of power
Apostolical annexed, and as it were appropriated unto themselves, as the
College of Cardinals does: I may therefore conclude that there are persons in
the Papacy answerable to the Apostles, as Rome is to Jerusalem, and that if
the Papacy be Antichrist, and if the number 666 be to be interpreted and
applied after the same manner, which is above proved that it ought to be; then
the first original number, and foundation of this College of Cardinals, must
be typed out unto us by the square root of the number 666, as the first
limited, and established number of the Apostles, is typed out by the square
root of the number 144.

CHAP. 15. That the first number of Cardinals according to their first
institution and foundation is chiefly to be considered, as that which does most
remarkably characterize Antichrist in his original.
AND that only the first decreed, and established number of the College of
Cardinals is typed out unto us, and plainly foretold by the root of the Beast's
number: this is a far more evident and remarkable description of Antichrist,
then if any other number had been declared which should at any other time have
been applicable unto them. For (as it is usually said) scire, is, per causas
cognoscere, and as we cannot perfectly know any thing until we know what were
the first original causes and beginnings of it, so this order of Cardinals
(which bears now so much sway in the Romish Church) and which is the very
body and corporation of Antichrist) may be then perfectly discerned, when we
know what it was in it is first original and beginning. And for this cause it
is that the holy Ghost in the description of the new Jerusalem uses chiefly
such numbers and measures as were conspicuous and remarkable in the first
apparent foundation of Christian Religion. For the wall of the new Jerusalem
is said to have 12 foundations, not because the number 12, either in respect of
the Apostles themselves, or in respect of Christian Bishops themselves (who are
their lawful successors in so much of their authority as is necessary for the
perpetual government of the Church) should be, at all times following,
actually existent, and remarkable in the Church; but that by this one number,
which is the root and Basis of another number, there might be an evident and
strong allusion not only to the number, but also to the nature, quality, and
office of those persons, from whom, as from the Root, the Churches Hierarchy
does originally proceed, upon whom it is fundamentally built, and in whom it
was first apparently to be discerned. As therefore the number 12 is not
applicable to the Hierarchy of the Church in respect of any one perpetual and
constant number of Persons, which was always to continue, so neither ought the
number 25 to be after this manner applicable to the Romish Hierarchy, but the
true and exact application of it, ought chiefly to be terminated in the
discovery, not only of the number, but also, of the nature, quality, and
office of those Persons from whom their Pseudo-hierarchy did originally
proceed, upon whom it was fundamentally built, and in whom and with whom it was
first apparently to be discerned. Howsoever therefore it may perhaps at the
first apprehension seem requisite, that according to this application which I
am at, the number 25 ought to be the only constant, settled, and perpetual
number of the Popes Cardinals, or Apostles, which should at all times during
the time of Antichrists continuance be actually applicable unto them; yet upon
due consideration it must be granted, that such an application can neither be
warranted by the example of the opposite number, which is applicable to the
first number of the Apostles only; nor be agreeable to the nature of this type,
which aims, not only at a certain number of unities, but also of such unities
as are the root and Basis of other unities, which were to proceed from them,
and to be built upon them; I say therefore, that it: must be granted that there
is no necessity, nor any probability, that this number ought otherwise to be
applied unto them, then in respect of that first decreed and established
number, which was most conspicuous, and remarkable, and most exactly applicable
unto them, in, and at the first foundation of their College, and in the first
apparent and actual institution of their order. And that, not only the number
of the 10 crowned horns mentioned in the Revelation, may be thus interpreted
in respect of their first original only; but that also the number of the
Beast ought to have special reference to the first original stock and image of
Antichrist's Anti-Apostles, is a truth clearly discerned, and in general
terms plainly expressed by a late learned interpreter of the Revelations,
although he aimed not at the same particular application which I do.

These things being now thus cleared and discussed in general, concerning the
time, the place, and the persons which this number ought chiefly to
characterize; and it being proved that Rome is answerable to Jerusalem; and
that the Cardinals of Rome are those persons which may be fitly styled
Anti-Apostles in the Romish Hierarchy; and lastly, that the time in which the
root of the Beast's number ought to be applied to the Pseudohierarchy of
Antichrist, must be in the first apparent and remarkable emersion of his
Hierarchy: that so it may be like and answerable to that very nick of time, in
which, and in which only, the root of the opposite number is actually
applicable to the Hierarchy of the Church; these things, I say, being thus
cleared and discussed, it remains now that J show by clear and evident
testimonies, that as the College of Apostles did originally consiste of 12
persons and no more, so the College and corporation of Cardinals in Rome,
according to it is first institution, and in the first apparent and remarkable
foundation of the That the first remarkable foundation of the Papacy was about
300 years after Christ, in or about the time of Constantine, is out of
question. Then was that voice heard, hodie seminatum est virus in Ecclesia.
Then was the seat of the Empire taken out of the way, and removed from Rome to
Constantinople, and then was Antichrist to come when the Roman Emperor was
taken out of the way. Then do they pretend Constantines donation to have been
made. Then was the ancient purity of the Primitive Church decayed, then was the
visible Hierarchy of the Christian Church almost quite extinguished by the
violence of persecutions; for then as Baronius relates Anno 304. The
persecuting Princes, velut gloriosae victoriae titulis de suba actis deletisque
penitus Christianis columnas erexetunt. Cluniae enim in Hispania in nobili
columna haec inscriptio legitur? DIOCLESIAN: JOVIUS etc. AMPLIFICATO por
ORIENT. and OCCIDENT. IMPERIO ROMANO, and nomine Christianorum deleto. Rursus
ibidem altera inscriptio. DIOCLESIAN. CAESAR AUGUST. SUPERSTITIONE CHRISTI UBI
QUE deleta. i But because the Papacy began then suddenly to start up after
these persecutions, therefore Baronius says, fefellit plane spes vana
principes, etc.
Papacy, did consist of 25 persons and no more.

CHAP. 16. A disquisition concerning other particulars, to which the number 12
is applied in the description of the new Jerusalem, and particularly of the 12
Gates, 12 Tribes, and 12 Angels.
THat this truth may more plainly appear, it is requisite that something be
first said briefly, and in general of those other particulars, to which the
same number is also to be applied; for (as it is above intimated) all those
particulars, to which the number 12 is applied in the description of the new
Jerusalem, must have so many other particulars answerable and opposite to
them, in that mystical Babylon to which the number 25 must be in like manner
applicable. Now the number 12 is actually and expressly applied unto six
several things, in the description of the new Jerusalem, which are these.

1 Twelve Gates. 2 Twelve Angels at the Gates. 3 Twelve Tribes written on the
Gates. 4 Twelve foundations with names written on them. 5 Twelve thousand
furlongs, the measure of the City. 6 Twelve manner of fruits of the tree of
life.
Notwithstanding that there is great difference among Interpreters, what these
6 things are, which are hereso expressly numbered, and described, and howthey
ought to be applied to the Church: yet their diverse interpretations (according
to which every man abounds in his own sense) are rather helps the^
hindrances, for the right discerning and finding out of those things, which in
the Romish Hierarchy are answerable unto the^. For which way soever these
things are to be understood, and according to what possible probability soever
they may be interpreted, there are things in all senses answerable unto them in
the Romish Babylon. If these Gates be literally to be understood of the gates
of the material city Jerusalem; then the material gates of the City of Rome
must be answerable unto them. And for a full application, in this sense, it
shall be showed, that as the gates of Jerusalem were 12 in number, so the
gates of Rome were 25 in number.

But if those gates be also to be understood in a spiritual sense, which
without all question is chiefly intended, and most exactly verified, then these
gates must be understood to be the gates of the Church signified by Jerusalem.
Now the gates of the Catholic Church (which is really and truly the Heavenly
Jerusalem, may be said to be 12 diverse ways. First, the Apostles themselves
may be said to have been the 12 gates of the Church in respect of their faith
and doctrine in general, because by their examples, and by the sincerity and
truth of their life and doctrine, all other Christians have been converted to
the true Religion. And in this respect the Cardinals of Rome, who make
themselves answerable to the Apostles, and whose original number was 25, may
be also said to have been the 25 gates of spiritual Babylon; because chiefly
and originally, by their policy and hypocrisy, in laying the first foundation
of Popery, all other Papists have been since persuaded, and invited to
believe, and to embrace the Heresies and superstitions of the Church of Rome.

But secondly, and in a more particular and proper sense, there may be said to
have been 12 gates of the Church, because the administration of the Sacraments,
and especially of Baptism (which is literally, and properly the gate of the
celestial Jerusalem) was chiefly, and originally Although others did baptize
in the Primitive Church besides the 12 Apostles, yet they cannot be properly
called the first gates of the Church, because these to whom this power was
derived from the Apostles, were first baptized themselves by the Apostles. So
that as Christ is truly and eminently said to be the foundation of that
foundation which was laid by the Apostles, so the Apostles themselves are truly
and eminently the first and chief gates of the Church, even in respect of
those who have been since made (as it were) gates of the Church by their
appointment, and by the fullness of their Commission and authority, which they
di^ all equally, and immediately receive from Christ as it appears in the
Gospel.
committed unto the 12 Apostles. And in this sense it shall be showed, that as
in the first apparent beginning of Christianity, the administration of Baptism
was originally committed unto 12 Apostles in the City of Jerusalem, which is
therefore truly called Matter, gremium, and ostium omnium Ecclesiarum, the
mother, the womb and the gate of all Churches; so in the first apparent
beginning of Popery, the administration of Baptism was originally committed
unto 25 Cardinals in the City of Rome, which city does also style her self
Matter, gremium, and ostium omnium Ecclesiarum, the Mother, the womb, and the
gate of all Churches.

Thirdly, these gates of the new Jerusalem seem to have special reference to
those material Churches (or to those places which were then answerable to our
Churches) wherein the Apostles did usually administer the word and Sacraments
while they were in Jerusalem; for, as the Apostles are called gates, because
administration of the word and Sacraments was performed by them, so Churches
may be called gates, because these functions were performed in them. And as
Baptism is truly said to be the gate of the Church, so according to the phrase
of the Scriptures, that may be truly said of every particular Church or
congregation which Jacob once spoke of Bethel, Haec est domus Dei, haec Genesis
28. 17.
est porta coeli: this is the house of God, this is the gate of heaven. And
although those places in Jerusalem, wherein Christians first assembled
themselves, were not such as our Churches now are (as neither was Bethel at
that time when Jacob called it the gate of Heaven) yet it cannot be imagined,
but that there were set congregations, which had some certain places to meet
in, and several Pastors to instruct them: for as the Apostles divided the
world as it were by line among themselves, so that one would not meddle within
the compass of another line, so it is to be conceived that the same Apostles,
by whose precept or example Parishes and Diocesses in all places began to be
erected, first in Cities, and then in Villages, did not confusedly and
promiscuously perform all duties and Ecclesiastical functions among
themselves; but that they did divide the City Jerusalem into 12 several
Jurisdictions, Parishes or Divisions, and that they did in 12 several places
administer the Sacrament of Baptism, and do all other religious duties which
are now usually performed in Churches. These places were for the most part
large upper rooms; such as that was which the Apostles prepared for our
Savior Christ to eat the Paschall Lamb in; these in those times were usually
called Ecclesia ante consecrationem proprie dicitur Basilica.
Basilicae (which name has been ever since retained, and shows the true
original from whence Christian Churches had their beginning) and these places
were in those times really and truly Christian Churches, although, in respect
of those which we now have, they were so but only as it were in semine and
origin. Now forasmuch as this celestial Jerusalem is the type of the
Christian Church universal, into which no man can have his entrance and
admission, except it be by baptism, which ought always to be performed in
some particular Church, or congregation, therefore every particular Church or
Congregation, wherein this Sacrament is usually administered, may in this
respect (as also in diverse others) be truly said to be agate, by which men do
usually and ordinarily enter into the spiritual Jerusalem. And because the
first Christian Churches or congregations, which were at once and the same time
instituted, and erected in Jerusalem by the Apostles, as patterns and
platformes to all succeeding times and Cities, are presumed to have been 12 in
number, according to the number of the 12 Apostles: therefore the number of the
gates of the Christian Church universal, according to it is first original and
beginning (which time is chiefly aimed at in this whole description) are truly
said to be twelve. And this I take chiefly, to be that literal verity, really
and actually existing in the primitive Church, to which the twelve Gates of the
new Jerusalem, have a plain and evident allusion.

And this is farther cleared, because it follows in the Text, that these
Gates had 12 Angels placed at them, and the names of the twelve Tribes written
on them. For first concerning the Angels, it is evident in this book of the
Revelation that the Ministers of the Gospel are called the Angels of those
Churches, which are committed unto them. If therefore these twelve gates be the
first christian Churches, then the 12 Angels may fitly be said to be those 12
Pastors, to whom the charge of these twelve Churches was committed. For as
touching Angels properly so called, which are ministering spirits, it is
certain that the dispensation of the Gospel, is not committed unto Angels,
but unto men; and that men, and not Angels, have power, and are appointed to
baptize, and to excommunicate, that is, to admit in, and to cast out of the
Church, and to open, and shut the gates of the heavenly Jerusalem. And for
this cause it is plainly said in the 2 chap. of the Hebrews, verse 5. that God
has not unto Angels put in subjection the world to come; in which place the
world to come, signifies the renewed estate of the Church under the Gospel.

Secondly, concerning the 12 Tribes, if the Gates be the first 12 Churches, and
the Angels the 12 first Pastors, then questionless these Tribes, are the 12
first Ecclesiastical divisions, Titles, Jurisdictions, or Parishes, into which
the City and people of Jerusalem, in some sort were, and should in process of
time have been more perfectly divided, if that City had not been destroyed, nor
the Passage of the Gospel hindered. For it is to be considered, that this
description of the new Jerusalem, is applicable to those times, by way of
anticipation as it were, and rather in respect of that beauty and perfection,
at which the primative Church then aimed, then in respect of that, unto which
it had in those times attained. Nevertheless because it is evident by the
Scriptures, that there was so great a number of believing Christians in
Jerusalem at that time, that every Apostle might have had the charge of near
500 souls, it cannot therefore with any probability be imagined, but that they
did distribute, and dispose themselves, and those believers, in as decent and
convenient order, as those times would permit, and according to such
Divisions, as did not only resemble, the 12 Tribes of the Jsraelites, (which
were typical predictions of the Apostles times) but were also exemplary causes
of the like Ecclesiastical divisions, namely, of Diocesses, and Parishes,
which began immediately after the Apostles times to be erected in other Cities,
and have been ever since continued in the Church.

CHAP. 17. Of such Particulars in the mystical Babylon as are (...), to the
Gates, Tribes, Angels, and Foundations of the new Jerusalem.
I Hope it is now sufficiently declared, what those things were in the
primitive Church, to which the twelve Gates, the twelve Angels, and the twelve
Tribes have a special allusion. The 12 Gates are 12 Churches or Congregations,
in which the Sacraments and especially Baptism was administered. The 12 Angels
are those 12 Pastors, to whom these 12 Churches were committed The 12 Tribes
are those 12 Titles, or Parishes, or other divisions, into which the City and
people of Jerusalem were divided. And all these things will be farther
cleared, by that, which I shall now say, concerning those things, which are
answerable, and opposite unto them in the Romish Babylon. And that not only,
because -- Contrariajuxta seposita magis elucescunt, contraries being placed
together are the more easily discerned; but also, because the Church of Rome,
by a pretended Imitation, but by a true and real Emulation, pretended her
self to have been framed, and erected, after the example of the Church of
Jerusalem, and to be a continual and perfect expression of it, even in
respect of those things, which are above recited. Onuphrius de praecipuis Vrbis
Rom: basilicis, in the second chapter, where he writes of the first Parishes,
Churches, and Pastors, which were instituted and erected in the City of Rome,
says that Saint Peter came to Rome, and there founded the Church of Rome, and
instituted the Clergy in that City, Hierosolimitanae caeter arumque
orientalium Ecclesiarum exemplo, according to the example of the Church of
Jerusalem, and other Oriental Churches. And concerning the institution of
Cardinals, who were the first Parish Priests of the first Churches erected in
Rome, Gondisalvus Villadiego Causarum olim palati^ Auditor in initio libell* de
Origin Cardina^^^us.
Gondisalvus Villadiego says, Jnstitutio Cardinalium figuraliter habuit ortum
ab institutione divina, exemplariter autem a Christo, expressa autem fuit facta
tempore Pontiani and Marcelli Romans Pontif. that is, the institution of
Cardinals, had it is institution figuratively, from divine institution,
exemplarily from Christ, but expressly from the Popes Pontianus and Marcellus.
By these and many other like testimonies, which are frequent in their own
writers, it is evident that the Romanists are not likely to deny, either that
their Church and City of Rome, has such things in it, as are fitly answerable
to those particulars, which are above rehearsed in the description of the new
Jerusalem; or that the literal Jerusalem, in the time of the Apostles, bad
not such Churches, such Pastors, and such Ecclesiastical divisions, as I have
above described. But supposing, that which will not be granted, that these
things mentioned in the description of the new Jerusalem, have no allusion to
things actually existing in the primative Church, and in the literal
Jerusalem; yet it may be plainly proved, that all these things whether real
or imaginary, which are mentioned in the description of the new Jerusalem, may
very fitly mutatis mutandis, that is, changing the Names, and the Number only,
be applied to such things as had real and actual existence in the City, and
in the Church of Rome. For it may be proved by a cloud of witnesses, that the
Popes, about the time of Constantine the great, did divide the City and people
of Rome into a certain number of Ecclesiastical divisions, Jurisdictions,
Titles, or Parishes; and that in every one of these divisions, there was a
Church erected for the administration of Baptism, and to every one of these
Churches a several Presbyter assigned and appointed. Of this first division of
the City and people of Rome, Onuphrius writes after this manner. Ne
Presbyterorum administratio in promiscuo esset, Evaristus Titulos, vel, ut nunc
dicimus, Paraecias in Vrbe primus presbyteris divisit, ut singuli a se invicem
secreti in sua vrbis regione, Titulo, vel paracia, sacramenta Christianis
exhiberent, singulosque presbyteros in unoquoque Titulo collocavit. which words
do in effect intimate thus much, That Evaristus first divided the City of Rome
into Titles, or, as we now say, Parishes, and appointed to every Priest his
several Region, Title or Parish. And afterward in the same chapter Onuphrius
writes thus, Dionisius vicesimus sextus Romanus Pont: Evaristi exemplum
secutus, cum jam Christiana pietas mirum in modum in e a vrbe auct a esset,
denuo Titulos, vel Paroecias Romae, cum eas ampliasset, presbyteris divisit,
ipsasque quo quisque suis limitibus, finibusque contineretur, distribuit: that
is, Dionisius the 26 Pope of Rome, following the example of Evaristus, when as
Christian Religion was much increased in that City, did again divide the
Titles or Parishes (after that he had enlarged them) among the Priests, and
did so distribute them, that every one might be contained within his own
bounds and limits. Jsodorus Mosconius speaking of the Cardinals, writes to
the same purpose, saying, Nonnulli tutius ausi sunt affirmare, hb 10. part 1.
cap. 5.
tempore Silvestri primi, hoc est anno 314, creatos esse, qui (ut aiunt) primo
Cardinalium Collegium ad similitudinem Romanorum procerum ordinavit; nam sicuti
servabatur ut in Vrbe cuilibet Regioni, quae in plures divisa erat, plures
Curatores deputarentur ad perficiendum ea, quae ad civium incolumitatem
pertinerent, sub praefecti potestate; Jta Silvester Papaut indemnitati
Ecclesiae commodius consuleret, singulis regionibus Vrbis singulos destinaverat
Cardinales, That is, Others more waryly have affirmed that they were first
created in the time of Silvester the first, in the year 314, who (as they say)
ordained a College of Cardinals according to the similitude of the Senators
of Rome. For as anciently it was observed, that (the City being divided into
many Regions) there were certain Curators appointed to every Region, who being
subjected under the authority of him, that was the chief governor of the
City, were to perform such things as pertained to the welfare of the Citizens.
So Pope Silvester, for the good, and for the more convenient government of the
Church, destinated several Cardinals to every several Region of the City.
These divisions which by Onuphrius and Mosconius are called Regions and
Parishes, are by other writers called by diverse other names. Some call them
Diocaeses, some Jurisdictiones, some Gubernationes, some Tituli, some Ecclesiae
parocbiales, some Curiae. By all which it is evident, that they were certain
local divisions of the City and people, having Churches or public places of
meeting erected in them, (as the Gates were to the ancient Tribes of the
Israelites) and a power of Jurisdiction and government annexed to them: and
being such, it cannot be denied but that these titles are fitly answerable to
those Tribes of the Israelites, into which the City and people of the literal
Jerusalem were anciently divided: and also unto those Ecclesiastical
divisions above mentioned, by which in the times of the Apostles, the Citizens
of the new Jerusalem, either were, or began to be, or shall yet be, or by the
description of the new Jerusalem are supposed to have been distinguished. And
it may be here observed, that these titles or parishes, into which the City of
Rome was divided about the time of Constantine, succeeded, and came in the
places, and were instead of those 30 or 35 Tribes, into which Rome was
anciently divided. For the Cardinals, as they increased in power, and grew
into credit, so being not content with that spiritual authority, and
Episcopal jurisdiction which they had in their Titles, they began by little
and little, to usurp upon the temporal dominion of the City, until they had
engrossed all that authority unto themselves, which either the Curiales
Flamines had over the Tribes in matters of religion, or the Senators in humane
affairs. And by this means it did quickly come to pass, that the new
division of Rome into 25 Titles, caused that ancient division to be antiquated
and extinguished. S. Austine in his enarration upon the 122 Psalm, writing of
the Tribes there mentioned (which both by himself and S. Hierome, are
interpreted to be the same Tribes, which are spoken of in the description of
the new Jerusalem) takes occasion to speak, not only of those 35 Tribes,
into which the City of Rome Ethnic was anciently divided, but also of certain
divisions, which he calls Curiae, into which Cities in his time were usually
divided; his words are these. Tribus alio nomine dici possunt Curiae, sed non
proprie, itaque Tribus uno nomine vicino, alio proprie dici possunt: sed vicino
dicuntur Curiae, -- Sunt autem, vel crant in istis quoque aliquando civitatibus
Curiae etiam populorum, and una civitas multas Curias habet, sicut Roma 35
Curias habet populi. Hae dicuntur Tribus: has populus Israel duodecem habebat
secundum filios Jacob. The effect of which words is, that Tribes properly so
called may by another name be called Parishes: and that all cities are usually
divided into such wards or parishes, as are answerable to those Tribes, into
which the Cities of Jerusalem and Rome were anciently divided. I might here
add, that as a late The word Curia is translated to signisie a Parish by a
late writer of the Roman Antiquities.
Writer of the Roman Antiquities, calls those ancient Curiae or Tribes of
Rome, Parishes, because of the great likeness which they had to such
Ecclesiastical divisions: so those first Titles or Parishes into which Rome
Christian was divided, may by the same reason be called Tribes: but it matters
not by what name they are called, so long as they are fitly answerable, to
those ancient Tribes of Jerusalem and Rome, although called by another name,
and changed to another number. And thus much of things, answering to the Tribes
of the new Jerusalem.

Jn the next place it is to be observed, that in every one of these Parishes,
there was some public place of meeting appointed, or some Church erected, for
the administration of Baptism; and these places or Churches in the City of
Rome, are fitly answerable to those Churches in the literal Jerusalem, which
were the first Gates of the spiritual Jerusalem. For as it is above declared,
that every particular Church, may for diverse reasons be said, to be a gate of
the Church universal, but especially in respect of the administration of
baptism, which literally and properly is the Gate of the Church: so these
Churches in the City of Rome, which are named Baptismall Churches (as it is By
D. Field
observed) because in these only, Baptism was originally administered, are in
this respect, as also in diverse others, properly and exactly answerable to
those Gates of the Spiritual Jerusalem. That there were such Churches as
these, and that to every one of these Churches there was at the first but one
Priest appointed, as there was one Angel placed at every Gate of the
celestial Jerusalem, is evident by that which Onuphrius has written, and by
the testimonies of diverse other writers, whose words J shall have occasion to
set down, when I come to speak of the number of these Churches. But when
these Parish Priests degenerated into Cardinals, and were made a College, and
Corporation, exercising a new kind of superepiscopall jurisdiction, in, and
over these churches; then was the birth of Antichrist, then did Antichrist
really, and truly, and literally, and locally sit, first in these christian
churches at Rome, and from thence his pseudo-apostolicall Authority, has been
obtruded and imposed upon other churches. By which it is evident, that, as some
interpreters do make the Apostles themselves, although in diverse respects, to
be the Gates, the Angels, and the foundations of the celestial Jerusalem; so
the Cardinals in one respect may be said to be the first Gates of the Church
of Rome because at their first institution, the administration of Baptism, was
committed unto them only: and in another respect they may be called Angels,
because they were Pastors of the first parish churches in Rome; and lastly,
they may be truly said to have been the first Foundation stones, on which the
Popish Hierarchy has been ever since erected, as it is above more fully and
particularly declared. I do not forget that some writers do interpret these
twelve Foundations, to be the twelve Articles of the Creed, but I pass over
this interpretation in this place, not because the Pope has not a Creed
consisting of twenty and five Articles answerable to those of the Apostles,
but because I conceive the 12 Articles of the Creed, to be chiefly and directly
aimed at, by the twelve manner of fruits growing on the tree of life, as in the
sixth and last place shall be observed. And thus much in general of things
sometime actually existing in Rome, answerable to the Gates, Tribes, Angels,
and Foundations, sometime actually existing in the new Jerusalem, and that,
according to all senses, which way soever they may with any probability be
interpreted: concerning all which I do oblige my self to prove, that there
were 25 Gates in Rome according to the sense literal, and 25 Churches for
Baptism according to the sense spiritual, and 25 Pastors placed at these
Churches, and 25 Cardinals sitting and ruling in them, and 25 Titles, Tribes,
or Parishes belonging to them.

CHAP. 18. Of such things as are answerable to the measure of 12000 furlongs,
and the 12 manner of fruits growing on the tree of life. The conclusion of all
that has been said concerning the Antithesis of things in general, as it is
distinguished from that Antithesis of numbers which is next to be proved.
IN the next place it comes to be inquired, what that is in the City of
Antichrist, which is answerable to the measure of 12 thousand furlongs, by
which, as it is above showed, the true compass of that City, in which Christ
did first and chiefly erect his Church and Hierarchy, is truly, although
mystically declared. To which J answer that as the number 12, having thousands
of furlongs added unto it, is the truesolid measure of an imaginary Cube,
whose compass is equal to the compass of the city Jerusalem; so the number
25 having thousands of furlongs added to it, is the true solid measure of that
imaginary Cube, whose compass is equal to the compass of the city of Rome. I
will not here trouble the reader with Arithmeticall computations; let those
that have understanding to extract the Roots of numbers, either believe me, or
else find out themselves, what is the solid root of 25000, and they shall be
then resolved that a Cube of 25 thousand Furlongs, is in compass 116 furlongs,
and above 3 quarters of a furlong, that is, 14 miles and an half, and almost
half a quarter of a mile, which measure, how fitly it agrees, with the
circuit and compass of the city of Rome, shall in it is place be evidently
declared.

It remains now in the sixth and last place to be considered, what is meant
by the 12 manner of Fruits growing on the tree of life, and what those things
are in the Church of Rome, answerable unto them. This tree of life in the midst
of the city, is Christ in the midst of his Church: these 12 Fruits, are that
food, by which Christians live, and are nourished up unto everlasting life; and
that food by which Christians live is Faith. For all just men live by Faith (as
it is written) and by every word that proccedeth out of the mouth of God: but
the Apostles creed is the only true faith, because it is the material object
of every Christian man's faith, and a perfect sum of the doctrine of
Christian religion, gathered out of the Scriptures, and containing all truths
necessary to be believed: and therefore whosoever confesses with his mouth,
and believes with his heart all the Articles of the creed, he does truly eat
of all those fruits which grow on this tree of life. Now because the creed of
the Apostles, did originally proceed from 12 persons, and does naturally branch
it self into 12 Articles, as it has been long since actually divided:
therefore J doubt not but that this is that particular truth really and
actually existing in the Church, to which these 12 manner of Fruits have a
special and evident allusion.

Now as touching the Romish faith, J shall make it evident, that the Papists
have added new Articles to the Apostles creed, and have increased the number
from 12 unto 25, For whether we take the council of Trent it self, to be the
faith and doctrine of the Church of Rome, or that Creed which was composed and
set forth by Pope Pius the fourth, according to the doctrine decreed in that
Council; in either of these, the number 25 is as remarkably applicable to the
Romish faith, as the number 12 to the Apostles Creed: but J pitch chiefly upon
that form and profession of the Romish faith, which Pope Pius the fourth has
set forth according to that Council, to be generally received by all men, or
as the Bull it self witnesses, ut unius ejusdem fidei professio uniformiter
ab omnibus exhibeatur, unicaque and certaillius forma cunctis innotescat. That
this Council of Trent, does fully contain, the whole faith and doctrine of
the Romish Religion, the Papists themselves are neither able, nor willing to
deny. Thus much is testified by the eight and ninth acclamations at the end of
this Council, which run after this manner;

Cardinalis a Lothoringia. Sacrosancta Oecumenica Tridentina Synodus: eius
fidem confiteamur, eius decreta semper servemus.


Responsio Patrum. Semper confiteamur, semper servemus.


Cardinalis a Lothor. Omnes ita credimus, omnes id ipsum sentimus: omnes
consentientes and amplectentes subscribimus. Haec est fides beati Petri and
Apostolorum: haec est fides Patrum; haec est fides Orthodoxorum.


Responsio Patrum. Ita credimus, ita sentimus: ita subscribimus.


I say therefore, as the 12 Apostles after that Christian religion began to be
believed in the world, did assemble themselves together, and composed a Creed,
consisting of 12 Articles, for the preservation of unity in matters of
religion, and for the suppressing of heresies: so the chief Prelates of the
Popish Church, after their Romish religion began to be received and believed in
the world, did for the advancement of their superstitions, and for the
suppressing of that which they call heresy, assemble themselves together at
the Council of Trent: which Council was begun by 25 Prelates, continued 25
Sessions, and ended with the subscription of 25 Popish Archbishops: and last of
all (which is the thing J chiefly aim at) the doctrine and faith decreed in
this Council, was afterward by the Pope and his Cardinals, reduced to a set
form of words, so naturally branching themselves into 25 Articles, that they
cannot with any conveniencie be divided into any other number, as it shallbe
declared.

I have now spoken in general, of all those six things to which the number 12
is applied in the description of the new Jerusalem; and I have showed that
there were things actually existing in the city Jerusalem, and in the
Primitive Church, to which every one of these things has an evident allusion.
And I have also showed that there were, and are things actually existing in the
City, and in the Church of Rome, fitly answerable and opposite to every one of
those six things above mentioned; and that, according to all senses, and
interpretations, which may, with any probability, be put upon them. If I have
spoken more, then needs concerning the opposition, or contraposition of Things
in general, I have therefore done it, because I am fully persuaded, that this
description of the new Jerusalem, is not for this reason only set down in
the Scriptures, that by it the true Church of Christ might be described; but
also, that the false Church of Antichrist by way of Antithesis, and opposition,
might by the same description ( mutatis mutandis) be manifestly revealed. For
there is not intended by this description an opposition of Numbers only, and
not of those things also, which are numbered* nor an opposition of Things only,
and not of those Numbers also, which are joined with them, but a double
Antithesis and contraposition, both of Things and Numbers: so that from this
description of the new Jerusalem, we may make two several inferences
concerning Antichrist* the one drawn from the consideration of Things
opposite, the other from the consideration of Numbers opposite. By the first,
may be found out the Genus: by the second, the Differentia, by which Antichrist
may be defined. From the first consideration it follows, that Antichrist
ought to have such things belonging to his state and Hierarchy, as I have
already proved to have been actually existing in the Papacy: as namely,
persons answerable to the Apostles, a City answerable to Jerusalem; having
certain measures, and a certain number of Gates, Churches, Pastors, Parishes,
professing their faith and religion under a certain number of heads and
Articles. But from the second consideration, (which consists in the application
of that number, which is opposed to 12, unto all these things above mentioned)
it may be concluded, not only that Antichrist must have a City answerable to
Jerusalem, but precisely, how many furlongs in compass his City must be, how
many Gates it must have about it: how many chief Churches in it; into how many
Parishes it was first divided: what the first original decreed number of these
persons must be, who must pretend themselves to be the Basis, and foundation of
that Hierarchy which Antichrist was to erect in it. And lastly, by this number
may be concluded, into how many heads or Articles, the Faith and Religion of
Antichrist, actually should, or conveniently might be divided.

It remains now in the last place, that I make the truth of all these things
to appear by particular application, and that I make good, what I have above
promised by showing out of history, that the number 25, is as evidently
applicable, in all these particulars above mentioned, to the City, State, and
Hierarchy of Rome, as the number 12 is, in all like and answerable respects,
to the Church of Christ and to the new Jerusalem.

CHAP. 19. That the first decreed, and limited number of Cardinals, and
Parish priests in Rome was 25. And that the first number of Churches for
Baptism, and Parishes, was 25 also.
I will first begin this application with the Cardinals of Rome, and with
those Titles, and Churches in seperably united unto them. And, as I first
showed that in the Romish Church, Cardinals were answerable to the Apostles;
so I will first show, that their first original decreed number in the City of
Rome was 25: as the first number of Apostles was 12 at Jerusalem.

It is a truth generally received, and as I believe not contradicted by any
writer, that the Cardinals sprang originally from being parish Priests in the
City of Rome. Tom 2. (...) Clericis. cap. 16.
Bellarmine acknowledges that Cardinalis in suo Titulo est veluti Parochus,
that a Cardinal is as it were a Parish Priest in his own Title. li^ro 1.
(...). page 31.
Alexander a Turre, writes to the same purpose in these words, Nec aliud
profecto erat ab Ecclesiae p^^mordijs agere Cardineas parts, quam obire ^uram
animarum, cujus rei in argumentum ad huc in urbe retinent Parochialium
Ecclesiarum Titulos. that is, neither was it any thing else in the Churches
beginning to execute the office of a Cardinal, but only to discharge the cure
of souls. For which cause the Cardinals even to this day do still retain
the Titles of the Parish Churches of the City. Of those Parishes, which were
also called Tituli Cardinales, Cadinall Titles, De praecipuis Urbis ROMAE
Basilicis. cap. 2.
Onuphrius writes thus, Tituli igitur erant sacrae aedes, vel (ut nunc
dicimus) Ecclesiae five loca consecrata, in Dei, beatae virginis, and sanctorum
hominum honorem vel memoriam, a fidelibus Christianis erecta, and per varias
urbis regiones a Pont: Romany antiquitus distincta, in quibus animarum cura a
presbyteris, qui in ijs commorabantur, habebatur: quibus qui praeerant,
Presbyteri vocabantur Cardinales. And a little after in the same chap: he
says, -- Hinc Presbyterorum Cardinalium nomen manasse crediderim, vt is
scilicet esset Presbyter Cardinalis, id est, Principalis, qui caeteris
Presbyteris ejusdem Tituli ( --) praeesset. Quum antea eo nomine opus non
esset, quod nisi^nus per singulos Titulos Presbyter lectus fuisset. It is
clear by these testimonies, and by that which I have above said, and shall say
concerning these titles, and by many other things that might be here alleged
out of the same, and other authors; that every one of these Titles, into which
the City of Rome was first divided, did necessarily imply and suppose three
things. First, a Church in which the Sacraments, and especially Baptism was to
be administered. Secondly, a Diocese, or Parish belonging to it. And thirdly, a
Presbyter Cardinal placed in it. And as every Cardinal had his title, and
every Title his Cardinal; so it is certain that originally, and at the first
institution every Cardinal had but one Title; and every Title but one
Cardinal. This necessary coherence, and dependence, which originally was
between the Cardinals and their Titles, caused S^^t (...) correlativa antiquo
more Praesbyter Cardinalis, and Titulus, ut alterum sine altero est* non
valeat. Baronius, Anno (...).
Baronius to say, that according to the ancient custom, a Priest Cardinal
and his Title, are in the Predicament of Relation, so that one could not
subsist without the other. By all which things it is evident, that whatsoever
was the number of the first Parishes in Rome, and of those Churches, which were
called Tituli Cardinales, Cardinal Titles; the same number must also of
necessity be the first number of the Cardinals, especially at their first
institution, when these Titles were first settled on them: but the first
certain number, and first decreed number either of such Priests, as were in
the City of Rome, or of such Parishes as were in Rome, or (which is sufficient
for my purpose) of such Cardinal Titles as were in Rome, was 25; and
therefore, whether the Cardinals had their original from the first Presbyters
in Rome, or from the first Parishes in Rome, or from the first Churches in
Rome, their first number was 25. The Minor proposition, or so much of it as is
necessary, J prove by many witnesses. First Baronius anno 309 says expressly
of these Titles after this manner. Marcellus xxv Titulos in vrbe constituit
quasi Dioeceses, that is Marcellus did constitute 25 Titles in the city as it
were Diocesses. in vita Marcelli.


Secondly, Alphonsus Ciaconius, who has written the lives of the Popes,
affirms the same in these words. Anno circiter 305. Marcelli Pontificatus 2o
viginti quinque Titulos idem Pontifex instituit. And a little afterward says,
Marcellus de quo nunc agitur Certum numerum praefinivit Titulorum, nempe xxv:
that is, about the year 305 Marcellus, in the second year of his Popeship,
did institute 25 Titles. Marcellus of whom we now speak prefined a certain
number of Titles to wit 25.

Isidorus Mosconius witnesses the same in these words. Successive Marcellus
anno 305 DECRETO statuit Titulos datos esse tantum xxv. in quibus Baptisma
dispensaretur. that is, Successively Marcellus in the year 305, did make a
Decree, that the Titles given to the Cardinals should be only 25, in which
Baptism was to be administered.

In like manner Hieronymus Platus in his book de Cardinalis dignitate and
officio, says of these Cardinal Titles, si quis numerum quaer at horum
Titulorum jam ante dictum est xxv ab Euaristo institutos esse: that is, If any
one seek after the number of these Titles, it is above said that Euaristus did
institute xxv.

Polidor Virgil in his fourth book de inventoribus rerum, and ninth chap. has
many things concerning the Cardinals, and their original: and among the rest
he has these words. Nec ita multo post Marcellus, titulos urbis ab Euaristo
primum Presbyteris datos numero limitavit, decreto statuens quinque and
viginti: ac quasi dioeceses esse ad Baptizandum eos, qui ex gentibus externis
in Christianorum coetum quotidi^ venirent, and ad sepeliendum mortuos: Haec ex
Bibliothecario, Damaso, Platina, ac aliis vel recentioribus sacrae historiae
scriptoribus; quos miror neque hoc neque alio quod sciam loco, non explicuisse,
qui essent ii Praesbyteri quibus Titulos in urbe datos tradunt, unde haud-dubie
prima Cardinalium origo est: that is, Not long after Marcellus limited the
number of Parishes in the City, which Evaristus first gave to the Priests, and
did by Decree constitute that there should be 25, and that they should be as
Dioeceses, to baptize those unbeleiving Gentiles, which came daily to be of the
number of Christians, and to bury the dead. These things are taken out of
Bibliothecarius, Damasus and Platina, and out of other later writers of sacred
History: but it is marvel (says Polidor Virgil) that these writers neither
here, nor elsewhere (that I know) do declare who those Priests were, to whom
they affirm these Titles in the City to have been given; from whence, without
all doubt is the first original of the Cardinals. Afterward in the same
chapter, the same Author has these words also, Faciunt praeterea sidem Tituli,
quos hodie habent Cardinales, quos vocamus, in locum illorum perpetuo tenore
successisse Presbyterorum, quibus prout declaratum est, Evaristus primum
titutulos, deinde Marcellus velut dioeceses digesserat, that is, farthermore
these titles, with those whom we call Cardinals do at this day enjoy, do
witness, that the Cardinals by a perpetual and never discontinued succession,
have succeeded in the places of those Priests, to whom (as it is above
declared) Evaristus first distributed those Parishes, which were afterward made
Diocesses by Marcellus. When these Parishes were made Diocesses, then were
these Priests made Cardinals, by having a formal power, and jurisdiction added
unto them, as it also appears by the like testimony of Volater anu^, who
says, Marcellus titulos xxv, sicuti Dioeceses, id est, Gubernationes ad
Baptismi commoditatem instituit, that is, Marcellus made 25 Titles in the City
as it were, Diocesses, that is, Goverments or Dominions for the more convenient
administration of Baptism.

But of all other writers, Onuphrius Panvinius de praecipuis urbis Romae
Basilicis, sets down these things most fully, the effect of whose words is
thus in brief. That whereas originally there was a small uncertain number of
Presbyters at Rome, they were brought to a certain number and order by Cletus
and Evaristus, Popes of Rome; first Cletus reduced the Presbyters of Rome to
the number 25; afterward Evaristus, about the year of Christ 100, appointed
and prescribed a several Parish to every one of those Presbyters; which
Parishes were afterward enlarged, and had their bounds and limits more
perfectly and more exactly prescribed unto them, by Pope Dionysius about the
year of Christ 260; after which time Marcellus about the year of Christ 305,
limited the number of those Titles, which anciently were first given to the
Presbyters by Evaristus, and did by decree constitute that there should be in
Rome 25, as it were so many Dioceses for the more convenient Baptising of such
Gentiles, as were daily converted to Christian religion. And this is the sum
of that which Onuphrius says, concerning the first number of Cardinal Titles,
which were at one, and the same time instituted, and decreed. After the time of
Marcellus, when the Church was freed from persecutions, those Titles were
increased by diverse Popes, as the same Author writes, some adding one, and some
another; but as Saint Paul is not numbered among the twelve Apostles, because he
was not one of those twelve, who were all at once, and at the same time first
named, and chosen to be Apostles; so those Titles and Cardinals, who were
afterward added one after another, to this first established and decreed number
of 25 at one and the same time instituted, cannot, neither ought to be numbered
among them: because the mystery consists (as it is above clearly and
evidently proved) in that number only, which was truly applicable unto them at
the time of their first institution, and actual emersion of their order.

And this first number 25 may be yet farther proved by the testimony of
Hieronymus Albanus, who makes mention of 25 Cardinals created by Marcellus. It
may be confirmed also by the testimony of Platina who writes to the same
purpose in these words. Marcellus divino cultui intendens, ubi Priscillam
matronam Romanam impulisset coeme^terium suis sumptibus via salaria
constituere, Titulos quinque and viginti in urbe Roma constituit quasi
Dioeceses, ad commoditatem Baptismi, and opportunitatem eorum qui ad sidem ex
gentibus quotidie veniebant. To the same effect writes Damasus in these words.
Marcellus Papa xxv Titulos Romae constituit quasi Dioeceses propter Baptismum
and paenitentiam multorum qui convertebantur ex Paganis. The same is also
witnessed by Anastatius, who says of the same Pope Mercellus; Hic xxv. Titulos
in vrbe Romana constituit quasi Dioceses.

By the general consent of those testimonies and Authors above recited, it is
evident and unquestionable; (especially until the contrary shall be proved by
better Authors, as J believe it will For if there had been any considerable
objection in all antiquity by which the contrary could have been effectually
proved: I cannot think that these authors were ignorant of it; nor imagine any
reason, why they should conceal it.
never be) that the first number of Cardinal Titles, at one and the same time
erected, established and decreed, was 25. And from hence it follows
necessarily (as it is above declared) not only that the first original number
of the Cardinals was 25; but also, that at the first apparent foundation of
Popery, the first remarkable division of the City and People of Rome, into
Tribes, Wards, Parishes, or Dioceses was 25, and that at the same time the
first number of Churches for the administration of Baptism was 25 also. If it
be true which Onuphrius writes, that there were 25 Priests in Rome before that
there were 25 Parishes, and that there were 25 Parishes in Rome, before they
were actually made 25 Cardinal Titles, or Diocesses by Marcellus; then it
follows, that although the order of Cardinals had been actually instituted
before the time of Marcellus (as J believe it was not) yet their original
number would have been 25. But as it is certain that the As the first
foundation of that Ecclesiastical Hierarchy, which Christ did build upon the 12
Apostles, was laid by Christ, before Christian religion was remarkably apparent
in the world, and countenanced by supreme authority: so the first foundation
of the Popish Hierarchy, might he, and was laid, before the main errors of
Popery were remarkable in the world, and countenanced by supreme authority.
first remarkable foundation of the Popish Hierarchy was about the time of
Constantine the great, after the first 300 years were ended: so it is evident,
and not unworthy to be observed, that these Authors, and many more whose words
J have not recited, do testify by a more then ordinary consent, that at that
very time the established and decreed number of Titles, (and therefore of
Cardinals also and of Churches appointed for Baptism) was 25 as it is above
declared.

How long this first number of Cardinals and Titles continued without
alteration, it is not material to enquire. For as the College of Apostles and
their successors, did not long continue in their first number; so there is no
necessity in respect of this mystery, that this College of Anti-apostles ought
to do. Yet nevertheless it seems probable by that which Saint Cumque
secundum lueram manifestum sit quod dicituromissis parumper Iezoniae. and Azur
hoc, dicendum est, quod usque ho die in Ecclesia quae est domus Domini, and
ante porta^ in introitu sunt 25 viri ad sensus cuncta refere^tes. Hieron. in
11. cap. L. zechielis. S. Hierome could not be ignorant than Rome in these
days did call her self Ianuam and osthum omnium Ecclesi^ru^. and by that
which he adds afterward in his Comment on this Chapter, it seems he interprets
this Gate to be a City which he calls praetenta and perdita, as Rome then was.
Sunt multi in hujus portae introitu qui desperant salutem and dicunt, Cavitas
in qua versamur, lebes est, and nos ^^nes -- propterea audiunt quod non ipsi
sint Carnes p^ae^eri^ae and perditae Civitas, sed li quos scandalizaverint and
interfeceim. Ideirco super eos gladius indacitur, u^ in si^ (...), nequaquam
intergentes, sed inter Christianos fuerint judicati Hieren. ^^id.
Hierome has written upon Ezekiel, that the same number continued unto his
days. If it were afterward augmented before the time of Gregory the great, it
seems it was de facto and not de jure: because in the time of Gregory ( I
(...) in vita Gregorii lib. 3. cap. 11.
who is said to have reduced the Cardinal Titles to their ancient institution)
there were only 25 Cardinals and no more, as they are nominatim recited by
Onuphrius in his book de Pontisicum and Cardinalium creatione.

Concerning Deacon Cardinals of the City of Rome their number is not to be
considered. For it is certain that they were not instituted by Marcellus, nor
at the same time that the Presbyter Cardinals were, nor in many ages after
them. Yet if there had been Cardinal Deocons in Rome from the beginning, they
should have been (...), answerable to those 7 Deacons in the Primitive Church,
(as Evaristus vero Apostolorum insticuto ad septenarium numeru^ Diaconos in
Ec^lesia Romana auxit. Onuphrius de praecipuis urbis Basilicis cap 2.
Onuphrius intimates) and not to the 12 Apostles. The like may be said of
Cardinal Bishops, that they were not thought upon, when the Presbyter
Cardinals and their titles were first instituted; Wherefore Isidorus Mosconius
says thus of them; Episcopi tunc non erant in Collegio Cardinalium, ideo
primus Episcopus ad Cardinalitiam dignitatem assumptus, fuit Conradus Suenns,
Archiepiscopus Moguntinus, creatus ab Alexandro tertio Ann. 1163: that is*
Bishops were not then in the College of Cardinals, therefore the first Bishop
promoted to this dignity was Conradus Suenus, Archbishop of Mentz, created by
Alexander the third in the year 1163. There was for many ages, a great
difference and distinction, between the Presbyter Cardinals of the ancient
foundation, and between the Bishop, and Deacon Cardinals, which were of a later
institution; these were not capable of any of those ancient titles, given first
to the Parish Priests of Rome. And although the Sixtus quartus, quod nun quam
antea factum suerat, Deaconias Praesbyteris, Titulos Diaconis assignare non
dubitavit. Hieron. Piatus. page 19
Popes omnipotency, has since brought this anciently observed order, unto a
promilcuous confusion, by giving these titles to Bishops, Deacons, and all
sorts of Cardinals: yet there is in stiling them, and writing of their In
lite^is Domini Papae nunquam ponitur Cardinalis Presbyter, quin additur.
Titulus, nec Episcopus vel Diaconus cu^ Titulo. Alvarus Pelagius de planctu
Ecclesiae lib. 2. Nota, Omnes Presbyteri Cardinales intitulantur hoc modo: Dil.
Fill. F. T^. S. Lauretii etc. Praesbytero Cardinali, excepto uno videlicet, 12
Apostolorum qui intitulatur hoc modo. N. Basilicae Apostolorum Praesbytero
Cardinali. ut in Capite, Cum olim de Privilegiis. Episcopi autem Cardinales
intitulantur hoc modo: F. Episcopo Portune. Et non fit mentio de Titulis,
Diacom, Cardinales similiter sine titulis hoc modo. N. Sancti Georgi^ ad velum
aureum Dracono Cardinali. Practica Cancellatiae Apostolicae a Petro Rebusso
edita page 475.
names, a distinction still observed, to testify the ancient difference which
was between them. Forasmuch therefore as these Cardinal Bishops, and Deacons
were not originally in the College of Cardinals, when their first number was
decreed, but are rather redundant extuberancies of the Papacy, built upon, and
dangerously overhanging that ancient foundation of the Presbyter Cardinals; I
say therefore that whatsoever the number of Cardinals, either Bishops, Priests,
or Deacons, either now is, or has been at anytime since their first
institution, either de facto, or de iure, it can no way prejudice, or infringe
(howsoever, it may perhaps De omnibus Christianitatis regionibus Cardinales
assumantur, sic tamen quod numerum 24 non. excedant. praedicto autem numero pro
magna Ecclesiae necessitate, ant utilitate duo alii aduci poterunt. Council.
Basil. Oecumenicum Ses. 23. sub Eugen. 4. By this decree there must not be
above 26, nor under 24: therefore there may be 25. And if the Pope be numbered
among them, there must be 25 at the least.
confirm) the truth of that which is above said concerning their first
original number. I do therefore now conclude according to that which I
suppose I have above evidently and sufficiently proved by many witnesses; first.

That there were in Rome originally, at the first remarkable foundation of the
Papacy 25 Churches, in which, and in no other Baptism was to be administered;
which 25 Churches according to a First in a general sense, as it may be said
of every Church, that it is Domus Dei and porta coeli. Secondly* as they were
Baptismal Churches. Thirdly, that as the Gates of the City, were seats of
judgment to the Israelites, so there was an Ecclesiastical jurisdiction
annexed to these Cardinal Titles as perhaps it is intimated in the ^ 22 Psalm,
that there shall be to the Churches in the n^w Hie^usalem.
treble sense are answerable to the 12 Gates of the new Jerusalem.

Secondly, that there were 25 Titles, Parishes, Wards, Dioceses, or other
divisions of persons and places, belonging to these 25 Churches: which 25
Titles, are answerable to those 12 Tribes of the new Jerusalem.

Thirdly, that there were 25 Priests or Pastors, to whom these 25 Churches were
assigned; which 25 Pastors, are answerable to the 12 Angels placed at the Gates
of the new Jerusalem. Lastly, I conclude that these 25 Priests were changed
(which change was the first great and remarkable degree of the great
Antichristian Apostasy) into 25 Cardinals; and so became the Basis and
foundation, of a then newly erected Romish Hierarchy, which has ever since
continued, clayming and usurping supreme power and authority in the Church.
And this Romish Hierarchy properly and essentially consists of the Pope and
Cardinals only, who are a different kind of government from all that ever were
before them, pretending themselves to be the sea Apostolic, and resembling an
ancient government of Rome, but being nothing else in the truth of their being,
but a real and continual emulation, and opposition of Christ and his
Apostles: even in respect of that transcendencie of Authority, and
infallibility of Doctrine, which was proper unto Christ and his Apostles
only, and absolutely incommunicable to any of their successors. And herein
especially (as I conceive) consists the very soul and essence of
Antichristianisme, in pretending to be what they are not, by imitating Christ
and his Apostles, in those things wherein they are unimitable. And howsoever
the Romish Clergy, are more properly the servants and vassals of Antichrist
then the Laietie: and both Clergy and Laiety of that Church, then any other
Christians; yet I believe that the very body, and essence of that great
Antichrist, which was to come into the world, is to be confined to the College
of Cardinals only, of which College the Pope is head, and he together with
them, makes one corporation of false Prophets sitting properly (...) that is,
as those words are, and may be diverse ways interpreted, not only in, or
against, or over the Church of God, but also pretending themselves to be the
Church of God, The Romish Prelates assebled in the University of Prague against
John Husse and others do affirm in their fourth Decree or Article, That the
College of cardinals of Rome are the body of the Church. To which Ioh. Husse
answers, that Christ is the Head, and all faithful christians the Body of the
Church of Christ. To which the said Prelates do reply, as Master Fox relates,
by a long and ^edious process, showing how the Pope is Head, and how the
College of Cardinals only, and not other Christians are the Body of the
Church* Acts and Monuments Anno 1414. page 589. und 590. and 591.
as the Romish Prelates pretend the College of Cardinal to be. But I return
from whence I find my self digressing, and do conclude, that as all
Ecclesiastical Hierarchy in the Church of Christ (against and above which the
Cardinals of Rome do most energetically oppose and advance themselves) had
it is first original, institution, and foundation from the 12 Apostles in
Jerusalem: so the opposite Hierarchy of Cardinals in the Synagogue of
Antichrist had it is first institution and foundation from 25 Parish Priests in
Rome.

CHAP. 20. That the number of the Gates of Rome was 25.
COncerning the number of the Gates of the City of Rome according to the sense
literal, it remains yet to be showed that their number was 25, as the number
of the Gates of the material Jerusalem either was, or is generally received
to have been 12. For howsoever the first number of Churches, in which Baptism
was administered, be by the name of Gates, most principally aimed at in the
description of the new Jerusalem, as according to the sense spiritual I have
above showed: yet I cannot but think, that the number of the Gates according to
the sense literal, is also directly intended; and that the number of the Gates
of Jerusalem was twelve and no more Villanpandus Tom. 3o. page 68, and 69
where is also exhibited a Map of Jerusalem with this inscription, Vera
Hierusolimae veteris imago, Roma, superiorum permissiu, cum privilegio summi
Pontificis, Imperatoris, Regis Catholici, ac Senatus veneti, etc.
apparatus urbis and templi: plainly affirms and recites them nominatim,
after this manner.

1 Porta fontis. 2 Porta stercoris 3 Porta vallis 4 Porta Anguli. 5 Porta
Ephraim. 6 Porta Vetus. 7 Porta piscium. 8 Porta Benjamin. 9 Porta gregis. 10
Porta Equarum. 11 Porta Aquarum. 12 Porta Fiscalis.
^n indice tertio Appendicis ad Civitates Orbis.
Georgius Braunus and Franciscus Hogenbergius, out of Livie and Pliny, who
lived near about the time that S. John writ the Revelation, do write thus.
Portas suburbiorum and urbis in universum 24 fuisse refert Plinius: Livius
tamen ut passim in illius Historia est legere 27 ponit. And whereas some
editions of Pliny make him to say sometimes, that there were 27 Gates in Rome,
and sometimes 37, this is corrected as an error by Onuphryus lib. description
urbis, where he writes thus. Siigitur december has portas quas ab ijs quatuor
december diversas fuisse liquet ipsis adjunxerimus, erunt 24 urbis Romae Portae ut
Plinium dixisse existimo -- nam quod vulgati codices habent 27 mendum
proculdubio est ex adjectione numerorum aliquot ortum, ita ut 12 portae semel
numerentur, praetereantque ex veteribus septe^ quae esse desierunt: It seems by
the differing opinions of Live and Pliny, who lived not long the one after the
other, that the number of the gates of Rome, was near about 25; for plus uno
verum esse non potest, there can be but one truth; and it is not probable that
either of these Authors was ignorant, how many Gates Rome had in their own
times. If there were 27 when Livy writ, and but 24 when Pliny writ, then it is
probable that in this interim, there were for some time but 25: but it is most
likely, that as in all great Cities, there are Gates some of greater, and some
of lesser note, some public, and some belonging to private houses or Palaces;
and some so ambiguously placed and used, that it is hard and doubtful to be
determined, whether they are to be accounted as Gates of the City, or not: so
I say it is most likely that Livie accounted 2 or 3 Gates of lesser note, for
Gates of the City, which Pliny thought fit rather to be left out as private
passages; but perhaps a third man, which had been to set down his opinion
concerning the number of the Gates of Rome in those times, would have taken one
of those 3 Gates into the number which Pliny left out, and have left out 2 of
those 3 Gates which Livie took in: and so doing it is likely he might have
spoken more truly then either of them. For when Authors of equal credit and
estimation, are of different opinions, it is more safe to go between them
both (if there be any medium) then to join with either. But I confess all
this proves but a probability at the most, that the number of the Gates of
Rome was 25. I am content therefore that Onuphryus that learned Roman Antiquary
(who, and who only (as far as I know) has written a peculiar Tract concerning
the Gates of Rome) shall decide this Question. It is evident by those words of
Onuphryus which are last above recited, that he affirms the number of the
Gates of Rome in the time of Pliny to have been 24 at the least; but it is
plain that among all those, Porta Triumphalis is not numbered, and therefore
Onuphrius presently after, when he rehearses nominatim all those 24 Gates
above spoken of, adds this Gate in the last place, as a Gate of the City,
although not one of the former number number, saying expressly, Porta
triumphalis extra numerum. And whereas afterward he names two other Gates,
which are Porta fenestralis Palatii, and Porta Stercoraria, he says of the
first, Porta fenestralis Palatii, non urbis, sed potius Palatii fuisse
crediderim; and of the second, Porta Stercoraria, non urbis sed Capitolii:
plainly excluding these two last Gates, from being of the number of the Gates
of the City, and plainly adding Porta triumphalis to the former number, as one
of the Gates of the City; as, not only other authors do account it, but
^^^ip. Roma. (...) page 54
elsewhere also, as well as in this place, himself affirms it to be, as
these his words do witness, Pars muri antiquitus per medium Burgum girabat
and habebat duas portas, Aureliam and Triumphalem. But for the greater evidence
of this truth, I will here set down the names of these Gates recited by
Onuphrius in manner following.

1 Porta flumentana. 2 Porta Collatina. 3 Porta Quirinalis. 4 Porta Viminalis.
5 Porta Gabinia.
1 Porta Esquilina. 2 Porta Coelimontana. 3 Porta Latina. Diverse of these Gates
were called by other names also, a^ Onuphrius shows.
4 Porta Capena. 5 Porta Ostiensis.
1 Porta Portuensis. 2 Porta Janiculensis. 3 Porta Sextimiana. 4 Porta Aurelia.
5 Porta Querquetularia.
1 Porta Piacularis. 2 Porta Catularia. 3 Porta Minutia. 4 Porta Mugionia. 5
Porta Sanqualis.
1 Porta Naevia. 2 Porta Randuscula. 3 Porta Lavercalis. 4 Porta Libitinensis.
5 Porta Triumphalis.


These 25 Gates Onuphrius sets down as such as were altogether actually
existing between the times of Pliny and Justinian, which does very well agree
with that time in which Marcellus did erect 25 Cardinalships in Rome. There
were anciently 7 other Gates, of which Pliny writes, that they ceased to be
before his time; and therefore they are mentioned by Onuphrius, as such, as
cannot, nor ought not to be numbered with those above named. But as touching
these 25 Gates above specified, it is not material to enquire how long their
number continued, whether until the time of Justinian, or how long afterward.
For, as those that affirm the number of the Gates of Jerusalem to have been
12, do not mean that there were so many precisely at all times, but that there
were so many at that time in which the City most flourished, or that there were
so many plus minus, so that taking one time with another, and considering all
things, there is no one number, by which the number of the Gates of Jerusalem
can be more truly expressed, then by the number 12: so in like manner, it may
be said of the Gates of Rome and of the number 25. For as the Gates of
Jerusalem, so is it certain that the Gates of Rome, especially in these
latter times, have been much altered and changed, which has caused a great
variety of opinions among many writers, as well concerning their names, as
their number. But thus much may be observed, that although the new addition
unto Rome, called urbs Leoniana, has brought 7 other Gates with it, yet some
of the former decaying, the same number 25 may still remain, and so much is
expressly witnessed by Severinus Binius in his first Tome of general Councels,
page 261. where, speaking either of his own time, or of that time in which
Georgius Braunius writ his Theatrium urbium orbis, he has these words, Portas
suburbiorum and urbis 24 fuisse refert Plinius, Livius tamen 27. Nunc sunt
turres 365, portae 25 super* sunt, that is, pliny relates that the Gates of the
City and Suburbs were 24, yet Livy says 27, now there are 365 Turrets, and
there remain 25 Gates.

Thus I have now showed, that which way soever the 12 Gates of the new
Jerusalem are to be understood, whether literally for material gates properly
so called, or spiritually for Churches in which Baptism was administered, which
are as properly Gates of the Church universal in a spiritual sense, as the
other are of the material City in the sense literal. I say, which way soever
these are to be understood, J have showed that as there were 12 Gates of
Jerusalem, so there were 25 of Rome. I may now therefore conclude in general
concerning the 4 first particulars above specified, that in what sense soever
the new Jerusalem may be said to have had 12 Gates, twelve Tribes, twelve
Angels, and twelve Apostles, who were the first remarkable foundations of the
Church of Christ, and all Ecclesiastical jurisdiction: in the same sense the
Romish Babylon may be said to have had 25 Anti-gates, and 25 Anti-tribes, and
25 Anti-angels, and 25 Anti-apostles, which were the first remarkable
foundations of the Babylonicall Tower of their Antichristian Hierarchy.

CHAP. 21. That as 12000 furlongs are the solid measure of a Cube, whose
perimeter is equal to the compass of the new Jerusalem: so 25000 furlongs
are the solid measure of a Cube, whose perimeter is equal in compass to the
City of Rome.
THE next degree of application which remains yet to be proved, concerns the
measures of the Circuit and compass of the City of Rome: and by that which is
already above said, this point is driven unto this issue, that if the Pope be
Antichrist, and Rome that City in which Antichrist was chiefly to erect his
kingdom, then the measure of the compass or circuit of Rome must be plus
minus between 116 and 117 furlongs, that is, 14 miles and an half, and almost
half a quarter of a mile; and certainly this measure fitteth so justly, and is
placed so exactly in the midst of that latitude which is admitted by diversity
of the opinions of diverse Writers concerning the compass of this City since
the Pope ruled in it, that I do not believe it to be possible by any one other
measure, more truly to express it. J need not in so clear a matter set down
many men's opinions, especially being I shall have occasion to say more of it,
when I come to speak of the Figure of this City, and of the Figure of the
number 666. But briefly it may be observed, what Commentationum Apocalypse. par.
2. page 152. Cantabrigiae 1632.
a late Writer, in his Commentaries upon the Revelation, has already observed
out of Lipsius concerning the compass of Rome, his words are these. I am vero
Roma hodierna, seu pontificia ambitum habet non nisi 13 aut 15 milliarum, ut
norunt, inquit Lipsius, qui dimensi sunt. And of these two measures the same
Admir. lib. 3.
Author supposes 15 miles nearest unto the truth. But Georgius Braunius, and
Franciscus In indice tertio Appendicis ad Civitates Orbis.
Hoggenbergius write thus. Quod si urbem ad nostrae aetatis consuetudinem
metiri volemus, vix passuum millia quatuor december omnis Romae, and I aniculae
transtiberinae regionis, and Vaticani ambitus implebit. And De descriptione
urbis. lib. 7. page 28.
Onuphrius to the same purpose in these words; Vrbis moenia aetate nostra vix
quatuor december millibus passuum complectuntur. Other Authors there are, which
make the compass of Rome to be 16 miles and more, and some that affirm it to
be less then 13 miles: but where diversity of times, and diverse men's opinions
have made such a diversity of measures, I leave it to any man's judgment,
whether the measure of 14 miles and an half, and somewhat more above
mentioned, be not more probable then any of them; because it is placed (as it
were) in the very middle between them. I conclude therefore that as an
imaginary Cube, whose solid measure is 12 thousand furlongs, is equal in
compass to that City in which Christ erected his kingdom; so an imaginary
Cube, whose solid measure is 25 thousand furlongs, is equal in compass to the
City in which Antichrist has erected his kingdom.

CHAP. 22. That the Popish Creed consists of twenty five Articles, as the
Apostles does of twelve.
I Come now unto the sixth and last point of application, which concerns the
faith and doctrine professed by Antichrist, and the number of heads and
Articles into which it is, or may be conveniently divided: and to this purpose
I have already mentioned the Council of Trent, (of which the acclamations
above mentioned testify, saying; Haec est fides Beati Petri and Apostolorum:
Haec est fides Patrum: Haec est fides Orthodoxorum) I have noted three things
in which the number 25 is applicable unto it. First, concerning the number of
Prelates there assembled in the first Session, the History of the Council of
Trent, lib. 2. page 130. plainly testifies that the number of all the Prelates
then, and there assembled, was 25. And although the number of Prelates was
afterward in other Sessions increased, and continually altered, and changed;
yet this first Session was that which gave nomen and esle to the Council, and
therefore the number of Prelates assembled in this Session is most remarkable,
and rather to be observed then in any other.

Secondly, concerning the number of Sessions, and that the whole Council is
divided into 25 Sessions, all editions of that Council do testify, and the
books themselves will be as a thousand witnesses until the end of the world.

And lastly, it is witnessed by the same books also, that the number of Popish
Archbishops, which subscribed to this Council was 25, and although many other
Bishops and Legates, and Abbats, and others subscribed also, yet the number of
Archbishops is more remarkable then any of the rest, because, as Bishops (who
ought chiefly, if not only to have decisive voices in general Counsels) are
virtually and representatively, their whole subordinate Clergy: so they
themselves, especially in the Romish Hierarchy, are virtually and
representatively contained in their Archbishops. It might be here, as I
believe, truly added, that the number of all the Decrees of this Council of
Trent, was also 25. (I mean of such For the other Decrees which concern
either the beginning, continuing, prorogueing, translating, or ending of the
Council, or of any Session, or which concern safe conducts, are matters of
mere formality and unavoidable necessity, and are not to be numbered with the
Decrees of the Council, nor were read when the Decrees were confirmed, as the
last act of the Council witnesses.
Decrees as concern matters of faith and reformation, which only are to be
accounted for the Decrees of the Council, because these only were read and
confirmed in this Council, as appears by the last words of the last Session)
but because it is hard to set down any one certain number of them, and because
it is already proved by that which is above said, that the number 25 is more
remarkable in this Council then any one other number: therefore I pass now to
that Creed and form of profession of the Romish faith, which was composed by
Pope Pius the fourth, according to the doctrine of the Council of Trent, by
which Creed it is evident that they have increased the number of the Articles
of the faith from twelve unto twenty five, as by the Creed it self here
written verbatim out of Pope Pius his Bull may evidently appear.

1 Credo in unum Deum, patrem omnipotentem, factorem Coeli and Terrae.
visibilium omnium and invisibilium. It is evident that some Articles of the
Apostles Creed were believed by the Jews, and were Arti le^ of their says
before our ^aviour Christ came in the flesh* The Jews then did, and do yet
believe one God the father almighty, they did believe the holy Catholic
Church, the Communian of Sa^nts, the forgiveness of sins, the resurrection
of the flesh and life everlasting. A^ therefore the Apostles did not make de
novo all the Articles of their Cree^* but did ^nely add certain articles to
that faith, which was formerly believed in the Church pretending (and that
truly) that this their addition was implicitly contained in that says which
the Jews did then profess concerning the Messiah which was to cow: So
Antichrist was not to make de novo all the Articles of that Creed which he was
to profess, but was only to add, as it were, one moitie to that faith which
was formerly believed in the Church, pretending (but falsely, as it behooved
Antichrist to do) that this his addition was implicitly contained in the Creed
which was formerly professed in the Church.


2 Et in unum Dominum Iesum Christum, filium Dei unigenitum and expatre natum
ante omnia secula; Deum de Deo, Lumen de Lumine, Deum verum de Deo vero,
genitum non factum, consubstantiolem patri, per quem omnia facta sunt.

3 Qui propter nos homines and propter nostram salutem descendit de Caelis, and
incarnatus est de Spiritu sancto ex Maria Virgin, and homo factus est.

4 Crucifixus etiam pro nobis sub Pontio Pilato passus and sepultus est.

5 Et resurrexit tertia die secundum Scripturas.

6 Et ascendit ad Coelum, sedet ad dextram patris.

7 Et iterum venturus est cum gloria judicare vivos and mortuos, cuius regni
non erit finis.

8 Et in Spiritum sanctum Dominum, and vivificantem, qui expatre filioque
procedit, qui cum patre and filio simul adoratur and conglorificatur, qui
loquutus est per Prophetas.

9 Et unam sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Ecclesiam.

10 Confiteor unum Baptisma in remissionem peccatorum.

11 Et expecto resurrectionem Mortuorum.

12 Er vitam venturi saeculi Amen.

13 Apostolicas and Ecclesiasticas traditiones reliquasque ejusdem Ecclesiae
observationes and constitutiones firmissime admitto and amplector.

14 Item sacram Scripturam juxta eum sensum, quem tenuit and tenet sancta matter
Ecclesia (cujus est judicare de vero sensu and interpretatione sacrarum
Scripturarum) admitto; nec eam unquam nisi juxta unanimem consensum Patrum
accipiam and interpretabor.

15 Profiteor quoque septem esse vere and proprie sacramenta novae legis a Jesu
Christo Domino nostro instituta, atque ad salutem humani generis, licet non
omnia singulis necessaria, scilicet Baptismum, Confirmationem, Eucharistiam,
Panitentiam, Ordinem, Extremam Vnctionem, and Matrimonium, illaque gratiam
confer, and ex his Baptismum, Confirmationem, and Ordinem sine sacrilegio
reiterari non posse.

16 Receptos quoque and Approbatos Ecclesiae Catholicae Ritus, in supradictorum
omnium sacramentorum solenni administratione recipio and admitto.

17 Omnia and singula quae de peccato originali and de justificatione in
sacrosancta Tridentina Sy nodo definita, and declarata fuerunt, amplector and
recipio.

18 Profiteor pariter in Missa, offerri Deo verum proprium and propitiatorium
sacrificium pro vivis and defunctis, atque in sanctissimo Bucharistiae
sacramento, esse vere, realiter, and substanti aliter, corpus and sanguinem,
una cum anima ^^ Divinitate Domini nostri Jesus Christ; fierique conversionem
totius substantiae panis in corpus, and totius substantiae vini in sanguinem,
quam conversionem Catholica Ecclesia, transubstantiationem appellat.

19 Fateor etiam sub altera tantum specie totum, atque integrum Christum
verumque Sacramentum sumi.

20 Constanter teneo Purgatorium esse, animasque ibi detentas, fidelium
suffragiis juvari.

21 Similiter and sanctos una cum Christo regnantes venerandos, atque
inrocandos esse: eosque orationes Deo pro nobis offerre atque eorum reliquias
esse venerandas.

22 Firmissime assero, Imagines Christi ac Daiparae semper Virginis, nec non
aliorum sanctorum habendas and retinendas esse; atque iis debitum honorem ac
venerationem impertiendam.

23 Indulgentiarum etiam potestatem a Christo in Ecclesia relictam fuisse,
illarumque usum Christiano populo maxim salutarem esse affirmo.

24 Sanctam Catholicam and Apostolicam Romanam Ecclesiam omnium Ecclesiarum
Matrem and Magistram agnosco, Romanoque pontifici beati Petri Apostolorum
principis successori, ac Jesus Christi Vicario veram obedientiam spondeo ac juro.

25 Caetera item omnia a Sacris Canonibus and oecumenicis Conciliis, ac
praecipue a sacrosancta Tridentina Synodo tradita, desinita, and declarata,
indubitanter recipio: atque profiteor simulque contraria omnia atque haereses
quaseunque ab Ecclesia damnatas and rejectas and anathematizata^ ego pariter
damno, rejicio, and anathematizo.

The words which follow next in the Bull, which are these, Hanc veram
Catholicam fidem, etc. do suppose and intimate that a perfect form of the
Catholic faith is premised and formerly declared; wherefore J suppose that it
cannot be denied, either that this Creed ends in this place, or that it is
not aptly and fitly divided, and distinguished into 25 Articles. For supposing
the first part of this Creed, wherein we agree with the Papists, to be
distributed into 12 Articles (as commonly it is, and as no man that is a
Christian will deny) J do upon this supposition appeal unto any man, whether
this whole Creed can with any tolerable conveniencie be distributed, either
into a greater number of Articles, without separating such things as are in
themselves united, or into a lesser, without confounding such things as are in
themselves to be distinguished. If it be objected that the 12 Articles of the
Christian faith ought not to be accounted as part of Antichrists Creed, and
that this application would better fit Antichrist, if that addition only which
he has made unto the Apostles Creed, either were, or conveniently might be
divided into 25 Articles: J answer, that if Antichrist had added 25 Articles
unto the Apostles Creed; then the number of Articles contained in the
profession of his faith, would have been 37, and not 25. For it cannot be
denied, that the Pope does openly profess the 12 Articles of the Christian
faith, nor proved that Antichrist ought not so to do. But rather it is to be
considered; that it is as great, if not greater impiety and presumption, to
add new Articles to the Christian faith, as wholly rejecting it, to erect
another faith and religion. And that it more properly befits Antichrist, to
deny the Christian faith ex consequenti and indirectly, then to renounce the
external profession of it: for the mouth of Antichrist ought to be as a
fountain sending forth at the same place sweet waters and bitter, he is to
have a form of godliness, but to deny the power thereof; he is to pretend
himself to be a Christian, and to be built upon the true foundation of the
Apostles; but he is also to overthrow this foundation upon which, in some sort
he is, and pretends himself to be built, by superinducing damnable doctrines,
exconsequenti and indirectly contradicting and denying that faith which he does
externally profess. The Devils themselves may make profession of the Christian
faith, to the same end that Antichrist does, that is, to deceive by it: and it
is probable that the Devils do more certainly know and believe, the
historical truth of the Creed, then some Popes have done. And lastly, the
Papists themselves cannot deny, but their imaginary Antichrist (who shall be of
the Tribe of Dan as they say) must believe, or at least prosesse himself to
believe, so many of the Articles of the Creed, as the Jews now do, or as may
be evidently proved out of the old Testament. By all which things it is
evident, that the external profession of the Christian faith, can no way
privilege the Pope from being that great Antichrist which was to come into the
world: but rather it may be truly said, that this external profession, is
causasine qua non, such a thing as could not but concur to his constitution.
For as Antichristianisme consists of two parts, the one being an open, yet a
fained and hypocritical profession of the truth; the other a secret and
indirect, yet a real and effectual eversion of it: so this form of the
profession of the faith above mentioned, consisting of 25 Articles, of which 12
belong to the first part, and 13 to the second, may be fitly esteemed a perfect
sum and character of Antichristianisme.

CAP. 23. The conclusion which follows upon the chief part of the
application above proved, and some necessary and remarkable Observations
concerning it.
I Have now showed and proved, that as the number twelve is in six several
things applicable to the new Jerusalem: so the number twenty five is
applicable to the mystical Babylon in six several things, answerable and
opposite unto them* and whereas the Tribes, Gates, Angels* Foundations,
Measures, and Fruits of the tree of life, are all, or most of them such things
as do admit a double, or manifold interpretation, according as they have been
by diverse Authors diversely expounded; I have made it manifest, that which way
soever they be understood, there are things in all senses answerable unto them
in the Romish Babylon, to which the number 25 is applicable, and that it should
so fall out according to such diversity of interpretations, Ille quippe author
in ^^s^ them verbis quae intelligere volumus, and ipsam sententiam forsitan
vidit; and certe Dei spiritus qui per eum haec operatus est, etiam ipsam
occu^^u^a^ lectori vel auditori sine dubitatione praevidit, imo ut occurreret,
quia and ipsa est veritate subnixa, providit. Nam quid in divinis cloquiis
la^gius and uberius potuit divinitus provido^i, quam ut cade^ verba pluribus
intelligantur modis, quos alia non minus divina constantia faciunt approb^ri.
Aug. de Doctrine. Christiana, lib. 3. cap. 27.
this (as I believe) adds much to this mystery, because every differing
exposition, is, as it were, a distinct and several prophecy, in one respect or
other, more clearly describing the Papacy. If the root of the number 666 had
been applicable, only to one of those six things above mentioned, as for
example, to the College of Cardinals of Rome in respect of their first
original: this one thing, as I conceive, (if the historical truth of it
cannot be confuted) had been a more manifest sign and token, that the Papacy
is Antichrist, then all the For it is above evidently proved both by reason,
and by an example in the Scripture; that the mystery of the number consists, in
the application of the root of it. But that the mystery consists in numerall
letters of any name, it cannot be proved either by reason or Scripture, but
only by the event.
interpretations that any Writers have hitherto set forth concerning the number
666. But being the same root or number, does not only show the first original
number of Cardinals or Anti-apostles, but does also intimate that they are
according to diverse spiritual senses, the Gates, Angels, and Foundations of
the Popes mystical City, State, and Hierarchy; and does also show, how many
furlongs in compass the City of Rome should be; how many Gates it was to have
about it; how many Churches for Baptism in it; how many Pastors did first
exercise Ecclesiastical jurisdiction over it; into how many Titles, or
Parishes it was first divided, and unto how many heads and Articles Christian
religion should be there augmented; being, I say, this one number 25, does not
in one, nor in two, nor in three only, but in all these particulars, and in
all senses in every one of these particulars, truly and evidently, Number,
Measure, Describe, and Characterise the City, State, and Hierarchy of Rome, and
that state and City only; so that it is not so fitly applicable to any other
state and City, no not in any one thing fitly answering any one of those six
particulars above mentioned: then how can any man desire a more essential and
exact description of the Papacy, then the right application of this number 25,
plainly exhibits to him, that does fully understand it? or how can any one
which understands these things, justly say, that I have spoken
hyperbolically, whereas I have above said, that the City, State, and Hierarchy
of Antichrist, is by this number 25 most evidently, and miraculously described?

J have as yet applied the number 25 unto the Papacy, only in such things as
are (...), that is, answerable and opposite to such things, as are mentioned in
the description of the new Jerusalem. But as the number 12 is in many other
respects besides these, applicable to the true Church, and to such things as
pertain unto it: So J am now to show (as I have also above promised) that this
number 25 is in many other things applicable to the Papacy, and to such things
as do pertain unto it. But first there are some observations concerning that
part of the application which is already proved, which may in this place be
interposed.

First, it may be observed, that although the root of the number 666, were
applicable to the Papacy in no other things, saving only in these above
proved. Yet these are sufficient: because by these the Papacy is evidently
distinguished from all other states of government: and because there are no
other things in the Papacy more essential and remarkable then these.

Secondly, that although the description of the new Jerusalem were of a City
in all respects merely imaginary (as perhaps in some things it is,) and were
not applicable either according to a sense of allusion, to that material
Jerusalem which once was, or according to a sense of prediction, to the last
state of the new material Jerusalem, which for all that we know, may be yet
for to come: yet such an imaginary City, being so exactly, and in so many
diverse respects measured, numbered, and described by the root and figure of one
number only, may be purposely set down, as a rule and pattern, by which the
root and figure of another number given, ought to be applied, to a City, not
imaginary, but really and actually existing: for God, who sometimes chooses
things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, may also by things
that are not, bring to light things that are; and by the opposition or
juxta-position of supposed and imaginary measures and numbers of a heavenly
Jerusalem, may discover the true and real numbers, and measures of all things
remarkable in the City of Rome.

Thirdly, it may be observed, that although the description of the new
Jerusalem had not exemplarily directed this application chiefly unto those
particulars above mentioned, yet the things themselves are such, that it is
probable that the wisdom of God would rather have foretold those things of
Antichrist then any other. For God by his Prophets in the old Testament,
intending to fore show and foretell the kingdom of Christ, did not foretell
what number the letters of Christ's name, or any name of his Church or kingdom
should contain (as the Papists would make us believe S. John does concerning
Antichrist) but did foretell by diverse types, the number of Christ's Apostles,
and their office and quality, as appears by diverse Types in the Scriptures,
and especially by the Type of the 12 Oxen under the brazen sea, by which, not
only the number of the Apostles was foretold, but also their condition, as
that the Sea of Grace, and Laver of regeneration should by them be supported,
and carried into all quarters of the world, and that they should go and
baptize all nations, etc. Since then the Cardinals of Rome are those persons in
that Antichristian Hierarchy, which are answerable to the Apostles, and those
to whom the administration of Baptism was originally most remarkably
committed; it is therefore more probable, that their Number, Nature, and
Condition should be typed in the Scriptures, then any other one thing
concerning Antichrist.

Lastly, it may be observed concerning the compass of the Area, or platform
of the City of Rome, and concerning the first number of Churches at once and
the same time instituted, that they are things fatal and mystical in
themselves, as Onuphrius Panvinius, concerning both these things, has
observed; of the first he writes thus. Pomaerii autem urbis Romae terminos non
sine Augurum consilio poni, mutari, ac restitui potuissesatis constat innu^tque
haec inscriptio, Collegium. Augurum Autore. Imp Casare Divi. Trajani
Parthiciterminos Pomaerii restituendos curavit.


Of the number of Churches he writes thus. Cur autem non plures neq, pauciores
Ecclesiae simul institutae fuerint, quae his nominibus decorarentur, operae
pretium erit explicare, huicque instituto maxim consentaneum, cum haec res
insigni mysterio celebratasit. For although Onuphrius in the 2 chap. of his
book De praecipuis urb. Romans B silicis wilnesseth that there were 25 Titles at
^nce instituted, and that this number was afterward augmeted succe^sively,
some Popes adding one Title and some another until they came to ^8 in number
which as he co^^e^lures was ab^ut the Time oF L^o the first in the year 44^.
Onuphrius speaks these words of other Churches in Rome also, and not only of
these 25, which were first called Titles, yet his words can be verified of
these Churches only, because even himself being judge, and that cloud of
witness, which I have above alleged, there never was any other Total number
of Churches which were called Titles, in the City of Rome, which were as in
this place he says, simul institutae, at one time and altogether instituted,
but only those 25 above mentioned. If therefore there be any mystery in this
number, it must be in the number 25, and in no other.

CHAP. 24. A brief and cursory recital of some other less remarkable
particulars; in which the number 25 is remarkably applicable to the City, and
Church of Rome.
BUT I come now to a multitude of other remarkable particulars belonging to the
Papacy and Church of Rome, in which their affectatio^ of this number 25 may
also be observed: and these things I will re^ite very briefly and cursorily,
because I take them to be adventitious and supernumerary, and no essential
part of this interpretation, yet are these things for the most part answerable
in some sort to such things to which the number 12 is applied in diverse places
of the Scriptures. As the land of Canaan was divided into 12 jurisdictions and
Divisions, which were governed by the heads of the Tribes, and did perhaps type
out that division which That division of the land of Canaan mentioned by
Ezechiel, seems not to be yet fulfilled, but perhaps that land shall be yet
again divided into 12 Dioceses, after the conversion of the Jews, and shall
have 12 Christian Bishops in it. And perhaps Jerusalem shall be n^w built, and
be the Metropolis of it; but that Christ shall then reign personally and
visibly in it, I see no reason.
Ezekiel fore-telleth, or that Ecclesiastical government which the 12 Apostles
did exercise, not only over the City of Jerusalem as Pastors, but also over
the whole Country belonging to that City as the first Christian Bishops. So
perhaps, the Antichrist of Rome, in those Kingdoms where conveniently he
might, and in those times when he had fullest power, has also divided certain
kingdoms, into 25 provinces or other divisions, and has placed 25 men of note
and eminency in several Kingdoms who by their power could rule and govern
others. There were heretofore 25 Abbats in England, as Camden witnesses, which
had voices in the Parliament house. And although I could set down some other
particulars to this purpose, concerning other Kingdoms, yet I choose rather to
leave it to those, who are better acquainted with the histories of foreign
nations; who, if such observations shall be thought necessary, have better
means and opportunities to search after them, then I can have. It shall be
sufficient for me, only to touch briefly upon some common and obvious things
in which the number 25 is remarkablely applicable to the Papists: rather to
give an hint unto others, then that I do conceive the number of those
particulars which I shall here set down, to be so much as considerable in
respect of those, which may be found out hereafter.

In the first place their affectation of the number 25, is remarkable in
respect of the number of their Monks, Friars, and singing Mass Priests in
diverse of their Abbeys, Priories, Monasteries, and other their societies and
corporations: and because there are no others in the Romish Clergy more fitly
answerable to those singers mentioneed in the 25 chapter of the first book of
Chronicles, then these Monks and Friars, therefore it is so much the more
observable, that the number 25 should be remarkable in respect of these, as the
number 12 appears to be in that Chapter, in respect of those. The book called
Bibliotheca Cluniacensis, in which are recited the Abbeys, Priories, and
Deaneries belonging to that Order, testifies, that in all those societies,
where there is any settled number of Monks and Friars, there is none so
frequent, and remarkable as the number 25, as by these particulars gathered out
of this one book only may appear.

De Provincia Lugdunensi.
Prioratus de Gigniaco Lug. Dioecesis ubi per definitionem factam anno 1266
Monachi fuerunt reducti ad numerum 25. Decanatus de Paredo Eduensis Dioecesis
ubi debent esse -- 25 Monachi, Priore non computato, and notandum est per
literas benae memoriae DominI Bertrandi Abbatis Cluniacensis quod debent esse
25 Monachi in hoc Decanatu. page 1706. Prioratus Naluaci Lug. Dioec. ubi debent
esse -- 25 Monachi. ibid. Prioratus Sancti Marcelli Cabilenensis Dioec: ubi
debent esse -- 25 Monachi. page 1706.
De Provincia Franciae. These in some sort are (...) to those orders mentioned,
1. Chron cap. 25. verses 9. 10. 11. 12. 13. 14. 15. 16. 17. 18. 19.

Decanatus Sancti Petri de Lehuno in sanguineterso Ambianensis Dioec: ubi
debent esse Decano computato -- 25 Monachi. p. 1712. Prioratus Sancti Lupi
Bellonacensis Dioec: ubi debent esse Priore non computato -- 25 Monachi.
ibidem. Prioratus Mon^alium Sancti Victoris LeodiceNsis Dioec: ubi debent esse
-- 25 Moniales. p. 1716. Prioratus S. S Petri and Pauli de Raallo Meldensis
Dioec: ubi debent esse -- 25 Monachi. p. 1717. Prioratus de Arenthona in Anglia
ubi debent esse 25 Monachi* p. 1719. Prioratus beatae Mariae de Gernago
Parisiensis Dioec: ubi debent esse -- 25 Monachi. Prioratus Sanctae Crucis de
Volta, Sancti Flori Dioec: ubi debent esse -- 25 Monachi. p. 1737. Prioratus
Sancti Orientii Auxitanensis Dioec: in quosunt de praesenti -- 25 Monachi. p.
1740.
De Provinciis Angliae and Scotiae.
Abbatia de Passaleto Glascoensis Dioec: in qua debent esse -- 25 Monachi. p.
1748. Prioratus de Arenthona subditus Prioratui de Charitate in quo debent esse
-- 25 Monachi. p. 1749.
To these might be added many other in England and elsewhere, but these are
sufficient to show, that there are not so many corporations of any one other
number belonging to the Cluniacensian Monks, as by the Catalogue exhibited in
this book called Bibl. Cluniacensis. page 1715 plainly does appear. And it is
very probable that he that would trouble himself to find out the ancient
numbers of other corporations, belonging to other Orders, might easily make (if
it were necessary) the like observation. But instead of those many particulars
which I might in this kind set down, I will mention only the last Order of
note that the Popes have erected, and this is the order of Knights of the most
glorious Virgin Mary (as they call them) instituted at Rome by Paul the fifth,
An. 1618. which Order, as it is Thea^er of Honor, by Andrew Favine, l. 8. c. 2.
supposed, will be the most famous throughout all Christendom, and there is no
other determination concerning the number of the Knights of this Order, but
only this: That of the Knights of this order, there shall always remain
These 25 Residents having monthly allowance are in some sort answerable to
those 12 Captains mentioned 1 Chronicles cap. 27. v. 1.
Resident at Rome, in the Court of the holy Father 25, having 20 Ducates by the
month, and the like number at Loretto.

Next unto the numbers of these Societies and Corporations, it may be here
observed, that the number 25 is also remarkable, in respect of certain
Officers of great note and estimation, belonging to the highest Courts of
justice in The chief Penitentiary his Court is as it were the high Court of
Chancery in Rome, and perhaps these 25 Officers are not of less note* then the
12 Masters of the Chancery here in England.
Rome; of which Courts and Officers Franciscus Abrahamus Annalibus
Ecclesiasticis anno 1457. page 27.
Bzovius writes thus: Inter Cardinalestria officia sunt magni momenti, primus
est Poenitentiarius, huic subsunt Poenitentiarii minores ^aud p^uci, and
scriptores 25. And a little after, concerning another Court, he says, Militant
circa Rotam inter alios officiarios, Abbreviatores non minus 25.

CAP. 25. That the number 25 is remarkable in diverse things pertaining to S.
Peter's Church in Rome. Of the measures of S. Peter's Altar, and the Characters
imprinted upon it, and other Popish Altars.
I Come now to their Altars, and first to that Sanctum Sanctorum, that great
and high Altar in S. Peter's Magnae haec Basilica toti terrarum orbi venerationi
perpetuo fuit, inqua praecipu^ quaeque nostrae religionis mysteria and Romanae
Apostolicae sedis facta celebrata leguntur. Onuphr. de praecip. ^^b. Romae
Basilicis. p. 65
Church at Rome, of which Altar and Church diverse things are written very
remarkably by diverse authors: upon the top and high Terrace of this Church, as
Angelus Rocca witnesses, is placed upon a gilded Globe of brass, a gilded
Cross of Apud Basilicam Sancti Petri Romae supra tholi laternam locatur pila
aenea inaurata, supra pilam cernitur Crux aenea inaurata palmorum quinque and
viginti. Angel. Rocca in appendice Bib. Vatican p. 419.
25 hand-breadths in height. In the forepart of this Church are 5 Gates, which
are commonly used, and one other Gate called Portasancta, which stands open
only one year in Onuph. de praecip. Bas. cap. 4.
25, and the twenty fifth year being ended, it is again shut by the Pope. In
this Church (as also in the

Basilica S. Mariae ma^^ris est una ex quinque Pat^^archalibus Eccle siis; una
ex septem, quae solenni ritu perpetuo visitari solent, ex quatuor demum anni
jubilei una constituta. -- Haec Ecclesia aliis Patriarchalibus Ecclesi^s
similis est -- Habet Altar majus marmoreo operculo ornatum, podia sive
moeniana duo lapidea tessellat: etc. -- sacella aliquot magnifica, Altaria
circiter 25 marmorea, tessellatam sedem etc. Onuph. Pavin. de praecipuis Romae
Basil. cap. 6. page 289.
Church of S. Mary the greater) have been about 25 Altars as 1 Altar S. Xisti.
P. P. 2 Altar S. Leonis. 3 Altar Hadriani. 4 Alt. S Mariae. 5 Alt. SS.
Processi, etc. 6 Alt. S. Mauritii. 7 Alt. Silvestri. 8 Alt. Mariae. 9 Alt.
Gabinii. 10 Alt. Martialis. 11 Alt.. Bartholomei 12 Alt. S. Pastoris. 13 Alt.
S. Thomae. 14 Alt. SS. Andreae and Gregorii. 15 Alt. Beat. Virginis. 16 Alt.
Innocentii. 17 Alt. S. Suda^ii. 18 Alt. S. Antonii. 19 Alt. S. Tridentii. 20
Alt. novum SS. Apost. 21 Alt. Philippi and Jacob. 22 Alt. Mortuorum. 23 Alt.
vetus Simonis and Iudae translatum ad mediam Ecclesiam. 24 Alt. S. Habundii
nunc dict. S. Catharinae. 25 Alt. S. Petronillae.
All these 25 Altars were erected and altogether actually existing in S Peter's
Church at Rome before the year 1500. That is, before there was any new
addition of building to that Church. He mentions also sour other Altars, but
they were not in the ancient Church of S. Peter, as Onuphrius writes, but in a
wall which is between the new Church of S. Peter and the old, built since the
year 1500. by Paul the third, in a place where anciently was a Chapel
dedicated to S. Lucie. Onuph. de praecip. Urb. Rom Basil. cap 4.
Onuphrius particularly recites them, besides the great Altar or Sepulcher of
S. Peter, which is, as it were, their Sanctum Sanctorum, upon which no man may
celebrate Mass but the Pope only. This is that before which the Roman
Emperors have prostrated themselves and their Crowns, and this is that
Sepulcher which (although it be not so) the Popes of Rome do account and
esteem to be the Altar of Christ, as D. Hieronymus adversus Vigilantium
testatur Romanum Pont. Supta Petri and Pauli ossa veneranda (...) Domino (...),
and ^umulos eorum Christi arbitrari* altaria D. August. Epist. 42. ad
Madaurenses: Imperi^ Ro^ ni nobilissimi eminentissimum culmen ad sep ulchrum
Pisca^o^is Petri submisso (...) supplicat. Onuph. il^d.
Onuphrius makes Saint Augustine and S. Hierome to witness. This Altar or
Sepulcher is made four square of a perfect Cubicall figure; the length,
breadth, and the height of it are equal; the measure of every side or area of
this Altar is precisely 25 foot of square measure, as the words both of
Constantinus fecit Basilicam beato Petro Apostolo in Templo Apollims, cujus
locum, cu corpus S. Petri recondidit, undique ex aere cyprio conclusit, quod
est immobile: ad caput pedes 5, ad pedes pedes 5, ad latus dextrum pedes 5, ad
latus sinistrum pedes 5, subter pedes 5, supra pedes 5, etc. Ba^on* anno 324.
Baronius and Onuphrius do testify to all those that know what superficial
or square measure is.

But the number 25 is most remarkably imprinted upon all their Altars, because
Christ's 5 wounds, as they call them, are in five several places ingraved upon
the top of every Altar; which their multiplying of our Saviors wounds from 5
to 25, what it may signify, either in their intention, or beyond their
intention (either that they offer up Christ many times whom the Jews crucified
but once, or that their apostacy has given him more wounds then the Jews
cruelty) it is not material to inquire; Onuphr. de praecip. urb. Romans Bas. c.
4.
but certain it is, that usually and ordinarily, there are precisely 25
prints, marks, dents, or Characters ingraved upon all their Altars. And that
the square measures of S. Peter his Sepulcher or Altar above mentioned, and the
manner how their Altars are characterized with the number twenty five, may be
more plainly understood, let this figure following be considered.

That the number 25 should be remarkable in respect of their Altars is so much
the more to be observed, because the number 12 is applicable to certain Altars
mentioned in the Scriptures; as 1. Kings c. 18. v. 31. Ezekiel c. 43. v. 16.



CHAP. 26. That the number 25 is an affected symbolicall device among the
Papists: Of the Mass of Christ's five wounds, five times multiplied and
repeated. Of their Jubelies, and affection of the twenty fifth day of the
month.
BUt these five Cinques, or these 25 round spots, which in Arms do signify
numbers, That round spots in Arms do signify numbers is observed by the
Author of Armory E. B. p. 179. and sequ.
as a some Writers have observed, have not been only imprinted upon their
Altars, but being (as it is probable) from thence derived, have been accounted
a symbolicall device, and made armoriall and recorded to have been sent from
heaven in a more celestial manner, then the Ancile of ancient Rome as a
sanctified Elements of Armories page 166.
banner to lead Armies fortunately. And what greater testimony can there be of
the affectation of a number? Yet if these 5 Cinques are inserted into the Arms
of the Emperor of Rome, the King of Spain, and the Archduke of Austria; if
the Pope and Cardinals cause them to be imprinted in the frontispice of diverse
books printed at Rome for their better success, and the greater confirmation
of them. If their Mass of Christ's five wounds, five times multiplied and
repeated; have been by an Angel from heaven commanded, and by authority
Apostolical confirmed, as the Boniface Bishop of Rome lay sick and was like to
die, to when our Lord sent the Archangel Raphiel with the office of the Mass,
of the five wounds, saying: Rise and write this office, and say it five t^mes,
and thou shall be restored to thy health immediately: and what Priest soever
shall say this office for himself, or for any other that is sick 5 times, the
person for whom it is said shall obtain health and grace, and in the world to
come (if be continue in virtue) life everlasting. And in what soever
tribulation a man shall be in this life, if he procure this office to be said
five times for him, of a Priest, without doubt he shall be delivered. And if it
be said for the soul of the dead, anon, as it shall be said and ended five
times, his soul shall be rid from pains. This hearing the Bishop he did erect
himself in his bed, conjuring the Angel by the name of Almighty God, to tell him
what he was, and wherefore he came, and that he should depart without doing him
harm: who answered that he was Raphiel the Archangel, sent unto him of God:
and that all the premises were undoubtedly true. Then the said Boniface
confirmed the said office of the Five Wounds, by Apostolic authority, M. Fox
in his Acts and Monuments p. 1398. has related these things out of the Rubric
of their Mass book. And by these things, two things are evident; First, that
they do acknowledge the multiplication of the number 5 by 5, to have some
secret mystery and virtue in it. Secondly, that the reason why they do affect
the number 25, consists in the root of it, which is five.
Rubtick in their Mass books affirms: then all these things seem to imply
yet a greater mystery in this number, and to testify a greater affectation of
it. To prosecute all these things particularly would require a large volume,
but I do briefly and cursorily pass over these things which perhaps are not
essential unto this interpretation.

Lastly, their affectation of the number 25 seems remarkable in respect of
certain times of note and high estimation among them. For first it is apparent
that their Jubilee is, and has been for many ages celebrated every five and
twenty year only. Our Savior Christ began to show himself, and to go about
his Fathers business when he was twelve years old; but Priests, Deacons, and
Subdeacons, and all other the Popes sons and daughters, are not accounted of
a perfect age, until they are Qui 25 annum complevit aetatis est perfectae,
qui non complevit imperfectae nec proprie res suas administrare potest Dig lib.
1. tit. 7. Dig. 7. Bas. B 33. tit. 1. c. 13. Them. 4. Austat p. 240 Diaconus
aut subdiaconus annis 25 minor non ordinatur. N. 123. Bas. 3. tit. 1. c. 26.
Higinius Virgins sacrari ante annum 25 prohibuit. Volateran: lib. 22. p. 496.
25 years old completely. Perhaps the affectation of this number in this
respect has caused some translations of the Scriptures to be corrupted: for S.
Hierome in his Commentaries upon the 11 Chapter of Ezekiel, having observed
that the number 25 is never used in a good sense in all the Scriptures,
answers an objection against this his observation in this manner. Licet in
Levitico ad sacer dotale ministerium a viginti quinque annis eligantur, in
hebraeo enim non habet hunc numerum qui in Septuaginta dicitur, sed
tricenarium. And this conjecture may be thought the more probable, because in
another place of Scripture where it is evident that the number 25 is used in a
bad sense, there the same copy of the Septuagint which S. Hierome used, makes
no mention of the number 25, but instead of it takes another number, as by
these his words upon the 8. Chap. of Ezekiel may appear. Quos nos viginti
quinque viros transtulimus, Septuaginta posuerunt viginti, and in quibusdam
exemplaribus quinque de Theodotione additisunt.

And last of all, as they seem to affect the 25 year more then any other, so
have they also affected the five and twentieth day of the month more then any
other. Their chief holydaies are upon the five and twentieth day of the
month, and there is no one day of the month, which has had originally so
many holidaies laid upon it. Upon the five and twentieth day of December the
Church of Rome begins the year, and upon that day they have ordained the
nativity of our Savior Christ to be celebrated. Upon the five and twentieth
day of Ian: is the conversion of Paul. Upon the five and twentieth of February,
so often as it is leap year, is the feast of S Mathias: and it is observable
that that day which is added to the year every leap year, is not placed at
the beginning or ending of the year, or any month, but is made to be the five
and twentieth day of the month. Upon the five and twentieth of March is the
Annuutiation of the blessed Virgin. Upon the five and twentieth of April is S.
Marks day. When Pope. Gregory reformed the Kale^der, they rejected the golden
number 19; by which means they made a twofold Epact of 25, of which one is
written thus, 25, the other thus xxv* or in a different color, but this is not
mine own observation, but of a learned man; who also added, that until be
could see some reason why the Jesuits fastened this conceit upon 25 rather then
any other number, he should impute it to their affectation of this number above
all other.
Upon the five and twentieth of July is S. James day. And which is more
remarkable then all these, the feast of S. Barthol. is celebrated at Rome upon
the five and twentieth day of August, as their Breviary witnesses, although in
all other places it be celebrated one day sooner. And this particular seems
plainly to testify their affectation of the twenty fifth day: because although
all those holy days above recited, have been celebrated in all places upon the
five and twentieth days of several months by the authority By comparing the
59 ver. of the first chap. of the first book of the Macab with the 7 verse of
the sixth Chap of the second book of Mac. it seems probable that the birth day
of Antiochus was the five and twentieth day of the month.
of the Church of Rome, yet they would have the City of Rome it self to be
singular in this, that it should celebrate one five and twenty day more then
all the world beside. And to this purpose it may be here observed, that
Antiochus who was almost in all things a type of Antichrist, failed not in
this, but of all the days of the month, he and his officers did solemnize the
five and twentieth day by offering sacrifice upon the Idol Altar on that day,
and by their monthly persecutions of the Jews, as it appears in the first
book of the Maccabees cap. 1. verse. 59.

CHAP. 27. Objections answered concerning the fractions of the Root of 666.
That the Root of 666 is more exactly applicable to the Papacy then the root of
any square number could have been.
HAving now, as I believe, sufficiently proved all that I have above promised
concerning the application of the number twenty five unto the Papacy, both in
respect of such things as are essential to this application, and also in
respect of such things as are perhaps only accidentally adventitious unto it: I
come now to answer such general objections as may be made against all that
has been yet said, and to show that howsoever some things may be objected
which seem to make against this interpretation, yet they being duly considered
and well examined, are a full confirmation of it; and do open a door to the
finding out of as great, if not greater mysteries concerning the Papacy, as
any of those which have been hitherto declared.

First, it may be objected concerning the root of the number 666, that the root
is not precisely 25, but a surd number between 25 and 26; and that therefore if
in this mystery the number 25 be chiefly aimed at, it is probable that the
wisdom of God would have led us to the finding out of this number 25, rather
by commanding us to count and extract the root of the number 625, then the
number 666.

Secondly, supposing the root to be 25 (as it is most certain that it is) it
may be objected concerning the number of the College of the Cardinals at their
first institution, that their number was not 25 but 26, because the Pope
numbreth himself among the Cardinals, as he is Peter's successor, in his
Apostleship. And because he is a Cardinal and so accounted. Item Papa se
annumerat inter Cardinales secundu^ Archid* in capitale Sacro* sancta. 22.
distinct. Sicut imperator ponitur de numero Senatorum. Lib. Ius Senatoru^ cap.
de dignitatibus. I^cobatius de council. number. 176.


To the first objection it might be replied, that although the root of 666, may
in some sense be said to be a surd number; yet it is to have its denomination,
not from any square number exceeding the number given, but from the greatest
square number contained in the number 666, as it is above said, and as by those
that have written of this part of Arithmaticke is sufficiently declared: yet if
it be granted that roots of numbers may sometimes have their denomination, as
well from the next square number exceeding the number given, as from the
greatest square number contained in it: this does rather confirm then
prejudice the truth of this application, as it shall be anon declared.

To the second objection, it might be answered, that as Christ was not numbered
among the Apostles, nor properly was an Apostle, but was their Lord and Master,
so the Pope, as he pretends himself to be Vicarius Christi, is not, nor can be
numbered among the Cardinals, but is their Lord and Master: but yet, as the Pope
pretends himself to be Successor Petri, (and that as well in his Apostleship,
as in the Vicarship of Christ) in this respect it is nothing prejudicial to
the application of the root of the number 666 to the Papacy, if it be granted
that he may in some sort be numbered among them. For howsoever I say that these
two objections may be thus briefly answered, yet J choose rather by admitting
something to be true in either, to show how these two objections do
reciprocally answer each other. For indeed either of these objections is a full
answer to the other; they are like two earthen vessels, of which if one be
knocked against the other, both are dissolved. All that can be concluded from
the first objection is, that howsoever the root of 666 be expressly 25, that yet
in some respect it may be said to be 26, because sometimes, and in some cases,
although not properly, roots of numbers may have their denomination, a numero
quadrato simpliciter proximo, from the next square number, although it exceed,
and be not contained in the number given. All that can be concluded from the
second objection is, that howsoever the first expressly decreed number of the
Cardinals was 25, yet if the Pope be numbered among them, as in some respect he
may and ought to be, that then that number may in some respect be said to have
been 26, as therefore the first objection proves the root of 666 to be
expressly ^25, and yet in some respect 26. So the second proves the original
number of Cardinals to have been 25, and yet in some respect 26. from both
therefore it may be concluded, that there is a greater similitude and likeness
between the root of 666, and the first number of that College and Corporation
which is Antichrist, then by any of those other things which are above said
could have been conceived or imagined. For if the number of the Beast had been
said to have been 625, the Quod Papa inter Cardinales connumeratur, signuest
pileus ex purpura qui in sepulchro Papae pingi so. let Hieron. Manfredus de
Cardinalibus cap. 9.
root of which number is so 25, that it can in no respect be said to be 26.
Then the Jesuits might with probability have alleged, that S. Peter was
numbered among the 12 Apostles, and that the Pope being his Successor actually
is and ought to be numbered among the Cardinals, and that after the Popes death
to testify that he was still a Cardinal, it is one of the usual ceremonies
at the Popes funeral, that a Cardinals hat should be painted upon his coffin:
and that therefore the first original number was 26, and not 25. Contrariwise,
if the number of the Beast had been said to have been 676, the root of which
number is so 26, that it can in no respect be said to be 25, then it would have
been alleged, that the Pope is Vicarius Christi, and that as Christ was not
numbered among the Apostles, so the Pope ought not to be numbered among the
Cardinals: and that therefore the first decreed number by Marcellus was 25, and
not 26: and against this objection J see not what could have been materially
replied.

But the wisdom of God foreseeing all these difficulties and ambiguities, and
intending to declare exactly the true number of the first foundation of that
College of Cardinals, whereof the Pope is head, and knowing that it could not
be foretold absolutely without ambiguity, by one number only (because it is
absolutely unpossible to say truly, that that number was absolutely in all
respects 25, or that it was absolutely in all respects 26, for as the Pope is
Vicarius Christi, so it was 25 and not 26. But as he is Successor Petri, and as
he is numbered among the Cardinals, so it is 26 and not 25.) does therefore set
down this number 666, that by our counting and extracting the root of this
number he might lead us unto these two numbers the number 25, and the number
26, the last unities of both which numbers, are as two indivisible extremes
and limits, without and beyond which, this number of Antichrists foundation* is
not found, and between which, the very ambiguity of this numbers termination is
in such an admirable manner contained and confined, that although it may in
diverse respects be said to be either of them; yet it can in no respect be said
either to be any other number without, that is extra, not sine.
without, or beyond them: or to be so between them, that it may be said to be
neither of them. For as the root of 666 cannot be said to be any number which
is greater then 26, nor to be any number which is less then 25, so neither can
it be truly said, that it is neither 25; nor 26. But as the original number of
the foundation of that College was either 25, or 26, which way soever it be
understood: so the root of 666 (considered as an absolute number in nudis
essentialibus, as it ought to be) is one of these two numbers, take it which
way you will. For if this number 666, be considered as it is an absolute number
in it self, and as it is quantitas discreta only, then the root of this
number cannot at all be said to be between 25 and 26, either as medium
participationis, or as medium abnegationis. Not as medium abnegationis, because
it may be said to be either, and in diverse respects (although not by equal
propriety of speech) to be both of the extremes: not as medium
participationis, because in absolute numbers, unities immediately succeeding
each other, do admit no latitude, either of extension, or denomination between
them; and because all unities in absolute numbers are simpliciter and absolute
indivisibiles, that is, such as cannot be divided into parts, either of the
same, or of any other denomination. Wherefore as it is absurd and impossible,
to say that the number of Cardinals at the first foundation of their College,
was 25 Cardinals and half a Cardinal; or 25 Cardinals and three quarters of a
Cardinal: so is it as unproper and unpossible to say that the root of 666
(being considered in puris essentialibus, and as an absolute number) is 25
unities and half an unity, or 25 unities and three quarters of an unity. But
as the root of this number is properly and expressly 25, and yet in some respect
26: so the number of Cardinals was properly and expressly 25, as it is above
proved, and yet if the Pope be numbered among them, it may in that respect be
said to be 26. For because such a number was chosen and expressed to be the
number of the Beast, as had a surd number for it is root, it is therefore
certain that the manner how the original number of Cardinals was terminated,
is ambiguous, and such as could not by one number only be expressed. For the
choice of such a number as had a surd root, does not make that which is
certain in it self, to be ambiguous unto us, but it makes the very ambiguity
it self to be certain, that is, it makes us certainly know, that although 25
should be the only express and first decreed number of Cardinals; yet that
the Pope himself (howsoever he be Primus in ordine and of another
denomination) may, and must in some respect be numbered among them, and may, and
must in some respect be excluded from them. And being the Pope must be numbered
among them, as he is Successor Petri in his Apostleship, and must not be
numbered among them, as he is Vicarius Christi, or as he is Successor Petri in
his Vicarship of Christ, why may it not therefore be said, that the Root of
this number does foretell, not only the number of the Cardinals, but also,
that the Pope should pretend himself to be, both Vicarius Christi, and
Successor Petri. But however this may be, or seem to be too nice and intricate,
yet I am persuaded that those few which fully understand what the surd root of
a number is, and how it ought to be denominated, cannot but confess that here
is a strange and extraordinary similitude, between the By the Papacy I
understand that College of Cardinals of which the Pope is bea^.
Papacy in its first original, and the root of the number 666; and perhaps
the likeness is so great, and so great, and so exquisite, that man's
understanding is not able fully to comprehend it, nor the tongues of Angels to
express it. And thus much I conceive to be sufficient to have said in way of
answer to such objections as are above mentioned, and that a reason might be
showed, why it was neither possible nor convenient, that any perfect square
number, could so perfectly characterise the Papacy, as some one of those
numbers which are contained between the number 625, and the number 676. But yet
it may be here farther added, that although the number 25 be simpliciter, and
may be truly said to be the root of all those numbers which are contained
between those two square numbers 625 and 676, yet the number 26, may secundum
quid, that is, in some respect, be also said to be the root of so many of those
numbers as are nearer unto 676 then to 625, and for this reason it was most
convenient, that the number of the Beast should be greater then the number For
if any number less then 650, and greater 'then 625 had been taken, th^n the
root had been 25, both taking minus ve^e, and also taking proxi^ vero pro
vero, and so by consequence it could in no respect have been said to be 26, as
in some respects it was necessary i^ should b^.
650, and less then 676: that so taking proximum vero pro vero, it might in
some respect, although not properly, be said to be 26. * But speaking properly
and strictly, the root of 666, can be said to be no other Cardinal number but
25. because Quod inest in dicitur de, and quod non inest in non dicitur de,
that is, because it is to have it is denomination from the greatest square
number contained in the number 666, and not from that number which is not
contained in it, as it is above declared.

CHAP. 28. A farther and a full answer to all objections about the Root of 666,
drawn from the consideration of the figure of that number, by which the figure
of the City of Rome is exactly expressed.
A Reason may be yet farther demanded, why of all those numbers which are
between 650 and 676, there was no other number expressed to be the number of
the Beast, but only the number 666, to which I answer, that as it was most
convenient for the reasons above alleged, that the number of the Beast should
be between those two numbers; so there may be many reasons here alleged, why
the number 666 was chosen rather then any other. First, it may be said that no
other number whose root was 25, could be expressed by the numerall letters of
the Beasts name, as concerning the word (...), and diverse other names of this
Beast, in diverse languages has been, and may be observed.

Secondly, it may be said that the number 666 was chosen rather then any other
number, whose root was 25, that by the two last figures of this number, or by
the number signified by the two last figures of this number, there might be an
allusion to that image mentioned Dan. cap 3. whose height was 60 Cubits, and
the breadth 6 Cubits. Which Image as Mr Forbs does not without probability
intimate, may very fitly shadow forth the Papacy. For as diverse Nations,
Tongues, and Languages were allured with all kinds of Music, and enforced by
the fiery furnace, to fall down and worship that Image: so diverse nations and
languages have been both allured by the music of all kinds of flatteries and
false doctrines, and also enforced by fiery Furnaces and other torments, to
fall down and worship that Idol Shepherd at Rome. But as Nebuchadnezzar to
his great astonishment, saw four men walking in the midst of the fire, instead
of those three which fell down bound at the first: so the Pope to his terror
may behold, that the number of Protestants increases daily notwithstanding his
fiery persecutions, and those that heretofore lay dead for a time, in the
street of the great City which spiritually is called Sodom and Egypt, do now
stand upon their feet again in greater numbers, and cause fear to fall upon
their enemies.

But if neither of these reasons, nor any thing yet said, give satisfaction to
judicious readers, nor show sufficient cause why the number 666 should be
chosen rather then 625, or any other number whose root is 25; yet I am
confident that that reason being added to it, which I shall now set down in
the last place concerning the figure of the number 666, cannot but give full
satisfaction to all such as understand it. For as the root of 144 is opposed to
the root of 666, so also is the figure of that number opposed to the figure of
this, and as the root of 666 exceeds the root of 144 by a double proportion and
somewhat more, so the figure of 666, exceeds the figure of the number 144, by a
double proportion and somewhat more. And as diverse mysteries have been already
found out, by the application of the root of the number 666, to such things as
pertain to the Papacy: so there remain some mysteries to be found out, by
application of the figure of the same number to the City of Rome. For as the
actual application of that number which is the root of 144, to such things as
are mentioned in the description of the new Jerusalem, does guide, and direct,
and as it were confine the application of that number which is the root of 666,
to such things as are answerable and opposite unto them: so the actual
application of that figure which is the figure of the number 144, to that new
And the city lies four^ square, ^ed the length is as large as the breadth,
etc. Rev. 21. 16.
Jerusalem described in the Revelation, is both an example and a warrant,
showing how that figure which is the figure of the number 666, ought to be
applied to that City which is answerable and opposite to Jerusalem. If
therefore a reason be yet demanded, why the number 666 ought to be chosen to be
the Beasts number, rather then any other whose root was 25. I answer, that for
what reason soever the number 144 was chosen rather then any other number,
whose root was 12; for the same reason was the number 666 chosen, rather then
any other number, whose root was 25. But no better reason can be given or
imagined, why the number 144 should be chosen rather then 145, or 146, or 154,
or any other number, whose root is 12, but only because the figure of this
number, is a perfect figure perfectly representing the figure of the City
Jerusalem; and therefore it may be concluded, that no better reason ought to
be expected, why ^66 should be chosen rather then any other number whose root
was 25, but only because the figure of this number, does perfectly represent
the figure of the city of Rome. Now therefore that the truth of this may
appear, I must briefly express what figurated numbers are.

The sum of that which Euclide and others have written de numeris planis
figuratis, that is, of flat superficial figurated numbers, is, that those
numbers only are figurated numbers, which can be produced and made, either by
the multiplication of one number by it self, or by the multiplication of some
one number by another number: as for example, the number 12 is a figurated
number, because it may be produced and made by the multiplication of the number
3 by the number 4, and also by the multiplication of the number 2 by the number
6, as by the following figures, wherein 12 unities are placed according right
angles, and equal distances, may plainly appear.



But the number 13 or 11 can by no means be reduced to any That is, to any
quadrangular figure straight lines and rectangles either of equal or unequal
sides.
figure, wherefore they are not figurated numbers, neither can so many unities
be placed any manner of way, but still there will be something wanting to make
the square figure complete, or something redundant which does exceed it; as
these examples show.



The number 30 is a figurated number, because three times ten, or five times
six make this number, as these examples show.



And by these examples it may be observed, that the same number may have diverse
figures. And when it so falls out that the same number may be varied into
diverse figures, then that figure which comes nearest unto the equilaterall
square figure is the most perfect figure. For, Quadratum aequalium laterum is
perfectissimum in suo genere, and the equilaterall square figure is capacissima
figura, the most capacious figure, of all Isoperimentrall figures consisting of
4 straight lines. But Quadratum oblongum, that is, such a figure as is longer
one way then the other, is a figure which is more or less perfect, either as
it approaches nearer, or as it is farther distant from the perfect square of
equal sides. Now when the figure of any given number is sought after, that is
still to be accounted the figure of that number, which either is a perfect
square, or nearest unto it. For when the same number is capable of diverse
figures, the rule is, Denominatio sit a praestantiori, that is, the most
perfect figure is to give denomination to the number. As for example the number
144. may be made either by multiplying 12 by 12, or 9 by 16, as these examples
do show.





Yet this number is named a perfect square number of equal sides, from the
more perfect figure, and not from the other; and this, and not the other,
shows the true figure of the City Jerusalem.

Now then that the true figure of Antichrists City may be found out, let us
seek after the figure of the number 666: for the most perfect figure that this
number is capable of, is as exactly applicable to Rome, as the most perfect
figure of the opposite number is to Jerusalem. The nearest way that J know to
find whether any number given, be a figurated number or not, and to find what
is the most perfect figure of it, is to divide the number given by its own
root, and severally by all such numbers as are less then it, if after the
performance of every several division, there do some fractions remain, then
is the number given no figurated number; but so many times as there do no
fractions remain, of so many several figures is that number capeable, of all
which figures, that which either is the equiliterall square, or else that which
is hear unto it, is the most perfect figure which is sought after. I divide
therefore the number 666 by 25, the quotient is 26, and the fractions are 16 /
25 so that it does not yet appear to be a figurated number, but by this first
computation it appears to be no perfect square number of equal sides, as 144
is; and therefore by this first division it may be concluded negatively, that
the City of Antichrist is not of an equilaterall square fiigure as Jerusalem
was. In the next place I take away one unity from the number 25, and I do
again divide the number 666 by the number 24, the quotient is 27, and the
fractions remaining and because there be fractions remaining, it does not yet
appear to be a figurated number, in the next place J divide the number 666 by
23, the quotient is 28, the fractions remaining are 22 / 23. In like manner if
the number 666 be divided by 22, the fractions remaining are 6 / 22. If by 21,
the fractions are 15 / ^^. If by 20, the fractions are 6 / 2^. If by 19, the
fraction is one unity, but if it be divided by 18, the quotient is 37, and no
fraction remains; by this therefore it may be concluded that 18 being
multiplied by 37, the product must be 666, and therefore this number is a
figurated number, and that the most perfect figure of it is, Quadratum If
furlongs be added to these numbers, it comes near to show also the quantity
of the City, for Rome is, or ^^^ long since has been, about 37 furlongs in
length, and about 18 in breadth, and does, or has contained about 666 furlongs
of square measure, but as this manner of measuring the City of Antichrist is
not drawn from the like example of the opposite numbers of Jerusalem; so
neither is it so exact as the manner of measuring which is thence derived.
oblongum proportione quasi dupla, that is, an oblong square figure in which
the length exceeds the breadth by a double proportion and somewhat more; as by
this figure may appear.



Now how fitly this figure agrees with the figure of the City of Rome let all
men judge, and show if they can any one regular figure that comes nearer unto
it. There ca^ be no greater testimony for the truth of this, then the testimony
of those who nether knew, nor aimed at any such application as I do, and yet
have affirmed the figure of the City of Rome to be the same with this, as a
late learned Commentator upon the Revelation has affirmed in these words, Iam
vero Roma hodiernaseu Pontificia ambitum Commentationum Apocallyp. part. 2. p.
152.
habet nonnisi 13 aut 15 milliarium, ut norunt, inquit Lipsius, qui dimensi
sunt; formam ut and ex ichnographia ejus videre est, quadrangulari proximam
oblongam proportione quasi The Disegno and Ritrato of Rome, set forth at
Venice, and fixed to Ortelius his Theatrum Orbis, is so delineated; and the
longitude being taken from the Castle of S. Angelo or mole di Adriano, to S.
John of Lateran, compared with the latitude, observed from Saint Peter's Church
in the Vatican, to the Church called S. Maria dell'opulo, carries the very
same double proportion mentioned by Lipsius. Thus I have been informed, but
cannot yet procure the sight of that book.
dupla. I do therefore now conclude, that as the most perfect figure which the
number 144 is capeable of, shows and represents the true figure of the
City Jerusalem; so the most perfect figure that the number 666 is capeable
of, shows and represents the true figure of the City of Rome. These things
are so certain and perspicuous to all such as do understand what figurated
numbers are, that I am persuaded they cannot, nor will not desire a more
satisfying reason, why the number 666 was named to be the number of the Beast,
rather then 625, or any other number whose root may be said to be 25;
especially if they do consider these three things. First, how great a mystery
concerning the figure of the City of Rome, is by this means revealed.
Secondly, how plainly and expressly this reason is warranted and confirmed, by
the evident application of the figure of the opposite number to the opposite
City Jerusalem. And thirdly, it may be observed, that if but one unity be
added unto, or subtracted All such numbers as are included between the two
square numbers 625 and 676, either are no ^igurated numbers at all, as 661,
659, 669, etc. or else are such whose most Perfect figures do plainly differ
from the figure of 666, and therefore from the figure of Rome.
from the number 666, the figure of it is quite altered and changed, and such
as either comes nearer to Jerusalem then Rome, as the figure of 667, or such
as differs more from the true figure of Rome, then that figure which is above
expressed. And thus much of the figure of Rome, and of the figure of the number
666, by which perhaps many other things may also be found out.

CHAP. 29. Objections answered, and difficulties cleared, (even to such as have
no knowledge in Arithmetic) concerning those solid figures and numbers, by
which the several measures of the compass of Rome, and the new Jerusalem may
be found out. Also some other objections briefly answered.
HAving now found out the true figure of Antichrists City, some things may be
here added to that which is above said concerning the measures of it; and so
much the rather because those imaginary measures of the new Jerusalem, by
which the true measures of the literal Jerusalem are truly, though mystically
described, do as well depend upon the figure of the City there expressed, as
upon the solid number which is there named. For it may be objected that that
imaginary solid figure by which the perimeter of the new Jerusalem was found
out, was made only by multiplying the whole Area into the length, or into the
breadth of it self; and that therefore that imaginary solid figure, by which
the perimeter of the opposite City is to be found out, ought not to be a Cube,
as it is above said, but ought to be made only by the multiplication of the
Area by the length or breadth of it self, having also respect unto the figure
of it. To this objection I answer, that although the Area or Basis of a Cube be
not like in figure to the Area of the City of Rome, ye it may be equal in
compass unto it; and perhaps the literal Jerusalem was not exactly and
precisely of an equilaterall square figure, and yet it may be equal in
compass with that cube mentioned in the description of the new Jerusalem. But
yet nevertheless J grant that such an imaginary solid figure, as this
objection aymeth at, and such a one as is not a perfect Cube, but is agreeable
and applicable to the figure of the City of Rome, may be deduced fitly and
analogically from the opposite measures of the new Jerusalem, and may also
truly show the measures of the City of Rome, as by these figures following
shall be declared.

The first Figure.
25000 S^^d. sol. The number 18 and 37, are not here placed to show the true
lineall measures of ihese figures, but to show the proportion of them.




The second Figure.
25000 Stad. Sol.



The solid measures of both these solid figures must be understood to be 25000
furlongs, that so they may be answerable to those 12000 furlongs, which are the
true measure of the opposite solid figure, raised upon the square Area of
Jerusalem, by multiplying the Area it self by its own length or breadth. For
so likewise these two figures are made by multiplying the Area of the City of
Rome by its length in the one figure, and by its breadth in the other figure.
For because the length of this Area differs from the breadth, therefore two
solid figures arise from their several measures; whereas by the Area of
Jerusalem, in which the length and breadth are all one, there can but one
solid figure be produced. Now because these two solid figures (of which one is
equal in height to the breadth of the Area of Rome, and the other equal in
height to the length of the Area of Rome) cannot be both of them truly applied
to the measures of Rome at the same time, and because no reason can be given,
why one should be taken rather then the other (they being both derived,
precisely after the same manner, from the figure and measures of the Area of
Rome) as the opposite solid figure is from the Area of Jerusalem. Therefore
they must both of them truly express the measures of the City of Rome, but at
diverse times. The first figure in which the height of this imaginary City is
equal to the breadth of the Area, shows the measures of the Area of Rome, at
that time in which Antichrist began first to lift up himself and to bear sway
in it. The second figure, in which the height of this imaginary City is
increased from being equal to the breadth of the Area to be equal to the
length of it, shows the measures of the Area of Rome, at that time when the
pride of Antichrist shall be at the highest, and when his Kingdom shall begin
to be topheavie, and to threaten a downfall both to it self, and to those
that depend upon it. Whosoever therefore desires to know how many furlongs in
compass Rome heretofore was, when it was at the greatest that it has been at,
since the first remarkable foundation of the Papacy; let him by computation
find out the Which perimeter if I have rightly cast it, is about 140 furlongs
and od paces, that is 17 miles and an halse etc: which measure as it is less
then the compass of Rome as it was under the heathen Emperors, so is it
greater then most writers have affirmed it to be at any time since the Pope
ruled in it.
perimeter of the first solid figure above mentioned, supposing the solid
content of the figure to be 25000 furlongs. And whosoever desires to know how
many furlongs in compass Rome was, when it was in its greatest perfection,
beauty and stability, that has been incident unto it, since the first
remarkable foundation of the Papacy; let him by computation find out the Which
is 14 miles and an halse, and almost halse a quarter of a mile. as is above
showed.
perimeter of that solid Cube, of which I have above spoken, supposing the
solid content of itto be 25000 furlongs. And lastly, whosoever desires to
know, how many furlongs in compass Rome now is, or shall be when it shall be
at the least that ever it shall be at, before its utter ruin and destruction,
let him by computation find out the Which is, if I have rightly cast it, 1 10
furlongs, and 66 paces, that is 13 miles and 3 quarters. which measure how
near it comes to that which some late writers have observed, may appear by
these words of Georgius Braun and Franciscus Hoggenbergius. Quod si urbem ad
nostrae aetatis co^suetudinem met^ri volemus, vix passuum millia 14 omnis Romae
and ^aniculae five Transtiberinae regionis, and Vaticani ambitus implebit in
Indice 3o Appendic: ad civitates orbis.
perimiter of the second solid figure above mentioned, supposing the solid
content of that figure to be 25000 furlongs, and he shall be then resolved that
the wisdom of God by the root and figure of this number 666, has so
exquisitely set down and foretold all the differing remarkable magnitudes of
the City of Rome since the Pope ruled in it, that there is no imaginable
exactness wanting. But because these things are dark and intricate, and those
which have not (and many which have) a competent knowledge in Geometry cannot
yet readily find out the perimeter of a solid figure having only the solid
content and proportion of the whole figure given, but none of the lineall
measures, therefore such as would have the truth of these things made plain
and evident, even to their senses, may consider, that it is a true rule, vt
pondus ponderi, ita Solidum solido, that is, As weight to weight, so is solid
measure to solid measure. If therefore one ounce of soft wax, or clay, or any
other Homogeniall substance be taken, and be molded and fashioned according to
the figure of a Cube, whose length breadth and height are equal, and be
supposed to represent 1000 solid furlongs; then the length of one of the sides
of this little Cube, being divided into 10 parts, every one of those parts do
represent the true length of one furlong. (for 1000 is a perfect and exact
Cubicall number, whose Cubicall root is 10.) Let there be therefore a scale
made or a line divided, containing 100 or 200 of those parts or divisions. And
a line being thus divided let there be another piece of the same wax taken,
being in weight precisely twelve times as much as the former, if the former
little Cube were one ounce in weight, then let this be just 12 ounces, and let
it be made and fashioned according to the figure of a Cube. Then let the
compass or perimeter of this greater Cube be measured by those divisions of
the little Cube, or by the scale above mentioned, and the perimeter of it will
appear to our senses, and will be found to be 91 of those divisions, and some
fractions remaining; as it is above showed, that the measure of the compass of
the new Jerusalem is 91 furlongs and some odd paces. Then let there be
another piece of the same wax taken, being 25 ounces in weight, and let it be
made into a Cubicall figure also. And let the compass of this be measured by
the same divisions above mentioned, and it will be found to be 116 of those
divisions and some fractions remaining. Then let the same Cube or another piece
of the same wax equal in weight unto it, be molded into an oblong solid
rectangular figure having 4 equal sides, the length exceeding the breadth or
thickness by a double proportion and somewhat more, as 37 is to 18, so that it
may be like in its proportions, to the first of the two figures above
mentioned, in which the height is equal to the breadth of the Area: and then
let the perimeter of the Basis or Area of this figure be measured by those
divisions of the little Cube first mentioned, and it will be found to be above
140 furlongs as is above said. Lastly let the same piece of wax or another
equal in weight unto it be transformed into the figure and proportions of the
second figure above mentioned, in which the height is equal to the length of
the Area of the same figure: and then let the perimeter of the Basis or Area be
measured by the same divisions of the scale and little Cube first made, and the
perimeter will be found to be, about 110 furlongs as is above said. And by this
means J suppose, those that have little, or no insight in Arithmetic, may
understand and see, how the perimeter of the new Jerusalem is mystically
expressed by the measures of a solid Cubicall figure in the 21 Chap. of the
Revelation; and may also conceive how the diverse measures of the mystical
Babylon or new Rome, may be, mutatis mutandis, analogically deduced from them.

If it be objected against that which J have above said concerning the solid
measure of the new Jerusalem, and consequently against all that I have above
said of the measures of Rome; that according to some Copies and Editions, the
words in the text are not, (...). but (...). that is, not twelve thousand, but
(as some interpret it) twelve times twelve thousand. J answer first, that that
reading which I have followed, is most generally and commonly received.
Secondly, that these words (...), do more properly and more probably signify
twelve thousand and twelve which causes no considerable alteration in the
measures) then twelve times twelve thousand. For if that number had been
intended, then it should have been said, (...), or rather (...), or (...).
Lastly, supposing both these diverse readings of this text were equally
probable, yet being the measure of 12000 furlongs, does agree with the measures
of the same City set down by Ezechiel, and the measure of twelve times twelve
thousand cannot agree with them, therefore that is the true reading, and not
this. For by what means can we better interpret a doubtful and ambiguous
place of Scripture, then by comparing it with another place of Scripture, which
is clear and out of question.

If it be objected, that 12000 furlongs cannot be the exact measure of the new
Jerusalem, because the new Jerusalem is an exact Cubicall figure, but 12000
is not an exact Cubicall number. I answer, that howsoever some Authors which
do write of these measures, do seem to imply some such objection, concerning
the solid measure; and Lira concerning the square measure of the Area of this
City, where he endeavors to apply this number 12000 unto it; yet there is no
reality in this objection. For, that 12000, or any other number, which is not a
perfect Cubicall number, or a perfect square number, may yet be the exact solid
measure of a Cube; and may exactly express the superficial measure of an
exactly square figure, is a certain and undoubted truth which cannot be denied,
although perhaps some men do not suddenly and easily conceive it.

J have now, as J hope, sufficiently answered all such objections, as J do yet
know, can be materially objected against the substance of that which I have
above written. And I am willing to publish these things (notwithstanding I
cannot but discover much ignorance and weakness with them) that J may know what
more can be objected against them. Wherefore J do humbly and earnestly desire,
those religious, wise, and learned men, which do not yet believe that the Pope
is Antichrist, nor that this is the true interpretation of his number, that
they would not conceive their own apprehensions, which seem to make against
these positions, so paraeneticall, as if nothing but vain jangling, could be
replied unto them. Let them publish them to the world, that Truth may be
discovered, errors confuted, the Church enlightened, Antichrist revealed, and
God glorified. They may perhaps receive satisfaction beyond their expectation,
if not from me, yet from those who are better able to defend so much truth as I
have written then I my self can be. As for Romish Catholics, especially such
as are seducers of others, and such as are truly Italionated, J do well know
that no evidence of truth is sufficient to convince them; and that although a
man should bray them in a mortar with a pestle, yet would they not cease to
gainsay those truths, which they are not able to confute. But for those of
their laity, who out of ignorance and simplicity are seduced by them (of which
there are many in this Kingdom) I do rather pray for their conversion, then
desire their confusion, and that God would vouchsafe to open their eyes, that
they may wonder at themselves, for having been so long deceived by those
hypocrites at Rome; who are that very Synagogue of Satan, and that corporation
of false Prophets, in whom dwells bodily, the fullness of that spirit of
Antichrist, and the fullness of that spirit of error, which was to come into
the world. For the farther manifestation of which truth, if it has pleased God
to discover any thing by me; it is, because he is sometimes pleased to show his
strength in weakness, and to choose things that are weak, and things that are
despised, to bring to naught things that are mighty. To him therefore, who is
the only wise God, and who will in due time discover all necessary truths to
his Church, be all Glory and Praise for ever. AMEN.

FINIS.

