A PRACTICAL ABSTRACT Of the Arts, of Fortification and Assailing.

Containing Four different Methods of Fortifications, with approved rules, to
set out in the Field, all manner of superficies, Intrenchments and approches, by
the demi Circle, or with lines and Stakes.

Written for the benifit of such as delight in the Practice of these noble Arts.

By David Papillon Gent:

I have diligently perused this Abstract: and do approve it, well worthy of
the Public view.

Imprimatur

Io: Booker.



London Printed by R: Austin and are to be sold at the south side of the
Exchange and in Popes head Alley 1645

Tho: Cross f^cit
engraved title page

PLUS GLADIVS, QVAM SCEPTRA VALENT.

TOMAS FAIREFAX. ANAGRAMMA. FAX ERIT FAMOSA.

THOMAS FAIRFAX.

Generalis exercitus Anglicani Mirare tacitus, fataque vergant vide.

IN ANAGRAMMA.

Ferri-Fax erit haec patriae Famosa salutem Civibus ense suis exitiumore fereus.

portrait of Thomas Fairfax

TO HIS EXCELLENCY, Sir THOMAS FAIRFAX, Generallisime of the Forces of the
honorable Houses of Parliament.
Excellentisime,
IF the subject of this Abstract were rightly considered, it would appear to
all ingenious spirits, that the dedication of it does properly appertain to
your Excellency, as the most experienced Commander in the Art of War, of all
these Northern parts, as it may appear by your Martial achievements; having,
like a lightning, past this Summer from the North part of this Kingd me, to the
utmost point of the West of it; throwing down, like a rapid Torrent, the banks
that did endeavor to stop his course: and therefore the better able to judge
aright of the benefit that might redound to the State, if these Methods of
Fortifications were observed in the Works of our Garrisons; and these field The
Arts of Defense and Assailing are two of the most essential parts of ^he Art
of War.
intrenchments, and double entrenched Camps here described, were used in all
our formidable sieges and pitched battles; the neglect of which has been one
of the maine secondary Causes of the spinning out of this unnatural War.

But since it has pleased God to raise you to that eminency of place, that
affords you power to rectify these defects; I have presumed to tender to your
Excellency these essays, The neglect of these intrenchm^nts is to be rectified.
containing some approved directions, for the future, of the Works of our
Garrisons; and for the double entrenched Camps, that we are of necessity to
make use of, if we intend to give (by the gracious favor of God) a speedy and
a blessed period to the miseries of this poor and desolated Kingdom.

If I were not assured that you are extraordinarily well versed in the ancient
and modern Histories, I should endeavor by manifold instances, to persuade
you to be the restorer (in these Northern parts) of the Military Discipline of
the ancient Romans, and of the field-intrenchments, and double entrenched
Camps, whereby See Caesar's Commentaries in the vvaries of the Gauls and of
Africa.
Caesar made himself the absolute Monarch of the world, as Maurice Prince of
Orange was the restorer of them in the Netherlands, to his eternal fame. For
certainly, it is the only means, after Gods favor, to conduce these civil
distractions to a speedy and a blessed accommodation: but being confident that
these things are familiar to you, I will refer them to your judicious
consideration; and only beseech you to be pleased, out of your gracious
affability to all men, and particularly to my self, to be the Mecaenas was
the Emperor Augustus Caesar's favorite, and the Patron of learning.
Mecoenas to these Essays, and to accept of them with the like affection, as
Artaxerxes the great King of Persia received two hands full of fresh water,
that were presented unto him by a poor Subject of his, for want of a better
gift to express his love: So shall I for ever be obliged to remain

Your Excellencies most humble, and devoted Servant, DAVID PAPILLON.
From London, Jan. 1. 1645.
To the Reader.
SOme will corceive this time unseasonable for the publishing of this Abstract,
because of the prosperous success of our Armies this summer, and therefore
(say they) it were more seasonable to write of razing to the ground our old
Garrisons, then to write of directions to erect new: I answer, that I wish
their conceits should prove real truths, for although I write of two of the
most essential parts of the Art of War, yet I daily pray and wish that all
the Inland. Garrisons in this Kingdom were razed to the ground, that his
sacred Majesty might the sooner return in love and peace to his most loyal
Parliament. But when I consider, First Consideration.
that the virulency of the humor of a Civil War is like a canker in a
woman's breast that never gives over the sucking of her blood, till by her death
he slay himself; and that the two parties of all civil wars, Second
Consideration.
may be compared to a couple of tennis-ball players, that have sometimes the
best, and sometimes the worst, one after another, and that they that do rely
over much upon their advantage, do commonly lose the game, I dis-assent in
judgment with these imaginary conceits.

For as a wise and learned Physician can partly guess by the symptoms of the
disease of his patient, The evidences that signify our miseries are not yet
come to their last period.
whether his sickness will be of a short or long continuance, even so
ingenious spirits, may partly guess by these ensuing symptoms, visible to all
men, that the dangerous malady of this unnatural war, is not yet near her
crise.

First, by a general antipathie that continues still in the incliclination of
men. The symptoms of the general malady.


Secondly, by the Heresies, Sects and Schisms that rent and make greater
breaches in the Church, then ever was known since Queen Mary's days.

Thirdly, by the great obstinacy of such as would seem more holy, then their
Brethren, and yet prefer their own ends before Gods glory, and the unity
and concord of the Spouse of Christ.

These dangerous symptoms, I say, are evident signs that Englands mieseries
are not yet nea^e to their highest period, yet Gods ways are not like our
ways, for he can when he pleases, draw light out of darkness, and
deliverance from things that seem most destructive to his Church.

As concerning these that conceive the publishing of this Abstract unseasonable
at this time, and would have us because of this sumines prosperous success
cast our selves in the bed of a carnal security, I will prove by two
instances that there is nothing more dangerous then to rely upon prosperous
events, and upon our own^ p^^ts and activitie.

1 It is recorded that Attelante running the race in the Sea Plutarch in his
discourse of the Olympian Games.
Olympian games, did so rely upon her activitie, that she took up twice one
after another in her race, two golden balls, that her Antagonist did cast down
to retard her speed; and notwithstanding rec^vered her ground: but the third
pall being cas^, as it seems, too near the end of the race, she l^st by the
taking of it up, the Crown of honor due to the Victor: whereby it appears,
that consta cie in all things carries the bell away.

2 When See Hannibals Life, and Titus Livius Decads.
Hannibal did run the race against the Romans, for a Crown of no smaller value
then the Empire of the whole world, he was after the three famous victories
obtained against them, at the river Trebie, at the Lake of Trasymeine, and at
Cannis, in greater probability to obtain the Crown he ran for, then we are
at this present to obtain the Crown of the race of this unnatural war. And
yet by these defects; 1 By rel^ing overmuch upon his former success; 2 By
neglecting his advantages; 3 By casting himself in a bed of carnal security
in Capua, in stead to advance toward Rome with his Army, he lost not only the
Crown he strove for, but also his life and Commonweal.

These considerations and instances past, and these motives following, have
therefore induced me to publish this Abstract.

1 To procure the common safety. 2 To rectify the deformities of our
Fortifications. 3 To enlighten the meanest capacities, that delight in the
practice of these Arts.
For the first, it is certain and known to all men, that the insufficiency
of the works of our Garrisons, has been the secondarie cause, that diverse of
them have been lost suddenly and their Inhabitants rought to penu^ie. To
prevent this ev^ll for the future, I propose to our ^ounties four different
method^ ^f Fortifications, that they man make choice of the most ^u^^ble to
their means and abilities, assuring them that the meanest of these four
Method (...) stronger and ^^fer then their Mounts and winding Angle^; so they
observe the dimensions described here for every one of them.

For the second, the deformity of our Works is so great, and the errors in
the setting out of them so gross, that they serve only as an object of
derision to Forrainers that see them: And these errors proceed from a
selfe-conceitednesse inherent in some men of these days, that presume to have
skill in those things, in which they have no skill at all; for the most
mechanic^ll Artificers and Shopkeepers will be meddling with the spi^ituall
Function, and control Enginiers. And some Divines, in stead to feed their
flocks, do take upon them to be Sub-Committees of the fortifications of a
Garrison. And these dnorders are permitted by the over-frugalitie of some
Committees, to save an Englniers pay: a destructive frugalitie to themselves,
and to a whole County, as some have found by lamentable experience. Now to
avoid these errors for the time to come, I have in this Abstract set down
(without reservation) the proportions and dimensions they are to observe, and
from whence they are to draw the Lines of their Flanks, and of their Line of
defense to be convenient for the Cannon and Musket Shot, without which
observations no Fortification can be good, or serviceable.

For the third, the Theoricall writings of Mr. Ward, Mr. Cruso, Mr. Norwood,
and of the Author of the Enchyridion, have rather increased the ignorance of
mean capacities, then their knowledge in the practice of these Arts: For I
have co^ve^sed with some, that had all their rules upon their fingers ends,
that could not set out a Superficie in the field to any purpose, and that is
the reason why I write more plainly then they; or that I should otherwise have
done, if it had not been to enlighten the meanest capacities, that delight in
the practice of these noble Arts. Therefore if these Ess^yes of mine may any way
be profitable to thee, I shall attain to my wished end: If not, accept how
^o^ver my good will, since I can neither offer nor give more then I have
received from above. And so committing thee to the gracious protection of God,
I desire to rest

Thy servant in the Lord, David Papillon.
From London the first of January, 1645.
THE CONTENTS.
Chap. 1. Of the true character of a complete Enginier. Chap. 2. Of the
antiquity of the Art of Fortification. Chap. 3. Of the Nations that have
excelled, and do excel at this present time in the Art of Fortification. Chap.
4. Of the true use of the Art of Fortification. Chap. 5. Of the best, and of
the worst seats for Garrisons. Chap. 6. Of the Foreign Fortifications and
Dimensions. Chap. 7. Of the superficies contained in the first Plate. Chap. 8.
Of the superficies contained in the second Plate. Chap. 9. Of the superficies
contained in the third Plate. Chap. 10. Of the five Redonts contained in the
fourth Plate. Chap. 11. Of the two first methods of Fortification in general.
Chap. 12. Of the fortifications of the Equilaterall Triangle by Bastions with
Orillons, demonstrated in Plate 9. Chap. 13. Of the Fortifications of the
Square by Bastions with Orillons, demonstrated in Plate 10. Chap. 14. Of the
Fortifications of the Pentagon by Bastions with Orillons, demonstrated in Plate
11. Chap. 15. Of the Fortifications of the Ovall by Bastions without Orillons,
demonstrated in Plate 8. Chap. 16. Of the Fortifications of the Sexagon by
Bastions with Orillons, demonstrated in Plate 12. Chap. 17. Of the third Method
of Fortification, by Avant-guards, and Out-guards, and half Moons, in
general. Chap. 18. Of the extent of the sides or Bases of all manner of
superficies, and of the just length of the Line of Defense. Chap. 19. Of the
Fortifications of the superficie in the form of S. Michaels Cross, fortified
by eight half Moons, demonstrated in Plate 13. Chap. 20. Of the
Fortifications of the Paralograme, fortified by Avantguards, demonstrated in
Plate 14. Chap. 21. Of the Fortifications of the Equilaterall Triangle,
fortified by Avant-guards, demonstrated in Plate 15. Chap. 22. Of the
Fortifications of the Square, fortified by Avant-guards and Out-guards,
demonstrated in Plate 16. Chap. 23. Of the Fortifications of the Pentagon,
fortified by Avant-guards and out-guards, demonstrated in Plate 17. Chap. 24.
Of the Fortifications of the demi-Sexagon, fortified by Avant-guards, and
out-guards, demonstrated in Plate 18. Chap. 25. Of the fourth and last method
of Fortification by small Plankers in general. Chap 26. Of the Fortifications
of the Octogon fortified by small Flankers, demonstrated in Plate 19. Chap. 27.
Of the Fortification of the Paralograme, fortified by small Flankers,
demonstrated in Plate 20. Chap. 28. Of the Fortifications of the Square,
fortified by small Flankers, demonstrated by a Demi-Square, in Plate 21. Chap.
29. Of the Fortifications of the 24. Angle Poligon, fortified by small
Flankers, demonstrated in Plate 22. by a demi-Poligon of 12. Angles. Chap. 30.
Of the Fortifications of the mixed superficie, fortified by small Flankers and
three Redouts, demonstrated in Plate 23. Chap. 31. Of the Art of Assailing in
general. Chap. 32. Of the charge, and qualities of a prudent and experienced
Governor. Chap. 33. Of six different ways how strong Holds may be^ reduced.
Chap. 34. Of the opinion of experienced Commanders concerning sallies made by
the Defendents at the beginning of a Siege. Chap. 35. Of the entrenched Camp,
demonstrated in Plate 24. Chap. 36. Of the Batteries erected, and of the Mines
to be sprung against a besieged Garrison, demonstrated in Plate 25.
CHAP. I. Of the true Character of a complete Enginier.
AS the blessed success of an Army depends (after the favor of God) upon the
election of a wise and valiant General; so does the sufficiency of the works
of a Garrison depend upon the choice of a skillful Enginier. And the want of
this choice has been hitherto the essential cause, that sew or none of our
Garrisons have been fortified, as they ought to be; and why diverse of them have
been lost in eight and forty hours. Therefore to prevent this evil for the
future, I intend, in the first place, to speak of the qualities required in a
good Enginier, That the Committees of our Garrisons, to whom this choice
appertains, may be informed of them, to the end, they may hereafter be more
circumspect in their election.

1. He is to be religious; for Eccles. 2 15.
the fear of the Lord is the beginning of wisdom.

2. He is to be a soldier; for none can better judge of the sufficiency or
insufficiency of Fortifications, then they that have learned from their youth
to defend, and to take them.

3. He is to be a traveller; for he that has not seen variety of works, and
the excellency of foreign Fortifications, cannot perceive the defects of ours,
nor give directions to rectify them.

4. He is to be well versed in the Arithmetike for his calculations; in the
Geometry, for the setting out of all superficies; in the Architecture, for to
direct all manner of artificers; and in the other parts of the Mathematikes,
for the taking of distances depths, and elevations, and for the inventing and
the contriving of all manner of Engines and machines of war.

5. He is to be wise in all his proceedings, punctual in all his promises,
careful and diligent in his calling, and rather inclined to austerity then
lenity, or otherwise he will never be respected, served or obeyed.

6. He is to be of a solid judgment, and quick of apprehension, to judge
aright of the defects and advantages of places, of raising grounds, or hollows
that may endanger, or command a place committed to his trust, and what kind of
method of Fortification is most convenient for it; and which method, among the
rest, requires less men to man the works; or to judge of the weakest places of
a Garrison, if he be desired by his General to go with him to besiege a Town,
advising him where he is to begin his approaches, plant his batteries, where he
is to erect his bridges, if there be a river running of one side, or in the
midst of the Town, and how the line of communication is to be drawn to secure
his bridges; and what redoubts or flankers are required to fortify his Camp.
He is not to give account of his actions to any, but to the General, or to the
lieutenant General of the Ordnance; if he be in an Army, or in a Garrison, only
to the grand Committee, and to the Governor; and as for all other kind of
men, inhabitants, soldiers or officers; he is not bound to expostulate the
case, if they demand of him reasons for any thing he directs or commands to be
done; neither ought he, if he regards his reputation, and makes conscience of
his ways, to comply (when he is called to a Council of war, or before a full or
whole Committee) with the humor of the greatest in authority, or be led to
assent to any resolution, that is against the maxims of his Art, by the Logical
and Sophistical reasons and arguments of Scholars or Churchmen; for some of
them are now a days over-busie in things that go beyond their element, and
endeavor to over-sway Artists by rhetorike, considering not that their reasons
are no reasons at all to the reasons of art. And this last quality is the
essential part of a good Enginier; for all the other are but to small purpose
without this.

CHAP. II. Of the Antiquity of the Art of Fortification.
THe antiquity of this Art may be derived from the time of Nimrod Genesis 11.4, 9.
, for the Tower of Babel was an admirable structure, or Fortification, and from
that time it came to a higher degree of perfection in the days of Ninus and
Semiramis his Queen, that erected the incomparable Rampires, and unparalled
Towers, that did begirt the great City of Babylon, that were of such an
incredible strength, height and breadth, that See S Walter Rawley Histor.
Cyrus when he besieged the same, durst not attempt to assail it on the Land
side, but was enforced to drain the great river of Euphrates, into small
channels by the irksome and indefatigable labor of his great Army, and so
entered the same the very night that King Dan. 5.3.
Belshazzar was carousing with his Princes, wives and Concubines. We read also
that See Titus Livius in his Decade. 1.
Vejente was so strongly fortified, in the second century of years after the
foundation of Rome, that the Romans could not have reduced the same in ten
years siege, if Furius Camillus their General had not invented, at the later
end of the tenth year, the Art of mining, by which means he took the same, by
breaking in the middle of the City with his mine, while a general assault was
given by his Army, to draw all the soldiers and inhabitants of the City to man
and defend their Rampires. See S Walter Rawley in his history of the world.
Tyrus also was so strongly fortified in Alexander the greats days, that his
Army durst never assail their works on the Land side, but were enforced after
three years siege to erect a Mole, over a bay of the sea, of an incredible
structure, whereby it was reduced, because the seaside was not fortified.
Syracuse also was so admirably fortified, that See Plutarch in Marce lus life.
Marcellus, a rare and valiant General of the Romans with a great Army could
not reduce the same in two years siege, and had never taken it, if Archimedes,
the rarest Enginier and Mathemaetician that ever was, had not preferred the
completing of a Geometrical demonstration before his own life, and the
preservation of his Country. See Plutarch in his life.
Demetrius also king of Macedonia, with a great Army, and all his admirable
Machines of war, could never make a sufficient breach in the Rampires of
Rhodes, but was enforced to raise his siege from before it, because of the
impregnable Fortifications of it, but it flourished specially, and attained to
the highest degree of perfection, that ever it was before: and since that time
in See Caesar's Comment. and Ioseplus history.
Casar and Titus days, as it will appear in the next Chapter, when I shall
come to speak of the siege of Alexie in France, and of Jerusalem. Therefore I
do not a little wonder, that a Gentleman so well read in Histories as Mr Ward
was, should disagree from the opinion of the greatest Commanders that have
lived in our days, by maintaining, as he does in his ^^e from p. 50 to 60.
Animadversions of war, that we excel, in this Age, the Ancient in the Art of
Fortification and assailing. But this error proceeds by the comparison he
makes between the Fortifications that were erected in Christendom, some
century of years after the Goths and Vandals, that had overrunne the greater
part of it, and by their barbarous disposition, had destroyed all the ancient
monuments, and over-cast by their burning of all books of Sciences, a cloud of
ignorance over all the face of Christendom: and therefore to make good his
opinion, he should have taken his comparisons from the flourishing times of the
Greeks and Romans, as I will show in another place.

CHAP. III. Of the Nations that have excelled, and do excel at this present
time, all other Nations in the Art of Fortification.
IT is certain that the Caldeans, Jews, Greeks, and Romans have anciently
excelled all other Nations in the art of Fortification and assailing: And that
the Italians, the French and the Hollanders, do at this day excel all others
in these Arts. M. Ward in his Animadversions of war, is pleased to give the
precedence to the Hollanders; yet I know no reason for it, except it be to
honor that Nation, where he exercised his Militia. For if the Hollanders
excel these two former Nations in their out-guards, they do as much excel
them in their inward works; and all Enginiers know, that the inward works are
the essential parts of the Art of Fortification. And yet of late years Sr
Anthony de Ville, and Honorat de Meynier, two of the last French Kings
Enginiers, have gotten in my opinion the start of the Hollanders, for
outworks, and avant-guards also. Notwithstanding they have the most convenient
soil for such works, of any Nation in Christendom, because twenty Pioneersin
Holland, will do more work in one day, then threescore can do here in England,
France, or Italy in two days, for the evennesse of their soil, the tenderness
of their ground, and their plenty of turff. But if the precedence in these Arts
belong to any of these three Nations, it appertains really to the Italians, for
John Baptist Zanche, Castriot Durbin, Francis Montemeillino, Lorini Florentine,
and Peter Sardi a Roman, and diverse other Italian Enginiers, some of which
coming with the Duke of Parma into the Low Countries, infused in the French
and the Hollanders, what they know of these Arts, for they were the first that
revived and adorned them, after they had been buried for diverse centuries of
years, in the grave of oblivion, by the inhumanity of the Goths and Vandals. I
do not here place the Spaniards and Germans, to stand in competition with these
three Nations, because the greater part of the best Fortifications in Germany
and Spain, have been lined out and surveyed by Italian Enginiers. Now, whether
our modern Fortifications do excel the Fortifications of the ancient Caldeans,
Jews, Greeks and Romans, it cannot be decided, because theirs are destroyed,
and ours extant; except we refer our selves to the testimony of the ancient
Historians: which, if we do, M. Wards position, spoken of in the last Chapter,
is absolutely overthrown. For although I have seen in my travels, the greater
part of the rarest and strongest holds in Christendom, yet I must ingenuously
confess, that I have seen none to be compared to the Towers and Rampires of
Babylon, to the Fortifications of Vejente, Syracuse, Tyrus, and Rhodes, but
especially, to the Citadel of Antonia, and the three Towers, and the Rampires,
that Herod the great built in Jerusalem, in commemoration of his wife, brother
and intimate friend. And as for the Art of assailing, that goes hand in hand
with the Art of Fortification, as two inseparable Twins or Companions; all
judicious men know, that as the one increases in degrees of perfection, so
does the other, because if new inventions be found to fortify places, more
sufficiently then one could formerly, the ingenious spirits of great Commanders
have no rest, till they have found new ways of assailing to reduce them. For
instance, the invention of bastions and motes of fourscore, or of a hundred
foot broad, and thirty foot deep, full of water, was no sooner found out, but
Gerard a French Enginier, that was in the service of the Prince of Orange,
found the invention of our Galleries, whereby these large and deep motes may be
passed without danger, and mines made to blow up the bastions. Whereby we may
conclude, that if the ancient did excel us in the Art of Fortification, they
did also go beyond us in the art of assailing. Now to prove that they did
excel us in them both; we are, 1. To examine what modern Fortifications are
extant, that may be compared to the ancient Fortifications before cited. 2. In
which of all our modern sieges, there has been more art and industry shown,
then at the siege of Alexie, and of that of Jerusalem? But because this point
may more properly be decided, when we shall have occasion to speak of the art
of assailing; I will pass it over at this time, to examine another position of
M. Ward, that maintains, our Ordnance to be more powerful then the great
Machines of war of the ancients; and upon this infers, that of necessity our
Fortifications must be stronger then theirs were, because some of ours can hold
out against the thunder of our roaring Cannons. Mistake me not, I do not speak
of the Fortifications of this Kingdom, for I knew never a Garrison of ours,
whose works are only of Cannon-proof, but of the best foreign Fortifications.
I acknowledge that the great Machines of war of the ancient where more
combersome to manage then our Cannons are; but that our Cannons be more
powerful then they were, it does not appear to be so by the testimony of the
ancient Historians. For the great Rams of the Romans, made great and sufficient
breaches to come to an assault, in the strong Rampires and Towers of the
Cittadell of Antonia, and in Herod's Towers, that were built, says Josephus, of
bard free-stones of an incredible thicknes; against which, a battery of six of
our Cannons could not have moved one of them. And in liew of our muskets, they
had ballisters that were more powerful, where with they kept the defendants in
such awe, that they durst not peep out through the port-holes of their
battlements. It is therefore most certain, that the ancient Greeks and Romans,
have not only excelled us, in the Art of Fortification and assailing, but also
in diverse other Arts; as in the Art of graving, of painting, of sculpture, of
architecture, and in all the parts of the Mathematikes, and in the very art of
war. And as for the power of their Machines and ballisters, it was also
greater then that of our Cannons, and of our musket shot; only they were, as I
have said before, more combersome, because their great Rams required two
hundred men to manage them, and their ballisters four or six men: and six
Cannoniers with their six mates, and four and twenty matroses, will manage six
Cannons mounted upon a plat-forme, and every one of our soldiers can manage a
musket; and notwithstanding this advantage, they excelled us in the art of
war.

CHAP. IIII. Of the true use of the Art of Fortification.
THis Art was invented at the first, to preserve a handful of men against the
oppression and cruelty of a multitude; for according to the rules of it, a
Garrison Town is not sufficiently fortified, except one hundred men within it,
can oppose a thousand assailants without; and a thousand, ten thousand, that
is, one defendant against ten assailants; but it is with this caution, that the
place besieged be provided with a competent number of men, ordnance,
ammunition, arms, victuals, and a Magazine furnished with all manner of
fireworks, morter-pieces, engines of war, ladders, and pioneers tools; for
if any of these necessaries be wanting, this Garrison will not subsist against a
lesser number, then is here spoken of. But the Committees and Governors of our
Garrisons, are for the greater part so careless of these things, that few or
none of our Garrisons are provided of victuals for a month, and of ammunitions,
arms, fireworks, ladders, and pioneers-tools, so slightly, that the first
assault would deprive them of all their store: nay, I have been in a Garrison so
ill provided, that in their timber-yard, there was not so much good timber, as
to make a drawbridge, nor a ladder, nor barrows to be had, when occasion did
require to use them, but was enforced to stay while they were made. Now how
such a Garrison could subsist against an active army, if it were besieged, I
leave it to the judicious Reader to judge of it. But our enemies are more
provident, witness the long resistance of Basing, of Latham-house, of Carlisle,
of Skipton, and Scarborrow-Castle, and now of Chester.

2. It was invented to preserve a small Army in the field, against a great and
powerful army, or of an army against three armies. As See Caesar Comment. of
the war of Africa.
Caesar did preserve himself, and the small army he had with him in Africa,
against the three powerful armies of King Juba, of Scipio, and of Labienus;
and by his great experience in this Art, did overthrow them all, more by the
spade and pickax, then by his sword. And one of the main secondary causes of
the spining out of this unnatural war, has been, that our Commanders in
chief have neglected to make use of this noble Art, that Caesar himself did not
disdeign to practice; for he often lined out the intrenchments of his own Camp,
and would draw upon paper the models of the Forts, or Engines of war, that he
would have his Enginiers to set out, and have made. And for the erecting of
bridges over See Caesar Commentary in the wars of Gaul
Rivers, and raising of high mounts and plat-forms to place high wooden Towers,
and his Machines of war, he excelled all his Enginiers, as may be seen in his
Commentaries, by the strong and stately bridge that he erected over the Rhine,
when he past over into Germany, which bridge he fortified with four Forts, and
rare intrenchments, to secure his return into France, leaving for the defense
of them one of his Legions, and for the raising of incredible Towers, Mounts
and Plat-forms, and for the setting out of an entrenched Camp, with a double
line of Communication, I will refer the Reader, because I shall have occasion
to speak of it in another place, to the siege of Alexie in France, where we may
see his admirable industry and skill in this Art. But we have shamefully been
enforced sundry times to raise our sieges for want of an entrenched Camp, as at
Newark, Dudley Castle, Pomfret-Castle, Banbury-Castle, and Dennington-Castle,
and in all these by an handful of men; whereas if we had be^^ in an entrenched
Camp, an Army six times as great could not have forced us to a retreat.
Therefore to besiege Towns or Castles of any moment, without an entrenched
Camp, except we come to a general and furious storm, the next day after our
Army has faced the same, it is properly to spin out this war wittingly; and
for to receive rather an affront, then to obtain a victory, or honor and
reputation.

3. It was invented to erect strong holds upon the Frontiers of a State or
Kingdom, to prevent the incursions of a foreign Enemy, that might with a
great Army, come like a roaring flood, that throws down all the river banks,
into the very heart of a Kingdom, without opposition, and by mere activitie
conquer the same; as the Duke D'Alva conquered for the King of Spain, as
unjustly as suddenly, the Kingdom of See the History of Spain in Ferdinand
and Isabels Reign.
Navar, under pretext to pass through that Kingdom, to go against the French
King, then in Languedock. And the essential cause of this great loss came by
the negligence of the King of Navar, that had not provided, as he should have
done, with men, Ammunition, and victuals, his Frontier Garrison Towns.

4. It was invented to preserve men's habitations, and the Suburbs of
Corporations, and not for to burn, or pull them down, as many of our
Enginiers have done in these days, to their shame and guilt of conscience. For
if an Enginier, to comply with those in authority, or with the selfe-conceited
men of a Garrison, assent to pull down Suburbs, or small Hamlets that are
joined to their Corporations, except they are suddenly and certainly in danger
of a Siege, it argues that he is either unskilful in his profession, or void
of all Christian charity, and natural humanity; for by the experience of his
Art, or alteration of his method of Fortification, he may preserve these
Suburbs or Hamlets, to the great advantage of the Town; or of another
Fortification, and so dispose of his works, that he may secure them, and yet
the Corporation shall rather need fewer men to man their works, then it would
require when these Hamlets are pulled down. This has been the case of
Leicester, for had they not rejected a good counsel, they might assuredly have
been preserved by a larger Line of Communication, then there was by half a
mile; for this Line might have been defended with three hundred men less then
that they made, for the which they were enforced to pull down many honest men's
houses, and draw a true imputation of inhumanitie upon themselves; for what
greater inhumanitie could these poor souls expect from their cruel Enemies,
then to see their houses burned, or pulled down. And by this instance you may
see how dangerous it is for Committees and Governors to be led away by the
chat and ridiculous reasons of ignorant and selfe-conceited men, that make no
conscience what mischief they do to others, so they secure themselves, as they
suppose; for it is often rather a supposition, than a true security or
preservation, because it falls out oftentimes, that if these Hamlets or Suburbs
be fortified, they serve as Bulwarks for the preservation of their Town, and
so by pulling down of them, they advance their own ruin, to save some small
charges; nay, they often increase them, by pulling of them down. For instance:
It is supposed by the judgment of such men aforementioned, that Cotton End, a
small Hamlet adjoining to the South bridge of North-hampton, is to be pulled
down, if they be threatened of a Siege, to make the circumference of their
Works the less, and to secure their Bridge. But I will maintain that if
Nature it self, and the Art of man had plotted together, to place a commodious
seat to serve as a Bulwark, not only to the South bridge, but to the whole
Town, they could not have found out a better then that part of Cotton End is.
For being fortified as it ought to be, it will make that side impregnable; and
this End might have been fortified and secured at the first, with smaller
charge and a shorter Line of Circumference, then that which they have made, by
which it is exposed to the Enemies mercy, and yet their Works are by it of
less validity, if they had not relied overmuch upon their own judgment.

And although this conceit is backed with the assent of a earned Divine, yet I
will judge charitably of his assent, as being in judgment so possessed, this
being out of his element; yet wisdom should induce him to rely more upon the
judgment of an Artist, than upon his own, and specially when it is bent upon
the safest and the most charitable course. And this counsel I give them, to
fortify only the said End, according to the model inserted in the 23 Plate;
now they may conveniently do it, will be worthy of thanks if they embrace it;
but if they do not, if ever they be besieged, it will produce an after-wish, as
those of Leicester did, when it was too late; O that we had followed such an
advice and counsel: And so much for the discharge of a good conscience.

5. And lastly, it was invented to fortify some places of refuge in the time
of a Civil War, that a whole County be not ruinated by a roving and
plundering Army: But in this, the Committees of such Counties are to be very
cautious in their election of a seat, for all the head-Towns of Counties are
not convenient to erect Garrisons: And therefore I shall acquaint them in the
next Chapter, of the best and of the worst seats for a Garrison: And will only
for a conclusion of this point, inform them, that all seats of Garrisons, if
they may be found, are to be as near the middle of the County as may be, that
they may the sooner releeve all the parts of the County: And that by no means
they assent to erect any more than one in one and the same County, that they
may be the better able to fortify, man, and provide the same to some purpose;
for plurality of Garrisons in one and the same County, whether they are foes
or friends, are destructive to a County.

CHAP. V. Of the best, and of the worst Seats for Garrisons.
ANd first of the best Seats, as better deserving the preccedency; a good Seat
is to be freed of all sides, from hills or raising grounds that may command, or
of all hollowes that may endanger the Garrison it self, or the Works of it;
If the Town has walls, Mr. Ward is also of the same opinion concerning our
old vvalls. See page 35. and chap. 20.
a good Enginier is not to regard them, specially if there be hollowes, and
raising grounds within Cannon-shot of them; for it it is not the lining of
these walls, or the erecting of Mounts near or upon them, or the drawing of
ill-lined and ill-flanked dikes within five or six yards of them that will
secure the same. But a prudent Enginier is to let them stand, as a second weak
defense, to obtain a parley after all is lost, and yet not to rely on them,
for they are rather destructive helps then profitable defenses; But to draw his
Line of Communication one hundred yardes or more into the field beyond them, to
take in those hollowes that will endanger, and hills or raising grounds that
will command his Works. Or if they be too far distant from the walls, he is
of necessity to erect well flanked Forts, or Redoubts to secure them, or all
his Works will not be worth a button; let his Works be never so well carried
up, or lined out. And these Forts are to have Corridors, or covered waves to
retreat into, for to be relieved from the main Line of Communication, out of
danger of the assailants shot: for a raising ground left out of the Line of
Communication of Leicester, was the secondarie cause of the loss of it, and of
a hundred towns more, if an abstract did permit to produce diverse like
instances. And as for Mounts errected near or upon old walls, they are of no
other service, then to hinder the assailants approaches, for a day or two; but
when their approaches are made, they are of no defense at all, for having a
raising ground within Cannon-shot, one may dismount all the Ordnance upon them
in an instant of time; and for the musket shot, they are also of no use,
because the shot of the Musket does not fly upon a level line, but upon a
descending line from a great height downwards, and so can hurt none except it
be at point-blanke, but upon a level line, if the bullet miss one, it will
hit another, and what is said here of the musket shot, it may be applied to the
Cannon-shot, for if the assaylants had no raising ground to dismount the
Cannons placed upon these Mounts, their Cannon-shot cannot offend them, when
their approaches are within one hundred yards of these Mounts, for it is the
long distance that gives a level line to the Cannon-shot, when it is mounted
so high. And as for the lining of old walls and the making of dikes so near
them, they are distructive ways for the defendents: For the first, the earth
and walls does never bind together, but falls and helps to fin and level the
town dike upon the first storm of the Cannon-shot that is shot against the
walls. And as for the second, the very splinters of the wall during a Cannon
storm will drive the defendents from the Brest-Workes of these dikes, that are
so near the Walls, to a shameful desertion of them, to save their lives, and
so they will become by accident a very safe intrenchment for the assayllants,
and so much be it spoken upon this subject for them, to whom it concerns.

1. The best seat of all seats, Of the best Seats.
is a Haven town freed on the land side of the foresaid impeciments, having a
safe rode for ships, and a deep and broad channel for the coming in, and such
a one was Tyrus and Rochell, for a Garrison so seated can hardly be reduced
without a Sea Navy and a Land Army, and how inconstant the winds and seas are
when winter is at hand, all ingenious men know. Therefore it is to be reduced
in a summer, or diverse accidents may fall out, to free the same from the
restraint by sea, and as for Tyrus See Sir Walter Ra^^^ leigh his History of
the world.
after three years siege, and an incredible charge, to make a mole over a bay
of the sea, to reduce the same, the great Army of Alexander found in it but a
small recompense for their labors, for the richest Inhabitants saved
themselves and their treasures by sea: and as for Rochell, if the Cardinal de
Richelieu, or his Enginiers for him, had not found an admirable invention to
make a floting bridge with great Liters over a narrow arm of the sea,
fortified on both sides the Land with two strong Forts, having in the midst two
great Platformes erected, every of them upon four great Liars fast chained one
to another with strong iron chains, Rochell See the French History.
might (according to humane reason) have been at liberty at this day.

2. The second is a Town seated upon a raising hill in the midst of a Champion
Country, well provided with springs and cisternes of water, having an even
flat top, and all the sides but one, of straight down and R^ckey ^lif^es of
some thousand yards Diameter, and such a one was Beeston-castle in Cheshire,
for such a place cannot be reduced but by famine.

3. The third is a Town seated in a Champion Country, free of the aforesaid
impediments having an unfordable r^v^r running in the midst or close to one
side of it, and such another is Newarke, for it cannot be reduced without an
entrenched Camp (if the Works be high and strong) and two bringes traversing
the river, that the one Army of one side may relieve the other on the other
side, as occasion requires.

4. The fourth is a Town seated on the side of a hill having a deep river
running in the foot of it; whose buildings and works extend themselves to the
very top of the hill, and her Fortifications unto the two sides of the river,
and such a one is Nottingham, had it not as it has a sandy soil, yet this
defect may be remedied with art and charges.

5. The fifth is a town seated upon a raising ground, in the midst of a
marish, having but one coming to it, provided with wholesome springs, and such a
one is Pessaro in Italy.

6. The sixth is a dry town seated in a Champion Country that is of a good
soil, and in a place where diverse Roads meet, and upon the borders of three or
four Counties, for this being regularly fortified, is of great defense, and of
great advantage to the owners of it, and such a one is Cremona in Lombardia.

The worst seats are these: Of the vvorst Seats.
First, a Town seated between two hills, within Cannon shot; Secondly, a
Town seated in the midst of a Marish, upon a flat and even ground: Thirdly, a
Town seated upon the side of a hill, the top of the hill commanding the same:
Fourthly, a Town seated upon a hill barren of water, and a rockey ground;
Fifthly, a Town seated upon a sandy soil. Sixthly, a Town seated in the midst,
or on the side of a Forest.

CHAP. VI. Of the foreign Fortifications and Dimensions.
THe greater part of the foreign Fortifications are not for our imitation,
because they require a long time to erect them, and more men then we have, or
are able to pay, to maintain and defend them, and more means to finish them,
then we have at this present, the means of this Nation having been exhausted,
by this unnatural war: Therefore I will omit to speak of their Cavalliers,
Faulses, Brayes, Tenailles, Horne-works and Outworks of their Ravellins, and
Corridors, or covered ways, as being altogether unusefull for us, for the
reasons above expressed. Yet to satisfy the curiosity of the reader, I will
treat of two of their methods of Fortifications, by Bastions without, and with
Orillons, and of the dimensions and proportions they observe in them, that the
Reader may the better judge, whether these chargeable works are convenient for
us, or no. I will also speak of another of their Methods of Fortification by
Avaunt Guards, newly invented by Honnorat de Maynier, a rare French Enginier,
that would be as chargeable as any of the other two, if we did not reduce it to
shorter dimensions, and wholly omit the costly Freestone Works they adorn
them withal. And I do it the rather, because this kind of method (above all
others) is more capable of dimintion in her proportion, and be little or
nothing at all the worse.

But I will (in the fast place) represent unto you the proportions and
dimensions of the two methods by Bastions without, and with Orillons, that have
no difference at all in their proportions and dimensions, but only in the Line
of the Flanks, and in the turning and framing of the Orillons.

First, the dikes of these two Methods are ordinarily between fourscore or
fivescore foot broad, and their depth about twenty five, or thirty foot deep.

Secondly, they have another smaller dike in the midst of these great dikes,
if in case they be dry, calied La Cunette, that is some four and twenty foot
broad, and twelve or sixteen foot deep; this small dike is commonly full of
water in all places; for the raine-water descending from the Rampires, and the
sides of the great dike, fill it, although the ground be void of springs; this
small dike is very useful, for it preserves the Garrison from being scaled,
or surprised in the night time, for the undertakers cannot pass the same
without they cast a casting-bridge over it, and that cannot be done without
noise, and this noise waketh the Sentinells, and alarmes the Garrison; and with
the earth of this dike they commonly make their Counterscarp brest-work,
adorning the same within side with turfe, and one foot slope, the rest being
laid or spread aslope, till it come to nothing, and even with the firm ground;
that the French call Glacis.

Thirdly, their Rampires are commonly fourscore or fivescore foot broad in the
bottom, with a slope on both sides of two foot or a yard high; but on the wall
side it comes no lower than the boltill of the stone walls, that the French
call Cordeau: for upon that boltill they set their battlements of their wall,
that are about five or six foot high, having a Port-hole at every two yards,
and three foot from the Cordeau, and by reason of the great slope, that the
Rampire has, a way of some eight foot broad is presently formed, that runs
between the battlements of the wall, and the Rampire, that is called the way of
the rounds, and in French Le chemin des rondes, and this way goes from one
Bastion to another, round about the Garrison; a very commodious and necessary
means for the Rounds to go safe in the night, and to discover by looking out
of the Port holes of the battlements, if any appears near to their
Counterscarp or Corridor that are on the other side of their dike, and the
Rampire besides the Brest-work upon it, is commonly six foot higher then the
battlements of the walls, and the Brest-worke six foot more; so that the
splinters of the wall during a battery, cannot offend the soldiers, that
defend the Brest-workes of the Rampire.

Fourthly, the Rampires are commonly thirty foot high, besides the height of
the Brest-worke that is six foot high within side, for it has a foot-step of
eighteen inches high, and two foot broad, and the whole height of the Rampire
with his Brest-worke, is within side thirty six foot, and without thirty three
foot high, because the top of the Brest-work is carried three foot slope,
because it is always twenty foot broad at top to be of Cannon-proof: and the
Rampire besides the thickness of the Brest-worke and the slope of the two
sides defalked, is always forty foot broad on both sides, on which they plant
Elmes or Sicamore Trees, that in few years make very pleasant and shadie
walks, that serve in time of siege for a way for horse, men, foot and
carriages, to come to defend and relieve the Rampire.

Fifthly the distance from the Center of one Bastion to another is commonly from
two hundred fifty yards to three hundred yards.

Sixthly the faces of their Bastions are ordinarily from one hundred yards to
one hundred twenty yards, besides the turning of their Orillons that is about
twenty yards.

Seventhly the whole gorge of their Bastions are from one hundred yards, to an
hundred and twenty yards, from out to out.

8 The breast of their Bastions are from 120. yards, to 130. yards.

9 And from the center of the Bastion, to the point, or the utmost Angle of the
Bastion, from 80 yards to 100 yards.

10 The flanks of the Bastions from 42 yards to 50 yards, that is divided into
three equal parts, if they make Orillons; one part is allowed for the flank,
and the other two for the turning and the framing of the Orillons.

11 Their curtains are always between 160 yards to 200 yards.

12 The Line of Defense, to be good for the defense of the musket shot, is to
be from 220 yards, to 250 yards, at the most.

13 The slope of their Brest-works without side, is one foot for every yard, if
the earth be good; Now let the Reader judge, whether these costly
Fortifications be for our turn.
and within side a foot in two yards: but if it be a sandy ground, or a running
clay, it requires a foot and half without side, and a foot within, for a yard
high.

14 The foundation of these walls begin from the bottom of the dike, and are
carried up to the upper water-table of the wall to the Cordeau; and from the
bottom of the dike on the field-side level with the ground, and all of free
stone. The midst of the Bastions are filled up with earth to the Cordeau, and
made slope to the firm ground of the town, and their Rampires and Brest-works
are raised fifteen yards above the Cordeau.

CHAP. VII. Of the superficies contained in the first Plare.
SInce the Principles of Geometry are the very groundwork of the Art of
Fortification, I judge it convenient to begin this Abstract, by the
demonstrations of such superficies as are most commonly used in the practice of
this Art. Of Superficie.


A Superficie is properly any kind of form demonstrated upon paper, or upon
the ground, enclosed with three lines at the least, except it be the circulary
form, that has but one circulary line, that begins at one point, and ends at
the same.

The point is a small touch of the pen, Of the Point.
that cannot be divided, because it has no parts, but is the beginning and end
of all lines, and the center of all Forms. See Figure 1.

A line is the continuance of a point that is incapable of division; Of Lines.
but in the length of it, it is distinguished by diverse terms: As, by the
strait line, in Figure 2. by the circulary line, in Figure 3. by the
perpendiculary line, in Figure 7. by the parallel line, in Figure 8. by the
diagonall line, in Figure 11. and by the diametricall line, in Figure 12. There
are diverse other distinctions of lines, but they are not useful in this Art.

All Angles derive from the conjunction of two lines in one point; Of Angles.
whether they be strait, circulary, diagonall, or mixed with any one of these.
As Figure 4. is called a plain Angle, because two strait level lines, from
one and the same distance, meet at one point, and a strait perpendicular, and a
level line falling in the midst of a strait line, produces an Obtus, and a
strait Angle, as in Figure 7. And two circulary lines meeting at one point,
makes a circulary Angle, as in Figure 5. And a strait and a circulary line
meeting at one point, produces a mixed Angle, as in Figure 6. There are also
diverse other sorts of Angles, some of which we shall have occasion to speak of
in another place.

The eighth Figure demonstrates how to make a perpendicularie line cut a strait
line given, Of the eighth Figure.
and how you may cut that perpendiculary line in three parts, by three
demicircles, to make up the line given, three parallel lines, without altering
the compass to any other distance but the first.

First, let a strait line be given, then take the just distance of that line
with your compass, and set one of the points of it upon the right hand end of
the line, and with the other point make a small demicircle above; then remove
the point of your compass upon the left hand side of the line given, and with
the other point make another small circle, cutting the first; and where these
two small circles cut one another, set your rule, and draw a strait line to the
line given, and it will cut the same with a strait perpendicularie line. Now to
avoid all error that might proceed from the mis-placing of your Rule upon the
line given, make but two other small demicircles below the line, as you did
above, and where these cut one another, put one end of your Rule, and the
other, upon the upper cutting of the two small demicircles, and draw a strait
line, and (of necessity) the perpendicularie line will be strait, and without
error.

Now to cut that perpendicular Line in two equal parts more, to make up the
Line given, three parallel Lines, set your compass upon the just distance of
the length of the perpendicularie Line, then set one of the points of the
Compass, upon the lower end of the perpendicularie Line, and make a demi
circle upwards, then remove your Compass upon the upper end of the
perpendicularie Line, and make a demy-circle downwards, then remove the point
of your Compass upon the Center-point, where the perpendicularie Line did cut
at the first the Line given, and make the third demy-circle upwards, and this
demy-circle will cut the other two in four places, and where they cut, set
your rule, and draw two strait Lines, and these will make up the Line given,
three perfect parallel Lines, as it is clearly demonstrated in figure 8.

The ninth figure shows how to draw as many parallel Lines as you please,
upon two lines, Of the ninth Figure.
that are the upper and the lower lines in this figure. First, let two equal
lines be given, one below, and another above, according to the length you
desire to have your parallel lines, then divide these two lines with your
Compass, in as many parts as you desire to have parallel lines, and at every
division make a point, and from every point make a demy-circle above the upper
and the lower given lines, then set your Rule upon them one after another, and
draw as many lines as there is demy-circles, and these will all be perfect
parallel lines. Now if you will double these parallel lines, it is but to
divide with your Compass the just breadth of them in two parts, and at every
division to make a point, and to set your Compass again upon its first
distance, and to cut your first demy-circle with it, and to draw as many lines,
and you shall have as many more perfect parallel lines as you had before, as it
is clearly demonstrated in Figure 9. Of the tenth Figure.


The tenth Figure shows how to make a square and a triangle upon a line
given: Suppose the Base of the square is the line given, now to make a perfect
square, and four Scalene triangles of this line, you are to set your Compass
upon the just distance of the line, and to set one point of it on the right
hand end of it, and to make a demy-circle, and to remove your compass upon the
left end, and to make another demy-circle, and where they cut one another, set
your rule, and draw a perpendicularie line, then turn your rule, and draw a
strait top line, and join the base line with this top line, by two strait
lines, and you will have a perfect square, and four perfect square scalene
triangles, as it is demonstrated in Figure 10.

The eleventh Figure shows how to make a paralograme out of two circles. Of
the eleventh Figure.
First, set your compass upon the demi breadth of the paralograme, that you
intend to make, and then make a circle on the right hand then remove your
Compasse-point upon the extreme of the first circle on the left hand upon a
strait line, and with the other point mark the Center-point of the other
circle, then turn your compass round, and you will have two circles whose
extremes will touch one another, then set your rule upon the four extremes of
these two circles, and draw four strait lines; and where these lines cut one
another, there is the four Angles of the Paralograme, as it is demonstrated in
Figure 11.

The twelfth Figure shows how to make a perfect square by the outside of a
circle: Of the twelfth Figure.
Make choice of your Center, and set your compass upon the very Diameter that
you intend to have your square, then make a circle, and draw four strait lines
upon the extremes of it, and it will produce a perfect square, as is
demonstrated in Figure 12.

CHAP. VIII. Of the Superficies contained in the second Plate.
AMong all other Superficies there is none so useful for the Art of
Fortification, as the Triangles; and yet Mr. Ward in his Animadversions of War,
makes mention but of three sorts, yet there are six principal sorts of
Triangles, from which all other mixed Triangles are derived; and these six sorts
may be all set out by the Circle, as it is demonstrated in this Plate.

The equilaterall Triangle deserves the precedencie, 1 Of the equilaterall
Triangle, and the best way to set out the same.
because it is the only Triangle that can be fortified by Bastions, for all her
sides are equal; the best way to set it out, is to set your Compass upon the
just distance of the Base of it, and to make two points with your Compass, and
to draw two Demy-circles, one from the right point, and the other from the left
hand point, and where these Circles cut one another, make the third point, and
draw three strait lines to these three points, and it will produce a perfect
equilaterall Triangle equal of all sides.

Some set it out by the Circle, How to set out the equilaterall Triangle by a
Circle.
dividing the Diameter of it in four equal parts, and draw a strait line upon
the first quarter point, as the Base of it, and two lines more from the two
ends of the Base to the top of the Diametricall Line of the Circle; but this
way is not so perfect as the other. See Figure 13.

The Isocele Triangle is also very useful in the Art of Fortification; 2 Of
the setting out of the Isocele Triangle.
for all the regularie Poligons of many Angles, after the Sexagon, are composed
of Isocele Triangles; but the Sexagon is composed of six equilaterall
Triangles, that have all their sides equal: But the Isocele Triangle has
always two sides equal, and longer than her Base; it is set out after this
manner out of the Circle. After your Circle is made draw a strait
perpendicularie Line Diametricall wise upon the Center of it to the two
extremes of the Circle, then divide that last Line into eight equal parts,
and draw a strait line with your rule, upon the first point of the eighth part
division, from one extreme of the Circle to another, and that Line represents
the Base, then draw two strait lines from the two ends of that Base, to the
top-point of the Diametricall Line of the Circle, and these three Lines will
produce a perfect Isocele Triangle. See Figur 14.

The Recteligne Triangle is also useful in the Art of Fortification to set out
Half Moons, 3 Of the rectiligne Triangle, and how it is to be set out by the
Circle.
her Base contrary to the Isocele Triangle is longer then her two sides; it is
set out after this manner: After your Circle is made, draw a strait Line from
the two side extreamities of the Circle, and cut with that Line the
Center-point of the Circle, and this Line represents the Base, then draw two
other Lines from the two ends of the Base, to the upper point of the Circle,
and two other Lines from the two ends of the Base, to the lower point of the
Circle, and it will produce two perfect Recteligne Triangles, that makes also a
perfect square Rhomb.

The Scalene Triangle has all her sides unequal, it is very useful for
measuring of land; 4 Of the scalene Triangle, and how it may be set out by the
Circle.
for two of them make an Equilaterall Triangle, and four of them a perfect
long Rhomb. It is to be set out after this manner. After your circle is made,
divide the side diametricall line of the circle into eight equal parts, then
cut with a strait line the first eighth point of that division on the left hand
point, and then divide the diametricall line of the circle that is drawn
perpendiculary-wise into four equal parts, and cut with another strait line
the first equal point of that division toward the Base, or the lower side of
the circle; then from the two sides of these two lines draw a strait diagonall
line, and these three lines will produce a perfect scalene Triangle. See Figure
21.

The acute Angle, 5 Of the Oxigon Triangle, and how it may be set out by the
Circle.
or Oxigon Triangle, is only useful, for measuring of land, all her sides are
also unequal, and all her Angles acute, you are to set it out after this
manner: After the Circle is made, draw a Diametricall line perpendiculary-wise,
that may cut the point of the Center from the top of the Circle to the bottom;
then from the lower end of this line on the left hand, make a point at the
fourth part of the Circumference of the Circle, and another point on the right
hand, at the third part of the Circumference of the Circle; then draw a line
from the left hand point to the right point, and two other lines from the right
hand, and the left hand point, to the top point of the Diametricall line, and
these three lines will produce a perfect Oxigon Triangle; see Figure 22.

The Obtus Triangle is useful in Fortification, 6 Of the Obtus Triangle, and
how it may be set out by the Circle.
and for measuring of Land, two of her sides are equal, and contain but the
two third parts of her base, her base being longer then her sides by a third
part, it is to be set out after this manner: After the circle is made, divide
the Diametricall line of it into three equal parts, and cut the first point of
this division by a strait line, and this line represents the base, then draw
two lines from the two ends of this base, to the top of the Diametricall lines,
and these three lines will produce a perfect Obtus Triangle, see Figure 23.

Now I come to the 24. Superficie that contains an Ovall, Of the setting out
of the Ovall.
and in that Ovall two long Rhombs, a Paralograme, two equilaterall Triangles,
and four Scalene Triangles. But because I have already spoken of all these,
the Ovall and the two long Rhombs excepted, I will begin with the Ovall, the
most difficult of all other superficies to be rightly set out upon paper, or in
the field.

To set it out upon paper, you are to set your compass upon the scale of the
third part of the length you intend to have the Ovall, and this third part is
to be divided again into two equal parts, and your compass set upon that
sixth part: then make choice of your Center, and cut the point of the Center
with two strait lines, one of them perpendiculary-wise, and the other
diametricall-wise: then set one of the points of your compass upon the Center
point, and with the other make a point upon the diametricall line on the right
hand, and another point upon the same line on the left hand, then set the
compass again upon the third part of the length of the Ovall, and set one of
the points of it upon the right hand point, that represents the End of the
third part of the line of the length of the Ovall, and with the other point of
the compass make a circle, then remove the point of the compass, and set it
upon the left hand point of the aforesaid line, and make another circle and the
two extremes of these two circles represent the length of the Ovall. Then
remove your compass and set one point of it upon the lower cutting of these
two circles, and set it at that distance, that having a point upon this lower
cutting of these two circles, it may conjoyne with a true circularie line, the
two upper extremes of the two circles, that being done, remove your compass,
without any alteration of the distance, and set one of the points of it, upon
the upper cutting of the two circles, and with the other point of it, make a
true circulary line, to join the two lower extremes of the two circles; and
this being traced with a pen, will produce a perfect Ovall, one third part
longer then it is broad; some make it half as long again, as it is broad, but
the sides are too flat, and the Ovall is by it more deformed, and not so seemly
and complete as this is, demonstrated in Figure 16.

Now to make the most perfect Rhomb that can be made, Of the setting out of the
Rhomb.
you are but to draw four lines dioganall wise, from the upper and lower
points of the perpendicularie diametricall line, that cuts the two broad sides
of the Ovall, to the two points of the diametricall line of the length of the
Ovall, and it will produce a perfect Rhomb, as in figure 18.

And to make the two equilaterall Triangles, and the four scalene Triangles
out of the smaller Rhomb, Of the setting out of the 6. Triangles.
you are but to draw four lines diagonall-wise from the two Ends of the first
line that did represent the eighth part of the Ovall to the two upper and lower
cuttings of the two circles, and these lines (with the two diametricall lines
of the length and breadth of the Ovall already drawn) will produce these six
foresaid Triangles.

And to set out the Paralograme, Of the setting out of the Paralograme.
you are to divide the breadth of the Ovall into four equal parts, and the
length of it into nine equal parts, and at every division to make a point, and
to draw four strait lines upon the first points of these two divisions, and
they will produce this Paralograme that is a ninth part longer then twice his
breadth.

CHAP. IX. Of the Superficies contained in the 3. Plate.
THe first Circle of this Plate contains an Equilaterall Triangle, Of the
setting out of the equilateral triangle out of a square.
a Square, and a Pentagon. And because all the Equilateral Triangles that are
set out by a Square have their two sides longer then their square by an^ part;
I have drawn two demy-circles to show where the upper Angle of the Triangle
should come to be perfect and equal of all her sides, and that is where the
two circles cut one another. As for the square, it is more easy to set it out
from without the circle, Of the setting out of the square by the inward side of
the circle.
then from within the circle, because it is more difficult to reduce the sides
of it to that scantling proposed, if in case you set it out by the inward side
of the circle, then it is if you set out by the outside of the circle; for the
diametre of the circle is of the just length of the sides; but to take out a
square out of the inward side of the circle, the demy-diametricall line of the
circle is to be one third part longer then when you make it by the outside of
the circle. But if you are not tied to a scantling, then you may make as
perfect a square our of the inward side, as well as from the outside of a
circle, by dividing the two cross diametricall lines of the circle, into 6.
equal parts and by drawing 4. straight lines, cutting the four first points of
this division in the four sides of the circle, drawing the lines to the inward
extremes of the circle, and these lines will produce a perfect square.

Concerning the setting out of the Pentagon, you are to divide the
circumference of the circle into five equal parts, and at every division to
make a point, then you are to draw five straight lines from point to point, and
these five lines represent the five sides or bases of the Pentagon: then you
are to draw five other lines from the center point to the end of these five
bases diagonal wise, and these five lines complete the five sides of the five
triangles of the Pentagon; and this being done, this superficie is perfected.

The other three Circles contained in this place are to set out in every one of
them a Poligon with different Angles: viz. The first a Sexagon, the second a
Septagon, and the third an Octogon; having all of them the Basis of their
Triangles of an equal length, by the increasing the circumference of the
circle of the length of one of the Bases. And because this is a point of great
concernment to an Enginier, that may by the same know at an instant how many
Bastions the place will require, if he does but know the true circumference of
it, I will express my self more clearly.

Suppose then that the six Bases of the six equilaterall Triangles of a Sexagon
contain 250. yards a piece, that is in all 1500. yards circumference. And that
you would set out a Septagon with seven Bases that should contain every one of
them 250. yards a piece, you are then to add to the demy-diametricall line of
the Sexagon, a sixth part more of the extent that it had before; and by this
means the circumference of the circle will be able to afford you seven Bases
of 250. yards a piece, that is in all 1750. yards. The reason of it is, that
the circumference of a circle contains three diametricall lines, so that you
are of necessity to add to the former demy-diametre line of the Sexagon, a
sixth part more then it had before, because a demy-diametre is but the sixth part
of the circumference of a circle.

And by this rule you may make all the Bases of any Foligon from six Angles to
twenty four Angles, nay to eight and forty Angles if you please, of two
hundred and fifty yards a piece, adding always to the demy-diametre as
follows; To make a Septagon you are to add the part; to make an Octogon you
are to add a seventh part; to make a ninth Angle Poligon you are to add the
eighth part; and so as you go on, the ninth, the tenth, the eleventh, or
twelfth part. And as I have said, you are to observe that course, till you come
to set out a Poligon of eight and forty Angles. That I conceive would be
sufficient to fortify the City of London on both sides the water, with as
large a Line of Communication as it has at this present, having at every two
hundred and fifty yards distance an Angle, to form a strong, complete, and
defensible Bastion. A far more beseeming a Fortification for so famous a
City, then such slight, winding Angles, and ill flanked Redouts, wherewith it
is now fortified.

CHAP. X. Of the five Redouts contained in Plate 4.
BEfore I come to speak of the Superficies of these five Redoubts, it will not
be amiss to inform the Reader of their extent, continent, and dimensions. And
first of their extent. Of the extent of Redouts.
All square or circullary redouts are to be of one hundred yards from out to
out in their diametricall line, otherwise their inward continent will be too
small. But a Triangle redout is to have her three sides of two hundred yards a
piece, because two equilaterall Triangles contain no more then a square.

Secondly, their continent is to be so large, Of the continent of redouts
as it may lodge a competent number of Soldiers for their defense, that is,
two hundred men at least, and every two men cannot have a smaller piece of
ground allowed them for their lodging then a piece of eight yards square, that
makes in all sixty four square yards; Now a redout of one hundred yards
diametre, reduced in the form of a square, will contain but 10000. square
yards; out of which you are to defalke a third part, for the Rampires, the
place, and the streets; and then there will remain but 6667. yards for the
lodgings; and this being divided by sixty four yards, it will contain but two
hundred and eight Soldiers lodgings, if two of them be lodged together in a
chamber of 24. foot square. And by this you may judge whether the greater part
of the Redouts about the City of London are of a proportionable extent, seeing
most of them have not fifty yards of diametre.

Thirdly, for their dimensions. Of the breadth and depth of their ditches.
Their ditches are to be ten yards broad, and five yards deep, and the slope
of the sides of these ditches are to be but one foot slope in three, that the
bottom of the ditch may remain to be twenty foot broad, when it is fifteen
foot deep, for the reasons that will be shown when I come to speak of the
contre escarpe: and the Rampiars their Breast-works are to be proportionable to
this ditch. Of the height and thickness of their Rampires.
The height of it within side is to be twelve foot high, and nine foot without;
the slope of it within side is to be but one foot in six, and one foot in three
without side; there are to be five footsteps of two foot broad a piece, Of
their slope within and without.
and of eighteen inches high a piece, that the breastwork may not be above
four foot and an half high, that is of a convenient height for tall and
middle sized Soldiers to discharge easily their Muskets. The top of the
breast-work is to be twenty foot broad, Of their five footsteps.
to be of Cannon proof, and is to have a slope of three foot, and that is the
reason that the outside of the Rampiar is to be but nine foot high, and within
side twelve foot high, for by this slope the Musketeers can defend the very
brim of their ditch, which otherwise they could not do. Why the slope of their
top is to be a yard.
Moreover, this great slope preserves the Works from cleaving in the midst,
because all the rain water falls off from them into the ditch. And by these
dirnensions your Rampire with the five footsteps will be four and thirty foot
in the bottom, and twenty foot at top: a very sufficient Rampire to oppose a
good battery.

These broad and high breast-works require to be brought up with brush or bavin
wood, if you desire they should be of continuance; the smallest bavin wood is
the best, and it is to be bound up with bands, and of some four foot long, and
some four or five inches thick; the smallest end of the bavin is to lap over
the turfe on both sides, and the thickest end is to be turned toward the middle
of the Rampire; How the Rampires are to be lined with bavins.
and when you have laid four rows of them, every end lopping one over another
half a foot, you are to cast in the midst of the work, a row of such bavins of
six foot long, to serve as a key to bind all the rest; and this course you are
to observe so soon as your turfe is risen to be eighteen inches high; so that
in the height of a yard, there are to be two such courses of bavins, that is in
all six courses of bavins for a Rampire of nine foot high without side, and of
twelve foot within side; for the last course of bavins is to be placed when
your outside is eight foot high, that there may be eight inches high of earth
to cover the bavin wood. And after every course of these bavins, before you
place another course, half a dozen of the strongest Pioniers are to ram the
earth stoutly, with rammers made of a three inch'd plank, of a foot square,
with a strong state fastened to it. If this be but observed, you will have
strong and permanent works; but those that will not go to these charges, are
to expect to have the greater part of their works to be repaired every spring,
and these repaires will be as tedious, and almost as chargeable as to make new
ones.

Now when these ditches are finished, and the Rampires and their five foot
steps perfected, and hay-seed sown on the top of the breast-work, after it has
been raked and rammed, you are to erect your Contre escarpe after this manner:
Your great ditch being twenty foot broad in the bottom, if in case it be dry,
or if it has but a little water, you are to cast it out, and to make in the
midst of it another ditch, that the French call La cunnette of sixteen foot
broad and nine foot deep, Of the Cunnette or small ditch.
leaving a foot-step of two foot broad on both sides; and these footsteps
preserve your great ditch from calving in, and serve in Forts for the footing
of casting bridges, to sally in the night upon the assailants out of
salley-ports made on purpose under the orillons of the bastions; and this
manner of double ditch all in one, is far safer then these small double
ditches, having a bank of earth of some two foot broad left between them, used
and erected about the London Redouts. Now all the earth that is dug out of
this small ditch, How a contre escarpe is to be made.
is to be cast on the field side; and as it is cast out, other Pioniers are to
stand upon the brim of the great ditch, for to cast the said earth twelve or
fourteen foot farther off into the field; and when this is done, and the
smaller ditch perfected, then you are to make the breast-work of the Contre
escarpe with this earth, adorning the inside of it with turfe, and with a
foot-step of two foot broad and eighteen inches high, and the breast-work
higher then that foot-step by four foot and an half. Of the slope of the
breast-work of the contre escarpe, that the French call Glacis.
And having levelled even and rammed the top of the breast-work some two foot
broad, you are to lay all the rest of the earth so slope till it come to
nothing, and level with the firm ground; and this slope is called for
distinction sake, by the French Glacis. And by this means a sufficient and
defensible Contie escarpe will be made round about the Works of the Redouts
twelve foot distance in every place from the brim of the great ditch.

I have been the larger in the description of these dimensions, because I
intend that these very same directions, shall suffice once for all, for the two
last methods spoken of in this abstract; which in all parts are to be like
these, if the erectors intend to have strong and permanent works. Master Ward
in his Animadversions of War, would have the ditches or a Redout to be but
nine foot broad, and six foot deep, and the bre^^-work six foot high and six
foot thick; but these dimensions are contrary to the Rules of Art, for these
reasons: 1. The top of the rigge of the lodgings of the Soldiers is to be
covered by the height of the Rampire, which cannot be done if they be so low.
2. When a ditch and rampire require a ladder of 30. rounds to scale the same,
it is more dangerous and difficult to scale and to storm then when it requires
but a ladder of 12. rounds. 3. When the ditches are so shallow and so narrow,
they are presently levelled with bavins, and one soldier helping another with a
Pike, may easily get up on the Rampire, and the other with his Pike drive the
defendants from the defense of the Rampires. In a word, it were better to erect
no redouts at all, then to erect any so slight, and to expose men's lives to
danger after that manner, for such a redout will be gained at an instant by a
Storm. Moreover, there is to be a good Well, and two Cisterns made of
Freestone, plastered with Tarris, to receive all the rain water that falls
upon the tiles of the soldiers lodgings, that are to be built by long ranges,
and not to exceed in height 12. foot when the rigge tiles are up, to be free
from the enemies battery; and every room of 24. foot broad, may be divided in
two of 12. foot broad, and 24. foot long; in the one may be the two soldiers
beds, their apparel and Arms; and in the other, their drink, victuals, fuel,
and all other necessaries. And these ranges are to be lined out according to
the form of the superficies of the redout; if it be a Triangle, Triangle-wise;
if it be a square, after a square manner; if it be of a fifth, sixth, seventh, or
eighth angle form, the ranges are to be after that manner, that a place be left
in the midst of the redout just after that form of some 30. or 40. yards on
all sides, as you shall see it demonstrated in greater Forts, having three, or
four, or five, or six streets, according to their angles, to go from the place
to the Rampires, because all things in a Redout are to be as orderly carried as
in a Royal Fort, for all the difference that is to be between them, is in
their extent, the Redouts extent being smaller then of a Royal Fort, or
Citadell.


Now concerning the superficies of these five redouts demonstrated in plate
four; the first being the figure 24. is a perfect square set out by the
outside of the circle; the sides of the square are of one hundred yards a
piece. It is fortified by four half moons, whose bases are of fifty yards a
piece to agree with the four angles of the square, whose sides flank the half
moon, and the sides of the half moons flank them, so that a man cannot
appear at any point or side of it, but he may be in danger of his life by the
Musket shot.

The second redout demonstrated in figure 25. is also a perfect square, set out
by the outside of a circle, Of the second Redout.
of the same extent of the first, and fortified by four great half moons that
reduce the form of it to a perfect corner cap; the utmost angles of the four
half moons extend themselves twenty yards beyond the four angles of the
square, for the better flanking of the sides and points of the said half
moons that flank one another very well. There is a small redout erected a:
Grays-Inne-lane end much like after this manner; but her extent is too small,
and her flank invisible; and therefore no better then a plain little square
redout.

The third redout is a demy-Paralogramme, Of the third Redout.
half as long again as it is broad; it is set out by the four extrems of two
circles, and fortified by four half moons, whose bases are of 75. yards a
piece, the better to flank the Angles of the Paralogramme that flank the half
moons; this redout for her extent requires three hundred men for her defense,
for it contains 150. yards in length and one hundred yards in breath; It is
of a very convenient form to be placed before the coming in of a gate of a
great garrison Town to command diverse rodes, so the rode that traverse the
same be winding like the letter S. coming in of one side of the exterior half
moon, and going out on the other side of the interior half moon.

The fourth redout is a perfect circle divided in six equal half moons after
the form of a Sexagon; Of the fourth Redout.
it is very well slinked of all sides; because the utmost Angles of her half
moons extend themselves twenty sive yards into the field, more then her
circulary circumference, whereby it is of a greater continent then the other
redout; the demi paralogramme excepted.

The fifth redout is a perfect square, Of the fifth Redout.
s^t out by the outside of a circle, and fortifyed by four Avant-gards, at
the four angles of it; whose utmost angles extend themselves thirty yards into
the field; the breast of the Avaunt guards are twenty five yards broad; just the
quarter part of the base of the square, the face of the Avaunt guard is of the
same extent, and the flank of twelve yards and half. If the 4. sides of this
redout that are in this figure but one hundred yards a piece were of two
hundred yards a piece, it would make a strong and well flanked Fort, so the
utmost angles of the Avaunt guards extended themselves 60. yards into the field;
and the breast to be of fifty yards, the flanks twenty five yards, and the face
of the Avaunt guards of fifty yards. The Royal Fort near Islington is much
after this manner, only the face of his Avaunt guards are square, and do not
extend themselves far enough into the field, and therefore not so regular,
nor so defensible as this.

CHAP. XI. Of the two first Methods of Fortification in general.
THe small difference there is between these two first Methods of
Fortification, by Bastions without, and with Orillons, has induced me to join
them into one; for they agree in all their essential parts, but in two things,
viz. in the Line of their Flanks, and in the having or not having Orillons.
First, concerning the Line of their Flanks, Mr. Ward, Mr. Cruso, Mr. Norwood,
and the Author of the Enchiridion, do make no difference at all between the
Line of their Flanks; Of the difference that is to be observed in the dravving
of the line of the Flanks, when you are to form bastions with, or without
Orillons.
for in all their Modells and Superficies, they draw the Flanks of the Bastions
with, and without Orillons, all after one manner, that is, upon a strait
perpendicularie Line: But on the other side, they would have the side, or the
Base, to be divided into eight parts, when they frame Bastions with Orillons,
and only into six parts when they frame Bastions without Orillons, in both
which points I maintain they are mistaken: First, for the Line of their
Flanks, if it be drawn as they propose, strait and perpendicularie wise, the
Flanks by this means are too much exposed to the Enemies great batteries, and
to the volleyes of their Musketeers shot, as soon as they have gained the
Defendents Counterscarp; and therefore to prevent this evil, I say it is
better and safer to draw the Line of the Flanks of the Bastions that are to be
without Orillons, one eighth part more slope than strait: As for instance,
suppose the Line of the Flank to be forty two yards, then are you (I say) to
strain that Line five yards and one quarter more slope toward the other Flank
of the other Bastion, then a strait perpendicularie Line will afford; for these
five yards make the shoulder of the Orillon, to jet more into the dike then
otherwise it would do, being drawn strait; and by this means this jetting out
is a great safeguard to the Flanks; for all that thick and massy piece of
earth, of the shoulder with this jetty, must of necessity be battered to dust,
before the Flanks can receive any hurt; whereas if the Line be drawn strait,
the Flanks lie open to the Enemies batteries, if the Bastions have no Orillons,
or this jetting shoulder to defend them. This is clearly demonstrated in Plate
7, where the Pentagon fortified by Bastions is described better then it can be
in the Triangle, Square, or Ovall forms, So that I conclude, that the Line of
the Flank is to be drawn strait, when you intend to form your Bastions with
Orillons; and more slope by five yards and a quarter then strait, when you
intend to set out, or form Bastions without Orillons.

As concerning their dividing of the Base, Of the error of dividing the base
into eight parts, when they intend to set out Bastions with Orillons.
or side of any Poligon, when they intend to frame Bastions with Orillons, into
eight parts; and only into six parts, when the Bastions are to be without
Orillons: I say it is superfluous, except they will imitate altogether the best
Italian method; that is, first to divide the Base into ten equal parts, and to
allow four parts for the two Flanks, and the other six parts for the Courtine,
which they divide again into eight parts, to take their Line of defense from
the seventh first part of it. But if they intend to follow the Low Country
method, they are not to divide their Base, but only into six parts, because the
forming of the Orillons does not take or shorten the Courtine at all, as it
will be clearly proved in the next Chapter.

CHAP. XII. Of the Fortifications of the Equilaterall Triangle by Bastions with
Orillons, demonstrated in Plate 9.
THe Equilaterall Triangle is fitter to be fortified by Avant-guards then by
Bastions, because her Angles be so acute, that they produce these defects in
some essential parts of her Fortifications, her Flanks are shorter, the face
of the Bastions longer, and their Breast narrower then they should be, and
these defects cannot be avoided, except the Line of defense be defective, that
all Enginiers are to shun, as the most essential part of all; and therefore I
have had special regard to make that perfect, rather then to amend the other
imperperfections. The Angle of her Center is of sixty degrees, her Angle
flanked of forty five degrees, and her Angle flanking of 160 degrees; her
three sides are of 250 yards a piece, her circumference of 750 yards, and her
continent from out to out, of 26230 yards; and therefore fitter for a large
Redout then for a Royal Fort, for when we have defalked the third part of her
continent for the breadth of the Rampires, the Marketplace and the streets,
there will remain but 17500 square yards for the houses of the Inhabitants, to
every one of which cannot be allowed in this small continent, above one
hundred square yards, that is a piece of ground of ten yards square on all
sides, and according to this scantling there will be 175 Inhabitants, that are
according to the rules of war, to billet two hundred and forty Foot, and a
Troop of threescore Horse, that is, for every third house an Horseman, and
for all the other houses two Footmen appece, or otherwise 350 Foot, and no
Horsemen; for the continent is too small for to billet Horse. But 350 Foot,
with the Inhabitants, commanded by a valiant Commander in chief, may defend
the place three months, against an Army of four thousand men, so it be
provided with all necessaries for a Siege.

To set out the same in the field, How an equilaterall Triangle may be set out
in the field without a Demi-circle, or any Geometrical instruments but a
Square.
have a line of two hundred and fifty yards, having a loop fastened in the
midst of it; and when you have made choice of the Seat, turn your self to
wards the South, and strain your line from the South-East to the South-West,
and where the loop is, and at the two ends of the Line, knock in three stakes;
then take a line of 210 yards, and fasten the same upon the middle stake, and
strain the same full North, and with a great wooden Square try (by setting
one of the sides of it to the first line, and the other side of the Square to
the second line) whether the last line be a perfect strait perpendicularie
line, and when it is so, knock in a stake at the end of the line, The Center of
the equilateral Triangle is in the third part of her perpendicularie line, and
not in the midst, as the Center of circularie Superficies is.
And these three out stakes will represent the three Angles of the Triangle,
then take a six foot rule, and measure from the South stake along the
perpendicularie line, seventie yards Northwards, and at seventie yards end
knock in another stake, and it will represent the Center of the Triangle; for
the Center of the Equilaterall Triangle is in the third part of the
perpendicularie line of it, and not in the midst, as it is in all square or
circularie Superficies: then remove your line of 250 yards from one Angle-stake
to another, and then if you find them all of an equal distance, fasten small
lines about them, and have the Superficie of the Triangle traced by many
Pioniers, with pick-axes and spades; but if any of the Angle-stakes are not
equal, you are to amend the error by the line.

You may also set out the equilaterall Triangle by the Demycircle, as I will
give you directions in the next Chapter saving one, when I shall come to set
out the Pentagon. In the mean time observe this for a general rule, that the
Note once for all, that the gate or dravvbridge of a Fort is alvvaies to be
South, if the seat will permit, and in the midst of a Courtine, to be
defended by the Flan^s of two bastions.
gate o^ drawbride of a Redout, Fort, or Citadell, is always to be full South,
if the seat will permit; but howsoever it must be seated in the midst of a
Courtine, that it may be secured by the Flanks of two Bastions.

The Superficie of the Triangle being traced, you are to divide the three sides
into six equal parts, and at every division to knock in a stake: then you are
to fasten a line to the Center-stake, and to strain it Diagonall-wise toward
the South-East and South-West Angle-stakes, and strait perpendiculary-wise
toward the North stake, making the line thus strained touch every one of
these stakes; and you are to strain this line of 95 The distance from the
Center of the bastion to the point, is in this Triangle of 95 yards.
yards beyond these three Angles stakes, for it is the distance that is to be
between the Center of the Bastion of the Triangle, and the uttermost point of
her Bastions, and at this distance knock in three stakes, and they will
represent the three exterior Angles of the three Bastions. Then fasten a This
Line is to be of 240 yards long, the just extent of the Line of defense.
line to the third stake of every one of the sides, and strain it till it be
fastened one after another to these three Angle-stakes, and it will set out all
the faces of the three Bastions, and all the six lines of defense; then fasten
a short This Line is to be forty yards long, the just extent of the length of
the Flank of this Triangle.
line to all the second stakes of your sides, one time after another, and
strain the same strait perpendiculary-wise, till they cut the other lines that
represent the faces and the lines of defense, and where they cut one another,
knock in six stakes, and they will set out the six Flanks of the three Bastions
and the three Courtines; then have all these things traced by diverse Pioniers,
after you have fastened lines as near the ground as you can to them all.

And that being done, you are to set out the six Orillons of the three Bastions
after this manner; divide the Line of the Flank into three equal parts, and
allow one part for the Flank, and in that part knock in a stake, and the other
two parts for the turning of the Orillon; then you are to advance the shoulders
of every one of the Bastions beyond the stake that did represent the end of
the Flank and of the shoulder, seven yards; How a perfect Orillon is to be set
out in the field.
then you are to knock in a stake, and to fasten a line of seven yards to the
stake that represents the first division of the Flank, and to strain this Line
parallel-wise with the former, and at the end of the Line to knock in a stake;
then you are to divide the just distance of the breadth that is between these
two last stakes, that will fall out to be thirteen yards and a third part, and
in that division you are to knock in a stake, and to that stake you are to
fasten a line of thirteen yards and a third part, and at the end of it being
strained upon a strait line, you are to knock in a stake; then you are to
fasten your iron tracing pin to the other end of the line, and to draw with the
point of it a circularie Line from one stake to another, touching as you pass
by the very last stake that you knocked in, representing the extreme, or the
midst of the circularie line of the Orillon; and by this means you will
form the Orillon perfectly, and very round; and as you have set out this
Orillon, set out all the other Orillons after this very minner: for this one
direction will suffice once for all, for the setting out truly of a perfect
Orillon.

By the setting out of this Orillon, the truth of the former position made in
the last Chapter, viz. that the Base or side of any Poligon is not to be
divided into eight parts, but only into six parts, whether you intend to erect
Bastions with, or without Orillons, because the Courtine is not shortened at
all by the forming of the Orillons; for the dike runs between the Rampire of
the Courtine, and the inward side of the Orillon, as it is clearly demonstrated
in this Triangle fortified by Bastions with Orillons, the Courtine having the
same extent as the other Triangle has, that is fortified by Bastions without
Orillons, except you please to imitate (as I have said) the best Italian
method, that is perfectly set out in a demi Sexagon, in the last Plate of this
Abstract, where you shall find the Base to be divided first into ten parts,
four of which are allowed for the two demi gorges, and the other six parts for
the Gourtine, which Courtine is again divided into eight equal parts, that
the Line of defense may be taken from the first division of the eight equal
parts. And this they do to increase the breadth of the breast and of the gorge of
their Bastions, that they may be more capable of a second, or a third
re-intrenchment, when the Flanks, or the points of their Bastions are beaten
down; but these Bastions erected out of a Base divided into six equal parts,
are reputed here to have their breast and their gorge already too spacious, and
therefore it were superfluous to make them larger.

To conclude: The irregularitie of the Triangle causes the dimensions of her
Bastions to be these: The Flanks are forty yards with the thickness of the
Orillons, the Courtines 166 yards, and two third parts, the Line of defense 240
yards, the breast from out to out 90 yards, the whole gorge 80 yards, the face
of the Bastion of 120 yards, the Orillons 26 yards thick, and twenty yards
long, jetting over the dike, that is a great preservation to the Flanks; and
the distance from the Center of the Bastion to the point, is of 95 yards, the
Orillons being set out: Then you are to set out all the dikes round about the
Fort and Works, observing the dimensions described in the Chapter, where is
spoken of foreign Fortifications, casting the earth of the dikes inward, to
raise your Rampires; and when all your inward works are finished, and the broad
dike perfected, then you are to set out the small dike called La Cunnete, in
the midst of the great dike, that you may make with the earth of it, the
Counterscarp round about the Fort, according to the directions before described.

But if in case your great dike be full of water, and that it is impossible to
dig the small dike, to get earth to make your Counterscarp brest-work, you are
to line the How to erect the brestvvork of the Counterscarp, when the great
dike is full of water.
great dike round about the Fort, at four yards distance from the brim of the
dike, and to dig that twelve foot distance a foot deep, and with that earth you
are to erect the brest-work of your Counterscarp; that is (as I have formerly
said) to be six foot high, having one foot-step of two foot broad, and eighteen
inches high, being adorned on the inside with good Turffe, and the outside
made slope to nothing, and level with the ground, so wne with hay-seed; and
the twelve foot space that has been dug a foot deep, is to be levelled with
an ascent to the foot-step of the brest-work, falling toward the brim of the
dike, that the raine-water may fall into the dike, and keep that space and your
works dry.

CHAP. XIII. Of the Fortifications of the Square by Bastions with Orillons,
demonstrated in Plate 10.
THe square is also irregulary, yet not so much as the Triangle, because the
Angle of his Center is of ninety degrees, his Angle flanked of sixty five
degrees, and his Angle flanking of one hundred forty seven degrees: and by
these helps the faces of his Bastions are not so long, their Breast broader, and
their exterior Angle more Obtus, then those of the Triangle, his four sides
are of two hundred fifty yards a piece, his Circumference of one thousand
yards, and his continent from out to out of 62500. square yards, out of which
is to be defalked the third part, for the breadth of the Rampires, the
Marketplace, and the Streets, and there remains for the lodgings of the
Inhabitants and Soldiers, 41666 yards square, and two third parts, and because
this continent is greater then the former, we will accordingly increase the
scantling of the Inhabitants houses, and allow them to be of 150. square yards,
that is a piece of ground of twelve yards and half square of all sides; by
which scantling, the 41666. yards being divided, there will appear to be in
this continent 277. dwelling houses, and as many Inhabitants, that may billet
four hundred Foot, and two Troops of Horse: and this number is sufficient to
maintain this Fort against an Army of five thousand men three months, so it be
provided with sixteen piece of Ordnance, Balls, Ammunition, Arms, Victuals,
and all other necessaries, fit for a Siege.

Object. Some will wonder why so small a Fort, should have sixteen pieces of
Ordnance, when many of our Garrisons that are of two or three miles
Circumference, have not so many.

Ans. I answer the more is the pity, they are no better provided. But if this
Method of Fortification were not better stored, to what end should Forrainers
be at the charges to erect upper and lower flanks: and because I have not as
yet spoken of these upper and sower flanks, I will upon this occasion describe
how they are made, and for what use they are erected. In the Ancient
Fortifications by Bastions, Of the upper and lovver Flanks of a Bastion.
there was formerly low Casamates to scour the dikes even with the water, for
they were built so low, that a Cannon being mounted in them and pointed, shot
upon a level Line, even with the water of the dike; and these Casamates were
all vaulted with arches of freestone, having two Port-holer, and two
Demy-Cannons, in every one of them, their vault being some sixteen foot square,
and they had a slanting descent from the gorge of the Bastion with a door to
come down to them, but because they had no other light then the Port-holes, nor
no other evacuation for the smoke, then the door, when the Cannoniers fired
their Pieces, they were so encumbered with the smoke in the vault, that they
could not suddenly charge their pieces again, but were enforced to s^ay till
the evacuation of the smoke were past: Whereupon the modern Enginiers to
prevent these defects, have invented the upper and lower slanks, where they
always place two pieces of Ordnance in every one of them, so that according
to the Foreign Method, every Bastion is to have ten pieces of Ordnance, at the
least, two Demy-Cannons in every flank, and two long Culverins to defend the
faces and the point, that is in all ten pieces of Ordnance, these Flanks are
made after this manner: The wall of the flanks is brought up from the bottom
of the dike with freestone of two yards thick, to the level of the water of
the dike, and within and without laid with Tarris, that the water of the dike
may not pierce the same: and upon this wall and the firm ground, after another
foundation of stone has been laid, twenty four foot from the brim of the first
wall, some five foot deep, a Brest-work is brought up of earth and turfe, of
twenty four foot thick in the bottom, and of twenty foot broad at top, and
six foot high, having three Port-holes, and beyond this Brest-worke the ground
is dug lower the whole length of the flank, that is ordinarily from thirteen
yards, to sixteen yards in length, and in breadth, eight yards, and in depth
five foot, and this being laid with tracin; and planked, is the Platform of
the lower flank open over-h^^d, in which they place two Demy-Cannons, and
these scou^^^^d free the dikes from the assay lants galleries, and from the
scaling of the Rampires. Now to erect the upper flank they go eight and forty
foot wider into the g^rge of the Bastion, and upon the in ward foundation of
the lower flank wall, and the earth of the Bastion they erect another
Brest-work of the same height, breadth, and thickness of the former, with three
Port-holes in it, and then they planke another platform and place two
Demy-Cannons more upon the same, and these are the manner of their upper and
lower flanks, that have a slope coming down from the upper to the lower some
ten foot broad, which being covered by the Orillons, make the Bastions very
strong; and when these double flanks are taken out on both sides, the gorge is
not above fifty yards broad, that is narrow enough for the last
re-intrenchment. Now these flanks being all open over head, the smoke of the
Ordnance is suddenly evacuated: the use of the upper Flank is to scour the
face, and the points of the Bastions in the time of a storm, and to beat all
along the Courtine. And so much will suffice once for all, concerning the
erection and use of these lower and upper Flanks.

Now I come to show how you are to set out this Square in the field. If men
could as soon and as easily set out a Superficie in the field, as they may upon
paper, it were soon done; but this last requires a greater labor and care.
You are then in the first place to make choice of your Center, and there to
knock in a stake, then you are to stand close to that stake, and turn your
face full South, and then take your Demi-circle, and set the sight of it upon
the ray of 90 degrees, that is the Angle of the Center of the Square; then you
are to have two men by you, one with lines and the other with stakes, and he
with lines is to have a line of one hundred and You are to observe, that this
line of 180 yards, is the just demi-diagonall line and distance that is
betvveen the Cent r-stake and the Angles of the Square.
fourscore yards, the one end of which line he is to fasten to the
Center-stake; and when you have taken your Demi-circle, and set the sight of it
as aforesaid, you are to take with it, having your face turned to the South,
the right hand ray of the Angle of 90 degrees, and when you have it, let the
man strain the line fastened to the Center-stake along the said ray, to the
end of the line, and when he is just against you and the ray of your
Demi-circle, let the other man knock in a stake at his feet; then turn your
self, and set your Demi-circle to take the left hand ray of the angle of 90
degrees, and when you have it, let the man with the end of the line come to it,
and when he is just against you and the ray of your Demi-circle, let the other
man with stakes knock in a stake at his feet at the end of the line, and these
two stakes represent the South-East and the South-West Angles of your Square;
then turn your self fall North, standing close to the Center-stake, and set
out after the same manner the North-East and North-West Angles of your Square,
and let the man with stakes knock in two stakes, as he did in the South side,
and these four utmost stakes will represent the four Angles of the Square.
Now to avoid error, you are to fasten the line of 250 yards with a loop
fastened in the midst, on the South-East stake, and to strain it to the
South-West stake, if the stake be at the just distance of the line, that side
is rightly set out; then you may knock in a stake where the loop is, to
represent the middle of that side, where the gate and the drawbridge of the
Fort is to be placed; and so prove all the other three sides with your Line of
250 yards, knocking stakes in the midst on every side; for they will stand
you in stead, when you come to divide the sides into six parts. Now if any of
these sides be amiss, and agree not with your Line, then you are to amend them
by your Demi-circle and your Line, which is easily to be done; and when the
four angles and sides are right, you are to fasten lines to the eight stakes
as near the ground as may be, and to set Pioniers to trace the Superficie of
the Square with spades and pick-axes, before you set out the Bastions.

That being done, you are to divide the four sides of the Square into six
equal parts, and to knock in a stake at evene division, then you are to fasten
a line of 90 yards to the former demi-Diagonall Line of 180 yards, that will
then be of 270 yards, and to strain the same The distance from the Center of
the Bastion to the point, is of 90 yards in this Square.
90 yards beyond the four Angle-stakes of the Square, after it is fastened to
the Center-stake, making the said Line to touch the Angle-stake; and at the end
of the said line knock in a stake, and these four stakes will represent the
four utmost points of the four Bastions, and the four former Angle-stakes,
will then represent the Center of the Bastions. This being done, fasten a line
one after another to the third stake of every side, of This Line of 230 yards
is the just extent of the Line of defense of this Square.
230 yards, and strain the same to the four stakes that represent the four
utmost points of the four Bastions, and this line will set out the eight faces
of the Bastions, and all the Lines of defense; then you are to fasten a line
one after another of 41 yards and two thirds to every second stake of the
four sides, The Line of the Flanks in this Square is of 41 yards and two
third parts.
and to strain the same upon a strait perpendicularie line till it come to cut
the former line, that represents the line of defense, and sets out the faces of
the Bastions; and where it cuts the other drive in a stake, and these eight
stakes will represent and set out the eight Flanks and the four Courtines: And
that being done, you are to set Pioniers at work, to trace all these things
before you go about to set out the Orillons.

Now to avoid mistake, you were better to set out one side at a time, and to
have it traced as you set it out, for it will save charges, because it will not
require so many lines. This being done, you are to set out the Orillons, and
after the Orillons the dike; and when all is finished, you are to erect the
Brest-work of the Counterscarp with the earth taken from the small dike, called
La Cunette, adorning the same on the inside with Turffe and a foot-step, as I
have formerly given large directions in Chap. 12. and Plate 9.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Fortifications of the Pentagon by Bastions with Orillons,
demonstrated in Plate 11.
THe Pentagon is also irregularie, yet less then the Square; for the Angle of
his Center is of 75 degrees, and the Angle flanked of the same extent, and his
Angle flanking of 142 degrees and a half, his bases or sides are of 250 yards
a piece, his circumference of 1250 yards, and his whole continent from out to
out of 125000 square yards, it is of a convenient form for a Citadell, or of a
well-compact Town, whose circumference does not exceed three quarters of an
English mile.

Now to direct the Reader once for all, How you may know the continent of any
Poligon with variety of Angles.
how he may speedily calculate the continent of all sorts of Angle Poligons, I
have in this Figure set out a demonstration of it, viz. you are first to draw a
strait perpendicularie from A to B, then a strait parallel line from C to D,
and then to join D and A by a strait line, as it is demonstrated in this
Figure, and it will produce a demi long square, his broad sides containing,
according to the scale of this Figure, 200 yards, and his end-side 125 yards,
which being multiplied one by the other, it will produce 25000 yards, as the
just continent of one of the Triangles of this Pentagon, which being multiplied
by five, (because it contains five Triangles, the whole continent will amount
to 125000 square yards. Now the one third part of it being defalked for the
breadth of the Rampire, the Marketplace and the streets, there will remain for
the Inhabitants houses 83333 yards and a third part, which being divided by one
hundred and fifty square yards, that we allow for every Inhabitants dwelling
house, that is a piece of twelve yards and an half square of all sides, it
will according to this scantling contain 555 houses, and as many Inhabitants,
that are according to the rules of war, to billet in every third house a
Horseman, and in all the rest two Foot-Souldiers apeece; so that it will
contain 185 Horsemen 740 Footmen, and 555 Inhabitants, a sufficient Garrison
to defend this place against an Army of ten thousand men for three months; so
it be provided with Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, victuals, and all other
necessaries for a Siege.

Now to set out this Fort in the field, you are to bring along with you two
men, one with lines, and the other with stakes: and when you have made choice
of your Center the man is to knock in a stake, and you are to stand close to
this Center-stake, and having set the sight of your Demy-circle upon the ray of
75. degrees that is the Angle of the Center of the Pentagon, Note that this
line of 240 yards is the extent of the demi diagonall line of the Pentagon.
the man that carries the lines is to fasten a line of 240. yards to the
Center-stake, and to strain the same full North upon a strait perpendiculary
line, and at the end of it he is to knock in a stake and this stake represents
the North Angle of the Pentagon; that done, take your demy-circle and wind the
right hand ray to the right hand, the man holding in his hand the line of 240.
yards, straining the same according to the ray of the demy-circle, and when he
is at the end of the line and just against you agreeing with the ray of your
demy-circle, let the man with the stakes knock in a stake at his feet, and this
stake will represent the North East Angle of the Poligon, then turn your face
to the North-West, and with the ray of your demy-circle on the left hand, the
man with the line following the same, and when he is just against you and the
ray of the demy-circle, being at the end of the line, the man with the stakes
is to knock in another stake at his feet, and this stake will represent the
North West Angle of the Pentagon. And after this manner set out the South-East
and South-West Angles of the Pentagon, and having knocked in stakes, these five
utmost stakes will represent the five Angles of the Pentagon, and by these
observations, the gate and the drawbridge of this Fort will be full South, and
in the midst of the South Courtine, to be defended by the flanks of two
Bastions; when this is done, you are to take the line of 250. yards having a
loop in the midst, which line you are to strain from stake to stake to prove
whether your stakes are at an equal distance, driving at every middle of all
the sides a stake, as you will be directed by the loop fastened to the middle
of the line: now if any of your stakes be amiss you may easily amend them, by
the demy-circle, and the line, and when they are right, you are to fasten lines
from stake to stake as near the ground as may be; and set many Pioniers to
trace the superficie of this Pentagon, before you set out the Bastions. And
this is also the way how you ought to set out the equilaterall Triangle How to
set out an equilaterall Triangle by the demi-circle spoken of in Chap. 12.
by the Demy-circle, spoken of in the 12. Chapter, by driving a stake full
North to represent the North Angle of the Triangle, and by turning your face
South after you have set the sight of the demy-circle upon 60. degrees, as
being the Angle of the Center of the equilaterall Triangle, turning the ray of
your demy-circle on the right hand, and then on the left hand, and driving at
the end of the line of 250. yards two stakes, for by this means the gate and
the drawbridge of the Triangle Fort will be full South, and just in the midst
of the South Courtine, and defended by the flanks of two Bastions.

The Superficie of this Pentagon being traced you are to divide the five sides
of it into six equal parts, driving in every division a stake, then you are
to fasten to the former line of 240. yards, another line of 83. yards, and a
third, that is the just distance, from the Center of the Bastion to the utmost
point of it, and when you have done so, you are to fasten the same to the
Center stake, and to strain it diagonall-wise 83. yards and one third part
beyond the five Angle-stakes, making the line as you strain it to touch the
said stake, and at the end of the line to drive in five stakes, that will
represent the five utmost points of the five Bastions. And for the setting out
of the rest, I refer you to avoid repetition to the two last Chapters, where
you had large directions to set out the flanks and faces of the Bastions, with
their Orillons, Dikes, and Conterscarpes; and will only acquaint you with the
demensions of this Pentagon, since I did omit the same in the square, yet I
will give a hint of them in this place: the flanks of the square were but
forty yards, and the flanks of the Pentagon are forty one yards, and two third
parts, their Courtines are alike of 166. yards and two third parts, the
distance from the Center to the point of the Bastion, in the square was 86.
yards, and in this Pentagon of 83. yards; the gorge of the Square and of the
Pentagon alike, of 83. yards and one third part.

And the line of defense in the square 230. yards, and in the Pentagon three
yards less.

The faces of the Bastions in the square of 105. yards and in this Pentagon
100. yards, and the breast in the square of 95. yards, and in the Pentagon 100.
yards.

CHAP. XV. Of the Fortifications of the Ovall by Bastions without Orillons
demonstrated in Plate 8.
THe Ovall is as irregularie as the Triangle, and one of the most difficult
superficies to set out in the field, because of the circulary form, and the
variety of the Angles, four of them being of sixty five degrees, and two, of
thirty seven degrees and a half, the Angle flanking of 130. degrees, and the
Angle flanked of 72. degrees and a half; her circumference is of 1500. yards,
and her continent from out to out of 118800. yards; out of which the one third
part being defalked for the breadth of the Rampires, the marketplace, and the
streets, there remains for the houses of the Inhabitants 79200. square yards,
that is to be divided by 150. square yards, for a piece of ground of 12. yards
and half square of all sides, that is allowed to every one of the
Inhabitants, that are found to be by this calculation, 528. that are to billit
176. horsemen and 704. foot-souldiers: A sufficient Garrison to oppose an Army
of eight thousand men for three months, so it be provided with Cannons,
Ammunition, Arms, Victuals, and all other necessaries for a Siege. It is also
a convenient superficie, to fortify a well-compacted markettowne, that may be
reduced to this form of three fourth parts of a mile Circumference.

Now to set out the Superficie in the field, Note once for all, that you are to
have a Sea-compasse, when you go about to set out any kind of Superficies in
the field, to place your angle South, North, East, and West rightly.
you are to make choice of your Center, and to drive in a stake, and to fasten
a line of 80 yards to that stake, and to strain the same full East upon a
strait line, and to drive in a stake; then you are to wind the line about, and
to strain it full West, and to drive in a stake, and these two last stakes
divide the length of the Ovall into three equal parts, of 160. yards a piece,
and represent the two Centers of the two circles, out of which the Ovall is
formed, then you are to fasten a line to the Center stake of 220. yards, that
is the extent of the demy-diagonall line of the South-East and North-East
Angles, and of the South-West and North-West Angles, that are of 57. degrees
and a half, upon theray of which Angle, you are to set the sight of your
demy-circle and standing at the Center stake to turn your face full East,
winding the ray of the circle on the right hand, the man with the foresaid
line straining the same till he come just against you, and the ray of the
circle, then is the man that carries the stakes, to drive a stake at his feet,
then you are to wind the ray of your demy-circle on the left hand, and to do
as you did at right hand, and at the end of the line to drive in a stake, and
these two stakes will represent the South-East and the North-East Angles of the
Ovall, then you are to turn your self full West, and to set out with your
demy-circle, and the foresaid line the South-West and North-West Angles,
driving two stakes at the end of the line. Then you are to fasten a line of
160. yards This is the extent of the demi diametricall line of the breadth of
the Ovall.
to the Center stake, and to strain the same full South, upon a strait line,
and at the end of the line the man with stakes is to drive in a stake, then
wind the same line about, and strain the same full North upon a strait line,
and at the end of the line drive in another stake, and these two last stakes
represent the South and North Angles of the Ovall: then remove this line from
the Center stake, and fasten it to the East Center circle stake, and strain it
full East upon a strait line, and at the end of the line drive in a stake, then
remove the same line to the West Circle Center stake, and strain the same full
West upon a strait line, and at the end of the line drive in a stake, and
between these eight circularie stakes consists the superficie of the Ovall.

Now because the six sides of it are circularie, you are to remove the
foresaid line of 160 yards to the Center-stake, and to fasten your iron
tracing-pin to one side of the line, and the other side to the stake, and to
strain the same full South, and to trace the ground as far as the line will
give you leave, on both sides of the South stake, and then you are to do the
like on the North side; and that being done, you are to fasten these lines one
after another to the East and West circle Center-stakes, and to trace the West
and the East sides of the Ovall with the point of your iron pin, as you did the
South and North sides, joining the tracing of your pin on all sides; and this
being done, you are to set many Pioniers to make the tracing deeper with
spades, or with the flat ends of their pick-axes.

And when this Superficie of the Ovall is sufficiently traced, you are to
divide the six circularie sides into six equal parts, driving a stake in
every division; then you are to fasten a line of 85 yards to every
Angle-stake one after another, and to strain the same upon a strait Diagonall
line from the four Angle-stakes that represent the South-west and North-west,
and South-East and North-East Angles; but upon a strait Diametricall line from
the South and North Angle-stakes, and at every end of the line you are to
drive in a stake, and these six stakes will represent the six utmost points of
the six Bastions; then you are to fasten a line of 240 yards to every third
stake of your six sides, to set out by it the faces and the line of defense of
the Bastions, by straining and fastening this line to every Angle stake twice
to set out the twelve faces, then you are to fasten a line of 45 yards to
every second stake of the six sides or bases, and to strain this line not
perpendicularie-wise, as you have done formerly, when you did set out the
Bastions with Orillons, but five yards more bevell, toward the next Bastion,
then strait; and where the Line cuts the other that sets out the faces of the
Bastions and the Line of defense, you are to drive a stake, and after this
manner set out all the rest, till you have gone round.

Now let me inform you once for all, that the safest and the most frugall way
to set out your Bastions after your maine Superficie is set out, is to set out
one half Bastion at a time, and to have it A general observation to be noted.
presently traced before you remove your Line; for these two Lines, one long to
set out the faces and the Line of defense, and a short one to set out the
Flanks will serve turn; and besides, it will prevent all confusion and
mistakes.

Now when all the Bastions are traced, you are to set out the dike; and when
all is finished, the Counterscarp; as you have been directed Chap. 12, and 13.

The Line of defense of this Ovall is of 240 yards, the distance from the
Center to the point of the Bastion of 85 yards; The gates and dravv, bridges of
this Ovall fortification are to be placed in the midst of the East and West
courtine, that represents the length of the Ovall, and not South and North, as
other Forts are.
and the length of the Courtine, because of her circularie Line, of 170 yards;
the breast of the Bastion, 110 yards; the Gorges of 83 yards and one third part;
and the faces of the Bastions of 100 yards, and others of 90, because of the
winding of the Ovall; and her Flanks of 45 yards, three yards longer then
ordinary, because of the circularie line of the Courtine, that it may the
better defend the inward Angle of the other Flanks.

CHAP. XVI. Of the Fortifications of the Sexagon, by Bastions with Orillons,
demonstrated in Plate 12.
THe Sexagon is regularie, and a most complete Superficie, the Angle of her
Center is of 60 degrees, the Angle flanked of 80 degrees, See in Chap. 18. why
these sides have been set out fifty yards longer then any other formerly have
been. This Sexagon is composed of six equilacerall Triangles equal on all
sides, containing every one of them 39000 yards, which being multi^lied by
six, contain 234000 square yards.
and the Angle flanking of 135 degrees; her sides are of 300 yards a piece, her
circumference of 1800 yards, her whole continent of 235000 square yards; out of
which the one third part being deralked for the breadth of the Rampires, the
extent of the Marketplace and the streets, there remains 156000 square yards
for the houses of the Inhabitants, to whom we will allow in this greater
continent, 200 square yards, that is a piece of ground some thing more then
fourteen yards square on all sides: And after this allowance, the foresaid
number of 156000 square yards, being divided by two hundred square yards, it
will appear that this continent will contain 780 houses, and by consequence
so many Inhabitants, that are according to the rules of war, to billet in
every third house a Horseman, and in all the rest two Foot-Souldiers a piece:
And after this account, there will be 260 Horsemen, and 1040 Foot-Souldiers, a
very complete Garrison to defend a place not much above an English mile in
circumference, so it be stored with Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition, victuals, and
all other necessaries for such a Siege.

I have in this Superficie, as being the last of this Method of Fortification,
set out the broad streets, that go round about the Rampires, and from the
Rampires to the Marketplace, that are to be ten yards broad, and the
Marketplace of an hundred yards in her Diametricall Line, and of the same
form of the Fortification of the Sexagon; for you are to observe in all new
erected Forts, The Market place of a new erected Fort, Citadell, or Garrison,
is to be of the same form of the out-Superficie of the works.
Citadels, or Garrisons, to reduce the Marketplace after the form of the
outside works, to be the more complete, viz. if it be an equilaterall
Triangle, or a Square, or a Pentagon, the Marketplace is to be of the same
form of a Triangle, or a Square, or a Pentagon. Moreover, you are carefully to
observe to line out in every one of them, broad streets of thirty foot broad
round about the Rampires, and from the Rampires to the Marketplace, and these
broad streets that run from the Rampires to the Marketplace, are always in
this Method of Fortification, to be upon a strait Diagonall, or Diametricall
Line from the Center of the Bastion, to the Center of the Marketplace, as
these are drawn in this Figure for these reasons: 1 The streets round about the
rampires serve for all manner of carriages to be brought to the works, and for
the Horsemen to ride to the releef of any of the rampires in the time of a
siege or storm. 2 The great streets that run from the For what use broad
streets lined round about the Rampters and the Marketplace, are erected.
Marketplace to the Bostions, serve for a Troop of Horse, of five of a breast;
or for a Company of Foot, with five or six men on a breast, to come to the
relief of any of the Bastions that are stormed. 3 The Marketplace is always
to serve as the Randezvouz for Soldiers to gather themselves together, to be
sent by the Governor where occasion requires. I have also set out the order
that is to be observed in the erecting of the houses for the Inhabitants, that
are to be lined out with strait double ranges, that gardens or back-sides may
join one against another, that houses may have the more air and light, and
that all their doors may open to the streets, that are to be fifteen foot
broad; for narrow lanes are dangerous in Garrison Towns. The Storehouses or
Magazines of Powder, Bullet, Fireworks, Engines, Ladders, Pioniers tools; and
provision of victuals, as Corn, Meal, Oat-meale, Oats, Malt, Hay, Salt, Powder
Beef, Bacon, Dry fish, Butter, Cheese, Rice, White Pease, and all such
necessaries, are to be in those houses seated round about the Marketplace, as
the most safest seat of the Town.

All these observations are carefully to be regarded, if in case the State
should erect any new Forts, Citadels, or Garrison towns, where there never was
any habitation before; for such a new erected Hold would ten times be more
serviceable then any old erected Town in this Kingdom; (provided all the
dimensions of this Method be observed, that shall clearly be described in the
Ichnography of this Chapter) because they are for the greater part of deformed
shapes, and of a vast extent, and not compacted together, nor their streets
well lined, nor ranged in order, nor their houses well contrived, some of them
being very high, and some very low; but these of this new Of the height of
the nevv-erected Houses in a new Fort, Cittadell, or Garrison town.
erection are to be all alike, and not above two stories high, that may not
exceed with with their roof thirty foot high at the most, that the ridge of
the top of their houses may be lower then the top of the Rampire Brest-work by
nine foot.

Now to set out this Sexagon in the field, you are to make choice of the
Center, and to drive in a stake and to fasten to that stake a line of three
hundred yards, and a foot over, which line the two men that are always to be
with you to carry your instruments, lines, and stakes, are to strain full
East, after you have taken with a good An Enginier is never to be without a
demi-circle, and a good Sea-Compasse.
sea-compasse the East and West points. But if by the long extent of the line
the line swags and cannot be drawn strait, they are to strain it but one
hundred yards very strait, and stiff, and to drive in the ground very deep a
strong stake, and to wind the line about it, then to strain the line again
another hundred yards, and to drive in another stake as before, and to Observe
to vvinde the line alvvaies of one and the very same side of the state, to
avoid breaks.
observe to wind the line always of one and the same side, and to make it come
to be strained again, on that very side you did first wind it upon the first
stake, to avoid all breaks; then you are to strain the line again for the
third time, and to drive in a stake, and this last stake will represent the
East Angle of the Sexagon. Then your men are to untwist the line from the
stakes and to wind it about to the West point, and to strain it and to drive
in three stakes as they did before, and the last stake will represent the West
Angle of the Sexagon: Then you are to stake your demi-circle, and to set the
sight of it upon the ray of 60. degrees, and to stand at the Center-stake and
to turn your face and demi-circle to the East stake, winding the ray of the
demi-circle East and by South, then are your men to follow that ray with the
line, driving at every hundred yards a stake, and when they are at the end of
the line just against you, and the ray of your demi-circle of 60. degrees, let
them drive in a third stake and it will represent the East and by South Angle
of the Sexagon; then turn your self and your demi-circle East and by North,
and set out after this very manner the East and by North Angle, and when that
is done, turn your felfe full West, and set out after this manner the West and
by North, and West and by South Angles, and when all the six angle stakes are
driven in, Note that a good line of three double vvhip-cord vvound together of
300 yards and a foot, having loops fastened at every fifty yards, and another
colored loope at every hundred yards, will suffice to set out all this great
superficie.
then you are to remove your line from the Center stake, and to strain the
same from Angle-stake, to Angle-stake, to try whether your Angle-stakes, and
sides be equal, and to amend them if any be amiss, by the demy-circle and
your line; and when they are all equal, then you are to fasten this three
hundred yard line, one after another from Angle-stake to Angle-stake, as near
the ground as may be, and to set Pioniers to trace that fide before you remove
the line, and that side being traced, you are to trace the other five sides,
one after another, after the very same manner, before you undertake to set out
your six Bastions, that are to be set out after this manner.

When the Superficie of the Sexagon is traced, you are to divide your six sides
into six equal parts, that will be of fifty yards a piece, and to drive in
every division a stake, then you are to fasten one end of your three hundred
yards line to every one of the six angles-stakes, one after another, and to
strain the same into the field one hundred yards beyond the Because the
distance from the center of the bastion to the utmost point, is in this Sexagon
of 100 yards.
Angle-stakes, according to the former rows of stakes you did drive in,
whether the lines of them were diametricall or diagonall, and these six stakes
will represent the six utmost angles of the Bastions; the six former Angles of
the sides of the Sexagon, being by these last six stakes become the Center of
the Bastions. Then you are to fasten one end of your long line to the third
stake of every side, and to strain and fasten the same to the stakes that
represent the utmost points of the Bastions, and for the first, we will suppose
to be the East Angle, then fasten a line of 50. yards to the second stake of
the East and by South side, and strain it perpendicularie wise till it cut the
long line fastened to the third stake of the said East and by South side, on
the right hand that is strained and fastened to the utmost angle-stake on the
left hand of the East and by South side, and where this short line cuts the
long line, drive in a stake, for that stake binds the Courtine, and sets out
that flank, and the long line that runs from the third stake and touches the
East stake to the utmost point of the bastion, represents the line of defense,
and the face of the bastion on that side, and to this face, and the flank, you
are to set Pioniers to trace the same, before you remove your lines, and this
side being traced you are to set out and trace after this very manner all the
eleven other sides, before you undertake to set out the Orillons.

For the setting out of which, The gates and dravv-bridges of this Sexagon
Fortification are to be placed South and North, that they may be defended by
the Flanks of two Bastions, and in the midst of the South Courtine, because
the East and the West points have two Bastions.
I refer you to the 12. Chapter of this Abstract, where directions are
described to set them out, and when the Orillons are set out, you are to set
out the great dike, that is to be thirty yards broad, and ten yards deep, and
the Cunnette five yards deep, and ten yards broad, and the Counterscarp is to
be made with the earth taken out from this small double dike, called La Cunette.

To conclude, this second Method of Fortification, by Bastions with Orillons,
is the best and the strongest that ever was invented, to fortify all manner of
Angle-Polligons, that are regularie, especially if the demensions contained in
this ensuing Ichnographie be observed.

The Ichnographie of the Sexagon demonstrated in Plate 12.
A represents the sides or base of the Sexagon, that are of 300. yards a piece.
B represents the Center of the Bastion, and the distance from the Center to the
point of the Bastion, that is 100. yards. C represents the Courtine that is of
200. yards. D represents the faces of the Bastions, of 120. yards. E represents
the exterior Angle or point of the Bastion. F represents the circularie
compass of the Orillon. G represents the Line of defense, by two pricked lines
that is from 240. yards to 260. yards. H represents the Flanks that are of 50.
yards with the Orillons, but sixteen yards and half besides the Orillons. I
represents the jetty of the Orillons over the dike that is of 20. yards. K
represents the demi gorge that is of 50. yards. L represents the whole gorge of
the Bastion, that is 100. yards. M represents the Breast of the Bastion, that is
140. yards. N represents the Angle flanking of 135. degrees. O represents the
Angle flanked of 80. degrees. P represents the Marketplace, that is of 100.
yards diameter. Q represents the breadth of the dike that is of 30. yards. R
represents the Rampires of 30. yards broad in the bottom, and 20. yards at
top, because the parapet of it with the three footsteps take 30. foot of it,
and the brest-worke is nine foot high within side, and six foot without side,
and twenty foot thick at top, with a slope of three foot. S represents the
broad streets, that go round about the Rampires and to the marketplace that
are thirty foot broad. T represents the small streets that are of fifteen foot,
and the rows or ranges of the houses of the Inhabitants.
CHAP. XVII. Of the third Method of Fortification, by Avant-guards and
out-Guards, and half Moons in general.
THe third method of Fortification would be as chargable as the second, if we
should imitate in the erecting of it, the demensions and proportions of the
Italian and French Enginiers, or adorn them as they do with freestone of all
sides to the Cordeau, or water-table, that is always five yards higher then
the firm or even ground, and sometimes from the bottom of the dike, that are
ordinarily 30. yards broad, 10 yards deep, and their Rampires 20. yards broad,
besides the Brest-workes, and three foot steps that are also 10. yards broad in
the bottom, and 20. foot thick at top, their Rampires being ordinarily brought
up fifteen foot with stone-work from the even-ground and fifteen foot with
turfe and earth, besides the brest-work of nine or ten foot high, that is in
all some forty foot high, besides the depth of the dike, and this they term in
the French Tongue, Tells Rampars sont horse de danger deseallade, that is, such
Rampires are out of danger of scaling; and so they are, for ladders of fifty
rounds, cannot be raised in the night time without noise, although they be made
never so artificially, to be dismounted or set up by screwes in five or six
pieces.

But since we have neither time, nor means, nor men, to man, to erect, or to
finish such great works, we will reduce this third Method of Fortification,
that is capable above all others, to endure without being much the worse,
alterations or diminutions in her dimensions and proportions, to these ensuing
scantlings.

The dikes are to be ten yards broad and five yards deep, not slope to nothing,
as our Country ignorant Surveyours make theirs, more like hedge-dikes, then of
Works and Fortifications; but only allowing a foot slope in every yard; and by
this means the broad dike when it is finished, will be twenty foot broad, out
of which is to be taken a small dike of sixteen foot broad, and eight or ten
foot deep, called by the French La Cunnette; and the slope of this dike is not
to be on every side above a yard, that it may remain ten foot broad in the
bottom; and these dikes are far better, and more difficult to be filled, or to
be passed over, then those that are not a foot broad in in the bottom, as I
have already proved in Chap. 16.

And because the great dike is no broader nor deeper than is abovesaid, and
that the earth that is to be dug out of the small dike is to be thrown on
the field side, some twelve foot beyond the brim of the great dike, for to
erect when all the inward works are perfected, a Counterscarp with a Brest-work
round about the Garrison, of six foot high with a step, we will absolately cut
off from this foreign Method the whole Rampire, and erect only with Turffe,
and the earth that is taken out of the great dike, a Brest-work of twelve foot
high within side, and nine foot high without side from the firm ground,
leaving a water-table between the Turffe and the brim of the dike, of eight
inches, if the earth be good; but if it be sandy, or of a running clay, it must
be left eighteen inches, or two foot broad, notwithwithstanding the chat of
selfe-conceited and ignorant men. The slope of the Brest-work without side is
not to be above a yard in three yards, if the earth be good; but if it be
naught, a foot more will serve, so it be well filled and rammed at every four
courses of Turffe with small brush bavins, as I have formerly given'directions.
And for the flope within side, it is sufficient if it be two foot in twelve, or
one foot in six; for the three footsteps are as a butteresse unto it. And the
reason why the outside of the Brest-work is but nine foot, and the inside
twelve, is, that the Brest-work is to be with five footsteps, four and
thirty foot in the bottom, and twenty foot at top, and so great a thickness
is to have at least a yard slope to convey the raine-water away, and to make
way for the Musketeers to clear with their shot the brim of the dike. But in
this place I will confute the gross ignorance and foolish frugalitie of some
Country Surveyours, that set the inward wall of their Brest-work upon loose
earth, in stead of bringing it up as well as the outside from the firm
ground, and all to save some few loads of Turffe, and a little labor; but this
is a destructive frugalitie; for by it, within a year or two, all their
Brest-works cleave in the midst, and fall as much inward as outward. Now if
these dimensions and proportions be observed in this third, and in the fourth
Method; and the Faces, Flanks, and Angles of the Avant-guards, Out-guards,
Half Moons, and small Flanks truly lined and set out according to Art, our
works should not be an object of derision to Forrainers, as they are, and the
charges would not have been greater then they have been, to erect our slight
and ill-flanked Redouts, Scar-crow mounts, and ridiculous winding Angles as we
have done, for it were better not to fortify at all; but if we fortify thus,
we need not fear with Gods favor, to lose our Garrisons as we have done, in
eight and forty hours.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the extent of the sides or bases of all manner of Superficies,
and of the just length of the Line of defense.
THe opinion of Enginiers does vary much, concerning the extent of the sides
or bases of any manner of regulary Superficie, that is to be fortified by
Bastious: See his Animadversions, Chap. 17. and page 49.
Mr. Ward would have it 900 foot, or 1000 foot at the most. The Italian
Enginiers from 700 foot to 800 foot, and yet their foot is smaller then ours;
and Errard de Barleduck, an ancient French Enginier, would have it from 600
foot to 700 foot: But Sir Anthony de Ville, and Honorat de Meynier, two later
rare French Enginiers, would have the extent of it of 750 foot, that is 250
yards, and with their opinion I concur and assent: And to that end I have
drawn all the sides or bases of the two first Methods, the Sexagon excepted,
of 250 yards a piece, as the most convenient to reduce all the proportions of a
Fortification by Bastions, to a perfect dimension or scantling; Of the true
extent of the side, to have the Line of defense from 200 yards, to 240 yards.
but above all, the Line of defense to her true extent, and have only drawn
the sides of the Sexagon of three hundred yards a piece, to show that Mr. Ward
was as much out in that extent, as Errard de Barleduck was, in maintaining it
should be from six to seven hundred foot at the most; for if his opinion be
followed, the Courtines and the Line of defense will be something too short, as
it may appear in all his Modells, and specially in his regularie Angle
Poligons, that exceed seven Angles. On the other side, if Mr. Wards opinion be
followed, the Courtine and the Line of defense will be some thing of the
longest, as it may appear by the Sexagon demonstrated in Plate 12. And
therefore I conclude, that 750 foot is the best extent for the side or the base
of any Poligon fertified by Bastions.

But as concerning the sides or bases of these two last ensuing Methods, by
Avant-guards and small Flankers, the bases or sides of all manner of
Superficies may be (if you please) from five hundred, to two thousand yards, so
you observe in your division, or in the placing of your Avant-guards and small
Flankers, two hundred and fifty yards between Center and Center of every one
of them. But as for Forts that have no need to have neither Avant-guards, nor
small Flankers, but only in their Angles, you are then to observe carefully to
make their sides of no longer extent then of 250 yards a piece.

Now if any should so much mistake himself, as to erect two or three Bastions
upon a side of 500 or 750 yards, these Bastions are no more true Bastions, but
Ravelias; for it is improper for a Bastion to be placed any where, but upon an
Angle. Suppose then you would fortify a Town that contains some three miles
circumference, that can be reduced in a circularie form: if you will fortify
the same by 24 Bastions, you must reduce this circularie form into four and
twenty sides, and as many Angles; but if you fortify the same by
Avant-guards, or small Flankers, you need not to divide this circularie form,
but into eight sides, and place in every side two Avant-guards, and one half
Moon beyond the dike, to defend the Angle; but if you fortify the same by
small Flankers, then every one of these eight Angles is to have a Flanker, and
every side two Flankers more, as it is demonstrated in Plate 18, and 23. And
this will suffice to have been spoken, concerning the sides, or bases of all
manner of Superficies.

Concerning the Line of defense, See his Animadversions, Chap. 30. and page 74.
Mr. Ward is over-bitter against Errard de Barleduck, because he draws his
Line of defense from the very corner of the Flank, and not from the third of
the base or side which he calls the Courtine. I do acknowledge that it is
better to draw the Line of defense from the third part of the side or base, as
Mr. Ward would have it, then from the corner of the Flank, and especially if
the sides of the Fortification be of If a side is of 300 yards, it is better to
dravv the Line of defense from the middle of the Courtine, then from the third
part of it.
300 yards a piece, as Mr. Ward would have them to be; nay, it were better if
it were drawn from the middle of the side or Courtine, (for it is one and the
same thing.) To rectify the error of the extent of his sides, of three
hundred yards a piece, that makes the Line of defense unserviceable for the
musket shot, if the Line be drawn from the third part of the Courtine; whereas
it would serve turn, and amend the error of the overlong extent of the fide,
if it were drawn from the middle of the Courtine. Yet for all this small
error of Errard, I see no reason why Mr. Ward should be so bitter against him,
for his own Modells are not without defects; for it is a very good horse that
never stumbleth. And it is well known to all Artists, that Errard de Barleduck
was an experienced Enginier, and the first that adorned the Art of
Fortification in the French tongue. Besides, the Line of defense is better (in
the Superficies of the equilaterall Triangle, and of the Square) to be taken
from the corner of the Flank, then from the third part of the side or Courtine,
because it opens the breast of the Bastion, and makes their exterior Angle
more obtus, then when it is drawn from the third part of the Courtine.
Moreover, Mr. Ward does wrong or mistake Errard, and the other French Enginier,
to allege as he does, that they rely most upon the musket shot for the
defense of the Courtines, faces, and points of their Bastions, despising the
defense of them b^ the Ordnance shot; the defense of the musket shot being
(says he) no defense at all, to empede the Assailant from casting their
galleries over the mote. But I say that Mr. Ward does mistake the meaning of
Errard, and of the rest of the French Enginiers; for they erect their lower
Flanks, and provide them with Demi-Cannon; only to prevent the casting of
galleries over their mote: And for their upper Flanks, besides the
Demi-Culverins they place upon them, to defend the faces and points of their
Bastions, they place Musketeers to discharge their shot continually, while
their Demi-Culverins are charging again, and so make use of Ordnance and of
Musket Shot also, for the defense of them. Therefore I will conclude with the
Assertion of one of the greatest See the Duke of Roan in his Perfect Captain,
Chap. 8.
Commanders of our days, that the extent of the Line of defense is the best,
that is convenient for the Musket Shot, as well as for the Cannon-shot.

CHAP. XIX. Of the Fortifications of the Superficie, in the form of S.
Michaels Cross, fortified by eight Halfe-Moones, demonstrated in Plate 13.
THe Circumference of this Superfice is so great that it contains 3680. yards,
that is two English mile, and one third part of a mile, and therefore fitter to
fortify some Corporation town then for a Fort, so it may be reduced to this
form; the Angles of the Center of it are of fifty five degrees, and the
exterior Angle of the halfe-Moones are of sixty five degrees, half of the
faces of the halfe-Moones are of 250. yards, and the other half of 210. yards
a piece, whereby they require to be defended by small drakes, or sacres,
besides the musket shot, but if upon every point of the half Moon a platform
were erected as they are most commonly in all Redoubts, or Forts after this
manner, viz. the Angle upon which you intend to erect a platform, is to be
brought up twelve foot high from the ground, to be level with the inward side
of the Brest-worke, and toward the town slope nothing, and when it is so, you
are upon the last course of turfe, to place a frize with sharp picked quarters,
of six foot long, four inches broad, and three inches thick, Seven or eight
inches distance one from another.
jetting one yard over the dike and running a yard into the brest-worke, that
is to be raised so far as the platform goes on both sides, fix foot higher
then the other Brest-work, in which Brest-work the Port-holes are to be made
two on every side, so that these Angle-Brest-workes are to be 18. foot from the
ground, having a frize as is above said round about the Platform to free it
from scaling, to place two Sacres, and two Drakes upon every platform, this
Fortification being so provided, will be of great defense, and very offensive
to the assaylants, because the half Moons flank one another so well, that
none can approach the sides or the points of them, without great danger of
their lives; but if the diametricall line of this Superficie were reduced less
by one half or the scale of it, brought from 30. yards to 15. yards, it would
have been of a great defense, without Drakes or Sacres, by the musket shot
only. But I have purposely set out the same so large to show how such great
sides may be set out in the field, for they are far more difficult to set
out, uhen shorter demensions.

Now to set it out in the field, you are to make choice of the Center, and to
drive in a stake; then you are to have a line ready of 330. This Line of three
hundred and thirty yards is the just Demi-Diagonall and Diametricall extent of
the Line that is to set our the eight inward Angles of this Superficie.
yards, having at every fifty yards a loop fastened to it of one color, and
another loop of another color fastened to it at every hundred yards, then you
are to stand at the Center-stake, and to turn your self full South, after you
have set out with your Sea-compasse as near as you can to that distance, of
the line, the South, North, East, and West points, because the four sides of
your cross are of necessity to be lined so; then set the sight of your
demi-circle upon the ray of 55. degrees, and wind the ray of your circle first
on the left hand, and let the man with the line fasten the one end of it to the
Center-stake, and follow with the other end of the line, the ray of your
demi-circle, and when he is one hundred yards distance from you, and just
against you, and the ray of your demi-circle, let the other man that carries
the stakes, drive in a stake at his feet, and twift the line once or twice
about the stake, observing always to make the line to come to be strained
again on that very side, In sides that are above one hundred yards, that
require above two stakes, you are carefully to observe, to vvind the Line upon
the stakes all of a side, to prevent breaks
that he first twisted the same, to avoid breaks, because the thickness of a
stake of two inches thick will cause a great break in the extent of three
hundred yards, that being done, let him follow still the ray of your
demi-circle, and when he is another hundred yards distant from the last stake,
and two hundred yards from you, but just against you, and the ray of your
demi-circle, let the man with stakes drive in a second stake at his feet, and
wind the line about the stake ^he did before, then let him go forward and
strain still the line till he be a hundred yards more from the second stake,
and when he is just against you, and the ray of your demi-circle, let the man
with stakes drive the third stake at his feet, and having twisted the line
about that stake as he did before, let the man with the line go forward 30.
yards, and when he is just against you and the ray of the demi-circle, let the
man with stakes, drive in the fourth stake at his feet, and between these
four stakes there will be 330. yards, and the last stake will represent the
South-East inward Angle of the Cross; then you are to wind the ray of your
demi-circle on the right hand, and to set out after the very same manner the
South-West inward Angle, and having driven in four stakes as before, you are
to set out the other six Angles after the very same manner as you have done
these two, and when the eight Angles are set out thus, and stakes driven in
them all, then remove the line of three hundred thirty yards, and fasten
another line to the Center-stake, of 250. The extent of the Demi-Diametricall
and Diagonall Line, from the Center to the utmost point of the Hasse Moon, is
500 yards.
yards, and strain it South-East diagonall wise, this line being the just
moytie of the demi-diogonall and diametricall line, from the Center-stake to
the utmost points of the eight half Moons, and at the end of it drive in a
stake, and this stake represents the Center of the South-East half Moon; then
remove the line from the Center-stake and fasten the same to the last stake,
and strain it again diagnail-wife, and that stake will reprsent the utmost
point of the South-East half Moon, then set out after the very same manner
the other seven Centers, and utmost points of the half Moons. Now because-the
sides or faces of your half Moons are not equal, eight of them being 250.
yards a piece, and the other eight but 210 yards a piece, you are to set out
the eight longest first by fastening a line of 250 yards one after another to
the four stakes, that represents the four ends of the two diametricall lines
of the pricked Square demonstrated in this Plate, and to strain this line eight
times one after another to the utmost Angle stakes that represent the utmost
points of the half Moons, and as you strain it, fasten the same to the
stakes as near as you can to the ground, that the Pioneers may trace that
side, or face of the half Moon, before you remove the line to another side,
and one side being set out and traced, set out and trace all the other seven
sides after this very manner.

Then you are to remove this line of 250. yards, and to fasten another line of
210. yards to the four diagonall inward Angles Center stake, that are just
oposite to the Angles of the pricked Square demonstrated in this Plate, to set
out the eight shorter sides or faces of the half Moons after the very same
manner as you did set out the longer sides or faces, and these being also set
out and traced, the superficie of this Fortification will be perfected, then
you are to set out the dikes according to the demensions described in Chapter
17. and when the inward Works are finished, then you are to erect the
Counterscarp with the earth that is taken out of the small dike, called La
Cunnette.

CHAP. XX. Of the Fortifications of the Faralograme, fortified by Avant-guards,
demonstrated in Plate 14.
THe broad side of this Paralograme is of 900 yards, and the end side of it of
450 yards, and all the circumference of it 2700 yards, that is, an English
mile, and three fifth parts of a mile; for her continent I will not stand upon,
because it is not of a convenient form to erect a new garrison, but only fit
to fortify some market town, if need should require; of which form there are
many in this Kingdom, most of them being as long again as they are broad: Yet
let the Reader observe, that incase he be required to fortify a town that may
be reduced to this form, that has her broad side of 700 yards, and her end
side of 350 yards, that he may boldly undertake to fortify the same after this
manner, so he divide his end into five parts, and his broad side into ten
parts, and does reduce the rest of the demensions of the faces, breasts, flanks,
courtines, and line of defense after the proportions of his sides; for then the
dimensions of such a fortifiation will be more complete then this, and
altogether defensible by the musket shot. But I have set out this so on
purpose, to show what may be done, when men are tied by the extent of a place,
and enforced to omit to erect four Avant-guards less then they should, to
avoid charges. The Angle of the Center of her broad side is of 135 degrees, and
of her end side of 45 degrees. This is the most frugall way that can be
invented to fortify a long town of so large an extent as this is; for it is
almost a mile and three quarters in the circumference, her end side individed
into five parts, two of which are allowed for the breast of the two end
Avant-guards, that contain 90 yards apeece, and the courtine 270 yards: her
broad side is divided into ten equal parts, two of which are allowed for the
breast of the Avantguards, that are of 90 yards a piece, uniforme with the end
of the Avant-guards, the four Angle Courtines are longer then the middle
Courtine by 120 yards, because of the addition of the long Flank to every one
of them, that extend themselves into the field 120 yards more then the utmost
angles of the Paralog rame, the end and the middle Courtines are defensible by
the Musket Shot, because they are between two Flanks, and also because the Line
of defense of the faces of the Avant-guards is taken from the middle of the
Courtine, whereby the Line of defense comes to be from two hundred and forty
to two hundred and fifty yards; but the long Angle Flanks cannot sufficiently
be defended by the Musket Shot alone, without four Drakes and four Sacres,
one Sacre and one Drake mounted upon every one of the long Flanks, and with
them, this Fortification will be of great defense: The short Flanks are of 60
yards a piece, and the faces of the Avant-guards of 120 yards a piece, uniforme
with the long Flanks.

To set out this Superficie in the field, you are to knock a stake in your
Center, and to stand close to it, and to set your self East, after you have
set the light of your Demi-circle upon the ray of 45. degrees; to set out the
East and by South, and the East and by North Angles, as you have been directed
for merly, and then to turn your self West, and to set out the West and by
South, and the West and by North Angles; and these b^ing rightly set out, and
stakes knocked in them, your two broad sines North and South cannot be amiss
But if it be an erected Town, take the just length on the broad and end-side of
it, with a line of 100 yards, and set out your Angles with the Demi-circle
accordingly: and divide your end-side into five, and your broad side into ten
equal parts, and then set out your Avaunt Guards thereafter.

CHAP. XXI. Of the Fortifications of the Equilateral Triangle fortified by
Avaunt Guards, demonstrated in Plate 15.
ALL the sides of this Equilateral Triangle are equal, and contain 520 yards
apiece, so that her circumference is of 1560 yards, that is an English mile
wanting 64 foot; the Angle other Center is of 60 degrees. I omit her continent,
because of her large extent, that is fitter to fortify a well compacted town,
that may be reduced to this form, then for a new Fort. Her sides are divided
into eight equal parts; two of which, are allowed for the two breasts of the
Avaunt Guards, that contain 65 yards apiece; and the other six pares are divided
equally for the three Courtines, that contain 130 yards apiece. Her long
flanks are 100 yards apiece, and her short flanks of 50 yards apiece, and the
faces of her Avaunt Guards, are uniform to her long flanks, whereby they are
also of 100 yards apiece. And by these dimensions, it is apparent that this
Superficie is a compact and complete Fortification because all her Faces,
Flanks, Courtines, and Angles, can be easily defended by the Musket shot; her
line of defense is taken from the middle of the Courtine, and by this means of
160 yards.

Yet let me inform the reader, that if he had occasion to fortify a town that
might be reduced into this Triangle for me, although her sides were from 520
yards apiece, to 750 yards apiece, that he may boldly fortify the same after
this manner, so he divide his three sides into 8 equal parts; and does
preportion his Flanks, Faces, Breasts, Courtines, and line of defense, after
this extent: for notwithstanding this addition of 230 yards to every side of
the Triangle, all the dimensions of his fortification, will be defensible by
the Musket shot.

Now to set out this Superficie in the field, you are to make choice of your
Center, and to knock in a stake; and after to set the sight of your Demi-circle
upon 60 degrees, and to follow the same directions given you in plate 9 for the
setting out of a Triangle fortified by bastions. And because these sides are as
long again as they were, I refer you to the directions given you in chap.
19. for the straining of a long line by knocking in at every hundred yards of
it a stake. But if it be an erected town that you are to fortify, after this
manner, go up to the end of the town where you intend the North Angle of the
Triangle shall be, and turn your face South; and with your Demi-circle, when
the sight of it is set upon the ray of 60 degrees, set out the South-East Angle
of the Triangle, cau^ing the man with lines to strain a line from the North
Anglestake where you stand, to follow the ray of your Demi-circle; the man with
stak s knocking at every hundred yards a stake, and by this plurality of stakes
you may lengthen your line as you please, twisting the same always of one and
the same side of the stake, till he come to the just distance of your side of
the Triangle, whether it be five hundred and twenty yards, or 720 yards; and at
the side of the distance, knock in a stake, and that last stake will represent
the South-East Angle of the Triangle, then set out after this manner the
South-East Angle, and knock in a stake at the same distance, that it may
represent the South-West Angle; then measure with a line of 100 yards, whether
the distance between the South-East and South-West Angle stake, is equal with
the two other sides; and finding it to be equal, then is the Superficie of the
Triangle perfected, that you are presently to have traced, by many Pioniers;
but if there be any error, you are to amend the same by your Demi-circle and
your lines.

The Superficie of the Triangle being traced, you are to divide the sides into
8 parts, and at every division to knock 8 stakes; knocking in also a stake in
the middle of every side, for it will serve to set out the faces of the Avaunt
guards, and the lines of defense, allowing two parts to every Courtine, and two
parts to the two breasts of the Avaunt guards; and at every third stake of every
side, you are to fasten a line of 32 yards and, and to strain it first on the
right hand along the side traced; and at the side of the line you are to knock
in a stake, and then you are to wind the same line on the left hand, and to
strain it along the side traced; and at the end of the line you are to knock
in a stake, and these two stakes will represent the breadth of the breast of the
Avaunt Guards; the exterior stake toward the Angles of the Triangle,
representing the beginning of the long flank, and the inward stake toward the
middle of the side, representing the beginning of the short flank, and as you
have set out this first breast of the Avaunt Guard, you are to set out the other
five after the same manner. That being done, you are to fasten a line of one
hundred If you can strain a line from the middle stake of the side of 320
yards, that is the just distance; from the side opposite to every long flank,
it would ^e the better; if not, this way will serve turn, so you stand with
your Demi-circle. At the middle stake of the side ^o guide the end of the line
of 100 yards, to the very out most Point or Angle of the Avaunt Guard.
yards to every one of the stakes that represent the beginning of the long
flank, and to strain the same into the field upon a Diagonal line, taken from
the midst of the Courtine or side opposite to it; and at the end of the line
knock in a stake, and six of these stakes will represent all the utmost parts
of the long flank, and set out the sides of them that are to be traced as you
set them out: then fasten a line of fifty yards to every inward stake that
represents the inward parts of the breast, and the beginning of the short flank,
and strain the same into the field, parallel with the line of the long flank,
and at the end of a line knock in a stake, and these six stakes will bound and
set out all the short flanks that are to be also traced, as you remove the line
from one stake to another. Then you are to fasten a line of one hundred and
threescore yards to every one of the middle stakes of the side, and to strain
and fasten the ^^me one after another to the utmost stakes that represent the
Angles or Points of the Avaunt Guards; and they will set out all the faces of
the Avaunt Guards and the lines of defense; for they will out the line of the
short flanks, and end at the point of the long flanks, and these faces are also
to be traced before you remove this line from one stake to another: and these
being all traced, you are to set out all the ditches, according to the
dimensions described in the 17 chap. of this abstract. And when all the ditches
and inward works are finished, you are to set out the small ditch called La
cunette out of the great ditch, and with the earth of it to erect the
brest-work of the Contre escarpe, as it is described in chap. 17.

Here follows the Itchnographie of this method of Fortification, but
specially of the fortifications of this equilaterall Triangle. The letter A.
represents the Market place, that contains in extent one hundred yards on
every side.

B. Represents the breast of the Avaunt guards that are in this figure, out 65
yards bread. C. Represents the Courtines that are in this figure, but 130.
yards. D. Represents the ditches that are 10 yards broad, and 5 yards deep,
besides the small ditch called La cunette, that is 16 foot broad, and nine foot
deep. L. F. Represents the long flanks, that are 100 yards long. S. F.
Represents the short flanks, that are 50 yards long. F. Represents the faces of
the Avaunt guards, that are in extent 100 yards. G. Represents the broad street
that goes round about the Rampiars, and from the Rampiars to the Market place,
that are to be 30 foot broad. H. Represents the places for the lodgings and the
small streets, that are to be 15 foot broad. I. Represents the middle of the
South Courtine where the gate and the drawbridge is to be placed. K.
Represents the brest-works with his five footsteps, that is 34 foot in the
bottom, with the five footsteps, and twenty foot at top; 12 foot high within
side, and 9 foot without side, with a slope at top, from twelve to nine that is
a yard; the five footsteps are two foot broad, and eighteen inches high
apiece.
CHAP. XXII. Of the Fortifications of the square, fortified by Avaunt Guards,
and Out-Guards, demonstrated in Plate 16.
THe four sides of this square contains 400 yards apiece, and by consequence
the circumference of it is of 1600 yards, that is almost an English mile; the
Angle of his Center is of 90 degrees; I will omit his continent, for it is
fitter to fortify a compact Market town, that may be reduced to this form,
then for a Fort; it is to be set out after the manner as has been described in
Plate 10. And therefore I will only here insert some directions how you are to
set out the Avaunt Guards, and Out-Guards, by which it is fortified.

The square being set out and traced, you are to knock four stakes in the midst
of the four sides of it, then you are to fasten a line one after another to
these four stakes of 125 yards, and to strain the same upon a strait
perpendicular line from the Center stake, 125 yards into the field, and at
every end of the line to knock in a stake, and these four stakes will
represent the middle of the faces of the four Avaunt Guards; then you are to
fasten a line of 41 yards. to the very same stakes whereon the line of 100
yards was fastened to; that is, to be removed and put by: and this line of 41
yards, and. is to be strained first on the right hand, and then on the left
hand; upon the traced sides of the squares, and at every end of the line you
are to knock a stake; and having done so to all the four sides one after
another, these eight stakes will represent the breadth of the breast of the
four Avant-Guards: that is of 83 yards,. for the Avaunt Guards are to be one
third part longer then they are broad; then you are to fasten to every one of
these last stakes, the former line of one hundred yards one after another, and
to strain the same parallel wise to the stakes that represent the middle of the
face of the Avaunt Guards; and at the end of every line you are to knock a
stake, and to trace that flank of the Avaunt Guards, before you remove the line
to the other flanks stake; and having done so round, and knocked in eight
stakes, all the flanks will be set out and traced: then you are to remove the
line of 100 yards, and lay it by, and to fasten the former line of 41 yards,
1/5. to the utmost middle stakes, that represent the middle of the faces of the
Avaunt Guards, and to strain and fasten the same first to the right hand stake,
and then to the left hand stake that represents the utmost Angles of the Avaunt
Guards; but before you wind the line from the right hand, to the left hand
stake, have that moity of the face of the Avaunt Guard traced, then wind the
line on the left hand, and trace the other moity of the face; and as you have
set out and traced that face of the Avaunt Guard, do all the rest after this
manner: which being done, your four Avaunt Guards will be perfectly fet out and
traced.

Then you are to set out all your ditches after the same dimensions described
in chap. 17. and to cast all the earth inward; to erect your brest-works and
their footsteps, of that height and breadth mentioned in the said Chapter. And
when all the ditches, brest-works, and footsteps are finished, then you are to
set out the small ditch called La cunette, out of the great ditch; end with the
earth that is taken from it, you are to erect the brest-work with the foot-step
of it of your Contre escarpe, four yards beyond the brim of the great ditch.
Before you set out any of your Out-guards, that are not to be undertaken before
the brest-work and the slope of it belonging to the Contre esearpe, be fully
finished; only you are to leave a gate of 12 soot broad against the places
where you are to erect your out-gtards, and these gates are to be made up by so
many strong and sufficient Turn-Pikes, well ironed, with iron pikes, and good
hasps and locks: for by these you are to relieve your Out-guards, or make your
retreat, if you be driven from the Out-guards: all this being finished, you are
to set out the Out-guards after this manner.

The four Out-guards against the four Angles of the square, are four
equilater all Triangies or Holfe-moones of one hundred yards on all sides, two
of the sides are to have a di^ch of nine foot broad, and six foot deep; and
their brest-works of six foot high with a foot-step, and the brest-work at cop
is to be six foot thick, and in the bottom nine foot with the foot-step. And
the other side toward the Angle of the square is to be open, that the
assailants may be discovered if they should possess themselves of these
Out-guards; he Points of these Triangles that are toward the Angles of the
square, are to be 16 foot distant from the brim of the ditch.

The four smaller Triangles have their Base 13 yards longer then their two
sides that are to have ditches and brestworks that are to be of the very same
dimensions of their former Triangles; their base is of 83. and their fortified
sides of 70 yards; the first defend the Angles of the square and the flanks of
the Avaunt Guards, and the last defends the faces of the Avaunt Guards; so that
this fortification is complete, strong, and of great defense: the coming in is
to be in the middle of the South Avaunt Guards, for the gate and the drawbridge
are flanked, and covered by one of the Halfe-moons.

CHAP. XXIII. Of the Fortifications of the Pentagon fortified by Avaunt Guards,
and Out-Guards, demonstrated in Plate 17.
I Have formerly shown in Plate 11, how to set out the Pentagon in the field;
to omit repetitions, I will only give you some directions how to set out the
Avaunt Guards, and the Out-guards of this Pentagon, because this Fortification
differs from the other. The Angle of the Pentagon is of 75 degrees, his five
sides are of 240 yards apiece, ten yards less then the former; the
circumference of it is 1200 yards, that is almost three quarters of an English
mile, a very convenient form for a Royal Fort for the continent of it: it
differs little from the other, because the circumference of it is but 50 yards
less, and therefore I will refer you to Plate 11. only I will inform you
that if the circumference of it were a quarter of a mile greater then it is,
that it might be defended, being fortified after this method by a smaller
number of men then the other could be, that is fortified by bastions, with
orillons.

When the Superficie of the Pentagon is fully set out and traced, you are to
divide his five sides, into three Note by this that the breast of the Avaunt
Guard is 80 yards broad.
equal parts, that will be of 80 yards apiece, and you are to knock in stakes
in all their divisions; then you are to divide the middle division in two
parts, that there may be a stake knocked in to represent the middle of every
side. Then you are to fasten a line of 80 yards Note that the greatest slanks
of the Av nt Guards advance 80 yards into the field.
to the South-East Angle stake, and to strain the same full East upon a strait
line agreeing with the side, and at the end of the line knock in a stake; then
remove that line and fasten the same to the North and by East Angle stake, and
to strain it as before, and to knock in a stake; then remove that line, and
fasten the same to the North and by West Angle stake, and strain it as before,
and knock in a stake; then remove the line and do the like, to the West and by
North Angle, and as much to the West and by South stake, straining the line as
is said before; and at every fide of the line knock in a stake, and these five
stakes will represent the five out-most Angles or Points of the five Avaunt
Guards. Then remove that line, and fasten a shorter line of The short slank is
sorcy yards.
40 yards to the second stake of the South side, on the left hand South West;
and strain the same into the field perpendiculary wise, and knock in a stake at
the end of the line, and this line will represent the short flank of the
South-West Avaunt Guard: and as you have set out this short frank, set out the
other four, and knock stakes at every end of the line, and these five stakes
will represent the five short flanks. Then fasten the former line of 80 yards
to every one of these last stakes, one after another; and first of all to the
South-West short flank, and strain the same Diagonal wise, fastening the same
to the stakes that represent the out-most Point of the Avaunt Guard: and before
the line be removed, set Pioniers to trace the same, and it will set out the
face The line of defense is taken from the midale of the side or Courtine that
is in this figure of 240 yards.
of the South-West Avaunt Guard; and as you have set out this face, set out the
other four, after the same manner. You are to observe, that if a line of four
hundred yards could be strained from the South-East Angle of the side of the
Pentagon, and fastened to the outmost Point stake of the South-West Avaunt Guard,
that this Diagona line that represents and sets out the face, would be more
perfect, for it would cut the end of the short flank, and terminate it self at
the end or point of the long flank; but this cannot be done conveniently: only
when you set out these faces, stand with your Demi-circle at every Angle stake
of the side opposite to the face you set out, and by the Diagonal ray of your
circle, you may guide the line of the faces, to be set out as perfectly, as if
a line of 400 yards had been strained.

Now when you have thus set out and traced the five Avaunt Guards, with their
faces, long and short flanks; you are to set out all your ditches, after the
dimensions described in chap. 17. Casting the earth of them inward, to erect
the brest-works and their five footsteps of that height, breadth, and
thickness, there described. And when all your inward works, and the great
ditch is finished, you are to set out the Cunette or small ditch out of the
great ditch, and to erect with the earth that is taken out of it, the Contre
escarpe brest-work, distant from the orim of the great ditch four yards,
observing the rules and dimensions described in chap. 17. and also five places
of twelve foot apiece to be left open in the brest-work of the Contre escarpe;
to set five Turn-Pikes right against these five Halfe-moones here demonstrated,
which Halfe-moones you are to set out after your Contre escarpe brest-work is
finished, placing the open side of them within 16 foot distance of the slope of
your Contre escarpe, that there may be a clear passage for horse and foot to
come to the Halfe-moones, without spoiling of the slope of the Contre escarpe,
that the French call glasis.

The five Out-guards of this figure are five Halfe-moones, that have one side
longer than the other by twenty yards; And this must of necessity be observed
that the Ling side of the Halt-moones, may cover the slanks of the Avaunt Guards.
the long side is of 80 yards, and the short side of 60 yards; their ditch is
to be nine foot broad, and fix foot deep; their brest-work is to be 9 foot
broad in the botteme, with the foot-step; and six foot thick at top, having a
foot slope; and their height six foot from the ground, and four foot and a
half from the footstep. The gate and drawbridge of this Fort is to be in the
middle of the South side, that it may be defended with the South-West flank,
and covered with the South Halfe-moon, marked with the letter A.

CHAP. XXIV. Of the Fortification of the Demi-Sexagon fortified by Avaunt
Guards, and Out-guards, demonstrated in Plate 18.
THis Sexagon is of a large extent, for her sides are of 800 yards apiece, and
by consequence her cucumference is of 4800 yards, that is almost two English
miles and a half; and therefore fitter to fortify a good Corporation, then
for a Citadell, or Fort: the Angle of her Center is of 60 degrees. And the same
directions that were given you for to set out the Sexagon demonstrated in Plate
12. fortified by bastions with orillons will suffice, with the observations
contained in chap. 19. viz. to knock in stakes at every hundred yards, when
sides, or Diametricall, or Diagonall lines exceed 250 yards.

The Superficie of this Sexagon being then set out, and fully traced, as it
has been shown in the foresaid Plate; you are to divide every one of the
Bases into three equal parts, that will be of 266 yards, and. apiece; and to
knock in a stake at every division: then you are to fasten a line to the two
inward stakes one after another of 60 60 Yards is the just moity of the breast
of the Avaunt Guards.
yards, and to strain the same first on the right hand; and upon the side
traced and the end of the line you are to knock in a stake, then you are to
wind the said line about on the left hand, and to strain the same upon a
strait line upon the sidetraced: and at the end of the line you are to knock in
a stake, then you are to remove the line, and to fasten the same to the other
in ward stake of that side, and to do as you did before; and to knock in two
stakes at the end of the line, and these four stakes represent the breadth
That is of 120 Yards broad.
of the two breasts of these two Avaunt Guards, and the middle stake represents
the Center of the Avaunt Guards. Then you are to set out the breast of the other
ten Avaunt Guards of the other five sides, after the very same manner as you did
these last.

And that being done, you are to fasten a line of 120 yards to every one of the
exterior stakes that represent the breadth of the breasts of the Avaunt Gnards,
and to strain the same into the field upon a strait Diagonall line, derived
from the Center stake of the Sexagon; that you are to guide by the sight of
your Demi-circle, standing at the Center stake, while the man that carries
your lines, straineth the foresaid line into the field: and at the end of it,
the man that carries your stakes, is to knock in a stake, and this stake
represents the utmost Point of the long flank of your first Avaunt Guard. And as
you have set out this long Note and observe, This course is to be taken,
lecause the Demi Diagonal line of this Sexagon, from the Center stake to the
utmost Point of the long flank, is of 680 yards; that is too long a line to be
conveniently strained.
flank, set out the other eleven that remain. And that being done, you are to
fasten a line of 60 yards to the inward stake of that Avaunt Guard, that
represents the breadth of the breast of it; and to strain the same into the
field parallelwise, to that of the long flank; and at the end of it, you are to
knock in a stake, and this stake represents the utmost point of the short flank
of that Avaunt Guard. But observe These long flanks, are of 120 yards apiece.
to trace the long and short flanks before you remove the line to another
flake, to avoid mistake. And as you have set out this short These short flanks,
are of 60 yards apiece
flank, set out the eleven that remain.

That being done, knock fix stakes in the middle of the six sides of this S
xigon, then you are to fasten a line to every one of them one ofter another of
240 yards, and to strain and fasten the same first on the right hand stake that
represents the utmost Point of the long flanks, and this line will cut the end
of the line of the short flank, and set out the face of that Avaunt Guard, and
withal does represent the line of defense; The line of defense is taken from
the midst of the Courtine, and the extent of it in this figure, is o^ 240
yards. And the extent or all the Courtines are o^ 186 yards. aprece.
but before you remove this line, you are to trace the face of this Avaunt Guard
that extends it selce from the stake of the short flank, to the stake that
represents the utmost Point of the long flank. Then you are to wind the very
same line about, and to fasten it to the left hand inward stake that represents
the utmost Point of that long flank, and to do as you did before to the other
on the right hand, and then the two Avaunt Guards of that fide of the Sexagon
will be perfected; and as you have done this side; do the other five sides
after the very same manner.

When the twelve Aven Guards are thus set out and traced, you are to set out
all the ditches of it, after the very same dimensions set down in chap. 17.
Casting all the earth inward, to crect the brest-works, and their five
footsteps; of that height, breadth, and thickness; described in the aforesaid
chapter. And when they are all finished, you are then to set out the small
ditch called La cunette, out of the great ditch, and with the earth that is
taken out of it, you are to erect the brest-werk of of your Contre escarpe,
with the foot-step of it; the height of which is to be six foot high with the
foot-step from the ground, and four foot and a half from the footstep; and
the top of it sloped to nothing, and levelled with the firm ground, leaving six
places of twelve foot broad to place six Turn-Pikes, right against the middle
of the six Halfe-moons, that are to be erected after the brest-works of the
Contre escarpe are finished; the distance between the brest-work and the brim
of the great ditch, is to betwelve foot at the least; and these Turn-Pikes are
all of them to be locked in the night, and serve to retreat or relieve the
Out-guards in time of a siege.

And when all this is perfected, you are to set out the six Out-guards, that
are six Halfe-moones in the form of six equilaterall Triangles, that have all
their sides equal, of one handred and forty yards apiece; their Base that
lies toward the Contre escarpe is to be open, and the ends of it 20 foot or
24 foot from the slope of the Contre escarpe; and the coming to the town and
the going out, is to be by the South and North Halfmoon, marked by the letter
A. For by this means the gate and drawbridge will be secured and covered by
the Half-moones; and the Horse, Carts, or Foot that come to town, shall be
enforced to wind about the said Half Moon; and by it exposed if they be
enemies, to the musket shot of them that keep the brest-works of the
Half-moones. Now to secure these Halfmoones from surptises, besides the
Sentinel Perdues, there is to be a small Court of Cuard in the midst of them,
and strong Pallisadoes, with Pallisado gates; that extends from the Points or
Angles, to the very brest-works of the Contre escarpe. The ditches of these
Halfe-moones are to be nine foot broad, and fix foot deep; their brest-work 9
foot broad in the bottom, with their foot-step; and their height fix foot from
the ground, and four foot and a half from the foot-step; and their thickness
at top six foot, having a foot slope toward the ditch.

This Garrison thus fortified, and manned with a thousand foot and three
hundred horse, and provided with 24 pieces of Ordnance, Arms, Ammunition,
Fireworks, and Victuals, and all other necessaries for a siege; will be able
to oppose an Army of twelve thousand men for 3 months. For to conclude, this
method of Fortification, is as convenient for us in these times of civil
distraction as any, for it is not of great charges, and requires less men to
man the same; and yet is safer and stronger threefold, then our skare-crow
Mounts: small and ill flanked redouts, and winding Angles.

CHAP. XXV. Of the fourth and last method of Fortification by small Flankers in
general.
THis fourth and last method of Fortification is derived from the first;
composed of Flanks, Courtines, and Eastions, without Orillons; for they agree
in their form, but disagree in their dimensions: the faces, flanks, and breasts
of these flankers, being in a manner half as short again, as those of the
Bastions; and the extent of the Courtines of this method by A Flanker is
properly a bastard Bastion, without Or^llons.
flankers; longer by forty yards, by reason of the narrowness of their breasts.
It was invented to save charges, both in the erection of the works, and in the
manning of the Garrisons; for I know no manner of Fortifications that will
require less men to defend it, nor smaller charges to erect it, then this
method: and therefore the more convenient for us to make use of it in these
times of civil distractions, in which we want means and time to erect strong,
complete, and permanent Fortifications, and men to man and defend them; yet I
will inform the reader of this truth, that if this method of Fortification be
set and lined out by a judicious Enginier, and the dimensions of it here
described, carefully observed; that it will be threefold as strong again, and
as permanent and regulary then the Mounts, weak redoubts, and slight winding
Angles, used In these days. And that a valiant and experienced Governor in a
Garrison thus fortified, will be able to defend it with twelve hundred foot,
and three hundred horse, although it be of three mile and a half
circumference; then he could do one that I know, fortified with Mounts and
winding Angles; with eighteen hundred foot, and three hundred horse.

So much avails the Art and the Method of Fortification in the defense of a
corporation, and yet I dare affirm for a truth, that their charges have been
greater, then if they they had erected such works as these; with the very same
dimensions following.

1, The extent of the sides or Bases of this Method, are not to exceed two
hundred and fifty yards. 2. The neck of their flankers is neither less, nor
exceeds in extent fifty yards. 3. The breast of their flankers neither more nor
less then 60 yards. 4. The flanks of their flankers neither less nor more
then 25 yards. 5. Nor the faces of their flankers less or more then fifty
yards. 6. The Courtines between two flankers, is not to exceed two hundred
yards. 7. Their line of defense is to be taken in this method from the middle
of the Courtine, that it may not exceed one hundred and fifty yards. Nor the
exterior Angle of their flanker, be more acute then these are. 8. The line of
their flanks is not to be drawn upon a strait perpendiculary line, as most men
use to do; for this way is destructive to the flanks, and they being reduced
to dust, the Garrison is lost. But they are drawn one. part more slope toward
the other flank opposite to it, that the shoulders of the flankers may be
thicker; and jet or extend so much the more over the ditches, to preserve the
flanks. 9. All the ditches are to be in this methed that has no Contre
escarpe, or Out-guards, thirty foot broad, and twenty foot deep; the slope of
them is to be for every yard a foot on every side, that the very bottom of
them may be sixteen foot, and, broad; for it is a disparagement to make the
ditches of Fortifications, and Martial works, like the ditches of enclosed
grounds; besides, they are not so safe, because they are sooner filled in a
storm: and this manner of ditches savours over much, of the ignorance and
selfe-conceitednesse of our country surveyers. 10. The brest-works are to be
twelve foot high within side, and nine foot without side; their inside is to
be carried up from the firm ground, as well as the outside; and the five
footsteps within side are to be carried up after the brest-work is finished on
both sides; they are to be two foot Of the breadth and height of the five
footsteps, and of the brest-works.
broad, and eighteen inches high. The slope the slope of brest-work walls.
of the inside wall is to be but a foot in six foot, because the footsteps
serve instead of buttresses to that inward side; but the step of the outside
wall is to be a foot in three; and a water table is to be left, of eight inches
broad (if the earth be good) between the brim of the ditch; and the turfe of
the outside wall, if the ground be sandy, or a tunning clay, it is to be
eighteen inches broad; notwithstanding the chat of ignorant men. The bottom or
foundation of the brest-work is to be thirty five foot in the bottom, with the
five footsteps; and twenty foot broad at top, that it may be of Cannon proof;
and it is to have a slope toward the ditch of three foot: and for that
purpose, Of the water table of the brest-works. Of the slope of the top of the
breast works, and of their thickness.
the outside wall is but nine foot, and the inward twelve foot; that the slope
may be from twelve to nine. And observe once for all, that all the Angles of
this method where you erect Platformes, are to have another brest-work fix foot
higher then the rest, in which you make your Port-holes; and that this
brest-work is to have a Of the frize of the Platform.
frise when it is twelve foot from the ground, made of wooden pikes sharp at
one and of six foot long, and four inches broad, and three inches thick, that
are to be placed eight inches distant one from another; jetting three foot over
the ditch, and running a yard into the brast-works.
These high brest-works are at every four course of turfe to be laid with
brush, or bavin wood well rammed with the carth; if the crectors intend they
should be of continuance.

Having so clearly expressed the dimensions of this method of Fortification, I
shall not need hereafter to speak any thing at all of them, because I have
observed in these five Superficies following, these proportions related in
their Sides, Courtines, Flanks, Breasts, Faces, Gorges, and Lines of defense;
and so I come to the method it self.

CHAP. XXVI. Of the Fortifications of the Octogon, fortified by small Flankers;
demonstrated in Plate 19.
THe eight sides of this Octogon, contains two hundred and fifty yards apiece;
and by consequence, the circumference of it is of two thousand yards, that is
an English mile; and the. part of a mile. The Angle of her Center is of 45
degrees, it is to be set out in the field as the Sexagon, by the Demi-cirle and
Lines; as it is described in Plate twelve, and Chapter 15. I will therefore
only give you some directions how to set out the small flankers, because it is
a new method of Fortification, that we have not as yet given you any
directions for.

When the Superficie of this Octogon has been set out and fully traced, after
the manner you were directed to set out the Sexagon; you are to divide all the
sides of it in two equal parts, and to knock in a stake From these middle
stakes is the line of defense drawn, that is in this figure of 150. yards; and
the Courtine 200 yards.
in every one of their divisions; then you are to fasten a line of twenty five
yards to every one of the eight Angle stakes one after another, and to strain
that line first on the right hand, and then at the left hand, upon a strait
line; upon the sides traced on the left and right hand of that stake, and at
the end of the line you are to knock a stake, and these two stakes will
represent the two Demi-Gorges The whole Gorge of the flankers is to be 50 yards.
of that flanker; then remove your line to another Angle stake, and do as you
did before, till you have set out all the demi-gorges after that manner. Then
set by that line, and fasten another line of fifty The Line of fifty yards
represent the distance from the center to the point of the flanker.
yards to every angle-stake of the sides, and strain the same into the field
upon a strait diagonall line, standing at the center-stake with your
demi-circle to guide the same, (because the demi-diagonall line from the
center-stake to the utmost point of the flank is of 380 yards in this Figure,
and therefore too long to be strained conveniently) and at the end of this line
of fifty yards drive in a stake, and this stake will represent the utmost
angle or point of the said flanker; and as you have done this, set out the
other seven angles of the flankers after this very manner; then you are to
fasten a Line of 28 28 yards is the extent of the slope flank.
yards to every one of the sixteen stakes one after another, that represent
the Demi-Gorges of the Flankers, and to strain it three yards more slope then
upon a strait perpendicularie Line, toward the other Flanker of that side of
the Octogon, and at the end of th Line you are to drive in a stake. The reason
why you strain this Line three yards more slope then strait, is to preserve
the Flanks from the Enemies battery, that are otherwise too much exposed to
be ruinated by it: when the Line of the Flank is drawn upon a strait
perpendicularie Line, you are also to observe that the strait perpendicularie
Line of the Flank is but five and twenty yards, and that these three yards are
added to it, that the Flanks may be three yards more slope then strait, because
a slope line in five and twenty yards extent, comes to be three yards longer
then a strait. And as you have set out this Flank, set out the other sixteen
after this manner, and drive in stakes in them all; that being done, you are to
fasten a Line of 150 yards to the middle stake of every side, and strain it
first on the right hand, and then on the left, and as you strain it, make it
touch the Flank-stake, and fasten it to the stakes that represent the utmost
point of your Flankers, and this Line does represent the Line of defense, and
the The face of the flanker is to be 25 yards, besides the three yards added to
thicken the Angle of the shoulder.
face of that Flanker; and before you remove the Line, have the face traced by
the Pioniers, and this face extends it self from the Flankstake to the stake
that represents the utmost angle of the Flanker. And as you have set out this
face-stake, set out all the fifteen other; and they being set out and traced,
your eight Flankers will be perfected. Then you are to set out all your dikes
after the dimensions described in Chap. 25. And these directions for the
setting out of the Flankers of all the other ensuing Superficies, shall suffice
once for all, to avoid repetitions. This Octogon thus set out, and the
proportions of her Flankers thus observed, it will produce a strong, and a
very regularie Fortification, fit to fortify a fair Market-Towne, of a mile
and a quarter circumference, that may be reduced to this form.

CHAP. XXVII. Of the Fortifications of the Paralograme fortified by small
Flankers demonstrated in Plate 20.
THis Paralograme fortified by 18. Flankers has his broad sides of 1500.
yards, and his end sides of 750. yards, for a long Paralograme is to be as long
again as broad, and a Demi-Paralograme one third part longer then it is broad;
his Circumference is of 4500, yards, that is of two English miles, and one
third part of a mile, a large Circumference for so small a Continent, for it
contains from out to out but 1125000. square yards, whereas if there had been
750. yards added to his breadth to reduce it to a Square, it had contained
2250000. square yards, that is just as much again; so much avails in the Art
of Fortification, to make choice of compact Towns for a Garrison, when a place
of three miles, and two fifth parts of a mile Circumference can be fortified
for one quarter part more of charges, then a Town that is smaller by half,
and all because of her ill form; yet because there are many Towns in this
Kingdom, of this form, I have inserted two different kind of Fortifieations
for them in this Abstract; for his Angles if you take the Angle of the Center,
of the end side, from the Center of one of the two Cirdes of which it is
composed, you shall find it of 90 degrees, but if you take it from the Center
of the Paralograme it self, you will find it is but of 45. degrees, and the
Angle of his broad sides is of 135. degrees, a very open and obtus Angle. This
Superficie is easy to be set out upon paper, as you may see by this Figure;
but because it is more difficult to set out in the field, when the broad sides
of it are of so large an extent, I will here add some observations to my former
direction given in Plate 14.

The best and the most speedy way to set out so large a Paralograme in the
field, is to make choice of your Center, and to drive in a stake, and to fasten
a line to it, of 375. This line of 375 yards is the fourth part of the
diametricall line of the long side of the Paralograme.
yards, and to strain it full East, and at the end of it to drive in a stake,
then you are to wind that line about and to strain it full West upon a strait
line, and at the end of the line drive in a stake, and these two last stakes
will represent the two Centers of the two circles, from which this Paralagrame
is composed. Then you are to set the sight of your demi-circle upon the ray of
90. degrees, and to stand at the East circle stake, turning your face full East
winding your demi-circle on the right hand to set out the South-East Angle, the
man that carries your lines following the ray of your demi-circle till he be
five hundred and thirty The ray of this line of 530 yards is the diagonall
line from the center of that circle to the angle of the Paralograme.
yards and just against you, and upon the ray, then your man that carries the
stakes is to drive in a stake at his feet, and with a line of 100. yards, that
they are to strain between them, let them cast with it, if there be just 530.
yards from that stake to the Center stake you stand at, if there be just so
much, then is that Angle perfectly set out, but if the distance begreater or
less, they are to remove the stake, and amend it, you guiding them by the
sight of your demi-circle, then you are to wind your demi-circle on the left
hand, to set out as you did this the North-East Angle; and that being set out
and a stake driven in, you are to remove your self from that East circle
Center stake, to go to the West circle stake, and to set out with your
demi-circle, the South-West and North-West Angles, after the very same manner
as you did the former, and two stakes being driven in them, the four Angles of
the Paralograme will be perfected. Then you are to stand with your demi-circle
at the middle Center stake of the whole Paralograme, and after you have set the
sight of it upon the ray of 135. degrees, you are to turn your self full
South and to try whether your South-East and North-East Angle stakes are just
of 135. degrees, which being so, that broad side is perfected, then return
your self full North, and try whether the North-East and the North-West Angle
stakes are just upon 135. degrees, which if they be, then is the Paralograme
perfect in all his four Angles, then you are to stand at every Angle stake,
one after another, and to fasten a line to them, of 250. This Line of 250 yards
is the distance that is to be betvveen the center of one flanker to the other
center.
yards, and the man with the lines is to strain the same from one Angle stake
to another, drive in at every end of the line a stake, till he has gone
round, guiding his stakes with the sight of your demi-circle, that all the
stakes may be upon a perfect strait line, then you are to fasten lines as near
the ground as may be to these stakes and to set many Pioniers to trace out the
whole Superficie of this Paralograme, and that being done you are to set out
all the 18 Flankers one after another, as you were directed in the last Chapter.

CHAP. XXVIII. Of the Fortifications of the Square fortified by small Flankers
demonstrated by a Demi-Square in Plate 21.
THis Square fortified by twenty four small Flanks if of 6000 yards
circumference, that is three English miles and two fifth parts of a mile. It is
very convenient to fortify a great Corporation Town that may be redeced to
that form, his continent is great, because of the soliditie of his body, for
it contains 2250000 square yards. The Angle of his Center is of 90 degrees, and
it is to be set out in the field after the very same manner of the end-sides
of the Paralograme, described in the last Chapter, and his Flankers are to be
set out according to the directions given in Chapt. 26. and therefore to avoid
repetitions, I will omit to speak of these things, and will only set forth
what number of Ordnance, Foot-Souldiers, and Horsemen, will be required to
defend a place thus fortified against an Army of twenty thousand men, the
circumference of it being so great as it is.

1 It requires to be provided with forty eight Pieces of Ordnance of all
sorts; for there cannot be less then two upon every Flanker, six Demi-Cannons
to dismount the Assailants Cannons, if they erect their batteries, twelve
Demi-Culverins to hinder their approaches, and twenty four Sacres and six
Drakes to clear the Courtines, with Balls and Ammunition sufficient for these,
to shoot six thousand shot. 2 Every Flanker with his Courtine requires to have
for their defense fifty men besides the Cannoniers and Matrosses, viz. twenty
Musketeers at every Flank, and ten more along the Courtine; for the Flanks are
the maine defense; for the Flank being of 28 yards, every one of them will
have a yards space to manage his Arms, and the Cannoniers eight yards at
every side to manage their Ordnance; and after this rate, 1200 Foot with the
Inhabitant Trained Bands is sufficient, and a Regiment of three or four
hundred Horse, to make sallies, and to bring in contributions and provisions.
And I dare maintain, that a place of this extent fortified with mounts and
winding Angles, will require as many more men to defend the same, as well as
the lesser number before cited can defend it, if it be thus fortified. 3 It is
to be provided with great store of Fireworks, with two hundred Ladders of all
sizes, with two hundred wheelebarrowes, and two hundred hand-barrowes, with two
hundred new spades, two hundred shovels, and two hundred pick-axes, all new,
besides those of the Inhabitants; and with ropes, flax, poles, and great store
of timber, with many woollsacks; for all these things serve to repair and to
stop breaches suddenly. 4 It must be carefully provided with Corn, Meal,
Malt, Oat-meale, Pease, Oats, and store of Hay and Straw, to fodder and releeve
the Horse, with great store of Powder Beef, Pork, Bacon, White Pease, Rise,
Butter and Cheese, and of all these such a competent proportion, according to
the number of the Inhabitants, and Soldiers there in the Garrison, to serve
them three months, for otherwise it avails little to fortify Towns.
CHAP. XXIX. Of the Fortifications of the 24 Angle Poligon, fortisied by small
Flankers, demonstrated in Plate 22 by a Demi-Poligon of twelve Angles.
BEcause the scale of this demi-Polligon is smaller then that of the last
square, some will suppose his sides the Circumference, and Contment of it, to
be less then those of the last Figure, but it is not so, for their sides and
circumference are equal, and the Continent of this last is so much greater, as
the circularie form does contain more then the square, which I could easily
calculate if it did any wise concern to be informed of it, but it concerns
not, because this large Superficie is fitter to fortify a great Corporation
already built then for a new-erected City, and therefore I do omit the
calculation of it.

To acquaint you, that the demi-diametricall and diagonall lines of this
superficie are of a thousand yards, and the whole as much more, that is an
English mile, and the one tenth part of a mile, and therefore very difficult to
set, by any other way then by the demi-circle; the Angle of his Center is of
15. degrees, and it is composed of 24 Isocele Triangles that have three sides
four times as long as their Bases, the Base containing 250. yards, and their
sides 1000 yards: the best and the most speedy way then to set the same out in
the field, is to drive in a stake in the Center of it, and to set out first of
all these four Angles, viz. the South, North, East, and West Angles, for those
being perfectly set out, all the rest will be the easier to be set out, by
dividing every quarter into five equal parts: Now how you are to set out
these four Angles, it would be superfluous to relate, because I have formerly
given so many directions for it, and therefore I will refer you to the
precedent Instructions set down in Plate 12. and 19. I will then acquaint you,
that if this Corporation or City that you are to fortify after this manner
has no streets nor gates, that are seated, or run strait South, North, East
and West, that you are in stead of a stake to set up a very high pole, in the
Center of the Town, in manner of a may pole, having a small slag or a bush at
the top, except there be near the Center of the Town a high steeple, that you
may stake by it your Angles from without the town, and having set out and
traced the superficie of it, you are then to set out and trace one quarter of
the Flankers, one after another, to avoid confusion or mistake, and then you
are to set out all the dikes after that manner described in Chapter 17. and of
the very same breadth and depth, and having done so, and your work being fully
finished, you are to provide this Garrison with the like number of Ordnance,
Footmen and Horsemen, Ammunition, Victuals, and all other necessaries for a
siege mentioned in the last Chapter, and so it will be able having a valiant
and experienced Governor to oppose (by Gods favor) an Army of twenty thousand
men for three months.

CHAP. XXX. Of the Fortifications of the mixed Superficie, fortified by small
Flankers, and three Redouts, demonstrated in Plate 23.
THis Superficie has six of her Angles regulary, and the other irregulary; the
regulary are of 75. degrees, the irregulary sides whose point terminates it
self in the midst of the Paralograme Redoubt, are reduced to the form of a
recteligne Triangle whose base is of greater extent then her sides, the three
Redoubts are so placed, to blind the deformity that does always ensue upon
the conjunction of regulary and irregulary lines, and for diverse other
considerations, the whole circumference of it is of three English miles, and a
half, and will require 1600. foot, and 300. horse, and 54. pieces of Ordnance,
with all other necessaries for a siege, mentioned in Chapter 28. for to enable
the same to oppose an Army of twenty thousand men for three months.

It is to be set out not from the Center, but with the demicircle, standing one
hundred yards in the field beyond the walls, to take in all the Allows that
are near to the walls: The steeple serving naturally as for the Center; having
then set your demi-circle upon the ray of 75. degrees, you are to set out the
six regularie Angles after the very same manner, as you have been directed to
set out the Sexagon and the Octogon, in Plate 12, and 19. and in the midst of
the South-East and South-West sides you are to set out the two square Redoubts,
that will require for their defense two pieces of Ordnance, and 100. men a
piece; and from the South Augles of those two sides, you are to draw two
diagonall lines, that may terminate in the Center stake of the Paralograme
Redoubt, turning the rod after a winding manner, as it is set out by the prick
lines, this Redoubt will require two pieces of Ordnance, and two hundred men
for her defense, and every flanker fifty men, for the defense of it and his
courtine, these flankers are to be set out, after you have divided the eight
sides into three equal parts, according to the directions given in Chapter 26.
and where the Platformes are erected in the Angles of the Redoubts, you are to
erect your Brest-work six foot higher then the other Brest-works, that have
five footsteps, because the Platform is to be level with the inside
Brest-worke, that is to be twelve foot high, whereby the Brest-workes of the
Platformes will be eighteen foct high from the ground, observing in all Angles
where you erect a platform, to place upon the last row of turffe that reducett
your Brest-works to be 12 foot high, a How the Frize of a platform is to be
placed, and of the distance betvveen the pikes.
frize of sharp square wooden pikes of six foot long, and of four inches one
way, and of three inches the other way, jetting out a yard over the dike, and
running a yard into the Brest-works, and these pikes are to be but eight inches
distant one from another; now if this Garrison were thus fortified, and
provided, it would be one of the strongest and one of the most complete
Garrisons in this Kingdom.

PLANS and SVPERFICIES
plate: 1:

diagrams

PLANS and SVPERFICIES
Equilateral

Isosele

Recteligne

Scalene

Oxig^ne

Obtus

scale 10 yardes for everi part of an inch

plate: 2:

diagrams

PLANS and SVPERFPCIES
plate 3

diagram

V: REDOVTES (The scale js for everi part of an jnch: 10: yardes
plate: 4:

diagrams of redoubts

The scale of this Equilatirall Triangle is for every part of an jnch 15 yards

plate: 5:

diagram

A TRIANGLE
The scale is for every part of an jnch 15 yardes

plate: 9:

diagram

The scale of this Squaire is an part of an jnch for 15 yardes

plate: 6:

diagram

A SQVAIRE
The scale js (...) part of an jnch for 15 yardes

plate: 10:

diagram

A PENTAGON
The scale js for everi part of an jnch: 20: yardes

plate: 7:

diagram

A PENTAGON
The scale js for every part of an jnch 20 yardes

plate: 11:

diagram

AN OVALL
Fortified with Bastions the scale js for part of an jnch 20 yardes

plate: 8:

diagram

A SEXAGON
The scale is for every part of an jnch 20 yardes

plate: 12:

diagram

A Fort jn the form of a Cross fortified with 8 half moons, the scale 30
yardes for parts of an jnch
plate: 13:

diagram of a fort

A LONG SQVAIRE fortified with avaunt gardes, the scale is for everi part of an
jnch: 30: yardes
plate 14

diagram of a fort

A TRIANGLE Fortified by Auant gardes the scale js 20 yardes for everi part of
an jnch
plate. 15.

diagram of a fort

A SQVAIRE fortified with auant gards and out gardes
The scale is for everi part of an jnch 2^ yardes

plate. 16.

diagram of a fort

A PENTAGON fortified with avaunt gardes and out gardes
The scale is for everi part of an jnch: 20: yardes

plate 17.

diagram of a fort

A SEXAGON fortified with auant gardes and out gardes The scale is 40 yardes
for eueri part of an jnch
plate. 18.

diagram of a fort

AN OXOGON Fortified with small Flankers
The scale is for every part of an jnch 20. yardes

plate. 19.

diagram of a fort

A PARALLOGRAME fortified with: 18: small flankers; the scale js for everi: 8:
part of an jnch. 46. yardes and
plate. 20.

diagram of a fort

A DEMI SQVAIRE fortified with 24: small flankers, the scale js for everi part
of an jnch. 25. yardes
plate. 21.

diagram of a fort

A DEMI FIGVRE OF: 24: ANGLES fortified with. 24. small flankers; the scale 40
yardes for everi.. part of an jnch
plate. 22.

diagram of a fort

NORTHAMPTON RIGHTLY Fortified Tae scale is for every part of an jnch: 50.
yardes
diagram of a fort

A GARRISON BESEIGED By an Entrenched Army the scale is for every part of an
jnch 100 yardes
diagram of a garrison

A GARRISON UNDERMINED AND Battered with Tenn Cannons the scale of the Sexagon
is for every part of an jnch 15 yardes
The scale of the Mine Work is for every 8 part of an inch one (...)

diagram of a garrison

OF THE ART OF ASSAILING IN GENERAL.
AS there is diversity of 1 Cor. 12.4.
gifts in the spiritual Function, among those that God has set apart from
their mothers womb, to be the Messengers of the blessed tidings of the Gospel
of Christ: Even so God out of his admirable wisdom, does also bestow different
gifts to men of one and the same profession: But this wise dispensation of his
gifts is more apparently seen in the variety of parts that he is pleased to
bestow upon the most eminent Commanders, that have anciently, and do at this
day exercise themselves in the Art of war: For among all the ancient and
modern Commanders, there was never any but Caesar, that did attain to the
perfection of this Art; all the other having only received different gifts, to
excel others in some of the most essential parts of it, but not in all. For
some have excelled in the field, some in stratagems of war, some in the Art of
assailing, and reducing of Towns, and some in the Art of preserving of them:
And some have been very successful in the field, and yet very unhappie in
sieges. See Plutarch in his life.
Nicias Generalissimo of the Athenians, lost his life and the reputation he had
obtained in Arms, by the besieging of Syracuse. And the Emperor Charles the
fifth was always victorious in See Sleidans Histories.
field, and always foiled in his sieges; for he lost the former reputation
that he had obtained by Arms, and threescore thousand men, by the sieges of
Marseilles and Mests. We read that Alexander See Plutarch in their lives.
the Great, Scipio, and Sylla, were prosperous in the field; Aratus, * See
Tacitus.
Hannibal, and Sertorius, successful in stratagems of war; See Josephus
Marcellus, Carbulo, and See the French History.
Titus, happy in their singes, and excelling in the Art of assailing, and of
reducing of strong holds. And among our modern Commanders, Heary the fourth
King of France, and the last King of Sweden, were always victorious in the
field; Scanderbeg, See the Sweden Soldier.
Mont Luc, and Mondragon, prosperous in their stratagems; the Duke See his
Commentary.
de Parma, the Sea the Turkish History.
Marquess Spinola, the two Princes of Orange, Maurice and Henry, and the
Marshall Gastion, wonderfully successful in their sieges. And in the Art of
defending of Towns, Monsieur de la Valette, great Master of Malta, the Duke of
Guise, * See Demetrius History of the Netherlands.
Sir Francis Vere, and of late Colonel Massey. But, as I have said before,
there never was any perfect and successful in all the essential parts of the
Art of war, but Caesar; for he has excelled all others in the field, * See
the French History.
in the Art of fortification, defending, and assailing, in his stratagems of
war, in his admitable activitie, in his prudent forecast, in his entrenched See
the siege of Malta.
Camps, in his military discipline, and in taking the opportunities of war by
the fore-lock, to advance his designs. * See the French History.
And therefore the Duke de Roan, in his Perfect Captain, does affirm, that
all the most famous exployts of all these forenamed modern Commanders, * See
the siege of Ostend.
were but weak imitations of the noble and unparalleld actions that he did
execute and perform at the siege of Alexie in France, * See his Commentary.
as the masterpiece of this admirable Soldier.

Now if any should presume to inquire the reasons why God was pleased to be
larger in dispensation of his gifts to Caesar, then to any of the greatest
Christian Commanders, he being but a Heathen.

I answer; That it was his free will and pleasure, and that it is not for us to
dive into his private and unrevealed will; yet we may suppose in all
humility, that it was his pleasure to enrich Caesar with these unparalleld
parts of the Art of war, to make him the instrument of the greatest revolution
that ever happened in the world; for the three former revolutions of the three
Monarchies of the Caldeans, Persians, and the Greeks, were nothing in
comparison of this last revolution, that Caesar was the maine instrument of, to
reduce the greatest and most powerful Commonweal that ever was, under the
absolute command of one man: And by this means to accomplish the Prophecies of
the Prophet Daniel, that prophesied many hundred years before, See Daniel
chap. 7. ver. 17
that the Roman Monarchy should excel the other in might and power. We may
conjecture that he was pleased to have the instrument of so great a work to
excel all others in the Art of war, as this last revolution did excel the
former. And we may also collect by the Commentaries of Caesar, that the finger
of the admirable Providence of God had the ruling of all his actions; for it is
beyond humane reason or belief, that fifty thousand men should pen up
fourscore thousand in Alexie, and rout and defeat one hundred and fourscore
thousand more that came to their relief: Or overcome with a handful of men
(as he did) the great Kingdom of Egypt, and defeat so many great Commanders
joined together in Africa and Spain.

To conclude the point, God under Caesar was the Author of all the segreat
actions, and so he is of all our modern Commanders exploits, yet wisdom,
valor, activitie, and experience in Arms, are the secondarie causes of their
great achievements; and these rare qualities are as much required to be in a
Commander in chief, that will excel others in this Art of Assailing, that we
are to speak of, as in any other essential part of the Art of war.

Now since the erecting of strong and well-lined works are but a part of the
Art of defense, that will avail little, except the Governor of a Garrison
thus fortified be provident, valiant, and experienced in the practical Art of
war, to make the better use of these works; I will in the next Chapter set out
the charge of a prudent Governor, before I come to the particulars of the Art
of Assailing: Because this Art, and the Art of Defense, are like two
inseparable twins, that are to go hand in hand together; for it is impossible
to assail judiciously, except the Assailant be experienced in the Art of
Defense; or for a Defendent to defend a place as he ought, except he be
versed in the mysteries of the Art of Assailing, to prevent in either of them,
what may be done by the Assailants or Defendents.

CHAP. XXXII. Of the charge and qualities of a prudent and experienced
Governor.
1 HE is to be well-affected to the party he stands for, his own interest
rather inducing him to it, then otherwise, and faithful and diligent in his
place, for upon his fidelity, valor, and experience in Arms, Of the parts of
a Governor.
depends the safety of a County; nay, sometimes the welfare of a Kingdom, for
the loss of a well-seated Garrison indangers a State, more then the loss of
an Army, and therefore it behooves a Prince or a State to be very circumspect
in the choice of a Governor, if the place assigned to him, be a frontier
Garrison, Of the choice of a Governor.
it matters not if he be of great descent, and allied with great families, for
when they are such, upon the least discontent, they are apt to foment civil
discords; neither is he to be of a low descent, but a Gentleman by birth, and
by merit, whose valor and fidelity makes him to deserve such a place: he is to
be of competent means, borne in the same County, and allied to men of repute,
and abilities, and trained from his youth in Arms, and such a man is reputed
amongst Statesmen the fittest for such a place.

2 He is to be of an approved conversation, Of his manners and disposition.
honorably inclined, no swaggerer, nor a vanting rover, but temperate in all
his actions, not over young to be seduced or missed, nor over old to avoid
heaviness, fear, and apprehensions, infirmities, incident to old men, but in
the flower of his age from forty to threescore, that he may be active,
provident, and vigilant, and well acquainted with all things that appertain to
his charge.

3 He is to be well versed in Histories, and to be adorned besides his natural
parts, with diverse acquired virtues and qualities, but above all, he is to have
a practical knowledge, of all the essential parts of the Art of War, that
he may know how to assail and to defend places, how to Martial his men both
horse, and foot, how to advance and how to retreat, for if he has not been
present in great battles, in famous sieges, in routs, in great batteries, in
storms, and assaults, he will be terrified or astonished, upon any unexpected
accident.

4 He is to be free from avarice, oppression, drunkenness, licentiousness,
and from all impiety, He is to be free from vices and adorned with virtue.
and adorned with the opposite virtues to these vices, sincere in Religion, and
rather fervent then of the Laodicean temper; temperate and moderate, frugall
and yet charitable, punctual in his promises, cherishing valor, and punishing
cowardice, a loving father to his soldiers, relieving them in their need,
rather then to detain or deprive them of their pay, by wiles or collusions.

5 He is to be acquainted with the ancient and the modern Military Laws, and
with the Civil and Politic Statutes, He is to be learned, and versed in the
Military and Politic Laws.
and Ordinances, to decide all controversies, that may happen between the
soldiers of his Garrisons, and the Countrey-people, or the Inhabitants of it,
he is also to love as his own life, the place where he has been assigned, and
to procure the good and the welfare of the Inhabitants, and of all honest and
religious people that sojourne there; and to have especial care of the
preservation of it, having always in mind, that his life, honor and
reputation, depends upon the safety of it.

6 He is to provide his Garrison of all necessaries for a siege, He is to be
provident in the repair of the works of his garrison.
and to repair the Works of it in due and in convenient time, not delaying
from day to day, but pressing the effecting of it, to the utmost of his power;
although there be no likelihood of a siege, for when an enemy is at hand, it is
too late to go about such employments, neither is it a sufficient excuse for a
Governor to say who would have thought the enemy had a design upon this place?

7 He is to be acquainted with all the principles of the Mathematiques, and
especially with the essential parts of the Art of Fortification, that he may
be able to control the ignorance of selfe-conceited men, that take upon them
to set out ridiculous and destructive works, He is to be skillful in the Art
of fortification and assailing.
improper for the defense of the place where they live, with whom he is by no
means to combine, as some do for private or politic respects, because such
deformed and ill flanked Works indenger his own life, and will one time or
other blemish his honor, and reputation; and therefore he is to be skillfull in
the Art of Fortification and assayling. For if the town be lost by these
defects, the blame will only be laid upon him, and not upon the contrivers of
these works: now because the safety of the Town is entrusted to his care, he
ought not to endure that ignorant Shopkeepers be chosen Sub-Committees of the
Works of a Garrison, for these places belong more properly to the wise, and
prudent Gentlemen of the County, and to the most experienced Officers of the
Garrison, then to such men as these that will precipitate their own ruin,
rather then they will be crossed in their destructive ways.

8 He is to dispose of all the Functions of War, He is to dispose of all the
functions of war, and not to meddle with politic affairs.
and to command absolutely over Horse and Foot, or otherwise, he is but a
titularie Governor, and it is no wonder if diverse of our Counties are
plundered daily, by the incursions of the Enemies Garrisons, since he that
should send out parties to curb and restrain these disorders, has his hands
tied. In all things, without order, nothing can be successful: for a
Governor to anticipate upon the prerogative of Committees, and be meddling in
civil and politic affairs, it is to go against order; or for Committees to
anticipate and be meddling with those things that belong properly to a
Governors place, as to command over a Colonel of Horse, Committees are not to
meddle in warlike affairs, only in civil and politic affairs.
and to send out parties at random; it is against order, and against the rules
of war; for Committees should not be answerable for the defects, errors, and
omissions of martial designs; nor the Governor be answerable for any
dismeanour committed, or duty omitted, in civil or politic affairs; but
every one should be answerable for such things that belong to their places.
Therefore if a County be daily molested by the incursions of the Enemies
Garrisons, the Governor should be answerable to the State for his neglect and
carelessness in this case, because the protection and preservation of the whole
County depends upon his charge. On the other side, if the men of war of such a
County be not duly paid, and notwithstanding the County is oppressed, the
Committees are answerable to the State for this omission and dismeniour. But by
the common disorder there is in the greater part of our Counties, between the
Committees and the Governors of the head Garrisons, by the anticipation they
do upon one another charges, the State knows not whom to call to account for
diverse gross abuses that are daily committed, under which diverse Counties
groan, and become desolate. In a word, there is no wisdom nor policy to
suffer the Committee to manage, or to dispose of the designs of war; or to
suffer the Governors to raise contributions for their own Garrisons pay, or
to meddle in any manner of way in civil or politic affairs, except it be to
decide some differences that may befall between some Soldiers, and some of the
Inhabitants.

9 He is to observe an austere military discipline, and to suffer none of the
Inhabitants to be wronged and abused by any of the Soldiers of the Garrison;
for if he give them an inch this way, they will take a foot; and of the two,
he is rather to take the part of the Inhabitants then of the Soldiers,
because the Soldiers are most commonly the first Aggressours: He is to be
austere in the Military Discipline, and just in his judgment.
Yet for fear this rule should not be general, he is to examine the case,
and to distribute justice impartially. He is also to train his Soldiers
every week, and withal to command the Sargeant of every Company to instruct
them daily, when their Company enters in guard, and especially the youngest and
rawest Soldiers, how they should manage their muskets and pikes, that they may
be the more perfect when they train before him, in the handling of their
Arms. And for the Horse, when they are at home, once a fortnight he is to
appoint their Colonel a place in the field near the walls, where he is to be
himself, to see them exercise, by dividing their Regiment in two equal parts;
He is to be careful and present at all military exercises.
the Colonel commanding one party, and the Lievtenant-Colonell the other; the
one being the Assailants, and the other the Defendents. And in all these
exercises the Governor is to take exact notice both of the Horse and Foot,
that are defective in their horses, arms, and apparel, and to censure them
severely for the first time, and to panish them the next training day if these
defects be not amended.

10 He is to be active and vigilant, that Centinells be placed and relieved
punctually at their hours, and to over-see the Courts of Guards every night,
not relying altogether upon his Major, for two eyewitnesses are better then
one; the French, whose Garrisons are not ordinarily above one English mile, and
half circumference, Of the number of the Courts of Guard.
content themselves with six Courts of Guards, the greatest in the Marketplace
of 120. men, four more at the four gates of 60. men a piece, and one before
the Governors lodging of twenty men. and by this calculation there is to be in
that Garrison 1140. Foot-souldiers, of which 380. are so enter into guard every
night, that they might have two days respit in three. Their Centinells or
Centries are relieved in the night time every hour, and in the day time every
two hours, and they place at every 200. yards distance a Centry, Of the
number of Sentinells.
if their Garrisons be fortified by Bastions, they place besides the abovesaid
Centries, three upon every Bastion, one at the point of it, and two at the two
ends of the faces, next to the flanks, so that this place of so small a
Circumference is to have forty Centries relieved every hour in the night times,
besides them that are to make the Rounds, that are to be done three times
every night, besides a private Round called by the French La Patronille, every
Round is to have a principal The Governor is sometimes to go the Rounds, but
the day and hour of his going is to be kept private. Of the Rounds, and of the
French Patronille.
Officer, their number is commonly of 12. and this private Round of as many, it
marches commonly in the dead time of the night, that is an hour before day,
the most dangerous time for surprises. By this calculation the Reader may see
that the greater part of our Garrisons are not half manned as they should be;
for I know some of three English miles and half circumference, that have not a
thousand Foot-souldiers, and a place of this extent should have at least ten or
twelve Courts of Guards, whether it has so many gates or no; for where the
distance between two gates are over great, there is a Court of Guard to be
erected in the midst, to prevent a surprise by scaling.

11 He is to have care to see his Garrison provided with Ordnance, Arms,
Balls, Ammunition, Fireworks, some ready made, and store of materials ready to
make more, Of the Ordnance and Ammunition of a Garrison.
and with all manner of Engines of war, as Manttlelets and Ladders, Tortoises,
Pioniers tools, store of timber, of wooll-pacles, pitch, oil, Brimstone,
coal for powder, pit-coale, and wood for sewell; and hay, straw, oats, and
pease for the Horse.

If I should here relate the number and quantity of these necessaries, that
the Italians, French, and Hollanders use to provide their Garrisons withal, it
would seem to many a false, or an incredible relation; and therefore I will
pass them over, and will only speak of a very mean proportion, fitted
according to our ability, after I have given you a hint of the store of the
Citadell of Milan. The Citadell of Milan is a perfect Sexagon, fortified by six
Bastions with Orillons, as in Plate 12. The Circumference of it cannot be at
the most above an English mile and a quarter, and yet it had in my time 160
Cannons and Demi-Cannons in the Magazines, besides those that were placed in
the paints, faces, and Flanks of the Bastions, that were above 90 in number,
and in all 250 at the least, and fifty thousand iron bullets of all sorts, and
two hundred thousand weight of powder, and victualied for a year for three
thousand men, and with Arms and other necessaries proportionable, and such
provisions will seem (as I have said) incredible.

But the meanest proportion allowed for foreign Garrisons is of fifty Pieces
of Ordnance, for a Town of two English miles circumference, of these sorts,
six Cannons, six Demi-Cannons, six long If it be a Sea-tovvne you are to double
the number of the long Culverins, and to de^^lk the same from the Sacres.
Culverins, twenty Sacres, and twelve Drakes, and one hundred thousand weight
of powder, that is a thousand barrells of powder. But it were well if one of
our Garrisons of three or four miles circumference were thus provided: for
Arms there are to be of all sorts as many in the Magizines, as there is
Soldiers in the Garrison; and for balls, the least number that can be
provided, is for Cannon-balls, Demi-Cannons, and long Culverins, six hundred a
piece, that is 1800 of these three sorts, and 2000 balls for the Secres, and
1200 for the Drakes, and fifty new Carriages of all sorts in the Magazine,
that if any Piece of Ordnance be dismouned, it may presently be let up again;
and twenty lie thousand weight of match, five hundred Granado's, and 100 great
oues for Master-peeces, and as many materials to make twice as many more, and
of all other necessaries spoken of before proportionably.

12 He is to have a provident forecast to provide in due season his Garrison
with all manner of victuals, and malt, for otherwise the strong Works of the
Garrison, the number nor the valor of the Soldiers, nor this store of
Cannons, Ammunition, and Arms, Grenades, and other necessaries will avail
nothing, if the Garrison be distressed for want of victuals, for all these
things will but enrich the Enemy, when by famine the Town shall be enforced
to yield to the Enemies mercy.

The two most necessary provisions, He is to provide his Garrison with all
manner of provisions and victuals.
are bread and beer, and therefore the Governor is to take an exact account
of the number of men, women and children, there is in his Garrison, I mean
with the Foot and Horsemen of the Garrison, that I will suppose to be ten
thousand living souls. The least allowance of bread and beer that can be
given, is of a pound of bread and a pottle of beer a day, now every strike,
or bushel of Corn, will yield, 56. pound weight of bread, and this will amount
to 188 strike a day, and in three months to 16920. strike of wheat, that is
2115. quarters of wheat. And as for beer, every barrel of beer contains
36. gallons, and every quarter of malt will make eight barrells of small beer,
that contains 576 pottles of beer; so that after this rate there will be spent
17. quarters and half of malt in a day, but we will allow 18 quarters for the
soldiers mornings-draught, that will amount in three months to 1620. quarters
of malt.

The salt is the next, for without salt a Garrison cannot subsist, and
therefore one hundred quarters of salt is the least that can be provided for
three months. Butter and Cheese are the next, and ten thousand weight of each
is of the least, and a thousand barrells of Porke, and of salt Beef, is little
enough, besides a thousand fliches of Bacon, five hundred quarters of white
Pease, two thousand weight of Rice, twenty tun of Vinegar, for it is useful to
cool the pieces of Ordnance when they are overheated; three or four tun of
oil, great store of timber and fuel, and especially of brush bavins, for to
repair breaches, good store of sugar, and spices, but specially all manner of
Physical drugs, for sick and wounded men, and store of Chyrurgions to dress
the wounded soldiers: All these things and many more, a provident Governor
will have a care to provide his Garrison withal, if he intend to make a noble
resistance, and to preserve his Garrrison, life, honor, and reputation. But
diverse will object, that the providing of these things belongs to the
Committees, and not to the Governors. I answer, that it belongs to the
Governors in foreign parts, and that he is bound by his place, after he has
twice or thrice admonished them, to provide these things, and they do it not,
to protest against them, and to acquaint the State of their neglect, and
omission of it, otherwise if the Town be lost by the want of any of these
things, the blame will be imputed only to the improvidency of the Governor.
Moreover The duty of a Governor to prevent surprises and scaling.
he is to be very vigilant, to prevent surprises, by Ambushes, that may lie
undiscovered in allows near to a gate, that may of a sudden slay the
Centeries, force a Court of Guard, and take a town; or by scaling in the night
time, for it is a thing easy to be done, to scale Works that are so low as
ours. To prevent these surprises, and scaling, the Governor is to send out
every night 24. horse divided into four parties of six a piece, and these
parties must range all the principal rodes that lead to his Garrison, for the
distance of seven or eight mile every way, as South, North, East and West,
and to cause at the break of day all hollowes, and old walls about the town to
be viewed by two soldiers of every gate, that are to be put forth at the
Sally-ports, and to come in again before the gates be open, and their
drawbridge put down, and by these two means the Governor will preselve his
Garrison from scaling and surprises.

CHAP. XXXIII. Of six different ways, how strong Holds may be reduced.
ANtigonus King of Macedonia was wont to say, that the strongest Hold in the
world might be reduced, if by the gate of it a Mule laden with gold might enter
therein, meaning that strong Holds that were by nature or by art impregnable,
might be won by the infidelity of the Governor, if he was inclined to Avarice
and greedy of money, whereby we may collect that concussion and briberie was as
familliar in those days as they are in ours: The first way attempted by the
Spaniard is briberie.
And this is one of the first means that Philip the second King of spain did
attempt to reduce the strongest Garrisons of his Enemies, for by these means
he obtained Cambray and Callis, in the reign of Henry the fourth King of
France; a good Caution for a Prince or State, to make choice of trusty and
faith full Governors, that may be free of Avarice and Concussion.

The second way is more noble and generous, and that is by Stratagems of War,
The second way is stratagems of war.
as the great City of See the History of the civil wars of France.
Amiens was taken by Montdragon, by four and twenty soldiers, hidden under
four wagons laden with hay, and a disguised soldier that was upon the last
load, that tumbled down wittingly a basket of apples, and wall-nuts, when he
saw the wagon under the Portcallice, whereupon the Centries and all the
soldiers of the Court of Guard being over eager about the taking of them up,
were all slain by the 24. armed soldiers, that came out of the wagons, and
the gate made good, till a thousand horsemen with as many Dragoones behind
them, entered the town and took it without little or no opposition at all; or
as See the History of the Netherlands.
Breda was taken by a French Captain, with twenty soldiers hidden in a ship
laden with turffe that was let in at the Port, and in the night time sallied
out, killed the Round, and put to the sword all the Soldiers of the Court of
Guard that were next to the gate, where a thousand Horse and five hundred Foot
of their party lay inambusc^do, and so took that strong Hold, without much
loss for opposition. But the two next Stratagems are worthy of admiration; in
the civil wars* of France a young Gentleman and a Royallist, did oftentimes
repair to a strong Garrison of the League, to fee a kinsman of his, that was a
Commander of the Garrison, and having noted that the soldiers of that Court of
Guard next to the gate that he was used to come in, kept but an indifferent
watch, persuaded five young Gentlemen of his acquaintance, that had no more
hair on their faces then he had himself, to attempt the taking of that
Garrison, they embraced the motion and disguised then selves in Gentlewomens
apparel, ryding behind six Gentlemen, that lived near that Garrison, every
horseman having at his side a young valiant soldier, disguised like Lacquie's
that made up eighteen in all, having pistolls in their pockets, and coming to
the gate of the Garrison, he that rid foremost carried behind him the undertaker
disguised like a Gentlewoman, the Set jeant of the Court of Guard began to
examine where they went: we come (says the first horseman) to be merry in
the Town, with these Gentlewomen our kinswomen, whereupon he let them pass,
but being come between the two gates, where the Portcullice was, the first
Gentlewoman fained to be ready to swound, and called to some of the Court of
guard for help, they as officious men came all to assist the sick Gentlewoman,
whereupon they all lighted, and the Lacquie's did instantly run to the Court of
guard, and brought all the Partisans and Halberts they could lay hold on, and
the Gentlemen and Gentlewomen drew out their pistolls, and slew every one of
them a fouldier of the Court of guard, and made good the gate till their
Ambuscado that was within a musketshot of the town in a hollow came to their
relief, and so took this garrison that was strong and of great concernment.
The last Stratagem is known of all men, for it is the surprising of Hereford,
that was as neatly carried as any of the former, for he that played the
Constables part, was certainly a valiant Gentleman, for it was a great attempt
to venture upon so strong and so well manned a garrison as that was; The third
way is by policy.
The third way was used by the Parthians to famish Crassus See Plutarch in
Crassus life.
Army in Armenia the great, and by the Duke See Du Belluy his Commentaries.
de Montmorency, in the days of Francis the first King of France, to famish
the Emperor Charles the fifths Army, that was coming to besiege Marseilles;
for he persuaded the King three weeks before the coming of the Emperors Army,
to publish a Proclamation that all the Inhabitants of what degree soever, that
lived within twenty miles compass of the City of Marseilles, should upon pain
of death, remove all their Cattle, Wine, Corn, and Movables, and bring them
to his Camp where they should have money for their corn and wine, and lodging
for themselves in the adjacent towns, with pasture for their cattle, at free
cost, till the war was over: and those that did not obey this Proclamation,
within fifteen days, were enforced to obey the same by a party of 2000, horse
that were sent by the King to see the execution of it, whereby the Emperor was
reduced within a month after, to such extreme want of victuals, and of
provender for his horses, that he was enforced to raise his siege with the
loss of his former reputation, and of 30000. of his men that perished by
famine, and by the sword upon their retreat into Italy.

This policy may be used also to reduce the strongest Garrison that can be, if
the party be master of the field, or lie in an entrenched Camp some twenty
miles off, that he may day and night scour all the roads with strong parties
of Horse, as the Deke de Montmorency did; for after the favor of God, it was
the secondarie cause of the preservation of the Kingdom of Frances for if the
French King had enforced the Emperor to a pitched battle, and that he had been
routed, the Emperors Army had advinced without opposition to the very gates
of Paris, because there was not in those days any strong hold between
Marseilles and Paris. But by this means the French King did not hazard his
Kingdom upon the casual event of a battle, and yet preserved the same, and
did utterly waste and reduce to nothing, the greatest Army that ever this
Emperor was Master of, and that was led by the most experienced Commanders in
Christendom. The fourth way is by scaling in the night time.


The fourth way is by scaling in the night time, as Geneva was likely to have
been taken by the Lord D'Aulbigny, General for the Duke of Savoy in Henry the
fourths days; The best way for a Governor to prevent these surprises by
stratagems of War and scaling, is set out in Chap. 32.
for there were above five hundred men gotten up upon the Rampires before they
were discovered; and had it not been by the favor of God, that one of the
first Inhabitants that was alarmed, did run to the lower Flanks of one of their
Bastions, that had two Cannons mounted, pointed and charged with case and
chaine-shot, and presently fired them, whereby all the Assailants scaling
ladders were broken, and cast into the dike, the City had been taken; but the
Soldiers and the Inhabitants being assured by this means, that no greater
number then was entered could annoy them, took courage, and put the greater part
of them to the sword, some Lords excepted, that they caused to be beheaded the
same day.

And this is the reason that I have pressed so much in my former discourses of
the practical Art of Fortification, the necessity there is to erect upper and
lower Flanks, as the only means to preserve a strong hold from scaling in the
night time, and from casting of galleries over the mote or dike, to prevent a
general assault; for these Flanks (under God) were the cause, not only of the
preservation of Geneva, but of Casal in Italy some certain years since; for
the French He was the very same that was Governor of the Isle of Ree,
called Monsieur de Thorax.
Governor that was entrusted by the Duke of Mantua to defend that strong hold
against an Army of thirty thousand men, commanded by the Marquisse Spinola,
did make such use of the lower Flanks of the Bastions of that Garrison, that he
broke three times one after another, the strong galleries that the said
Marquisse did cast over the mote, and hindered him by that means to come to a
general assault, and so enforced him to raise his siege, which disgrace struck
such a deep impression in the heart of the Marquisse, that he died shortly
after, more of grief then by the violence of his disease, holding and reputing
that it was a great blemish to his former reputation, to be beaten off by so
young a Governor, from a siege, when he had been reputed the most experienced
Commander in Christendom, in the Art of Assailing.

The fifth way is by the blocking up of a Garrison at a certain distance, by
strong Forts, or strong houses, seated and erected by, The fifth way is by the
blocking up of a Garrison at a certain distance.
or near the said Garrison. This way is tedious and uncertain, because such
ancient houses are rarely seated in the most convenient places, or at an equal
distance for that purpose, and by these defects, the reducing of the Garrison
is much retarded; for the besieged receive ordinarily some relief from the
adjacent villages. It were therefore safer for a General, if he be resolved
to reduce a Garrison this way, to erect four new Forts, on the South, North,
East, and West of that Town, upon the most convenient seats that can be found,
within no longer distance then a mile, of all sides from that Garrison; and are
to be seated where they may most conveniently command and block up the roads
that lead to that Garrison. The continent of these Forts are to contain four
hundred Foot, and two hundred Horse, and from The lodgings of these Forts are
to be lovv and slight, so they be kept dry, for it matters not so they may
last half a year.
Fort to Fort, a small Line of Communication is to be drawn, with a dike of
six foot deep, and nine foot broad. And if there be a River running through, or
by one side of that Garrison, two wooden bridges are to be erected, either
with boats, or with piles, and two good Redouts erected to defend these
bridges. And all this may be done in less then a months time, by an Army that
is eight thousand Foot strong, and two thousand Horse, so it be Master of the
field: And this course being taken about the latter end of October, this
Garrison will be in such streights for victuals and Ammunition before March,
that it will be enforced to yield to the mercy of the Assailants: for it
cannot be releeved, but by a greater party by half then are billetted in
these four Forts and two Redouts, because they releeve and join one with
another upon all occasions.

The sixth and the most certain and method-like way, The sixth and the surest
way is by a do able entrenched Camp.
is by an entrenched Camp used in Caesar's days, and at this time in Flanders
by the French and Hollanders; because if all the five former ways having been
attempted and fail, this will assuredly carry away the Garrison, either by
storm or famine. But before I come to the particulars of it, I will relate the
judgments of the most experienced Commanders, both ancient and modern,
whether the sallies of the Defendents are prositable to them, or necessary to
be done, to hinder the Assailants to incamp themselves, and to make their
approaches.

CHAP. XXXIV. Of the opinions of experienced Commanders, concerning sallies
made by the Defendants at the beginning of a Siege.
ALL our modern Commanders do not agree in this point, for some would have no
Whether it be best to sallie, or not to sallie, in the beginning of a Siege.
sallies at all, till the Assailant begin to pierce the Counterscarp with their
secret approaches, because they would maintain the soldiers of the Garrison
in their full number and strength, for the most urgent occasion of defense,
that is, when the enemies do indervour to cast their galleries over the mote,
and to make their Mines for to come to a general assault: their reasons are
these. 1. All the sallyes of a Garrison say they, cannot hinder an Assailant
Army to perform eight of the ten operations, that shall be spoken of in the
next Chapter. 2. If it be never so well manned, the Assailants are always sive
to one at least, and sometime ten for one; and therefore if the Defendants in
these sallyes lose one man, their loss is greater, then if the Assailants lose
five; nay, more then ten, because they may be supplied and recruted: but the
Defendants cannot, but by the coming of a great Army to their releife. 3. When
the Defendants sally so far from their Rampiars, as to endeavor to impede
the incamping of the Assailants, or the making of their first approaches; it is
ten to one say they, if they be not beaten and driven in again with loss.
Forces that sally out are subject to be routed, if a party of the Assailants
horse goes between them and the town.
Nay, they may be utterly routed, and their retreat into the town stopped; if a
good party of horse of the Assailants, can get between their Rampiars and them:
which if they do, as it has been oftentimes effected; the strength and the
courage of the Defendants is much weakened, and the town in a manner half
reduced. Therefore say they, it is safer, and a part of greater wisdom for a
Governor to keep in his men till the Assailants are near the Contre escarpe,
that their retreat may be secured by their musket shot, from the Contre
escarpe, and from the Ordnance of the Bastions and rampiars. But if in case the
Garrison is not strongly manned, they are not say they, to make any sallyes at
all; but only to discharge now and then some Culverings shot when some of the
Assailants horse are in a body, and in the reach of the shot; or to discharge a
Drake or two when they see some Commander of quality come near to view their
Outworks: for such expenses are not always cast away, for many great
Commanders have been slain after this manner; and among the rest the King of
Sweden See the Sweden soldier.
escaped narrowly, for his horse was killed under him, and the hinder part
carried a way by the shot of a Sacre, as he was viewing the works of the Castle
of English-State in Bavier. On the other side, some other Commanders maintain,
1. That if a Garrison do keep within their Rampiars, and make no sallies at
all, that the Assailants are encouraged by it; and suppose the town to be
weakly manned, or ill provided of Ammunition, if they be not lavish of their
powder, in shooting daily their Culverins, to hinder with shot the assailants
approaches. 2. They say that if the Defendants do not endeavor to impede by
sallyes their approaches, before they come to pierce their Contreescarpe; that
their sallies will be then to little purpose, because they may be so suddenly
begerted, that they will not then be able to sally forth at all. 3. That to
gain time, which is more precious in sieges then to any other occasions of
war, because they hope to be relieved by some party of theirs, if they can
hold out but a certain time, that the defendants are by their daily sallyes,
to hinder the Assailants approaches; and to the utmost of their power, to
impede them, to break through their Contre escarpe: for if they can but busy
them three weeks or a months time, about these operations, it will much
dishearten the common sculdiers, and discourage the Commanders of the
Assailants Army.


Now to decide this point I leave it to the judicious Reader, yet I will inform
him that the Duke De See his perfect Captain.
Roan, Sir Authoine See his Treaty de la charge dun Governeur. Of the charge of
a Governor.
De Ville, See his Military Architecture.
Petro Sardy, and the greater part of the Italian and French Commanders, side
in their judgment, with the first opinion here related; and that I conceive it
also to be the safest way, and especially in this civil war of ours; in
which, our Garrisons are so ill manned, and so ill provided with Ordnance and
Ammunition. And also, because we have neither Outworks, nor Contre escarpe, and
not so much as any lower flunks to scour our Courtines, or ditches; and
therefore our works being so weak and deformed, as the greater part are, we are
to keep our men fresh and in heart, for the defense of a general assault.
Besides, raw, and unexperienced soldiers, that never were in besieged Towns,
are mightily astonished and amazed, at the first approach of a great Army
before their Rampiars; but when they have been wonted to look the enemy in the
face, their courage and resolution is increased, and dare better attempt such
sallyes then they could at the first coming. And to prevent this Panique fear,
See Plutarc. in Marius life.
Marius a great Commander of the ancient Romans, being appointed by the Senate
to raise an Army to hinder the Cymbers, a barbarous nation, that was coming
into Italy, to pass the Alpelins Mounts, for they were already entered in
Lombardia; he seeing that the greater part of his Army did consist of raw
soldiers, he caused them to lie in an entrenched Camp every night, but when he
came in sight of the enemy, their multitude, their grim countenance, their high
stature, and barbarous carriage, and apparel, did so affright his soldiers,
that he could hardly make them defend the Rampiars of their Camp; whereupon he
gave charge to his Officers, to make one Regiment after another, to be day and
night upon the Rampiars, that they might be wonted to see without fear, this
barbarous and grim nation; and lay purposely near a month, in one and the same
entrenched Camp, suffering the enemies to approach sometimes to the very brim
of the ditch, till he saw his soldiers freed of this Panique fear; and till
they came and entreated him to issue forth of their Camp, to give the enemy
battle, which he granted with much ado, reproving them for their former fear
and cowardice. And by this wise Policy obtained a famous victory, for there
remained slain in that battle, fourscore thousand in the field of the
Cymbers, and very few of the Romans. But had he set upon them at the first,
when his Army was amazed, he had undoubtedly been routed; and had cast the City
of Rome into a great danger, for they had then no other Army ready to oppose
them.

To conclude this point, it is most certain that the Assailants in this
unnatural war of ours, are to come to a storm the very next day that their
Army has faced a Garrison, if the works of it be not regulary, or have no
lower flanks; and their brest-work not above nine foot high, and six or seven
foot thick, with a graft of some nine foot deep, and twenty foot broad; for if
they have but courage, they will undoubtedly take the same. And for the
Defendants, they are not to wast their men, and Ammunition, in ridiculous
sallyes, but to be watchful, and valiant to oppose the assailants in a
general storm: for if they can beat them off twice or thrice, they will free
themselves from their ^ury. But if the works of a Garrison be regulary, and
lined out according to Art, and well flanked with upper and lower flanks,
having the Rampiars and Brestworks of Cannon proof, and twenty or thirty foot
high, with a graft of twenty foot deep, and forty foot broad, besides the small
ditch called La cunette: with a good Contre escarpe: having a brest-work of six
foot high, with a foot-step going round about the inward work, and well manned
and provided with Ordnance and Ammunition; then is the General or Commander in
chief that undertakes to besiege such a Garrison, to entrench himself in such
an entrenched Camp, that is demonstrated in Plate 24. and by degrees to make
his approaches both open and private, to break into the Contre escarpe; and to
beat to dust the defendants flanks by his batteries, that he may cast his
Galleries over the mote: and set his Miners at work, to blow up by Mines, the
Point, or Faces of the Bastions, to come to a general assault; for otherwise
he will but spin out the time, and at last, come off with little honor and
reputation.

CHAP. XXXV. Of the entrenched Camp demonstrated in Plate 24.
TO besiege such a strong hold to some purpose, marked in this figure by the
letter A. that the General or Commander in chief of an Army, that undertakes
such a siege, may come off with honor; he is in the first place to entrench
himself in four The first operation of the ten that are to be done in a fiege.
large quarters, of a continent, convenient and proportionable to his Army: if
it exceed not four thousand horse, and twelve thousand foot, the dimensions of
these four quarters marked in this figure by the letter B. will as I conceive
be sufficient, if it be greater or less; his Enginers are to increase or to
diminish the Continent of it. For we have found by experience, in this
unnatural civil war of ours, that to besiege strong holds, without an
entrenched Camp, One of the causes of the spining out of this unnatural war.
is wittingly and wilfully to spin out this war, because it is an easy thing
for an experienced and active Commander to beat up and put to rout a quarter of
our Armies, as they lie open, and that are at so great a distance one from
another, as ours commonly do; it has been the overthrow of diverse of our
forces before Newark, Pomphret, Dennington, Banbury, and Dudley Castle; and the
tedious spinning out of the reducing of Basing, and Latham house. Besides, they
exhaust the means of the Kingdom; for a Garrison begerted with a circulary
intrenchment, will be sooner reduced in a month, then another will be in six
that is besieged; as we have done hitherto. For instance, How had it been
possible for See Caesar's Commentaries of the wars of Gaul. lib 7.
Caesar to have penned in fourscore thousand fighting men in the great city of
Alexie, and to defeat an Army of one hundred and fourscore thousand more that
came to their releife, with his small Army of fifty thousand men at the most,
if he had not doubly entrenched himself against the town, and against the
great Army that came to raise the siege? And yet some will maintain that we
excel in these days, the ancient Romans in the Art of war; But it is not
so, for the French, or Gauls, were then a Warlike Nation, and their General
Vercingentorix was a very resolved and valiant Commander, but it was by the Art
of Fortification, and the excellent military discipline of the Roman soldiers,
with the great activity, and the experience in Arms of Caesar's works and
Carriage before Alexie in Erance.
Caesar, that brought to pass in so short a time, such incredible things; for
he enclosed Alexie, with a double entrenched Camp, with a ditch of twenty foot
broad, and twenty foot deep, without a slope; and erected a Rampiar of twelve
foot high, and twenty foot thick, beside a brest-work having at every
fourscore paces a distance: high wooden Towers to secure his Archers, and to
discharge his Balisters against the Assailants, and the exterior of these
entrenchments, was at the least twelve English miles compass, and the inward
entrenchment could not be less then eight English miles circumference, as may
be supposed by the Continent of the city of Alexie, You may see how much it
avails, to be in a double entrenched camp.
since it was able to billet fourscore thousand fighting men, besides her own
inhabitants. And all these works were erected and perfected in less then a
month; for he was not in all six weeks before it, so that it may be supposed,
that the interior intrenchment, or the circulary line that did begert the city
round, was done in eight or ten days; and so sufficiently made, and so
vigilantly guarded, that the besieged could never break through these works, to
join with them that came to their releife: Nor that great Army could not also
go over these works, but tired themselves in endeavoring to break through.
And being thus over-tired, Caesar made a sally with his fresh Army, and by
these means routed them, and obtained the city, that yielded to his mercy,
being not able to hold out for want of victuals. By this unparalleld example it
is apparent, that there is no way to this to reduce a strong hold, and to be
able to oppose a potent Army that comes purposely to relieve it, when it is
besieged.

But to return where I left, these four quarters being set out and finished,
and the Huts or Tents being set up, and the horse and foot with the Carriages,
and the Train of Artillery being placed, and the Generals Tents being erected
in the midst of one of the best seated quarters, a double line The second
operation.
of Communication marked C. is to be lined and taken in hand; having in every
side small flankers as it is demonstrated, to secure the covered way, made
between the two Rampiars, marked by the letter M. whereby one quarter may
relieve the other as occasion requires, without danger. Now if a deep and
unfordable river run in the midst, or on the side of this Garrison, two bridges
The third operation.
are to be erected over the same, in the two broad sides quarters of this
entrenched Camp; for in that place they will be secured without any other
works, and seated conveniently to relieve from both sides the river, any of the
quarters, if any of the^ were assailed by the besieged, or any party that
should come to their relief. These bridges Four kind of bridges, and how they
are to be erected; the first sort being the best, and soonest erected
are to be made with Barges, or great flat bottom boats, well linked together
with iron chains, and fastened to pills droven in the midst, and on both sides
of the river, that the stream may not drive them down; and these Barges or
Boats, are to be covered with planks of three inches thick, and then with
gravel; that Carriages and the Train of Artillery, may pass over without
fear. But if such flat Boats nor Barges cannot be found, then they are to be
erected with Pills, and covered over with such thick planks, or gravel. Or if
seasoned Pills could not also be had, then long timber trees are to be felled,
and the bark and branches being he wed away and squared, they are to be bound
fast together as flotts of timber that are driven down a shallow river, where
Barges cannot go for want of water; and five or six of these flotts well bound
together, will make a strong bridge, so it be covered with the aforesaid planks
and gravel, and fastened in the midst and in the sides to Pills, driven with
violence into the ground. Another kind of bridge may be made suddenly, with two
double rows of empty Sack-pipes, Hogs-heads, or Beer-barrels, well hooped, See
Philip the Commin. Commentaries.
and close botomed, bound together and fastened to Pills driven in the midst,
and in the sides of the river. As Charles the last Duke of Burgundi, did erect
one (over the river, the Seine that runs through the midst of Paris) some
three miles from the city, and this bridge was erected in one night: And all
the Dukes Army, with his Train of Artillery, bag and baggage, passed the
river before eight of the clock in the morning; upon which unexpected tidings,
Lewis the eleventh, the great Politician, was greatly amazed.

This double line of communication, and these bridges being finished, the
Enginiers are to line out their approaches The fourth operation.
after any of these two ways demonstrated in this Plate by the letter D.
erecting at every return an Angle flanker, where Musquettiers are placed to
secure the approaches, having a Court of Guard in every one of them, of forty
or fifty men; these flankers serve also for Carriages or horsemen to retreat,
when other Carriages or horsemen are discovered coming in the next approaches,
if in case the General will have them so narrow, that two Carriages cannot
pass close together, for he has the disposing of it: some therefore will have
them but 12 foot broad, and 4 foot deep, and some twenty foot broad, and five
foot deep; but very flat in the bottom: the slope of the sides is not to be
above a foot. The principal care of the Enginier that lines them out, is to
set out their Angles so far into the field on the right, and on the left
hand, that they may not be as the French term it (Enfillees) that is, Of the
true setting out of approaches.
that any Cannon or Culvering shot, placed upon the the Angle or Point of any
of the Bastions of the Garrison besieged, may not upon a strait line beat in
any of the approaches; for if they may, the approaches are not safe, nor lined
out as they should be, but will be destructive to the Assailants; for such a
shot may endanger the lives of twenty horsemen, or footmen, at a time.

These approaches marked by the leetter F. being finished, and brought within
one hundred yards of the Contre escarpe of the besieged; the Plat-forms The
fist operation.
are to be raised, marked by the letters E. and 4 or 6 Demi-Cannons to be
placed and pointed against the flanks of the Bastions, and the brest-works of
the Rampiars; to batter to dust all the brest-works of the Flanks, and
Rampiars. And while this is a doing, some of the Pioniers are to work day and
night in the private approaches under ground, The sixth operation.
to break into the Contre escarp; and some other Pioniers in the night time are
to work about the begerting circulary trenches, (but if the Army be provided
with mantlets, they may also work about this trench in the day time) that is,
to go round about the Garrison, marked by the letter O. that is, to have
spaces left to place Turn-pikes to sally forth, when the secret approaches are
almost finished, to assail the Contre escarpe, while these that are in the
approaches under ground, break into the Contre escarpe, and by a furious onset
insorce the Defendants to retreat into the Garrison, and to forsake the Contre
escarpe.

The Contre escarpe being won, and the circulary When this circulary line is
finished, the defendants can by no means sally for th any more.
trench finished, the Pieces or Demi-Cannons, that were appointed to beat down
the brest-works of the Flanks and Rampiars, are to be removed as soon as other
Plate-forms The seventh operation.
are raised upon the Contre escarp, to place and point some of them against the
Points of the Bastions that are intended to be stormed; and the other against
the flanks that may be repaired that way, that they may erect their The
erecting of Galleries, is the eight operation.
Galleries over the Mote, if it be full of water: or if it be dry, to fill the
same in a night with Bavins, that the Pioniers may begin their Mines, to blow
up some part of the Bastions; but because the ensuing operations are
demonstrated in the next plate, I will here describe the Ichnography of this
entrenched Camp with the dimensions of all the parts of it, and will refer
you for the rest to the next Chapter.

The Ichnography of the 24 Plate.
A. Represents the Garrison besieged of a Sexagon form fortified by six
Bastions, with Orillons; after the best Italian Method, as may be seen in the
next Plate. B. Represents the four quarters of the Army, that contain in their
circumference a mile and a half, and may contain three thousand Foot and a
thousand Horse a piece. C. Represents the double Line of Communication that
conjoyn the four quarters one with another; the circumference of the whole
Camp, with the sour quarters, is in all of eight English miles; and the
distance from the end-side of the Camp to the Contre escarpe of the Defendants,
is of five eight parts of a mile; and the distance from the broad side of the
Camp is of seven eight parts of an English mile, and thereby free in all parts
from the besieged Garrison Cannon shot. D. R presents the winding approaches
that run to the begirting trench, the earth of which is cast toward the Town,
to serve as a b^^ast-work to the assailants, to cover them from the Musqu^t
shot of the Defendants that are in the Contre escarpe; the earth of the winding
approaches is cast some at the right hand, and some at the left hand, the
better to preserve them that go, or are in them; their ditches are represented
by the white lines, and their banks by the thatcht lines; their banks are so
high, that neither Foot nor Horsemen can be in danger of the Cannon or Musket
shot of the Defendants. The breast of their flanks placed upon every winding
angle, are of seventy yards broad apiece; that they may contain 40 or 50
Musketeers apiece, if need require. E. Represents the sour first plat-formes
for to raise Battery; these batteries are to be raised according to the s^at of
the place; if it be to batter the upper flanks of the brest-works of the
Rampiars, they need not to be above two y^^ds high; if it be to batter the
lower flanks, and the faces or p^^^^s of the Bastions, and the foot of the
Rampiar, they are to be 4, paras high, and sometimes more. They are always to
be entrenched round, but in one (...), (...) barrier is placed with a good
ditch, and a brest-work (...) flanked, and to contain between 60 or 100
Musqu^^^^^ (...), and Hol^^^d^^^^,, to preserve the Pe^ces, if in case the
D^^e^^ants made a gr^^^ and strong (...). F. Rep^^sents ^he Flank^^s (...) the
approaches; their breast is from 70 yards to 80, and may contain 40 or 50
Musketeers. G. Represents the Diagonall approaches of the broad sides of the
Camp, that cross one another like a traverse, of which we have not spoken at
all, because the batteries were not of that side; but what has been said of
the other, will also serve for them. H. Represents all the flanks of the
Diagonall approaches of the broad sides of the Camp. I. Represents the upper
traverse of the Diagonall approaches, and a small half moon that defends the
coming in of the said traverse. K. Represents the lower traverse of the
Diagonall approaches; and the little half moons that defend the coming in
and going out of the two great quarters of the two broad sides of the Camp. L.
Represents the four small half moons that defense the coming in and the
going out of the four great quarters of the Camp, toward the fields. The
sides of these half moons are of 6^ yards a piece. M. Represents the road or
covered way, that leads from one quarter to another, between the Lines of
Communication: it is of 16 yards broad, besides the thickness of the two
breast-works, and of their five footsteps that are in the bottom eighteen
foot, and at top ten foot, and of nine foot high (...), the ditches are
eighteen foot broad and nine foot deep. N. Represents the two plat-formes
erected by the diagonall approaches on the broad sides of the Camp. O.
Represents the begitting trench, and her flanks or breast-works. P. Represents
the turne-pikes and issues to go to assail the Defendants Contre escarpe.
Some will object, that to erect such a Camp, it will be a tedious and a
chargeable piece of work. But I answer, That an Army consisting of twelve
thousand Foot, will finish such a Camp, and erect two such bridges over a
River, as broad as the Trent is before Newarke, in less then a fortnights
time, so the Army be provided, as it should always be, with six thousand
pick-axes, spades, and shovels, and with four hundred wheel, and
hand-barrowes, and as many scuttles, and with store of Carpenters. And for
Pioniers there need none, so the General be pleased to allow four pence a day
to the Foot Soldiers of his Army, that will work when they are out of guard,
over and above their pay. And these charcges would be recovered one hundred
fold, by the speedy reducing of the Garrison that is consumed by the pay of an
Army, that spins out the time in other methods of Sieges; and which is of more
value, many hundred men's lives will be preserved by this method of Sieges.

CHAP. XXXVI. Of the Batteries erected, and of the Mines to be sprung against a
besieged Garrison, demonstrated in Plate 25.
Upon these last opperations, depends the honor or disparagement of the
Assailants, and the preservation or desolation of the defendants, if they
behave themselves like men of War, or be daunted or dismayed by the roaring of
the Cannons, and of the furious storms of the Assailants. Now to describe
these effects that are the most dangerous and terrifying actions of the Art of
War, I will in the first place set forth the Assailants duty, and secondly,
the Defendants opposition.

The new batteries erected upon the Contre escarpe, that we spoke of in the
last Chapter, marked with the letter V. in this Plate, appointed to beat, to
ruin the two points of two Bastions, are to have six whole Cannons mounted
upon them, and pointed against the side of the face of the Bastions, within
twenty yards of the point, as the most convenient place, to make a speedy
breach, for to fill with the ruins of it the mote or ditch, these six Cannons
are to be pointed, discharged, and fired at one and the same instance of time,
by six Cannoniers, and not one after another, allowing some intermission of
time, between the fiting of them, as we commonly use to do, but all at one
clap, because six Cannon shot coming at once against a Bulwark, Rampiar, or
Stone Tower, is more powerful to shake and ruin the same, then forty single
Cannon shot, that are fired between some intermission of time: And as soon as
the six Cannons of one Battery have been fired, the other six Cannons of the
other Battery pointed against the other face of the other bulwark is to be
fired, that there may be a continual roaring of the Cannons, that the besieged
may be the more amazed and perplexed, to which of these two breaches they shall
first repair, or bring materials to repair them.

The other two batteries also, marked by the letter R. are to have three or
four whole Culverings upon them, that are to be pointed against the flanks of
these two bastions, that are also to be fired one after another from every
several battery, but the four culverings upon every one of them are to be
discharged and fired at one instant of time, as has been formerly said of the
six Cannons. And so by these four batteries, if they be well ordered, there
will be a continual Roaring of the Cannon, with little or no intermission at
all; And these batteries are to continue till the breaches be sufficient, and
at the least twenty yards broad, and level with the ground, that twenty men
may come out abrest, as close together as may be, and all the night time the
assaillants from the Contre escarpe intrenchments, that they have made as near
the brim of the mote as may be, are to hinder (with fresh companies of
Musketeers that are to be relieved at every change of the Centries) the
defendants to repair the breaches, that the general assault may be given the
next morning.

But before these Batteries begin, the two The ninth operation.
Mines marked by the letter O. are to be brought to such a pass, as they may
be ready to spring just in the midst of these four Cannon batteries, that
there may be four breaches in three of the bastions of this Sexagon Garrison,
all at one time, to make a diversion of the Defendants forces; by which
diversion, their forces must of necessity be divided: and by consequence
weakened and disinabled to make so strong an opposition as they might do, if
there were but two breaches.

The best way to guide covered approaches or mines, to that very place you
purpose to do, is to have a perfect Sea-compasse with you, that you may note
upon your Table Book, upon what point or degree the place you intend to come
to, stands; from the mouth, or opening of the covered approaches, or mine.

This mouth or opening, is to be made eight or nine foot square, and the
bottom as deep as you intend to go with your Mine, The true way how to begin
a Mine.
then you are to set your Sea-compasse Sea-compasse is of necessity to be used
in the setting out of Mines.
upon the point or degree noted before, and to order the Pioniers to mine just
upon the ray of the degree; their way is not to be, if the ground permit above
four, or four foot and a half broad, and not above five, or five foot and a
half high, that two men may conveniently pass with These hods are great
baskets pointed in the bottom, and two foot broad at top, flat against the
backs, and round without side; wherein a man may carry three times as much
earth as in a Scuttell.
hoddes on their backs full of the earth of the mine; that is, to be brought up
from the mouth of the mine with a Ladder, and placed some sixteen foot from the
brim of the mouth; in manner of a square brestwork, as it is demonstrated in
this Plate by the letter N. the letter M. representing the mouth of the mine.
But this method is to be only observed, if in case the mouth be in the field,
as the mouth of all covered approaches are; but if the mouth of the mine does
begin beyond the mote, then the earth is to be bestowed to raise the banks of
the small intrenchment that are made along the wall of the Rampiar.

Now when the Pioniers have entered the mine some four foot, you are to set up
at the entrance of it such a strong door case, as is marked by the letter T.
having two strong ledges nailed two inches and a half lower then the very top;
and at every six foot of the way of the mine, How to hold up the earth of a
Mine from calving in.
you are to place such another doore-case, and to set planks of two inches and
a half thick upon these ledges spoken of before; and this must of necessity
be done, where you find the earth to be apt to calve: but where it is sound,
this charge may be spared.

And when the way of the Mine is come so far under the face of the Bastion,
as you desire; you are then to wind the way of your Mine ten yards on the right
hand, and ten yards on the left hand; in the manner of a T. as it is
demonstrated in this Plate, and to make two round Ovens of that capacity, to
contain six or seven barrels of powder apeece; as it is demonstrated by the
letter P. and when these barrels are placed in both Ovens, the mouth of them is
to be stopped (after the Train of powder to them, has bin laid upon boards)
with All other kind of stoping the ovens mouth, is nothing to bricks and lyme.
bricks and lime, with a hole in the bottom of four inches square, for the
Train to be brought along the way of the Mine to the very mouth of it. Others
make use of a copper pipe made like a T. in which they put a fine tinder match;
the burning of which, they have made experience of, to know the just time that
it will require to burn, to set the Train close to the powder barrels on fire,
and do set the other end toward the mouth of the Mine on fire, so many hours
before the time they intend to spring the Mine; the other way by a Train upon
boards to the very mouth of the Mine is to be fired with a lighted match,
fastened to the end of a long kane; and he that fireth the same, is to run aside
as far as he can, to avoid the danger of the splits of the Mine.

These two Mines being sprung at the same time, that the breaches of the Cannon
batteries are ready for a general assault, will produce a great amazement, or
a panique fear among the Defendants. And upon this amazement, the Regiments
that are appointed to attempt every one of these several breaches, are to be
ready, and to advance furiously The tenth and last operation of the Assailants,
to obtain and reduce a Garrison Town.
forward to enter the breach; for to crown their heads with the Crown of
Laurel, due to the Victors. But because most of our soldiers go not armed as
they should, for such a dangerous and desperate attempt, I will here describe
the Arms, that a wise General, that holds the lives of his soldiers more
precious to him then his own, should have always ready to preserve such
valorous soldiers, that lead the way to such a Feast; he is I say to have
always one hundred of brest-plates, and one hundred of headpeeces, and one
hundred of Roudaches, or broad Targets of musket proof, to dispose among those
that undertake to lead the Front of the three first ranks that enter these
breaches, and this would preserve many men's lives, and make them go on more
boldly to so dangerous a fight.

In the next place we are to suppose that the Assailants by their valor have
entered the breaches, and obtained the points of the Bastions, and other the top
of the Rampiars; and yet cannot enter the town, because of the provident
forecast of the Defendants, that have entrenched themselves between the town
and their Rampiars, and overthwart the breast of the Bastions: yet the
Assailants are not to be discouraged, but presently cast up some small trenches
upon the Rampiars, and the points of the Bastions they have taken, till their
smallest Sacres and Drakes be drawn up upon the Rampiars, and the points of the
Bastions, that will speedily beat the Defendants from their weak intrenchments,
and enforce them to a parley, having then no other means left to preserve
their lives but that; for if they be forced by another storm, they are like to
suffer all the miseries that a provoked and incensed enemy, will be able to
inflict upon them.

But suppose that the Assailants be repulsed with great loss from the first
and second Assault, yet if the General can bear these losses patiently, being
entrenched in such a manner as is before said; he may reduce in few days this
obstinate Garrison, and obtain the Crown of Laurel, due to such as are
constant in their warlike attempts, by famine, that inforceth the greatest
resolution, to an accommodation. For if he can but endure the irksome and
tedious labor of a long siege, this Garrison notwithstanding this great
resolution, can hope for no relief. For if a greater Army then his come to
endeavor to raise the siege, it cannot force this entrenched Camp, nor enforce
him to battle, except he list himself, or that some apparent occasion of
prevailing should be offered; as the weariness of the Gauls, did induce
Caesar to sally out of his entrenched Camp, after they had tired themselves
upon their vain attempt, See Caesar's Commentaties lib. 7.
so break through his strong Rampiars and intrenchments, otherwise it would be
no wisdom for a General to embrace an uncertain enterprise, for a certain
victory, that cannot be taken out of his hands, if he continue in his
entrenched Camp; for at last that Garrison will be enforced to yield to his
mercy, as the City of Alexie was constrained to submit to Caesar's clemency.

Having fully shown the endeavonrs and the valor of the Assailants, it
remains for the conclusion of this point, and of this abstract, to show also
the endeavors that a valiant and prudent Governor is to perform, to discharge
with a good conscience the great trust that has been reposed upon him, for the
defense of such a Garrison. First, as the Assailants erect their batteries, and
point their Cannons to beat down the brest-works of the flanks, and of the
Rampiars; he is to endeavor to hinder the raising of these batteries, or to
dis ount their Cannons by placing the greatest pieces he has, upon the Mounts
or Cavalliers that are erected near to the middle of the Courtines of his
Garrison.

2. He is to have great care to cause the brest-works of the Flanks, or of the
Rampiars, that have been beaten down in the day time to be repaired in the
night; causing women and children to bring earth in the day near unto the
places of the greatest breaches, The ten opperations for opposition.
that may with the more speed be repaired, having always many hoppes and
wool-sacks in a readiness to serve as brest-works upon the breaches of the
Rampiars, and of the Bulwarks.

3. He is to charge the Inhabitants to bring store of sewel and their greatest
Caldrons, or Kittles to the houses adjacent, to the Rampiars, and to command
that store of oil, and water may be in a readiness: that in the time of the
general assault, sires may be kindled near to the Rampiars; and oil and water
heated boiling hot in these Cauldrons and K^ttles, to be thrown by the women
upon the Assailants that endeavor to scale the Rampiars.

4. He is to have great store of all manner of fireworks ready to cast upon
those that endeavor to enter the breaches, to dismay and offend the
assailants, placing many musketeers on both sides of the breaches, that may
g^ll the assailants in the flanks.

5. He is to have in the Magazine of his Garrison, one hundred of Sea-Muskets,
that the French call Harquebus a Groch, that carry a bullet three times as
great as an ordinary Musket, and longer then they by half a yard, and one
hundred of Roudaches, or iron targets of Musket proof, and one hundred of
Partisans, and as many good Halberds, with a hundred of breast-plates, and as
many head-pieces, all of them of Musket shot proof: and all these are to be
disposed to the most valiant soldiers of the Garrison, that dare undertake to
defend the breaches.

6. As soon as he perceives that the assailants erect their batteries, he may
presently guess where they intend to make the breaches; then is he to take
order, to erect by times new intrenchments, for it is too late to go about
them, when the assailants have gotten the rampiars, and the points of the
Bulworkes.

7. When the Assailants begin their Mines, he is diligently to search the place
where they intend to carry their mine; and because they seem sometime to go
one way, when they intend to go another, to delude the defendants, he is to
try in all places that he may mistrust they intend to go with their Mines,
these conclusions:

Let a very thin Barbers basin be set to that place that is suspected, full
of clear water; If the Assailants mine in that place, at every stroke of their
pick-axes, the water in the basin will frizzle into small round circles, as if
a small stone were cast in a paile of water.

Or let a drum be set down to the place, and some very round white pease be
set upon the top of the drum, and these pease will leap at every stroke of
the assailants pick-axes, if they be mining in that place. And if any of these
symptoms appear, then is he suddenly to set Pioniers at work, to countermine,
and to give air or vent to the assailants mines; and when the defendants
Pioniers come near their Mine, let them proceed no farther, but let the
Centries that are near the place, where the mouth of the assailants mine is,
give intelligence from time to time, if any barrells of powder be brought into
the ovens of the Assailants mine; for before they can sire the same, the
defendants may if they be vigilant, deprive them of their powder, and all is
under one, give vent to their Mine. This stratagem has been successful to
diverse defendants.

8. When the assailants endeavor to carry over their galleries over the mote,
he is then to spare no pains to place Musketeers on their flanks to impede
them; but if in case they are covered from the Musket shot by mantlets, he is
then to have the Demy-cannons placed in the lower flanks of the bastions, to be
suddenly charged with iron balls, (and the caseshot wherewith they were charged
before, removed, that as soon as the assailants galleries are almost brought
over) the shot of these two Demi-cannons may break them to pieces.

9. The Demi-cannons that are placed in the upper flanks, are to be charged
with chain shot, that is, with two iron balls linked together by an iron
chain, that when the general assault is given, if in case the assailants
should attempt to scale the Rampiars, the said chained balls might cast down
all their scaling ladders.

10. And lastly, the Governor during the siege is to double his Courts of
Guards, and Centries, and to go the Rounds oftentimes himself, and in the day
of a general assault, he is to go to all places, and to view the defects, and
to apply remedies to them, sending sudden relief to those breaches that are in
most danger to be entered, and to have always about him, some three score of
the most valiant soldiers of the Garrison, being in the head of them, to
relieve the most distressed place of the Garrison: and by these and such like
endeavors of valor and fidelity, he is to discharge the trust reposed upon
him, and preserve his Garrison, if it be possible.

Here follows the Ichnegraphie of the dimensions of the Fortifications of the
Garrison besieged, demonstrated in Plate 25.
A. Represents the Garrison reduced into a Sexagon form; the sides of it are
according to the best Italian Method; divided first into ten equal parts;
four of which are allowed for the two demi gorges, and the other six for the
Courtine, and these sides are of 250 yards apiece. B. Represents the whole
gorge, that is of 100 yards. C. Represents the demi-gorge, that is of 50 yards.
D. Represents the distance from the center of the Bastion, to the utmost point
or angle of it, that is of 100 yards. E. Represents the face of the bastion
that is of 120 yards. G. Represents the circulary compass of the Orillons that
jet beyond the shoulder 20 yards. H. Represents the breast of the Bastion that
is of 120 yards. K. Represents the Courtine that is of 150 yards, that is
divided into 8 equal parts; from the first part of which, the line of Defense
is taken, according to the Italian method, that is, 14 yards nearer the flanks,
then the Hollanders take it. L. Represents the line of defense that is of ^40
yards. M. Represents the mouth of the Mine. N. Represents the earth of the
Mine, placed in the manner of a breast-work. O. Represents the way of the Mine
underground. P. Represents the two ovens of the Mine. Q. Represents the
Copper-pipe, in which they set the tinder, match, where with the train of the
Mine is fired. R. Represents the two smallest plat-formes. S. Represents the
winding approaches, whereby they come to the smaller plat-formes. T. Represents
the two door-caser, to support the earth of the mine V. Represents the two
great plat-formes.
FINIS.
ERRATA.
Page 4. line 2. for higher read highest. p. 9. l. 32. for another, r. by
another method. p. 25. l. 4. for square, r. base or side. p. 25. l. 11. for set
out, r. set it out. p. 32. l. 17. for but one, r. but of one, etc. p. 61. l. 5.
for slope nothing, r. slope to nothing. p. 75. l. 15. for step, r. slope. p.
87. l. 4. for stake r. take. p. 88. l. 12. for rod, r. rode. p. 92. l. 28. for
rover. r. roarer. p. 101. in the Annotations, for du Belluy, r. du Belay. p.
110. l. 33. for Planks or gravel, r. and gravel. p. 111. l. 7. for bottomed,
r. bomed.


