A TREATISE OF The Antiquity, Authority, Uses And Jurisdiction of the Ancient
Courts of LEET, or view of Franck-Pledge, and of Subordination of Government
derived from the Institution of MOSES, the first Legislator: And the first
imitation of him in this ISLAND OF Great BRITAIN, by KING Alfred, and
continued ever since.

Together with Additions and alterations of the Modern Laws and STATUTES
inquirable at those COURTS, until this present Year, 1641.

With a large Explication of the old OATH of Allegiance Annexed.

LONDON, Printed by R. B. and are to be sold by G. Badger at the Kings Head, in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1641.

TO The Right Honorable, the Knights, Citizens and Burgesses Assembled in the
Commons House of PARLIAMENT: And in that Numerous Assembly to the Worthy
SPEAKER, His much Honored, JOHN SELDOM, ESQUIER, with the rest of the Learned
long ROBE.
THis Treatise of the most Ancient Court Leets (Right Honorable) contains in
it the several Crimes and Offenses there inquirable, as well by the Common Law
as by diverse Statutes, whereof many of this great Congregation had a Vote and
interest in the making.

It has bin the work of many intercisive hours, and had a whole winter-Age
under the oversight of a Judge, Sir Edward Coke.
famous in his time, sometimes an Honorable member of former Parliaments. How
it was entertained by him, and with what benediction it returned to the Author
from him, is well known to a Gentleman yet living, his then Amanuensis. Since
it pleased his late Majesty's Attorney general, upon a reference to him from
his Sacred Majesty, dated December 1634. Tho. Tesdall Esquier.
to recommend the examination of this work, and the Statutes therein cited to
an able Counselor, of Grayes-Inne, who after a deliberate perusal and
consideration had of it, did at the end thereof Certify his opinion in these
words.

I have seriously perused this Tract concerning Court Leets, 13. July 1636.
and find it to be compiled with much care and diligence; And I conceive
generally well composed and useful to be published.

Not long after this the Decree of the Star Chamber intervening for limitation
of the Press upon some strict terms,

This little Creature had the happiness to be reserved for these long looked
for times. The motive inducing the publishing of it is a threefold engagement
of the Author.

1. Debitum reipublicae, a debt due from him to the Commonwealth, for
expiation of the many lost and misspent hours of precious time.

2. It is debitum professionis, a debt of his calling or profession, wherein
every man is but a Steward, and must render an account; He must not reponere
talentum in sudario, but so order and improve it, that he may be enabled to
cast, if not a Talent, yet a Mite into the Common Treasury.

3. In Vita Aturedi.
It is debitum promissionis in praelo, a debt of Promise and that in the
Press. All legal promises, especially those which are publicly attested, are
inviolably to be observed: Now the end of publishing it, is for the common
good: For sithenoe the Leet is justly termed schola insigniendi juvenes, It is
very necessary that the sons and servants of Farmers, Yeomen and others
versed in rural affairs, should be disciplined in the Laws, under the
government whereof they live and have their protection. And for their better
instruction, J have in the rehearsal of the several Statutes declared the
pains and penalties, for the benefit of persons who have not Statutes at large
or abridgements. Reverend Master Crompton, in the Dedication of his Justice of
Peace, affirms that he thought fit to set down the penalties and
punishments due to every offense mentioned in the charge contained in that
book, in pursuance of the Order and method prosecuted by the Honorable, Sir
Anthony Fitzharbert, in his treatise of that Subject, and in imitation of the
usage and custom of the Justices of Assize in their Circuits, deeming it
necessary to inform the people as well of the punishment, as of the offense.
And if parvis fas sit componere magna, I have presumed to take my pattern
thence, that offenders may know the proportion of their pain as well as the
quality of their crime. And now, right honorable, this treatise, together with
the other annexed, the Author does most submissively present unto this thrice
Honorable Assembly, humbly imploring the vouchsafement of Your Honorable
License and safe Conduct for those innocent Twins to pass cheerfully into
the world; That they may be disposed and employed to that end for which they
were compiled as Your Honors shall think fit. The God of all Counsel and
Consolation be present and President in all your religious Counsels and
Consultations, and multiply his blessings upon this whole body, as well in all
your public, as private affairs; For which the Author will never cease
incessantly to pray.

Rob. Powell.

The Table of the several Sections in the first part of this Treatise.
THe Preface or Introduction touching the occasion, and Original of Laws. The
first Institution of subordination by Moses. The first promulgation of Laws
and the beginning of legal oaths for administration of Justice. The first
imitation of Moses in this Kingdom by King Alfred. The first division of this
kingdom by King Alfred into Counties, Hundreds, and Tythings. The appointment
of Officers and making Laws for the better ordering of the Kingdom. The
Statutes concerning the approvement of Wastes-Woods, etc. and other Laws
derived from the Law of Alfred, cited by Mr. Cambden. The manner of proceeding
by Iuries in those subordinate Courts of Counties, Hundreds, etc. All
subordinate Justice derived from the King and Crown. The most principal uses
of Court Leet stand upon three points. The oath of Legeance ministered at those
meetings first instituted by King Arthur. Three things considerable in the
keeping of Tournes and Leets 1. Time, 2. Place. 3. Persons. To answer an
objection for the time, that all Leets are not kept infra mensem after Easter
and Michaelmas. In what cases and by what means a Leet or franchise may be
seized or forfeited or the Lord damnified. A direction for Lords in choosing
their Stewards. The properties and qualities which a Steward ought to have. The
authority of a Steward in Leets. A Stewards power to impose a reasonable fine,
And such fine is not afferable nor traversable. The remedies for recovery of
fynes and amerciaments in a Leet. Certain cautions in the taking of
distresses. The last act or period of proceedings in a Court Leet is
Afferement. The ministerial part of a Court Leet in the levying of fynes and
amerciaments assessed. A special caution for Lords of Leets against the
farming out of their perquisites.
THE Antiquity, Authority, Uses and Jurisdiction of Court Leets, or view of
Franck pledge, etc.
The Preface or Introduction, touching the occasion and original of Laws.
WHilst man stood in the state of Innocence, There was no sin, and so no need
of any written or positive Law, no need of Oaths for the administation of Law;
For in the first age and in a long time after the deluge, there was no oath
heard of.

In the second age of the world, As there was confusion of languages; So there
was of all other things; All things were in common: Noe distinctions of
Dominions, Possessions, and Inheritances by partitions, Virgil. Geo. 1
Lotts and boundaries; Nesignare quidem, aut partiri limite Campum, Fas eratand
Hence Confusion bred Contention, and might controlled right: Nimrod then began
to be a mighty one in the earth, He was a mighty hunter before the Lord, and
was the first Monarch, who usurped power without laws.

From this confused generation God calls Abraham and gives him this charge,
Get. cap. 12. v. 1.24.
Get thee out of thy Country, and from thy kindred, and from thy fathers house
unto a land that I will show thee, And I will bless thee, and make thy name
great, And thou shall be a blessing etc,: So Abraham departed as the Lord had
spoken unto him, And Lot went with him.

They had not long dwelt together buetheir substance increased and the land was
not able to bear them; As riches increased so the right of property, or meum
et tuum began to be narrowly pryed into, and has since begotten all civil
differencies, and consequently all civil laws for discussing and deciding of
differencies between man and man.

There was civil dissension between the heards-men of Abraham and Lot, and
certainly it was about their substance. To redress this growing mischeife
Abraham bethinkes himself of a partition. And to prevent a division of mind,
descends to a division of means. And (though Uncle unto, and elder than Lot)
begins to stoop first in this wise.

Let there he no strife I pray thee between thee and me, and between thy
heards-men and my heardsmen, for we are brethren, is not the whole land before
thee? Separate thy self I pray thee from me, etc. And Abraham gave Lot the
benefit of election of the land, to take either the right hand or the left
hand; which was an example of division of possessions and distinguishing right
of property for future ages.

As God had promised to Abraham, that His seed should be in number as the
stars of Heaven; so did his generations increase and multiply; With
multiplications of families, Sins and Iniquities were also in abundance
multiplied: All sorts of people both good and bad grew up together: Force and
Fraud enlarged their dominions; Esau was a cunning hunter, a man of the field,
And Jacob was a plain man, dwelling in Tents. Jacob had Joseph a good son,
And so he had his Simeon and Levi who troubled him, Genesis 34. instruments of
cruelty in their habitations, Genesis ca. 49. Joseph had one Reuben to his
brother, But all the rest envied, hated him, and conspired against him.

At length Jacob and Joseph in fulness of years die. From the tribe of Levi
Moses is raised, and preserved in an Arc of Bulrushes from the tyranny of
Pharaoh, to be a Lawgiver, a Prophet, and a chief Ruler amongst the children
of Israel, Prudentissimus Legislator, Iustissimus Princeps, ac Propheta maximus.

In the mean time the Isralites do grieviously suffer under the tirannicall
oppressions and impositions of Pharaoh; and Moses is sent with the assistance
of Aaron to deliver them; After whose miraculous deliverance by the overthrow
of Pharaoh and his host in the red sea, Moses and the Israelites having sung
praises unto God, and erected an Altar in memorial of their bl ssed
deliverance, Moses disposes himself to a settled government of the people, And
he sat to judge, And the people stood by Moses from the morning to the
evening.

The first Institution and Subordination by Moses.
IN this course of Judicature Moses was much ^^combred, and overcharged with
variety, and multitude of causes; which Iethro his father in law observing,
does gently admonish him in this wise, The thing that thou do do, is not
good, Thou will surely wear away both thou, and this people that is with thee,
thou art not able to perform it of thy self alone. And then does Counsel him
for the ease of himself and the people to elect subordinate officers.

Thou shall provide out of all the people able men, Such as fear God, Exodus
18.2.
men of truth, hating covetous nesse, And place such over them, to be rulers
over thousands, of hundreds, of fifties, of tens, And let them judge the people
at all seasons, etc.

In pursuit of this grave advice, Moses accordingly did choose able men out of
all Israel, and made the^ heads over the people, rulers over thousands, rulers
over hundreds, rulers over fifties, and rulers oftens, and they judged the
people at all seasons; the hard causes they brought unto Moses; but every small
matter they judged themselves. Thus ( Moses upon consultation with God having
performed and put this holy Counsel in practice) His incomprehensible Deity
vouchsafed the honoring of Moses with his own presence upon Mount Sinai, And
therewith His immediate voice proclaimed the mora. Law, Containing all the
grounds of Equity and Justice, and gave them unto him engraven in two tables of
stone.

The first promulgation of Laws, and the beginning of Legal Oaths for
administration of Justice.
AS Moses received them from God, so in discharge of his sacred function, he
faithfully enjoined them unto the people. And as falsehood and fraud increased,
So for avoiding and discovery thereof, and for true execution of Justice, Heb.
6.16.
As also to put an end to strife and controversy, The ministration of legal
Oaths began to grow in use. And not long after the receiving of the Decalogue
by that great Prince and Prophet. It was one of his first Laws given in charge
unto the people.

If a man deliver unto his neighbor an Asse^or an Ox, or a Sheep, or any
beast to keep, And it die, or be hurt, or be driven away no man seeing it, Then
shall an Oath of the Lord be between them both, that he has not put his hand
to his neighbors goods, and the owner of it shall accept thereof, etc.

By this it is evident, that Moses from Gods mouth, and by inspiration of his
holy Spirit, was the first personal Legislator in the world, and the first
distributer of Justice by subordination of Rulers and Magistrates, and the
only pattern for all succeeding Princes; which moved Eusebius to say A Deo
igitur Lex originem habet, Et eam mortalium omnium primus Moses Hebraeis
constituit, Quae caeteris deinceps hominibus condendarum Legum haud dubio
exemplar fuit.

The first imitation of Moses in this Kingdom by King Alfred.
THat Moses was a Pattern and Exemplar of making laws and managing of them by
inferior Ministers, in this our ancient and famous Island of Great Britain,
renowned in the constant succession and preservation of her laws,
notwithstanding the permutation and change of government by the Conquest, and
rule of several nations, may manifestly appear by that which follows.

King Alfred who began to reign in this Island, Anno Christi. 872. the best
lettered Prince that was in those times, began his laws with Loquutus est
Dominus ad Mosem hos sermones, dicens, Ego sum Dominus Deus tuus, etc. And so
recites the 10. Commandments given by Almighty God upon Mount Sinai. And then
proceeds with the most material laws mentioned in the 21.22, and 23, Chap. of
Exodus. which he thought to be most apt and competible for the government of
his kingdom, closing it up with: Haec easunt jura, quae rerum omnium praepotens
Deus ipse Mosi custodienda proposuit, etc.


And then concludes with, Has ego Aluredus Rex Sanctiones in unum collegi,
a^que easdem literis mandavi, Quarum bonam certe partem Majores nostri
religiose coluerunt; Multa etiam mihi digna v. dentur, quae a nobis hac etiam
aetate pari religione obscrventur, Nonnullatamen torum ex consulto Patrum,
partim antiquanda, partim renovanda curavimus, etc.

I King Alfred have collected these laws into one body and have caused them to
be written, whereof truly a good part, our Ancestors did religiously regard or
obey: And many of them do seem worthy unto me, That they should be with the
like religion in this age or time observed, yet some of them by the advice of
our grave men (our Fathers) we have taken care partly to antiquate, and partly
to revive or renew. Which in the language of succeeding times, was as much, as
if he had said, Some of them by the advice of our Parliament we have thought
good partly to repeal, and partly to coptinue.

After this, the good young King (doubtless Non sine consulto Patrum) does
proceed, and culles out and confirms certain laws and sanctions of King
Inas, Offa the King of the Mercians, and Ethelbert the first King that ever
received Baptism here in England.

The first division of this kingdom by Alfred into Counties, Hundreds and
Tythings.
THis blessed Prince (the division of his kingdom being confounded by means
of the then late distracted Heptarchy) having made league with Guthrunus the
Dane, and thereby possessed himself of the entierty of the Realm, and being
sole Monarch thereof, did (in imitation of Iethro his Counsel to Moses)
subdivide and distribute the government of the land into several parts; And
did first reduce it into Satrapias which we now call shires or Counties, Centurias
now called hundreds, Decurias now lalled tythings, which at that time, in the
infancy of of this sub rdination, consisted only often men But in succeeding
ages grew more populous, and are not confined in number of persons, though it
still retain the same appellation: Of those ten persons, proscribed to their
decurie, or tythings, Every one was to be a fidejussor or pledge, one for
another; And if any one received loss, the rest were to make recompense for it.

Hence it was that nine of them were called ingenui fidejussores, which we in
the title of our Leets call Franciplegii: And the Tenth was called Decurio,
which continues in the west-terne parts by the name of tething man, in other
places called vadem primarium et praecipium, in Kent called Borsholder (that is
to say) a chief pledge, in Yorkshire called Tenteutale.

The appointment of Officers and making Laws for the better ordering of the
Kingdom.
THis mirror of Princes having thus ordered his Kingdom, did set over every
Shire a Senator and a Greve, which the Normans afterward called Comes, and
Vicecomes, and our later ages, an Earl, and Sheriff; Over every Century, an
officer called a Constable, and every Decury, a chief pledge, or tethingman.
And did decree, that every man of free condition (liber homo.) should be of a
certain Handred or Tything, out of which he was not to remove without
security.

After he had thus ordained a law for the local settling of his Subjects, that
they might be known, and called to account by the certainty of their abode
upon all occasions of suspicion, or accusation for any crime or misdemeanour.
Then he provided good and wholesome laws, for the better avoiding of rapines,
thefts, murders, or any crimes whatsoever, as also for the securing of the
persons and estates of his Subjects, and for the better rule and government of
them in the place of their resiance: amongst which I find one Law cited by
that noble and ever memorable Antiquarie, Cambd. (...) fo. 57.
Quod si quis delicti alicujus insimularetur, statim ex centuria and decima
exhiberet, qui eum vadarentur^ Sin istiusmodi vadem non repereret, legum
severitatem horreret; Si quis vero reus, ante vadationem, velpost transfugeret;
Omnes ex Centuria, and decima, Regis mulctam incurrerent, If a man were accused
of any offense, he should presently out of the Hundred and tything tender such
as should be pledges or bail for him, but if he could not find such bail,
he should then dread the severity of the Law (which I conceive to be according
to the modern law, Imprisonment) But if any person accused, either before
pledges, or after should fly away, all the men and inhabitants of the tything
and hundred should incur the Kings mulct, that is, be amerced, to be in
misericordiam Regis at the Kings mercy.

The fruit and effect of this law is worth observation, what good redounded to
the Common weal in those times, For says the Author, Hoc commento pacem
infudit provinciae, ut per publicos aggeres, ubi semitae per quadrivium
finduntur, armillas aureas juberet suspendi, Quae viantium aviditatem rideret,
dum non esset, qui eas abriperet, By this devise he made such peace in the
whole Country, that he caused certain golden bracelets to be hanged upon
public batches or hillocks at every cross way, which might, as it were,
deride the aviditie of passengers, sithence there were none that durst take
them away.

It is no doubt, but this Law or Ordinance does not only in part retain a
vigor and being at the common Law, but has given light to many statutes to win
force of great consequence.

As, to that, of the Statute of Winton, 23 Adward 1.
inquirable at Leets, by which it was enacted, That cries should be solemnly
made in all Counties, Hundreds, Markets, Faires, and all other places where
great resort of people is, so that none should excuse himself of ignorance,
that from thence forth every country be so well kept, that immediately upon
such robberies, and felonies committed, fresh suite be made from town to
town, and from country to country, etc. And after that the felony or
robbery be done, the country shall have no longer space than forty days,
within which it shall behoove them to agree for the robbery or offense, or
else that they will ans were for the bodies of the offenders.

But albeit the Statute be general and no mention made whether the robbery
be committed in the day time or in the night, Co. lib. r fo. 6. Ashpoles Case.
the Hundred shall not be liable, but where the robbery or felony is
committed in the day time, yet if diverse do commit a robbery, those of the
Hundred ought to apprehend all the felons, for though they apprehend some of
them, yet that will not suffice to excuse them, unless they apprehend all of
them by that Statute of 13. Edw. 1.

But now it is qualified in that point, by the Statute of 27. Eliz. cap. 13. By
which if any of the Inhabitants of any town, village, or hamlet next to the
place where the robbery was done, do in their pursuit apprehend any of the
offenders, that shall excuse them, though all be not taken.

The Statutes concerning the approvement of wastes, woods, etc. and other Laws
derived from the Law of Alfred, cited by M. Cambden.
FRom that Law of King Alfred, the Statute of 13. Edw. 1. cap. 46. concerning
approvements of Wastes, Woods, and Pastures, may seem to borrow its light,
whereby it is provided, that if any having right to approve, do levy a Dike or
an Hedge, and some by night, or at any other season, when they suppose not to
be espied, do overthrow the Hedge or Dike, and men of the towns near, will
not indict such as be guilty of the fact, The towns near adjoining shall be
distrained to levy the Dike or Hedge at their own costs, and to yield
damages.

At the Common Law, if one be slain in any town in the day time, so long as
it is plain day light, and the man-killer does escape, the town where the
Felony was committed, shall be amerced for it, Dum quis felonice occisus fuit
per diem, nisi felo captus fuit, tota villata illa oneretur.

This I thought pertinent to my present discourse, to parallel that ancient
Law of Omnes ex centuria and decima Regis mulctam incurrerent, with our latter
Laws, whereby towneships are onerable upon the escape, or not apprehending of
offenders in certain cases.

Besides that good and profitable Law, amongst many others, that gracious
Prince did further decree, that the Decurio or Tything man might judge of small
matters, and the Centurio or Constable of greater matters, and at the fiequent
meetings in every Satrapie, or Shire (now called County Courts) the Senator or
Greve was to hear and determine matters, of greatest difficulty and moment.

King Edward sen. succeeded who made a law De diebus cogendi populi, Edw. sen.
An. 900 Lamb. fo. 51.
that every Greve and Praepositus quisque, should every month call the people
together, do every man right, and decide all controversies, which confirmed
the use of the County Court.

King Edgar made a law De Comitiis, Centuriae Comitiis quilibet interesto, That
is to say, Edgar. Anno 599.
let every man be present at the Leets or meetings of Hundreds, but out of
every shire, let there be a more famous meeting twice a year, Celeberrimus
autem bis quotannis Conventus agitor, and this is now the Sheriffs turn.

This King did farther decree, Lamb. fo. 80.
that each person should find pledges who might bring him forth to render
every man his own. Quisque fidejussores, qui eum jus suum cuique tribuere,
quam paratissimum praestent adhibeto.

The manner of proceeding by Juries in those subordinate Courts of Counties,
Hundreds, etc.
NOw the manner of proceeding at that time in those meetings, called Centuriae
Comitiis, and Satrapiae Comitiis, (now called Court Leets and Sheriffs turns)
does appear by a Law practiced in those days, and after revived by King
Etheldred, who lived Anno 979. which thus insueth, In singulis Centuriis
Comitia Sunto, at que liberae conditionis viri duodeni aetate superiores, Lamb.
Exp^^. verbo.
una cum Praeposito sacra tenentes, juranto se non innocentem damnaturos,
sontemve absoluturos.

Let there be meetings in every Hundred, and let twelve freemen of the better
sort, together with the chief pledge, swear upon the holy Evangelist, not to
condemn the innocent, nor to acquit the nocent, that is, to do every man right.

I will pass over many good laws before the Conquest, let us cast our eyes a
little nearer, and see how the Counsel of Iethro to Moses has been since
pursued.

Bracton a learned and famous Common Lawyer, who wrote in the time of Hen. 3.
from the Conquest, writes of the practice and duties of Kings,

Rex and non alius debet judicare, etc. Bract. l. 2. cap. 2.
The King and none else ought to judge, if he alone be able to do it, sithence
he is bound thereto by virtue of his oath, and there fore the King ought to
exercise the power of law as Gods Vicegerent, and minister on earth, Sin autem
Dominus Rex ad singulas causas determinandas non sufficiat, etc.

But if the King be not able to determine all causes, that his labor may be
the easier, in plures personas partito onere, eligere debet de regno suo viros
sapientes, and timentes Deum, in quibus sit veritas eloquiorum and qui oderunt
avaritiam, quae inducit cupiditatem: Et ex illis constituere justiciarios,
vicecomites and alios ministros and ballivos suos, ad quos referantur tam
quaestiones super dub^is, quam querimoniae super injuriis, etc.

He ought to choose out of his Kingdom wise men fearing God and hating
coverousnesse, and out of them to appoint Justices, Sheriffs and other
Ministers to decide questions of doubt, and to redress injuries, etc.

All subordinate Justice derived from the King and Crown.
IN a cause of Replevin upon a distress for an Amerciament in a Leet, 12 Hen
^.18
Fineux then chief Justice in his grave and learned argument affirms, That at
the first, the administration of justice was in one hand, and in the Crown,
and then afterward by reason of the multitude of people, the administration of
justice was divided into Counties, and the power was committed to a depatie in
every County, that is to say a Sheriff, who was Bayliffe and Deputy to the
King, and was assigned for conservation of the peace, and to punish offenders,
and to defend the Realm upon invasion of enemies, to be attendant upon the
King in times of war, and to cause all his people within his County to go
with him for defense of his land, and for the better government of the
County, and correction of offenders. There were two Courts assigned to him
(viz.) the County Court (held every month) and the Sheriffs turn, held
twice every year, by which two Courts, the whole County was governed: the
County Court was for one man to have remedy against another, for any thing
between them under 40. shillings, And the Sheriffs turn; unto which every
man within the County of a certain age, should come, and were compelled to
come, that they might not be ignorant of the things there published (or given
in charge) whereby they were to be governed; and this was called Suite Real,
by reason of their allegiance; unto which they were sworn to be true and
faithful to the King, etc. Afterward it seemed to be too great a thing for
the Sheriff to perform all in his own person, whereupon Hundreds were
ordained, and divided out of the Counties, and in every Hundred was appointed a
Conservator of the peace, called a Constable; and after, Boroughs were made and
ordained, and within every of them a petty Constable, and in some places a
Boroughead according to the diversity of the languag, for that this land had
been inhabited by persons of diverse Nations, as Britanes, Saxons, Danes, and
Normans, So that, the diversity of terms and appellations came by the
diversity of Languages, That the Hundreds and Boroughes did resort unto the
Tournes, by reason of their allegiance, And the Constables, and petty
Constables, did there present the defaults of offenders, but afterward upon
consideration had of the great trouble, which the people sustained in
traveling to the Sheriffs Tourn, Leets or View of Franckpledge were granted
unto Lords of Manours, within certain precincts, to reform all manner of
defaults there.

By all which it is plain, that Leets had their derivation both in nature and
power out of the Sheriffs Turn, and were purchased for the ease of the
people by diverse Lords; Bullens Case, Co. li. 7. fo. 78.
And in diverse places, there is a duty or sum of money payable to the Lord
of the Leet, by custom, in regard he purchased the same, for the ease of the
resiants and inhabitants, to free them from their attendance at the Sheriffs
Turn, and also in regard the Lord of the Leet was at every coming of the
Justices in Air at his own costs to claim his liberty, which duty is
sometimes called Capitagium, sometimes Certum Letae, and so by other names
according to the Custom of several places: So that now by the example of
Moses the pattern and president of all Princes and Judges, the particular
imitation of K. Alfred, and by the practice of times, ever since, it is most
evident that the Justice of a kingdom cannot be circumscribed within the
compass of a Crown, but must receive execution by subordinate officers and
ministers, and consequently there have been and must be subordinate courts of
Judicature, and Justice, for the ease both of Sovereign and subject, amongst
which, the leet or view of Fanckpledge has been and is of most special use.

The most principal uses of this Court, do stand upon these three points.

1. To take view of all Franckpledges or Freemen, and by inquisition or
examination to discover, whether every person of the age of 12. years and
upwards have a free pledge, or fidejussor, that they shall keep the Kings peace,
which, with our Ancestors was in great use and esteem, but now by desuetude of
time is utterly antiquated, and only care taken by presentiments of Jurors and
Officers upon their oaths, to find out and punish several delicts and
offenses perpetrated within the view and precincts of the Leet, proper for the
jurisdiction of that Court.

2 To elect and swear all officers and ministers of Justice, who are to attend
the service of that meeting, as Constables Tethingmen, and such others, wherein
the Steward must be very circumspect and careful of the idoniety of them, that
they be persons of honesty to execute their office truly without malice,
affection, or partiality. 2. Science, to know what belongs to their place, and
what they ought only to do. 3. Ability, as well in estate of body that they may
diligently attend and execute their office upon any occasion, and not be
negligent or remiss, either for impotency of body, or indigence in estate.

3. The third and principal use, which is indeed now most in use, s to take all
Suit royal, that is, every person born within the kings dominions, is a liege
subject, and owes natural legiance, and all male persons of 12. years old,
ought to take an oath for the demonstration of their natural legiance, which
is called legal, because the municipal laws have prescribed the order and form
of it to be done at the leets and tourns, and this natural legiance is
absolute, pure and indefinite, and is originally due by nature and birthright,
and is called alta ligeantia, and he that owes this is called subditus natus.

The oath is described by Britton c. 29. titulo, who wrote in the first year
of Edw. 1. the effect whereof is, You shall swear, that from this day forward
you shall be true and faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King and his heirs,
and truth and faith shall bear of life, and member, and terrene honor, And you
shall neither know, nor hear of any ill or damage intended unto him, that you
shall not defend; So help you God.

If antiquity do make things more venerable, as most commonly it does, this
oath of natural legiance at the tourn and leet can plead as large prescription
of its ancient and constant usage as any one thing in this nation, for it was
first instituted by K. Arthur, at which time the Leet was called Folkmote, viz.
a meeting of the people, and this appellation is retained in London to this day.

Amongst the Laws of King Edward the second before the Conquest, Lamb. fo.
135.136.
it it thus expressed. Omnes Principes and Comites proceres, milites and lib.
homines debent jurare, etc. in Folkmote, and similiter om^es proceres regni,
milites and lib. homines universi totius regni Britanniae facere debent in
pleno Folkmote sidelitatem Domino Regi. etc. Hanc Legem invenit Arthurus, qui
quondam fuit inclytissimus Rex Britonum, etc. Hujus legis authoritate expulit
Arthurus Rex Saracenos and inimicos a regno, etc.

Three things considerable in the keeping of Tournes and Leetes, 1. Time, 2.
Place, 3. Persons.
THus far you see the Antiquity of this Court, and the ancient and natural
privileges incident unto that. There be three things or circumstances,
considerable in the keeping of it, 1. Time, 2. Place, 3. Persons. In ancient
time the keeping of it was arbitrary, at the pleasure of the Lord, until by
the great Charter it was restrained to be kept twice a year.

Non aliquis Vicecomes vel ballivus suus faciat turnum suum per hundredum, Mag.
(...) ea. 35.
nisi bis in anno: Et non nisi in loco debito et consueto, viz. semel post
pascha et iterum post festum sancti Michaelis, et visus de franci plegio tunc
fiat ad illum terminum Sancti Michaelis sine occasion. Fiat autem visus de
franciplegio sic, viz. quod pax nostra teneatur, et quod tithring a teneatur
integra sicut esse consuevit, etc. Notwithstanding which restraint, diverse
Sheriffs did afterward make their Tournes oftentimes in Lent, when men ought
to intend devotion and other works of charity for remedy of their souls,
and sometimes after the gule of Harvest, when every man almost was busied about
the cutting and carrying of his Corre, Plowd. fo. 316. b. The Calends of Aug.
or the feast of S. Peter ad vincula. 31. Edward 3. ca. 15.
whereby the people were much grieved and disquieted. King Edward the third,
upon the grievious complaint of his Commons, desiring the quietness of his
people, did ordain and stablish, that every Sheriff from thenceforth should
make his Turn yearly, one time within the month after Easter, and another
time within the month after Saint Michael, and if they held them in other
manner, that then they should lose their Turn for the time.

As it was restrained in time, 2 Place.
So it was to place and persons, it must be kept within the precinct and
liberty in loco debito et consueto, If it be holden otherwise, it is coram
nonjudice; And the matter of cognizance must be within the view. For 41.
Edward 3. fo. 31. Kyrton cites a Case, wherein the Lord avowed the taking of an
amerciament for the stopping of an Highway, which in rei veritate was out of
the Jurisdiction of the view, and therefore the Plaintiff recovered damages.

If the Sheriff shall keep his Turn, in loco in consueto, he may be
indicted and punished for it. 3 Persons.
Dyer 151. As for the persons. Although in the time of King Arthur, Omnes
Proceres, Comites, Barons, etc. were to swear and do their suit real, in
pleno Folkmote, yet by the Statute of Marlebridge, Marl ca. 11.
it is thus provided by way of restraint, De turnie vicec: provisum est, quod
necesse non habeant ibi venire Archiep scopi, Episcopi, Abbates, Priores,
Comites, Barons, nec aliqui viri religiosi, seu mulieres, nisi little
praesentia ob aliam causam specialiter exigatur, etc. So by this Statute, All
clergy and religious men, All Earls, Barons and all women are excepted and
exempted, and by the law al other people under the age of 12. years, their
presence being not necessary there, in regard they are never sworn upon any
inquests; But all freeholders, terrtennants and other persons inhabiting within
the precincts of the Leet, ought to appear and do their suit, and tennants in
ancient demesne, are not bound to come to the Sheriffs Turn, and consequently
not to any Leet.

If any of the said persons mentioned to be exempted, Fitz^, na. Bre. f.
158.161.
or if any in wardship to the King should be distreyned to do their fuite, the
law has provided several forms of writs, De exoneratione sectae, for
discharge of every of them.

Whatsoever the law prescribes or restreines in the Sheriffs Turn, Broo.
Leet, 26 22 Edw. 4 22.
the same is binding in a Court Leet, and it was agreed for law that the power
of a Sheriffein the Town, and a Steward in the Leet were all one: only the
Leet have power to enquire and take presentiments of nusances and offenses
as well in the Courts after the feast of Easter, as after the feast of S.
Michael, Fitz^. Leet 11
whereas the Sheriff in his Turn after Easter ought not to enquire of any
action popular, etc. but only to take suite of the resiants and other suitors,
and to take the view, quod trithinga teneantur, scilicet.

That all above the age of 12. years come, and appear there to do their
suite, and to take the oath of Legiance, if they were not sworn before. For
after a person is once juratus in decennaria or ad fidem and legeanciam Domini
Regis, he is not compellable to be sworn again.

As a Leet is derived by grant from the crown, Forseiture of a Leet.
so, by diverse causes that may be seized into the Kings hands, and return to
the Crown again, and if for any just cause it be forfeited and seized, then
must the resiants and suitors again attend and do their suite at the
Sheriffs Turn, and what is omitted in the Turn might be presented in the
Kings bench, for in the case of John Charneles, Edward the third, Belknappe
sets forth the law to be, that if a thing were not presented within the Lords
view, then it should be presented in the Sheriffs Turn, and for default
there, it should be presented in the Kings Bench when the King came into the
country, by which it plainly appears as before is expressed; that the
Justice of the Kingdom was at first wholly in the hands of the King and
immediately derived from his person to Subalterne Officers.

To answer one Objection for the time, that all Leets are not kept strictly
infra mensem after Easter and Michaelmas.
Where there are ancient Customary Courts of Tenants in ancient demesne, or
such like, that were ever exempted from the Sheriffs Turn, and the Lords of
such lands had their own Tournes, that of Easter being called Turnus de
Hockday, and that of Michaelmas, Turnus Sancti Martini, as in the Bishopric of
Winton and other places, those Courts are left to their Arbitrary keeping,
either before or after the month, or at other set times, according to their
ancient respective Customs, and not restrained by any Statute.

Britton the tenor of whose learned work runs in the Kings name, Edward 1.
as if it had been penned by himself, answerable to Justinians Institutes,
does there in the first salutation of the Kings subjects, with Edwardus Dei
gratia, etc. set forth, That because his peace could not well have its being
without Law, he caused the Laws then used in this Realm to be put in writing,
and did thereby command a strict observation thereof in all things, Saving a
power to repeal, alter, and amend, all such things as should seem meet unto
him, with the advice of his Earls, Barons, and others of his Council, and
saving all customs unto those, as by prescription, used the same time out of
mind, so as those usages were not discordant unto right.

At that time being 5. Edward 1. those ancient customarie Tournes, within many
particular Lordships were in use, not subject to the Sheriffs Tournes, and so
not within the meaning of the Statute of 31. Edward 3. cap. 15. which being
made long after, extends not to any Leets, but such as were and are derived
out of the Sheriffs Turn, and so it was admitted by the Judges, that the
Leet of another Lord was not within the Statute, but the Leet of the Turn.
Brook Leet 21.6 Hen. 7.2. And so by necessary consequence, All Leetes derived
out of the Sheriffs Turn, and no other.

In what Cases, and by what means a Leete or Franchise may be seized or
forfeited, or the Lord damnified.
IN all grants of any Liberties, or Franchises there are commonly two
conditions, one in facto, which is always explicit, as to pay money, or to do,
or not to do any other act, etc. 2. Condition in lege, which is tacit, and
implicit created by law.

There are two sorts of conditions in Law, by the rule of the common Law, 1.
The one which is founded upon a Confidence and skill, 2. The other without
either of these.

There be 3. causes arising from the violation of trust or confidence, and want
or privation of skill, which induce a forfeiture as well of offices, as of
franch ses (that is to say) 1. Abuser, 2. Non user, 3. Refuser, All which I
will but summarily touch, and they may all three proceed, 1. Either from
ignorance, 2. Or from wilfulnes.

Abuser.
It is said by M. Kitchen, that Court Leets are to be forfeited in quo
warrante, which are kept by ignorant Stewards. Some make a doubt of it. In
Offices which concern the mere and only private profit of the Lord without
damage to the weal public, the ignorance of a Steward can be no cause of
schism, but in Offices concerning administration of justice, pro bono publico,
as a Leet, there is no doubt, but the Franchise may be forfeited.

The Steward of thelibertie of the Abbot of Crowland, Crompt. Iur. so. 145.
by color of his liberty of Infang-theefe adjudged a man to death, and for
this the liberty was seized in the Kings hands, Et nulla poena Senescallo, For
Quicquid Iusticia fecerit de Recordo ignoranter and pro defect. scientiae, non
erit proeopunitus. 2 Ric. 3. fo. 10.

A Lord of a Leet was fined forty shillings, for that his Steward took an
indict meant de morte de home, in his Leet, which did not belong unto it, and so
incroached upon the King. And also took an indictment of a robbery done out of
his franchise in another County. Brook in finibus pur contempt. 49. cites 41.
ass. p. 30.

If the Lord do hold his Leet at any time after the month from Easter and
Michaelmas, it is void by the Statute of 31. E. 3.15. and all presentiments
void, and the Lord shall lose his profits. Brook, Leet 17. and 21.

Non user.
Assise of Bread and Beer, and pillorie, and tumbrell are appendant to the
view of Franckpledge, where a man has them by a grant from the King, if he
does not keep pillory and tumbrell he loses his office, Brook, Quowar. 8.

Refuser.
The Abbot of S. Albon having the grant of a Gaol, deteyned the prisoners, for
that he would not be at the charge to sue out a Commission for their
deliverie, the King seized the Franchise into his hands, 8. Hen. 4.18.

A direction for Lords in choosing of their Stewards.
SIthence the jurisdiction of this ancient Court is liable upon just cause of
for feiture, and seizure into the Kings hands, it is necessary that Lords of
liberties, as well for prevention of their own inconvenience, as for the
better government of the Country by due execution of the Law, should select,
choose and appoint out of men treyned up in the studies of the provincial
Laws of this kingdom, such, as must have the four properties of Iethro his
counsel, Able men, such as must be viri potentes, not in strength of body,
but in courage of mind. 2. They must be viri timentes Deum, that fear God and
not the faces of men; he that has this virtue wants none, and he that wants
this is open to injustice, oppression, malice, and all other enormious
impieties. 3. They must be Amantes veritatem, it is S. Paul's counsel, Ephesians.
6.14. Stand therefore, and your loins gird about with verity, and having on
the brestplate of righteousness, etc.

4. They must be abhorrentes avaritiam, the root from whence all evils grow,
1 Timothy 6.10 That which (as Bracton says) does inducere cupiditatem, when
Samuel his sons were Judges over Israel, it was a brand upon them, They
walked not in his ways, but turned aside after lucre, and took rewards, and
perverted judgment, 1 Samuel 8.3.

The properties and qualities which a Steward ought to have.
F Let a describes the office of a Steward, and gives counsel unto Lords of
Manours, and liberties, to provide (or elect) their Stewards in these words,
Provideat sibi Dominus de senescallo circumspecto, and fideli, viro provido,
and discreto and gratioso, humili, pudico, pacifico and modesto, qui in legibus
consuetudin busque provinciae and officio senescaleiae se cognoscat, and jura
Domini sui in omnibus teneri affectet, quique subballivos Domini in suis
erroribus and ambiguis sciat instruere' and docere, quique egenis parcere, and
qui nec prece vel pretio velit a justitiae tramite deviare and perverse
judicare. Cujus Officium est Curias tenere Maneriorum and de substractationibus
consuetudinum, servitiorum, reddituum, Sectarum ad curiam, mercata, molendina
Domini, and advisus franciplegiorum aliariumque libertatum Domino pertinentium
inquirat, etc.

By which Description it is to be observed, that a Steward ought to have a
double qualification, 1 In Moralibus. 2 In judicialibus, whereby he must be
guided as well in the keeping of Court Barons for the profit of his Lord, as
for the honor of him, in the government of Leets for the good of the Common
weal.

1 In Moralibus, A Steward must be qualified with these properties before
mentioned, circumspection, fidelity, providence, discretion, humility, peace,
and modesty, which may be reduced into these two generals, S. verity, and
Industry, the one proceeding from the heart, the other from the hand; his
diligence or industry must be tempered, with 1 Circumspection, 2 Providence, 3
Discretion, otherwise it may incur the peril of temeritie and precipitance,
which commonly prove fatal in all actions.

Canis festinans caecos parit catulos. His verity must be attended with
fidelity, Co. l. 5. Epist.
humility, peace, and modesty, Veritas secum ducit Comites simplicitatem,
unitatem, and pacem tandem.

2. Iudicialibus; and therein he must be attended with four properties: 1
Scientia, he must know himself (or be expert) in the Laws and customs of his
Country, and have ability to instruct or direct the Bailiffes and other
ministers in dubious things, wherein they may err.

2. Misericordia, he must spare the poor, not rack poor tennants, nor grind
their faces, he must not be outrageous in imposing excessive fines in the
Leets, but (as Judges in other Courts are, or ought to be) moderate and
discreet, secundum quantitatem delicti, not beyond the demension of the
offense, for excessive amerciaments are against the law, Excessus in re
qualibet jure communi reprobatur, Coo. li. 11. fo. 42.

Mercy and truth must meet together, righteousness and peace must kiss each
other, Psalm. 85.10.

3 Iustitia: the Prince of virtues, the faithful Companion of this life,
without which no humane society can subsist, Justice knows no father, mother,
nor brother; Persona non accipit sed Deum imitatur, A Steward must put on this
Armor. And must neither be drawn by price nor prayer, neither by lucratotie
corruption, nor any sinister affection, to deviate and wander out of the
highway of Justice, and Judge perversely.

Qui nec (as Bracton advise^h) ad dextram nec ad sinistram, vel propter
prosperitatem terrenam, vel adversitatis metum a tramite Iustitiae declinent.

4 Fertitudine animi. He must not be daunted neither by threats nor fear, nor
overswayed by the Landlord himself, either in the electing of officers (a thing
too frequent) or in any other thing that may concern the due administration of
his office.

A Steward being thus endowed, adorned, and qualified with those moral and
judicial virtues, and properties is the fitter to undergo the burden of that
authority, where with he is entrusted by the Laws of the Realm. From his
qualities I will pass unto his authority.

The Authority of a Steward in Leets.
A Leet is a Court of Record, The Steward is Judge, and has a double power, 1.
of election of officers, 2 of Coertion or punition of offenders; In the latter,
viz punition, there is a double act to be respected, 1. Actus Curiae, 2. Actus
Patriae, the act of the Court, and the Act of the Jury or Country.

These two do meet with two sorts of offenses or misdemeanors by two sorts of
remedies, 1 Fine, 2 Amerciament, the one sort of offenses are Extra Curiam, the
other in Curia.

1 Extra Curiam, Coili. 8 so. 38. Grisleys Case.
of those which are extrinsecall offenses, The Jurors and officers sworn to
present (who ought also to have the four properties of Iethros counsel) have
peculiar cognizance, and therefore power to present them, and to assesse
amerciaments for them.

2 In Curia, being the second sort, which are offenses, either in omitting or
neglecting a duty enjoined, and to be performed by Constables, Bayliffes,
Jurors, or ministers of Justice, or in committing some contempt and disorder in
the face of the Court by any officer or suitor; The Steward has cognizance,
and may punish it by fine, without inquiry by the Country.

1 As if a Bayliffe refuse in Court to execute his office, 7 H. 6.12 b.

2 Or if a Tethingman refuse to make a presentment in the Leete, 10. H. 6.7.

3 Or if any of the Jury in a Leet depart without giving his verdict.

4 Or if any suitor or other person does misdemeane himself either in word or
deed.

5 Or if any inquest refuse to present in a Leet such defaults as they have
information of, 10 Ed. 3. fo. 4.

The Steward has power in these and the like Cases, to impose a reasonable
Fine, and such fine is not affereable nor traversable, 10. H. 6. fo. 8.
6 He has power by several Statutes in several cases, to impannell a second
Jury, to inquire of the defaults and concealements of the first jurie, and to
fine them for their offense.

7 A Steward may by paroll command a Bailiffe to make distress. 16 H. 7 fo. 14.

8 In every Leete, the Lord of the liberty has but the amerciaments, the
Court is the Kings, and therefore the Steward does represent the person of the
King, 41 Edward 3 fo. 31.

9 A Steward for default of resiants may compel a Stranger coming within the
view to be of the inquest.

The remedies for recoverie of Fynes and Amerciaments in a Leete.
AS in a Leete there is a twofold remedy according to the nature and quality
of the offenses, viz. 1 Fine, 2 Amerciament: So there is in the Law, a twofold
way or mean respectively to recover and obtain that remedy for the benefit
of the Lord of the liberty.

1 Either by action of debt against the offenders fined by the Steward, or
pained and amerced by the Jury.

2 Or by distress of his or their goods or cattle in some cases upon their
land, Bro. Leet 7.
though the goods of another man, in other cases by distreining the offenders
proper goods in any place within the precincts of the Leete.

If a pain be imposed in a Leet upon any person for redressing or removing of
a nuisance by a day, sub poena 10. lib. And the non fe saunce thereof be
afterward presented, and the pain thereby becomes forfeited, this is a good
presentment and the pain shall not be otherwise affered, and the Lord shall
clearly have an action of debt, 23 H. 8. And the reason why such a pain is not
afferable, is, For that the word ( afferre) is as much as to say, to tax, or
to assesse, ponere in certitudinem, or taxare, and a pain for not doing, or
not removing of a thing by a day, is, upon a presentment of a non fezance by a
Jury, an immediate taxation and a certitude of assessment by the Country, and
therefore needs not further or otherwise poni in certitudinem.

In the case of assessment of a fine by a Steward upon a tethingman, who would
not present at a Leet. ^o Leet 36.
The Lord may bring an action of debt, and if the Defendant tender the wager of
Law, it was optima opinio that a wager of law did notlye in that case, for that
the Leet was a court of Record, 10. H. 6.7.

As in these and other pains and fynes of like nature in a Leet an action of
debt does lie, Co. li. 1. so. 42.
so also for them, and for all amerciaments in a Leet, distress is incident of
common right, that is, by the Common Law a Lord may destreyne the goods of the
delinquent.

In Grislies case, Co. l. 8. so. 38.
Trin. 30. Eliz. where doubt was made, whether a Lord of a liberty might
distreyne of common right, for a fine imposed in a Leete by a Steward for
contempts and misdemeanors: It was resolved, that if for lesser things, S. for
amerciaments of offenses, extra curiam, distress was incident of common right,
by an argument a fortiori, in a case of Fynes imposed for offenses, committed
in the same court distress shall be incident, For,

Quod licitum est prominore, and pro majore licitum est, And nothing is more
natural to be punished by a Court, than offenses committed in the same Court.
And it were a hard thing to drive a Lord to his action of debt for every petty
fine or pain, and in case the Lord do distreine, he may sell the distress,
or put the same in pound at his pleasure. For the place of distress whether
upon the offenders lands within the view, or upon his goods in any place within
the precinct of the Leet may arise a question, which was resolved, 2 Hen. 4.24.
Bro. Leet. 28. That for amerciaments in a Leet or Handred, a man may distreyne
the beasts of the offenders in any place within the precinct of the Leet or
Hundred, and a fortiori (as is before) for fines and pains in a Leet.

The Lord may distreyne in the highway for an amerciament in the Leet, 34. Ed.
2.19. Edw. 2.

Or the goods of the offender in the custody of another man, 47 Ed. 3 fo. 12.
Krenebyes case, And the reason for that the offense does arise upon the person
of the offender, and ought to be estreated upon his person, and not upon the
issues of his lands, 41 Ed. 3.26.

In some cases the distress may be of another man's goods upon the lands of the
amercee, As if a man do hold lands of a Leet, by the service of Crier of the
Court, or the like, and is amercied for neglecting of his service, A Lord may
distreyne the beasts of any other upon the land so holden, 47 Edward 3 folio
13.12 Henry 7.15. And the reason for that the offense does arise ratione
tenurae or soli, 41 Edward 3.26.

Certain Cautions in the taking of Distresses.
A Lord cannot distreyn for amerciament in a Leet in any lands seized in the
Kings hands for the Kings debt, for that the place is privileged, and the
right of distress suspended for that time, for as the King cannot be
amercied, so by consequence his lands are out of the Jurisdiction of a Leet,
Bro. Leet. 8.
and the distress tortious, and so was the opinion of Finchden in the Case of
Sudbury Bishop of London upon a Replevin inter Norwiche and Manley, 47 Edward
3.13.

He cannot distreine the Horse of a stranger in the Stable or osterie of the
party amercied, nor the garment of another in a Tailors shop, where the Tailor
is amercied, and so was the opinion of Keble, 10 Henry 7.21.

If upon a distress taken the amerciament, fine, or other duty be tendered,
and satisfaction offered, it ought to be accepted, Bro. Distress 8.
and in case it be refused, and the distreynee put to a Replevin, the Lord
shall not have return, For a distress is but a gage or pledge for a duty,
which being offered, the Lord ought to deliver the gage.

A Lord may not distreyne a millstone, parcel of a mill, nor doors, nor
windows, nor any thing that is fixed unto, or parcel of a freehold, 14 Henry
8.25.

The distress ought not to be excessive, for excessive distress is forbidden
by the common law, 41 Edward 3 folio 26. As for the amerciament of two
shillings, or such like, to take two or three Horses, were outrageous and
excessive.

The last act or period of proceedings in a Court Leete is afferment.
AFferement is as much as ponere in certitudinem seu taxare, to assesse or
tax, derived from the French word; The Subject of this Act is called
amerciament, in latin misericordia: and it is described by an ancient writer,
Glanvill lib. 9. cap. 11, in this wise, Est autem misericordia Domini Regis qua
quis per juramentum legalium hominum de vicineto, eatenus amerciandus est, ne
aliquid de suo honorabili contenemento amittat. And by the Statutes of Magna
Charta, cap. 15, and Westminster. 10.6. Liber homo non amercietur, etc. nisi per
sacramentum parium suorum, viz. proborum and legalium hominum de vicineto, qui
facultatum suarum noticiam habeant pleniorem, as it is recited by Fleta, lib.
1. cap. 48. That is, Amerciaments are to be assessed by the oath of equals,
good and lawful men of the vicinage or neighborhood, who have the better
knowledge of the estate and abilities of the Amercees.

The parties to this act are the Steward and the Country (or pares) And these
pares or probi homines, are according to modern practice chosen at the Leet,
out of the Jury by the steward, to tax and afferre the amerciaments
indifferently, not to wrong any for hatred, nor to spare any for favor, etc.
which oath by Bracton lib. 3. cap. 1. fo. 116. is thus declared, Et ad hoc
fideliter faciendum (speaking before, Ad hoc videndum qualiter quis sit
amerciandus etc.) affidabunt amerciatores, quod neminem gravabunt per odium,
nec alicui deferent propter amorem, Et quod celabunt ea quae audiverunt, 38
Edward 3 fo. 3.9.

As if one be amercied upon a presentment in a Leete, for not repairing a
bridge or a highway, The manner of entry up on the Court book and Rolls must
be Ideo in mia. et amerciamentum inde afferatur per afferatores in eadem Curia
ad tunc electos et juratos ad 20s. Rastall intrat, tit. trus in Amerciam. 2.

So that the Steward cannot tax or afferre an amerciament upon the presentment
of a Jury, if he do, it is void in law, and lies not against the party
amerced, The Steward as only to record and enroll the Amerciaments afferred,
and truly and justly to estreate them to the Bailiffe of the Manor to be by
him distreyned for and levied for the use and benefit of the Lord.

This last Act of Taxation and recording thereof does determine the judicial
part of a Court leet, and after judgment must follow execution, wherein the
life and vigor of all laws do depend.

The ministerial part of a Court Leete in the levieing of fines and
amerciaments assessed.
THis part or act has a double relation, 1 To the Lord, 2 To the Bayliffe. The
Court is the Kings, but the emergent profits formerly described by two
remedies, S. 1 Fine, 2 Amerciament, belongs to the Lord, and for that they do
arise out of offenses, which concern the King and Common weal, the Lord is
bound both in Law and conscience not to be too prone in remitting of them,
especially in those cases which concern the King immediately as in his
prerogative touching the oath of legiance, or immediately in regard of the
Common wealth, whereof the King is caput et custos, as touching fines upon
delinquent Officers and Ministers, Amerciaments in cases of common Barretors,
Drunkards, false and double Weights and Measures, deceits and corruptions in
Victuallers, Tradesmen, and Artificers, and such like enormious offenses, which
in their quality are exemplary, and have generally an interest in the public
calamities of Church and State: As also in Amerciaments, for not repairing of
Bridges, Causies, Highwayes, and many more of that nature hereafter ensuing in
the second part of this Tract, which ratione communis nocumenti, deserve no
manner of favor or indulgence. The best excuse that a Lord can plead for
himself in such cases of remission of amerciaments, is but misericordia, And
that excuse is taken away by a former act of mercy and moderation, in the
afferors or equals, who being astrict by a solemn oath, quod neminem
gravabunt, etc. That they should neither surcharge for hatred, nor detract or
diminish for favor.

The law presumes, That as they ought, so they did assesse them mercifully, and
after a solemn and judicial mercy, Non opus est extrajudiciali misericordia.

2 The second relation concerns the Bailiffe, who must be true, faithful, and
vigilant (observing the Cautions before prescribed) in levying of distresses,
He must not be exoculated with common rural bribes, Bacon, Cheese, etc. as
that he cannot see a Jury man in his right place to return, nor any goods or
catsell to distreine, his office is also de c^bed by Fleta, lib. 2. ca. 67.
whereof so much may be applied, as does accord with the practice of this age.
Ballivus cujuscunque maneri esse debet in verbo verax, et in opere diligens et
fidelis, Ac pro diserto appruatore cognitus, plegiatus et cler cus, qui de
communioribus legibus protanto officio sufficienter se cognoscat, Et quod sit
ita justus, quod ob vindictam seu cupiditatem, non quaerat versus tenentes
Domini nec alios, etc.

A special caution for Lords of Leets, against the Farming out of their
perquisites.
BY the Stature of 4 Henry 4, cap. 5. the Sheriff is not to let to Farm his
Baily wicke to any man for the time that he occupies such office. By the
Statute of 23 Henry 6, cap. 10, For the eschewing of extortion, perjurie and
oppression, it was ( inter alia) enacted, That no Sheriff should let to farm
in any manner his County, nor any of his Bailywicks, Hundreds, nor Wapentakes.

These Statutes do extend only to Sheriffs and not to Lords of Leets and
Manours, but as Leets and Hundred Courts had their derivation of authority
from Sheriffs Tournes and County Courts, So they had in process of time by
example (which in evil actions is always a better mistress than in good) a
derivation of their abuses, ^1 Iac.
and corruptions. This growing mischief, the wisdom of the Parliament, 1
Iaco. well observing, and that Stewards of Leets, and Court Barons had in their
own names, or in the names of some other to their use obtained and gotten
diverse grants of all the profits and perquisits of such Courts where of they
were Stewards, out of a greedy desire of undue and extraordinary gain to
themselves, whereby many of his Majesty's subjects were unjustly vexed, and by
grievous fynes and amerciaments, unduely punished to their great wrong and
impoverishment, did therefore restrain all Stewards, Deputy-stewards or
Vnder-stewards, that they should not directly or indirectly, in their own names
or in the name of any other, take, receive, or make benefit, to his or their
own use, in money, goods, or any other thing to the value of 12. pence or more,
by virtue or color of any demise or grant then after to be made, of any the
profits, perquisites or amerciaments of any such Courts whereof they were
Stewards, upon pain to forfeit for every such offense 40 pound, and to be
disabled for ever after to be Steward of such Court, or of any other. This
Statute does in the penalty point only at the Steward, and therefore I may be
bold to free the Lord a poena, but I cannot a culpa, For doublesse, he is
partiseps criminis, and as guilty of wronging and impoverishing the Tenants by
the concession, as the Steward by the acceptance thereof. The law would not
entrust a Lord to be Judge in his own Courts, in regard the profits and
perquisits were to accrue unto him, and therefore according to the rule of
Fleta, Provideat sibi Dominus de Senescallo, etc. A Steward ought to be a man
indifferent between the Lord and the law, being nominated and appointed to his
place by the one, be it by word or writing, but credited and invested in
authority by the other; He receives his name from the Lord, but his power and
faculty from the law; He is called in latin Senescallus, a word of many
significations, derived from the word Schale, an officer or governor, and Sen
(as some would have it) an ancient word for justice. So as in this Case, he is
officiarius justitiae, and therefore not fit to be a Judge, and a pernor or
proprietarie of the perquisits of his Judgment, the reason is sufficiently set
down and illustrated in the Statute. Though Stewards only be by that act of 1
Iaco. debarred from being farmours of amerciaments and perquisites, it is as
dangerous and inconvenient, That the Lords Bailiffe should be capeable of any
such grant (a thing now too common) for as the one may be too excessive and
oppressious in imposing, So the other may be in distreyning. And if the
Bayliffe once get a power of dispensation of those things at a certain Farm,
he may be partial and corrupt in returning of Iuries, and may assume the
greater liberty and privilege to be remiss in that, and other services to
the hinderance and prejudice of his Majesty's service in regard of his
Farmeship of the profits, and by consequence of the fines which might be
imposed on him, by the Steward for his wilful or negligent offense.

The Second part of this Treatise, Which Contains, Subjectum visus
Franciplegus, OR, The matters there inquirable, and presentable.
HItherto I have only touched the Antiquity and Authority of Court Leets,
and the first institution or derivation of that, and all other subordinate
Courts of Instice. Not unaptly nor unnecessarily will follow, the useful
handling of the Subject of the Court Leet, or the matters and misdemeanors
whereof that Court does challenge peculiar Jurisdiction, which do all of them
depend either upon the liberty of the Common law, or upon the power of Statute
law.

The first Statute law that directs the matters of inquiry at the Leet, is the
Act for view of Franckpledge, made 18 Edw. 2. which was but an affirmance of
the Common law; and in that Statute are comprised and enumerated 33. several
particular branches of misdemeanors inquirable at the Leet, which so far as
they may concern the modern Jurisdiction of this age, and are neither
obsolete not antiquare, ye shall find in this ensuing tract; according to a
prescribed method, though distinguished from the rest by quotations of the
Statute, and they are divided into two sorts.

1. They are either matters inquirable, and not punishable, as Treasons, Petty
treasons, Praemunires, and Felonies, and all of them to be published for the
disciplining of his Majesty's liege people, that they might not plead ignorance
of the laws of the Realm; But (as for Petty treasons and Felonies) for that
they are contra Coronam and dignitatem, by the Statute of 1 Edw. 3 cap. 17, 1
Edw. 3. C. 17
which literally does command, That all Sheriffs and Bayliffes of liberties,
and all others which take Indictments at their Tournes, or elsewhere, where
indictments ought to be taken, shall take Indictments by roll indented,
whereof one part shall remain with the indictors, and the other part with him
that takes the inquest, so that the indictments shall not be imbezelled, as
they have been in times past, and so that one of the enquest may show the one
part of the Indenture to the Justices when they come to make deliverance.

Yet this Statute by the general words does extend to Stewards of Leets and
all others; 1 Rich. 3. c. 4.
Also such inquisitions in Tournes, and consequently in Leets, are void, if
every of the Indictors S. (Jurors) are not of good fame, and may expend 20.
shillings by the year of Freehold, or 26. shillings 8. pence, of Coppihold in
the same County, and this by the Statute of 1 R. 3 cap. 4. Stamf. plit. Coron.
li. 2, cap. 24, fo. 85, 86, 87.

2. The second sort are matters here inquirable, presentable, and punishable.

For the first it may seem unnecessary to enquire at the law day of those
things which the Court has not power to correct and punish, and which the
authority of Instices of peace do daily meet with, But there are two reasons
to clear the doubt and approve the inquiry of them.

1. The benefit of Escheats of lands and forfeiture of goods and Chattells: for
upon conviction of any offender, in cases of Felonies, their lands do escheat
unto the King if they be holden of him, or to the Lord, of whom they are
holden, Saving to the King, the waste thereof for a year and a day; and
therefore it is to be inquired what lands, tenements, and goods the offender
has, for they accrue to the King, if the Lord has not a grant of Cattalla
felonum by Charter from the King, 9 H. 7, fo. 23, 29.

2. Instice Flemming.
The second reason Id. from the mouth of a Reverend Judge, who in a speech of
his concerning the necessity of Leets and law-dayes, said that a Leet was
Schola insigniendi juvenes, a School to direct and instruct young men to know
the ancient laws of the Kingdom, and to prepare them for greater employments
at greater meetings, as the Assizes, Jail deliverie and Sessions of the peace.

The first sort of offenses which concern power of inquiry, but not of
punition, are Treasons, Praemunire, Pettie-treasons, and Felonies.
HIgh Treasons, which Glanvill lib. 1, cap. 2, calls, Crimen laesae Majest. ut
de nece vel sedic. personae Domini Regis, velregni, vel exercitus, Britton ca.
29, title Tournes de Viscounts, gives directions for inquiring at the
Sheriffs Turn of the mortal enemies of the King or the Queen, or their
children, or of their consenters.

And long after that, by the Statute of 25. Ed. 3, cap. 2, a declaration was
made what offenses should be adjudged, High, or Petty treason.

If any person do imagine or compass the death of our Lord the King, or of
the Queen, or of their eldest son and heir, It is High treason, Crimen
laesae Majest. by the ancient common law, For Princeps censetur una persona cum
ipso Rege.

Or if a man do violate the Kings companion, or the Kings eldest daughter
unmarried, or the wife of the Kings eldest son and heir.

Or if a man do levy war against the King in his Realm, or be adherent to
the Kings enemies, in his Realm, giving them aid or comfort there, or
elsewhere.

Other Treasons which do not touch the person of the King so near.
IF any counterfeit the great seal, privy seal, or the money of this Realm.

Or if any bring false money into this Realm counterfeit to the money of
England, knowing it to be false; to merchandise, or make payment in deceit of
the King, and his people.

If any do falsely forge or counterfeit any coin of gold or Silver, which is
not the proper coin of this Realm, and is or shall be current within this
Realm.

If any do forge or counterfeit the sign mannuall, privy signet, or privy
seal.

If a man slay the Chancellor, Treasurer, or the Kings Justices of the one
bench, or the other, Justices in Air, or Justices of Assise, or any other
Justices being in their places doing their offices.

All those before cited and all ayders, procurers, and abbetters, shall be
deemed and adjudged Traitors, and shall incur^e all pains and for feitures, as
in cases of High treason is used and ordained, 1 Mar. ca. 6.

If any for wicked lucre or gain do clip, wash, round, or file any money,
which is or shall be the coin of this Realm, or the money thereof, or the
coins or money of another Realm, which is or shall be allowed to be current
within this Realm, or the Dominions thereof, it is high treason, 5 Eliz. 11.

The forfeiture by the Statute is of goods, but of lands only during life, and
no corruption of blood, nor forfeiture of dower.

It was first declared high Treason, 3 H. 5, afterward abrogated, 1 Mar. 1,
and revived by this Statute, of 5 Eliz. 11.

Praemunire and Treason.
FOr the preservation of the dignity of the imperial Crown of England, 5
Eliz. c. 1:
it was enacted, 5 Eliz. ca. 1. That if any person of any estate, dignity, or
degree soever, should by writing, ciphring, printing, or preaching, deed or
act, advisedly and wittingly extol or set forth the authority of the Bishop
of Rome, used or usurped within this Realm, or any the Dominions thereof,
every such person, their abbetters, procurers, and counselors, being lawfully
indicted or presented within one year after such offense committed, and being
lawfully convicted or attainted shall incur the penalty of Praemunire,
provided by the Statute of Provision, made Anno 16 Rich. 2.

And if any person, or persons, their abbetters, or procurers, after such
conviction and attainder, do eftsoons commit the same offenses, and be thereof
duly convicted and attainted, shall incur the pains and forfeitures of high
Treason.

In like danger are they, who refuse to take the oath of supremacy prescribed,
1 Eliz. 1, which for the first offense is Praemunire. And if any the persons
appointed by this Act, to take the said oath, do after the space of three
months, next after the first tender thereof, the second time refuse, or do
not take and pronounce it, shall also be adjudged in the case of high Treason,
and this Statute requires a publication hereof at the Leete.

But this Act shall not extend to make any corruption of blood, disinherison of
any heir, forfeiture of any dower, nor the prejudice of any right or title of
any persons, other than the right or title of the offender during his, her, or
their life only.

Nota, the penalty in a Praemunire is described 22 Edward 3.1, and 16 Richard
2.5, to be ou^ of the Kings protection, to forfeit lands, goods, and chattels,
and their bodies to be taken, imprisoned, and ransomed at the Kings pleasure,
But by this Statute of 5 Eliz. 1, It is not lawful to kill any attainted in
Praemunire.

Petty Treason.
IF any servant kill his or her Master or Mistress, or a man secular or
religious kills his Prelate or Ordinary, to whom he owes faith and
obedience, it is petty treason in them and the abbetters, 25 Edward 3, 2.

If a woman kills her husband, in regard of the subjection and obedience
which she owes to him, it is petty treason, 19 Henry 6, fol. 47.

If a servant after he be out of service kills his Master, so as it be done
out of a prepensed malice whilst he was in service, It is petty treason
though not express^ly within the letter of the Statute of 25 Ed. 3.

It is petty treason in a son who kills his mother, and he shall be drawn
and hanged, and so was the opinion of Thorpe, 12 Edward 3, 17. where a man
killed his mother, took Sanctuary, and was drawn from thence and convicted,
Cromp. Just. fo. 15.

Note that in all Petty Treason Felony is included, but not e contra, and it
was affirmed 22 li. Ass. that a pardon of all felonies would servef^r Pett^e
Treason, which is the reason that all Petty Treasons are inquireable as
fel^nies in the Turn and Leet.

The escheats hereof pertain to every Lord of his own fee, and the reason is,
because such Treason does not touch the King himself.

Felonies.
ALL Felonies at the Common law are here inquirable as felonies, saving the
death of a man and Rape, which are here to be inquired as trespass, 7 Henry
6, fo. 13. 6 Hen. 7, fo. 4, 41 Ass. plit. 30.

Of Felonies here inquirable there are these four several sorts ensuing, viz.

1 Such as do concern the ademption of Life. 2 Or hurt of body, without
privation of Life. 3 Or the spoliation, and taking away of goods 4 Or the
taking away, wasteing, and consuming of life, body, and goods.
All privation of Life is comprehended under the general name of Homicide, But
as one writes, Ex diversa interficientis intention hoc diversas and
appellationes and causas habet, The intention of the Actor does alter the
appellation of the Act. Skeny l. Regiae Majest.
A learned Writer of the laws of Scotland does set forth duo genera homicid^i,
one which is called Murdrum; and the second sort, which is called simplex
homicidium, and both are inquiable at the Leete as Bloodshed.

Murder.
MVrther is, where any of prepensed malice does kill another feloniously
(felleo animo) whether it be openly or secretly, and whether the party be an
English man, or any other whatsoever, so as he lives in the Realm under the
Kings protection. And all homicide which is done in this manner is called
murder to this day for the name of murder was never changed, but: the law does
retain it continually for the heinousness of the crime, to put a difference
between that and other homicide, and as a Civilian writes, Quicquid a
praecedenti malitia, vel ferro, vel veneno, Cowel instit.
vel modo quocunque perpetratur, illud murdrum dicitur.

It was the crying scarlet sin of Caine in the first infancy of the world,
and has been, and is so horrid and detestable, as that by the Statutes of 2
Edward 3, 2, and 14 Edward 3, 15, a Charter of pardon was not to be allowed in
such a case.

By the Statute of 13 Richard 2, Stat. 2 c. 1, It was provided, that if the
charter of the death of a man were alleged before any Justices, and if upon a
good inquest of the Visne where the dead was slain, they did find that it was
done by awaite, assault, or malice prepensed; the Charter should be disallowed,
and further it should be done as the law commanded.

Hence it was that a charter of pardon of all felonies will not discharge a
Murder, without express words.

And here in the duty and legiance of a Subject, I cannot pretermit the
remembrance of his now gracious Majesty's tender and incomparable care in
pursuance of the true intention of those ancient laws, by rejecting and
denying all suggestions and suites for pardons in cases of murder, rape, and
such like heinous crimes, which to the comfort of all his true and loyal
subjects he has sufficiently demonstrated, by the equal and exemplary
distribution of his justice, as well to the tallest Cedars as to the lowest
shrubs of his Kingdom.

Manslaughter.
ALL simplex homicidium or Manslaughter are distinguished from Murders, by
reason they are done suddenly, and upon hot blood without malice forethought.
In ancient times, if a man did lie in wait to kill another, it was felony,
quia voluntas profacto, but now exitus in malificiis spectatur, and non
voluntas duntaxat.

These two are called homicidium voluntarium, the first aggravated by the name
of Murder, ex praemeditato, which (as Bracton notes) is committed, Ex od^o vel
causa lucri nequiter and in Felonia.

The second in regard of the sudden act not premeditate nor forethought, is
qualified by the name of Manslaughter, and has the benefit of Clergy, in
resemblance to the law of Moses; who so killed his neighbor ignorantly whom he
hated not in times past had the favor to fly unto one of the Cities of
refuge, Deuteronomy 19.4.

There are two other sorts of Homicide, one ex necessitate, in defense of a
man's self, the other, ex casu, or by misfortune, both here inquirable by the
common law.

In the first, the necessity must be so great, as that it may be deemed
inevitable, or else that homicide is not excusable, the definition of it is
rendered by M. Stamford, li. 1, cap. 7.

If a man make an affray upon another, and the party assaulted does fly so
far as he can, for safeguard of his life, so that he be driven to a streit,
beyond which he cannot escape, and the other still continue the assaulting of
him, In this case if he strike and kill the assaultant, It is homicide se
defendendo.

But the matter must be specially found upon the Inquisition or Indictment. And
2. presidents of such inquisitions are set forth by Master Weste ti^.
Indictments.

Yet he forfeiteth his goods, and must purchase his Charter of pardon for the
same, by the Statute of Glonc. cap. 9.

Homicide casual or by misfortune or misadventure, is defined by Moses, the
pattern for all Lawmakers, Dent. 19.5. When a mangoeth into a wood with his
neighbor to hew wood, and his hand fetches a stroke with the Axe to cut down
the tree, and the head slippeth from the helve, and lights upon his neighbor
that hed^e, he shall flee to one of those cities and live.

So that in this case or the like, as throwing a bar, or stone, or shooting
an arrow at a mark, or in doing any other lawful act, without an evil
intent, it is homicide by misadventure, and the Actor shall (instead of Moses
City) have his refuge to the mercy of his Majesty's crown for a pardon of
grace, by the Statute of Glone. c. 9. as in the case of se defendendo.

But note as a rule, in all unlawful actions or attempts the event is not
excusable, as if two or more commit an affray, and a third person comes
between them to keep the peace, and is slain, albeit this accident was
without an evil intent, yet in regard of the unlawfulness of the occasion (as
the affray, contrapacem) It is selonie in the manslayer, and not misadventure,
Fitz. tit. Coro. 180.22. lib. Ass.

Felonies which do concern the hurt, dishonor, and detriment of the body,
without privation of life.
Rape.
IF any man ravish any woman, be she widow, or maid, she not assenting before
nor after, or if it be done with force she assenting after, every such person
and the aiders and abetters are in the case of felony, by the statute of Westminster.
2 cap. 24.

A pardon of all Felonies in general words, does not discharge a Rape, without
special words by the Statute of 25 Edw. 3. ca. And the benefit of Clergy is
taken away by the Statute of 18 Eliz. cap. 6.

It was ever anciently enquirable at the Tourn and Law day, where it was not
presented before the Coroner, 18. E. 2.

Upon a presentment before the Sheriff in his Turn, and returned upon a
Certiorari into the Kings bench, of a Rape feloniously committed, it was the
opinion of Hussy chief Justice, and other Judges, 22 Edw, 4. fol. 22. that
the presentment was void, and that the power of a Sheriff in his Turn, and
of a Steward in the Leet, being all one, they had no authority to enquire of
any things, but such as were felonies, and trespasses by the common Law. Yet it
seems the wisdom of the common Law thought fit to continue and maintain the
inquiry of that and other offenses at Tourns and Leets, in the same nature and
condition as they were before the alteration by Statutes. And though the
Statute laws have in many cases enlarged and extended the punishment, yet have
they not abridged the ancient discipline and jurisdiction of those Courts.

All Rapes are here inquirable as trespasses, and so it appears by Fitz. in
his Court Leet, and in M. Kitchen, and all other tracts of this nature.

Phisyognomie defaced or disfigured.
IF any put out any man's or woman's eyes, or cut out their tongues, or noses, or
disfigure any member to the intent they should not see, nor speak, it was and
is inquirable as bloodsheds, Fitz. Leet 1 Mariae. And yet by the Statute of 5
Hen. 4 cap. 5. The malicious cutting out of the tongue, or pulling out of the
eyes of the Kings liege people, were made felony, and not without good ground,
sithence they are the principal members to glorify almighty God: The eyes to
look up to heaven, I will (says the Psalmist 12 1.) Lift up mine eyes unto
the hills from whence comes my help, And Psalm. 123. Ad televavi oculos meos,
Unto thee lift I up mine eyes, O thou that dwellst in the heavens.

The tongue to chaunt and send up the sweet incense of prayers and praises to
the mercy seat of heaven, It must be malice in excess, that dare adventure
the depriving and defacing of those instruments and organs of Gods glory.

Felonies which concern the taking away, wasteing, and consuming of Life,
Body, and Goods.
Sorcerers, Conjurers, and Witches.
ALL Sorcerers, Conjurers, and Witches, which sort of offenders were by the
common law guilty of felony, and were to be burnt; Fitz. Not. fo. 269. who
cites for his authority Britton lib. 1. cap. 17. It was death by the law of
Moses, Thou sh^lt not suffer a witch to live, Ex. 21.18.

A man or woman that has a familiar spirit. or that is a wizard, shall be
surely put to death, they shall stone them with stones, their blood shall be
upon them, Levit. 20.27.

For the repressing of those abominable offenses, diverse laws were made 33.
Hen. 8.8. and diverse other succeeding statutes, All repealed, 5 Eliz. 16. And
that Stature adnulled by An. 1 Iacobi 12. By which for the better restreyning
the said offenses, and more severe punishing the same, It was enacted,

That if any should practice or exercise any invocation, or conjuration of any
evil and and wicked spirit.

Or should consult, covenant with, employ, or reward any evil and wicked
spirit, to or for any intent or purpose.

Or take up any dead woman or child out of their grave or other place of rest,
or the skin, bone or any other part of any dead person, to be used in any
manner of Witchcraft or Sorcerie.

Or shall use or exercise any Witchcraft, Sorceric, Charm or Enchantment
whereby any person shall be killed, destroyed, wasted, consumed, pined or lamed
in their bodies, or any part thereof,

It shall be felony in them, their aiders, abbetters, and counselors, without
privilege of Clergy or Sanctuary.

And if any by such practices shall take upon them to declare where any
treasure of gold and silver should or might be found, or had in the earth, or
other secret places, or any goods lost should be found.

Or to the intent to provoke any person to unlawful lust.

Or whereby any person should be destroyed, hurt, wasted or impaired in their
bodies, cattle, or goods, although the same be not effected and done.

The first offense is imprisonment for one whole year without bail, and once
in every quarter of that year to stand in the Pillory in a market town, in
open market or saire by the space of six hours, and there to confess their
offense.

And the second offense felony, without any privilege of Clergy or Sanctuary.

This Statute so exactly deciphering these offenders, does seem to receive its
light from the Levi^icall law, Deuteronomy. 18. verse. 10, 11, 12, Those that ^asse
through the fire, that use divination, or are observers of times, or an
inchanter, or a Witch, or a charmer, or consulter with familiar spirits, a
Wizard, or a Necromancer, all that do these things are an abomination to the
Lord, etc.

These offenses are inquirable at the Turn and Leet by the Common Law.

Felonies which concern the goods of any person, and first of Gods House.
Sacrilege.
SAcrilegious ^obbing of Churches or Chapels, or other holy places, and taking
away any ornaments out of them feloniously, is here inquitable as Felony.

Such as Lyc^^^chus the wicked Church robber is described to be, Maccha.
2.4.42. who for his offense was stoned by the multitude.

Such offenders in our days have not the benefit of Church or Clergy.

Frustra petit auxilium Ecclesiae, quipeccat contra Ecclesiam.
Latrocinium. Thest.
ALL Theft called by the Law Larceny, Latrocinium, (which Bracton describes to
be, Contrectatio rei alienae fraudulenta, animo furandi, invito illo, Cujus res
fuerit) is either de re magna, of any thing above 12 pence, or de re parva,
under twelve pence.

But note that this Contrectatio rei alienae, must be of personal things, and
not of real things, as to cut down a tree and carry it away, Or to take away
a box with Charters, Or to take and carry away treasure trove, any wrecke of
Sea, or wayfe or strayes is not felony, Quia Dominus rerum non apparet.

Cut-Purses, or Pick-Purses.
A Kind of evil disposed persons, felons and thieves by the law, which
commonly usurp amongst themselves a wicked brotherhood, and live by the spoil
of good and true Subjects, by felonious slights and devices, from which they
have their appellation, they set up their shop every where, not only in places
of commerce, as markets, and faires, and other popular meetings, but in the
sacred places of piety and justice, nay at the very execution of malefactors,
which should be a terror to them. Britton cites the inquiry of them at the
Tournes, and Stat. 8 Eliz. 3, bars them of their Clergy.

Petit Larceny.
PEtit Larceny is parvum Latrocinium, of any thing under twelve pence, as Hens,
Capons, Pigs, Geece, Chickens, Sheaves of Corn in harvest, and such like. And
for such petty things, the rule of the Law, Nullus Christian morti tradatur,
Stamsord.
sed allo modo castigabitur, which is now by whipping, for the Law will not
suffer the least offense to escape without its proportion of punishment, Ne
facilitas veniae, praebeat aliis materiam delinquendi.

Other sorts of Felonies.
Felonious taking of Doves in Dove-houses, so as they be not in their savadge
or flight, for then they are nullius in bonis, is felony, and by the common
Law here inquirable.

Taking young Pigeons out of their nests, or young Goshawkes in their nests,
which cannot fly nor go, Tr. 18 Edward 4, 10 Edward 4, folio 15.

Taking fish out of a pond, stews, or truncks, or any place set a part for a
man's private propettie, and not in a common river, Or taking any Cignets, Swans
marked, or Peacocks, or any tame domesticke Dear, knowing it to be domesticke.

All other thefts, which are Felonies at the common Law, are here inquirable,
To touch some few for instruction of youth.
If a Taverner put a piece of plate before one to drink, who carries it away,
it is felony, because he had not the possession but the use of it.

If any Butler or Cook who has any vessels or plate to use, does carry them
away, it is felony, because the possession, was always in the owner.

If I deliver the key of my chamber to another, and he goes and takes my goods
out of my chamber, it is felony.

If I bargain with one to carry certain chests to a place, and he takes and
carries them to another place, and breaks them open, and takes away the
goods within them feloniously, and converts them to his own use; It is
felony, for he did not pursue his Bargain.

If I deliver a Tun of Wine to one to carry, and he takes out 20 Gallons, or
more, or less, it is felony.

And in like case, If I deliver goods to one to carry to a place, and after he
has carried the same thither, he steals them away, it is felony, for that
the privitie of the deliverie was there determined.

To take the flesh of any tame or wild foul, or beast, (that is dead) out of
the possession of another man.

Or to take the wool from the sheep back, or to take the skin or tallow, and
leave the body behind, is felony, Stamford fo. 25.

Many more might be reckoned, but the distinction of an^mo furandi being
observed; this may serve instar omnium.

Burning of Houses.
IF any shall feloniously burn any dwelling House, or any Barn adjoining, or
any stacks or mowes of Corn, near any Barn or dwelling house in the night
time, it was felony at the common Law, and the offenders no way repleviseable.
As appears by the Statute of Westminster. 1. cap, 15. No. M. 11 H. 7, fo. 1. One
indicted for burning of a Barn feloniously in the night time adjoining to an
house, was attainted of felony by the common Law.

Bracton notes, that this crimen incendii, must be done nequiter and in
felonia, vel ob inimicitias, viz. wickedly, feloniously, or for enmity,
otherwise (says he) if it be done by chance or negligence Tunc civiliter
agitur contratales, etc. An action of the Case lies, M. Britton li. 1. ca. 17.
fo. 16. affirms that such felonious incendiaries were burnt, For in quo quis
peccat, in co punietur, Fitzh, Not. fo. 269.

There are two grand felonies which commonly aim at Contrectationem rei
alienae, and though little be acted, yet are they aggravated by the will of the
offenders, viz. Burglary and Robbery.

Burglarie.
IF any man in the time of peace, after Sunset, and before the sun rising (that
is to say) in the night time, cum facta silentia tectis) shall break any
Houses, Churches, Walls, Towers or Gates, with a felonious intent, to rob, or
kill, or commit some other felony, though nothing be carried away, It is
Burglary, the indictment must be quod noctanter fregit.

If a man has a mansion house, and he and all his family are (upon accident)
absent some part of the night out of the house, and in the mean time one comes
and breaks the house to commit felony, it is Burglary, for although neither
the owner nor any of his family be in the house, yet it is domus mansionalis.

By the same reason, if a man has two houses, and dwells sometimes in the
one, and sometimes in the other, And in the night time when the family are out,
one of them is broken by thieves, It is Burglary, Co. li. 4 fo. 40.

Bracton notes, that if the owner of a house in a case of Burglary, defends
himself in his house, and the Burglo be slam, So as the owner could not o
herwise defend himself, invasor inultus remanebit, the owner shall not be
punished, For says he, Non est dignus pace qui non vult servare eam, etc.

Robbery.
Robbery, or (as Bracton terms it) rapine, is when a man takes any thing
from the person of a man feloniously, though it be but the value of a penny,
is here inquirable. The law was ancient (and so still remains in the case of
Burglarie) That if a man were taken depraedando, or deburglando, though he
took or carried nothing away, it was Felony; it is otherwise now in the case
of Robbery, unless some thing be taken away.

In both these the benefit of Clergy is taken away by the Statute of 18 Eliz.
c. 6.

Accessaries before and after the Fact.
IN Felonies, there are and may be Accessaries, If one procure or command
another to commit a fe^onie, though he be not present at it, when it is
perpetrated, this procurer or commander is an Accessory before the fact.

If any person receive a felon having knowledge of the fact which he committed,
or do favor or aid him, he is an Accessarie after the fact, Stamford fo. 40.
If there were no receivers, there would not be so many thieves.

In the arrest and apprehension of any the offenders before mentioned, the law
is careful to have them brought to examination and trial, and to prevent all
escapes which are either voluntary or negligent, as also all rescous of
felonies.

Escape voluntary.
IF any be arrested for felony or any other crime, and afterward the party
in whose custody he remains, does suffer him to go at large whither he will,
it is a voluntary escape. And if the arrest of him (who escaped) were for
Treason or Felony, it shall be adjudged the like against him who suffered the
escape, and so in a trespass, Et sic de singulis, Stamford fo. 33.

Escape negligent.
EScape negligent, when one arrested for felony escapes against the will of
him who does arrest or keep him, and is not freshly pursued nor taken before
the pursuer loses the sight of him, though he after take him, It is fineable
according to the quality of the offense.

Rescue de felon
IF any shall presume to rescue and set at liberty by fraud or force any person
apprehended or arrested for felony, it is felony in the rescuer, and here
inquirable, 1 Henry 7.9.

*

The Second sort of Offenses; which do concern the power of a Leet, both in
inquiry, and punishment, and are either grounded upon the Common Laws, or the
Statute Laws of this Realm, and may be reduced to these several Branches
hereafter following.
The KINGS Prerogative.
ALL Suitors and Resiants within the Precinct of a Leet ought to appear in
person, and are presentable if they do absent themselves.

Chief Pledges.
IF the Capital or chief Pledges of every Decennary viz. the Tething man,
whose institution and office has been before at large described, do not
appear, the ancient use of them was to take care, that none should come within
the Seigniorie or liberty, but find pledges of their good abearing; If this
law were well observed, the Justices of peace would not be troubled with
settling and dissetling of persons from parish to parish as now they are.

Legiance.
ALL and every male person of the age of 12 years and upwards abiding within a
Liberty by the space of a year and a day, who has not done his suit royal,
scil. taken the oath of Legiance (before at large expressed) are presentable,
18 Edward 2. Every one of that age being a subject borne, must be Iuratus in
Decennaria, Brook Leet 39.

See Canutus Law 19. Lamb. ^r^h.
Nos vero praecipimus ut quisque annos ad 12 natus jurejurando fidem det, se in
posterum tum furto, tum furti societate temperaturum.

All and every person or persons, who shall keep or harbor any such youths,
and do not bring them in to be sworn, are presentable, Broo. Leet 7.

Common Nusances
ALL Purprestures are here inquirable; The word is not obvious to every
country capacity, Glanv. li. 9, ca. 11. thus defines it, Dicitur autem
proprie purprestura, etc. It is properly called Purpresture, when any thing is
unjustly usurped upon the King, as upon the Kings demesnes, or in stopping the
public ways, or turning public waters out of their right course.

Or when any man shall erect any thing in any City upon the Kings street, and
generally, Quoties aliquid sit ad nocumentum Regii tenti. vel Regiae viae vel
civitatis.

All Purprestrures, are either erigendo, or destruendo, either in setting up,
or casting down something which may tend to a public annoyance.

They are commonly made in Lands, Woods and waters, to the inconvenience of his
Majesty's liege people, by stocks and blocks, or levying any Dikes or Hedges,
or by making or filling up any Dikes.

If any walls, houses, pales or hedges, be made and erected, or beaten and
thrown down, or any ways and paths opened or stopped to the hurt of the
people.

If any waters be turned or stopped, or diverted out of their right course, or
if the common Rivers be corrupted and annoyed by white tawing, lime, or such
like.

Or if any ditches mounds, and Rynes, which are the fences, of grounds be not
duly scoured and cleansed.

Incroachment on Highways.
IF any incroach upon the Kings high ways, or any carrion or unwholesome thing
be cast into the same, or in the common streets to the annoyance of the people.

Bridges, etc.
IF any Bridges or Causeyes be decayed or broken, inquiry is to be made of the
defects, and who ought to repair them.

Watering with Hemp, etc.
IF any person do water any Hemp or Flax in any river, running water,
stream, or brook, or other common pond, where beasts do use to drink, it
was and is a popular nuisance at the Common Law, and inquirable and amerciable
at the Leet.

But by the Statute of 33 H. 8. cap. 17. the party offending does forfeit for
every time so doing 20. shillings, 33 H. 8. c. 17.
the one half to the party grieved, or any other that will sue for the same
forfeiture in any Court of Record, Leet, or Law-day, by action of debt, bill,
plaint, information or otherwise, and the other moytie to the King.

As Highways must not be incroached upon or annoyed, so they must be duly
repaired and amended.

Highways.
THere are two sorts of Highwayes, 1 Chimini Majores, 2 Chimini minores, The
Majores are the four great fosse ways, whereof two extend through the
Kingdom in length, and two in breadth.

The lesser ways are such which lead from City to City, and from one Town
to another, per quos mercata vehuntur, etc. for conveying and carrying of wares
and merchandise from market to market; and concerning these, it was the Law of
King Edward Confessor, Si quippiam operis ad little perturbationem erigatar
solotenus deponatur, and chimini more solito reparentur, which is agreeable to
the common Law at this day.

And for that the highwayes grew very noisome and tedious to travel in, 1, 2.
Ph. Marca. 8.
and dangerous to all persons, passengers, and carriages, It was enacted, That
the Constables and Churchwardens of every parish within this Realm, should
yearly upon tuesday or wednesday in Easter week, call together a number of the
parishioners, and elect two honest persons of the parish to be surveyers and
orderers for one year, of the works for amendment of the high ways in their
parish, leading to any market town.

That the surveyer shall have authority to order and direct the persons and
carriages which shall be appointed for those works by their discretion, and
shall take upon them the execution of their offices upon pain of 20 shillings
every one making default.

That Stewards of every Leet have power to enquire by the oaths of the
suitors, of all and every the offenses, that shall be committed against every
point and article of this Statute, and to assesse such reasonable fynes and
amerciaments as shall be thought meet.

That the Steward of every Leet shall make estraets indented of all the fynes,
forfeitures, and amerciaments, for the defaults presented before him, and shall
deliver one part figned and sealed by him to the Bailiffe or high Constable of
every Hundred, Rapelathe or Wapentake, where the defaults shall be presented,
and the other part to the Constables and Churchwardens of the parish, wherein
the defaults were made, the same to be yearly delivered within six weeks
after Michaelmas, to be bestowed on the high ways in the said parishes.

That the Bayliffe and head Constable shall at least once every year, between
the first of March and the last of April, make true account and payment of all
such sums of money to the Constables and Churchwardens of every such parish,
or two of them, as he shall have collected upon any the said estreats, upon
pain to forfeit, 40. shillings for every time, to be bestowed as aforesaid.

This Statute by a Latter of 5 Eliz 13. was continued and the authority of
supervisors enlarged, 5. Eliz 13.
for the taking and carrying away of rubbish, or the smallest broken stones, of
any quarrie or quarries within any such parish, without license, controllment
or impeachment of the owner or owners, so much as shall be deemed necessary
for the amendment of high ways, and in default of any such quarries, to dig
in any private grounds, for any gravel, sand or sinder, and to gather stones
lying upon lands or grounds, so as the said digging be not in the garden,
house, orchard, or meadow of any person or persons, and under other provisions
in the said statute mentioned.

It is further enacted, that the heies, fences, dikes or hedges, next adjoining
on every side, to any high or common fairing ways, shall from time to time, be
diked, scoured, repaired, and kept low, and all trees and bushes growing in the
high ways, cut down by the owners of the ground or soil, whereby the ways
may be open, and the people have the more ready and easy passage in the same.
If any person shall not do it, he forfeits, 10. shillings, 18. Eliz. 9.

There must be yearly, six days used and employed in the reparation and
amendment of the high ways, before the feast of the nativitie of S. John
Baptish, and knowledge thereof to be given in the Church the next Sunday after
Easter, and upon the said days the parishioners shall endeavor themselves to
the mending of the ways, and shall be chargeable as follows, viz Every
person for every plow-land in tillage or pasture within the parish, And every
other person there keeping a draught or plow, shall find and send at every day
and place, one Wayne or Cart furnished according to the custom of the
Country, with all necessaries meet to carry things, and also two able men with
the same, upon pain of every draught making default, 10 shillings.

Every other householder, and every cottager and labourer, not being an hired
servant by the year, shall by themselves, or one sufficient labourer, upon
every of the said days, work there every of the said days, upon pain every
one making default, each day twelve pence.

Every person (except such as dwell in London) that shall be assessed in
subsidy 5 pound in goods, or 40 shillings in lands, or above, and being none
of the parties chargeable by any former law, but as a cottager, shall find two
able men every of the said six days to labor in the high ways.

Every person having a plow-land in several parishes, shall be chargeable to
the making of the ways where he dwells.

Every person keeping in his or their hands several plow-lands, in several
parishes, shall be charged to find one cart or waine etc. furnished for the
amendment of the high ways within each several parish.

All occupiers of lands adjoining to the ground so adjoining to any such high
way, where any ditching or scowring should or ought to be, shall from time to
time ditch and scour in his and their ground so adjoining, whereby the water
conveyed from the high way over the ground next adjoining, may have passage
over the said ground next adjoining, upon pa^ne for every time, for every rod
not so ditched and scowred 12 pence.

If any having any ground, adjoining to any high way, leading to any market
town, shall cast or scour any ditch, and throw the soil into the high way,
and suffer it to lie there by the space of six months, shall forfeit for every
load 12. pence.

The moitie of the forfeitures by all these three several Statutes, 1, 2.
Phil. Ma. ca. 8. 5 Bliz. 13. 18 Eliz. 19.
shall be to the Churchwardens to bestow upon the ways, and Stewards of Leets
have power to hear and determine all offenses, etc.

Popular Annoyances.
ALL common or popular Nusances done to diverse and sundry of the Kings
Subjects, are inquirable as this ancient Court, and so are all trespasses at
the Common Law being popular.

Boundaries.
IF any ancient bounds, metes, or landmarkes be withdrawn and taken away, such
as distinguish hundreds, parishes, tythings, Common, Common meadows, and
common fields to avoid confusion, and consequently dissension, are here
inquirable, 18 Edw. 2.

Cursed is he that removes his neighbors landmarke, and let all the people
say, Amen. And it is commanded in Deuteron Thou shall not remove the ancient
bounds which thy fathers have made.

It is to be observed that divisions by lots and boundaries, have been ever
held in great esteem in all ages, even amongst the Heathens.

For the taking away of a particular boundary or mete, which concerns only
one man, an action of trespass lies. And so I find in the Regist. fo. 107,
De petris pro metis positis abstractis.

Hedge-Breakers.
IF there be any common breakers of hedges within the Leet, who tear up
frithes and fences, and leave their neighbors ground subject to incursions of
Cattle, and are a means that many trifling actions of trespass are set on
foot, to the disquiet of his Majesty's Subjects.

Pound-Breach.
IF any break any common pound or pinfold, which is Custodia legis, to take
any distress out of the same, though the distress be tortious and without
cause, yet the poundbreach is unlawful, for that the cattle were in the
custody of the Law, and the owner might have a Replevin.

If any shall rescue, and by force take away any cattle or other thing which
is distreyned for any rent, amerciament, or other cause before it be impounded,
or in any other safe custody, it is presentable.

Rescous.
IF any commit any Rescous within the liberty upon the Sheriff or his
Bailiffes, or any the Kings officers, in disturbance of them, from taking and
detaining any person arrested.

Bloodshed.
IF any person commit any assault whereby bloodshed does ensue, or does make
any affray or outrage whereby any mutiny or disturbance does arise amongst the
Kings liege people, it is popular and presentable, 1 R. 3, fo. 1. Bro.
Presentm. 7 Leet 26.

General Grievances.
THe subsequent offenses will descrve that mark or character, in regard they
are generally pernicious to the Commonwealth by their fruits and example, and
are punishable by the common Law, Or because they are generally prohibited by
Statute Laws for the good of the public weal: And in the first rank are
the evil members of a State and Realm, of which regiment the common Barretor
may well be the ringleader.

Common Barretors.
IF there be any common Barretors within the liberty, they are of both sexes,
Scoulds, Brawlers, common malefactors, disturbers and disquieters of their
neighbors.

A common Barretor is well discribed. Co. li. 8. fo. 37. to be a common mover
and stirrer up or maintainer of suites, quarrels or parties either in court or
country.

1 In Courts of Record, or in the County, Hundred, and other inferior Courts.

2 In the Country three manner of ways, 1 In disturbance of the peace, 2 In
taking or deteyning of possessions of houses, lands or goods, (which are in
question) not only by force, but also by subtlety, 3 By false invention and
dispersing of calumniations, rumors and reports, whereby discord and disquiet
do arise amongst his neighbors.

This person is the common incendiarie of strife in his neighborhood, and is
ever fishing in troubled waters. He is always like a Woolfe worrying his
harmless neighbors with multiplicity of unjust and fained suits, either by
information upon penal Statutes, or by personal actions, for himself and
others, or by malicious procuring of Latitats or Supplicavits of the peace, and
all by fraud and malice, to enforce the poor party to give him money, or some
other composition ad redimendam vexationem.

Evisdropper.
THe Evisdropper who is a species of a Barretor, does succeed in his order, one
that lurks under walls or windows, by night or day, to hear and carry tales,
and raise strife twixt neighbors, a most perilous member in a peacable common
wealth: the holy Ghost in the new Testament, calls such an one Diabolus, a
false accuser, calumniator, or makebate, 2 Timothy 3.3 Solomon, Prove. ca. 26. v.
20. cries our against them in this wise, Where no wood is, there the fire goes
out, where there is no talebearer, there strife cease, verse. 21. The words of
a talebearer are as wounds, and they go down into the inner most parts of the
belly, Levit. 19. ver. 16. Thou shall not go up and down as a talebearer
among the people.

The litterall interpretation of a Talebearer or accuser is one that makes
merchandise as it were of words, uttering them as wares, going from place to
place to hear and spread abroad criminations of other men.

Such creatures are compared to a kind of foul and infectious vermin, called
Weasels, who conceive by the ears, and bring forth their little ones by the
throat, a thing abominable in men to receive by the hearing any false and
feyned deprivations, and to utter and exaggerate the same by their tongue and
report, and certainly a patulous and forward ear, does encourage and intise a
busy tongue, and both the detractor and the hearer Diabolum habent, alter in
aure, alter in lingua.

Lewd houses.
THose who keep and maintain in their houses lewdness, and lewd strumpets,
whose persons are justly branded for Bawdes and Panders, and their habitation
for Stews and Brothell houses, which minister frequent occasion of murders,
and bloodsheds, and often infringment of the peace, to the utter ruin and
destruction of famines, a most odious and audacious sin which poysoneth and
corrupts the public weal, this lewd and too accustomed vice is punished in
the spiritual Court, pro salute. animae, but here inquirable, pro salute
reipublicae, 27. Hen 8. fo. 17.

Rogues, etc.
ALL Rogues, Vagabonds, and sturdie persons that wander up and down are here
inquirable by the common law; 39 Eilz. ca 4.
For suppressing such kind of people, diverse laws were made which were all
repealed by the Statute of 39. Eliz. ca. 4. and thereby a description made, who
should be accounted Rogues, Vagabonds and sturdie beggars, That is to say, 1
All persons calling themselves Scholars, going about begging. 2 All Seafaring
men pretending loss of ships or goods. 3 All idle persons going about begging,
or useing any subtle craft or unlawful games. 4 Or faining knowledge in Phy
siognomie, Palmestry, or other like crafty science. 5 All tellers of
destinies, fortunes, or otherlike fantastical imaginations. 6 All Proctors,
Procu^ers, Pattent-gatherers, or collectors for Gaoles, Prisons, or Hospitals.
7 All Fencers, Bearewards, common Players of interludes and minstrells,
wandering abroad (other than such as belong to honorable personages, lycensed
under their hands and seals of arms.)


By the Statute of 1 Iac. 7. which did continue and enlarge the said Statute of
39 Eliz. all licenses of honorable personages are taken away

And all glassemen wandering up and down the country are numbered in the rank
of rogues, By this Statute every man is bound to apprehend such a rogue as he
or they shall see or know to resort to their houses to ask or receive any
alms, and to carry, or cause him to be carried to the next Constable or
Tethingman, upon pain for every time, 10 shillings, to be levied and employed
according to the provision of 39. Eliz. in manner following, viz.

For the reparations and maintenance of the houses of correction, and stock
and store thereof, Or relief of the poor where the offense is committed, at
the discretion of the Justices of peace of the limit, city, or town
corporate, and to be levied by warrant under the hands and seals of two or
more of the said Justices, by distress and sale of the offenders goods and
chattels.

And in default of any such levy, then to be levied and employed by the Lord
of the Leet or his Officer, in such manner, as is prescribed by the Statute of
39. Eliz.

By the same Statute of 1 Iac. If such Constables or Tethingmen, do not cause
the said rogues, vagabonds, and sturdie beggars, to be punished according to
the Statute of 39. Eliz. That then they shall forfeit 20 shillings for every
default to be levied, and employed in manner as in the Statute 39. Eliz. is set
forth.

This Statute of 1 Jacob. is continued by 21. Jacob. and 3. Car. and does not
any way abridge the former power of the Court Leet, in inquiring, presenting,
and amercing, but rather gives an amplification to it, and a special direction
(who are to be accounted rogues) which before those Statutes were not so
exactly known and deciphered.

This Law in point of preventing justice, is the most useful of all other
ordinary Laws, for experience will teach every one, that the opportunities of
their lawless and wandering liberties, (were not such provisions of restraint
made) would minister occasions of robberies, burglaries, assasinations,
murders, and other grievous offenses.

Message of Thieves.
IF any be employed, and do go in the message of thieves, and are as bad, and
worse than rogues, are here inquirable.

Masterlesse persons.
ANd so are those, who like Antipodes, walk in the night, and sleep in the
day, men that live without means, or master, fare well, and have nothing, who
are not able to render an account of their life.

Haunters of Alehouses.
Amongst vagabonds, or hazarders and night walkers, M. Fitzh. and M. Kitchen,
have joined common haunters of Tavernes, or Alehouses, and since they wrote,
diverse good laws have been made, as well against such haunters, as against
drunkards, and their harbourers, and receivers.

The first Statute being 1. Iaco. 9. entitled, an Act to restrain the
inordinate haunting and tippling in Innes, Alehouses, and other victualing
houses, does set forth the ancient true and principal use of such houses, to be
for receipt and releif of way faring persons, and for supply of the wants of
poor people, and not meant for the harboring of lewd and idle persons to
spend and consume their money and time in drunken manner.

By which Statute it was restrained that no Alehouse-keeper, etc. should permit
any inhabitant or towns man (other than laborers and handicrafts-men, or
persons invited by any traveller) to continue drinking or tippling in any such
house, upon pain to forfeit for every such offense to the use of the poor of
the parish ten shillings.

Drunkards.
ANd afterward by a Statute of 4. Iac. 5. and entitled, 4 Iac. 5.
An Act to repress the loath some and odious sin of Drunkenness, which
thereby is rightly described to be the root and foundation of many other
enormious sins, as bloodshed, stabbing, murder, swearing, fornication,
adultery, and such like, to the great dishonor of God, and of our nation, the
overthrow of many good arts and manual trades, the disabling of diverse
workmen, and the general impoverishing of many good subjects, abusively
wasting the good creatures of God, It was provided, that every person which
should be drunk, and thereof lawfully convicted, should within one week after
conviction pay 5. shillings to the use of the poor of the parish, And upon
refusal or neglect or non ability to pay it, to be committed to the stocks,
there to remain six hours, and if any person should continue drinking and
tippling in any Inn, etc. in the place where he inhabiteth, being duly prooved
in such manner as is limited in the act of 1 Iaco. He shall forfeit 3.
shillings 4. pence, to be levied as the penalty of drunkenness, and for
non-payment to be committed to the stocks, by the space of four hours.

That all Constables, Churchwardens, Headboroughs, Tethingmen, Aleconners, and
Sidemen, shall in their oaths incident to their several offices, be charged
to present the offenses contrary to this Statute.

This Statute appoints a forfeiture of ten shillings upon the Constable or
other inferior officer, who shall neglect the correction of a drunkard, or
levying the penalty upon him, and further gives power to the Court Leet, to
inquire of, and punish all the offenses in these two acts, so as the
presentment be within six months after the offense.

These two Acts by a latter of 21 Iaco. ca. 7. with the alterations and
additions therein expressed, 21 Jac ca. 7.
are to be put in due execution, and to continue for ever.

And whereas proof of two witnesses was required by the said statutes, now the
proof of one should be sufficient.

That the voluntary confession of any offender against either of the said
Statutes (before any person, authorized by the said act to minister an oath)
shall suffice to convince the party so offending, and afterward the oath of
the party so offending and confessing shall be taken and be a sufficient proof
against any other, offending at the same time.

That if any stranger should be found upon view of his own confession, or
proof of one witness to be tippling in any Inn etc. he shall incur the
like penalty, as if he were an inhabitant, to be levied and disposed, as in
the said act of 4 Iac. is expressed.

That the oath limited by the said Statute of 4. Iac. to be ministered to
Constables, etc. for presenting of offenses contrary to the Statute, shall be
always hereafter enlarged and extend to present all offenses, done contrary to
all these three several Statutes, according to the several alterations and
additions in the same. 1 Car. R ca. 4.


By the Statute of 1 Car. Regis cap. 4. entitled, An Act for the further
restraint of tippling in Inns, Alehouses, and other Victualing houses. It is
provided that every Alehouse keeper, etc. which shall permit any persons not
there inhabiting to tipple in his house, shall incur the same penalty, and
in such manner to be prooved, levied, and disposed, as by the Law of 1 Iac. is
appointed for suffering townsmen, and inhabitants to tipple in their houses.

And keepers of Tavernes, and such as sell wine in their houses, and do keep
Innes or victualling, shall be taken to be within the said two former Statutes
of 1. and 4. Iac. and also within this Statute of 1 Car. ca. 4. 4 Iac. 5.


A drunkard convicted the second time, 21. Ia. 7.
is to be bound with two sureties, to the good behavior from thence forth.
Every Alehousekeeper which shall be convicted for any offense, against any the
branches of either of the two former laws, and the meaning of this Statute,
shall for the space of three years after his conviction, be utterly disabled
to keep any such Alehouse. Who shall be a drunkard.


There is no Law or Ordinance so exactly made by the wisdom of a State; but
the enemy of mankind, and his ministers and members, would invent some device
and machination to elude it. As, to that good law against that odious sin of
drunkenness, there is a great disputation grown (as if there were need of a
new act to interpret it) who shall be accounted a drunkard. In the opinion of
some famous in that faculty, none shall be deemed a drunkard, unless he be so
bereaven of his memory, reason, sense, and understanding, that he is not able
to knew the difference between his head and feet,

Et pedis and capitis quae sint diserim na nesoit.

But such sophistical Symposiarchistes must look back upon that of Isaiah,
Vae qui consurgitts mane ad ebrietatem sectandam, and potandum usque ad
vesperam ut vino aestueris, that wine may inflame them.

All excess of drinking, vltra necessitatem, which does inflame and begets a
distemper, and disorder, in the ordinary disposition of nature, is to be
accounted Drunkenness. He that is strenuus in vino, and can carry his burden
like a brewers Horse, is not more excusable than the weak infirm drunkard.

All the several sorts and kinds of drunkenness, may be reduced under two
regiments. 1 The one sort which drink ad insaniam, till they be so mad, as that
they will fight with a wall, or with their own shadow in the Moon light. 2
The other sort which drink ad delirium, till they fall into a sottish and
swinish drowsinesse, The Psalmist 107. verse. 27. describes them by a comparison
of ships on the Sea, They reele to and fro, and stagger like a drunken man, and
are at their wits end.

I need not speak more of them, There are many Sermons and Tracts extant in
print against them, and yet a man may commonly with grief hold several sorts
of them reeling, and in conflict with the stones of the streets, in the face of
the Sun, and pass with impunitie.

There follow three mischievous members, who are public enemies to the peace
and plenty of a Realm, one preyes upon the coin, the other two, upon the corn
and victual of a Common weal.

Usurie.
USurers were here inquirable, as offenders against the common Law, It appears
by Glanvill, li. 7. ca. 16. that their goods and all their chattels, which they
had at the time of their death, were to be seized to the Kings use, and their
heirs to be disinherited, and their lands to return to the Lord of the fee,
and the reason why he was not to be convicted in his life time, because it was
presumed that he might repent and forsake the sin before his death, which if
he did, he was then freed from the mulct of the Law, and so it is rendered in
the same tract,

Sciendum tamen, quod si quis aliquo tempere usurarius fuerit in vita sua, and
super hoc in patria public defamatus, Si tamen a delicto suo ante mortem suam
destiterit and penitentiam egerit, post mortem ipsius, ille, vel res suae lege
usurarii minime sensebuntur.

And li. 10. ca. 3. He defynes what a Usurer is, one that takes more than his
own, Si quis aliquid crediderit, si plus eo receperit, usuram facit.

This Law had its propagation from the confirmation of the Mosaicall law by
king Alfred. Exodus 22. verse. 25. Lamb. Arch. fo. 23.
Si pecuniam mutuam dederis populo meo pauperi qui habitat tecum, non urgebis
eum quasi exactor, nec usuris opprimes.

It seems by the Statute de Iudaismo, made An Dom. 1289. and 16, Ed. 1. That
the dispersed Jews (who then much infested this Kingdom) were the first
introductors of this sin, and the only usurers of this Kingdom, whereby his
Majesty's liege people received much mischief and disinherison, and many
offenses arose, and therefore for the honor of God, and common profit of his
people, it was ordained, That no Jew should from thence forth take any thing to
usurie of any Christian, upon any Lands, Rents or other things, and if any Jew
did offend against that ordinance, he should lose his loan, be punished at the
Kings pleasure, and the Christian should recover his gage, viz. his lands,
rents, or other things.

This Jewish leprosy had so spread it selfein this Kingdom, that it grew even
excessive amongst Christians, for redress whereof, it was provided 3. Hen.
7.6. That all unlawful chevisance and usurie should be extirpate, and Brokers
of such bargains, should be set on the pillory, be half a year imprisoned,
and pay twenty pound.

That Statute and an other of 11 H. 7.8. were repealed by 37. Hen. 8. ca. 9.
And provision made, that no person by any covin, engine or other deceiptfull way
should take (above ten pounds in the hundred) interest for one whole year,
upon pain to forfeit the treble value of the wares, marchandizes, and other
things so bargained etc. imprisonment of body and fine and ransom at the
Kings pleasure.

This Statute being repealed 5. Ed. 6.20. was fully revived 13. Eliz. ca. 8.
And further enacted, that all bonds, contracts, and assurances, collateral, or
other to be made for payment of any thing reserved above the rate of 10. pound
in the hundred, should be utterly void, and all Brokers, sollicitors, and
drivers of usurious bargains, above that rate, to be judged, punished, and
used as Counselors, Attourneys, or Advocates in any case of Praemunire. And
for that all usurie being forbidden by the Law of God, is sin and detestable,

It was further enacted, That in all usurie, loan, and forbearing of money at 10
pound in the hundred and under, the offender should forfeit so much as shall be
reserved over and above the principal, to be recovered and employed as is
limited for forfeitures by the Statute of 37. H. 8. And not to be punished by
the Ecclesiastical law or otherwise.

This law was made perpetual by the Statute of 39. Eli^. 18.

The Statute of 21 Iac. cap. 17. which by 3. Car. cap. 4. is made perpetual,
11 Iac. ca. 7
does restrain the taking of any more, than after the rate of 8. in the
hundred, for one whole year, under pain of forfeiture of the treble value of
the moneys, wares, etc. and all bonds, contracts, and assurances to be void.

The Scriveners, Brokers, Drivers, and Sollicitors, to forfeit 20 pound, and
imprisonment for half a year, if they take above 5. shillings for the
procuring or driving the loan, or forbearing the same lent after the rate of
an hundred pound for one year, or above 12, pence for making or renewing the
bond.

These two last mentioned Statutes do respectively stand and remain in their
proper and peculiar force, according to their several restrictions and
limitations, yet none of them do abrogate the inquiry of it as an offense of
the common Law, in the Sheriffs Turn or Court Leet, but the Steward cannot
inquire nor inflict the forfeitures, limited by the Statutes, because thereby
no power is given unto him.

Forestallers.
IF any buy, or cause to be bought any merchandise, victual or other thing,
coming by land or water toward any fair or market, to be sold in the same,
or toward any City, Port, Haven, Creek, or rode of this Realm or Wales from
any part beyond the Sea to be sold.

Or shall make any bargain, contract or promise for the having or buying of
the same, or any part thereof, before it shall be in the market, fair, city,
port, etc. ready to be sold.

Or shall make any motion by word, letter, message, or otherwise, to any person
for inhaunsing the price, or dearer telling of any of the said things.

Or else diswade, move, or stir any person coming to the market, or fair,
to forbear the bringing of any of the things to any fair, market, cuie, etc.
to be sold, shall be judged a Forestaller.

Regrator.
IF any shall Regrate or get into his possession, in any fair or marked, any
Corn, Wine, Fish, Butter, Cheese, Candles, Fallow, Sheep, Lambs, Calves,
Swine, Pigs, Geese, Capons, Hens, Chickens, Pigeons, Conies, or other dead
victuals whatsoever, that shall be brought thither to be sold, and does sell the
same again, in any fair or market holden in the same place, or in any other
fair or market within four miles thereof, shall be reputed a Regrator.

Ingrosser.
IF any get into his hands by buying, contracting, or promise taking (other
than by demise, grant, or lease of Land, or tithe) any corn growing in the
si^l^s, or any other corn, butter, cheese, fish, or other dead victual within
England, to the intent to sell the same again, shall be taken an unlawful
Ingrosser.

They are all linked together in this Statute, and the punishment of them
equal, viz.

1. Offense, imprisonment for two months without basle, and forfeiture of the
value of the goods bought, etc. 2. Imprisonment for one half year, and lose
the doable value of the goods, etc. 3. Offense, pillorie in the place where he
dwells, forfeiture of all his goods and cattle, which he has to his own use,
and imprisonment during the kings pleasure.
By this Statute, no express power is given to Leets to inquire of these
offenses, or any of them, whereupon much doubt has arisen, and much neglect
insued, in not charging the suitors to present the offenders, and forestallers,
and Regrators at Tournes and Leets, the rather for that M. Kitchen in his book
of that subject, and in the particulars of the charge, does not once mention
those offenses, but that they were and are offenses at the common Law, and
inquirable and punishable in Tournes and Leets will be very manifest. (...)
Leet, so.


Fitzh. in his Court Leet, so 86. printed A.D. 1559, after the Statute of 5 Ed.
6. does charge the inquiry of Forestallers and Regrators.

And the Statute 5. Ed. 6. does not abridge any other power or jurisdiction, as
appears by a clause in the same Act, viz. If any should be punished by virtue
of that Act, for any thing therein mentioned, he should not otherwise be vexed
or put to any pain for that thing. It will not be amiss here, to take a short
survey of the ancient ordinances of this Kingdom, which were but declarations
of the common Law.

The old Law, entitled, Indicium Collistrigii, 51 Hen.
51 Hen. 3. provides that inquiry be made de forstallariis, who before the due
hour did buy any thing, contrary to the ordinance of the town and market. Or
do go out of the town to meet with any vendible things, and do buy them extra
villam, that they might sell them in the town to Regrators, at a dearer rate,
than they which would have brought it into the Town.

That law is seconded with another, entitled Statut. de pistoribus and
braciotaribus etc. and de Forstallariis (being repealed only touching the
assise of wine by 21 Iac.) by which the King commands, that no forestaller
should dwell in any town, and renders the reason. Qui pauperum est depressor
manifesle, and totius Communitatis and patriae publicus inimicus, An oppressor
of the poor, and an enemy of the country, and hereby the 1 Conviction is a
grievous amerciament. 2 Judgment of the Pillorie. 3 Incarceration and
redemption. 4 Abjuration of the Town.


And the like against those that should counsel or countenance them, and it
was to be inquired, if any Steward or Bayliffe, did for any reward remit the
judgment of the pillorie, by which it is plain, that Stewards of Leets had
power to inquire of this offense.

By the Statute of 25 Ed. 3, cap. 3, all forestallers of Wines, and all other
victuals, wares, and marchandizes, that comes to the towns of England by land
or by water, being attainted at the Kings suit by indictment, or in any other
manner, shall forfeit to the King the things forestalled, if they were full
bought, But if agreement were only made by earnest, then the value of the
things so forestalled, and two years imprisonment or more, at the Kings will,
if the buyer had not whereof to pay it.

By all those laws it was not perfectly known what person should be taken for
a forestaller, etc. and therefore a full declaration was made by the latter
Statute of 5 Ed. 6.14.

These Monopolists of late years, began to swarm and muster themselves
against the Common weal, and in time like the frogs of Egypt, would have
overrun and covered the whole land, and without a scarcity would have brought
a dearth amongst us, if his now Royal Majesty by his Proclamation, orders and
directions, Dated 28. December, 1630, afterward put in execution against some
principal ingrossers of corn and grain by two several censures and decrees,
in the high court of Starchamber, Mich. 7. Car. had not ministered a timely
prevention, by which directions a strict inquiry of Forestalles and Regrators
is required in a Court Leet.

There follow several sorts of frauds, deceipts, and conspiracies, as well in
making, selling, and uttering of victual and wares, which concern the alimony
and sustenance of the body, as also in trades of mercimony, and manufacture,
and in artificers and laborers, all which are inquirable at Leets.

Assize of Bread.
BRead is the principal of all kind of victual, it is the staff of life,
and the life of the poor, in sacred Scripture the commination of famine, is
denounced by breaking the staff of bread, Levit. 26.26. If therefore any Baker
shall make and put to sale any bread which is not of good and sufficient weight
and assize, according to the ^ate and prices of corn and grain, in the markets
adjoining, or is not wholesome for the body of man.

Brewers and Tiplers.
IF Brewers and Tiplers do not keep and observe the assize of ale and beer,
and make it good and wholesome for the body of man, or do drefuse to suffer
their Ale and Beer to be assayed an tasted by the officer, on that behalf
appointed, before they set the same to sale To the end he may be the better
directed where to search, Every licensed Tipler ought to have a Bush or
alestake at his door.

Cups, Glasses.
IF any Tiplers sell by glasses, cups, or dishes, or any measure which are not
of due assize, and lawfully sealed, whereby the poor labourer and wayfaring
passenger, (for whose relief and comfort such persons are allowed to tipple)
be scanted and defrauded.

By the ancient Law of Iudicium Collist. 51. Hen. 3, before mentioned, If a
Baker or Brewer be convict for not observing the assize of bread and ale, the
first second and third time, he shall be amerced according to his offense, if
it be not overgrievous, but if it be grievous and often, Si grave fecerit
delictum and pluries, and castigari noluerit, tunc patiatur judicium corporis
(scil.) Pistor collistrigium, and brasiatrix trubicetum vel castigatorium, A
Baker to the Pillorie, and a brewer to the Tumbrell, or other correction, etc.

Butchers, etc.
IF any Butchers, Fishmongers, Regrators, 13 Edw. 3.6.
Hostlers, Brewers, Bakers, Pulters, or any other sellers of any manner of
victual, do not sell the same for reasonable prices, having regard to the
prices in the places adjoining, so that the same sellers have moderate gains
and not excessive, reasonably to be required (according to the distance of the
place from whence the said victuals be carried) shall pay double for the same
to the party damnified, or in default of him, to any other that will pursue on
this behalf. 13 Ed. 3.6.

Victuallers.
BY the Statute of 13 Ri. 2.18. For victuallers, 13 ^^h. 2.1^.
it was accorded, that they should have reasonable gains, according to the
discretion and limitation of the Justices and no more, upon pain to be
grievously punished, according to the discretion of the said Justices, where no
pain was limited in certain before that time; and that Sheriffs, Stewards
of franchises, and all others that have assize of bread and ale, and the
correction thereof, shall take no amerciament or fine for any default, touching
the assize, to spare any bodily punishment.

In the time of Edw. 4. certain persons for their own profit, did procure
Letters Patents of the King to be surveyors and correctors of victuals, within
certain Cities, Boroughs, and other places, and by pretense thereof did commit
diverse extortions and oppressions, to the damage of the people, and
derogation of liberties and franchises, which Letters Pattents by the Statutes
of 12 Edw. 4. ca. 8. were made void.

But for that the dearth and plenty of Cheese, Butter, Capons, Hens, Chicken,
and other victuals, necessary for men's sustenance, were many times inhaunsed
and raised by the covetousness of the owners, by occasion of engrossing and
regrating the same, 25 Hen. 8 cap. 2
It was 25 H. 8, cap. 2. provided, that upon complaint of any such inhaunsing,
the Lord chancellor of England, and others therein named, should have power to
see and tax reasonable prices upon such kind of victuals, to be sold in
gross or by retaile, and Proclamation to be thereof made under the great
Seal, and those prices so taxed to be observed upon such pains as by the said
Proclamation should be declared.

But this Act should not be hurtful to Majors, Sheriffs, Bailiffes, or other
officers of Cities, Boroughs, or Townes-corporate, nor to any other having
authority to set prices, etc.

Nota, the power of a Leet is not abridged by any of these Statutes, but rather
declared and explained.

Horsebread, etc.
IF any Baker in any City, Town corporate, (...) Jar. ^1
o^ Market town, shall make or sell any Horsebread, which is not of lawful
assize, and reasonable weight, after the price of Corn and Grain in the
market adjoining.

Or if any Hostler or Inholder, dwelling in any City, etc. shall make
horsebread in his hosterie or without.

Or shall not sell their horsebread, and their hay, oats, beans, pease,
provender, and all kind of victual, both for man and beast, for reasonable
gain, having respect to the prices in the markets adjoining, without taking
any thing for litter.

Or if any Inholders of Hostlers, dwelling in any throughfare, town, or
village, (being no city, town corporate, or market-towne, where any common
Baker having been an apprentice at that trade by the space of seven years is
dwelling) who may by this Statute make horsebread in his house, shall not make
it sufficient, lawful, and of due assize, according to the said prices of
grain and corn, Or shall offend in any thing contrary to this act.

All stewards of Leets have power to enquire, hear, and determine all the said
defaults and offenses of the said Hostlers and Inholders. And the punishment to
be insticted, is for the 1 Offense to be fined according to the quantity of
the offense. 2 Conviction, imprisonment for one month without bail, etc. 3 To
stand in the pillorie without redemption of money. 4 After judgment of the
pillorie given, he shall be forejudged from keeping any Inn again.


Unwholesome or corrupt Victual.
IF any Butchers, Fishers, or other Victuallers, do sell any manner of corrupt
victual, not wholesome for the body of man.

If any butcher shall sell carnes sustentatas vel de morte morina, any
contagious flesh, or that dyed of the murrain, 51 Hen. 3. Or shall kill and
sell the flesh of any Bull unbaited, or of any cattle killed suddenly upon the
drift, or with their breath do puff and blow up meat, whereby it prooves
deceitful in the sale, and may be unwholesome, it is presentable.

Flawing of Hides, etc.
NO Butcher by himself or by any other person, 1 Iac, ca. 22.
shall gash, slaughter, or cut any hide, of any Ox, Bull, Steer, or Cow, in
flaying thereof or otherwise, whereby the same be impaired or hurt, under
pain of 20 pence for every hide so gashed, etc. 1 Iac. c. 22.

No Butcher shall water any hide (except only in the months of June, July, and
August) nor shall offer or put to sale any putrified or rotten hide, upon pain
of every hide so watered, putrified and offered to be put to sale, three
shillings four pence.

Calves under five weeks old.
NO Butcher or other person or persons shall kill any Calfe to sell being under
five weeks old, upon pain for every Calfe so to be killed and sold, six
shillings four pence.

No Butcher shall by himself or any other person use the craft or mystery of
a Tanner, during the time that he shall use the craft of a butcher, upon pain
for every day six shillings eight pence.

Cooks.
Inquiry is to be made of Cooks that sees flesh or fish, with bread or
water, or any otherwise, that is not wholesome for man's body, or after that
they have kept it so long, that it loses its natural goodness debitam
naturam) and then reseeth it and sell it, 51 Hen. 3.

Malt-maker.
THe Maltmaker (the only Sire of an unruly Alchouse, 21 Edw. 6.10 revived 27
Eliz. 14.
by his excess in making of too much, Continued 1 Iac. 25, Continued 21 Jac.
28, Continu^^ 3 Car. 4.
and his slights and deceipts in his hasty making of bad and corrupt malt, is,
as ill a member as any, his frauds and slights are in the preamble of this
Statute described to be such in the making and drying of his malt, that no
wholesome drink for man's body could be thereof made, to the peril and
danger of his Majesty's subjects, the loss and decay of the Common wealth, and
the utter impoverishment of Brewers, for that they could not make so much of
fifty quarters of malt, being evil dried and made, as they could of forty good.

If therefore any person shall make any barley malt (the months of June, July,
and August only excepted) but that it shall have in the Fat and Floor,
steeping and sufficient drying thereof three weeks at the least, and in those
months 17 days at the least (without which it cannot be wholesome for man's
body) shall forfeit for every quarter of Barley malt, two shillings.

Or if any shall mingle any malt not being well and sufficiently made, or being
made of mowburnt or spired barlie with other good malt, and put the same to
sale, shall forfeit for every quarter, two shillings.

If any person shall put to sale, any malt not sufficiently and well trodden,
rubbed and fanned whereby there may be conveniently fanned out of one quarter
thereof, half a peck of dust or more, every such person shall forfeit and lose
for every quarter so put to sale twenty pence.

One moitie of those forfeitures, are to accrue to the King, and the other to
the party that will sue for the same, to be sued or presented within one year.

Of these abuses every Steward of Leets has power to hear, and determine,
as well by presentment of twelve men, as by accusation or information of two
honest witnesses, and the Bailiffes and Constables of every borough, market
town, or other town, where such malt shall be made or put to sale within any
of the said towns, and finding the same, with the advice of one Justice of
peace, shall cause the same to be sold at reasonable prices, and under the
price of the market, as to his discretion shall seem expedient.

Millers.
IF any Miller take excessive tole, he ought to take but the twentieth or
twenty fourth grain according to the custom of the place, and to the strength
of the water, or if he changes or alters the grain which he has to
grind, presentable.

Conspiracies in Butchers.
IF any Butchers, Brewers, Bakers, Poulters, 2, 3 Ed. 6. c. ^^
Cooks, Costermongers, or Fruiterers, not contented with moderate and
reasonable gain, shall conspire, covenant, promise, or make any oaths to sell
their victuals but at certain prices.

Or if any artificers, workmen, or laborers, do conspire, covenant, etc. not
to make or do their works but at a certain price and rate, or shall not
enterprise or take upon them to finish, what another has begun, or shall do
but certain work in a day, or shall not work but at certain hours and
times.

Every person so offending being lawfully convicted thereof, by witness,
confession, or otherwise, shall forfeit as follows.

1 Offense, ten pound to the King (if he have to pay) within six days after
his conviction, or twenty days imprisonment, with bread and water for his
sustenance. 2 Twenty pound to the King (if he have to pay) within six days, or
else the punishment of the Pillorie. 3 Forty pound etc. payable within six
days, or else to sit in the Pillorie, lose one of his ears, and at all times
after to be taken for a man infamous, and his oath not to be credited in any
matters of judgment.
And if such conspiracy etc. be had and made by any society, brotherhood, or
company of the victuallers above mentioned, with the presence or consent of the
more part of them, that then immediately upon such act of Conspiracy, covenant
or promise, over and besides the particular punishment, before appointed for
the offender, their corporation shall be dissolved to all intents,
constructions, and purposes.

False weights and measures.
IF any keep and use any false measures of bushels, gallons, else, yards, or
false weights, balances and pounds.

Double weights. etc.
OR if any use double weights and measures, the greater to buy with, and the
lesser to sell with, to deceive the people, in Mag. Car. ^. 26. one special
branch for the uniformitie of weight and measure, is in these words, S. Vna sit
mensura vini per totum Regnum nostrum, una mensura cervisiae, una mensura
bladi, et de ponderibus sicut de mensuris, Also by the foresaid Stature of 51
Hen. 1. It was to be inquired, if any sold by one measure, and bought by
another, or if any did use false else, weights, or measures, which was
confirmed and enlarged by 27. Ed. 3.10.

It is Gods law enjoined by Moses unto the people, You shall do no
unrighteousness in judgment in mete yard, in weight or measure, just
balances, just weights, a just ephah, and a just hinne shall ye have Levit.
19. verse. 35.36.

Wines.
THe Statute of 7 Ed. 6. 7 Ed. 6, c. 5.
ca. 5. entitled an Act made to avoid the great and excessive prices of wines,
for so much as does concern the prices of wines, or the restraining of having
wines in men's houses is repealed 1 Iac. 25.

But no person shall keep any Tavern, or sell or utter by retaile, by the
gallon, or less, or greater measure in any place, any Gascony, Guyon or
French, nor any Rochel wines, nor any other wine or wines, in any place, except
it be in cities, towns corporate, Boroughs, Port towns, or Market towns, or
in the towns of Gravesend, Sittingborne, Tuxford and Bagshot, upon pain to
forfeit for every day so offending ten pound.

No person shall sell wines by retaile in any City, borough etc. unless he be
assigned by the head officers, and the most part of the common Counsel,
Aldermen, etc. for the time being of such City, etc. by writing under the
common seal.

Nor in any City or town etc. not corporate, or in the towns of Gravesend,
Sittingborn or Bagshot, unless he be appointed by all or most part of the
Justices of peace of that Shire, at the general Sessions of the peace, by
writing under their several seals, under pain for every day five pound.

And if any having authority, etc. shall nominate and appoint, more or greater
number of Taverners, or Wine-sellers, than by the Statute is limited to be
assigned in several places, shall forfeit for every such nomination or
appointment five pound.

And none shall sell or retaile any kind of wines to be drank or spent in his
mansion house or other place in his tenure or occupation, by any color, craft,
engine or mean, upon pain to forfeit for every such offense ten pound.

The Steward in every Leet and the Sheriff in his Turn (inter alia) have
power to enquire by the oaths of twelve lawful men, of all offenses done
contrary to this Act, and every inquiry and presentment so taken, shall be of
such force, as if it were had or taken in the Kings bench, and the foresaid
penalties upon any such presentment (and no bill, plaint, action or information
thereof commenced in any the Courts of Record) shall be divided equally in two
parts, whereof one to be to the King, and the other to the poor of the town
or place, etc.

To be sued, presented etc. within one year.

Deceits in Tradesmen.
IF any Tradesman or Artificer whatsoever, does use any fraud, shift, slight,
or deceit in the making of his and their ware and chaffer, and do not make the
same as they ought whereby the people are deceived.

Learned Lynwood, titul. de haereticis ca. finaliter, sets forth seven sorts of
Mechanic arts or trades, and in the first sort he ranks all those qui circa
pilos et lanam, pelles et carnes operantur, those that meddle with hair or
wool, hide or flesh, amongst whom are butchers, Tanners, Curriers, Shoomakers,
or Cordwayners and others cutting of Leather, all comprised in the Statute of 1
Iac. ca. 22. the butchers I have singled out already in their due place.

Clothmakers and Laborers thereof.
IN the occupations of Clothmaking the laborers thereof were driven to take a
great part of their wages in pinnes, girdles, and other unprofitable wares, and
had delivered unto them woolls to be wrought by very excessive weight whereby
both men and women were discouraged of such labor. It was therefore ordained,

That all clothmakers should pay to the carders, spinsters, and all other
laborers in any part of that trade lawful money for all their lawful wages.

And should also deliver woolls to be wrought according to the faithful
deliverie, Repealed 5 Eliz. ^.
and due weight thereof, upon pain to forfeit to every labourer,

The treble value of the wages so not paid.

And for every default in deliverie of excessive and unlawful weight six pence.

That every carder, spinster, weaver, fuller, shereman and dyer shall duly
perform his duty in his occupation, upon pain of yielding to to the party
greeved double damages.

That every fuller in his craft of fulling, tasselling, or rowing of cloth,
shall exercise and use tazels and no cards deceitfully impairing the same
cloth, upon pain to yield to the party grieved double damages.

Every Steward of Wapentakes and Leets (out of any city, borough or town,
where no Mayor or chief officer is) shall have power to hear and determine
the complaints of every clothmaker and labourer, by due examination of the
parties, and for non-payment of the said duties forfeiture and damages, to
commit the offenders to the next Jail, there to remain until they pay the
same.

And shall also have power upon infor mation of any other person which is not
grieved, to cause the party to come before him, for offending this ordinance,
and if upon examination or other due proof the party be found guilty or
defective, he shall forfeit for every time to the King or Lord of the Leet
three shillings four pence to be recovered in manner aforesaid, without
paying any fee or reward.

Tanners. Who may be a Tanner.
NO person shall tanne any leather, 1 Jac. c. 22
or use, or have any profit of or by the said mystery, unless he had a
Tanhouse at the beginning of that Parliament And except such as have been or
shall be brought up as apprentises, or covenant and hired servants, by the
space of seven years in that mystery, and except the wife and such sons of
a Tanner, as has been brought up, and used the said trade by the space of
four years, or the son or daughter of a Tanner, or such person who shall
marry such wife or daughter, to whom he has or shall leave a Tanhouse and
fats, upon pain of forfeiture of all the leather so tanned, or whereof he
shall receive any profit, or the just value thereof.

No Tanner shall use the mystery of a Shoemaker, currier, butcher, or any
other artificer, useing, cutting, or working of leather; upon pain to forfeit
all the Hides and Skins so wrought, or the value thereof.

None shall buy, contract for, or bespeake any rough Hide or Calves skin in the
hair, but only Tanners, or tawers of leather, except salt hides, for the
necessary use of ships.

Forfeiture of the Hides and skins or the just value.

None shall forestale any Hydes coming toward any fair or marker, nor buy
any hide but in open fair or market unless it be the hyde of a beast killed
for a man's own private provision.

Forfeiture for every hyde so bought six shillings eight pence.

This Law provides against the insufficient ranning and drying of leather, and
so much as shall not be thoroughly tanned or dried, to be out our by the
oversight and direction of the tryers and searchers, etc.

None (to overhasten the tanning of their leather) shall set their fats in
tanhills or other places where the woozes or Leather may take any unkind
heats, nor put any leather into any hot or warm woozes, not tan any hides,
calve skin or sheeps kin with any warine woozes upon pain

For every offense ten pound, and to stand upon the Pillorie three several
market days.

This law gives remedy against regrating and engrossing of Oken bark before
it be stripped, or after to sell the same again upon pain,

To forfeit all such bark, or the value thereof.

Curriers.
NO Currier shall exercise the mystery of a tanner etc. or other artificer,
useing cutting of leather during the time he shall use the mystery of a
Currier upon pain,

To forfeit for every hide or skin six shillings eight pence.

He shall not curry any leather in the house of any Shoemaker or other person,
but only in his own house, situate in a corporate or market Town.

Nor shall curry any kind of leather (except it be well and perfectly tanned)
nor any hyde or skin being not thoroughly dry after his wet season, in which
season he shall not use any stale, urine, or any other deceitful mixture, way,
or means to corrupt or hurt the same.

Nor shall currie any leather meet for utter sole-leather with any other stuff
than hard tallow, nor any less of that than the leather will receive.

Nor any kind of leather meet for over leather and inner soles, but with good
and sufficient stuff, being fresh and not salt, and thoroughly liquored, till
it can receive no more.

Nor shall burn or scald any hide or Leather in the currying, nor shall shave
any Leather too thin, nor shall gash or hurt any leather in the shaving or by
any other means, upon pain

To forfeit for every offense (other than in gashing, or hurting in shaving)
six shillings eight pence, and the value of every skin and hide marred by evil
workmanship.

And for every offense in gashing etc. double so much to the party grieved, as
the Leather shall be impaired thereby, by the judgment of the Wardens, etc.

That the leather to be brought by any artificer which is or shall be a cutter
of leather, or by his servant, with good and sufficient stuff to liquor the
same, shall be liquored and curried perfectly with convenient speed not
exceeding eight days in summer, and sixteen days in winter, after it be
taken in hand upon pain

To forfeit to the party grieved for every hide and piece of leather not well
and speedily dressed ten shillings.

Cordwayner or Shoemaker.
NO shoemaker shall make or cause to be made any Boots, shoos, buskins,
startups, slippers or pantoffles, or any part of them of English leather wet
curried (other than Dearskins, Calve skins or Goat skins, made or dressed like
unto Spanish leather) but of leather, well and truly tanned, and curryed in
manner aforesaid; or of Leather well and truly tanned only, substantially sewed
with good thread, well twisted and made with wax, well rasonned, and the
stitches hard drawn with hand leathers, without mingling over leathers, viz.
part of the over leather being of Neats leather, and part of Calves leather.

Nor shall put into Shoes, Boots, etc. any sheeps-skin, bull or
horse-hide-leather, nor into the upper leather of any shoes, startupps, or
pantoffles, or into the nether part of the boores (the inner part of shoes
only excepted) any part of any hide, called the wombes, necks, shank, flank,
powle, or cheek.

Nor shall put into the utter sole any other leather, than the best of the ox
or steer hide, nor into the inner sole any other leather than the wombes,
neck, powle or cheek, nor in the treswels of the double soled shoes, other
than the flanks of the hides aforesaid.

Nor shall make or put to sale, in any years between ultimo Sept. and 20.
Apr. any shoes, boots, etc. meet for any person to wear exceeding the age of
four years, wherein shall be any dry English leather, other than Calve or
Goatskins made or dressed, like unto Spanish leather, or any part thereof.

Nor shall show, to the intent to put to sale, any boots, shoes, etc. upon
the Sunday, upon pain

To forfeit for every pair of shoes, boots, etc. made, sold, showed or put
to sale, contrary to this act, three shillings four pence, and the just and
full value of the same.

Searchers and Sealers.
ALL Mayors, Bailiffs etc. and all Lords of liberties, faires or markets, out
of the compass of three miles of London, shall upon pain of forty pound
(whereof one half to the King, the other to the party that will sue for the
same) for every year that they make default, shall yearly appoint and swear,
two, three, or more sufficient and skillful men to be searchers and sealers of
leather within their limits, and one of them shall keep a mark or seal
prepared for that purpose, and shall seal such leather as they find
sufficient and none other.

That it shall be lawful to any of them to seiz all such leather and ware as
shall be insufficiently tanned, curried, made, or wrought contrary to any
provision in this act, and shall retain the same, until it be tried as
hereafter is mentioned, viz.

That every such Mayor, etc. or Lord of liberty, or his sufficient deputy,
after notice given to him of any such seizure, shall with all convenient speed,
appoint six honest and expert men, to try whether the same wares so seized be
sufficient, according to the intent of this Statute or not, the same trial to
be made openly upon some market day, within fifteen days at the farthest,
next after such seizure, upon the oaths of the tryers.

To forfeit for not appointing such tryers, sive pound.

The tryers if they do not proceed and do their duties therein without delay,
do forfeit for every default sive pound.

Every searcher and sealer of leather which shall resuse with convenient speed
to seal any lawful leather, shall for every such offense forfeit forty
shillings.

For receiving any bribe, or exacting any fee for execution of his office,
(other than is limited by the statute, for searching, sealing, and registring
of leather) 20 pound.

For refusing after election to execute the office 10. pound.

Stewards of Franchises and Leets have power to hear and determine all the
offenses against this Act, and also by their discretions to examine all persons
suspected to offend this Statute, or any parcel thereof.

Cloth makers, Fullers, Sheeremen, Taylers, Shoomakers.
IF any of those trades shall retain to work in any of their trades any
unmarried person as a journey man to work by the day, ^. Ed. 6, 22.
or tail work, or by the great, for any less time, than for one whole quarter
of one whole year, the person or persons offending, shall suffer imprisonment
for whole month, and forfeit forty shillings for every offense.

If any Iou roey man of any the said mysteries being required by any persons
useing the said trades, This is fully repealed, by 5. Eliz. c. 4.
or any of them to serve by the quarter of a year, half a year, or whole
year, upon such reasonable wages, as between them shall be agreed, and in
case they cannot accord, then for such wages as shall be adjudged and decreed,
by one Justice of peace, Mayor, Alderman, Bailiffe, Portreeve, Constable or
Tethingman of the Shire, City, Town, Borough, Village, Hundred, Wapentake, or
Tything, where any such journeyman shall be required, and shall refuse to
serve, shall suffer imprisonment for one whole month, and forfeit for every
time 20. shillings.

All and every the said Tradesmen that shall have three apprentises in any of
the said occupations, shall keep one Iourneyman, and forevery other
apprentise, above the number of three, one other Iourneyman, upon pain of
every default ten pound, the one half to the King the other to the party that
will sue for it.

All Stewards of Leets (inter alios) has power to punish and correct all and
every offenders, contrary to the tenor of this, according to such presentiments
as shall be made before them.

The second Mechanicke art of M. Linwoods division is Armatura, and Sub hac
art (says he) continetur ars Sagittariorum and Balistariorum. And they fitly
succeed here, to be inquired of in their due order.

Artillery.
FOr maintenance of Sagittarie Discipline (an exercise famous and honorable to
this Kingdom for many victorious battles) and for debarring and repressing of
unlawful games, 33 H. 8. c. 9.
the Statute of 33. Hen. 8. ca. 9. was ordained, which provideth, that such as
be of tender age, be brought up in the knowledge of Shooting, and every person
shall provide and have in his house, for every man child of the age of seven
years and above, till he come to the age of seventeene years, a bow and two
shafts to learn and induce them, under pain (if they want them one month
together) of six shillings eight pence, incurred against the master.

After seventeene years every such young man shall provide a bow and four
arrows at his own cost, and if under threescore years taking wages, and
being able to shoot, he shall want a bow and four Arrows by the space of one
month together, shall forfeit for every such default six shillings eight pence.

No man under the age of 24. years shall shoot at a standing prick, except
it be at a rover, whereat he shall change at every shoot his mark, upon pain
for every shoot four pence.

Nor at any mark of eleven score yards or under, with any prick, shaft, or
slight, under pain of six shillings eight pence for every shoot.

That Butts shall be made in every City, Town and place by the inhabitants,
according to the Law of ancient time used, and maintained and continued by
them, upon pain for every three months 20 shillings,

Stewards of Leets have power to hear and determine the offenses, and at their
discretion, to examine all persons not having bows, shifts and arrows.

Unlawful Games.
THis good Law, (...)
as it injoynes a lawful, so it inhibiteth an unlawful exercise, especially
unlawful games, which are engendered and ^^rsed by idleness, the mother of all
vice, the (...) of youth, decay of trades, and thine of all common weal. It is
therefore enacted,

That none for his gain and ^^ere, shall keep or maintain any common
h^^^^alley, or place of Bowling, Tennis, Dicing, Carding, or any other manner
of game prohibited by any Statute, nor any hereafter to be invenced, found or
had ^^on pain for every day 40. shillings.

Every person haunting any of the said houses and places, and there playing,
forfeiteth for every time, six shillings eight pence.

All Constables and Bailiffes, etc. shall make search every month for
unlawful games, as well within franchises as without, or in default thereof,
they forfeit for every month not executing the same forty shillings.

No artificer, husbandman, handicrafts man, apprentise, journeyman, or servant
of artificer, mariners, fishermen, waterman, or any servingman, shall at any
time play, at any the said unlawful games but only in the time of Christmas,
servants to play in their masters houses, and in their presence.

No person shall bowl in any open place, out of their garden or orchard, upon
pain of six shillings eight pence.

But noble men, and every one that may dispend in lands or other profits to the
yearly value of an hundred pound, may permit their servants and others coming
to their houses, to play within the precincts of his houses, gardens or
orchards, at cards, dice, tables, bowls, or tennis, and shall not incur the
penalty of this Statute.

The forfeiture happening within the precinct of any franchise or Leet, the one
moyetie shall be to the Lord, the other to the p^^ty, that will sue for the
same by any action, etc. and out of the liberty of a Leet, the (...) moietie
to be to the King, etc.

Handguns and Crosbowes
FOr that diverse malicious and ill disposed persons did shamefully commit
diverse detestable murders, robberies, felonies, 33 (...)
riots and routs with crossebowes, little short handgu^s, and hagbuts, to the
great fear and danger of his Majesty's Subjects: And the laudable exercise of
the long bow was lately laid a part, which had be^ne the safe guard and def^nce
of the Realm and an inestimable dread, and terror to the enemies of the same.

It was ordained, That no person unless ^^e could dispend in lands or other
profits, an hundred pound per annum, should shoot in any crossbow, handgan,
hagbut, or demibanke, or keep any in then houses or elsewhere, upon paint for
every time 10. pound.

Nota, S John's Case Co. l. 5. so. 71. It was adjudged that a dagge and pistol
were comprehended under the word (handgunne) though not expressly memioned, and
that stonebowes were prohibited, swell as crossbowes.

No person shall shoot in, carry, use, or have in his house or elsewhere any
handgun, other than such as shall be in the stock and gunne the length of one
yard, nor any hagbut, demihauke other than such as shall be in stock and gunne
three quarters of a yard, upon pain of ten pound.

Every person having lands, fees, annuities, or offices of the yearly value of
an hundred pound, may seize and take every such Crossebow, and keep it to his
own use, and also seize every such handguns, etc. being shorter than before is
appointed, and to break and destroy the same within 20 days after such
seizure, upon pain of forty shillings for every gunne so seized and not broken,

No person unless he have an hundred pound per annum (as aforesaid) shall
carry or have in his journey, in the King his high way, any crossbow bent, or
gun charged, except it be in time and service of war, upon pain of ten pound,

None shall shoot in any handgun etc. at any thing at large, in any city,
borough, or market town, or within a quarter of a mile of any of them (unless
at a butt or bank of earth, in place convenient, or for defense of his person,
or house) upon pain of ten pound for every shoot.

If any master command his servant to shoot in any crossebow, handgun, etc. at
any dear, foul, or other thing, except it be at a bank or butt of earth, or
in the time of war, he shall forfeit 10. pound.

But some persons for exercise, and some places for defense, and other
purposes, are dispensed with by the Statute for useing and keeping of handguns
etc.

Stewards and Bay liffes of Leets have power to enquire, hear, and determine
all the offenses, so that no less than ten pound fine, be assessed upon every
presentment and conviction.

The one moietie of every fine to be paid and levied to the use of the King,
and the one half of the other moietie to the Lord of the Leet, and the other
half to the party that will sue for it by action, etc.

A second Jury to enquire of the concealements of the first, and if any
concealements be presented, every of the first Jury to forfeit twenty
shillings, one moietie to the Lord by distress or action of debt, the other to
the party that will sue, etc.

Other Laws here inquirable, which concern the preservation of Frye of Fish,
and of certain Foul and beasts of Warren, as Phesant, Partridge, Hare, and
Conies, and some beasts of chase, etc. Dear.
Fry of Fish.
THe preamble of this Statute sets forth the destruction of spawne, ^ Eliz 18.
Made perpetual 3 Car. Reg. c. 4. except the proviso for the River of Tweed etc.
fry, and young breed of fish in rivers and streams, salt and fresh, insomuch
as in diverse places swine and dogs were fed therewith, to the hinderance and
decay of the common wealth.

It was therefore enacted, that none should take and destroy any young brood or
fly of fish, in any waters, brooks, streams, or rivers, salt or fresh, with
any manner of net, or any ways or means whatsoever, nor take or kill any
Salmons or Trowts out of season, being kepper or shedder Salmons or Trowts.

None shall take in any rivers or places aforesaid any Pickorell, not being in
length 10 inches fish or more, Salmon 16. inches fish and more, Trowte 12.
inches or more, Baitell 12. inches or more.

None shall take any fish with any manner of net, trannell, or any other engine
or device (angling excepted) but only with net, or tran^ell, whereof every mesh
shall be two inches and half in breadth.

But where smelts, loches, mynnetts, bulhead, gudgions and eles have used to
be taken, it shall be lawful to use any such nets and means, as had been
thentofore used for that purpose, so as no other fish be taken, killed or
destroyed therewith.

The forfeiture for every time is 20. shillings, the fish taken, and the nets,
trannels, etc, to be to the use of the Lord of the Leet for ever, and to be
levied, as amerciaments for affraies in Leets have used to be.

Steward of Leets to give these offenses in charge, or else to forfeit 40.
shillings, and he may impannell a second Jury, to enquire of the concealments
of the first Jury, and it any concealements be found, every of the first Jury
shall forfeit to the Lord of the Leet 20 shillings, to be levied as before.

This Statute is perpetuated 3. Car. 4. except the proviso for the River of
Tweed, etc.

Phesants and Partridges.
THis Statute was made to prevent the destruction of the game of Phesants and
Partridges, 3 Eliz. 10.2
by taking of them by day and night with nets and other engines.

As also the spoil of corn and grass, by untimely hawking, in the beginning
of harvest.

None therefore shall take, kill, or destroy any Phesants, or Partridges, with
any nets, engines, or other devices whatsoever in the night time, upon pain of
forfeiture for every Phesant twenty shillings, every Partridge ten shillings,
to be paid within twenty days after conviction.

Or upon nonpayment, to have one months imprisonment, and to be bound by some
Justice of peace for two years, never to destroy any such game, contrary to
this Act.

The moietie of the penalty to be to the Lord of the liberty, and the other
half to him that will sue, etc. and if the Lord shall dispense with license,
or procure any such taking or killing, etc. then such penalties to be to the
poor of the parish, to be levied and recovered by the Churchwardens or any of
them.

None shall Hawk or Hunt with Spaniels in any ground where Corn or other
grain shall then grow (except his own ground) when any eared or codded corn,
or grain is standing, before it shall be shocked, cocked, hiled or copped,
upon pain of 40. shillings to the party grieved, unless he consent to it, to
be levied and recovered in manner aforesaid.

Stewards of Leets have power to hear and determine all offenses contrary to
this Act. This Statute is enlarged 1 Iac. 27. and 7. Iac. 11.

Tracing of Hares.
FOr preserving the game of hunting of Hares which was used and exercised by
the King and other noble men. 14 Hen. 8.10.


It was provided, that none should trace, destroy and kill any Hare in the
snow, with any Dog, Bitch, or otherwise, upon pain to forfeit to the Lord of
the Leet for every Hare, six shillings eight pence, after inquisition thereof
found by the Steward.

This Statute is much enlarged 1 Iac. 27.

Breaking the head of any Pond.
IF any by day or night shall break or destroy the head or damme of any pond,
poole, 5 Eliz 21.
mote stagnes, stews or several pits, within which the Lord of the Leet has
fish, to the intent to destroy, steal, and take away the said fish, shall pay
treble damages to the Lord, suffer imprisonment three months, and to find
sureties for the good abearing for seven years.

Hunting of Dear.
IF any shall chase out, hunt, or kill any dear, out of any Park or enclosed
ground, kept for st^^ing and ch^rishing of Dear by the Lord of the liberty,
or do take any Hawks out of the Lords woods or grounds, shall incur the
same penalty.

The Statute is general, extending to the Ponds, Parkes, or enclosed grounds,
etc. of all persons, and gives no power expressly to the Leet to enquire of it.
But M. Kitchen does direct the inquiry of it, Quatenus, it does concern the
Lord of the Leet.

Greyhounds, etc.
TO prevent unlawful hunting by artificers, laborers, servants, and grooms
with Greyhounds and other Dogs, (...)
It is ordained, That none such or any other layman, not having lands, to the
value of forty shillings per annum, Nor any Priest or Clark, not having lands
to the value of 10. pound a year, shall keep any Greyhound, or other dog to
hunt.

Nor shall use any Ferrets, heyes or other engines, to take or destroy any
Dear, Hares, nor conies nor other Gentlemen's game, upon pain of one years
imprisonment.

The first part hereof is mentioned by M. Fitzharbert in his charge of a Court
Leet, fo. 86. And because there is no power given by this Statute to inquire
here of, it is conceived, that it was here inquirable as a popular trespass or
offense at the Common law before this Statute. Ideo quaere.

These Laws last before cited, are for reformation of abuses in Hunting,
Hawking, and Fishing, which M. Lynwood in his division of Mechanic arts, does
set forth in his fifth sort called Ars Venationis, for though the game be
Regal and noble, and prohibited to mean persons, yet the instruments,
provision and engines incident and belonging to Hunting, Hawking, and Fishing,
must pass through the hands of Mechanic persons.

Other Laws inquirable for the good of the Common Weal by express Statutes.
Cottages and Inmates.
NOne shall build or erect any manner of Cottage for habitation, 31 Eliz. 7.
unless he assign unto it, four acres of ground at the least, to be
accounted according to the ordinance De terris mensurandis, of his own
freehold, and inheritance, lying near the said cottage to be continually
occupied therewith, so long as the Cottage shall be inhabited, under pain of
ten pound for every offense.

None shall willingly uphold and continue such a Cottage, under pain for every
month 40. shillings.

None shall place or willingly suffer any Inmates, or more families or
households than one, in any cottage made, or to be made, upon pain to forfeit
to the Lord of the Leet for every month ten shillings.

But Cottages in Cities, Boroughs, and market towns, or for convenient
habitation for workmen within a mile of any mineral works, Colemynes,
Quarries, etc. are not within this Statute.

Musters
FOr remedy of abuses in musters and the hindrances of due service in wars,
It is enacted, 4 and 5 Phil. (...) Ma. 3.
That if any person shall refuse to come unto public musters, and absent
himself without any lawful impediment or appearing, do not bring with him
his best furniture or array and a mour, shall for every such offense, have 10.
days imprisonment, unless he pay a fine to the King of forty shillings, to be
estreated in the Exchequer.

If any Muster-Master or Commander, shall by any means exact or take any
reward for sparing, or discharging any person from his service in the wars.

Or if any Captain, or other having charge of men for service in the war,
shall for any lucre or gain discharge or license any soldier to depart out of
service.

Or shall not pay unto him his full and whole wages, Conduct, and coat money
within 10. days after such Captain or leader shall have received the same,

He shall forfeit ten times the value of the reward received,

And pay to every Soldier trebble the sum withholden.

Horses not sufficient in length.
THe generation and breed of good and strong Horses, 32 H. 8.13.
do extend not only to a great h^lpe for defense of this kingdom, but is a
great commodity to the inhabitants. And the efore it is provided, that no
commoner in any Foriest, Chase, More, or Common whatsoever, shall have or put
to pasture into such ground or Common any stoned Horse, above the age of two
years, not being fifteen handfuls high, to be measured from the lowest part
of the fore foot to the highest part of the withers, every handful four
inches of the standard, upon pain to forfeit such horse or horses.

And i^ shall be lawful to any person to seize such horse, and to bring him to
the next pound, and to measure him in the presence of three honest men, to be
appointed by the Constable, Tethingman, or other Officer, And if he be not of
that altitude, to challenge and retain the same to his own use, as his own
proper goods for ever.

The penalty of every Officer or other persons, appointed to measure any such
horse, either refusing to do i^, or not truly measuring, is to pay for every
time so refusing forty shillings.

The one moietie to the King, the other to the pa^ty that will sue for the same
by bill, etc.

That the Forests, Chases, Commons and grounds shall be yearly driven at
Michaelmas, or within 15. days after, by the Lords, owners, or officers
thereof, and by the Constables, Bailies, Tethingmen etc. within whose limits,
the Commons and grounds are, upon pain of forty shillings to be forfeited by
every officer, at every time that the said drift shall be omitted, or not
effectually done.

And if in any of the drifts there shall be found any Mare, Filly, Fool, or
Gelding, that then shall be thought not able nor like to grow able to bear
foles of reasonable stature, nor to do profitable labors, by the discretion
of the more number of the said drivers, then the same shall be killed and
buried, or otherwise bestowed.

Stewards of Leets to enquire of all defaults and to certify the presentiments
unto the next quarter Sessions, or to the Custos Rotul. of the County, within
40 days after such presentment made, to be heard and determined by them, or
else

The Steward to forfeit 40 shillings.

Horses infect.
NOne shall have or put to pasture, any Horse Gelding or Mare, infect with scab
or mange into or upon any Commons or common fields, upon pain to forfeit to
the Lord of the Leet for every such Horse, etc. so infect, ten shillings.

This offense to be inquired and presented in the Leet as other common
annoyances.

Nota, this Statute in the most and fortilest shires of the Kingdom, does
limit 15 handfuls, and in the rest but 14.

And by the 21. Iac. ca. 28. in fine. This Stafor the breed and stature of
Horses, and killing of Fillies etc. shall not extend to Cornwall.

The life and spirit of all law does consist and depend upon the due execution
of it.

For which purpose there must be fit places and instruments of custody, and
correction for offenders, and an upright care and integrity in officers, for
performance of their duties.

Pillorie, etc.
EVery one who has view of Frankpledge, or the precincts and liberties of a
Leet, ought to have a Pillorie, and a Tumbrell, whereby to do justice, and
every Tything ought to have a Stocks, as well for the keeping and safe
detaining of offenders, until they be brought before Justices of peace or
other Magistrates, as also for the castigation of malefactors and disordered
persons, as Drunkards and others, or else five pound forfeited.

The often cited ancient Law of 51. Hen. 3. does injoyne an inquiry, if any
Steward or Bay liffe for any reward, shall remit the judgment of the Pillorie
or Tumbrell, and si habeant in villa pillorium debitae fortitudinis, etc. a
Pillorie of convenient strength, as appertains to the liberty of their
marker, which they may use (if need be) without bodily peril, either of man or
woman.

Constables, Ale-conners, etc.
IF any Constable, Aleconner, Bay liffe or any other officers within the
liberty, do not well and duly execute their offices, according to their
several oaths and duties.

Purveyer.
IF any Purveyer shall make any purveyance for the Kings house of any thing to
the value of forty shallings or under, 20 H. 6. ca. 8.
and not make ready payment to the party, It shall be lawful to the owners to
retain their goods, and to resist such Purveyers.

That every Constable, T^thiugman, or chief pledge of every Town, being
required, shall be assistant to such owner or seller, upon pain to yield unto
the party grieved the value of the things and double d^mmages 20. Her. 6. ca. 8.

Huy and Cry.
TO abate the power of Felons, it was commanded that Cries shall be solemnly
made in all Counties, Hundreds, markets, faires and other places of great
resort, and that immediately upon robberies and felonies committed, fresh suite
be made, from Town to Town, and from Country to Country, according to the
Statute of Winton. 13. Edw. 1. ca. 1.

In this service the Constables and Tethingmen have special interest, and
their contempt or negligence here inquirable.

Outcries made without cause.
But if any Huy and Cry be levied, or any outcry made without any ground or
cause, to the disturbance of the Country, and the peace of the people,
inquirable.

Watch and ward.
ALso the Constables ought to see, that the peace be kept, and watch and ward
observed from Assension day till Michaelmas, continually all night, from the
Sun setting, till the Sun rising, according to the number of the inhabitants of
the town 13 Ed. 1. c. 4.

And that search be duly made every month for unlawful games.

That the Statutes made against haunters of Alehouses and Drunkards, be duly
put in execution.

If the Constables have been remiss and delinquent in these or any other
things, touching any part or branch of his oath and office, It is presentable.

All Officers Defaults.
ANd so all other Officers whatsoever, which owe any suite and service to this
ancient Court, as Tethingmen or chief pledges, Surveyers of highwayes,
Searchers and Sealers of Leather and such others, according to the Customs and
Jurisdictions of several Courts.

The profit of the King or Lord of the Leet.
CErtum Letae. In most Leets there is a duty or common fine, called in some
place Certum Letae, payable to the Lord. The reason and Commencement of it is
before declared. If that or any custom, or du^tie be withdrawn, it is
presentable.

Mortmaine.
TO preserve the services, due of the Fees and tenures of Lands, 7 Ed. 1.
which at the beginning were provided for the defense of the Realm, and to
prevent the loss of the escheats of the same, It is ordained, that no person,
religious or other, shall presume to buy or sell any lands or Tenements, Or by
color of any gift, or term, or by reason of any other title whatsoever, or by
any craft or engine appropre to himself any lands or Tenements, whereby it may
in any wise come into Mortmaine, If any do offend it shall be lawful to the
King, and other chief Lords of the fee, immediate, to enter into the Land so
aliened, within a year, from the time of such alienation, and to hold it in
fee and as inheritance, and if the chief Lord immediate be negligent, then the
next chief Lord may enter within half a year after, etc.

Treasure Trove.
IF there be any Treasur-trove, viz. treasure put into the earth, and no man
knows who has hidden it, it belongs either to the King or the Lord, according
to the ancient rule of the Law.

Thesaurus inventus competit Domino Regi, et non Domino libertatis, nisi per
verba specialia in facto libertatis contenta, vel per praescriptionem,
antiquitus fuit inventoris, de jure naturali, nunc de jure gentium efficitur
Domini Regis.

Estreyes.
ALL Estreyes are here inquirable, that is, If there be any Horses, Piggs,
Hogs, Cattle or Swans, which have come within the Lordship, and been there a
year and a day, and not claimed, the Lord may have them by prescription.

But such beast ought first to be impounded, in an open pound, proclaimed in
three Market towns next adjoining, and then if none claim them, they shall be
seized, and ought to be put into some several land, and not into any covert
or wood, where the owner cannot find them.

For if they be in covert, the property is not altered, though they be there a
year and a day.

Wayfes.
CAtalla Waviata, when a thief upon huy and cry, and pursuit after him, or
else for ease of himself without huy and cry, does wave or derelinquish
(therefore called by the Civilians, bonaderelicta) the goods feloniously stoine
by him, or any part thereof, and slyeth away, the King or the Lord is to have
it, unless the owner of them do make fresh suite after the Felon to attaint
him for tho^ goods, which if he does, he shall have his goods again,
notwithstanding the wayving and seizing.

^ot note if Goods be stoine and wayved, yet the owner may rescise them 20
years after, if they were not formerly seized by an officer of the King or the
Lord of the liberty.

Fugam fecit.
IF any upon Indictment of murder before the Coroner be found quod sugam fecit,
or if any be indicted of Felonic and acquitted, and found that he sled, he
forfeits his goods to the King, and the Lord may claim them by Charter, but
not by prescription.

The old law, Si quis post fugam redierit and inno centiam suam purgaverit,
nihilominus facultates suae ap^d fiscum remanebunt.

Exigent.
IF Exigent be awarded against one Indicted in Felony, he forfeiteth his
goods, though he be after acquitted of the Felony, the King shall have his
goods, and the Lord by Charter, but not prescription.

Outlawes.
ALL persons outlawed in trespass, debt, or other personal actions, do
forfeit their goods to the King, and the Lord may have them by Charter.

Cleri Convicti.
ALL Clerks convict, men that have the benefit of their Clergy, and do
undergo the burning in the hand (called by the common law Cauterization) do
forfeit their goods notwithstanding.

By-Lawes.
ANy By-lawes for the common weal may be made in a Leer, and are good and will
lie against those that do not consent, as to make Cawseyes, Highwayes, Bridges,
and such like, 44 Ed. 3. so. 19. But a By-law to repair a Church, binds none
but such as do assent, vid. Co. 5. f. 63.

A Leer may make by-lawes, the Lord by prescription may distreyne for the
Amerciaments, and sell the distress: For the King may so do, and the Leet is
the Kings, although the Lord has the profits. Brook Leet 34. Prescription 40.

The Statute for view of Franckpledge made the eighteen year of King Edward
the Second.
FIrst, you shall say unto us by the oath that you have made, if all the Jurors
that owe suite to this Court be come, and which not.

And if all the chief pledges or their dosens be come, as they ought to come,
and which not.

And if all the dosens be in the assize of our Lord the King, and which not,
and who received them.

And if there be any of the Kings villains fugative dwelling otherwhere than
in the Kings demeanes, and of such as be within the Kings demeans, and have
not..hiden a year and a day.

And if there be any of the Lords villains in Frankpledge, otherwhere than in
this Court.

Of customs and services due to this Court withdrawn, how and by whom, and in
what Baylifes time.

Of Purprestures made in Lands and Waters to annoyance.

Of Walls, Houses, Dikes, and Hedges, set up, or beaten down to annoyance.

Of Bounds withdrawn and taken away.

Of Ways, and Paths opened or stopped.

Of Waters turned or stopped, or brought from their right course.

Of breakers of Houses, and of their receivers.

Of Petie Larens, as of Geese, Hens, or Sheafes.

Of I heeves that steal cleathes, or of Thieves that do pilfer clothes
through windows and walls.

Of such as go on message for thieves.

Of Cries levied, and not pursued.

Of Bloodshed, and if frayes made.

Of escapes of Thieves or Felons.

Of persons outlawed returned, not having the Kings warrant.

Of Women ravished not presented before the Coroners.

Of clippers and forgers of Atoney.

Of Treasure found.

Of the Assize of Bread and Ale^roken.

Of false measures, and of Bushels, Gallons, Yards and Else.

Of false Balances and Weights.

Of such as have double measure, and buy by the great, and sell by the less.

Of such as continually haunt Tavernes, and no man knows whereon they do
live.

Of such as sleep by day and watch by night, and fare well, and have nothing.

Of Cloth-sellers and Curriers of Leather, dwelling out of Merchant towns.

Of such as take Church or Churchyard, and after depart without doing that
which belongs there^nt^.

Of persons imprisoned, and after let go without maineprise.

Of such as take Doves in Winter by doorefals, or engines.

And of all these things you shall do us to wit, by the oath that you have
taken.

A note of the Statutes which are repealed, altered, or expired, since the time
wherein M. Kitchen wrote, which I thought fit to set down, in regard many of
them (I have observed) are frequently given in charge till this time.

The Statute of Cordweyners, 5 Eliz. ca. 8.

Repealed 1 Jacob. 22.

The Statute of Crow-nets for the destruction of Crows, Rookes, and Choughes,
24 Hen. 8.10.

Expired 8 Eliz. 15.

The Statute of Hats and Caps, 13 Eliz. ca. 19.

Expired 39 Eliz. 18.

The Statute against Riots, 1 Ma. ca. 12. continued 1 Eliz. 16. during the
Queens life, until the end of the next Parl ament following.

Expired, yet Riots are in juirable as an offense at the Common Law.

The Statute of Wynes, 7 Ed. 6. ca. 5.

Repealed in part 1 Iac. 25. as is before declared.

The Statute touching Horsbread, 31 H. 8.41.

Repealed by 22 Iac. Reg. 21.

The Statute of Apparel made 24. H 8. ca. 13. Repealed 1 Iac. 25.

The Oath of a Constable set forth by M. Kitchen with the additions mentioned
in the Statute of 21 Ja. which oath contains a short Epitome of the d^tie and
office of Constables
YOu shall swear, that you shall well and truly serve our Sovereign Lord the
King, in the office of Constable for this year now to come, you shall see that
his Majesty's peace be well and truly kept according to your power, and you
shall arrest all those whom you shall find committing riots, debates, or
affrayes, to the breach of the peace, you shall endeavor your self according
to your knowledge that the Statute of Winton. For watch, huy and cry, and the
Statutes made for the punishment of sturdy Beggars, Vagabonds, Rog^^s, and
other idle persons coming within your liberti^, be duly put in execution, and
that the offenders be duly punished, you shall also (upon complaint made unto
you) apprehend all Barrertois, and Riotous persons, and all Felons, and if any
of them do make resistance with force and m^ltitude of Malefactors, you shall
make outcrie and parsue them until they be taken. And you shall look and
search after such persons as use unlawful games, and you shall have regard
unto the maintenance of Artillery. And you shall well and truly execute all
such process and precepts as shall be directed unto you from his Majesty's
Justices of peace of the County or any his Highness Judges, Justices or
Officers whatsoever, and you shall well and truly present all bloodsheds,
outcries, affraies and rescues happening or committed within your liberty; you
shall also present all offenders and offerces against the Statute made in the
fourth year of our late Sovereign Lord King James, entitled, an Act to
repress the odious and loathsome sin of drunkenness; and also against the
Statute in the first Session of Parliament in the first year of his late
Majesty's reign, entitled, an Act to restrain the inordinate haunting and
tippling in Innes and Alehouses, and other victualling houses with the
alterations and additions contained in the said Act of the fourth year,
according to the alterations and additions of the Statute, made in the 21.
year of his said late Majesty's reign, entitled, an Act for the better
repressing of drunkenness, and restraining the inordinate haunting of Inns and
Alehouses, and other victualling houses; And lastly, you shall well and truly
do and execute all those and such other things as are incident and do belong
unto your office of Constable for this year now to come. So help you God.

FINIS.
AN EXPLANATION OF The old Oath OF LEGEANCE: CONSISTING Of these four general
Heads.

1 What Legeance, Ligeantia or Fides, is 2 The extent of it by this ancient
Oath, and the several parts and branches of the Oath. 3 The Modus Reddendi of
aids and supplies to the KING. 4 The Royal Office of the KING in the
protection of his people, confirmed at his Coronation.
Together with their several Subdivisions at large.

LONDON, Printed by Richard Badger 1641.

AN EXPLANATION OF THE ANCIENT OATH OF LEGEANCE.
AN Oath is an attestation or calling God to witness of the truth, touching
those things which we say, affirm, and promise to do, upon the holy
Evangelists, and before a lawful Magistrate, authorized to take such an Oath:
and that is a legal Oath.

There are two sorts of Legal Oaths used and practiced within this Realm
(viz.) Iuramentum consuctudinarium, warranted by the custom of the Realm,
which is no more than the Common Law. 2 Iuramentum Parliamentarium, an Oath
created and enacted by all the three States, as the Oath of Supremacy
prescribed 1 Eliz. cap. 1. and the Oath of Allegiance, 3 Jacob. 4.

And no Oath can be imposed upon the Subject but what is enabled by the usage
of the Common Law, or by an Act of Parliament.

This ancient Oath was in time very long before the great Charter, as in the
former tract is remonstrated. And bath been confirmed from time to time, in
and by Magna Charta: So that it has (...) power and vigor, both from the
common and commit^^^ laws of this Kingdom; The Oath (though once before
mentioned) does follow, viz.

Hear ye, that I. N. do swear that from this day forward, I will be true and
faithful to our Sovereign Lord the King and his heirs, and truth and faith
bear of life and member, and terrene honor. And I will neither know, nor
hear of any ill or damage intended unto him, that I will not defend. So help
me God.

This Oath contains a real protestation of every Subjects duty to his
Sovereign, and expressly declares what Subjection and Obedience ought to be
expected from them, and implicitly the office of the King toward his people,
which is protection, for it is truly said, That protectio trahit subjectionem,
and subjectio protectionem.

It is clear that the general obligation of subjection and duties from the
people, and the power and prerogatives royal in the Prince are included in the
law of God, and are part of the Law of Nature, whereto all Nations have
consented, which if I should Illustrate (as well I might) by innumerable
testimonies, presidents and examples, as well out of sacred Scriptures and
Fathers, as out of Heathen Writers, Historians and others, it would fill up a
larger volumne, than this Subject would require.

I am only to deal with that subjective faith and Legeance, which by the
provincial Laws of this land, which are (Generalis consuetudo Regni
Anglicae.) is naturally, and legally jure haereditario, due to the person and
royalty of his sacred Majesty.

This Legeance is derived to him from Lex aeterna, the Moral Law, called also
the Law of nature, part whereof the Law of England is, being first written in
Tabulis rectae rationis, in the heart of man; and the people by that Law
governed two thousand years, before it was published and written by Moses, and
before any judicial or municipall laws.

For the better informing of the vulgar sort of people herein (for whom it is
most convenient) I shall assay to present to the well affected reader some
collections to that end whereof I shall (as the matter will bear) endeavor an
orderly prosecution.

1 First, a general proposition what Legeance, ligeantia or fides, is. 2
Secondly, the extent of it, by this ancient Oath, and the several parts and
branches of this Oath. 3 The Modus reddendi of aides and supplies. 4 The Royal
office of the King, ad protectionem, for the protection of his people,
sacramentally confirmed at his Coronation.
1 Legeance is a true and faithful obedience of the Subject due to the
Sovereign, this Legeance and obedience is a due inseparable from the Subject,
and is called ligeantia naturalis, for as soon as he is borne, he owes by
birthright Legeance and obedience to his Sovereign, Ligeantia est vinculum
fidei, the bond or obligation of faith and loyalty. Master Skency, De verborum
significatione, verbo ligeantia, says, That it is derived from the Italian
word (liga) viz. a bond, league, or obligation.

As a great Lord Chancellor in the case of postnati said, That ligeantia
understood sensu currenti in the language of the time, is vincusum fidei and
obedientiae, the tie or bond of faith and obedience. And he that is borne in
any of the Kings dominions and under the Kings obedience is the Kings liege
Subject, and borne ad fidem Regis, That is (being the proper word used in the
Law of England) to be faithful to the King.

It extends further in all cases of denization, which is called ligeantia
acquisita, where any alien or stranger borne out of the Kings Dominions does
afterward by any common grant of the King, any Act of Parliament, or other
ways or means, obtain the freedom of a Subject within this Land.

Sometimes the extention of this word is yet larger for he that is an alien
born out of the Kings Dominions, ad fidem, or under the obedience of another
King, if he dwell within the Kingdom, and be protected by the King and his
laws, he is under the Kings Legeance, ligatus Regi^ and the reason is plain,
For if to such a person any injury is done, either in life, member, or estate,
the Law takes as severe an account, and inflicteth as severe a punishment upon
the offenders in such cases, as if the party injured had been subditus natus,
borne within his Majesty's dominions.

Then great reason, that such persons having the benefit of natural borne
subjects (which is protection from suffering any detriment or harm) should be
as free from acting and doing any wrong, for as they have idem beneficium, they
must have idem supplicium, as the same protection in good actions, so the same
correction in bad. It was Sherley the Frenchmans case, who being in amity, and
under the protection of King Philip and Queen Mary, joined and conspired with
d^^ers subjects of this Realm in treason against the King and Queen, and the
Indictment concluded, contra ligeantiae suae debitum; The case of Perkin
Warbeck, 15. H. 7. and of the Portugal adherents to Doctor Lopes in the 36.
year of Queen Elizabeth, might here be remembered to this purpose.

We have seen what Legeance is, 2. Branch.
let us consider the extent of it, in its explication by this ancient Oath,
which I may well term vinculum vinculi, or ligamentum ligaminis. That
Legeanee, Faith or Fealty, which is annexed by birthright, is by this Oath
solemnly explained, attested and confirmed, and is called legalis ligeantia,
established by the wisdom of ancient times, and had its beginning with the
national laws of this Island in the time of the Brittons. It is true that this
oath does not create the Legeance of a subject, but does demonstrate the fruits
of faith and obedience, which must ever be concomitant with subjection: For as
it was gravely observed in the book of Postnati, fo. 64. Subjectio, fides et
obedientia, must be in a true and lawful subject, of what Nation soever, and
cannot be severed, no more than true faith and charity in a true Christian.
And he that has these three from his nativitie is ligeus Regis, the Kings
Liege man. Hence I infer, that ligeantia is visibilis and invisibilis,
visible as to subjection and obedience, and invisible as to fidelity and
loyalty, this must be rooted in the heart, the other expressed in the action.
A man may be a s^^^ect borne and actuate an external obedience, yet Cordi
nulla sides, he may be disloyal in the heart, Therefore the sacred Scripture
inhibits the very thoughs of a man against Kings and Princes the Anointed of
God, Nolite tangere unctos meos, he does not say ne tangite, but nolite, have
not so much as a will to touch mine anointed, In cogitatione tua Regi^e
detrahas, deprave not the King even in thy thoughts. Many more precepts might I
here instance. To prevent the mis^^ivous events of disloyal imaginations, and
to confirm the Legeance of the heart, and to discover agnes and haedis, the
good from the bad subject, the prudent policy of pristine ages, invented
forms of oaths in most Kingdoms, as may be problably conceived. In this
Island of great Britain, this oath of Legeance was first invented by King
Arthur, At which time the Leet was called Folkemote (viz.) a meeting of the
people, and this appellation is retained in London to this day.

Amongst the Laws of King Edward the second, before the Conquest, it is thus
expressed, Omnes Principes and Comites, Proceres, Milites and liberi homines
debent jurare, etc. in Folkemote, and and fimiliter ownes Proceres Regni,
Milites, and liberi homines universi totius Regni Britanniae facere debent in
pleno Folkemote fidelitatem Domino Regi, etc. Hanc legem invenit Arthurus, qui
quondam fuit inclitissimus Rex Britonum. etc. Hujus legis authoritate expulit
Arthurus Rex Sacacenos and inimicos a Regno, etc. And by that means he did
settle and co-unite his whole Kingdom together, Ita consolidavit and
confideravit Regnum Britaniae universum super in unum. It is therefore said.
that Lex ista diu sopita fuit and sepulta, donec Edgarus Rex Anglorum illam
excitavit and erexit in lucem, and illam per totum Regnum firmiter observari
pracepit. This law was laid in a slumber and forgotten until King Edgar (who
is styled Rex pacificus) did revive and bring it to light, and commanded a
strict observation thereof throughout his Kingdom: For during the Heptarchie,
and until King Alfred had made the way for settling of a Monarchical
government it could not well take place, this oath afterward gre^ so useful
and advantageous for the absolute gove^ment of this Island, as that all the
Danes who were dispersed in their abode amongst the English, and refused to
submit to this oath, were all upon the Feast of S. Brice put to the sword, by
the politic directions of King Ethelred and his Council. Hujus legit
authoritate E^helredu^ Rox sub^to uno codem^, di^ per universum Regnum Danos
occidit.

For the same end and purpose, as is herein before remembered, was that oath of
Allegiance justly conceived in the high court of Parliament, holden An. tertio
Iacobi, upon the occasion of that horrid and dreadful Gunpowder treason, as
our late learned Sovereign, in his monitorie preface to all Christian Princes,
prefixed to his Apology for this oath, does averte. Horrenda illa and
prodigiosa conjuratio quae per tormentarii pulveris impetum destinabatur, de
cujus immanitate nulla unquam aetas conticescat. That most horrid and
prodigious Gunpowder conspiracy, whereof no age will ever be silent. And
further says his Majesty in that Apology, Nec in alium finem constitutum est
juramentum, quam ut inter fideles subditos and perfidos proditores discrimen
aliquod extaret. That this oath of Allegiance was constituted to no other end,
but to put a difference between faithful subjects and perfidious traitors.

This later is enlarged in the occasional particulars, but the general scope
thereof is tacitly and implicitly comprised, in that other ancient and well
digested oath, this maine difference stands between them, the former oath is
confined as topersons, time, and place; the later has its extention to all
persons, without any exception.

There is the like oath used in the civil or Imperial law, called juramentum
ligei, one of the old, another of a new invention, cited Lib 3. Summae
Hostiensis, fo. 773. and thus begins. Ego T. juro super sancta Dei Evangelia,
quod ab hac hora ero fidelis contra omnem hominem, etc.

The Civilians distinguish two sorts of oaths, Judicial, and Extrajudiciall.
And their oath of juramentum ligei vel fidelitatis, they rank in the number of
extrajudiciall oaths. But our ancient oath of Legeance, is, and well may be
accounted in the judicial number, and my reason is, whatsoever oath is
administered in a Court of Record, as the Leet, and before a judge of Record, as
the Steward is, and according to the prescript form of our common Law, is
judicial; whatsoever oath is administered praeter legem, and not according to
the precise rule of Law, is extrajudiciall. This oath is not so administered,
but juxta legem and normam legis, and therefore is not extrajudiciall. But why
do I endeavor to light a candle at noone, or to explain that which is plain
enough in it self?

1 First for the time, it is indefinite, and without limit from this day
forward. 2 The terminus a quo, you, every subject whom the Law injoynes, to
take this oath. 3 The qualities or properties required, that is, to be true and
faithful. 4 Terminus ad quem, to whom? To our Sovereign Lord the King, and
his heirs. 5 In what manner? And faith and truth shall bear of life and
member. That is (as in Calvin's case) until the letting out of the last drop of
our dearest heart blood. And I must add what is there omitted, And terrene
honor, That is the uttermost of our estate and livelihood. 6 The circumstance
of place where these duties of Legeance concerning our lives and estate ought
to be performed, it must be in all plaees whatsoever, without any
circumscription, for you shall neither know nor hear of any ill or damage,
etc. that, you shall not defend. The parts of this oath for the better
instruction of the common people, I shall sum up in this one proposition,
which I will presume briefly and succinctly to handle. Every subject must be
true and faithful to the King and his heirs, to the uttermost of his life,
and fortune, or estate.
1 The King has a double capacity in him, one a natural body, being
descended of the blood Royal of the Realm, which is subject to death,
infirmity, and such like.

2 The other is a politic body or capacity, so called, because it is
established by the policy of man; and in this capacity the King is esteemed
to be immortal, invisible, not subject to death, infirmity, infancy,
nonage, etc. This Legeance is due to the natural person of the King (which is
ever accompanied with the politic capacity, that is, the Crown and Kingdom)
And is not due to the politic capacity only, distinct from his natural, (as
by diverse reasons in Calvin's case is at large recited and resolved) For if that
distinction might take place, then would the faith, legeance, and obedience, of
every subject due to his Sovereign, be appropriated, regimini, non regenti, to
the government of a Kingdom, not to him that rules or governs. In the time
of Edward the second, at a Parliament holden at York, Hugh la Spencer, the
son being nominated and appointed, to serve the King in the office of
Chamberlein, did draw unto his adherence Hugh Spencer his father, and they both
usurping upon the Kings Royal power, and compassing about, to have the sole
government of the land to themselves, did traitorously contrive a declaratorie
writing, which they would have compelled the King to sign, purporting (amongst
other mischievous positions) That homage and oath of Legeance, was more by
reason of the Kings crown, (that is his politic capacity) than by reason of
the person of the King; whence they inferred these damnable and detestable
consequents.

1 If the King did not demsne himself by reason in the right of his Crown,
his leiges were bound by oath to remove him.

2 That sithence the King could not be reformed by suite of Law, that ought to
be done per aspertee, by asperitie of Compulsion.

3 That his leiges be bound to govern in aid of him, and in default of him.
All which execrable opinions were condemned by two Acts of Parliament, one in
the 14. year of the reign of the same king Edward the second; called Exilinm
Hugonis le Despensor patris and fili^, the other An. 1. Ed. 3. cap. 1. which
confirmed the banishment of these Spensers.

Legeance then by law of nature (before any judicial or municipall laws were
recorded or reported) is due to the sacred person of the king alone,
immediately, and without any intervallum or moment of time, and before the
solemnity of his Coronation, and so must remain to him and his heirs, and
entirely without any partnership with him, or any intermission in default of
him. and emnimode, by all ways and means.

It is due to his natural person, accompanied with his politic capacitis,
indistinctly without any partition or separation, and this oath is a political
confirmation of that Legeance.

It is due to him as he is mixta persona, anointed by the hand of the priest,
as he is supreme head under Christ, in all causes and ove^ all persons, as well
Ecclesiastical as Civil.

The qualities prescribed by this oath are naturally incident to Legeance,
verity, and fidelity, to be true and faithful, and they comp^ehend what
before is spoken of, faith, obedience, and subjection, faith unto his person,
obedience to his laws, Subjection to his government, or all, to all, faith,
subjection, and obedience to his person, laws, and government: By the ancient
laws of this Realm, this kingdom of England is an absolute Empire and
Monarchy, consisting of one head which is the king, and of a body politic
(which is the common wealth) compact and compounded of many and almost infinite
several members, all which the law divides into several parts, the Clergy,
and the Laietie, this Legeance requires a due observancie of all the Moral
laws, contained in both Tables of the Decalogue. To obey our king in the true
and sincere worship of God, according to the canonical discipline of the
Church, ratified by his regal authority. To obey him in abandoning all
apostasy from Christianity, heresies, schisms, factions, fond and fantastike
opinions, repugnant to the Orthodox doctrine of the Church. To obey him, in
acknowledging a supremacy in him, and a subordinate superiority in his
Ministers and Magistrates over his people. To obey him in all the rights of
distributive and commutative justice, in doing good, as works of mercy,
charity, and piety, and eschewing evil, that is all sorts of felonies,
fraud, force, deceit, and all offenses whatsoever, which derogate from, or
deprave the peace and government of the Realm. The performance of these duties
makes a true and faithful subject.

The latitude and extent of this verity and fidelity from the subject to the
Sovereign, is twofold, The extent this oath.
first of life and member; secondly, of terrene honor, wherein the prerogative
of the king is considerable generally according to the special law of nature,
called by some jus Gentium, and styled by our common law, lex rationis, the law
of reason, and more specially according to the municipall laws and customs of
this kingdom.

The King is pater patria., and every subject is bound by the law of nature to
hazard, and adventure, both life and member, for the safety of the King and
Country, either against privy and traitorous conspiracies, civil mutinies,
and dissentions, or hostile Invasions, or injust wars, or in the execution of
legal acts of justice. The Poet could say, Dulci est pro patria mori, a sweet
thing it is to die for our Country, and as sweet a thing it is to die pro
patre patria, for the father of our Country, for indeed both come to one.

There may be many causes of war, which when they are discussed, and
resolved by the King and State, the justness of them is not to be disputed by
every private person.

The end of all war should be peace, bellum geritur ut pax acquir atur.

1 It is just cause of war, when public negotiation and commerce is
interrupted or disturbed, and for recoverie of things wrongfully, and by force
taken fiom us by foreign enemies.

2 Or if any shall go about to usurp upon the Kings right of dominion, in any
of his kingdoms, It is just cause of war. After that David by Gods direction
went up to Hebron, and was anointed king over the house of Judah, upon the
death of Saul, he maintained a long war against Ishbosheth the son of Saul,
for usurping the kingdom of Israel, 2 Samuel 2.

The revenge of an injury or disgrace dispitefully done either to a Prince or
to his Ambassadors is likewise a good cause of war, when Naash the king of
the children of Ammon dyed, and Hanun his son succeeded in his stead, David
sent messengers to comfort him, upon the death of his father, their
entertainment was not suitable to their errand, Hanun by the advice of his
Princes took David's servants and shaved them, and cut off their garments in
the midst, a natibus us^^ ad pedes, and so sent them away.

For this great disgrace and abuse (the text faith grandem contumeliam
sustinuerunt) David did justly wage battle against the king of the Ammonites,
Chro. 1.19.

He did the like against Sheba the son of Bochri a man of Belial, for blowing
a Trumpet, and soliciting the men of Israel to revolt from David, to him.
Samuel 2. chapter 20. ^^^y other particulars might be here instanced.

Next how far the preeminence of a king (as to life and member) is to be
consid^red, Life and member considerable by the common and statute laws.
specially by the common and Stature laws of this kingdom; by the common and
positive laws of England, The subjects are bound by their legeance to go with
the king, and by the Commandment of the king, in his wars as well within the
Realm as without, and this does copiously appear by several statutes, which
seem to be but declarative of the common law, as 1 Ed. 3. cap. 7. which
mentions the conveyance of soldiers into Scotland, Gasconie, or elsewhere, 18.
Hen. 6. cap. 19. which makes it felony, If any Soldier retained to serve the
King in his wars, does not go with, or do depart from his Captain without
license, the preamble of the Statute tells us, that the Soldier, so doing, did
as much as in them was, decay the honor and reverence of the king; And by the
Statute of 7. Hen. 7. cap. 1. Forasmuch as the offense of departing or not
going, did stretch to the hurt, and jeopardie of the king, the nobles of the
Realm and all the Common weal thereof, therefore he or they so offending
should not enjoy the benefit of Clergy. By the Statute 11. Hen. 7. cap. 1. It
is expressed, that the subjects of this Realm, are by reason of their
allegiance bound to serve the Prince, from the time being in his wars for the
defense of him and the land, against every rebellion, power, and might, reard
against him, either within the land or without, and this statute together with
some others were adjudged, Trin. 43. Eliza. to be perpetual acts and not
transitory for the kings time only wherein they were made.

As peace is the true end of war, so peace, must be preserved, that war may
be avoided; In the times of peace, there must be preparations for war, by
causing musters, and martial meetings, to be assembled at times convenient.
And therein the Lievtenants their Deputies of each several County, with
Muster-masters, and other subalterne officers have a special interest of
employment, and therefore provision was made, 4. and 5. P. and M. for the
better ordering of Musters, Captains, and soldiers. In the time of peace, the
common and municipall law of this kingdom provides for suppressing of all
rebellions, insurrections, and rietous assemblies, To which end the king
commits the custody of each county to an officer very ancient, with us called
a Sheriff, who for the service of the king, and peace of the country, has
power to raise the power of his county. And every subject is bound to attend
him, as the kings deputy, in causes of public service, warranted by the
laws: and this officer is to dwell in his proper person within his Baylywicke,
that he may the more readily attend the kings service.

The second point is, terrene honor, Terrene honor what it is
and herein I must walk warily, passibus aquis. First must be determined what
is meant by terrene honor. Some would have it to be the outward worship and
ceremonial honor, that we can do in this world to the king, next to the
service of God. If that were only intended by these words, it were but a shadow
in regard of substance, for in devoting our life and blood, is comprehended the
highest pitch and streyne of honor that might be; Our Savior Christ his
words, Matthew. 6.25, Is not life more worth than meat? and the body than
raiment? will fully satisfy us, that the life of man is above all worldly
riches, and honors; and therefore something else must be conceived out of
these words, more than a shadow, or ceremony.

By the first commandment of the second table, in the subdivision of the
persons to whom honor is due, there is in the opinion of many Divines, a kind
of particular honor or esteem to be ascribed to a man who is more wealthy than
his neighbor, in regard of the talent of terrene riches wherewith God has
endowed him, and thereby enabled him to supply the King and the common weal, by
rendering his respective dues and duties unto them, in a larger proportion than
other persons who are inferior in their worldly means, Dat census honores.
Then sithence all riches, wealth and substance, are called terrene, quiae
terris and terrenis accrescant, because they proceed and have their being out
of earth and earthly things; and are the causes of particular honor, and
esteem, and of distinguishing the degrees of men, as husbandmen, Yeomen,
Gentlemen, Esquires, and the like, and also of cradesmen, both of Merchandise,
and manufacture, according to the customs of this Kingdom.

It will follow by good consequence, that, as the King is to be honored and
obeyed with life and member, so with earthly substance, according to the
demension thereof, and the degree of each man's earthly honor; Saint Paul in
the general cleares this point of prerogative, jure divino, Romans 13. Omnis
anima potestatibus sublimieribus subdita sit, etc. Let every soul be subject
to the higher power, For there is no power but of God, verse 2. whosoever
therefore resists the power, resists the ordinance of God, And the Apostle
pursues it with Ideo necessitate subditi estote, etc. verse 5. Wherefore ye
must needs be subject, not only for wrath, but also for conscience sake,
Verse 6. For this cause pay you tribute also, For they are Gods Ministers
attending continually upon this verything: Verse seven. Reddite ergo, Render
therefore to all their dues, tribute to whom tribute is due, custom to whom
custom, fear to whom fear, honor to whom honor: By this text, me
thinks the very words terrene honor, is sufficiently explained in the
general word debita, dues, specified in the particular words tribute, custom,
etc. One thing more is worthy consideration, upon that of Romans 13. the
generality of the Apostolical edict, Omnis anima subdita sit, etc. No person
either of Clergy or Laietie is here excepted. Though Bellarmine and other
Romish Champions, would have bona clerici tam Ecclesiastica quam sacuularia,
the goods of an Ecclesiastical man, as well spiritual astemporall, to be free
from tribute unto secular princes, yet by their favor, both by the law of God
and the law of nations (and then by our common law no man doubts it) all
Ecclesiastical persons (as they make a part of the common wealth) are subject
to their prince, as well in their secular goods, whether they be patrimonialia,
seu mobilia, without any manner of exemption, nay such goods as we call
Ecclesiastical, being within the dominion of the prince (who has a general
charg of conserving all subjects goods) ought to be charged with necessary dues
and duties to the king. For if they be (as they are) upon judgments liable for
the payment of debts to particular persons, then a fortiori to the king for
tributes, taxes and subsidies. And great reason, for they have the same
protection, with some more privilege, and therefore ought to acknowledge the
same subjection due to him.

To add something more to terrene honor, and the explanation thereof, it must
signisie so much as the first word of the fifth Commandment implies, Honor a
patrem, etc. It is received amongst all Divines, that under the names of patris
and matris, are meant not only our natural but our civil parents, as Kings
and Princes and others constituted in authority under them; and by the word
Honor, is not intended a bare outward respect, but reverence attended with
fear, honor been faciendi, timor male agendi.

This word honor does first include all those duties, which we own, not only
to our natural parents, but to our prince, who is Pater civilis, and the
duties are respectively these, viz. love, observance, worship, obedience, aid,
and supply, in relieving their necessities, and all this must be done, cord,
ore, and opere, in thought, word, and deed.

The second duty, to pay their dues unto their princes, willingly and freely
without coffeehouse, tribute to whom tribute. etc. and what ever payment
else is necessary, for the maintenance of their estate, partly that they may
be able to repress enemies, and rebels, and partly, that having sufficient
maintenance from the people, they may not be distracted, but bend their whole
endeavor to the good government and protection of their Subjects. S. Ambrose
commenting upon that 13. to the Romans, citing the words of our Savior Christ
in S. Matthew ca. 22. Reddite que sunt Caesarts, Caesari. Give unto Caesar that
which is Caesar's, does interre, Huic ergo (viz. Principi) subjtetends sunt,
sicut Deo, cujus subjectionis probatio hac est, cum illi pendunt tributa vel
(faith he a little before) quae dicuntur siscalia, Therefore the people must be
subuject unto their prince, as unto God: The proof, (or badge, or cognizance)
of our subjection is, that we pay tribute, or such things or duties, as are for
the supply of the kings treasury, customs, tributes, subsidies, and all other
dues and duties, are therefore rendered unto the prince, as a token and
argument of subjection, whereby his subjects testify that they are truly
thankful for the protection which they receive from the powers which are from
God.

A modern writer upon the Pandects of the Law of Nations, Fulbeck.
cap. 10. maintains, (and well he may) that in the law of tributes, subsidies,
and prerogatives Royal, all nations have consented; And as (says he) it
behooves every Monarch to have a watchful care of his subjects good, and bend
the force of his mind to the preservation and maintenance of their safety,
and good estate: So subjects should not grudg to pay unto them tributes, and
subsidies, and other public impositions, that all necessary charges may be
substantially defrayed, all convenient designs produced into act, and
condignely executed.

By an Act of parliament, 1 Elizab. cap. 3. touching the recognizing of Queen
Elizabeth to the Crown, Stat, 1, Eliz.
It is there declared by all her subjects, representing the three estates of
this Realm, that they, as thereunto constrained by the law of God and man, did
recognize her Majesty's right, title, and succession to the Crown, and did
hereby promise, that they would assist and defend her Majesty, and her rights,
and titles, in, and to her imperial estate, crown, and dignity, in all
things thereto belonging, and at all times to the uttermost of their powers,
and therein to spend their bodies, lands, and goods, against all persons
whatsoever, that in any thing should attempt the contrary.

By the like Act Anno primo Iacobi, purporting a recognition, Stat. 1. Iac.
that the Crown of England was lawfully descended to king James his progeny
and posterity, his Highness subjects did thereby acknowledge his Majesty's
lawful descent to the imperial Crown of all his Realm, ^and his goodness,
and ableness, to protect and govern them in all peace and plenty, and
thereunto did humbly and faithfully submit, and oblige themselves their heirs,
and posterities for ever, until the last drop of their blood were spent.

In Magna Charta, ca. 14. no man is to be amercied, but according to the
quantity, and quality, of the offense. A freeman saving to him his
contenement (that is his free hold-lands) A merchant likewise, saving to him
his merchandise, and a villain or bondsman, saving to him his waynage (or
gainure) as it is 3. Ed. 1. cap. 6. that is his land which he held in
villenage; and the reason of this salvo, was (as is justly conceived) that
these things might be respectively enjoyed by the owners of them, and thereby
they might have where withal to sustain themselves and their families, and to
pay their duties to their princes. It is most infallibly true, and no man can
justly impugn it, That the King has power as well of terrene honor, that is a
man's estate, as of his life.

1 By the law of God, as a sign or Character of our subjection. 2 By the law
of nature, as a testimony of regardfull thankfulness, for his vigilant and
assiduous care, pains, and protection. 3 By our own provincial laws, as the
sinews of the states preservation. Thesaurus regis, securitas plebis, The
Kings treasury, is the peoples security. Money is the strength of a State.
But de mode reddendi, the manner of rendering to our prince his dues, 2 Branch,
De ^odo^reddendi.
according to the true meaning of this ancient oath of Legeance, is the
difficult question, S. Pet. 1.6, 2. v. 13. gives this monition, Submit your
selves to every ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether is be to the King
as supreme, verse. 14. or unto governors as unto them that are sent by him,
etc. Though by the rule of S. Paul the substance of every princes power, is the
ordinance of God, yet the specification of the circumstances thereto belonging,
as in regard of places, persons, Jurisdiction, subordination, and the rest, is
an humane ordinance, introduced by custom, or positive law. Hence I will
deduce this general position. That all subjects are bound by duty and
legeance to their princes, to render to them civil obedience, and their dues,
and duties, according to the laws and customs, of that kingdom wherein they
live, then by consequence, the subjects of great Britain to their gracious
Sovereign, according to the Laws and customs of our Nation.

To capitulate here all the casual dues, and duties, annexed to his
prerogative, as forfeitures, escheates, confiscations, or such like, or
wardships, marriages, primer seisin, and many more at large recited, and
declared by the statute, entitled, Prarogativa Regis, published in the 17
year of Ed. 2. Or to make particular rehersall of other ordinary dues, as
customs, aid and such like, were clearly out of the scope of my intention.
But faithfully to deliver by what ways and means the king may require any
extraordinary aid, and supply out of each subjects particular estate, or
terrene honor, hic labor, hoc opus est.

Some not well affected to the constant government of this kingdom, The
payments of dues and duties most proper by Parliamentary gift.
would have the kings necessities, supplied by impositions, and taxes to be
raised and levied by the kings mere and absolute power, without any commitiall
consent of peers, and commons; others more orthodox (if I may so term it) to
the happiness of his Majesty, and tranquillity of the State, do hold, (and
so it has been declared by ancient and modern parliaments) that a
parliamentarie gift, subsidy or supply, be it of what name soever, from the
subject to the King, is most proper and competible, with the ancient rule and
government of our kingdom. The very name of parliament is sacrum quoddam, and
the nature of it most sublime, and so long as the members are in unity with
the head, most absolute and illimited.

The kingdom of England is a most ancient Monarchy, under the rule and
government of a Supreme Liege Sovereign, conform, and according to the peculiar
laws, and customs of the nation, confirmed by several Parliaments: and
whereas all other nations, as Bracton faith, Lib. 1. Cap. 1.
were governed by written laws, Sola Anglia usa est in suis finibus jure non
scripto and consuetudine, in en quidem ex non seripto, jus venit, quod usus
comprobavit. Sed absurdum non erit leges Anglicanas (licet non scriptas) leges
appellare, cum legis vigorem habeat quicquid de consilio, and consensu magnatum
and reipublicae communi sponsione, authoritate Regis sive principis
praecadente, jucte fuerit definitum and approbatum, England only is ruled by a
law not written, and by custom which by usage has been approved; and it were
absurd (because not written) not to call them laws, inasmuch as whatsoever by
the counsel and consent of the Peers and commons, and by the kings royal
authority shall be determined and allowed, has the power and virtue of a
law. Herein we may observe an authentike description of a parliament, I cannot
pass by the word Quicquid, there is some remarkable energie, in the
generality of it, that must not go without a Quisquid.

Some would have religion and Ecclesiastike persons (and do not stick to murmur
loudly of it) exempt from all parliament power: All persons and causes subject
to Parliament,
but our Author (who wrote in the later time of Hen. 2. well nigh 380 years
agone, not long after King John had coactedly delivered over his royal Crown
into the hands of the Popes Legate, and thereby admitted papal encroachments of
jurisdiction in this kingdom) although with the common errors of those times,
he seemed to advance pontisiciall power, in Ecclesiastical causes, here ( cui
scil. Papae, alioqui invictissimi etiam Imperatores and Reges cesserunt, as it
is said in the prologue to Bracton, yet he brings all jurisdictions and matters
whatsoever with his Quicquid within the cognizance and power of parliament.

A parliament is the supremest Court of Justice in this kingdom, Parliament
the supremest court of justice.
an assembly of the King, the Lords and peers and the Commons of the Realm;
The word Parliament is a French word and signifies originally as much as
colloquium, a conference or treaty between the King and his Subjects. I^ ^is
great Court the kings of England have ever had authoritatem praecedentem, as
Bracton notes before as well in regard of their natural persons having
supremacy and preeminent, precedencie, over and above all persons, as of their
politic capacity, and have the sole and only power to call and convene
parliaments, and to do all other kingly offices. And they had and ever have
potectatem subsequentem, a power to ratify and confirm such acts, and laws,
and Statutes whatsoever, as are treated and agreed upon by the peers and
commons. The king, as learned Cambden observes, and has it from Bracton,
supremam potestatem and merum imperium apud nos habet, nec in imperii clientela
est, nec in vestituram ab alio quovis accipit, nee prater Deum, superiorem
agnoscit. In short, the king is supreme over and above all persons and owneth
no superior but God.

The parliament is called by writs of summons directed to each peer of the
land, The calling of the parliament
and by writs of summons directed to the Sheriffs of each several county.
And it is called by the advice and consent of the kings council: but note, the
king of England is armed with diverse Councels.

One which is necessarieto be explained, called Commune Concilium, in all writs
and proceedings, and that is the high Court of parliament.

A second, which is grande or magnum concilium, which is sometime applied to
the upper house of parliament, sometimes out of parliament to the peers of the
realm, Lords of parliament.

Thirdly, he has his legale concilium, his judges of the law for law matters.

The Fourth and last, and not the least is the kings privatum concilium, his
privy Counselors of State. The king has, as all the kings of England ever
had his sacros and secretos consiliarios, his sacred guard of privy
Counselors, Majorum et sapientissimorum e regno: Amongst whom he fitteth in
person and moderates their consultations in imitation of the precepts and
presidents recorded in holy Scripture,

Where no counsel is, the people fall, but in the multitude of counselors
there is safetic, Prove. 11.14.

Every purpose is established by counsel, and with good advice make war,
Prove. 30.18.

Moses had Iethro and Aaron, Joshua the son of Nun, his successor, Caleb and
Eleazar the high priest for his privy counselors: David had his succession of
counselors, Samuel the prophet, Jonathan whose love to him was wonderful,
Abiathar the priest, and Nathan also a prophet, with many others. To return to
our own nation, king Ine had his Cinredus, whom he calls his father, Hedda
and Erkenwald his bishops, with many others, Alfred had his Plegmund Archbishop
of Canterbury, Werefridus Bishop of Worcester and others, Athelstane edicted
his laws Ex prudenti Vlfhelmae Archiepiscopi aliorumque Episcoporum consilio,
by the counsel of his Archb. and other Bishops, and so successively the kings
of England ever had as before, their privy counsel, such and so many as the
prince shall think good, who do consult daily, or when need is, of the
weighty matters of the Realm, to give therein to their prince the best advice
they can. The prince does participate to them all, or so many of them as he
shall think fit, such legations, and messages as come from foreign princes,
such letters or occurrents as be sent to himself, or his secretaries, every
Counselor has a particular oath of faith and secrecy administered to him,
before he be admitted a privy counselor.

To show the extraordinary regard, and royal use of the kings counsel. The
regard ^ the Privy counsel.
Let us look back upon the case of 5. Hen. 4. upon an agreement for an
exchange had for the Castle of Barwick, between the king and the Earl of
Northumberland, wherein the king promised to deliver the Earl lands and
tenements, to the value of that Castle by these words, per avise and assent des
estates de son Realm and son Parliament, etc. By the advice and assent of the
estates of his Realm (So as the Parliament be before the feast of S. Luke) or
otherwise by the assent of his great Counsel, and other estates of his Realm,
whom the king shall assemble before the said Feast, in case there be no
parliament before, etc. as by the instrument thereof dated at Lichfield 27.
Aug. 5. Hen. 4. remaining in the Tower may appear. To this counsel the
Oracles of the Common law, the grave and reverend Judges, Leges loquentes
Reipublicae (God grant in all Successions they may be so) have had their resort
from time to time, in all ages, for advice and directions in their proceedings,
as well in criminal causes, as in matters of right and property, as it was
observed by the learned Lord Chancellor, I will touch but two which are cited
by that honorable Judge in cases of property. Thomas Vghtred Knight, brought
a Forme-don against a poor man and his wife; They came and yielded to the
demandant, which seemed suspicious to the Court, the matter being examined,
judgment was stayed, because it was suspicious. And Thorp said, that in like
case of Giles Blacket it was spoken of in Parliament: And (faith he) we were
commanded that when any like case should come, we should not go to judgment
without good advice: wherefore sue to the council, and as they will have ^s to
do, we will, and otherwise not in this case. 2. Green and Thorpe were sent by
the Judges to the Kings Council, (where there were twenty four Bishops and
Earls) to demand their advice, touching the amendment of a writ, upon the
Statute of 14. Ed. 3. cap. 6. which was an Act made for amending of Records,
defective by misprision of Clerks.

By the advice and assent of this Council, is that great and common Council
solemnly called. The form of the writ of Summons to the Sheriff, follows in
these words. Rex viz. S. etc. Quia sie avisamento and assensu Concilii nostri,
pro quibusdam arduis, and urgentibus negotiis, nos, Statum, and defensionem
Regni nostri Angliae, and Ecclesiae Anglicanae concernentibus, quoddam
Parliamentum nostrum apud Civitatem nostram: W. etc. teneri ordinavimus, Et
ibidem cum praelatis, Magnatibus, et Proceribus dicti Regni nostri colloquium
habere, et tractare. Tibi, etc. wherein these things are worthy observation.

1 That this great Court is assembled by the power of the King, expressed in
his writ under his great Seal, with Test meipso. 2 This power is extended
with the advice and assent of his Right Honorable privy council.
His grace, favor, and providence by calling a Parliament to parlee and treat
with his Lords spiritual and temporal, as also with his commons, who by their
Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, as their respective proxies, elected by, and
with the popular suffrage of the Freemen of every County, City, Town, or
Borough, do make up the body of that great court, and do there meet to yield,
and consent unto such matters, as shall be there treated and established.

4 The subject of a treaty or parliament: That is, certain difficult, and
urgent occasions, concerning his Majesty, his royal state, and the defense of
his kingdom and Church.

This high court consists of two honses, The higher or upper where the King
and his Barony, or Nobility spiritual and temporal, do take their place: And
the lower house, where the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, are assembled for
the Commons, consisting, when M. Crompton wrote his jurisdiction of Courts, of
439. persons. The King had the only power to appoint it, his gracious favor is
to give life, and beginning to it, by his own personal access, in most
Royal state, And as sinis coronal opus, he crowns and perfecteth all the
Acts of this great assembly with his Royal assent, without which no bill can
pass, nor law be made.

Though there be no written Acts of parliament extant before the reign of
Henry the third, yet some have sollicitously labored to draw the Antiquity of
this thrice excellent court of Parliament from King Arthurs time to king Ine,
Offa, Ethelred, Alfred and others, before the Conquer our, with a successorie
continuance until this Present age, and collected, and inferred, that the
words used by K. Inas in the proem of his laws exhortatione, etc. Omnium
Aldermannorum mcor'um, and seniorum sapientum Regni mei. And the like words of
Offa, and other kings, in the time of the heptarchie, and that the words of
Conventus sapientum, used by King Edward the son of Alfred; the words of
Conventus omnium Nobilinm and sapientum, used by King Athelftane; cum consilio
sapientum, used by king Edgar, Haec instituerunt Rex and sapientes, mentioned
of King Ethelred, and the like of other Kings, should include the Lords and
Commons of the parliament; whether this most eminent Court were in those
ancient days assembled and exercized in that manner, as now it is, dubium est,
dubitare liceat, doubtfullnesse is a fluctuation of the mind, which in
historical matters of indifferency, that concern not our Christian faith and
legeance to our Savior, nor our natural or civil Legeance to our Sovereign,
cannot be interdicted to the poorest thoughts; Sure I am this Court is so
ancient, and of such transcendent honor and justice, as Plow.com.fo. 399.
observes, that none ought to imagine any dishonorable thought of it; and why?
It must be so esteemed ratione person regis, by reason of the kings sacred
person, who is there present and president of that great Assembly, as also the
laws there made, are established by the general consent, and are obligatorie
both to king and people.

The parliament being called, with the advice and consent of the privy
Council, what is the end of their meeting? Sir Thomas Smith in his Common
wealth of England, l. 2. c. 2. shall speak for me.

The Parliament (the Kings Royal assent being had, Power of a parliament.
abrogateth old laws and makes new, gives order for things past, and things
after to be followed, changes the right and possessions of private men,
legitimateth bastards, establishes forms of religion, gives form of
succession to the Crown, defines of doubtful rights, whereof no law is
already made, appoints subsidies, tails, taxes, and impositions, gives most
free pardons and absolutions, restores in blood and name, with many such
preheminences.

In this great assembly, no reviling nor nipping words must be used: And if any
speak unreverently or sediciously against the Prince or the privy Council,
they have not noly been interrupted, but justly sent unto the Tower, by the
autho^^tie, of the house: those that be members of that body, must come with a
prepared heart to consult together, to give counsel and advertisement what is
good and necessary for the common weal, they must come with cheerful
resolutions to supply the prince his wants, they must cast off all rancor,
spleen, and private malignancie, for locus facer est.

I will second it with the words of a great Judge. Co. Inftit. fo. 110. a.


The jurisdiction of this Court, makes, inlargeth, diminishes, abrogateth,
repealeth, and reviveth laws, Statutes, Acts, and Ordinances, concerning
matters Ecclesiastical, Capital, Criminal, Common, Civil, Martial,
Maritine, and the rest.

What cannot a parliament do (as a great peer once told Queen Elizabeth)
Royal assent being had? was it not then a heinous and inexcusable crime, for
any man entrusted with the laws, publicly to declare, that the late
imposition of Ship Money was a prerogative so inherent in the Crown, as that
it could not be taken away by Act of parliament? It is most repugnant not only
to the works and writings of the ancient heroes of the law, Bracton, Fritton,
Fortescue, and others, but also to the opinions of grave and learned modern
Writers, and dead and living Judges. But that opinion, and all the proccedings
upon the Shipwrits are in this present parliament condemned and disanulled, 17.
Car. cap. 14.
and the petition of right in every particular confirmed.

To add something more; Bellarmine (after many sharp writings and vehement
disceptations in defense of merits and works of supererogation) his age
hastening his end, now bethinks himself, falls wholly from disputes of merits,
to pious meditations, and therein presents unto the world, Tutissimum est iter
ad calum per merita Christi; The safest way to heaven, is by the merits of
Christ. An honorable peer, as great in the policy of our English state, as
ever the other was in the Romish Church, was formerly a great Zelote for the
liberties and welfare of the common people, and an earnest prosecutor of the
petition of right. Afterward in the highest of his eminent advancements,
relapsing and disaffecting the course of parliaments, whose examination and try
all his actions could not well endure, mole tandem ruit sua, is at length
hurried down with the weight of his own greatness. And not long before his
death ingenuously confessed, That the Parliaments of England were the happiest
constitution that any kingdom did ever live under, and under God the best
means to make King and people happy. And sowith his dying words (omitting the
numerous privileges of that high Court) I conclude this part.

THE KINGS Royal office OF PROTECTION.
I Shall proceed to the last of my Generals, that is, The Royal office of the
King for the protection of his people. I have touched before his personal and
politic capacity, and the natural Legeance and Subjection of the people to
him, and principally in the right of payment, their dues and duties, and the
great question de modo reddendi.

As Legeance is due from the Subject to the King before the Oath be taken, and
the Oath is but a visible demonstration of it, So there is a Protection, due
from the king to the people, before the oath administered to him at his
Coronation, and that oath is but a political expression, of what by the law of
God and nature, and the laws of our nation, appertains to his Kingly office.
It is observed upon the sift Commandment, Vbi sanciuntnr officia inferiorum
erga superiores, And. Rivet in 5. Praec. Decal.
ibidem etiam superiorum ergainferiores sanciri, where subjection is jojoyned
there protection is employed.

As the Subjects must be true and faithful to the King of life, member and
terrene honor: So the King must be as true to them in the protecting of all
these: and their liberty and proprietiein all these, viz. the liberty of
their lives, of their religion, of their persons, and the property and right
of their lively hood and estates in their lands and goods, all which may be
comprehended under this one word liberty, dulce nomen and res dulcis B^t what
is liberty? What liberty is
It is a freedom, or free and quiet enjoying of a man his spiritual and
temporal estate, his bona animi or animae, and his bona fortunae from rapine,
expilation and all unjust encroachments, restrains, confinements, imprisonments
and oppressions whatsoever, and that part of our Law which concerns the
Subjects liberty is commonly called in the Law books, Lex terrae.

Liberty is the only preserveresse of a Christian Common wealth in incolumitie
and stabilitie, And as one says, Rebus omnibus humanis Anteponenda pro
illiusque incolumitate, and integritate totis viribus, and opibus dimicandum;
It is to be preferred before all humane affairs, and the safery and
entirement of it to be prop^gned and defended with all manner of strength and
power. But liberty must have its modum, and mensuram. It must be with an It a
tamen cum justitia, dignitate, praesidio, and reliquis reipulbl^cae ornamentis
sit conjuncta, It is and must be joined with lustice, Honor, aid, and the rest
of the Ornaments of a Commonwealth; That is true liberty which is joined or
affianced with uptight reason; And he is a true Freeman which has such reason
for his guide in all his actions.

Reason is radius divini luminis, the luster of a divine illumination; It is
the stamp of Gods Image in man, it renders man glorious in pre-eminence above,
and in Dominion over all other Creatures; In the participation of its
faculties, it makes one man more excellent, and eminent than another.

Liberty is a word of generality, excensive and appropriative to all Common
weal ^hs, Secundum modum, and so to be used and squared according to the
general law of N^tions. And it is defined by Bracton thus, Bract. l. 1. c. 6.
Number. 2.
Est autem libertas naturalis facultas cjus quod cuique facere libet, n^si quod
jure aut vi prohibetur, It is a natural faculty of every man to do
whatsoever he pleases; but what he is prohibited by Law or Arms. Freedom
says Fortescue is graffed in man's Nature by God, whereof if a man be deprived,
he is ever desirous to recover the same again, as all other things do that
are spoiled of their natural liberty; But more particularly there is a
National Liberty which must be regulated by its own peculiar and prescript
Laws; Let us instance our own British or English Nation, wherein we enjoy a
twofold liberty, the one Evangelicall, or Christian, which is our Religion; the
other Civil, or Political, our estates and livelihood: This Liberty is no so
free of it self, nor so large in its extent, but that it must be confined
under the wardship of the Law.

Lex igitur sit custos Libertatis, Law the Guardian of liberty.
que summis and insimis aequa reddat and praescribat jura. Nilcontra leges
committatur quod impune fiat, in al^enam dignitatem, fortunas, vitam denique
nemo temere invadat. Quod quis habet, illud se habere existimet, Let the Law be
the Guardian of Liberty, which may render and administer equal right, both to
high and low. Let no man transgress the Law with impunity, nor rashly assail
another man's estimation, life nor livelihood; And every man know himself to
be owner of what he has.

This last species is a most real property of true liberty, and a great
happiness indeed both to KING and People, that the people may know what they
have of their own to render to the King for his timely supplies; And the King
be ^ssured of their ableness and readiness with the^^ uttermost means to
support his great and weighty office of Protection.

A man may behold the emblem of true l^bertie in Jacobs Ladder. Angels
ascending, and descending, Angels of Legeance and Obedience, ascending to the
Throne of Majesty: Angels of Peace, Grace and Protect on, descending from the
Sovereign to the Subject. O quam exim^um and drvinum libertas est bonum, quod
omne vivens expetit, and sine quo nihil jucundum, nihil suave, nihil ^harum
cuiquam esse possit, Ac ne ipsa quidem vita vitalis^^se videatur, pro qua nemo
unquam bonus mori dubitavit, Oh what most excellent and divine good is Liberty,
which every living creature desires and affects, without which, nothing can be
pleasing, nothing comfortable, nothing can be dear to any man; Nay life it
self will seem to be no life.

And for support of this liberty, what good man would grudge to die. It is the
Mother and Nurse of all resplendent virtues, the Mistress of all liberal. Arts,
and Sciences, the beauty of Peace, and the Theater of Justice, This makes the
King splendently radious at home, and formidable abroad.

He that will behold liberty in its true luster, must cast his eye upon its
opposite; A base, asinary servitude and servile subjection. But what sort of
servitude I now mean, may be a question.

There are diverse several sorts of Servitude, Three sorts of Servitude.
There is,

1 Servitus creata constituted by the Law of Nations, whereby a man becomes
subject to another man's power and dominion, contrary to nature, and is called
so a servando, non a serviendo, from their safety, not from their service, For
in ancient times Princes were wont to sell their Captives who were subdued by
Wars, thereby to save and not slay them.

2. Servitus Nata, which was a bondage or service introduced in this kingdom
in all probability from the Law of Nations, and so by Native propagation they
were called Nativi and Nativae, and their service grew to be a tenure in
Villenage which was incertaine and indeterminate, they were bound to do,
whatsoever they were commanded, by their Lord, and did not know over night,
what they should do in the morning; yet this servitude was legal, because
warranted by the Laws of the Land. They were under the protection of the King,
whosoever killed any such person was to undergo the same judgment as if he
killed a Freeman. Neither of these are within the Scope of any of my
intentions, but a far worse.

1. Servitus lib^ris imposita, or libert as in servitutem redacta, a bondage
imposed upon Freemen, or liberty reduced to slavery, which whosoever shall
attempt to effect, do as much as in them lie compass the subversion of the
laws of Nature, the Laws of God, the fundamental Laws of the Land, the
incomparable glory of the King, and the welfare of the people; Liberty says
Bracton is evacuatio servitutis, an emptying out or voyding of servitude, Et
contrario modo s^se recipient, and ideo simul non morantur; There is such an
antipathy between them, that they never abide together.

Arbustum geminos non capit Erythacos. Where such servitude has its residence,
in what Nation soever, there is no Justice, no perfect virtue, no Valor, no
Arts, no Sciences, no Doctrine, no Discipline, no Law, no property, Ibi homines
ipsi (says one) dimidium animi perdunt, their lives and Conditions are
irksome to themselves, unusefull, and unprofitable for any service, and most
inglorious to their Prince; of this more in another place. I proceed in the
matter of Protection.

Master Bracton describes three things which the KING upon at his Oath his
Coronation ought to promise to his people under his subjection.

1. Imprimis, se esse praecepturum, and pro viribus opem impensurum ut
Ecclesiae Dei and omni populo Christiano vera pax omni suo tempore observetur;
He shall command, and to his uttermost endeavor, that true peace may be at
all times observed to the Church of God, and all Christian people.

2. Secundo, ut rapacitates, and omnes iniquitates omnibus gradtbus interdicat;
That he should by all means straightly prohibit, or restrain all extortions,
or oppressions, greavances, and all injustice whatsoever.

3. Tertio, ut in omnibus judiciis aequitatem praecipiat and misericordiam, ut
indulgeat ci suam misericordiam Deus, and ut per justitiam suam firma gaudeant
pace universi; That in all judgments He do presc^^be and injoyne the
execution of Justice (or right and reason) and of Mercy, That our merciful and
gracious God may have mercy on him; And that by his Justice all men may enjoy a
constant Peace.

Our late times (as by an old Magna Charta Printed, Anno 1556. appears) have
set forth the form of the KINGSO ath at His Goronation.

Out of which I have selected these branches, concerning the regal Office of
Protection.

1. That he shall keep, and maintain the right and the liberties of the holy
Church, of old time granted by the righteous Christian Kings of England. 2.
That he shall keep the peace of the holy Church and of the Clergy, and of the
People with good accord. 3. That he shall do in all his judgments equity,
and right Justice, with discretion, and mercy. 4. That he shall grant to hold
the Laws and Customs of the Realm, and to his power keep them, and affirm
them, which the folk and people have made and chosen, and the evil Law ^s,
and Customs, wholly to put out. 5. And steadfast, and stable peace, to the
people of this Realm, keep and cause to be kept to his power. 6. And that
he shall grant no Charter, but where he may do it with his Oath.
All these several branches, are but the specifications of that one word
Protection; What Protection is.
But it will be demanded (what is protection?) It is not only a safe-gard and
defense of life and member, liberty, lands, and estate of the Subject, but a
conservation and maintenance as well of the Religion, as of the Laws
established within his Majesty's Realms.

And that this blessing of protection may the better flourish over us; The
incessant prayers of our Church do daily intercede for Our Gracious Sovereign
unto Almighty God, so to dispose and govern his heart, that in all his
thoughts, words, and works, he may ever seek the honor and glory of God, and
study to preserve his people committed to his charge, in wealth, peace and
godliness. This protection is general, from the King to all, and over all his
people, and sometimes more specially to some particular persons in some special
cases of transmarine businesses, or other services by way of writ.

There are a twofold means by which this benefit of safety is diffused, and
distributed from the Prince to the people.

1. By Laws. 2. By Arms.
Whereupon learned Glanvill Chief Justice in the days of Henry 2. in his
prologue to his Treatise of the Common Laws of England, thus begines: Regiam
potestatem non solum armis contra rebels, and gentes sibi regnoque
insurgentes esse decoratam, sed and legibus ad subditos and populos pacifice
regendos decet esse ornatam, It does well become Majesty not only to be well
appointed with Arms against Rebels and Invaders of Him and his Kingdom, But
to be furnished with Laws, peaceably to order his Subjects and people. And
Bracton Chief Justice in the time of Henry the third affirms thus, In Rege
qui recte regit, necessaria sunt duo haec, Arma viz. and Leges, qu bus utrumque
tempus bellorum and pacis recte possit gubernari: He adds further, Si arma
defecerint contra hosts, rebels and indomitos, regnum erit indefensum: Si
autem Leges, exterminabitur Iustitia, necerit qui justum faciat judic um, If
Arms (or Military supply) against enemies be s^a^ted the kingdom will be
naked and indefensive, and if Laws be wanting Justice will be exiled, and
there will be none to give just judgment.

Laws and Arms are the proppes, or pillars of Protection, Laws are of a most
excellent preeminence above Arms, If the Law had not bin broken there had bin
no use of Arms. I will therefore first begin with Laws.

There was a Law insita naturae, Lawe^^
written in the heart of man in and with man's Creation after Gods own Image.
By some it is called the Law of Nations and ought to be observed as well
amongst Jews and Gentiles, as amongst Christians.

And in our Common Law it is called Lexrationis, Dr. and stud. ^.^. cap. 2.
which by a natural prompting does inform us, that all good things are to be
pursued and all evil to be eschewed; This Law of Nature through tract of time,
and Customs in sin was slurred, defaced, and in a great part worn out,
Necessarium igitur fuit quod daretur Liber extrinsecus, continens leges and
praecepta per traditionem Dei, etc. And thereupon the Law was given by God upon
Mount Sinay to Moses (as is herein formerly handled) which is the positive Law
in the Scriptures. The Prophets afterward by often denouncing of woes, and
judgments against the breakers of the Law, did quicken and give life unto it
in the people. The sum of all this Law and the duty of it, our blessed
Savior did in one Evangelicall precept render unto all posterity, In all
things whatsoever ye would that men should do to you, Matthew. 7.8.1^
do ye even so to them, for this is the Law and the Prophets. From the Law of
Nature or Reason, and from the divine Law imposed in the Scriptures, all the
principal and fundamental Laws of our Kingdom are subderived, and thence by
secundary and mediate grounds have their essence and consistence.

As the Law of Nature was at first not written in any judicial book; So (you
have heard before) that the Laws of England were at first leges non scriptae,
and the subjects liberties only known and distinguished by Custom and usage.
These not written Laws for the most part of the first two centuries after the
Conquest, were much obscured and even subverted, partly by the then overruling
arbitrary sway of Sovereignty, sometimes by Papal usurpations, oftimes by the
overweening power and tyrannical pressures of the Peers and Great
Counselors of state over the poor disheartened Commons, who for recovery of
their wounded, and defaced Laws and liberties, were of^ enforced into many
outrageous rebellions, and bloody insurrections, in so much as the Government
of the Kingdom for a long time, greevously languished of an Antonotnical
fever. Begin we with the beginning of the Subjects seeming recovery of their
old Laws and liberties.

King John before mentioned having bin long imbroyled by the Civil Wars of
the Barons inflamed by the Pope (who to advance his supremacy here soothed up
the King in thundering out excommunications against the Barons) about the
seventeenth year of his Reign being affrighted with the noy sed strength of
his Nobles Army, King John.
descended to a meeting and parlee with them at a place called Roundesmead
between Stanes and Windsor. And upon a pacification of his Nobles and for
quieting of his kingdom, He there by his Charter 16. Iunij Anno regni 17.
called Magna Charta, did grant unto his Peers and Commons their long claymed
liberties, and not many months after dyed.

Henry third a Child of nine years age Anno 1216. Henry 3.
ascends the Throne as heir to the encumbrances of the kingdom as well as
to the Crown; The Commons greedy of liberty, and the Nobility of rule, and the
humorous spirits of young insinuating favorites opposing and discountenancing
the wisdom of the gravest Counselors, kept the King in an unsteady and
unsettled course of Government.

In the ninth year of his Reign, Anno 1224, He granted to the Nobility and
Commons such Laws and liberties as had bin used long time before; And caused
Charters to be made, one called Magna Charta, the other Charta forestae, which
he sent into every County. The praeamble of Magna Charta does set forth; The
two Charters granted 9. Henry 3.
That to the honor of Almighty God, the advancement of holy Church, and the
amendment of the Realm, The King of his mere and free will, did give and
grant to all Archbishops, Bishops, etc. Earls, Barons, and to all of his
Realm the liberties following to be kept within his Kingdom of England for
ever, which grant contains in all 37. Chapters.

In the twenty ninth the greatest liberty of the Subject was granted, Nullus
liber h^ me, etc.
viz. No Freeman shall be taken or imprisoned, or be disseised of his freehold
or liberties, or free customs, or be outlawed or exiled, or any otherwise
destroyed. Nor we will not pass upon him nor condemn him, but by the Law of
the Land; we will sell to no man, we will not deny nor defer Justice, or
right: Here every word is a sentence grande, in grano a weighty matter (as I
may term it) in the continent of a grain; Herein is contained that eximium
quoddam, our National liberty before cited: And an epitome of so much of lex
terra in the generality as concerns the Kingly office of Protection. Grant of
a Fifteenth.
In the 37. and last chapter The Clergy, Earls, Barons, Knights Free. holders,
and others his Subjects, did give unto the King in respect of both those
Charters the fifteenth of all their movables. And the King did grant unto them
on the other part, that neither he nor his heirs should procure or do any
thing whereby the liberties of that Charter should be infringed or broken.

This grant of Magna Charta, though it carries the form of a mere Charter, ex
mero motu and spontane a voluntate (as it was the use at that time and long
time after,) yet is it a Paliamentary grant and Statute, and is called the
great Charter (though little in it self) in respect of the weighty matter
comprised in it in few words. It is the fountain of all the fundament all
laws of the Realm, and the only basis and ground cell which supports the
superstructure of all the Laws and liberties of the Subjects; And it is but a
confirmation or restitution of those not written Laws before mentioned.

Would any man think it possible that this Magna Charta could ever be
violated by the same hand that made it? The King was young, mild and gracious,
but easy of Nature, (a sin not in it self, but by accident,) He was happy in
his Uncle the Earl of Pembroke, the guide of his infancy, but unhappy in
Hubert de Burgo his Iusticiary and others. Those liberties redeemed with the
price of a fifteenth, the Subjects had not long enjoyed, and little fruit of
future freedom more than for the present, like a glimmering sunshine in an
unconstant calm, had this common people by this grant; Eft-soones the Clouds
return, malum in malum ingruit; The young King having newly attained the Age
of twenty one years, by the evil Counsel of his Chief Justice Hubert, at a
meeting at OXFORD in the twelfth year of his Reign, did by open Proclamation,
frustrate and cancel his former Charters made in the ninth year of His
Reign, under pretense, that he was under the power or ward of others; So it
followed that whosoever would enjoy the liberties before granted, must purchase
their Charters under the Kings new Seal, at such a price as the Iusticiar
should award.

This was greevously taken by the Lords and COMMONS, in so much as the same
year the BARONS supplicated the King to restore the Charters which he
cancelled at Oxford, or else they would recover them by the sword.

It was most disloyal in them to be assertores libertatum and to enter into
competition with the King with Comminations of the sword. Bracton who wrote
long before, left better Counsel behind him in such things as concern the Act
of the King, Si ab eo petatur (cum breve non currat contraipsum) if any thing
be requirable from him (sithence he is liable to no action) Locus erit
supplicationi, quod factum suum corrigat and emendet, He is to be supplicated
that he would reform and amend his doing, which if he do not, Satis ei
sufficit ad paenam quod Deum expectet ultorem; It is punishment enough to him
to expect the Lords revenge. Observe what followed in this Kings time, whilst
he gave over the raines of his rule to young unseasoned giddy brains, some of
them alyens, and strangers; the gravest Counselors being discountenanced, the
Barons falling into factious ruptures, and the repining Commons into
discontented rebellions; The whole Monarchy languished, all things were
disordered, and out of frame.

Almighty God looking down from Heaven upon the vacillation, and incertitude
of this Vicegerencie under him upon earth, exercises his own supremacy,
addresseth one of his greatest Messengers of indignation, famine, which raged
with that violence, Claus. An. 42. Henry 3.
That the King was enforced to direct writs to all the Sheriffs of Shires, ad
pauperes mortuos sepeliendos famis inedja deficientes. And it is observed,
fames praecessit and sequutus est gladius tam terribilis, ut nemo inermis
secure possit provincias pervagare; The Civil brandishments of the sword
followed every where the fury of the Famine. In this National distress silent
leges; Nay, vix legibus tempus aut locus; Scarce was there time or place left
for claim of liberties or execution of laws. Sure it is the King and Commons
had but little ease, whilst his absolute power was participated (not deligated)
to his great ones. To recount the various troubles and turmoyles of his long
and unsettled reign were the work of a sad and sorry Hystory. Afterward it
pleased God (who has ever a particular and tender care of Princesper quem
reges regnant and Principes dominantur) toward the latter end of his Reign,
to restore the King to his right and his tired Subjects to their natural
obedience; He had the happiness to call a successful Parliament at
Marleborough 18. of Novem. 52. of his Reign, 1267. and therein amongst many
notable Laws enacted; He solemnly confirmed the former Charters in all their
Articles, and strictly enjoined the observation of them to be inquired before
the Justices of Eire in their Circuits, and before the Sheriffs in their
Counties when need should be; The King seeing his former errors, now began to
balance his Government with Praemio and paena reward and reprehension, and
himself with an equal hand to hold the scale, He labors to reform all
that was amiss; The seats of judgment and Counsel he supplied with men
learned, and Nobly borne, He sat himself daily in Council and disposed his
affairs of most consequence in his own Person, His Counselors (as one says)
were avessa^^es nor principalls; He permitted them ability to advise, not
authority to resolve. By this means keeping the lore in his own power (as
fittest for Princes to do.) He had a gracious issue of peace, ever after
attending the remainder of his Reign, and happily lived to train and adaptate
his son and Successor, Edward the first Englands Justinian for the future
swaying of his Royal Scepter, and afterward 16. Novem. 1272. dyed, his son
and Successor being then in the holy Land and thirty years of age, who being
partner of his Fathers experience, showed himself in all his actions after
capable to command not the REALM only, but also the whole world.

This renowned King returning from the holy Wars, was with Eleanor his Wife
crowned at Westminster, 15. Aug. 1272. And afterward, 15. Aprilis 3. Regni,
began his first Parliament at Westminster called West. 1.

And therein the King did will and command that the peace of holy Church and of
the Land be well kept and maintained in all points, and that common right be
done to all as well poor as rich. And cap. 6. does provide that no City,
Borough or Town, nor any man beamerced without reasonable cause, and
according to the quantity of his trespass (that is to say) Every Freeman,
saving his Freehold, a Merchant saving his Merchandise, a Villaine-saving his
gainure, and that by their Peers, and this is but a reflexe upon the 29.
Article of the Great Charter, No Freeman shall be taken, etc. In October 25.
Regni, after many other Parliaments; The King held a Parliament at London, and
did then fully grant and renew the great Charter made by his Father in the
ninth year of his Reign, and the 37. Chapters therein contained unto the
Peers and Commons in haec verba, and likewise the Charter of the Forest under
his great Seal.

In this Parliament cap. 1. those Charters were confirmed. And the King did
well that the same should be sent under his Seal, as well to his Justices of
the Forest as to others, and to all Sheriffs of Shires, and to all his other
Officers. and to all his Cities throughout the Realm, together with his writs,
commanding that they cause the foresaid Charters to be published and to declare
to his people, that his Highness had confirmed them in all points; And that
his Justices, Sheriffs, Majors and other Ministers (which under him had the
Laws of the Land to guide) should allow the same Charters pleaded before them
in judgment in all their points, S. the great Charter (as the Common Law) and
the Charter of the Forest for the wealth of the Realm.

Cap. 2. All judgments given against the points of the Charters should be undon
and holden for naught.

Cap 3. It was enacted, that the same Charters should be sent into every
County under the King, Seal there to remain and should be read before the
people two times by the year.

Ca. 4. The sentence of examination was to be denounced twice a year against
the breakers of those Charters.

Cap. 5. It was enacted, That whereas the aids and taskes given to the King
before time toward his Wart^s and other business of the Subj cts own grant
and good will (howsoever they were made) might turn to a bondage to them and
their heirs, because they might be another time found in the Rolls, and
likewise for the prices taken throughout the Realm, by his Ministers; That
such aid, taskes, or prices, should not be drawn into a Custom for any
thing, that had been done before, be it by Roll or any other president
whatsoever that might be found.

Cap. 6. That from thence forth no such manner of aids, taskes nor prices
should be taken by the King, but by the common assent of the Realm and for the
common profit thereof.

Ca. 7. The Commons being grieved with the Maletent of wools, S. a toll of 40.
s. for every sack of Wool, upon their petition, the King released it. And did
grant for him and his heirs, that no such things should be taken without
their common assent and good will.

The whole Subject of this Parliament is styled, Mag. Char. Printed 1540.
Confirmatio chartarum de libertatibus Anglia and forrestae. And follows the
great sentene e of excommunication called sententia lata super Chartas,
denounced by Robert Kilwarby Archbishop of Canterbury and the Clergy against
the violators of those Charters.

I find next ensuing this sentence in that book of 1540. the Statute, de
tallagio non concedendo, that no tallage or aid should be laid or levied by
the King or his Heirs without the good will and assent of the Archbishops,
Bishops, Earls, Barons, Knights, Burgesses, and other Freemen of the
Communalty of the Realm.

Cap. 2. Nothing should be purveyed to the Kings use without the owners consent.

Cap. 3. Nothing from thence forth should be taken of sacks of Wool by color
or occasion of Maletent.

Cap. 4. All Laws, liberties and Customs were again confirmed; and the curse
of the Church to be pronounced against the breakers of this Charter.

This Statute has no certain time prefixed of its making; But afterward at a
Parliament held at Westminster, in Lent, 28. Edw. 1. certain Statutes were
made called Articulisuper Chartas, whereby the two Charters were more strictly
confirmed and enjoined to be read four times in the year, by the Sheriff
before the people in full County, and those are but explanations upon Mag.
Charta.

The second Chapter being large and wholly made for the relief of the Subjects
against the Kings Purveyors and Ministers for taking their goods and victuals
against their wills at what price they pleased, and sometimes without any price.

The third concerning the Marshals jurisdiction of the Kings House, and other
good ^n^uing Laws, and S^atures, which are but Comments or Paraphiases upon
that Article of Nullus liber homo, etc. and do provide penalties in certain
where none were before.

I will wade no further into the numerous confirmations of Magna Charta. It
has bin ratified since 9. of Henry third, above thirty rimes, I may be bold
to say it is the Grammar of the fundamental Laws of the Land; By which all
other Laws are to be construed.

It is the lydius lapis of the Law, It is the syse and Standard by which all
our National Laws must be assayed and tried. Those are the Laws which the
Kings of England at their Coronations have sworn to maintain, and to execute
Justice to the people according to the Laws, and thereby to protect their
subjects.

No Acts of Parliament are so wisely contrived and interwoven with reason, and
judgment, but some sons of Beliall will art vel ingenio strive and compass
to elude and subvert them. At the Parliament in the third year of his now
blessed Majesty's Reign an humble remonstrance was presented by the Peers and
Commons unto his Majesty in their petition of right, concerning diverse rights
and liberties of the Subjects before mentioned, which had bin entrenched upon
touching their lives, persons and estates. Whereupon his Majesty did fully,
freely, and graciously confirm in all points their said petition of ^gnt with
Soit Droit fait, come est desire. And I da^e boldly say, His Royal goodness
has been of himself most vigilantly careful and tender to observe it.

It is said before that the Law is the Guardian of liberty.

The Law must be under wardship too; Who be the Law Wardens
who then be the Law-Wardens? The King originally is entrusted under God with
the custody of the Laws, under him the learned and Reverend Judges are
interessed in the Curator-ship of the Laws, and in them of the lives,
liberties, and estates, of the whole kingdom, And at their first investiture
into their places they take a solemn oath incident to their great offices; By
that oath they engage themselves as fe-offees in trust to Minister true right,
between King and people, and to execute Justice to the people according to the
Laws of the Land, and thereby, and by receiving the weighty trust from and
under him, for the custody of that inestimable Jewel the Laws, they are to
acquit the King of so much of his oath. I cannot here forget some old verses.

-- Realms have rules, and Rulers have a syse,
Which if they keep not, doubtless say I dare
That eithers greefes, the other shall agrise,
Till the one be lost, the other brought to care.
I will not Comment upon them, they were written upon a Subject of 240. years
a gone, and a bad sample thereof has h^pned in our times. Laws are the syse
of rule and government. By which the opinions and judgments of our twelve
Iustitiars must be weighed and guided, they are the Subjects birthright and
inheritance; They are the golden ring by which the King at his Coronation is
politically espowsed to the Commonweal, and have bin enameld with the blood
of many Millions, and Myriads of souls. Woe be therefore unto them, that have
been, are, or shall be the violaters and betrayers of that sacred trust. What
must they be that will render themselves guilty of so heinous a crime? Surely
none of Iethro his Counselors, Not men of courage, nor fearing God, nor loving
Truth, nor hating Covetousness; They must be in their conditions Tyrants,
haters of Law, for having once broken the lore of Law they fear to be tried by
the plumb-line of the Law: And then follows, Quod timent, oderunt, quod
oderunt destrui and irritum omnio esse volunt, what they fear, they hate, and
what they hate, they would utterly destroy. Oderunt impij omnia Disciplina
vincula and legem ^yrannum esse judicant, Moller in Psa. 139.
The wicked hate all bonds of Discipline, and condemn the Law to be a Tyrant;
But their guerdon is, Qui peccant contra legem, lege plectentur; Offenders or
Subverters of the Law shall have their demerited punishment by the Law. It is
said of sacrilegious Church-robbers, Frustra petunt auxi lium Ecclesiae, etc.
They are excluded all benefit of Clergy that sin against the Church.

The Law is the Temple or Sanctuary whether the Subject is to run for shelter
and refuge. M. Saint Ioh^s speech fol. 4^.


If the Wardens of this Temple desert their Office, and abjure the Sanctuary,
Let them expect nor fuge thither, nor, other but the Law to be testem, jud
cem, and Satellitem, their witness, their Judge, their executioner. And their
I leave them.

So much for Law.
THe other prop or Pillar of Protection is Arms, Arms.
whereof I have sufficiently spoken before, for so much as concern the
Subjects duty and legeance.

And for that which concerns his Majesty; It is so generally known, That I
shall need to give but a touch. By the Common Law of the Kingdom, No man was
chargeable to arm himself, otherwise than he was wont in the time of the
Kings progenitors ( S. Edw. 1.) And no man was compellable to go out of the
Shire, but where necessity required, and sudden coming of strange enemies into
the Realm; And then it should be done as had been used in times past for
defense of the Realm.

Likewise the preparing men of Arms, and conveying them unto the King into
foreign parts, was merely to be at the Kings charge. And howsoever in the
time of Edw. 1. certain Commissioners did incroach upon the Commons, and
compelled the shires to pay wages to the Preparers, Conveyers, and Soldiers,
whereby the Commons had bin at great charge and much impoverished. The King did
will, that it should be so done no more. Stat. 1. Edw. 3. cap. 5.7.1327. And
18. Edw. 3. Cap 7. It is provided, That men of Arms, Halberts, and Archers,
chosen to go in the Kings Service out of England, shall be at the Kings wages,
from the day that they depart out of the County where they were chosen, till
they return. Those Statutes are but affirmations or the Common Law and are
utterly destructive to the late impositions of Coat and Conduct money, and
such like levies in that kind, as are not warranted by common assent in
Parliament.

By both these (S.) Laws and Arms the peace and unity of those two dear
sisters, the Church and Common weal, are strengthened and upheld; And in both
these the Prince has power of direction to make and establish laws, to raise
and levy Wars, and power to command the execution and expedition of them;
Neither of these are acted without Counsel, frustra leges, frustra sunt arma
nisi sit consilium; And it is a true rule, Sanissimum consilium non fine
concilio, the best Counsel is from a Council or Assembly of Counselors. And
therefore the King as you heard before is attended with his Privy Council,
which is a body politic, unum e pluribus constable tutum, and no body without a
head, for as Forrescue, fol. 30. says, Quandocunque ex pluribus co^st tuitur
unum, inter illa unum erit regens, and alia erunt recta.

This body politic whereof the King is head (the autiquity and use whe^of I
have sufficiently before remonstrated) is at ended with two great Nuncioes,
Angelis e Caelo, Justice and Mercy. They are ornamenta coronae, The pr^tious
Diadems of the Kings Crown, they are columnae Majestatis, the two maine
supper^ers of regal d^gnity; By the one, S. His Justice, he has potestatem
praeveniendi, and subveniendi, a power, by making of Laws sending forth his
Edicts, and Proclamations of preventing all capital and criminal offenses,
all homicides, rapines, oppressions, injuries, rebellions, mutinies, and all
greevances whatsoever, either of force, or frand, and either against the person
or estare of His Majesty's Subjects; And if prevention be not availeable (^^in
natural, so in Civil diseases it sometimes fails) Then must his power of
subveniendi be administered, and that by (...) execution of his Laws, which is
twofold.

1. By Castigation, correction, or correption of the Malefactor, either by
privation of life, conf^^^^ion of goods, mulcts, and penalties, and by (...) of
liberty and other corporal infliction.

Secondly, by releeving and comforting the offended and greeved Subject, with
restitution, or retaliation according to the nature, and quality of the
respective causes. And this cannot be performed wholly by himself in his own
person, but by a subdelegation of Judges, Magistrates, and Ministers; And them
also (if he find in any of them any perverse, or corrupt aberration from the
rules of Justice.) He has power and will to reprehend, and chastise, or else,
who could challenge any freedom of Protection; For if the King and His
Council should (as some conceive) by that forecited clause of Nullus l^ber
homo, etc. be abridged from hearing and examining complaints, either in causes
of extraordinary consequence, or against persons of greatest eminence (I mean
not every cause that may be regulated by ordinary Jurisdiction.) Then bootlesse
is that royal promise in the great Charter, Nulli negabimus aut differemus
Iustitiam, etc.

Then must he needs violate his solemn oath and vow at his Coronation, faciam
fieri Iustitiam, etc. His ears must be therefore open to the cry of the
poor, the fatherless and oppressed, or else he declineth the true properties
of his Vicegerency under God, who is refugium pauperi, Psalm. 99. The LORD will
be a defense for the oppressed, even a refuge in the due time of trouble.

This Princely office of Protection is lively described in the 72. Psalm made
upon Solomon, Give thy Judgment O God unto the King, and thy righteousness
unto the Kings son, verse 2. Then shall he judge the people according to
right, and defend the poor, verse 4. He shall keep the simple folk by their
right, defend the Children of the poor, and punish the wrong doer. Here is his
Justice of Consolation to the oppressed, His Justice of Castigation to the
oppressor. To that heavenly Poem of the Psalmist some allusion has bin by an
earthly Poet, Protegit insontes, castigat jure nocentes,
Defendit totum sub ditione gregem.


So much of his Justice.
BY the other prop or pillar of his Imperial Crown (S. his mercy) the King
has, 1. Potestatem remittendi. 2. Potestatem dispensandi.


1. A power of remission, or pardon.

2. A power of dispensation: and both in imitation of the sacred deity of
Heaven, whose immediate Minister and Lieutenant the King is upon earth within
his own dominions.

In the old Law Moses by Gods direction did appoint unto the Children of Israel
Cities of refuge, as so many Sanctuaries of Mercy, whether the ignorant man
slayer who hated not his neighbor in times past, as also the casual homicide
might flee and live: But if a man hated his neighbor, laid wait for him, rose
up against him, and smote him that he dyed and fled unto any of those Cities,
Then the Elders (or Magistrates) of the Cutie should send and fetch him thence,
that he might dye by the hand of the avenger, Deuteronomy. ca. 19. ver. 3, 4, 5, 11,
12.

In this Island were heretofore Sanctuaries, places of refuge for such
offenders to whom the Law intended Mercy, and these were in use many hundred
years, but in this last Century they were abridged by the Statute of 1. Iacobi
25. So much of all Statutes, as concern Sanctuaries, or ordering or governing
of Persons in Sanctuary, were repealed, and made utterly void.

Besides the refuge of Sanctuaries, The mercy of the Law in many cases, as
homicide in heat of blood without prepensed malice, theft, and such like, did
afford the benefit of Clergy; And it does at this time in a form different
from former times; For now, in stead of delivering the Malefactor over to the
Ordinary to purge himself, he is admirted to read before the secular Judge.
And if the Ordinary, or his Deputy pronounce legit ut Clericus; Then is he to
be discharged with a stigmaticall brand in his hand, as a warning to come there
no more, and he forfei^th his goods only. If non legit were pronounced; Then is
the offen^^^ to suffer death for his transgression. But this kind of Mercy is
not absolute but conditional. The most perfect mercy, as from God, so next
under him from the King is Pardon, which is a French word signifying as much as
pax, venia, or gratia, and is used in the Common Law for the remitting or
forgiving, of a f^lorious crime or other offense.

And it is twofold.
1. Ex gratia Regis, of the Kings m^ere grace and Clemency. 2. Per cursum
Legis, by the course of Laws, that is, according to the ancient Laws and
Customs of the kingdom.
Pardon of grace, is again threefold.

1. Parliamentary, which is called free, and general, granted upon the happy
close and solution of a successful meeting of the three States; The common
good and benefit whereof is well and sensibly known to all His Majusties
loving, and obedient Subjects: and this kind of pardon is pleadable at all
times.

2. Upon the KINGS Coronation, or other grand and extraordinary solemnity. But
whosoever will reap the fruit hereof, must at some charge, within one year
and a day, sueit forth under the Kings great Seal; Or else he is utterly
debarred of it.

These two sorts of pardons are ex generali gratia, to all that are not
excepted therein, and will take hold of the benefit thereof.

3. A pardon ex speciali gratia is that which the King in some special regard
of the person, his merits and future hopes of good service, or other
Circumstances, or in consideration upon some intelligence of the fact, or
manner of the conviction, by any corrupt, malicious, or illegal proceedings,
does extend and afford upon his absolute Prerogative and power; And it is so
far from violation that it well stands, with the observation of his oath.

2. Pardon by course of Law, is that which the Law in equity vouchsafes for a
light offense, as homicide casual.

His power of dispensation, is a temporary qualification of the rigor of
particular laws, emollit, non tollit legem, as one says, It does mollify,
not nullify a Law; And as the Civil Law has it, Ille qui dispensat, non
tollit legem, sed ex causa, in certapersona, vel ad tempus remittit; Et
dispensatio quandoque est necessaria, Panorunt. super decret, capit, proposuit,
He that does dispense with a Law, does not abrogate the Law, but for some
certain cause, in respect of persons, or times does remit the rigor; And
dispenlation sometimes is very necessary. Positive Laws are but leges
temporis, if so; Then are they dispensable, according to the necessity of
times, or occasions. The rigid Pharisees taxing the Disciples of Christ, for
that being an hungered, they did upon the Sabbath Day begin to pluck the ears
of Corn and to eat, Our Savior puts them two cases by way of question, Have
you not read that David being hungry, entered into the House of God and did eat
the shewbread, which was not lawful for him, nor any with him, but only the
Priests? Or have you not read in the Law, how on the Sabbath day the Priests in
the Temple break the Sabbath (Sabbatum violant and sine crimine sunt) and are
blamelesso? And then he does absolutely convict them of ignorance, If ye knew
what this is, I will have mercy and not sacrifice, ye would not have condemned
the innocents, Matthew. 12. ver. 1. Vsque 8.

If the Law of God by the mouth and judgment of his blessed Son was
dispensable; No man can deny, but humane laws which are transitory may admit a
qualification; Or else our Gracious Solomon cannot according to the third
branch of his oath, do equity and right Justice, with discretion and mercy;
Observe the rule of the Common Law in this point, Dispensatio mali prohibiti
est de jure Domine Regi concessa, propter impossibilitatem praevidendi de
omnibus particularibus. Et dispensatio est mali prohibiti provida relaxatio,
utilitate, seu necessitate pensata, Co. 11.88.

No greater argument of supreme, and uncontrollable Majesty than a dispensatory
power, for when the Common Council of the Kingdom, have enacted penal Laws,
for prohibiting somethings to be done, which are evil, per accidens; The KING
by his own Princely power alone, may either in regard of persons or times, or
other necessary conting encies dispense therewith.

PROTECTION, as it is grande opus so it has grave onus, a great Balke, a
l^rgel arthen.

The o^-stretched and puissant Aims of this Prot^ction.

1. By Laws. 2. By Arms,
Are not supported and maintained without inexpressibie charge.

In the first (S.) Laws, observe in the maintenance and execution thereof; the
^^^ries, and wages of the great and reverend Judges, the fees, stipends, and
allowances, of other Ministers, and Officers of Justice, his Majesty's
extraordinary great experce in sending abroad and dispersing his Edicts and
Proclamations, in all the quarters and corners of the kingdom.

In the second (S.) Arms, observe no less, if not sarre more, in the
reparations, and constant maintenance, and supply of His Royal Navy, of His
Ordinance, Artilerie, and all other munition, And his assiduous preparation in
the time of Perce, against the occasion or expectation of Wars; And all must
be (according to the Prayers of our own Church) to maintain the People in
wealth, peace and godliness.

But that we may return with the greater thankfulness to GOD, Let us look
back, and there are not many quarters of years since this great work of
Protection was invaded, the union of two Ancient Kingdoms disturbed, The
Subject, with jealousies distracted, the former Valor of our English hearts
blounted and amated, our Liberties in a desperate jeopardy of bondage; And
which is worst, -- Quis talia fando,
Myrmidonum, Dolopumve, aut duri miles Vlyssis, Virg, (...). l. 3.

Temperet a lachrimis? --


What flinty heart can forbear from tears? A sweet, mild, merciful, KING in
his studious vigilance for quenching of these flames, most sensibly perplexed;
and indeed brought into a great strait, that he had just cause to invocate the
Mercy Seat of Heaven in the language of the Kingly Prophet Angustia est mihi
valde, I am in a great strait, 2 Samuel 24. v. 14. He was so indeed, and like
Jonathan and his Armor-bearer between two sharp rocks, Bozez and Sench, the
forefront of the one was situate Northward, the other Southward, 1 Samuel 14.
v. 45.

What was the cause of all these miserable tumults, and turmoyles? Truly our
blessed Sovereign unhappily fell upon those times, wherein David complains of
the Judges, Magistrates and Ministers under his subjection, Psalm. 82. v. 1. etc.

God stands in the congregation of Princes: He is a Judge amongst Gods, ver.
2. How long will ye give wrong judgment: and accept the persons of the
ungedly? David by mentioning Gods pretense in the aomen ill ration of
judgments, endeavoring to (...) be a tenor in their hearts adds that sharp
increpa^^^n v. 2. ^sque quo judic at is iniquit^em, etc. ^o give (...) judgment
is in pronouncing of Law, not to observe an equality or rule prescribed by the
laws, but to give sentence pro arbitrio suo, after their own will, fancy, and
passion, for no other cause but so they would have it, whence that vox
tyrannica that proverb sprung up Sic volo sic jubeo, stat pro ratione voluntas,

Our will is our reason, and our will shall command. After this severe
objurgation the Prophet declares the true use and end of upright judgment;
Defend the poor and fatherless: See that such as be in need and necessity
have right, v. 3. Deliver the outcast and pcore: save them from the hand of the
ungodly, v. 4. And then despairing of their reformation, he does amplify his
reprehen sions against them, They will not be learned, nor understand, but
walk on still in darkness. All the foundations of the earth are out of course,
ver. 5. It was so in David's kingdom, and no less in King Charles His Great
Britain, David invocated God for redress, Exurge Deus and judica terram,
Arise O Lord and judge thou the earth, v. 8. And so did King Charles, God heard
the prayers, and humble supplications both of King and People. For in ictu
oculi, when all conditions of this State in the out ward survey of humane
judgment were most desperate and deplorable, Moventur omnia fundamenta terrae,
Psalm 74.22.
God did arise and (plead or) maintain his own cause, Our gracious Iosuah by
the dictates of the holy Spirit did summon his Elders, called his
Common-Councill or Great Congregation together, love. 1640.
to treat of the difficult and urgent affairs concerning his Majesty, the
State and defense of his Kingdom and the Church of England. The like in his
Realms of Scotland, and Ireland. They have all happily and religiously met in
their several orbs, the Civil and unnatural breaches of the two disjoynted
kingdoms are unanimously pacified, and both more firmly reunited than ever
before. The issues and fruits of the Counsels and consultations of our
Parliament have far sarpassed the presidents of all former ages. Let the Acts,
Ordinances and proceedings themselves be Judges. And pray we incessantly to the
throne of Heaven, that God will be still present and president in the
maturating of all their debates and deliberations concerning Church and State.
And in all such times when King, Church and people are in a strait, That God
would arise, exurgat Deus and dissipentur inimici.

Amen, Amen, Amen.
FINIS.

