THE LIFE of the Blessed ST. AGNES VIRGIN and MARTYR, In Prose and Verse.

By L. SHERLING.

Tibi me virtus tua fecit Amicum.

Hor. LONDON, Printed by T. H. for G. K. 1677.

TO the Worshipful ROBERT STAFFORD of Bradfeild in the County of Berks, Esquire
TO keep a mean as it has always been very difficult, I know not in what it
is more accounted so, then in that of writing a Panegyric. A Reflection which
I question not, Sir, but you have heard me make, since I first had the honor
of your Conversation. Not that I am of that severe or morose humor of which
some men are guilty, who think every thing dull or nonsense which is so spoke
of one, as that it may with as much justice be applied to another. Of the
reasons which made me first imagine this way of writing so difficult one was,
because I never saw above two (in my judgment) good: the one that of Pliny to
the Emperor, the other that of our incomparable Poet Laureat to the Duke of
New Castle. These have been the only men as yet, of whom we might not with
Tully, say, (pardon the pedantry) his laudationibus historia rerum nostrarum
facta est mendocior. The other reason was that I ever judged it as great an
abuse to an Ingenuous Person, to say more of him then he deserves, as it would
be to our selves to say less. However, Sir, in writing to you, I am sure to
avoid one extreme, since all my endeavors must needs fall short of delineating
those Virtues, which a Dryden only can describe, and I admire. It Is only for
such a Hero in wit to express what I have only a faint Idea of, and you would
have as just reason to be angry with me, if I should attempt it; as Alexander
had with those bold men, who durst presume to draw his Picture, while the
skillful Apelles was yet living. Had I sooner been acquainted with you, (so
much I find the improvement of one year,) I might then possibly ere this been
able to perform it not unworthy so much goodness, and from your self learned
truly to express you: for if as most say Conversation teaches as much as
Books; I may (in a different sense then what is usual,) justly call you a
living Library. But I owe my mishap to Fortune whom you held so long your
Debtor, 'till Providence as if it mistrusted the ill Dispensation of so fair an
Estate, removed so many Heirs to give it to your management, and disposal. Nor
indeed has it been deceived in it is Choice. Your Charity being universal, and
not only confined to your Lordship. The poor of which (being by reason of the
largeness, very numerous) in your absence, expect your return with more Faith
then the Israelites did their Manna, and are as certainly relieved by you. They
call your coming (be it at what time of the year it will) a good time, and find
little comfort in a Christmas, or Easters contribution, if you are not there
to show at once an example of Charity and Magnificence, of which there are not
only living Monuments: The rebeautify'd Church of Bradfeild, with those
necessary and decent Ornaments given to it of your bounty, Ubraids our
Puritanical Age with its irreverence, and tell it we have yet some true Sons of
the Church left, who think God ought not be served more slovenly then the
meanest Prince, and that Decency is no Let to Devotion. But it is not only your
Charity we admire; how free are you from all those Debauches, which usally
accompany a plentiful Estate, which to enumerate would be thought too
Satirical. You Sir, as if Nobility only consisted in Virtue (although I know
not any that can show a larger series of Noble Ancestors then your self,) are
as well known by your Virtues as your Manors, and seem wholly to employ your
Estate, in correcting those vices, others of your Quality are guilty if. I
could willingly expatiate of so pleasant a Subject, did I not fear I should
seem to undertake that rash task, I but just now professed so much above me. I
will now, Sir, give you an account why I choose this Subject of all others, to
present to you as a Testimony of the resentments I have of all those endearing
Obligations you have been pleased to confer upon me. It has been seriously
wished by all your Friends, (among which you have been pleased to allow me a
Title) that you would speedily settle your affections on some Lady which might
deserve your Love, (and really, Sir, you are to injurious to that fair Sex, if
you imagine there are not any which can deserve it; I could not therefore think
of a fitter expedient then this, to bring you into a good Opinion of those
Creatures, which you never seemed to favor, without showing any great aversion
for them. Here Sir, is a Lady presented to you, whom not to Love; would not
only be ignoble but impious, and I doubt not (if you shall do me the honor to
peruse this life,) but that the noble Agnes will revenge all those fair
Females; whose charms you have hitherto so stoutly resisted: I do not hereby
intend to make the Chaste Saint a Bawd to any impure Love, (for although in her
life time she professed Virginity, yet she never questioned the lawfullness of
the Marriage Bed,) but only to animate you to the search of some Heroine, who
has all those Virtues you see that Sex is capable of: which (if our age be not
too barren) that you may soon find is the Prayer of,

Sir, Your most obedient Servant to command, L. SHERLING.

THE LIFE of the Blessed ST AGNES VIRGIN and MARTYR, In Prose and Verse.
THE Holy Catholic Church of our Blessed Lord and Savior, had now almost
defeated the Rage of it is Persecutors, for the space of nigh 300 years, and
Gentilism was now advanced to it is last efforts of malice and cruelty, when our
blessed Martyr Saint Agnes was disclosed to the world, in the Reign of
Dioclesian and Maximian, or if you please to obleige them with those godly
Titles of their own coining, Jovius and Herculeus. You might justly wonder that
so sweet a Jewel was placed in so troublesome a Generation, did not adversity
give a new luster to all that is worthy and excellent. Those petty twinkling
eyes of night, that so beautifully adorn the face of Heaven, when surrounded by
obscurity, cannot so much as be seen, when the Sun approaches, and if you take
away the Jet from the sparkling Diamond, you will rob it of the greatest part
of those glories, that you see it adorned withal. So Holy a Virgin, so
undaunted a Martyr, so Chaste a Lady, in a word, so good a Christian, could
stand the Shock of Ten Thousand Dioclesians, and being supported by the Grace
of her dearest Savior, could still preserve her faith and honor, and remain
as good a Virgin, as a Christian, maugre all the vain assaults of lust and
cruelty. Her very Enemies, though unwillingly, extremely obliged her, and their
very opposition, furnished her with matter for a Triumph.

St. Agnes was Born at Rome, of a Noble Family, though the Names of her Parents
I cannot possibly acquaint you with, nor precisely in what year of our Lord it
was, St. Ambrose and all that have obliged the world with the History of our
blessed Martyr, being herein unanimously silent, nor ought our curiosity to
engage us in an unnecessary search of things of such indifference, and that
when kown cannot yield us any considerable advantages. The Nile enriched the
Egyptians never the less because his head was undiscovered, And the Life of the
holy Agnes may stir us to as great a piety, as if we knew her Patents most
exactly. How she spent her Youth, her Pious Life, and most Christian Death, may
give us reason to conjecture, though all the Authors I could meet with, have
not spoke a word of it in particular; and since I dare not assume the liberty
of foisting any in thing that the authority of St. Ambrose etc. would nor
justify, I shall pass it over, and advance to the more important parts of her
Life, where we shall make a full discovery of all those Beauties, Charms, and
Graces that a Crucified Savior can present us with, in comparison of which all
our worldly pleasures must loose their relish, and a Heavenly Spouse be
preferred to all out earthly enjoyments. But it is very certain that our holy
Martyr, when she was very Young, had dedicated her Virginity to her sweet
Redeemer, and made a formal Vow of perpetual Chastity, which may clearly be
discovered by the sequal of this discourse, and therefore it would be very
impertinent to insist long upon it.

Pious Lady, Thou at those years had fixed thy thoughts on Heaven, and wast
engaged in the contemplation of the Holy Jesus, which we commonly spend in
gratifying our corrupt Affections, thou did anticipate thy years, and
without an absurdity, I may justly say, thou wast old even in thy childhood,
and had the prudence and all that was to be esteemed of that age, without
any of it is inconveniences. Who dare say she was Young and Childish, that was
already ripe for Heaven, and had finished her glorious course of Christianity.
She was now about Thirteen years of age, when all the temptations imaginable
conspired to Divorce her from her Savior. Love (that potent Passion, that has
occasioned so dismal effects in the world, that by a sweet insinuation betrays
us to our ruin, and pleases into our destruction) was the first obstacle that
was opposed to her flight to Heaven, and that endeavored to retard her pursuit
of a blessed Eternity; which was thus.

As she was returning home from School, a Young Gentleman, the Son of one
Symphronius, at that time Goverour of the City, young and handsome, and Master
of all those excellencies that render one of his years accomplished, and that
might have enslaved any Soul but St. Agnes's, unfortunately chanced to see her:
He saw her, he admired her, he loved her, all in an instant: That crowd of
Beauties that Heaven had endowed her with, to render her fair body a worthy
habitation of it is fairer inhabitant, were not long in producing their effect.
Ladies less considerable could not have done that in an Age, that her fair eyes
effected in a moment. The Sun illustrates all the Horizon at once, and that
Affection our Gallant had for Saint Agnes, at it is first Creation (I can justly
term it no other, that was a motion so instantaneous) was not any longer
capable of degrees. In fine, he loved her, he doted on her, be preferred her to
half his Heathen Deities, and in her fruition he placed his only felicity. He
had not now opportunity either to spoke to her, or enquire of what Family she
was, And indeed, had all the opportunities in Nature courted him at that time,
he could scarce have made any benefit of them, being surprised with the
greatest astonishment that can be imagined.

However after some time having made inquiry who she was (a Star of so great
magnitude could not possibly long be hid) he understood she was of a Noble
Family, and born in that City, and what ever else he learned of her, from his
intelligence, gave him all the satisfaction that his Soul was capable of
receiving. She Is Nobly Born, said he, clapping his hand on his breast, after a
profound Reverie, and now I may justly Court her Affections; I may own my Love
without dishonor, and my Father, my indulgent Father, will never oppose
himself to my Intentions. But Villain (continued he with a great deal of
vehemence) how was it possible she should be otherwise, or how could one
imagine that the bountiful Gods, would throw away so many perfections on an
ignoble Person. No, what ever her Family was, or could be, she would
sufficiently ennoble it, and transfund an excellence into all about her; she
must necessarily either find her Kindred Noble, or make them so. The most
pitiful Rock in the Ocean can borrow luster from it is bright Native, the Pearl
that grows upon it, and the most craggy Shelves can gain worth and esteem from
their Diamonds, their Illustrious Inhabitants. Well it is so, and I have nothing
to conquer, but the heart of that Fair one, to complete my happiness. Whereupon
our young Inamorato, spurred on by his Passion, and armed with Confidence, that
his Fathers power in the City at that time, might extremely advance his
design, he is resolved to address himself to the fair Agnes, and having
signified the desire he had to wait upon her, with all the respects in the
world, and humbly begged her permission, at last he acquainted her with his
Passion in the most moving words that could be used in that conjuncture; and
when he had said what he would, and expected her Answer; what hopes and fears
was he then engaged in? But his eyes with their dumb Rhethorick still pursued
his Petition.

The poor Lady, surprised at this so displeasing a proposal, stood in the
greatest amazement that ever soul was troubled with, and if I should tell you
it was not unlike that astonishment which a poor Traveller resents, when at
midnight he sees his fellow thunder-strook just by his side, I should make you
but a faint resemblance of it. But after some few minutes recollecting her
scattered Spirits, and looking upon him with an eye that at once pitied and
condemned his passion, she thus answered him.

Remove (noble Sir) that Afffection, that will be equally troublesome to both
of us. I cannot imagine how this Miserable Face should gain me that esteem, you
are pleased to obleige me with; and I think more Charitably of all Men, then to
think any one can be so much mistaken, and have forfeited their Reason and
Judgment as to Love her, who may justly be contem'd of all the World, and there
to place an Obligation, where it would be counted an injury. In a word for
that very Love's sake, you say you have for me, forgo it utterly, banish it,
and with it all the train of Jealousies, Fears, Hopes, and other Distractions,
that will undoubtedly pursue it. This, Sir, is the means to obleige me, and
this is the greatest Testimony, I can demand of your Affection.

Ah! Madam, replied our Gallant, how unjust you are in this demand? Should Love
destroy it self, to show it is sincerity? And is there no other way to manifest
the truth of it, but by those Acts of indifference you mention? Stay Madam, for
Heavens sake, that -- He was vehemently continuing his discourse, when the Lady
interrupted him. No Sir, (said she) it is my final resolution, suspend your
ardour, or if you will continue your Affection, which I cannot recompense;
expect no mutual return from her, that avows to you and all the world, she is
already disposed of, my Soul's too free and open to make use of Artifice, and
draw you on into a Passion, that it is possible may ruin you; and I too much
esteem that Obligation you have laid upon me, to think you a fit Person to be
so deceived Be assured then, that my Soul is prepossessed, and being engaged
elsewhere cannot comply with your desires; you are Honorable I must avow it,
and Rich, and your Person is really Amiable, but since my Faith is already tied
else where, these accomplishments and advantages, will prove ineffectual to
shock my fidelity. Give over then in time and let your Duty comply with your
Interests.

No Madam (cried out the Lover) I must still Love, while you are still amiable;
Blame not the excess of my Passion, while you are Lovely to Admiration. You may
forbid me to hope for a suitable return, but know that despair it self cannot
make me cease to love and adore you, and though others are the most happy, I
may be the most faithful of your Servants.

He was Retreating, having said thus, with a most profound respect, but in the
most disconsolate condition that ever poor Lover was in, when St. Agnes pitying
his misfortunes, wherein she found her self too deeply concerned, pulled him
back and sweetning all that Rigor she had put on not long before; Stay dear
Sir, said she, And pardon me that seeming cruelty, which you think me guilty
of, my Soul is as capable of resenting, your favors as you your self could
wish. I esteem you, Sir; and will love you too, but as a Sister. Content your
self with all I can render you. Leave your Love, for God's sake, or place it on
some more worthy Object, my choice cannot, must not be altered; He must have my
whole Affection, that is only worthy of it; He must indeed, Sir, and you must no
longer pretend to her, that will acknowledge no other Lord and Master, but him
that Heaven has already assing'd her.

Who ever that happy person be, replied our Amorist, let him not think that I
will tamely endure his happyness. No, Madam, your Love cannot protect him.
Since he has the happiness to be beloved of the fair Agnes, he shall also have
the honor to die for her.

He spoke this with the greatest fury he could, and without taking the least
leave away he flung, rolling in his Breast revenge on his unknown Rival. Whilst
our holy Votary in vain recalling him, after she had bestowed a Shower of Tears
on his Misfortunes, which though unwillingly, she was the unhappy cause of, she
went into her Closet, seating her self in a posture fit for her Devotion.

Sweet Jesu, cried she, thou art my dear Master, to thee have I dedicated my
Life and Honor; Accept of this poor Sacrifice, which is my reasonable service.
Preserve what my free gift, and thy gracious Redemption has made thine, and
let not the Devil withal his gaudy Temptations, pull me from thy sacred
Protection, No, dear Savior, he shall not by thy Help; I am in thy hands, and
all the fury, the rage, as well as subtlety of Men and Devils, shall never
remove me from so agreeable a refuge. My Virginity is now no longer my own,
keep me chaste, and inviolate, and render me a fit Vestal for thy service,
should I having tied my self to my obliging Savior, desert him for a frail
piece of mortality? And having tasted those preparations of Eternal Bliss and
Glory, run after those dull and insignificant contentments that so abuse the
world with their pleasing appearances? No gracious Lord, I Will accept of no
Spouse but thee, and how unworthy so ever of thy Love and Favor, my sins have
rendered me, I will in my Chastity Imitate thy Holy Mother. And though I cannot
be at once a Virgin and a Mother, pure and Fruitful at the same Instant, which
is the blessed Lady's Prerogative, I will be a Wife and Virgin and with thy
holy consent too, nay and by thy command, preserve my Virginity even after my
Espousals. Yes, blessed Jesu, I will by thy help and favor, nor shall either
Love or Pity persuade me to any thing, that may offend my love to thee or my
Duty.

Having said either this or something like it, she rose extremely satisfied,
and the holy Spirit furnished her with all those graces that were necessary for
her in that conjuncture, which gently gliding through her Soul, ravished her
with all the delights that Saints were ever blessed withal.

And then after sometime having paid her Devotion to Heaven, she reflected on
what the Young Gentleman had said to her. Fond Man, said she, how do thy Love
and Anger delude thee, to what folly alas do they betray thee; Thy Rival fears
not what thy Sword can do against him, he will keep himself and me too, (if it
be his holy pleasure) from those dismal effects of thy fury that thou so vainly
threaten'st. Do what thy Rage shall dictate to thee, and at last learn to
acknowledge that I had infinite reason to contemn thee, and dote upon so
Gracious, so Almighty a Redeemer. You may very well imagine with what Vehemence
the Lady uttered these words, and what sorrows she then was perplexed with,
both in pitying the Young Lover, since she had bin the innocent cause of his
mirfortunes, and in deploring her own unhappiness; and you may (if you please)
hear her thus expressing her resentments.

A Soliloquie.
TYrannick eyes; for so ye still will be,
Cruel alike to others, and to me,
That with a guilty glance can storm a Heart,
And in each ray convey a Cupid's Dart;
Cease these your wild excursions, and no more
Procure Adorers, as you did before.
Procure Adorers, as you did before.
No, to some higher happiness advance
Then it is to be the Center of a Glance.
Lie in your Lids fond Lights, poor wandering Stars,
That make the Heathens twice Idolaters.
No, no, look out, but do not then do not then descry
Base worldly cheats that gaudy misery
Desert these meaner sights, and higher soar,
That make the Heathens twice Idolaters.
No, no, look out, but do not then desery
Base worldly cheats that gaudy misery
Desert these meaner sights, and higher soar,
Where Love, this fatal Love, shall be no more.
Here Is noble work to do, that may suffice
The proud Ambition of the proudest eyes.
Turn Heavenly Captives, in those Fetters lie,
Kissing those Chains they are the only Liberty.
To Heaven, to Heaven advance your glimring sight,
Your Light refund unto the Sourse of light.
Now all your Charms collect, your temping graces
And Court his Favor, that all else surpasses
Not with a wanton glance or melting eye,
O! these are not the Christians Armory.
It Is not with such Artillery as this
We please the Almighty, when we force our bliss.
Bring here a Still of Tears, a broken Groan;
With Sighs, and Vows, and Lamentation.
While others are advanced to Heaven by Fire,
Whose fervent Zeal did upward still aspire,
I Will weep a Flood, and in that Flood I Will be
Transported to a blessed Eternity.
And in a broken Sigh, I Will waft a Prayer;
'Twill never miscary, sighs true Bearers are,
Here Lamentations not fruitless be,
While I deplore I banish misery.
Thus shall my Soul to thee, dear Lord, aspire
Fervent in tears: Tears make the Flames the higher.
On Dust and Ashes cast an eye below,
They Are now notworthy, thou can make 'em so.
What cannot thy blood sweet Lord, and merits do?
He who for me turned Man, and suffered too,
What after that, will he refuse to do.
WHilst the blessed Saint does thus entertain her Pious Soul; let us see how
our passionate Gentleman spends his hours, whose every minute seems an Age, in
the absence of his Mistress: He went away possessed with the greatest fury that
ever Soul was in. He stamped, he Beat his Breast, and did whatever a Furious
Person is used to do in such encounters; He Imprecated his Heathen Deities to
assist him in his Revenge. He vowed the utter ruin of his unknown Adversary,
notwithstanding all the difficulties he might meet withal, and posting home
with all the speed he could make, having locked himself up in his Chamber, he
was somenting the most dreadful resolutions, that ever can be conceived.

Must I then be unhappy, said he, and live the most unfortunate Person that
ever Breathed? Must I draw on my life in all the extremes of misery, to a
period no less unfortunate? Must I do thus, and cannot it be otherwise; No, it
cannot, I must live and die a Wretch, and do all this, for an ungrateful Woman,
and long of one perhaps less worthy then my self. He stopped here, and the
vehemence of his resentments was better expressed by this silence, then it
would have bin by all the words in the World. He continued not long so however,
when beating his Breast he forced his Tongue in some measure to unravel his
thoughts. But since I cannot enjoy her, continued he, and I am doomed to my
misfortunes, by a person notwithstanding all her cruelty; so dear and agreeable
to me, that even Death it self would not be unwelcome when it proceeded from
her: I will however have some Companion in my unhappiness, and involve my
envied Rival, for all her Love and Favor, in that Calamity, she has damned me
to. I will do so, pursued he vehemently, Base and Ungrateful Woman, in spite of
that Respect I have for thee, that troublesome Love and Respect that has
betrayed me into the worst condition in the World. But can I thus injure him
(continued he, after he had been silent for some moments) that she is pleased
to bless with her particular Affection? Yes, I can do more then injure him,
that has deprived me of the most supreme happiness, my Ambition could aspire
to.

I should be extremely tedious, should I trouble the Reader, and my self, with
an exact account of all his Passion made him then utter. I shall therefore
content my self to acquaint him that after a nights rest (if I can properly
term that so, that was only a repetition of his former disturbances) he rose,
and laid out to all he could learn who this Favorite of his Mistress was; But
with what success you may easily imagine, though it is possible had there been
any and he capable of discovery, he might have setv'd himself with the greatest
Efficacy; since a Rival in such a case, as being most interess'd, was most
likely to find it out.

But after a tedious enquiry to no purpose, which though it infinitely
discouraged him, as depriving him of that Revenge he had already promised
himself, it did not a little encourage him, and gave him some hopes, that only
out of Design, and Artifice she had told him so, when really it was otherwise.
Having half persuaded himself to believe, what his hopes suggested to him, he
reassures himself, ventures upon a Second Visit, which considering his
Qualities, could not be well refused him. I shall leave you to guess what St.
Agnes sense was of it, she trembled, she changed her Color, but still for the
better, and her very amazement and surprisal, did very much increase her
Beauty, and renderd her more Lovely in the eyes of our Young Amorist, that alas
was but too too Lovely to him before. She was in this condition when our Young
Roman accosting her, assumed the confidence to tell her, notwithstanding he
held her as infallible as his Divinities, who could not but be peswaded that
she had abused into an error, which was extremely prejudicial to his repose,
and that he had troubled himself with the fear of a Rival to no purpose, since
he was the only person that Love had inspired with the assurance to lift up his
eyes to so much excellence. Be pleased therefore Madam, continued he in an
extraordinary transport, to rid me of this doubt, and assure me of a truth,
then the knowledge of which nothing can make me more happy, but the assurance of
your mutual Affection.

He staid his discourse here, and the Pious Lady not without some difficulty
assumed it. Know Sir, replied she, you have still a Rival and such a one as all
your Interests in Rome; how considerable so ever, cannot remove him, did you
know what sincerity I always make use of you would not have doubted of the
truth of that, which I assured you of. Oh! Madam, answered the Lover hastily,
why should you so soon return me to my former Apprehensions, and disabuse me of
an oppinion so advantageous to my repose? I am not acquainted with those Arts,
replied the Lady very sharply, that abuse Men into happiness. Know fond Man,
thou have a Rival; Know I Love him, and prefer him to all the World; and when
thou know this, if thou will still pursue a fruitless passion, never expect
any thing from me but scorn and contempt. Dismiss thy troublesome Affection,
and retrive thy Liberty. I conjure thee to it by all that is Sacred, by thy own
Interest, and if that be of any force with thee, for my sake, desist to trouble
me any more with thy addresses. Assure thy self this will be the greatest
engagement thou can make me receive, and which will equally conduce to thy
felicity and my own.

She was retreating then into her Closet, when our most disconsolate Lover
cried out with some vehemence; I cannot cease to Love thee, for all thy
cruelty, but my addresses shall no more trouble thee. I can Die to please my
self, as well as thee, and my Death perhaps may give me as great a contentment,
as it will thee, Cruel Creature; since it will free me from a Passion, that
nothing else can Rob me of. He departed immediately huri'd in a most fatal
grief. You may justly wonder he should so soon run desperate, and at his second
visit abandon himself to so absolute a despair; but be pleased to know he had
before made her several Presents, and spoke to her very often too, all which I
omitted as having nothing in them extraordinary. The Gifts he made her, with
which Ladies of her years, are easily deceived, with all his fair and foul
Words, Promises, and Threats, could not persuade her to his desires. She
despised them all, and continually told him what Noble Presents her Spouse
would make her, which I shall not here reckon up, both because you may have
them infinitely better exprest'd in the Divine St. Ambrose, as because I will
by no means debauch those Christian expressions with that, which we of this Age
call Eloquence; since they shine far brighter in their native Purity. As Adam
and the first Woman were fairest, before they came to their Figgleaves.

If the Gentleman was afflicted, he left the Holy Maid no less; She poured out
all her sorrows into the Bosom of her Blessed Savior, for whose sake she was
thus Cruel in appearances; She prayed for her Loving Enemy; She pitied him, but
all was to little to break her Resolution of a perpetual Chastity. No, Blessed
Lord, (would she Cry out oftentime) neither Loves, nor Pity, with all their
soft Insinuations shall storm my consent to an Act, that would rob Thee of thy
Right. My Vow, and my Virginity must be kept inviolate, and with thy Grace
they shall, Holy Jesu, my poor and unworthy Sacrifice.

Thus wast thou, Pious Votary, peircing Heaven with thy Pious ejaculations,
while thy disconsolate Lover was engaged in a very different ployment. His Soul
possessed with the greatest Grief, Anger, Love, and Fury, that ever the world
saw, was traversed with all most contrary commotions, and those too almost
incompatible, at the same Instant. He cursed his Stars, and yet in Spite of all
his Rage and Fury, he could not so much as have an ill thought of her that in
his Opinion, was the Cruelest thing that ever breathed. How often was he
deploring his own Calamity, and then on the sudden enjoying his Rival's
happiness, and perhaps scarce two Minutes after all this, complaining of his
Mistresse's unkindness. In so miserable a distraction as his Soul then was, his
Body could not choose but partake of the common misery. Their was as great
Revolutions in his humors as in his thoughts, and that profound Melancholy
that had seized his Soul; gave but too dismal Effects not to be discovered. I
shall wave those discourses he then made use of, both because they concern not
so imediatelie our Holy Agnes, as because other persons in the same conditions
might probably speak some thing like them.

He was got into his Chamber, there to entertain his thoughts with the greater
Liberty, where alas what felt he not, what said he not, and what
extravagancies was not he then guilty of; But he was not long there before his
Father was acquainted with his disturbance; When hurried on by that indulgence,
he always had had for him, pursued him into his Chamber, and taking him by the
hand, with the greatest tenderness, that ever Father yet discovered, He asks
him of the cause of his Melancholy; he entreated him to cashier it, as he
faithfully promises, he will endeavor to do the cause of it. And then seeing
him in a deep Reverie he claspes his hand something faster, and with tears in
his eyes, which expness'd his sentiments in their mute dialect, better then all
the Elegance in the World. What means this silence, my Dear Boy; said he, why
do conceal thy misfortunes from a Father, that would sacrifice his Life and
Interests to pull thee thence? for Heavens sake tell me what powerful cause
has oppressed thee with so killing a Melancholy, Let me partake of thy
misfortunes, as thou always most dutifullie have of mine. Make thy Father thy
Confident, and assure thy self that I will omit nothing that may re-instate
thee in thy former tranquillity.

Thus did the tender Father, caress his Son, but could not yet extort a word
from him; But continuing still importunate, when the Young Man perceived his
Father would have an answer, with a Voice that easily showed, what the
thoughts were he was to express with it. For the Gods sake, let me alone, Sir,
cried he out, and he pleased to pardon a disobedience that only my respect to
my Father could have produced. He said no more, nor could the poor Symphronius
make any probable Conjecture yet, whence his Sons misfortunes and his own
proceeded. And after having made a Hundred (Questions, to no purpose, he was
forced to leave him to his Solitude, where not long after he found him in a
very vehement Indisposition, which gave him the most fatal Apprehensions, that
he was ever capable of conceiving.

Ah! Unjust Gods, would he often Cry out, and did that Piety I have always
had for you, deserve such a recompense? Could not all my Incence, and
Sacrifices divert your Fury; Was there not Jews enough, and Christians that
scorn you, and all your Deities, to Plague with your Calamities, that you
dispense them so prodigally on your most Religious Observers? Had you but that
compassion you have planted in Human Breasts, and were you not either above or
below it, (for I cannot tell which to term it) you never would have injured so
much Goodness and Innocence; at least if you would but look upon him with the
eyes of a Father, of so indulgent a Father as Symphronious. And thus did the
unhappie Father make the Gods acquainted with his sorrows, which had it been
directed to a Dietie, that could have heard, and had any power to succor him,
might have proved efficatious, for all his Blasphemies. But in vain he Cried,
he Prayed, he Cursed; his Cries, his Prayers, and his Curses were like those of
Romantic Amourists, that compliment the Woods, the Seas and Rocks, that they
fancy are less cruel, then their cruel Fair Ones; sance they give them the
hearing, which their Ladies will not do, and the complaisant Echo gives them a
favorable answer to all their Petitions. But had not the careful Symphronious
taken a greater care of his Son, than his Gods did, a Fever might have
dispatched him out of the World, that was to fall by the immediate hand of the
Almighty.

Our old Governor stays not long this condition, but procuring the best
Physicians that were in Rome at that time, he endeavors by them to learn the
cause of his Sons distemper. They felt his Pulse, they consulted his Urine; but
all their endeavors, according to the precepts of their Art, proved
ineffectual, which renderd the Old Gentleman a mere Desperado, and I persuade
my self that that grief which was derived to him from his Son, was of the
nature of some plants, a slip whereof will make a more goodly Body than the
Mother-stock, from whence it was taken: Since his Sons extravagant sorrows were
moderate in comparison of his.

The Young Symphronius still pind away, and the Physicians being ignorant of
the cause of it, durst not make use of any Remedies. The Loving Father was yet
the more unfortunate, in that he was enforcd by another's Pulse to feel for his
own indisposition. The Physicians acquainted the Governer with all they had
done, and avowed that the Soul was more disturbed then the Body, that it
exceeded their power, to apply Remedies to that, they expressed their sorrow
that they could not serve him, and protested that except his Son were better
satisfied, it was impossible he should stay long in the World.

You may give a guess at what Symphronius suffered at so unwelcome news as
this, if you consider a loving and indulgent Mother, that was a little before
made a Widow by the Death of her beloved Husband, attending the Bed of her
only Son that she now tenderly dotes on, who just now in the Flower of his
Age, and when she had provided some Lovlie Lady to make happy with her chaste
Embraces, lies engaged in a cruel Feavor, which either over vehement Exercises
or some Surfeit may, it is possible have produced; and just now expiring his
latest Breath, which his good Mother stands ready to receive, and catches at
his Soul in it is excursion into Eternity. Thus stood the poor Old Gentleman,
and it is possible something more afflicted, in that he had something yet left to
fear, whereas the unhappie Mother was freed from so troublesome a Passion, and
she had lost so much she need not any longer fear the fury of her enraged
Fortune.

But Symphronious rather then perish was resolved to do his utmost, to extort
this secret from his Son, and thence learn the cause of their common
unhappiness, and he usd such address, that the effect could not well be
otherwise then what it was. He sat him down on the Lover's Bedside, and taking
him by the hand with the tears trickling down his reverend Cheeks. Must we Dye
then, my Boy, said he with a sigh, have Heaven and you decreed it so? He was
going on, but a World of sighs broke off his discourse, and looking on his Son
with all the marks of sorrow and compassion, he heard him with a low voice
thus Answer him: we must dye, Sir, when Heaven is pleased to call us hence. No,
cruel Child, replied the sad Symphronius hastily, we must not dye yet, the
Gods will not have it so. I conjure thee, by all that Religion Esteems
obliging, by that Duty thou ow'st me, by the consideration of thy own
Interests, as well as mine, discover this secret, that will undo us all, if it
any longer be concealed. It Is base and cowardly, it is impious and irreligious
to dye, when we can help our selves, and to creep into the Grave for fear of
our Misfortunes.

He made a pause here, and looking attentive upon our poor Lover, seeing him in
suspense what he ought to do. Out with it for the sake of the Gods pursued he;
Publish that Enemy to thy Repose, Banish it thence, and lodge it no longer in
thy breast, to thy utter ruin and my own. He spoke this with all the
earnestness imaginable, and almost frighted the young man to a confession,
that it is possible had never else been made. Ah! Sir, answered he, and sighed,
why should you be thus urgent to know that, which when known you cannot
remedy. Thou know not what an afflicted Father, in his extreamitie, replied
Symphronius, with a great deal of precipitation, can do for a Son that he loves
better than all the world. I can do any thing for my dear Child; my Love and
Pity shall render me almost Omnipotent, and where my power shall prove
deficient, the Gods shall second me, those Gods I have hitherto served with
such Devotion. and that could never exert their power in a more glorious
occasion than this. Good Sir, omit your importunity, answered then young
Symphronius almost astonished. No Child, replied the Father. I must never omit
it till I know, what it is afflicts you so. Will you know then, said the Lover
very passionately. Know it at once, it is this; I Love. Is this that secret,
cried the Father, with a smile, that must be extorted from you with so much
violence? Has this cost me so many tears* Has this so much impaird your
health, and disturbed my contentment? Yes Sir, replied the Lover, with a
languishing tone, (for now he dare himself avow it) that love which I have
preserved in my breast in the midst of all my sorrows, has been the cause of
all: But this is such a Love, as when you shall have learned it is Nature, and
all it is circumstances, you will undoubtedlie pronounce it the most fatal, and
me the most unfortunate Lover in the world. What some Coy Maid has refused
your addresses, said the kind Father, and you like a poor whining Lover must go
and die fort? Is that all? Nay answer me. And is not that sufficient Sir,
replied the Lover. But that is not all. She has scorned me indeed and forbid my
addresses, but my ill Fortune has led me further. She Loves, but not me; She
says she is disposed of, and that to a person that she prefers to all the
world, and Vows this Love shall, as she pretends it ought to be, be Eternal:
And what now could render me more unhappy than I am? I Love, and must do so
while I breath. She Scorns me, and will do do so Eternally. Now having learnt
this, Sir, trouble not your self with him that is not only himself so unhappy,
but will infect all about him with his unhappiness. No Son, answered
Symphronius, I must not yet leave you, my piety shall yet find some means to
make you fortunate. Only tell me who this fair Tyrant is, and then if there is
no other way it is but dying afterward. It Is, Sir, you may easily guess her,
the Handsomest Lady in Rome, said the Inamarato should I name the most glorious
Light in the Heavens, you would immediately say it was the Sun I meant, and when I
shall tell you she is the most beautiful Lady in Rome, you may easily imagine
it is Agnes. The good Father was extremely satisfied, when he knew she was a
Roman and no ignoble one, so that smilling, If Agnes said he be the Person that
enslaved you, you shall see e're long what I can do for you, and assure your
self I am not so much displeased at your Love, as the concealing of it.

Hereupon he went out immediately toward the advancing his Design, and left
our amorous Desperado in as great a contentment, as his condition was then
capable to admit.

He flattered himself with something like what we call hope, and though he knew
no reason for it, and was confident that Agnes's resolution was unalterable.
Yet however he comforted himself, since his Father was stirring in the
business, and that in a place where his Interests might make him hope for all
things from his help; where I shall leave him deluding himself with his pretty
fancies, and see what Symphronius is now adoing.

You may very probably conjecture what address and industry the Governor
made use of, in a Design that so nearlie concerned him. He searched out for the
Lady's Father and communicated his intentions to him, to make a perpetual
amity between their two Families. He made clear to him the advantages of such
a necessitude, and in a word did all he possibly could, to persuade him to what
he said did very much conduce to their common happiness. The discreet Father of
our blessed Votary, entertained his proposal with all the civility imaginable,
and avowing to him, that it would be the most welcome thing in the world to
him, to see his Daughter so well disposd of, assurd him he would use all his
endeavors to persuade her to it, and though she seemed to have a resolution
never to Marry; he doubted not but he might induce her to it. But if I cannot
prevail by this Fatherly method of persuasion continued he, you must excuse me,
if I want the power to serve you, and content your self with that hearty
desire, I shall ever preserve, to favor both you and yours. And this, Sir, is
my final resolution, and from which all the Arguments in Nature shall never be
able to dissawde me, never to descend to any violent means; and force my dear
Agnes to any Act, wherein her happiness is so highly concerned. The Governor
was not extremely satisfied, with these last words of the discreet Father, and
the joy that he resented at the first part of his discourse, was very much
abated by what followed, considering what his Son had told of the obstinacy,
(for so he termed it) of his beloved Agnes; Nevertheless not to betray the
cause he was engaged in, I cannot choose, said he, after a small silence, but
condemn that over scrupulous discretion of yours. Have you lived so long in the
World, and are yet ignorant, that Maids must be forced to what they most
desire, and that their formal modesty oftentimes makes them refuse that, which
they pine and whine for ever after? No, Symphronius, I Have often heard that
piece of Raillery, replied the other, but can easily distinguish between that
force you speak of, and which you say will be so agreeable, from that which
has produced so dismal effects in the World. Our Marriages still represent the
rape of the Sabines; but they do but represent them; and there would not be so
much jollity at our Nuptial Solemnities, were the violence as real as then it
was, you may assure your self, I shall oblige you with that personated cruelty,
and will do all that a Father lawfully can, to favor the Roman Governor.

Symphronius receivd his Civilities very Courteously, and after having once
more conjured him to forward his Design, and protested it was the infallible
means to make him his eternally; and it is more then probable, acquainted him
with the danger his Son was in at that very Moment, and the cause of it; (which
really seems to me, the most persuasive Argument that could be used in that
conjunction;) he departed home-ward, as fast as his Love could carry him, and
coming to our languishing Lover, he cried out very cheerfully, Courage, my
Symphronius, hope still. Thy Agnes must be thine, only live and recover, that
thou may be in a condition to receive her favors. He spoke this with so much
satisfaction, that the Young Gentleman raising himself from his Pillow, as much
as his weakness would permit him, and Reading his Destiny in the Air of his
Father. Do not abuse me, Sir, said he, out of an Oppinion, that I fear I have
too much reason to retain. Is it possible I should obtain my wishes? Can Agnes
then be flexible, and pity one that her Divine Beauty has almost dragged to his
Grave? Oh! answer me, Sir, but with Sincerity and use not any Artifice to
appease my Passion, that must have real blisses, or it will never cease its
cruelty. No, Child, answered the Loving Father, there is no need of Artifice,
only confide in me, and mind thy recovery, and thy Agnes shall be sooner ready
to receive thy Caresses; then thou to Embrace, and thank her for her Kindness.

Thus did the obliging Symphronius comfort the drooping Lover, who though he
entreated him to tell him his success, could by no means persuade him to it.
Only his Father acquainted him with the greatest part of the discourse that he
had with the Ladies Father, so much I mean as made for his purpose, but he did
it, as it were unwillingly, or before he was aware, which made the abusd Lover
believe his affairs were in a better condition, then at first, he could hope
they would ever come to. So that relying on his Father, and recommending his
Love to him, and desiring him never to use any violence against the Fair Agnes,
he desisted any longer to importune him, And the old Symphronius not long after
left him to ruminate on his imaginary pleasures, and expected with all the
impatience in the world, what answer he should receive from St. Agnes's Father;
who was really no ill agent in the buisness, but pressed his Fair Daughter to a
Marriage, that he told her was very advantageous to her. But meeting so
uncommon a repugnance in her, and being at last acquainted with that sacred vow
she had made of perpetual Virginity, he not only left off his persuasions,
which he knew would prove useless, but also encouraged her to keep her Vow,
notwithstanding all the violence of Symphronius. He promised her all the help,
he could render her, and flatterd himself into a fond Opinion, that he being of
a Noble Family, and of no small Interest in the City; the Governor durst not
assault either him or his. But the Sequel baffled his presumption, and has
left us a dreadful Example, of what a man is capable of performing; when
hurried on by the sudden Violence of some domineering Passion. But I must not
prevent my Story.

The two Fathers not long after had a meeting, which doubtless was infinitely
pleasing. At the first indeed their discourse was very obliging, but their
common civilities once past over, where Symphronius urged the other to some
Positive answer, the brave Roman after some such short preamble, as we commonly
usher in ill news withal, told him plainly his Daughter's repugnance to the
Proposition, not out of any disrespect to the Young Symphronius: whom all the
City for his many excellent accomplishments both Loved and admired; but out of
a most fixed determination, never to alter her Condition. And would you rest
satisfied with such an answer; replied Symphronius. How unkind are you to a
person, that you were pleased once to call Friend, and to one that always most
dearly Loved you? This was only a formal Piece of Modesty: why would you not
use that power, that Heaven and Nature have furnished you withal? Why would you
not treat her as a Daughter? She is all obedience, and a Father might persuade
her to any thing. No, replied the other with some precipitation, I will never
abuse so much Innocence, nor force her to any thing that would meet the most
cruel of Deaths to preserve her Father. I promised you to do what I could by
softness and persuasion, and Heaven knows I have exactly performd it, but to
wrong so sweet a Daughter by forcing her Inclinations, and so consequently to
engage her in an Eternal series of Misery, is that, which I shall never endure
to put in practice against my dear Agnes. Cruel Friend, is this all you will do
for me in this Extremity? Answered the Governor and sighed; are those all your
endeavors to retreive my dear Boy from the Grave? For Heavens sake desist not
at the first repulse. She may at last alter her resolution, and you may save my
dear Symphronius, and render me the most happy, as the most obliged, man in the
World. Propose not such impossibilities for a manifest of my Friend-ship, cried
out the good Father of St. Agnes, and let not that amity I have for you, Banish
the Sentiments of Nature; let me continue a Father as well as a Friend, and
have some consideration of my dear Child, my good Agnes, as well as of the
Noble Symphronius.

These things are not so incompatible as you imagine, replied the Governor;
it is as much for her advantage as my Sons, and it will be your duty to dispose
of your Daughter for the best, as well as an Obligation to succur a dying Son,
and a distressed Father. Her resolution is but too just to be ever removed,
said the other, and it would be too plain an injustice in me to oppose it; And
since you will not otherwise be satisfid be pleased to know; She has already
got her a Husband, and such a one, as I cannot refuse. His worth, his Riches,
his Virtues, his most Noble Love and Affection, are too considerable not to
make him received. And I must avow to you, that my Agnes scarce Loves him with
a greater Passion than my self. Falls unkind Man said Symphronius; And who can
this worthy Person be, that you despise the Son of the Roman Governor for his
sake? Whoever he be, answered the other very sharply, I do, and must prefer him
to all the world. Nor shall my Love of Symphronius, nor all his menaces make me
do any otherwise.

They parted immediately upon this, and though the discreet Father of the
blessed St. Agnes, had done nothing but upon Mature deliberation, he half
repented of what he had said, and wished his Duty would have suffered himself
to speak something more agreeable. But then remembering his. Dear Savior, his
Holy Daughters Pious Protestations, and that Noble persuasion, that it was
better to have a Daughter a Holy Virgin, then to see her in all the pomp in the
World. He immediately repented again, of his easy and inconsiderate repentance
it self, and more fully resolved to further his Daughters Piety. But
Symphronius was not so much at rest: How many dreadful thoughts had he then in
his Breast, what Designs was he contriving against the fair Agnes and her good
Father: How often did he damn that Rival, that stood in his way between him,
and happiness; But at last after many abortive contrivances, and a Thousand
Menaces that came to nothing, he began to recollect himself, and considering
what an infinite displeasure it would be to his Son, to hear such unwelcome
news as this, he resolved to conceal it, and make him believe his Love Affairs
were in a very good posture. And to this end, putting on a good Face, and
suppressing that sorrow which was at present but too visible all about him, and
looking as Merrily as he possibly could, he came to his Son, and assured him by
a very Pious Imposture, that his Mistrisse's Rigor, and Maiden modesty was at
last conquered; that so soon as he was recovered, he might take Possession of
his own cruel fair one.

The Young Man could not presently believe him, and the greatness of his
happiness made him suspect the truth of it; but being it was his Father that
told him so, (that Loving and Dear Father, that had so tenderly doted on him,
ever since the first Minute of his Life, and had given such pregnant Proofs of
his incomparable Affection so lately;) he esteemed it impious to suspect him of
any deceit, and gave a blind consent to all he said, and with tears of joy in
his languishing eyes, he tendered his humble thanks, and duty Ten Thousand
times. Just so some Merchant's Darling dearly caresses his Loving Father, when
he is after the absence of some Years, returned from a dangerous Voyage. When
the Boy and his Mother are in a pretty contest, which shall best express an
unfeigned Joy, and Loving Resentments.

If ever the quiet of the Soul did extremely advance the help of the body, it
was in our lover at that time, and those two familiar Neighbors, the Soul and
the Body, did so equally share each others Joys, as well as Sorrows, that as
soon as the Soul returned to it is former tranquillity, the humors reassumed
their temperament, and the whole Body insensibly recovered it is strength and
vigor. But his Malancholy had so weakened him, that he was confined to his
Chamber for some time, where we shall leave him pleasing himself with God
knovvs what thoughts, and pursue his careful Father, who is now employed to
compass his design, and make good his word to his Son at his recovery.

To this end, he made it his first buisness to hunt out this unknown Rival, or
rather this too happy possessor of so fair a Treasure. He had spent some time
to no purpose, when at last by accident he met a friend of his, who enquiring
after the cause of his unusual Malancholy, and having heard at last the whole
Story, surprised him with the strangest nevvs imaginable. It Is no vvonder,
Sir, said he, if your Intelligence has faild you; this is no such Rival as you
expected, and to clear what I tell you, be assured from me, She is one of the
Sect we call Christians, and being besotted with that foolish and ridiculous
persvvasion, she boasts that Jesus, their great Prophet, or their Divinity, or
whatever he be, that they worship, that Jesus, that they say was Crucyfied,
and tell us a hundred strange Stories of, is her Husband, that she has Vowed
her Virginity to him, as many more of them do; and this Vow, she says, sheis
resolved never to violate. Now, Sir, if you can draw any thing hence for your
advantage, I dare witness what I say, and will embrace this opportunity, as I
shall all other, wherein I may serve you most willingly.

The Governor could scarce believe this at first hearing, but being confirmed
by Oaths, and Protestations, and those too the most Sacred that their Religion
could furnish them with, he began to think, that some plot might be built upon
this, and the thing being not very difficult, be resolved on it immediately;
and thanking his Friend for his Intelligence, and conjuring him by their former
Friendship, and what ever else he thought was persuasive, to keep all secret,
and to be with him on the morrow something early, he departed, and laid all in
readiness for his proceeding But he took all the care in the world that Young
Symphronius should not know of it, who not dreaming of any thing else but his
Mistrisse's favor, their Nuptials, and all that Train of Delights he might
expect from thence, was enjoying his imaginary pleasures that never must have
any other. Fond Men, how do we pursue we know not what, and place our selves
upon a Precipeice? Little thought he of a destroying Angel, or that Calamity
that hung over his head.

The Governor at the time of Judicature dispatched his Officers to bring the
Holy Votary to his Tribunal, who, when they came to her Fathers house, and
demanded her in the Name of the Governor, would not perhaps so easily have
got her thence, had not the Blessed Martyr her self been consenting to it. Her
Father was providing for Resistance, and imagining what was the reason she was
sent for, he could not easily be induced to part with his Pious, Obedient
Child. The Mothers sentiments were not much diffetent from his. She wept, she
lift up her eyes to Heaven, and with a thousand piercing Ejaculations, invoked
the Holy Jesus to her rescue; she recommended her Child no longer hers, but
his Spouse, into his Sacred protection; nor did her Devotion hinder her
Endeavors. It was in the midst of these preparations that the Holy Saint was
acquainted with the Officers demands, and persuaded her self that Christianity
was the Crime she was to answer for, and then kneeling down most devoutlie, and
directing her fair eyes to Heaven. The hour is coming, Sweet Jesu (she cried
out) when my Soul shall take it is flight to Thee and Glory. Lord preserve thy
servent in this my last encounter against our common Enemies. Continue thy
Gracious Goodness, let me not faint in my last effort of Piety Preserve me to
thy self sweet Jesu, I am thine, my Vow and thy Goodness have made me so; O do
not desert me in my last Extremity, but be pleased to lead me from one Crown to
another, from that of Martyrdom to that of thy Eternal Glory. What a sweet Joy
and pleasure did the good Lady then resent; what an agreeable earnest did she
then receive of a blessed Eternity, in spite of her Body, that clog to her
ardent Soul, that hung on it is Wings when it took any brave flight toward
Heaven: In spite of it, and all its Passions, she was almost ravished in to
Happiness, and saw her Blessed Lord even before her Matyrdom.

But she staid not long here, before she went to meet her ruin, as others
would interpret it, but as her Pious Soul thought, her way to Glory. She found
her Father in the midst of his Preparations, and looking upon him with a Face
as gay, an Air as brisk and lively as ever she had in her Life. Stay dear Sir,
said she, stay, and be pleased to remember that we call our selves Christians.
This is not that resistance that our blessed Lord has taught us both by his
word and his Example. He that could summon all the Angels in the Heaven, and
make all the World assist him, died quietly, and suffered tamelie the rage and
fury of Men and Devils, He did so good sir, and let us for Gods sake do no
otherwise.

The Father was very much surprised at so charming a persuasion, and was in a
doubtful suspense how to behave himself, when his blessed Daughter pursued her
petition. Ah! can you doubt, Sir, whether you ought to follow so glorious an
example. Let us go and stem the fury of our Adversaries; but let our Tears and
Prayers be the only Arms against them. Let me go, Sir, and be more nearly
united to my dear Redeemer and let me testify to all the World, that neither
Love nor Fury can separate me from so good a Master: will thou go then dear
Child, and leave thy wretched Father, replied he with a languishing Accent.
Yes. Sir, I will fly to my sweet Savior, cried out St. Agnes. I will perform
his holy pleasure with all alacrity, I have hitherto waited with patience for
the happy hour, wherein he would be pleased to take me out of this miserable
Life; but since the time is come, I will not by an un-Christian resistance,
stop up my passage to Glory. It Is my Interest, as well as my Duty, that invites
me to it, and your extravagant Love would be infinitely prejudicious to the,
should it any longer oppose those Superiors, that God has commanded us to
obey. I must consent then, I see, said her Father throwing down his Arms, with
an action wholly disconsolate, and taking my last farewell of my Dear, my
Obedient, my Christian Agnes. Go then to that Glory, which thy Lord has
provided for thee, and leave thy Parents here in tears, while thou art advan'd
to a place, where all tears shall be wiped from our eyes. I should never have
done should I tell all the passionate and pious discourses of the good Mother
to her blessed Child, who hanging about her fair Neck, took a Thousand
Farewels, and would never have left her, had not the Officers been urgent to
hasten her delivery. At last they parted, but with no less pain and trouble
then ever Soul and Body did in the Rigor of Youth, after the familiour
acquaintance of Thirty Years. Her Father would accompany her, though she
expressed a great deal of repugnance to it, fearing least his immoderate Love
might hurrie him on to some Violence, and make him endeavor to retard her
Martyrdom.

But go he did, and led his fair Sacrifice to her Stage of Glory, where the
Governor sat expecting her, and according to the usual formalitie, (which was
but too too common in those days; that is about the Tenth Persecution)
demanding what she was whether a Christian or otherwise? She confidence avowed
it, and that with as much courage and assurance, as if she had expected the
greatest honor in the world, from her Confession; Symphronius seeing her Noble
Confidence, began to show her the danger of her obstinacy, and with a malicious
kind of kindness, advised her to desert it. He promised her she should be
pardoned her crime, did she not continue in it, and allured her to this
Apostasy by a magnificent promise of honors and preferments, and spoke really
so obliginglie to the fair Martyr, that any Soul but hers, which yet had not
arived to her Thirteenth Year, would have been perverted. But she brave Lady
kept her undaunted assurance, she firmlie stood the Shock of all his
Insinuations, and like a Christian Heroine looking upon her Judge with eyes
that had prevented her words, she made him see but too visibly the effect of
his persuasions. No Governor, cried she out, omit thy promises, unless thy
Liberality could Enrich me with better things, then those thou mention'st. My
God has prepared a more Glorious Possession for his Servants, and though my
Christianity must expose me to Death, with all it is terrible appendages, know,
I will still preserve it, and when I have by all the tortures thou can Plague
me with, ended my miserable Life, to be Translated to a better; I will still
hug my persuasion, and bless my Holy Jesus, that for so small a suffering is
pleased to place me in an Eternal State of Glory; I Will expire my Breath though
it be in the midst of Flames and Racks, and all those Instruments of Cruelty,
that your Ingenious Villainy can possibly invent, with an incomparable joy, and
a transcendent contentment; since I must die for my dearest Lord, who was
graciously pleased to do more then die for me; Yes Sweet Savior, I will, if it
be thy Holy pleasure, and manifest to those Infidels, that all their
Persecutions shall never divide thy Church and Thee. And since that if I lived
with Thee, in my death I will never be divided.

She said this, with so Heroic a boldness, that the people could not choose but
admire her, and wish with all their Hearts she were disengaged of that
bewitching piece of Folly (for so they called Christianity) that exposed her
to so manifest a danger. But the Governor had very different thoughts of her,
and called her Brave boldness, Sawciness, and Obstinacy, and said her
Christianity had made her Beside her self, and since his Promises proved
ineffectual, he resolved to take a rougher course with her, and see what
Menaces and Threats would do. He esteemed all her Protestations as vain, idle
Rhodomantado's, which a few harsh words, and the very Sight of Tortures might
force her to forsake. To which purpose, we shall, cried he, in a transport of
Fury, see whether you will preserve this rashness in the midst of punishments,
and what a firm constancy you will present us with, when the Flames are about your
ears. Know therefore my young Stoic of the long Robe, except you immediately
Sacrifice to the Gods, and Abjure your Foppery, that has troubled the world
for almost 300 years, I will proceed against you according to the course of
Justice, and revenge my self and the Gods on our common Enemy. Do, cruel man,
replied the Fair Agnes very vehemently, abandon thy self to thy Fury, provide
more and more exquisite Utensils of Cruelty, then have ever yet been invented.
I will suffer all thou can inflict, and in the midst of all, I will contemn
thy Gods as much as now I do. Thou may rob me of this poor and transitory
life, which is a thing I never valued nor esteemed, but thou shall then, though
unwillingly, advance me to an Eternal one. Thou may separate this Soul from
it is Body, but thou shall join it then to it is Dear Master. In a word, what
ever thou can do to me shall never deprive me of my Sourse of Comforts. I
will still hold fast my Belief of my Savior, while I keep my breath, and when
I have parted with that servant of life, and life together, I will still
continue what I am, and glory to be called a Christian.

The Governor was astonished to find so much courage in a Woman. He could not
choose, maugre all his resistance, but admire her: He began his heart to
disesteem the Regulus's Cato's, Rutullus, and Socrates, and those Prodigies of
constancy, that the Ancients boasted of, to see a feeble Woman Rival them in
their Glories, and be ready to march to the Flames, with a truer contentment,
then ever Socrates drank up his Poison, or Cato stabbed himself. He then began
to esteem her too, and to wish he could persuade her to save her Life at the
expense of her Christianity; and considering his Sons happiness was very much
concerned in her safety, he could not absolutely resolve on her Death, without
the greatest regret that can be imagined. Besides the promise he had made his
Son confounded him, and the bad success of his Intrigue; for he verily believed
if he could but once make her cease to be a Christian, she would dispense with
her vow, and immediately consent to his desires. He thereupon assumed a Milder
Countenance, and banishing that fiercness he had a little before, he descends
again to his Milder way of persuasion. Come you must live, said he, I cannot
have the heart to doom so Brave a Spirit to the Flames. I will save you, in
despite of you, and must have you leave your foolish persuasion, that tells you
of impossibilities to come, and thereupon engages you to deny your self all the
pleasures of this present life. I will furnish you with more certain delights,
and bring you to a love of that life, which now you so little care for. Do no
more blaspheme our Gods, though they are merciful, they will at last revenge
these injuries; but come and Worship them, and let your Repentance show your
sorrow for your impieties.

Peace unjust Governor, cried out the Saint, with indignation, and do no more
strive to divorce me from my happiness, my Dear Savior. Thy sly insinuations
shall prove as useless as thy menaces, and both together, with all thou can
do beside, shall never induce me to abjure my Christianity, or to embrace a
Religion that bids me worship Stocks, and pay Devotion to the work of Artists.
I defy the Anger of thy Gods, go fright poor Ignorant Superstitious Fools with
Jupiter's Bolt, and Neptune's Trident; I fear them less then thee, and dare
blaspheme them with far greater security, than abuse the weakest of thy
people. Let thy injured Divinities vindicate their honor, with all the power
they can. I am protected, and dare bid defiance to them and their Idolators.
She spoke this with all the vehemence she could, and struck a secret terror
into all that heard her, who stopping their ears, and stamping on the ground,
to signify they detested her Blasphemies, cried out, Away with her to the
Stake, and let her punishment expiate her Impiety, lest the Gods plague us
with some signal Judgment, if we let such wickedness go unpunished.

Symphronius was very much displeased to see the people in such a disturbance,
and to see himself almost enforced to deliver her to the Executioner. But
causing a silence to be made. Romans, said he, content your selves, you shall
either see her die, or recant her blasphemies. The Gods will be better
satisfied with her Repentance, then her punishment, and since upon better
consideration she may alter her resolution, she shall be conveyed hence to
prison, and here to morrow we shall expect her final determination, and thence
proceed either in her favor, or to her prejudice. The Proposition pleased the
people, and they expressed their approbation by their Acclamations, and solemn
Euge's. Whereupon Symphronius addressing himself to the Saint. We give you this
night to consider better on it, and hope your reason will persuade you rather
to accept your life with Honors and Preferments, than a Death as Painful as
Ignominious. That shameful Death, replied the holy Votary very brisklie, I
prefer to all thou can bestow upon me. You need not delay your cruelties,
you have my Answer, which the fear of Ten Thousand Deaths shall never alter.
She was proceeding, when the Governor gave order to have her taken away to
Prison. She went without the least repugnance, and considered her Prison as the
Preludium to her Martyrdom.

It will not be difficult to imagine how her good Father resented all this. He
was going to speak in her defense a Hundred times, but considering it would be
only an imprudence to involve himself in her Calamity without any hopes of
helping her, he stood astonished; and in the midst of all his sorrows, a secret
joy would often surprise him, to see his Daughters pious assurance, which he
could not choose but applaud and admire, though he knew it would rob him
infalliblie of what was dearest to him in the world; his dearest Agnes. In this
Condition he stood, when the Virgin was carried away, and though he was
resolved to follow her, he could not go a step in her persuit, and then it was
when Symphronius chanced to see him, who coming to him said very mildly. Go,
Sir, and persuade your Daughter not to throw away her Life. My Symphronius
would be a better Companion then the Stake, and a Nuptial Torch, then a Funeral
Flame. He said no more, but immediately left him least he should answer
unpleasantly as indeed with reason he could expect no other.

He might have spared himself the trouble of this admonition, and the Loving
Father needed not much persuasion, to do what his Love compelled him to. He
presenly followed the Young Lady to her Prison, and I should give my self an
unnecessary trouble, to tell you all their Holy Communication. Her Mother was
not long absent, who being informed of all that was past, ran to the Prison.
Never was such dear and obliging Discourses, such Pious Consolations, such
Affectionate Tears in the World, as then that Prison was Conscious of. And I
should never Have done, should I insist on the particulars. It shall therefore
suffice to say, that at last her Parents withdrew, To leave her to her
Devotions, which it is possible, no other consideration could have induced them
to. What Pious Raptures had our Good Agnes, when she considered her approaching
Martyrdom. Ah! good God, would she sometimes say, it is in vain they expect I
should renounce my right in thee; they shall never force me to disclaim the
Interest I have in thee. The more I consider thy incomparable goodness, the
more I am confirmed in my holy resolutions, to Live and Dye a Christian; I did
not embrace Christianity to desert it shamefullie. No Dear Lord, I will never
stain my former Life with so black an Apostasy. I will not, sweet Jesu, by thy
gracious assistance, and Flesh and Blood, Durst and Ashes as I am, by thy help
I will carry away the Victory from the conspiring fury of Hell and Earth.
Then got long after in a deep Reverie would she be almost transla ted into
Glory, and inticipate that Heaven she was going to possess.

A Soliloquie.
FOnd man that do with Fetters bind the Saint
And keep fair Agnes in a forced constraint,
How thou in vain expend'st thy cruelty,
And throw'st away thy rage? She still is free,
Free as brisk Lightning from it is Mother Cloud
Broke loose, and freed from it is surrounding shroud
Fetter the sprightly Sun in's watery Bed,
When in Hesperian Seas he hides his Head,
And let the Morning call him up to vain,
The fettered Sun will soon return again:
When this it done, the blessed Maid enchain
She and the Sun will both break forth again.
So did the Jews her Savior once entomb,
(A Virgin Grave he had, as once a Womb.)
They sealed the Stone, and careful watches sent,
His moveing flight to hinder, and prevent.
The Righteous Sunbreaks forth the Watchmen run,
Or prostrate fell to adore the rising Sun,
Turned Persians without superstition.
She Prays, she Sighs, and so transmits her Soul,
To her dear Lord, without the least control
Fetter her Pious Thoughts, and Chain her Sighs,
And seal that Lovely Source of Tears, her Eyes.
Whilst she can Pray in vain you cruel are,
Her Prayers make God her fellow Prisoner,
There can no Prison be while he is there.
THus did the Holy Votary keep the Vigil to that Glorious Festival of her
Martyrdom, after the primitive custom of the Church, before Superstition or
Profainess had debauched the true Christian Piety.

But the Morning was at last come, and Symphronius at the accustomed hour
seated on his Tribunal; commaded the Prisoner to be brought. He had taken
infinite care to conceal from his Son what had past the day before, and left
him now engaged in as pleasant imaginations as ever, while his own Soul, God
knows, was traversed with the greatest distractions imaginable. Sometimes Piety
prevailed, and presented him with the fair Idea of the Chaste Virgin, tied to a
Stake with the Flames all about her, and then starting up on the sudden, she
must not dye, would he cry out, that is so Lovly in the midst of all her
Sorrows. If the Sun shining through a watery Cloud dazles our eyes, what would
he do in a clear Heaven, and at his full Meridian. While pity thus wholly
possessed his Soul, and controlled all his other Passions, Justice began to
oppose it, he considered her then as the Blasphemer of the Gods, and then
presently damming his guilty Pity; he resolved to see her die or hear her
recant. And then the next minute he looked upon her as his Sons Mistress, in
whose ruin he should infallibly bury his own and his Son's contentment; In
such a distraction as this did he ascend the Tribunal, whither the chaste Agnes
was not long after brought. I need not tell you her Parents accompanied her,
since their former affection may make you very confident of it.

She came with her former courage, and her Air so lively, and so nobly
confident, did very well inform the Judge, and all the People of her Constancy.
Her eyes proclaimed her no A postate, and a Tyrant after he has waded through
Seas of Blood, to acquire a Crown, never hugged it with a greater Satisfaction,
than she did her Persecutions. When Symphronius demanded whether she did yet
repent of her impieties, and would accept her Life upon his conditions, you
would have admired her Christian answer. The brave Heroine still avowed her
perseverance in that Opinion, which he falsely called Impiety, she pursued their
Gods with new Injuries, and after a noble Harangue looking upon the Governor
with a Christian assurance. Thou have my final answer, continued she, proceed
now to my Condemnation. I am as guilty as Christianity can make me. I shall
never accept my Life upon such base Conditions, as thou proposest; I scorn to
court thy favor, my God if he please can protect me, and if he wills my Death,
I will willingly and joyfully entertain it. Prepare those Stakes and Faggots
now, expose me to the wild Beasts, and take away my Life the next moment, I
will not disgrace my Obedience with a murmur; Thou can but make me dye,
something sooner then Nature requires. All thy cruelties can give me but one
Death, that is all thy tortures can at the utmost amount to. But that Death with
all it is frightful adjuncts, shall never deprive me of my bountiful Savior,
that will instate me in Eternal Life and Glory.

Symphronius was more confounded then ever, at so unparalled a constancy, but
staying some minutes in a deep astonishment, at last he rose up and looking
upon the Saint. Since Death is a thing you so much desire, said he with a
malicious laughter, you shall Live something longer. We can touch you in a more
sensible part, and the Honor and Chastity you have vowed to preserve, and
thereupon despised a person you were wholly unworthy of, shall be a Sacrifice to
the fury of the Gods. Is this the last effort of thy Malice? Answered the
Saint, and smiled, do, Prosecute thy Design, my God to whom I have vowed my
Chastity, is able to preserve it. This is too weak an Engine to storm my Faith,
and though I prefer my Honor Ten Thousand times to Life, and all thy gaudy
Possessions, be assured that the fear of losing it shall never induce me to
sacrifice to a Stone. My Chastity is in too safe hands for thou, or all the
world to violate it. Since you are so mightily taken with this Honor and
Virginity, said the Governor, go sacrifice to the Goddess Vesta, and so
preserve both your Life and Honor. Become one of her holy Vestals, and direct
your Devotion to it is right end. If I for my dear Savior, replied the Lady,
despised thy Son, that lived and moved, and was informed by a reasonable Soul,
and endowed with all accomplishments desirable in his age; think not thy
Goddess, as thou call'st her, the Creature of some Workman, that neither sees
nor hears me, that neither sent's your Sacrifices, nor is conscious of the
Honors you do her, shall ever bring me to Apostasy. I contemn thy Gods more,
than thee, those useless, nay more, those destructive pieces of Stone, and
metal: Your foolish Legends of the miserable Niobe, and the unfortunate Actaeon
shall never fright me into an Opinion, as Impious as it is Ridiculous. You must
needs adore a whole Troop of Gods, though your Philosophers laugh at many
Infinites. Nor really can I conceive a God of a circumscribed power, and
jurisdiction. Brake down their Altars, then deface their Imagies, and convert
their Godships, that have lain fallow for so many Ages, at last to some use; go
pave the Streets with them, you need not fear what a Stone can do to you, and
you may trample on them with greater security, then adore them; since there is
no fear they should rise up to revenge themselves, but it is not impossible,
that their Images, may, as Nero's once did, fall down, and destroy their
Votaries.

The Governor and the People were so exasperated at her saucy Blasphemies, as
they seemed not able to contain themselves, they abandoned themselves to their
fury, which at that time they thought was too just, and reasonable to be
condemned. Symphronius rose up like a Madman, and cried out with the greatest
fury in the world. We shall see how your God will protect your Life and Honor,
that could not save himself from the Cross, And then without delay he commanded
her to be stripped of all her Cloths, and then to be led Naked to the common
Bordelli, and there to be exposed to the lust of all comers. Which command of
the Tyrant was so readily obeyed, that the Holy Agnes had no time to make an
answer. The Barbarous Ruffins had in a moment performed their Office, and left
the Pious Creature without any covering but her Innocence. But her heavenly
Husband did not here desert her, for her hair fell down so long, so thick, and
shady, that not the least part of her Body could be seen. The People were
amazed at the sight, and imagined it was a trick of her Witcherie (for
Christians at that time were commonly branded with the name of Witches and
Wizards) and notwithstanding so signal a miracle pursued their Villainies. But
be pleased Ladies to consider the chaste Virgin in this condititon.

A Soliloquite.
YOu that with Auburn tresses do ensnare,
The captive Hearts of those enamored are
That with their glorious hopes your Slaves retain,
They Are Prisoners still though in a golden Chain:
Hither your eyes convert, and here descry
The natural use of your fair Tapestry.
In vain they all her Ornaments removed,
That but concealed her Beauty, not improved.
If through the Cloud she did such light impart
That never pierced the Skin, yet pierced the Heart;
Now disengaged what wonder will she be?
Her Charms no longer can admit degree.
So stand the blessed Virgins force the Throne
Of the Thrice blessed ever Three and One.
They cannot the holy Saint by force undress,
She still preserves her Vest of Righteousness.
Clothed without Clothes, and naked without shame,
In what strange pleasing Labyrinths I am.
She a good Heretic might justly seem,
Who e're would such an Adimite condemn?
A Lovely Penitent she needs must be,
Clothed in her Hair-cloth and her Piety.
Thus she retrives the Golden Age, and is
A second Eve, though out uf Paradise.
So Agnes stands at Eve in Edom then,
Here Is Serpents too, but ah! There Is no such men.
THus was the fair Agnes led along toward the place of dishonor. Whilst the
People, even the most zealous among them, that is the most savage and impions
could not choose but commiserate her condition. The Roman Ladies, though they
were as great Sticklers for their Paganism, as their Husbands, raged and
condemned the Governor. They blushed to see one of their own Sex thus exposed
to the sight and laughter of all the world, and though they condemned her
blasphemies, they could not think, that she deserved so cruel a treatment.
However they said it was infinitely uhjust to punish the whole Sex, for the
fault of a single Person; and after these considerations what lamentations,
what distractions were amongst them? Nay those that were the most prudent and
stayed Persons, could not moderate their Passions in so strange reencounter.

Thus did the Ladies express their sentiments of their Husbands cruelty, but
the poor Agnes was not the better for them. The savage Ruffins led her along
for all the cries of the Distracted Matrons, though common modesty, and that
respect her brave deportment had struck into them, had made the more civil part
of the People to depart, or hide their eyes from so uncommon and unbeseeming a
Spectacle.

And now at last our chaste Votary was brought into the Bordelli. She blushed,
she trembled at the sight of it, but after some minutes astonishment. It Is for
thy sake, my dear Lord, she cried out, that I enter into this place of
pollution, preserve thou my Chastity, thou that make the Sun shine on a
Dunghill without defiling it, let not my Virtue contract a stain from this
place and be pleased to keep me chaste, where hitherto there was nothing but
abomination. She would have proceeded had not the rabble disturbed her by their
outcry. She was then led into her Chamber, which was formerly dedicated to
uncleaness, but her very presence sanctified the place. The Sun can make day in
Green-land after the night has continued for Six Months together, and our
Saint can transfund a Sanctity into a Bawdy House, where virtue was never
thought of. Who would not wonder to see one on his Knees there to any thing but
his Mistress? To hear Prayers instead of Oaths, and instead of a Damn, a Lord
deliver me.

A Soliloquie.
WHat do I see! chaste Agnes in a Stew?
No, I mistake. It is not, cannot be true.
Though Stars desert their Spears when guided thence
By some extravagant Intelligence.
And the bright Errant Sol disert his Line,
And will not himself within his bounds confine.
Saint Agnes still must be
Not chaste, but chastity,
The world may leave it is order, but not she.
2.
She Is there I vow, what shall I fix upon
To reconcile a Contradiction?
She Is there, She Is there her self, behold that Eye
That inflamed Lovers, in a River ly.
Which now advanced to Heaven you may see
Measuring her Journey to Eternity.
Behold that Lovly Ray
She does on Heaven display,
Could if she pleased at Midnight make a day.
3.
Her pure and Virgin hands, that broken sight,
And tears more Rich then the Indian treasury,
Her Prayer as humble as 'twas resolute,
Bravely assured against Heaven to dispute
By these I Am sure it is she, ay, ay it is she,
They the Characteristicks of good Agnes be.
She sighs, she weeps, she prays,
Heaven never heard sweeter lays
From him that Loved, and does now wear the baies
4.
Strange Praying in this filthy place! Ah! no,
While Agnes stays it can no more be so,
Than Night can with it is darkest shades remain
When to our world the Sun returns again.
The Tyrant does in vain express his hate,
The Stew's a Temple by her Consecrate,
Whilst others make the house of Prayer
A Den of Theives, for so they are,
Stews are made sacred, while the Saint is there.
THus did she spend her minutes in that place of wickedness, her Pious Soul
retaind its native purity, and never entertained her Lord with more Devotion
than at that time. Her piety I persuade my self was natural to her, and like
all natural Motions moved swiftest toward the end. Her Martyrdom now
approaching, her Devotion was more vigorous, and the piety of all the time she
might have lived, had not the Tyrant robbed the world of so bright a Jewel, being
contracted into so short a time, was infinitely augmented. She assaulted the
Almighty with so agreeable a violence, that he showed his approbation of her
petitions in a manner very miraculuos.

While she was intent upon her Devotion, casting her eyes by chance on one
side; she espied hanging on the wall a pure white Garment, whereas when she
came in, there was none there, She was at first surprised both with the
incomparable whiteness and pureness of it, and wondered how so much cleaness
should come into so defiled a place. But immediately reflecting on her own
Nakedness, she acknowledged it was the goodness of her Lord, that did not
forsake her in that condition. She took it, and putting it on, with her bright
eyes lift up to Heaven, Dear Lord, said she, how infinite is thy goodness, it
still pursues me. Thou art pleased to succor thy poor and unworthy Servant in
a Stew, and have sent thy Holy Angel with this Heavenly Garment to cover my
Nakedness. Lord make me worthy of these thy favors, keep me pure and
immaculate, and translate me hence into that place of purity, where no fear of
Stews, nor apprehension of Governors, with their Sons may molest me. Where in
that Virgin Quire, whereof thy blessed Mother is the chief; I may caroll out
thy praises, and in a long white Robe be ever happy in the contemplation of thy
Divine Excellence.

A Soliloquie.
WHat precious present does my Savior make,
Fit for a God to give, a Saint to take?
Whiter than Snow, and what ere strikes the sense,
White as her Soul, and Virgin Innocence.
Now let our rigid Heretics appear,
Who can hate surplesses, and see them here?
Who was the Heavenly Artist, what the Loom,
That Wove the Vest, that did the Saint become?
The Angels did in such a dress appear
Those early Guardians of the sepulcher.
Those Heavenly Swans that from their Silver Throat
Breathd out Salvation in a Lovly note.
She took the Heavenly present in her hand,
Brighter then Diamonds, sparkling on the Strand.
How many charms did in the Vest appear,
And yet it was far more Heavenly, set on her.
This Wedding Garment, would she sighing say,
Had in thy Blood its spots all washd away.
I am obligd unto their Cruelty,
That left me Naked to be Clothd by thee.
Yet cannot this thy Heavenly gift suffice,
My lofty wishes will still higher rise.
Not Heaven, nor Earth, nor all the world beside
When thou art absent, can content thy Bride.
O cloth me with thy self, and let me be,
Reflecting still thy Sun of Majesty.
Yet cant this present, Lord, unwelcome prove,
Both cause it is Heavenly, and it shows thy Love.
THus did she thankfully resent the Divine Goodness, and expressed her
gratitude. And now what Censorious and rigid Christian would not consent to the
Consecration of this Brothel-house, and make a Christian Church of a Pagan
Whore-house.

While the Saint was thus employed, the People were not engaged in so Pious an
employment. They had not left the Stew, but staid attending at the Door, least
she should make an escape, and I conjecture too, it was partly out of respect
that they did not go in too her, till the Young Symphronius had had his
desires. But some of the boldest of them came confidently in to look upon her,
and feed their eyes with so unhandsome a sight. But they staid not long there,
for our blessed Savior had invested his Saint with so heavenly a luster, that
they fell upon their Faces and retird with all the have and respect they could.
Thus our bountiful Redeemer was pleased to communicate his Heavenly Wardrobe,
and wipe all tears from her eyes, or if any remaind there, they turned into
Christian Jewels, while the Glory of her countenance illustrated them. As the
Sun turns an incomparable Jeweller, when it shines through a waterie Cloud, and
makes every drop a Diamant, resplendent in its native dew. Our bold intruders
came out again, not so brisk as they went in, which gave the People a fresh
cause of Admiration. They asked them a Hundred times what was the matter, but
could not receive a word in answer; whereupon some bold Ruffins among them
resolved to march in, and see if the Sorceress (for so they called her) would
send them back in the same condition. But their confidence had the same issue,
for they returned, as much surprised as the former, so that they desisted from
such Intrusions.

Go now, foolish Tyrant, pursue thy cruelty, deprive her of all her Garments;
her God shall supply her; expose her to the lust of all the world, set the
doors open, and invite all the Roman Gentlemen to the fruition of a Young and
Handsome Lady, her God shall still preserve her, and her Guardian Angel defeat
all thy projects against her. Yes Tyrant, in spite of all thy fury she still
preserves her Chastity, even in a Stew, and remains there a purer Virgin, then
thy Vestal Recluses are in their private Apartment. But thou alas art not now
in a condition to hear good advice, thy cares are directed to a very different
end, and instead of freeing the Innocent Lady, thou art now coining her some
new Destruction.

The Young Lover that had flattered himself for some time with the fair hopes
of enjoying his wishes, was now in a condition to leave his Chamber, and take
Possession of his Mistress, as his Father had promisd him he should; He was
thinking of nothing else, when Symphronius entered the Chamber, who looking
upon his Son very earnestly. Go dear Boy, said he, and enjoy thy Agnes she
cannot now oppose thy wishes, and thou have all the conveniences in the world
of making thy self as happy, as Agnes can make thee. The Young Man was so over
joyed at so welcome a Proposition, that he could not find his Tongue
immediately to thank his Father, and show with what willingness he would obey
him; but after some time looking on his Father with eyes that languished with
desire. Igo, Sir, said he, both because my own Inclinations invite me thither,
and you are pleased to command me. He said no more but was leaving his Chamber
to fly to the Arms of his Agnes, when his Father staid him, and looking on him
with more distraction then before. But you must enjoy her in a Stew then, said
the Governor. Our Lover was confounded at so strange an advertisement. Is
Agnes falls then? Cried he out, very furiously; has she violated her Innocence?
and ruined her honor? that honor that she opposed me with for so long a time,
and that though it hindered my happiness, I could not but admire. Is the Lovly,
Virtuous Agnes, turned a strumpet, and was she only a fair Hypocrite when she
stood most upon her Virtue? Was all her Piety but a personated piece of
goodness? Ah! Sir, it is impossible for the best of Women to remain innocent for
a moment after the Beautiful Agnes has left her Goodness by so shameful an
Apostasy. No, Child, you mistake your self, answered the Governor: Ay, I do
mistake my self, replied the Lover hastily, it is impossible she should be guilty
of such a wickedness, Villain that durst suspect her, and durst believe all the
world to her disadvantage. Agnes can never be in a Stew, till it cease to be
so, and it must first be made Virtuous before Agnes can be brought to it. As
our noble part, the Soul, is never infunded, till the Mass of matter be
furnished with convenient Organs for it is reception. He was so transported in
his Harangue, that his Father could not stop him, till he came hither; but
perceiving him stay a little, he said. Your Agnes is indeed in a Stew, but she
has still kept her honor, and were Lust the only crime she could be accused
of, she were the greatest piece of Excellence in the world. Good, Sir, abuse me
not, replied the Lover something more mildly than before, with your pleasing
Paradoxe: Though were that possible, continued he, you tell me of, it would be
possible to none but my dear Agnes, and she would be the only person in the
world, that could declame Debauchery, and transfund Virtue into the Stews. His
Father seeing him now something pacified and in a condition to hear him, assumed
the discourse, and told him all that had past; he acquainted him with her
Christianity, and what had past, very faithfully. And at last looking upon his
Son with all the fury in the world. Go revenge us, said he, on that fair Enemy
of Heaven take thy satisfaction, Fruition is the same all the world over,
whether in a Stew, or private Apartment. Stand not now upon your Punctilio's of
Honor: I conjure you to it by your duty, by that Piety you owe the Gods, and
the satisfaction you owe your self, and me. It would be impossible for me,
sully to describe our Lover's confusion. He grew pale, and red again, he
trembled, and when he endeavored to speak, he falter'd, and his Tongue could
not then serve him, with that Office he required of it. His Father made use of
his silence, and pressed him so vehemently to a thing, that were it not for
some unhandsome circumstances, he desired above any thing in the world, that at
last his reason retired, and his Passion hurried him on to the performance of
it. How did his Father then embrace and caress him, and forthwith sent him out
to the the accomplishment of what he so much desired.

The Young Man no longer made any scruple to obey him, but entered into the
Stew, as he would into that Elysium their Religion told them of. He entered
indeed, for nothing now could stop him, but with the same success as that Roman
Emperor, the Noble Julius, did into the Senate, to be ruined in that place,
where he expected the crowning of his wishes. He was no sooner in the Chamber,
but seeing his beloved Agnes, (he could not possibly mistake her, that carried
her Beautiful Idea in his Heart continually,) he spied her Heavenly Vestment,
and her surrounding Glory; he was surprised at this; but he reassumed his
courage, and advanced toward his Mistres, and his Destruction. For the Devil
by the Permission of the Almighty, strangled him. The Holy Maid was extremely
troubled at it, but considering all this was done for the preservation of her
Chastity, she blessed her Savior for his wonderful assistance, and could not
but admire his infinite Power and Goodness, that made even the Devil destroy
their common Enemies.

TOo fatal Love! how cruel art thou grown?
Hate never yet made a life Destruction.
He Is dead, his life, his hopes are fled away,
While he poor Soul, dreamed of some other fray,
Like Princes stabbed of the Coronation day,
He came to find a Mistress, and there be
Lulled into some sweet felicity.
How his hard fate opposed his sweet intent,
For a warm Mistress, a cold Monument.
Hot Devils must caress our Paramour.
Hot as his lust, nor then his flames more pure.
His lust could never with the Chaste Saint agree,
As Heaven and Hell have their Antipathy.
How safely may the Saint her foes despise,
The Devil himself destroys her Enemies.
Lust, and Devil, do the Saint surround,
Enclosed, her goodness does the more abound.
Incompas'd with a Stew she Chaster is,
Christians have their Antiperistasis.
THe Lady continued in her Devotion, and the People out of respect to the Young
Symphronius ceased their Incivilities, and seeing him stay something long
within, imagined he was about his pleasures, and therefore entered not in for a
considerable time. But at last seeing he came not out, suspecting by the
success of the former Intruders, that the fair Witch (for they could not allow
any better Title) might have killed him, they rushed in, and found the poor
Lover cold and pale upon the Ground, and immediately cried out, the Sorceress
has killed the Son of the Governor: they all pursued to the Stake with her, to
revenge the Gods and the Governor.

This lamentable news presently arrived at the Governors ears, who half
Distracted at it, run furiously to the Stew, and approaching the Holy Agnes,
Damned Sorceress, cried he out, why should thou destroy a Person, whose only
fault was his too well loving thee? Is this your Christian Conscience? And
could his Affection render him so great a Criminel? Ah! cruel, ungrateful
Woman! He was going on, when the good Lady extremely afflicted too hear her
Innocence abused so, No Sir, she cried out, and interrupted him. I did not kill
your Son, but that Master he served, the Devil; Blast not my Innocence, but
impute the Death of your Symphronius to him, that was the cause of it. No,
cruel one, said he, impatiently, thy Sorceries have produced it, and robbed me
of the greatest comfort I had in the world. But why, for Heavens sake, did
thou spare, the rest that came into the Chamber to thee, and only destine my
poor Boy to so severe a Punishment? The rest, said the Lady, came not upon so
bad a Design as thy Son did, and the just God would separate the guitly from
the Innocent. Thou lie, said the enraged Father. He was not guilty, he was
Good and Innocent, and thou art the only Criminel, or if thou will clear thy
Innnocence, and show what thy God can do, of whose power you talk of so much,
give me my Son alive again, and I will pronounce thee guiltless. Christians
talk much of Mercy and Compassion, show us now a Proof of it, and succor the
most miserable Father that ever breathed.

Though your Infidelity deserve it not, answered the Holy Saint, yet, to show
the power and mercy of my dear Savior, I will beg his Life, and doubt not but
my Prayers shall restore him. But think not Governor of Rome, that I do this
to oblige thee to rescue me. No, my Piety shall not be so mercinary. It
troubles me that that fatal Love, which your Son conceived for me, should
render him guilty of such a Vilanie, and then deliver him up to be strangled by
the hands of the Devil, and though I did not willingy produce that guilty
Flame, and though I caused it, was the Innocent cause of it, yet I would have
procured him his Liberty by any other means then leaving my blessed Savior,
and violating my most sacred Vow of a perpetual Virginity. I will therefore
humbly entreat my bountiful and Almighty Lord to restore him to his Life
again, and that ancient tranquillity he enjoyed, before my unhappie eyes had
destroyed it.

The Governor hereupon immediately retired, and left the Saint to her Prayers.
It would be impossible for me to express her Pious Oraisons, her Almighty
Tears and Sighs, that could extort what she desired from her blessed Jesus. The
Primitive method of Christian Devotion was then Vigorous, and Regular, and not
capable to be desired by us that live in so profane a Generation. Her Prayers
were not long, they were contracted, and therefore the more strong and valid; A
Period was included in a Word, and a whole Discourse enclosed in a Period. Such
powerful Petitions could not be long in producing their effects, as really they
were not, for the Young Gentleman presently arose, and to prove that the
Heathen only had died, and the Old Man been Buried in him, he Rose up to a
Christian, and running out into the Street, where his Father expected what the
Ladies Prayers could effect, he cried out with a loud voice there is only one
God, and that God is the God of the Christians.

SO raised! And by his Mistress too alone,
This is a double Resurrection.
She from whose hand, he could receive his death,
Without a Sigh, and Smile, away bis breath,
Does bountifully life and health confer,
Now doubly welcome 'cause they came from her.
From her sweet lips life does new charms derive,
And makes our happy Lover more then live,
He lives, and does a Christian become,
Born in the Grave, regenerate in the Tomb.
Say Christians what a sweet divorce was this,
How Lovly such a Separation is!
He died, but only died to live again,
As he is regenerate that is a Christian.
So after a debauch I Have often seen,
When sense and reason both were put out clean.
A gentle slumber lock the heavy eyes,
And steal upon the Soul by soft surprise,
But when these pleasing slumbers go again,
Then from the Beast there rises up a man:
Ah! happy Soul 'twas worth the dying so,
By Death to banish Death, and woe by woe.
While from Eternal pains, short pains retrive,
And dying once thou do for ever live.
Baptized in Death, turned Christian in the Grave,
What need he fear, that Death it self can save.
PIous Martyr, thou for all his outrages and violence which his extravagant
Love made him commit, do graciously pardon him, and by thy holy Prayers,
freest him from that Death he had endured, and deserved, to give him the hopes
of Eternal Life and Glory, in making him commence a Christian. How Divine is
this Act of thine gracious Lady, how well do thou Imitate thy God in this?
That oftentimes denies us what we desire, when we beg those things that may
hurt us, and gives us what his infinite Wisdom knows most convenient. Thou
would not grant him, what his immoderate affection made him desire; thou
woul'st not cease to be what thou wast, but made thy Lover like thy self, a
Christian, and made him approve of thy blessed choice, and Love thy dearest
Lord, almost as ardently as thy self.

The People were distracted, at so strange an encounter. The Priests, being the
most concerned Persons, were the first that demanded St. Agnes, and cried out,
that her Sorceries and Blasphemies could no other way be expiated but by
Flames, and then threatened them with the fury of the Gods; if such offenses
were left unpunished. The giddy Rabble seconded their zealous Priests, and all
the City, almost urged the necessity of punishing St. Agnes. The Governor
being now frighted by so many Signal Miracles, did all he could to retrive her
from those dangers he had engaged her in, but all was to no purpose. He could
not resist the fury of an incensed Rabble. So that seeing his impuissance to
rescue her, and perform his promise; which though the good Agnes never
mentioned it, he still remembered, he forthwith retired, and committed the
management of the buisness to his Substitute one Aspasius, that neither was
willing to save the Saint, as being a notable Zealot for their superstition,
and no friend to the Christians, and had he desired it the most in the world,
he durst not have resisted the multitude. Where (...) he immediately consented
to her punishment without repugnance, and formally condemned her to be burn.

COndemn her to the Flames! stay Tyrant, stay
She has no dross that can be purged away.
She Is pure as sprightly Seraphs that do prove
No other Flames, but those pure Flames of Love.
Flames of the Love Divine, that with perfume
Only guild on'e their object, not consume.
Why should you needless trouble thus pursue?
The Saint her self would finish, what you do.
Her servent Zeal, and Love might well suffice
Alone to make her Love's sweet Sacrifice.
If in your Flames she must her breath expire,
Your Cruelty will but advance her higher,
She Will scale the Heavens in a Coach of Fire.
Brighter in Flames, our blessed Martyr is
Then Caesar's in their Apotheosis.
Her Soul without an Eagle climbs the Sky,
Keeping her heavenly Quarry in her eye.
It Is to no purpose to speak any longer to the mad Rabble, and their madder
Governor. They are not at leisure to hear any thing in the favor of St.
Agnes. The buisy Priests think not themselves secure, nor their Gods safe at
their Altars, till she was dispatched out of the world. The People apprehended
strange Judgments, if such unheard of Blasphemies should go unpunished. So that
the conspiring fury of Priests and People, hurried our holy Votary to the place
of Execution; Be pleased to consider her Noble Constancy, she comes, her eyes
shine brighter then those Flames that are provided for her punishment, and her
Heart burns, with a noble ardor; but all these charms cannot prevail with the
cruel Villians, to remit her punishment: they persist in their cruelty, as much
as she does in her Devotion, and here it was that she gained a noble Victory,
and kept her Christianity with as much constancy as they opposed it: She was
now brought to the Stake, and the Faggots placed round about her, but all could
not tempt nor terrify this Heroic Martyr of Christ Jesus, she lift up her
hands her eyes toward Heaven, where her Heart had rested more then in her Body
many Years before. I come sweet Jesu she cried out; receive thy Martyr into
Glory; while she was saying this, the People to stop her Mouth put Fire to the
Faggots which immediately were all in a Flame; but the Pious Agnes still
continued her Devotions, all the crackling of the Flames and outcries of the
People, could not distract her. So I persuade my self in that dreadful day of
Judgment, thy Good Elect sweet Redeemer, will servently Pray unto thee, while
all the World is on Fire about their ears, and the miserable Reprobates make
the most woeful lamentations, that their despair and Anguish, and the worm of
Conscience can suggest them. The Pious Agnes still prayed and sighed and
recommended her Soul to Heaven, but her merciful Lord, freed her from the
violence of the Fire. How were the Flames then divided and only warned the
Saint, and then daparted, and what need a Christian, one that deserve that
Glorious Title, fear and tremble when the Waters and Seas retired at the
Prayers of a Moses, and the Fire at the Prayers of the Three Children, and St.
Agnes. While she thus continued her fervent Ejaculations, the Flames were quite
extinguished, and not one spark could be found in the Ashes.

WHat ails this charming Victress of the Fire
Whence do the frighted Flames in have retire
No Clouds have from their Wombs disclosed a shower
That might retard their force, or quell their power
It Is so, the greater Flame or' ecome the less,
The Sun our weaker Fire extinguishes.
Thy fervent Zeal, fair Sain's too great and high,
To suffer any Fire to burn that is nigh.
The conscious Flames first saw, then fled away,
She destined was to purer Flames then they,
Blessed Saint in this you more victorious are,
Then those, that so before protected were.
The first did with their Skins but gently play,
It kissed them on, and never fled away
Those gentle Flames, it is true never burned the three,
Thy civil ones, nor burned nor staid with thee.
Before Chaste Agnes the swift heats retire,
She that never burned with Lust, may dare the Fire,
If men turn Cruel thou know where to fly,
Flames will indulge that safety they deny.
ANd now the Fire was quite extinguished, and the Saint stood Pryaing in the
midst of it is Ashes, like some brave Hero, that stands encompas'd by those
Carcasses, that his Victorious Arm has made so.

The People were so astonished at so manifest a miracle, that they stood silent
for a long time, and had, I believe, scarce ever pursued their cruelties, had
not the barbarous Priests imputed this miracle to her Sorceries. The Governor
Aspasius seemed to favor their Opinion, and the foolish Vulgar as they are
easily persuaded into any thing, embraced it, and suffered themselves to be
abused into an Error as Ridiculous, as Damnable. Holy Agnes what were thy
sentiments of their cruelty? How did thou entertain those Scandals? And with
what patience could thou hear thy purest Innocence so stained and blasted? My
Lord, thou cridst out in the midst of the Multitude, where thou then wast, with
what ease and pleasure do I follow thy holy Example? They called thee Beelzebub,
and accuse me for a Sorceress: thou know my Innocence, thou my Master, to
whom I must stand or fall. I can despise the living imputations of malicious
men, when I suffer for thy sake, and nothing can be disagreeable to me, that so
dear a hand as thine is pleased to lay upon me.

Since their first effort of cruelty had failed the Villains, they resolved to
make use of another, and after some deliberations fixed upon beheading. The
Proposition was approved of the People, and without any longer delay they led
our holy Martyr to the Scaffold. At last, brave Christian, have I brought thee
to the place of Martyrdom, whence thy Pious Soul must fly into the Bosom of
thy Savior. Aspasius made use of the Peoples Pious Fury, and least their minds
should alter, commanded the Exec^^ioner immediately to perform his o^^^e, who
after the Saint had recommended her Soul to the Almighty, once again (so good a
deed could not be iterated to often by so good a Person) and laid down her fair
Neck on the Block, with as much tranquillity, as she used to do on her Pillow,
after she had spent the greatest part of the night in her private Devotions, he
gave the fatal blow, and severed her Head from her Body.

Thus fell that constant Martyr of Christ Jesus, the blessed St. Agnes, not yet
fully arrived to the Thirteenth Year of her Age. You may justly now admire her
admirable constancy at those Years. But she good Lady had prevented her Age,
and become a perfect Woman, and most consummate Saint and Martyr, before other
Ladies as Old as she then was, give themselves the trouble of one serious
thought, or an hour of regular Devotion. Her Constancy her Chastity, but above
all her Devotion, and all therest of her Christian Virtues were so admirable,
and shone with so great a luster, that it would seem almost as Ridiculous in me
to show them distinctly, as to point out the Sun at Noon, or the Moon at
Midnight.

THus she from Torture does of Torture go,
And what the falmes could not the sword must do.
In vain the Pious Flames such mildness used,
The Sword will give that Death, that they refused:
See how her Purple drops came trickling down,
Those Stars that must adorn the Martyr's Crown.
Why should the Blood along her Neck appear,
Nature, alas designed no Purple there.
Nature from Grace how much you disagree?
What that esteems a Grace you Vilify.
From her wide Wound a Thousand Beauties flow,
That please the Heavens, and all but us below,
Bad Judges sure! that nere discovered
A charm in ought, but what was white and red.
Thus do the Ladies handsome still appear,
Roses and Lillies all our Beauties are.
SHe ^^ed in the 300th Year of our Lord or there about, and the Church
Celebrates her Festival opon he day of Martyrdom, which is the Twenty Frist day
of January.

And now to make this History complete, I should tell you, what became of the
Governor's Son, that was now very happily cured of his Passion, by the Prayers
of the good Martyr, his dear Mistress. But really there is so little to be
found amongst Authors, that I judged it better to omit it, then to bring any
conjectures of my own, without any grounds for them in St Ambrse, etc. But it
seems to be more then probable, that he lived a very good Christian ever after,
and when he could not see his dear Agnes any longer, (for she was now without
question more Lovely to him then before, since he must needs esteem those
Christian Virtues before any of those accomplishments, he had before so much
admired in her, though form^^ly he had injurously termed them Impieties^ when I
say he could not enjoy her holy Company, he still preserved her Memory very
tenderly, and did still Imitate her Christian Virtues, which would open him an
infallibe Passage to our fair Martyr.

There is something more of certainty concerning her good Parents: they buried
her pure and Chaste Body in Via Numentana not far from Rome, where they
commonly, according to the Primitive custom, came to perform their Devotions
and lament the loss of their holy Daughter. One might easily pardon them
without doubt for so just a sorrow, and he must needs be insensible that was
not infinitely afflicted at so vast a loss as this. But our holy Saint to
comfort her distressed Parents, was pleased to appear to them at her own Tomb,
accompanied with a Glorious Troop of blessed Virgins all in white, and desire
them (...) as ever she had done in (...) cease their useless Lamenca^^^. She
told them, these irregular sorrows very much injured her, and made them seem to
doubt of her blessed Condition. All the cruelty, continued she, that they used
against me, has turned extremely to my advantage, and that Death that extruded
me out of the World, has seated me in a Place of Glory; where if any thing
could molest and afflict me, and Heaven could admit of any vexation, be assured
your sorows would effect it. And really I know not what can be the Subject of
all your Tears and Sighs, and your Grief that is the cause of both, your Agnes
still lives, and lives most Glorious in the Holy Company of these good Virgins,
and in the service of our common Master the Holy Jesu. What Parent would shed
his unseasonable Tears at his Sons advancement to a Throne, or if he needs must
weep would shed any other then those of (...) Crown of Martyrdom I (...) the
Caesar's ever had, and (...) more August as well as ha^^y, the all the Livia's
and Mesalina's, in the World; and might more justly seem (if there be any
Justice in any thing that is vicious;) an Object of your Envy, then your
Lamentations. For Christ's sake, therefore give over your more then unnecessary
sorrows: weep not for Agnes, but bestow your Tears on a fitter Subject, and
wash away your Impieties that make our Saviors Wounds deeper then the Jews did
make them. In am happy, and those good drops of Christian Penitence will make
you so, and securely bring you to the Beatifick Vision of our Heavenly
Redeemer. The Saint said thus and then immediately vanished away, and her
Friends returned home, full of unspeakable consolation. And hence our Holy
Mother the Church has ordered the second Festival of (...) be kept on the
Second (...) which was the day when (...) her Parents.

(...) here insert the Life of her good Foster Sister, St. Emerentiana, that
was Martyred at the Tomb of St. Agnes, with the miraculous cure and conversion
of Constantina, whereupon she built a Temple in the place, where the Chaste Body
lay, but it being my purpose only to bring the Lady to her Glorious Martyrdom.
I shall refer you to the Authors, of the Lives of the Saints, and conclude this
History with a Prayer to Almighty God of his Infinite Goodness to give us his
Heavenly Graces, that we may Imitate the Holy Life and Constant Death of his
Blessed Martyr Saint Agnes.

FINIS.

