IMPRIMATUR,

C. Alston, R. P. D. Hen. Episc. Land. a Sacris.
Dec. 19. 1692.
A Practical Discourse OF PATIENCE. EXCELLENCY USEFULNESS and REWARDS thereof.
By a Divine of the Church of England.

LONDON: Printed for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter Exchange in the Strand.
1693.

THE PREFACE.
FOR Satisfaction to those, to whom Custom makes a Preface a Debt, the Author
is willing to let us know, that this Treatise of Patience was the Argument of
several Letters written to a Person of great Honor and Religion to support her
under one of the heaviest Strokes that God's hand could lay upon her in this
World, except he had wounded her Spirit with so deep a Sense of his Displeasure
against her, by reason of her Sins, as not to be assuaged, and made his Arrows
stick so fast there, as not to be drawn out.

And though what she then found in some measure useful to the mitigating her
Anguish under so sharp a Trial and the staying her Mind from sinking under so
terrible a Blow, she judged might be beneficial to others in some circumstances
of Sorrow like hers, or any other sort of Trouble the World is full of, either
to calm and soften the Violence of their Passions, or to uphold their Minds
from extreme Dejection, or raise them up again; and thereupon desired it might
be communicated for their benefit as far as publishing it would serve that end;
yet the Author at that time modestly declined the complying with that Request,
upon this Consideration among others, that though she was a Person in her self
of a very accurate Judgment, yet she might pass too favorable, and
consequently a partial one on it with regard to him who sent it; and that she
probably might commend the Prescriptions contained in it; not because they had
any extraordinary Virtue in them to give her any ease, or to help toward
working a Cure upon her afflicted Spirit, but from being pleased with the
charitable Intentions of him who dictated them to her in that Distress; as some
Medicines prove many times effectual to the relief of a Patient, not so much
from having a Force adequate to the Distemper, as from the sick Persons good
Opinion of the Physician, who directed them. Since that time till almost this
present, this Tract has been laid aside neglected among several other Papers,
both of different, and agreeable Subjects to it: When the Author resumed and
reviewed it, to try what assistance he could draw from the Considerations
therein offered to another, to buoy up his own Mind under a less sort of
Calamity befallen him (as that Word is often applied to signify the diminution
of ones Condition) and to enable him to bear the Adversity, as in the Phrase of
the World any sort of Suffering is styled.

And finding some Advantage of that kind to himself from perusing his own
Meditations, he began thence to entertain an Opinion, (and hopes it may not be
too kind and fond a one) That perhaps they might be in the same sort beneficial
to others. And indeed the Shipwracks which befall Mankind on this Sea, which is
the Scene of their Commerce and Management of Affairs, are so frequent, as
render innumerable Persons so miserable, at least as to stand in need of being
relieved by good Counsel; the accidents so many, various and sudden by which
they are thrown down from their Station, when they have imagined themselves
most strongly rooted, and by the Fall so bruised and crushed, that make it a
seasonable Charity to endeavor to bind up their Wounds, to pour in some Oil to
mollify their eagerness, and to administer some Wine to revive and refresh
their Spirits. And last of all, there are multitudes of others, whose Virtue
being too sluggish, weak and drooping to uphold and maintain it self against
any violent shock, may make it necessary to have it excited, quickened and
animated by such Hortatory Discourses, and confirmed by the Heroic Behavior
of those, whose Examples are here represented.

If God shall be pleased by the influence of his blessed Spirit to prosper the
Advices here laid down, the Reasons, with Motives and Encouragements, by which
they are enforced, so as they may work any part of the forementioned good
effects on any person who shall have the mind or opportunity to peruse them, he
who makes them Public will have the abundant Satisfaction of having attained
the end he propounded in doing so, and the pleasure of having those good Wishes
he sends them accompanied with into the World answered and completed, and may
God have all the Glory.

THE CONTENTS.
S. 1. THe Vicissitudes of the World, and the various Calamities of Humane
Life, make a Discourse on this Argument useful. Page 1 S. 2. The Designation of
the Method. p. 3 S. 3. A Definition of Patience, what it is. p. 5 S. 4.
Arguments representing the necessity and benefit of exercising this Virtue. p.
8 Arg. 1. 1. Impatience being the Original of all Evil, will let us see this.
p. 9 Arg. 2. 2. Patience the Principle of all Obedience, and so of all Virtue.
p. 13. Of Charity in forgiving. ib. And Charity in dispensing Alms, p. 14. Of
Mortification, and of the Confessing of Jesus Christ. p. 15 Arg. 3. 3. No
Calamity so heavy but may be born with Patience, p. 16. And (2) so born it
becomes lighter. p. 26 Arg 4. 4. Sustained by Patience it turns to good
account, whereas Impatience renders imaginary Evils, real ones, and augments
the real. p. 29 Arg. 5. 5. The Danger of Prosperity, if not born with
moderation, and the difficulty of bearing it so helps mightily toward the
bearing of Adversity with Patience. p. 41 Arg. 6. 6. Afflictions are sent by
God, and therefore to be born with Patience, p. 45. For, (1) He may justly send
them by virtue of his Supreme Dominion, p. 55. (2) Though he may do this, yet he
always sends them in Wisdom. (3) In Goodness to us. p. 69 Arg. 7 7. Patience is
necessary to Perseverance, and so consequently to Salvation, because there is
no Salvation without Perseverance. p. 74 S. 5. Examples produced to engage us
unto the practice of this Virtue by the force of imitation. 1. (1) The Example
of God's Patience alleged to stir us up to the exercise of it, when so doing
we imitate him. p. 84 2. (2) The Example of Christ. p. 90 3. (3) The Example of
Job. p. 107 (4) Examples of others might be super-added, even of Heathens as
well as Christians. p. 116 S. 6. The Practice of it urged from the
Consideration of the Example of God's Saints. p. 121 S. 7. Directions for
establishing our Mind in Patience, by considering, (Dir. 1. 1.) The
inevitableness of Afflictions and Calamities. p. 128 2. That we have reduced
our selves to the suffering them as a punishment for our Sins. p. 139 N. 1. And
first it is set forth, that they are Punishments which our Sins have merited.
p. 140 N. 2. That albeit they are merited, yet they are less than we have
merited. p. 149 N. 3. As God may, so he will punish us farther, if we are
impatient under his Correction, even for this Sin of Impatience. p. 152 3. By
considering their Necessity in regard of our Christian Calling. N. 1. Their
Necessity (1) from God's Ordination. p. 155 N. 2. From a voluntary Obligation
we have brought our selves under to suffer. p. 159 N. 3. From the Connection
there is between enduring them, and receiving the Reward we hope and contend
for. p. 161 Dir. 2. 4. By considering that they are sent not altogether in
Justice to punish us, but (1) in Clemency to reform, and so to prevent the
inflicting of more terrible Punishments. p. 165 (2.) As Paternal Corrections,
and so as marks of Paternal Affection. p. 171 Dir. 3. 5. By considering that
God in a proper and convenient Season will ease or deliver us out of all our
Afflictions. p. 181 Dir. 4. 6 We should weigh with our selves the important
advantages of Patience, both in regard to the present and future Life. p. 188
N. 1. And first, we should consider the Advantages in order to a future Life,
of bearing with Patience the ills which are done us by Men, because God will
avenge us. p. 189 N. 2. 2. Because he will amply reward us with the Joys of
Heaven, which in an infinite proportion transcend the Sufferings of this Life.
This Consideration made the Confessors and Martyrs of old meet and bear their
Sufferings with so much Alacrity as they did. p. 196 N. 3. Memb. 1. The same
Consideration of the Reward will make us bear patiently the Evils which are the
common incidents of Humanity. p. 215 As first, Diseases which are of God's
infliction. p. 216 M. 2. 2. Death. The worst kinds of it, and in any place or
time. p. 222 M. 3. 3. The Death of our Friends, which usually causes a Sorrow
of all others the most afflicting. p. 231 S. 7. 7. Dir. 5. To read frequently
the Holy Scriptures, and to meditate on the Precepts and Examples of Patience
set forth there. p. 247 S. 7. 8. Dir. 6. To pray to God to set home all, both
Precepts and Examples of Patience on our Hearts, and infuse the Grace of
Patience, and the Joys and Comforts of his Holy Spirit into them. p. 251 A
Collect for Patience. p. 260
ERRATA.
PAge 29. Marg. for illustrated read sustained. Ib. for whereby read whereas.
p. 129. del. Marg. 1. in respect of our Humanity.

A Practical Discourse OF PATIENCE.
SINCE there is nothing permanent The Discourse on the Argument useful amidst
the Vicissitudes of the worldly Calamities of Humane Life.
and durable in this World, no, not it self; but the Earth, while it is laid
upon Foundations so sure that it cannot be moved, shall yet melt away like Wax
at the Second and Glorious Appearance of our Lord, when he shall return to
judge the World: The Heavens likewise, and those Faithful Witnesses the Sun and
Moon, shall not keep their Courses for ever, [nor have some Planets, if Varro's
Observation be true, kept the same Figure, Greatness and Motion they had] but
shall at that day pass away like thin Mists before the Meridian Heat.

Since many of the less parts of the Earth moulder and decay beforehand,
goodly Territories have been swallowed up by Inundations or Earthquakes, and
the fairest Cities have by the hand of Time been laid as low in the ground as
the Quarries whence their Stones were first dug: Stately and magnificent Piles
of Building have been buried so deep under their own Ruins, as the most
Curious with all their Inquisition, have not been able to discover the place of
their Interment.

Since the mightiest and strongest built Empires have had their Declension,
Wane and Period as well as their Birth, Rise and Growth; and those which now
are, shall have the same Fate.

Since every day shows the brittleness and variableness of our Constitution,
and scarce a larger portion of Time passes over our Heads, which makes not a
considerable Change in our Condition; and not the smallest alteration of this
kind, either befalling befalling our selves, or things, or persons, for which
we have an Affection, if we are Sufferers thereby, but makes an Impression of
Sorrow and Trouble on us; and these are apt to over-swell their Banks, and grow
immoderate, unless repressed or restrained; and they are best rebated and
assuaged by a patient bearing all the Evils which befall us, and an Equanimity,
which is the Consequent or Indication of this, in every state and circumstance
of our Lives. I cannot think but it may be useful to Mankind in general, and in
part seasonable to several afflicted Members of that great Community, to
recommend to them the exercise of this Virtue of Patience for that purpose.

2. This will be best done, if in a The Designation of the Method.
Discourse on this Argument I begin with declaring the Nature of the Virtue,
and instructing them what Patience is. (2.) Then proceed to the producing such
Arguments which may convince them, that the practice of it, even upon such
occasions, which are so sharp, as they may seem at most to justify, or at
least to excuse inordinate Passion, is most reasonable. (3.) Next to the
propounding such Examples as may induce them by the Imitation of them to the
Exercise of it, (4.) And conclude in prescribing some Directions for the easier
attaining to, or the better discharge of it.

But before I set my hands to work upon the Materials I have marked out, or by
the Model I have drawn, it is but just to premise an humble Confession to my own
Reproach, of my unfitness to Treat of this Subject, imitating herein that
Father, who arrested himself at the Tertul. c. 1. de Pat. p. 159. ad Rig.
confiteor ad Dominum Deum, satis temere me, etc.
very entrance of his Discourse upon this Theme to do so.

As he therefore, so I likewise acknowledge, that I may appear too impudent in
the Eyes of the All-seeing God, and too presumptuous in the Opinion of my
Fellow Creatures, who know me to adventure upon recommending the Virtue of
Patience to others, who find it too hard a Task for my own Weakness to
practice; whereas it is highly convenient, if not in some measure necessary,
that they who undertake the Recommendation of a Virtue to others, should first
be Masters of it themselves.

For it is a shame that any ones Words and Actions; a greater, that the Doctrine
of an Instructor, and his Conversation, should be at variance with each other.
And yet I am ready to Idem ibid. Itaque velut solatium erit disputare super eo
quo frui non datur, etc.
think, by way of Apology or Extenuation of my Confidence to add what he did;
Yet as Men in Fevers are apt to talk with pleasure of that temperature of
Health they want; so I, restless as I am under a burning Calenture of Passion,
may be allowed to speak with some agreeable Gusto of the Virtue I am destitute
of, but yet desire and thirst after it as much as they do for cooling Juleps.

3. This being premised, I enter The Definition of Patience.
upon declaring what this Patience is, which should Sovereignly preside over,
and manage the Motions of the Inferior Soul, especially those of the Irascible
Faculty.

Lactantius has defined it to be the Lactant. Instit. l. 5. c. 22.
bearing all the Injuries and Despights which may be done us, and all the
sinister Accidents which may befall us with an Evenness of Mind. Lips. de Constable.
l. 1. c. 4.
Another, following the Decrees of the Stoics, calls it a ready or willing
suffering of Evils without any manner of Complaint.

From whence we may collect, that we then possess our Souls in Patience, which
is what we are commanded by our Savior to do Luke 21. 19.
, or that Patience has then it is perfect work, which is what the Apostle
exhorts us to let it have Ja. 1. 3.
; when the several Vicissitudes and Changes without, cause no Alterations
within, when we continue the same through all the various Scenes we pass, or
amidst all the Revolutions which turn over our Heads.

When we keep the same footing, though all about us be moved and out of course;
stand firm though the Earth tremble, Reel to and fro like a Drunkard, Isa. 24.
20.
or be removed like a Cottage, in the Prophets Elegancy; or though the Sea make
a noise and rage horribly, and Psalm. 46.
the hills be carried into the midst of it, in the Psalmists; are like Gold
unchanged either in the Furnace of Affliction, or in the Sunshine of
Prosperity; are the same in foul and tempestuous Weather, as in serene and
calm; in the violent Commotions of State, as in it is most sedate Tranquillity:
When we can with the same Temper receive a Disappointment and Success, a Defeat
and Victory, the Death of Children as their Birth, the safe arrival of a Ship
in Harbor that is fraighted with our Wealth, or the Account of it is being
foundred at Sea or taken; the Devastation of our Houses and Goods, or their
Preservation; the Consumption of our Herds and Flocks by a Murrein, or any
other Casualty, or their prosperous increase; Banishment and Imprisonment of
our Persons, as the enjoyment of our Country and Liberty; the Sentence of Death
or the Grant of Life.

This in many Particulars, was that equal Behavior for which Job was renowned,
and in which he is propounded to us for an Example. And such a Carriage is the
fullest Evidence imaginable of our possessing our Souls in the most perfect
measure of Patience; to which, whether we can attain or not, we ought to aspire
and contend for it. And something like this was that frame of Mind which the
Heathen Writers would have us believe the froward Xantippe could not choose but
admire and extol in her Husband Socrates, while she beheld in him the same
unaltered Visage at his returning home as at his going abroad; which might very
well be, if as the Orator Cice. Tuscul. 3.
represents it, There was no change in his Mind to make any in the Air of his
Countenance: But that which kept his Mind even and unvariable, was his Patience
which had the guard of it.

These Descriptions may possibly be of too large a Circuit to be adapted and
appropriated to this single Virtue of Patience only, since they seem likewise
to involve and comprehend the Notions of Moderation, Constancy and Firmness of
Mind. If therefore we would accurately distinguish and separate this Virtue of
Patience from these which have such a Neighborhood and near relation with it,
and limit and bound it within it is just terms, we may define it, forasmuch as
it is proper Object is Adversity, to be a suffering Affliction without
Preturbation; or a bearing the Evils which may be intentionally done us, or
without the designed Malice of our Enemies may in the course of our Lives
befall us, with an evenness of Mind. Arguments to show the necessity of
Patience under Afflictions, or represent the Advantages of it.


4. The Arguments which may serve to evince that we ought to have our Souls
thus armed and fortified against the strokes of Adversity; or that upon such an
occasion we ought to support our selves with the Exercise of this Virtue, are
many; whereof the first that I shall produce shall be framed by way of
Remonstrance of the Inconveniences and Mischiefs proceeding from the contrary
Vice of Impatience, such as will sufficiently recommend this to our Practice:
As an ill Face represented together with a good one, sets off the Beauties and
Graces of this to Advantage.

This was the Original Sin of Lucifer, Arg. 1. Impatience being the Original of
all our ills, lets us understand the Benefits of Patience.
that bright Son of the Morning, and of those Troops of Angels that associated
with him. It was his Impatience to endure a Superior, though that Superior
was his God; and theirs, to abide in those Stations his Wisdom placed them in,
though they were eminent ones, which caused him and them to rebel; as that
wicked and unsuccessful Attempt occasioned his and their being deposed and
thrown down from the highest Region of Light into the lowest Abyss of Darkness.

And as this Impiety has first brought on his own, so it instigated him to
compass Mankinds Misery. His peevish regretting his own calamitous Fall, and an
envious disgust he took at Man's Felicity while innocent, and at his ample
Power, who had the whole lower World subject to him, and all things in it put
under his Feet, set him forthwith upon contriving, and hurried him impetuously
on to work the ruin of so noble a Creature. For could he have endured without
Grief and repining to have beheld him in that Orb of Greatness and Happiness,
he had never endeavored the degrading him from the one, or despoiling him of
the other. His Malice took its Rise from his Impatience to see that Excellency
in another of which he himself was deprived, and his Impatience increased and
enraged his Malice.

And it was this Distemper which disposed our first Progenitors to receive that
fatal Wound which Satan had by that Temptation prepared to give their Felicity,
and ours in them. For had our common Mother but with Patience resisted his
Onset, and opposed the Importunity of his Enticements; had she but persevered
in her Obedience to her Makers Command, she had remained safe and secure; or
had she been afterward qualified with this Virtue, she had not derived the
Contagion of Sin and Misery upon our great Father.

But restless until she had shown him the goodly forbidden Fruit, and
disburthen'd her self of all the fair Story the glozing Serpent told her of
it is Virtue, and unladed it in his Ears, she drew him in also into the same
Condemnation.

Cain's Murder of his Brother proceeded from his Impatience, which could not
bear God's Acceptance of Abel's Sacrifice before his own.

Esau's Loss of his Birthright, and in that of the Privilege of being Priest
to the most High God, came from the Impatience of an incensed Appetite, not
otherwise to be pacified than with a Mess of his Younger Brothers Pottage,
though this Satisfaction was not to be procured on easier and cheaper Terms
than the parting with the Blessing.

The general and ordinary Sin which provoked God to destroy the Israelites in
the Wilderness, with diverse Plagues, and sundry kinds of Death, was their
murmuring against him, and his Conduct of them by the hands of Moses and Aaron,
at every Stage and almost every step of their Journey. And what was this, but
the Expression of their Impatience.

Their Infidelity and Distrust in particular, while distressed for want of
Water at Rephidim, they did not only Exodus 17. 1, 2, 3.
mutiny against these Leaders for having brought them out of the Land of Egypt
to kill them, their Children and Cattle with Drought, but withal questioned
his Providence, -- Is the 47.
Lord among us or not? was the effect of their Impatience.

Their making a Calf at Horeb must Exodus 32.
be attributed to the same Cause, which would not suffer them to attend Moses
his coming down from the Mount with directions from God concerning his Worship,
and the manner of it.

A Defection from God now, which is generally committed when Men are pressed on
every side, and are brought to a kind of despairing of Relief, what is it but a
want of Patience, and of holding the Confidence of our Hope fast unto the end?
And has not the using of unlawful means to bring us out of Dangers and
Troubles when they beset us the same Original, the not patiently waiting upon
the Lord to make good his Promises, and give us deliverance out of them all in
his due season?

And as Impatience was and is the S. 4. 3. Arg. 2. Patience the Principle of
all Virtue.
Fountain and Source of Evil, or rather Evil it self, is but the Impatience of
Good: so is Patience on the other side of all Virtue, and every good Action is
but the instance of our Patience and Obedience. He who is ready to suffer Of
Obedience.
patiently, or does submit to God's Disposal of him and all his Concerns, the
Inflictions and Chastisements laid on him by the Divine Hand, will never
dispute his Commands, but stands prepared to comport with every signification
of his Will; while on the other side, he that repines at his Condition, frets
and chafes himself at what befalls him contrary to his Mind, will always think
the Yoke of Christ too heavy and cumbersom for him to wear, his Cross too
troublesome for him to take up and carry, his Discipline too rigid to be
observed.

An Instance or two will make the Dependence of other Virtues upon this of
Patience, or the requisiteness of this toward the Exercise of them plain.

That Charity which consists in forgiving Of Charity in forgiving.
Offenses cannot be without it; for it is very unlikely we should forgive
Offenses, yea, though repeated Seventy and Seven times over, to the Person who
thus incessantly injures us; nay, I may say it is impossible, unless we first
inure our selves to bear them patiently; for if we are provoked by them to
Anger, that unless immediately allayed, is apt to swell into Rancour, and that
if not cured or suppressed, to break out into Revenge.

Nor can that other sort of Charity, Of Charity in dispensing Alms.
which supplies the wants of the needy, be any more without it: For he who
cannot bear the least blasting of his Estate when God blows upon it, the
smallest Diminution when it is the Divine Pleasure to impair it, will hardly
have the generous Courage to put his hand to the heap of Wealth he has amassed
together, and take such Sums thence which will serve toward the liberal and
plentiful relief of the Indigent. He who has not the Heart to bear launcing by
a Chyrurgion when it is for his Health, will never venture to run a Sword
through his own Bowels, and so boldly dare to die.

We cannot chastise our Bodies with Of Mortification.
Watchings and Fastings, (and yet there are Offices that by our Christian
Religion ought many times to be practiced in order to the keeping under our
Bodies, and subduing the Flesh to the Spirit) nor be instant in Prayer, casting
our selves thereat upon our Knees, or our Faces to the Ground, (which yet the
Son of God out of a profound Reverence of his Father's awful Greatness did in
his Supplications in the Garden, recommending by that Example of his to us the
haughty Sons of Adam, the humblest Gesture in the performance of that Duty)
unless we have the Patience to endure Hunger, want of Sleep, hard lying, or the
like; for by the use of these we must be prepared to go through all the Rigours
and Austerities of a severe Discipline, in which every Combatant who would get
the Mastery of his Lusts, and strive lawfully, so as to gain the Crown of Life,
ought more or less to exercise himself.

I Will add farther, It Is unlikely we should Of Confession.
confess Jesus Christ before Men (which yet we are bound to do) when upon that
account we shall in all likelihood run the danger of Imprisonment, Torture,
Banishment) or that we should lay down our Lives for his Names sake, (which yet
in Preparation and Resolution of Mind we ought daily to do) if we cannot endure
the Melancholy of a Recess, a Confinement, the being restrained or barred from
Company, the Aches of a slight Wound, the Pains of a Disease that is neither
acute nor mortal.

(3.) No Evils are so great, or can S. 4. 3. Arg. 3. n. 1. No Calamity so
heavy, but may be born with Patience.
our Condition be rendered so calamitous by them, but that the one and other may
be born with Patience; and so the feesibleness of the Duty is a Persuasive to
the performance of it.

As no Happiness is absolutely perfect here below; for either those goods in
which we place them do not spring up at the same time and flourish together, or
they are not all enjoyed by one Person: V. Boeth. de Consolat. l. 2. Pro. 4.
This Man who flows in Riches, being of a mean Blood; that Nobly descended, but
having his Birth obscured by Poverty: A Third dies rich, and of a noble
Extraction too, but wanting an Heir to convey his Estate and Honors to: A
Fourth having Children to leave them to, but whose Crimes blot their
Escutcheons, and are the Disgraces of their Fathers House, as well as their
Grief] so there is no Extreme of complete Misery: Poverty may have that Health
annexed to it, which rich Men want; or that leisure which Men in Place, and
therefore in Business, have not; and the Man whose Rise is ignoble, may be
illustrious by his Virtue and Abilities; (as Cicero, who was an Arpinate, was
the greatest Master of the Roman Eloquence, and one of her ablest Statesmen)
may by his praiseworthy Deeds be his own Herald, and may reflect a Light upon
his obscure Ancestors. He who is destitute of all worldly Goods and Friends may
have God for his Portion, and Guide and Guardian; and on whom the Angry World
frowns, he may lift up the Light of his Countenance. As Nature has made
nothing of so rank and poisonous a quality, which is not useful to some good
purpose, (some of the most Soverein Medicines being extracted out of Poisons
reckoned the most mortal) even so by Wisdom such is it is Alchymy, and such is
the Subjection of all Humane Affairs and Accidents to it is Skill, Good may be
drawn out of Evil, Advantage and Profit from Disasters, and Comfort from
Calamities.

No Man's Misery, I may safely affirm, was ever so violent and lasting, as not
to afford him some Intervals of Rest: Nor did ever any suffer under so acute
and continued a Pain, as not to have some respite and Breathing-time. The
Waters of Marah, the bitter Waters of Sorrow never flowed in so fast or so high
upon any Souls, but that some time or other the Tide turned, and they ebbed as
fast back again, and sank full as low.

No one's Life was ever overcast with such a Blackness and Sadness, but that
Light and Gladnefs broke through the Clouds, and for a Season at least
dispelled all his thick Melancholy. As Solinus reports, there is scarce a day
so gloomy in the Isle of Rhodes, [and Seneca says the same of the City of
Syracuse] in which the Sun is not at some time or other clearly visible in that
Horizon.

There is in every Man's Age a time for Laughter as well as for Sorrow, a time
for clapping the Hands as well as for wringing them together; a time for taking
up the Harp, the Lute, the Viol, and singing to them with the Voice of Melody,
as well as for laying aside these Instruments of Music, and uttering the Voice
of Lamentation and Mourning, or the doleful Accents of Sighs and Groans. The
most adverse part of our Lives is commonly sweetened with some Temperament of
Prosperity: And God in his Infinite goodness has thought fit to make such an
alternation of Misery and Happiness, and Happiness and Misery in Humane state,
has so set Day against Night, and Night against Day; Summer against Winter,
and Winter against Summer; the Calm against a Tempest, and the Tempest against
a Calm; Serene against Cloudy, and Cloudy against Serene Weather; that we
should neither be melted into Softness by having too much Sunshine, nor be
broken in pieces by being tossed in a long or violent a Storm; that neither
ways we should be unmann'd; that the feeling the stroke of Adversity, and lying
under it, might the better commend the sweetness of Prosperity to our
enjoyment; and the interweaving or intermixing the Pleasures of this, might
make the hardship of that more tolerable; or to show his own loving kindness
and mercy in cherishing us with the one, as well as his Severity in
disciplining us with the other.

This was the Literal Sense of that Figurative Representation mentioned by
Plutarch and Max. Tyrius, with some small Variation of one from the other, that
there were in Jupiter's Palace two Casques which he pierced and drew of as he
saw occasion, the one of good, the other of bad Fate; or the one of acceptable,
the other of displeasing Presents.

This is what the observing Preacher has declared, That Eccles. 7. 14.

(...).

Lat. Ut non inveniat homo contra eum justas querimonias.

Vetablus ita explicat (...) a nostro interpret redditum.


God has set the Day of Prosperity against the Day of Adversity, the one
against the other, that Man should find nothing after him. i. e. No just Cause
to complain of the inequality of his Proceeding, nothing to blame or tax in his
Conduct.

And the Son of Sirach in these terms; that the Works of the Lord are two and
two, and he has one against another; Good against Evil, and Eccles. 19. 33.
14, 15.
Life against Death.

This is likewise the Sense of that mystical Saying of Zophar, That the Job 11.
6. La providenza Divina hadue facce, di rigore e di clemenza; temperato e
vorrato secundo lanecessita de figluoli di Dio in questa vita Diod. in loc.
Secrets of God's Wisdom are double, i. e. His Providence has a double Aspect,
a favorable and an angry one on Humane Affairs, which he changes according to
the different Exigency which is in them.

It is the Note of Theophrastus, which may be very applicable to this matter,
that the Frame and Constitution of the Universe is nothing else but a
Combination of Centuries, of Good and Evil in Equal Proportions; or rather,
with some odds, and the Predominancy of Evil.

And it is the Observation of the Judicious Philip Comines, that God has
Comin. l. 5. c. 10.
created nothing in this World, neither Man nor Beast, without an Enemy to hold
him in fears.

Heraclitus his Principle contained V. Petrarcha. praef. ad 2 l. de
remedutriusque fort late exequente in hoc Heracliti principium.
as much as this, if not more, That all things were made and are kept up by
Contention. The Winds and Element conflict with one another, and so do the
Seasons; and the issue of this War is Alternative.

The just Reflection which Job made Job 2. 10.
in his Misery on this Alternation, that he who then so sorely handled him, was
the same God who e're while had so obligingly caressed him, disposed him to
sustain the heavy load of it with Patience; and supplied him with a ready and
very reasonable Answer to return his Wife, when she urged his Cursing God for
Afflicting him. Thou speak as one of the foolish Women speaks, Shall we
receive good at the hands of God, and shall we not receive evil? As much as if
he had said, (St. Basil being allowed to be your Paraphrast) S. Basil. Orat. 13.
Call to remembrance the good things thou once enjoyedst, and weigh them
against the Evil thou now suffer; consider thy former Affluence, and let
that be Balance to thy present Wants; set thy former Joys against thy present
Sadness; compare the disturbed and mudded Puddle thou drinkest of now with the
clear running Streams, whose Waters refreshed thee heretofore; and thence learn
this Lesson, That the course of this Life is like that of a River, some part
whereof is glided by already, some is now flowing by; some is still to run into
the great Abyss of Eternity, as that empties and loses it self in the Ocean;
that thou art not to expect it should keep the same even tenor in all it is
parts, be all of a piece, all alike, clear and shining; no more than thou can
look that a River should every where and at all times preserve the same gentle
Flow, or the same Silver or Chrystalline Color: No; it is only the Divine
Life, which has no Succession of parts, no Intervals to divide it, that
continues at one and the same stay of perpetual and immutable Happiness.

But if it were possible that in some one Persons Life there should be no such
Interval of Joy to divide, no such Parenthesis to break off his Grief, and that
he could not support himself with any reasonable Confidence, That as God Hos.
6. 1.
had torn him, he would heal him; as he had smitten him, so he would bind him
up; yet he might comfort himself with this Consideration, that it could not be
of very long durance, and that would in some degree lighten the Burden when it
sat closest to him.

It cannot be longer lived than himself, whose Age extended to the farthest, is
but a Span long, and Death the end of that Span, which with that must put an
end to his Misery also. The Psalmist comforts himself with this; and that God
would set him at rest at the end of this Span, if not before it; And now Lord
what wait I Psalm. 39. 5.
for? my hope is in thee. For that is the Port where all ride safe, even they
who have been tossed most in a tempestuous Sea.

The Grave is the place where the weary are at rest, the Prisoners hear not the
voice of the Oppressor, the Servant is free from his Master; where all composed
to stillness, sleep quietly on Beds of Dust, secure from Violence, and
undisturbed with waking Pains and Cares. There he that died in the bitterness
Job 3. 18, 19, 20.
of his Soul, and never eat with pleasure, shall alike lie down in the dust
with him who died in his full strength, Job 21. 22, 23, 24.
being at ease and quiet.

But if Death be not the end of Humane Life, as by our Christian Faith we are
persuaded it is not; if it be not the wearied Pilgrims utmost Stage, yet it is
the way which without any further toil leads him to Happiness; the very Gate
which opens upon it; his Friendly Guide, which conducts him to Mansions of
Immortal Glory; his kind Benefactor, which gives him actual possession of them;
instates and settles him in them: So that if weeping endure for a night, (the
short night of our sojourning here; a Night overcast with Darkness rather than
a Day; the Shadow of Death rather than the Light of Life) yet Joy comes in the
Morning; the Morning of our Souls Birthday, in which, discharged from the
Sepulcher of their Bodies, they begin first truly to live; or in the Morning of
the Resurrection, in which our Bodies shall spring up again, like the tender
Herb impregnated by the Morning Dew, and quickened with a vital warmth from
it is Mother Earth, and flourish in a never-fading Verdure. Add besides, that as
no Temptation can befall us, but what is common to Men, and that it is less than
Childishness to lament with a Woe and Alas, when we suffer the common Incidents
of Mortality, and that Death which cannot be at a long Distance from any, will
put a Period to them; so God who is faithful, will not suffer 1 Cor. 10. 13.
us to be tempted above what we are able, but will with the temptation provide
a way to escape it, or one to bear it.

But let the weight of Misery be So born, it becomes lighter.
what it will, it is Burden as great as is imaginable, yet they are made
lighter and our Condition under them easier, by supporting them with Patience,
which is a farther encouragement to the doing this: I might say, comparing it
with the new load Impatience adds, and the uneasiness that creates, it alters
the nature of suffering, changes Pain, and Torment into Pleasure, Affliction,
into Recreation, Judgment into Kindness and Mercy.

For it is not the Stroke, while we are smitten by God, or lie under his
correcting hand, so much as our froward Carriage, that causes the smart. This
makes the Stripes look angry and inflamed; this envenoms, festers and rancours
them; as the wounded Deer, the more he stirrs, the more the Arrow which pierced
his sides galls him.

The Burden, the Yoke, the Cross, the utmost harshness and sharpness with
which God disciplines us here born with an even quiet mind, become light, soft
and gentle.

Very use and custom in suffering have Cic. 3. Tuscul.
power enough not only to qualify, but to alter the nature of it, and render
it well nigh grateful; whence we may rationally conclude, that a patient
Submission to the wise and gracious Will of the Imposer may be able to work the
same; yea, a stronger Effect, and introduce a nobler degree of change.

For thus it has been observed, that Slaves who have sighed deeply when they
were first condemned to the Galleys, have sometime after sung, while being
chained they tugged at their Bank of Oars; that Men who were afraid at first to
put out to Sea in a Calm, have by frequenting it learned to laugh in Storms;
that such unfortunate Wretches, who sentenced to work in the Mines, have been
fain to be driven and goaded on as it were to their laborious Task (so
reluctant was their Nature to the Service at first) have within some compass of
time after wrought in them with as much cheerfulness, as if they had been the
absolute Lords and Masters of all the rich Oar they dug up; that such
miserable Slaves, who doomed to the Fencing School, have hung back as if they
had been going to the Slaughterhouse to have been butchered immediately; after
a little inuring themselves to the bloody Combats there exhibited, have not so
much as cried, Oh! when fighting a Prize they themselves have been mortally
wounded; or so much as changed Color, or shrunk in their Neck, when felled to
the Ground, their Antagonist's Weapon was at their Throat.

The Noble Spartan Youths, when according to their Country's severe Discipline
instituted to harden them, they were scourged at the Altar till the Blood
streamed out, yea, sometimes till they died under their Stripes, were so far
from roaring out, that they fetched not a Groan.

And now shall not Persons of mature Age and Judgment behave themselves as
decently in the point of enduring Pain, as raw Boys or green Youths? Or shall
not Reason sway us as powerfully in this as Usage did them? Or shall not
Religion and Grace work as effectually in us as ever Reason or Custom did or
can?

Besides Time it self abates the strongest Calamity, tames the most stubborn
and obstinate Grief: And is it fit we should be beholden to Time to do that for
us, which we might do our selves, i. e. to put an end to our Sorrow? Shall we
stay for that to do this without our Wills, which we ought to do of our own
accord? Why should we not rather by wise Considerations snatch the Glory of
this from Time, and out of Prudence surcease from that which length of days
will oblige us to?

Certainly if such be the prevailing Force of Custom or Time as to alleviate
Afflictions, a quiet bearing them upon a just Estimate of their Nature, that
they are never intrinsecally Evil, and often operative of Good, may be
reasonably concluded to be more powerful to effect this, or even to change
their Quality, especially when besides it is own Virtue completely adequate to
this Service, it shall have the the Assistance of Time to produce it.

(4.) The Advantages accruing from S. 4. 4. Arg. 4. Illustrated by Patience
turn to good Account, whereby Impatience renders imaginary ones real, and
augments real ones.
possessing our Souls in Patience may be another Argument to induce us to do
so. For the Evils we suffer are either not real, or more in Imagination than
Truth, But whether true, or whether they lie in Opinion merely, they may always
by bearing them patiently, which is the making the right use of them, turn to
good Account. This Virtue is the best Defensative against the Lashes of a
malignant Tongue, or the rude Blows of the hand of Violence when it is lifted
up to strike, or the foot of Pride to spurn at us, that they do us no mischief.
This covers us against all the Engines and Instruments of Malice, or renders us
invulnerable from them; and that not by working a Stoical Apathy in us, by
bereaving us of our Senses, eradicating our Affections, dispoyling us of
Humanity, stupifying us into Stocks, hardening us into Stones or Adamants,
leaving us in the mean time only the Figure of Men; but by introducing an
imperturbation of Mind when we have the greatest Provocations to disquiet us,
and are the most sensible of them.

Fortified with this, all the poisoned Arrows of Slander and Reproach which are
directed, all the Weapons of Destruction which are levelled against us, will be
no more able to hurt us, than Darts thrown against a Brazen Wall; nay, like
them they will recoyl back upon the injurious Contrivers of them, and wound
them; the Shafts of Adversity will be so far from piercing this Coat of Mail,
that it will repel them back with greater Force than they came; by it we are
not only made impregnable against Disasters, but more than Conquerors over them.

Whereas Impatience under Wrongs Tertul. ibid. Jo. Bona manud. ad Coelum. c. 7.
5.
and Indignities makes us quit the Field to the Assailants who offer them; put
the Victory into those Enemies hands, and give them the opportunity to triumph
and insult over us. For without peradventure they intended by them to
discompose and molest, to vex and fret us, and we unwisely by Impatience concur
with and gratify them in their design, fairly suffer, or rather assist them to
get their Ends by disturbing our selves.

While the not taking notice of their Injuries would be a sufficient revenging
our selves upon them; for they propounded to themselves in doing them the
grieving of us; which if they see they cannot affect, they will torment
themselves with Anguish for the miscarriage of their Design.

The poisonous Tongue of the Slanderer, instead of blackning and cankring, may
brighten and polish our Reputation, if we will not heed his Calumnies.

Aristippus understood this well, when he made no other Reply to one who had
railed bitterly upon him, and thought to provoke him, but this, It Is in your
power to speak ill of me, but in mine to bear it quietly. And Socrates, who
meeting Aristophanes that had exposed and ridiculed him as much as he could
upon the Stage, instead of being incensed at him for this ill use, asked him
only, If he had occasion to use him again to any such like purpose of Buffoonry?

Other Ills likewise, as we term them, may turn to our Advantage, and upon that
consideration ought to be supported with Patience.

Diseases which impair our Health for the present, may secure and confirm it
for the future. The loss of Riches, which if they consist in Gold and Silver,
we ought to consider as the same kind of Earth we tread under our feet, hatched
merely to a higher degree of fineness by a greater heat of the Sun, and
purified over and over in the Furnace; if in Stones we call precious, we ought
to look upon as of the same Nature with those which pave our Streets, only more
brightned by a favorable Sun, and afterward polished by Art) Philostr. Vi.
Apollon.
may be the occasion of gaining us the true Treasure of Wisdom. Crates on this
account threw away his Wealth as an encumbrance, with which his Mind could not
be so free, as otherwise it would, for Study and Contemplation. And Aristippus
is said to have done Horat. l. 2. Ser. 3.
something like it, merely for Dispatch. And one of the Sages of Antiquity
termed that Tempest and Shipwreck a happy one, by which he was cast upon so
sound a shore as the Study of Philosophy. Troubles and Crosses afford us the
occasion for the Exercise of our Virtues; yea, inaugurate and consecrate them
such. Without Dangers there would be no proof of a Soldiers Courage, or a
Generals Conduct and Presence of Mind; unless the Sea was rocky and shelvy, and
sometimes boisterous withal, the Skill of the Pilot was not to be seen; except
the Course was long, the Racers Swiftness was not to be discerned; nor can
Greatness nor Bravery of Spirit be showed, where there are no Calamities to
contest with and surmount; without Difficulties to Master, Faith would be no
such commendable Grace; and unless there were appearances enough to stagger us,
Hope would lose it is Reputation; were there no Injuries to provoke our Anger,
there would be no place for Meekness; or none big enough to incense us to
revenge, there would be no room for Charity to bestow her Pardon: In short,
were there no Temptations to combat, there would be no Warfare for a Christian
to engage in here, he could not be called a Soldier without an Abuse, nor would
there be any triumphing for him hereafter; there would be no Martyrs, nor
Crowns for them, without Persecution, and the enduring it. The Trial of our
Faith by Fire, is that it may be found unto Peace, and Honor, and Glory, at
the appearance of our Lord Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 1. 7.

Besides, as our Virtues become conspicuous by being exercised, so are they
rendered purer for it, as Gold is for being tried in the Furnace. (For there are
some Spots which stain them, as are not to be got out but by the Fire of
Affliction) and grow stronger and more confirmed, as Trees settle and take the
deeper Root for being shaken by the Wind; and the more fragrant, as Gums and
Spices do, for being beat and pounded.

To this purpose is the Remarque of one of Plato's School on Jupiter's
Exercising Max. Tyr. Diss. 2.
Ulysses with all manner of dangers from Greeks and Barbarians, a Palamede and
an Ajax, the unhospitable Thracians and massy Cyclops, the Enchantments of
Circe and the Fury of Tempests, with wandering and Poverty, that his Design in
all this was to make and approve him good.

The like is observed by him of Engaging Hercules in so many Labors and
Hazards against wild Beasts, Monsters of Men, Tyrants, and the like, it was to
make him a perfect Hero; and that without such Adventures, some such
Difficulties to cope with, Virtue would be crampt and disabled. Aelian Ael. l.
11. c. 9. and 43. Var. Hist.
makes the Remarks, That the most renowned Worthies which the Grecian History
has furnished the World with, were extremely poor: And I dare say, the most
illustrious for Piety in Sacred History have been the most eminent in
Sufferings.

Though it be not in our power to dispose of our selves and Affairs as pleases
our Humor best; and it is well the goodness of God has put it out of our
Power, because the choice we might make for our selves might be extremely
pernicious; yet it is within our power, aided by his Grace, to steer through the
most disagreeable Condition with Patience

As he who plays at Tables: (For to this Game Plato, and others from him, have
compared the Life of Men) cannot throw what Cast he will; but yet he may, if he
has skill, manage the most unlucky one, so as it shall be to the least
Disadvantage of his Game. If it be not within our Sphere to prevent
Misfortunes, as we foolishly miscall all sinister Accidents, charging them upon
Fortune, yet it is our own fault if we are miserable under them.

But the bearing any Calumny impatiently and frowardly, which we had not the
power (if we had the foresight) to prevent, as it is the greatest Gratification
we can make our Enemies, who were the occasion of bringing it upon us; because
their Malice intended it for a Vexation to us, but could not effect their
Design without our contributing our own pernicious Aid, and disordering our
selves thereat, so it increases the Sharpness of it, and makes our Misery only
the more intolerable; as Birds that unfortunately light upon Twiggs daubed with
Bird-lime, the more they flutter, the more the viscous matter spreads it self
over their Wings, and the less serviceable they render them for that Flight
they would be at.

Afflictions are oft-times designed by God as Preparatives to a great measure
of Happiness and high degree of Glory in this World; but shall most certainly,
if sustained with Patience and an entire Resignation of our selves to God's
Will, for a Reward be Crowned with both those in the World to come; and
therefore upon this Reflection we ought thus to support our selves under them.
Thus as to the Genesis 39. ^. 1, 2, 3, 4
first case; Joseph's Dungeon made the way for his Ascent to the highest step
of Honor next the Throne. The Egyptian Bondage opened the Door for the
Israelites glorious Deliverance; the Red Sea and Wilderness were the Passage
which led them into a Country flowing with Wine and Oil, Milk and Honey.
Daniel's Captivity, and Mordecai's Esth. 10. 2.
Contempt withal, were the occasions, if not the means, of their Advancement to
the Supreme Ministry of their Masters Affairs.

The low Estate of the Virgin Mary, and her yet lower Opinion of her self, were
dispositions which fitted her for the subsequent Honor of being the Mother of
her own and our common Savior Iren. l. 3. adv. haer. c. 30.
. St. John's Solitude and Sequestration from the World in Patmos, prepared him
for conversing with God, and receiving from him by Revelation an account of the
future Estate of the Church.

And so in Secular History Marius his Prison-door opened upon his Consulship.
And J. Caesar's being taken by Pirates was preparitory to his Sovereign Command.

As to the Second, that it shall be so, we may securely depend on the truth of
God's Promises, which are to this purpose, That a Seed-time of Tears shall be
followed with a plenteous Harvest of Exultation. They that sow in Psalm. 126. 5.
and 6.
tears shall reap in joy. He that goes forth and weepeth, and bears precious
seed, shall doubtless come again with rejoicing, bringing his Sheaves with him.

That Desolation and Destitution of Comforts now, shall then be recompensed
with pure and chaste Delights. Christ came to appoint to them that Isa. 61. 3.
mourn in Sion. What? even to give them Beauty for Ashes, Joy for Mourning, the
Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness, i. e. Decking and Ornaments for
the Ashes they cast upon their Heads, or rolled themselves in, Odors and
Perfumes for the ill Smells which usually accompany neglectful Sadness; Robes
of Estate, or the Attire of high Festivals for sordid Raiment. This has been
thought by some to have been one Spiritual meaning, of God's Promise to his
Afflicted People by some Prophet; (for the Spirit Isa. 60. 7.
spoke not only in variety of Tongues by the Apostles, but of Sense likewise by
those whom he inspired.) For Brass I will bring Gold, and for Iron Silver, and
for Wood Brass, and for stones Iron; that weeping now shall be converted into
Laughter then, and Mourning exchanged with Joy. Blessed are Luke 6. 21
ye that weep now, for ye shall laugh Blessed are they that mourn, for they
Mat. 5. 24.
shall be comforted. Ye shall be sorrowful, John 16. 20, 22.
but your Sorrow shall be turned into Joy; turned into an indefectible,
unalienable one; so the following Words imply, and your joy no man takes from
you. And this Property, that it is not liable to Violence, makes it clean of
another Condition from any sort of enjoyment here.

For our Treasure may be taken away by Thieves and Robbers, our Estate and good
Name by False Witnesses, our Life and Honor may be forfeited, our Lands and
Goods confiscated, our Power may have a mighty Declension or Full Period, our
Glory a Wane or Ebb, or else a total Eclipse, our Strength and Beauty be a Prey
to Diseases, or else most certainly to Time to consume. But no Hand, no Tongue,
no Power, V. S. Chrysostom. hom. 16 int. Jo. T. 2. p. 620. ed. Savil.
no Fraud, no, nor devouring Time can rob or spoil us of this Joy when we shall
be once possessed of it.

That Paved Work of Sapphire-stone on which God set his feet when he showed
himself to Moses, Nadab and Exodus 24. 11.
Abihu in the Mount, or Sapphire brick, as Lyra and Arias have conceived it
Lyra reddit opus Lateris Sapphirini, Arias opus lateris Sapphir.
to be, has been thought to have had this mystical Signification, That God
should reward such who are harassed here by Afflictions, as the Israelites were
in Egypt by making of Bricks, with Sapphires of Glory hereafter. I might add
here, Afflictions are not so much the ordinary Road, as the only one which
leads to Happiness, but that I reserve it for a distinct and peculiar
Consideration.

(5.) The very Consideration of the S. 4. n. 5. The danger of Prosperity not
born with Moderation, and the difficulty of bearing it so, will help toward the
patient enduring Adversity.
danger of Prosperity, if it be not born with Moderation, and the great
Difficulty and almost Impossibility of so bearing it, will wonderfully
contribute toward the supporting our selves under Adversity with Patience.

It Is a Glorious and Heroic Act of Virtue to combat the Temptations of a happy
Estate, as St. Augustine has very well observed; and it is a rare and a well
nigh singular Happiness not to be overcome by them.

Its hard to flow in Pleasures and Delights, and not to have our Minds softened
by them, or melted into Luxury; to have Honors heaped upon us, and not to have
our Brains turned round with them; to abound in Wealth, and not Idolize it;
this is as hard, as to sail in a Cock-boat with a Sheet aluff, and not be
over-set. Its scarce possible to be at ease, and not to grow fowl in our Minds
with Vice, as well as in our Bodies by an abundance of Humors which will
gather there. Idleness and fullness of Bread engendered in Sodom Ezech. 16. 49.
Pride, and that other Sin which is called by her Name. This is as little
possible, as it is for Wine to stand in the same Vessel that was filled from
the Press without being racked off, and not to have Lees, or not to taste of
the Cask, if it was never transvasated. Moab, says God Jer. 48. 11.
by the Prophet, denouncing her Transportation into Captivity, has been at
ease from his youth up, and he has settled upon his Lees, and has not been
emptied from Vessel to Vessel, neither has he gone into Captivity. Therefore
his taste remained in him, and his scent is not changed.

Petrarch writing to Azo, an unfortunate but brave Prince of Parma, both for
his Consolation and Instruction, after he had contested the Opinion of
Aristotle, That its harder to bear sad and lamentable Accidents, than to
abstain from Delights and Pleasures. And that of Seneca to Lucilius, That it is
a greater thing to wade through Difficulties, than to moderate ones self in
Success and Prosperity, alleges for an Argument against them, the Paucity of
those who have put the Bridle on their Passions, and governed themselves with
Evenness when they have been afflicted. I have seen many, said he, who have
born Losses, Poverty, Banishment, Imprisonment, Torments, Death, and Diseases
worse than Death with Constancy; but I never yet saw any who in Wealth, and
Honor, and Power kept the same equal Mind.

Prosperity usually makes us in the first place unmindful of God, and the
ungrateful Rebels against him. Jeshurun Deuteronomy. 32. 13, 14, 15.
( Israel) fed with honey out of the rock, butter of Kine and milk of Sheep,
the fat of Lambs and Rams of the best and largest breed of Bashan, the fat of
the kidneys of Wheat, and the pure blood of the Grape, waxed fat, and kik'd
against God, forsook him who made him, and lightly regarded the rock of his
Salvation. A part of the same People, viz. Judah, Jer. 5. 27, 28.
when they were became great, and waxen rich, when they were fat and shined,
passed over the great Offices of Justice; judged not the Cause of the
Fatherless, nor the right of the Widow. Nebuchadnezzar in his height forgot
himself, and the hand of that Almighty Power which exalted him. Is not this
great Babylon that I have Dan. 4. 31.
built for the house of my Kingdom, by the might of my Power, and for the
honor of my Majesty? Nor did he recover a sound Mind, and a right sense of
himself and things below, till he had been tried in Affliction, till he had
been turned a grazing with the Beasts of the Field.

It intoxicates and makes us drunk; and when it has thus bereft us of our
Reason, we degenerate into Fools, and with the Confidence of Fools, say, Our
Hill is so strong, that it shall never be moved at any time, when by and by its
overturned or swallowed up by an Earthquake. Hannibal wisely observed Live. Dic.
3 l. 30.
in the Carthaginian Senate, That Men seldom had good Fortune and a good
Understanding together. And his Observation was no doubt grounded upon this
Reason, That Men's Understandings are almost naturally (however generally)
corrupted with Success. The wise Man from his manifold Experience Prove. 1. 23.
has predicted, that Destruction will be the inevitable Consequence of
Prosperity, when it happens to be the lot of Men who have not the Dexterity to
make right use of it, and few there are that have it. The Prosperity of Fools
shall slay them.

It smiles in our Faces, and gives us Promises and Assurances of her Constancy,
and then treacherously deserts us, and takes our Enemies part; blows fair for
us, and immediately chops about to a quite contrary point; lulls us asleep in a
state of Security, as Dalilah did Samson on her Lap, and then as she, after she
had awakened him, delivered him up into the hands of his cruel Enemies the
Philistines; so this, when she has enervated us; rendered us so feeble, that we
cannot stand against the lightest Fillip, gives us over to some of the rudest
Shocks of Adversity.

For Men dandled in the Arms of good Fortune, and constantly nourished with its
Milk from their Infancy, as they are therefore the nearer to some great
Alteration, and if wise, ought to apprehend themselves to be in that danger, so
are they the most unable to away with the smallest change of Diet, or to bear
the least degree of Calamity.

Had Felicity but this Inconvenience alone, that it lets a Person see but one
half part of the World, and that the falsest, viz. Flatterers, and hides from
his Knowledge the most valuable, or rather that which can never be valued
enough, a true Friend; (for Troubles, and well-nigh only those open our Eyes,
and afford us a true Light to discern between a mere Pretender to that Title,
and one that is really such; and the Sincerity of Friendship, and it is
Fineness, like that of Metals in Fire, is best tried in the Furnace of
Adversity) yet this were enough to make us afraid of it, as the occasion of of
mavelous Mischiefs.

This is such an excellent part of Knowledge, that Philosophy appearing to
Boethius, endeavored to hold up his Boeth. de Consolat. l. 2. pro. 8.
Spirit, ready to sink under the weight of his Misfortunes with this
Consideration: At what rate, said she to him, expostulating and arguing the
case, would you have purchased this piece of Knowledge when you stood whole and
entire, which you have gained by being broken and ruined? Cease therefore your
Grief, and silence your Complaints for your Losses, who by means of them have
found the richest Treasure, that of knowing your Friends. Had Job found his
such, he would not have deplored his Calamity at the rate he did; but this was
the aggravation of it, that his Friends were deceitful; as Brooks caused by
Winter Rains or Snow, which in warm Weather vanish, and are consumed Job 6. 15,
16, 17.
out of their places.

But besides this Disadvantage of keeping us in an ignorance of our true
Friends, (over and above all those already mentioned) Prosperity is a sort of
Divine Judgment, leading on to, or making the way for the final Ruin of
Persons and Nations. God denounces it against his sinful People as Hos. 4. 16.
Lyra and Sanct. in loc.
preparatory to their Destruction. For Israel's sliding back as a backsliding
Heifer. He threatens by the Prophet to feed them as a Lamb in a large place, i.
e. As Sheep are turned into rich Pastures to fat them for Slaughter either in
the Shambles, or at the Altar; so the Lord meant to send them an Affluence of
all things according to their Hearts desire, as a Forerunner of the Devouring
Sword which should consume them, or by which they should fall unpitied and
unregarded Sacrifices.

Heathens by mere natural Instinct have been apprehensive of the danger of too
much good Fortune, as they called it. Theramenes having escaped Plut. de
Consol. ad Apol.
the danger of being crushed to pieces by the Fall of a House in which he was,
while his Companions were destroyed under the Ruins of it, upon the first
recollection with himself, cried out amidst the Congratulation of his Friends
for his Preservation, O Fortune! for what and what dreadful season do thou
intend to reserve me? As if he had then foreboded his Fatal End, and that he
was delayed only to be condemned to die in greater Torments.

Philip of Macedon having received in one day the good News of the Birth of a
Son, of a Victory his Army under Parmenio had gained over his Enemies the
Dardanians, and of his Chariots having won the Prize in the Isthmian Games,
immediately fell to his Supplication, and prayed thus, O my good Genius, send
me some moderate misfortune to counterballance, or at least to weigh down the
Scale a little, which these Successes have raised too high. As if he had then
feared, and his Fears had made him prognosticate, that without some such Check
or Allay to his Happiness, his falling miserably as he did by the revengeful
Sword of Pausanias, to whom he had refused Justice, could not be prevented. As
it is one of the hardest Lessons to be learnt, to deport ones self well in
Prosperity; so it is the most dangerous Estate, if we do not govern our selves
by that Instruction.

See we a Man crowned with Success in his impious Undertakings, we are to
compute, that God's Anger for this burns the hotter and fiercer against him,
and collect thence, that he has provoked and incensed him to that degree, as
that he will not vouchsafe the favor of punishing him; or that he will punish
him to the highest degree, and of all others the most to be dreaded, by
suffering him to prosper in his villainous Courses.

Ephraim is joined to Idols, let him alone, Hos. 4. 17.
was a Resolution taken up, or a Sentence passed by God in his severe
Displeasure. Ezekiel. 16. 42.
And so was that other against Judah, I will make my fury toward thee to rest,
and my Jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no
more angry.

Upon this St. Austins Advice is Aug. in Psalm. 7.
founded, That we should gratulate no Man's Temporal Prosperity, that feels
none of God's Vengeance in this Life; because its a sign that God's Wrath is
the greater, and he has irritated him to that height as to permit this; that
he should never be corrected by any of his Scourges.

That Saying of St. Gregory, That S. Greg. hom. 12. on Ezech.
we are to regard such Sinners as the most miserable, whom we behold left
alone, and abandoned as it were to their Crimes without a Rod to admonish them.
As likewise that of St. Bernard S. Bernard Ser. 42. in Cant.
is worth minding, God is most angry when he is not angry at all. Let favor
(says he) be showed to the wicked, Isa. 26. 10.
yet will he not learn righteousness. I would not have this mercy showed me,
this pity is beyond all anger.

Tertullian having reported from Joh. 16. 20 Tertul. c. 13. de Idololat.
St. John those Words of our Savior to his Disciples, Ye shall weep and
lament, but the world shall rejoice, makes this Collection thence, That if we
rejoice with the World now, it is to be feared we shall weep with it hereafter;
and advises us upon the prospect of this, to entertain our present Misery
contentedly, and be willing to mourn while the World rejoices, that we may
rejoice when that mourns; because if we rejoice together now, we shall mourn
together hereafter. S. Hierom S. Hierom. ad Heliodor.
says, It Is a fondness to expect to rejoice here, and reign hereafter; and
that it is impossible to reconcile the enjoyment of the good things of this
Life, and another together. On the other hand, Affliction is the most signal
Expression of Kindness that God makes to those who are his; the most effectual
Remedy he applies to cure a Disease in his Beloved, when it is grown almost
desperate, to heal the wickedness of a Favorite People or Nation when it is
become great and strong.

How pathetically kind is that Speech of his toward his own People the Jews.
Therefore thus says the Lord, I will melt them and try them, Jer. 9. 7.
(i. e. in the Furnace of Affliction) for what shall I do for the Daughter of
my people? What can I do more than refine my People that no Dross or Rust stick
to them; and for this purpose to purge out these, what can I do other than use
the Fire of Tribulation?

And how eloquent is that complaint he makes by the same Prophet, that he had
used that extreme Remedy, used his Art in that kind; but all in vain. The
Bellows are burnt, the Lead is consumed Jer. 6. 29.
of the Fire, the Founder melts in vain, for the wicked are not plucked away.
As if he should say, I have tried my Skill, and employed my Pains; spent all
the Instruments and Metals fit for refining you, and yet your Naughtiness
remains; that is not consumed or wasted. His ceasing to use this Remedy of
trying or exercising by Afflictions is a sign he despairs of curing that Person
or Nation whom he thus forbears. Why should you be stricken any Isa. 1. 5.
more? Ye will revolt more and more, which are the Words directed by God to the
Jews, implies as much.

It Is the Note of St. Basil, that when St. Basil. in loc. Esai T. 2. p. 27. ad
Paris.
Men sin so, that they are in a recoverable state, God threatens to visit their
sins with a Rod, and their Iniquities with Scourges; but when they are
incurable, he expostulates thus, Why should ye be smitten any more, who have
felt all strokes, and despised them? After these Scourges, you are to expect
nothing but Destruction, which awaits you.

They are Words of one despairing to make any Reformation, which God uses by
Ezechiel, (Ez. 16. 42.) For I will make my fury toward thee to rest, and my
Jealousy shall depart from thee, and I will be quiet, and will be no more
angry. There is nothing remains, after these Essays have been fruitless, and
thereupon God declines to put any thing more of this kind in practice, but an
utter Destruction of a Person or Nation. God lets the Inhabitants of Jerusalem
know as much by the Prophet Ezekiel, Because I have Ezekiel. 24. 13.
purged thee, says he, (i. e. labored to purge thee by lesser Calamities) and
thou wast not purged; thou shall not be purged from thy wickeness any more,
till I have cansed my fury to rest upon thee. i. e. There shall be no more
Purgatives used, but for a punishment of thy Wickedness I will send an utter
Destruction upon thee.

Since therefore on the one hand a continual flow of Happiness is so dangerous
and formidable an Evil, as that ordinarily if it be not prudently stemmed, it
carries Men into an Abyss of Destruction; and on the other side, there is so
much kindness of Intention on God's part in sending of Adversity, it being
designed by him to purify and refine us; we cannot do less, if we cannot or
will not do more, than bear the stroke of its Hammer, endure the heat of it is
Fire quietly and patiently, since breaking and melting us are the Methods the
great Refiner uses to make us brighter than Gold or Silver, which have been
Seven times purified in the Fire.

(6.) The Consideration that Afflictions S. 4. 6. Afflictions sent by God. Isa.
45. 7.
are directed and sent by God, (who by virtue of his absolute Sovereignty can
do what pleases him both in Heaven and in Earth, is uncontrollable, whether he
Forms Light or Darkness, makes Peace or creates Evil; challenges this
illimited Power of bringing a Calamity upon a People or single Persons as his
peculiar. Shall there be any Evil in a City (any of this sort) and the Lord
has not done it? Who in Justice may lay Afflictions upon us, does, because we
have deserved them, and greater than he lays upon any part of Mankind here; and
because he has transcendently greater Rewards to bestow upon us in Recompense;
who in his most comprehensive Knowledge sees what is most convenient for us,
and in his Infinite Wisdom will be sure to dispense what is so) may be of
greater Force than any of the former Reasons alleged to persuade us to bear
them with Patience, and to convince us that we ought so to do.

And First, Did we on the account of Which he may do, ( n. 1.) First, by virtue
of his Supreme Dominion, and that justly.
Losses of any kind (of Goods, Honor, Friends, Relations) meditate upon God's
Supreme Dominion, (which though it be arbitrary, determined by no Law but that
of his own good pleasure, yet is always just and righteous) and that this
intitles him to a Propriety in whatever we possess: So that by virtue of it he
does but take back what at first he lent us; to which, if we will join that
other Consideration, that in his Wisdom and Goodness he does perhaps but recall
and seize back again into his own hands those things which he saw we might
abuse to our own hurt, if we were trusted any longer with them, we should not
be so sensibly afflicted, as we are apt to be, when deprived of them, how much
soever they were set by and valued by us, when we were Possessors of them:
However we should not reflect upon our selves as Losers, and bewail the parting
with them as a Damage, but look upon our Case as that of Restitution, a mere
refunding back of what was at first but lent us, not given.

Epictetus advises us to have this Opinion in the matter of Deprivation
Epictet. Enuhyrid. c. 5.
or Loss, and when we are parted from any thing we possess, to call it as we
ought properly, a surrendering of it.

Is thy Child deceased? Say, I returned him back to Providence. Is thy Land
taken from thee? (though it be by the Ministry of Violence or Fraud) say, I
have given it back again, or he has resumed it.

Seneca endeavors by propounding Sen. ad Polyb. c. 3.
the same Consideration to comfort the grieved and troubled mind of Polybius,
upon the Death of his Brother, Let that Justice ('it is his Council to him) which
has hitherto directed thy Actions, assist thee in making thy Reflections on
this occasion: Recollect with thy self, that thou had no injury done thee in
being dissevered from thy Brother; and that it was a great Courtesy thou
enjoyedst him so long as thou did. He must be very unequitable, who will not
leave his Benefactor to dispose of his Benefaction according to his own mind,
and upon his own terms; very covetous too withal, who reckons not upon the gain
he made by the Fruition of it, but computes merely the loss he sustains by the
want of it; and over and above ungrateful, in whose apprehension the putting an
end to a Pleasure, seems a doing of an Injustice. Providence lent thee thy
Brother only, gave thee no Propriety in him, but reserving this to himself, and
following the Motions of his own Free Will, which is the Law and Rule of his
Conduct, and that a right one, without regarding whether thy Appetite was sated
or not with the use thou had of him for so long a time as thou had it, it
re-demanded this Loan of thee, when he saw good. If any man grutches to repay a
Sum of Money lent freely and without any Interest, when it is required, is he
not deservedly reputed an unjust and odd fort of Man? And if thou repinest at
this, art not thou alike so.

And Cicero before him made use of Cic. de Consol. p. 141. ed. Elzevir.
it to buoy up his own mind from being overwhelmed with Grief for the Death of
his Daughter, or depressed with Fear at the Thoughts of his own.

The great God of Nature has lent us our Life, as some generous Creditors do,
gratuitously, without assigning any set Day for the re-payment of it; if he
then redemands what was lent upon that condition to be restored when he should
require it, why is he accused or complained of as if he dealt hardly? Why do we
not rather give him thanks, which is more seemly, that when he could have made
an earlier Claim of his own, he deferred to do with respect to our Convenience,
than complain, as we do, causlesly and injuriously, for making any Demand at
all?

Job being very well satisfied in this point, that all the abundance he enjoyed
before was merely a Loan from God's Bounty, and his reduction to Penury by
being bereft of all this through Plunder, and Fire, and Winds, was but a
restoring back the Loan to whom in Justice it was owing, the Thought thereof
armed him with a Resolution equally full of Bravery, Content and Thankfulness.
The Lord Job 1. 21.
has given, and the Lord has taken away, blessed be the Nume of the Lord.

Did we too in the case of Diseases and Pains, either tedious through length,
or very troublesome through their Acuteness, or of Deformity, or any other
reckoned Ignominy, consider that by virtue of his Sovereignty he may inflict
them, and yet be no more unjust in doing this, than we are able to resist his
Power when he does so; as a Potter may deal with the Vessels his hands
fashioned as he pleases, dash them in pieces, or apply them to the most
ignoble uses he thinks fit, we should not in any of these Conditions vex and
fret our selves, but with quietness and evenness submit to his Pleasure
concerning us. Any murmuring Salviac. de Gubernat. l. 4. p. 67. ed. Baluz.
against God when we are smitten by him, whose Dominion over us is natural, is
but a manifestation of our Iniquity and Injustice, who take the liberty, and
think we may lawfully do so, of striking our Servants, over whom our Dominion
is but acquired, and may be precarious, because their Subjection to us may be
but purely voluntary; and that oft-times out of Capricio and Humor, not for
any Fault committed by them, but merely to show our Power; and many times when
their Faults have occasioned this Treatment, immoderately, and beyond what the
Nature and Quality of them merited; whereas he never acts imperiously and
arbitrarily, never lays any Chastisement upon us, but its with relation either
to some perpetrated Crime, and in some proportion to it; or if it be not
formally as a Punishment, yet it is with some kind and gracious Intention, with
some wise Design of reforming and bettering us by it.

Bear then the Afflictions we ought S. 4. 6. n. 2. Which he does do in Wisdom.
in the Second place, which God sends, because his Wisdom knows them to be
convenient for us. Its he sends them, to whom Man is better known, and more
dear too than he is to himself; the Reflection on which made the Roman Juven.
Sat. 10.
Satyrist advise Mankind not to trouble the Deity with Petitions of their own
framing; as for instance, in asking Wives or Children, because they might be
Thorns in their Sides while they lived, or else would certainly pierce them
through with Sorrow when they should die; but to permit that all-wise Being to
judge what was fittest for Persons in their several Conditions and
Circumstances, and accordingly to make a suitable Designation for them; because
he would be sure to give them what was sit, though it was not the most
pleasing to their Imagination, or the most agreeable to their vitiated Appetite.

So before him Socrates, adjudged by the Heathen Oracles, and reputed by that
Age in which he lived the wisest of his time, on this consideration committed
himself and his Affairs to the Divine Providence, contenting himself with
asking God's Blessing in general, without descending to mention any particular
kind.

And he counseled his young Alcibiades to regulate his Prayers according to
this Practice of his; to make his Supplications for good things in gross,
without any distinct instancing in the particular kinds he would have. His
Reason for this touched not only his Scholar, but reached all Mankind; and
shows that they are therefore all concerned to observe the Direction: For
because of the hideous Darkness which benights our Understerstandings, we may
ask things pernicious to our state, and so better have never moved for them, or
never had them granted us. For example, We may ask Riches for our selves, which
have undone so many thousands who have thirsted for them, and labored after
them to cool that furious heat of Covetousness; Honors, which have broke so
many men's Sleep and Brains in aspiring after them; Kingdoms, which have
brought so many lawful Princes as well as usurping Tyrants to woeful Tragical
Ends; Wives, who have not more enriched or ennobled more Families with their
plentiful Fortunes or high Alliances, than they have ruined and disgraced with
their expensive Luxury and wicked Practices; whereas he who could easily give,
would in his Wisdom choose to bestow that, which if not so acceptable, would be
always most profitable for us.

Plato in that Book where he brings in Socrates thus instructing his Pupil
Alcibiades, commends that Form of Devotion in Homer, wherein they desire him
whom they took to be the great Sovereign of the World, to give them those
things which were good for them, whether they had prayed for them or not, and
to keep off all hurtful ones, though they might have asked them.

And the Lacedemonian way of Supplication was of Affinity to this, who whether
in their Public or Private Letanies were never observed to Petition their Gods
for more, than that they would do those things which were good, and superadd
the Grant of those which were of fair esteem.

The Counsel of Arian, how we Arian. l. 2. c. 8. p. 186. Ed. Cant.
should deport our selves in this Affair, is very Divine, I had well nigh
added, Christian, viz. That we should address our Prayers to God, who has the
Conduct and Guidance of the Universe with the same indifferency, as a Traveller
applies himself to ask the way of those he thinks can direct him, not caring on
which hand it lies, much less, vainly wishing that it might be on this hand,
rather than on that; but desiring only to be showed the best and nearest Road
that leads to the place for which he designs; so we should ask of him to
dispense what may most conduce to our Happiness without being desirous, least
of all sollicitous, that it may be this or that, rather than some other thing.

And his Rebuke of those who behave themselves otherwise, is no less sharp than
his former Direction was excellent; of those who implore God's pity to relieve
them, and redress their present afflicted condition; either changing it, or
delivering them out of it. -- Vile Wretches, says he, what would you be at?
Would you have any thing besides what is best for you? Would you by your own
impudent desires have your Counselor corrupted, and your Judge perverted to do
you harm?

This was the meaning of that Advice Iambl. vit. Pythag.
of Pythagoras, (for Iamblichus reports it was his) or Democritus (for Sen. Ep.
90.
Seneca ascribes it to him) to follow the Deity, i. e. To have no impatient
Desires of our own, but quietly to resign and commit our selves to his Conduct
through the whole course of our Life. Cleanthes it should seem by his Ap.
Arian. l. 3. c. ult.
Prayer, was thus ready to follow his Guidance, which was this: Lead me, O God,
whethersoever thy Providence has appointed, and I Will cheerfully follow. So
Arian kept his Will in Subordination Id. ibid.
to the Divine, if he speaks of himself, and does not under his own Person
instruct us how we should submit ours to us. I have ranked, said he, my Will
under God's. If it be his Pleasure that I should be parched up with a burning
Fever, its my desire likewise so to be. Would he have me affect this or enjoy
that? I will do so. Would he not have me? Neither will I. Would he have me die?
I am content, and will prepare my self for it. Seneca professed as much for
himself: Ep. 90.
I do not only obey God's Disposal of me, said he, but approve of it. I follow
him not out of Necessity, but Choice; I comply with the Advice, That what
pleased God should please us; and it is the best thing we can put in practice
to follow him, who orders all things wisely without murmuring.

The Consideration of God's Wisdom which furnishes him with an exact knowledge
of the Diseases of our Souls, and the proper Cures for them, should make us
perfectly comply with the Methods he takes, or the Course of Physic he
prescribes; quietly to submit to, and patiently to undergo the use and
application of the Remedies he directs for the restoring them to their Health;
as Persons in Bodily Distempers or Infirmities give themselves up into the
hands of a skilful Physician or Chyrurgion, whose Art and Experience makes them
much better acquainted with the Nature and Cure of their several Maladies than
they themselves, and submit upon the Confidence of this to all their Operations
and ways of Practice, to their Corrosives, Incisions and Causticks, as well as
to their Demulsions and Infusions, to their bitter, as well as sweet, to their
mild as well as sharp Potions.

Upon this account it is that St. Augustine Ser. 53. de verb. Dom.
directs us, when we ask any Temporal Blessings of God, to qualify our
Requests with this Condition, That if they may be profitable to us, he would
grant; if prejudicial, he would deny them; because the Physician knows much
better than the Patients themselves what is convenient for them.

And St. Hierome assigns this Reason, why God does not immediately give us
those things which we ask according to his Will, because his Wisdom sees it is
not a proper Season for us to have them, and therefore not for him to bestow
them. As a Physician refuses his Patient under a Calenture a cooling Julep he
calls for, not for that he judges it is unserviceable to allay the scorching
Heats of his Distemper, but because the time he calls for it is not so proper
for the Administration of it. He delays granting them, because he knows this
delay will inflame our Desires, and render our Prayers more fervent. And he
also gives this as a Reason, Pref. in Abac.
why though Daniel's Prayers were heard, from the Angels being sent to tell him
so, yet the accomplishment was delayed, that he might continue in that holy
Duty. He keeps us the longer at Bay, to try our Patience, our Hope, our Faith,
and to purge out all the terrene matter which may adhere to them; as Metals are
kept the longer in the Fire, that they may be the better refined when they come
out of it. He knows Afflictions are instructive and reforming, while Prosperity
is apt to corrupt the best Constitution of Mind, and therefore sends them. The
Psalmist found them so, and upon this account makes these Acknowledgments, It
is good for me that I have been afflicted, Psalm. 119. 71, 75.
that I might learn thy Statute. Thou of very faithfulness have caused me to be
corrected.

The Divine Wisdom knows, that if we always sailed with a full prosperous Gale
of Wind, and had Tide and Stream to our Wishes, we should not be sensible
enough of our Happiness, or sensible only to undervalue it; that if he fed us
all along with Manna or Quails we should surfeit of the Delicious Food and
nauseate it: And therefore he orders matters with such a Variety, as that we
should sometimes labor and row against a stiff Wind and a strong Tide; we
should be sometimes dieted with coarse Food, both for the Correction of those
peccant Humors pampering is apt to breed, and to give us the truer relish for
Dainties when he shall afford them us again; which as usually in goodness he
does when he has prepared our Palats for the right taste of them; as out of
the same Principle he turns the Tide and Wind, that we should not be tired out,
and quite despirited by too hard Labor and Toil.

And he magnifies it in us who are so disciplined as a Happiness, Blessed is
Psalm. 94. 11
the man whom thou chastnest, and teach out of thy Law.

But, (3.) As God directed by his S. 4. 6. n. 3. Which he does likewise in
goodness.
Infinite Wisdom knows what is best and most convenient, so prompted by his
Immense Goodness, he will dispense nothing to us but what is so, and therefore
we ought to rest satisfied, that when Afflictions are the Portion he dispenses
to us, he has a kind Design in this, though we, through the Mist we are in
here, either of Prejudice against any thing that is troublesome to the Flesh,
or of Ignorance of the excellent ends of doing so, (whether it be for the
extirpation of what is noxious in us, or for the Approbation, Illustration and
Consummation of our Virtues; or in order to prepare us for nobler Rewards and
higher Degrees of Glory hereafter) cannot discover the true Intention of his
Love. The very Captivity of those who under Jeojakim's Reign were carried away
into Babylon, was for their good, as God acquaints Jeremiah: Jer. 24. 5.
For Jerusalem was to be rebuilt, and re-peopled by their Descendents, whereas
those who remained were reserved for greater Calamities under Zedekiah.

Having therefore a firm Belief, as we ought to have, that God is essentially
and immutably good in himself; and that thereupon this overflowing Fountain of
Goodness is beneficially good to all besides and without himself; we can do no
other than conclude, that whatever such an one does, who is thus Entitatively
and Communicatively good, must of necessity be really good too; and that it is
our Mistake and Error when we think or call it ill.

Thus persuaded, we ought to interpret all kindly, and receive all
affectionately, which through the Divine Providence befalls us, though it seem
very harsh to Sense. This is the S. Hierom Ep. ad Paulam.
excellent Direction which St. Hierome, comforting the Lady Paula upon the
Death of her Daughter Blaesilla, gives her, and which he vows he was ready to
embrace and follow himself. If I am a Husband, and bereft of my loving Consort,
I become a Widower; if a Wife, and by the Death of my dearest Husband I am
brought to the desolate Estate of a Widow; I will bewail my Condition, but
however bear it, because the Calamity is of God's appointment: If I am a tender
Parent, and my only Child is snatched from me in the Bud of fair Hopes, as hard
as this my Portion is, I will support it, because he who gave him took him
away; his hand cropped the Flower who caused it to shoot. If I am struck with
Blindness, I Will procure a Friend to read to me, and so relieve my Melancholy;
if through Age or Accident I become deaf, I will entertain my self under the
Affliction with the Thought that I shall not be pestered with idle and vain, or
what is worse, with Filthy Communication; and that I shall have the more
leisure for Meditation, Contemplation of the Divine Perfections, and conversing
with my God. Shall Poverty, Hunger, Cold, Nakedness, Diseases come upon me? I
will wait till my appointed Change shall come, and in the mean time look upon
that as a short, or no Inconvenience which shall determine and conclude in so
happy an end as Death.

His Justice in the most proper Act Chald. Paraphras. in 30. Psalm. 104.
of it, punishing, cannot be divided from his Mercy. When he sent the Flood as
he sat upon the Seat of Judgment to take Vengeance of the Wicked, so he sat
upon the Seat of Mercy to deliver Noah and his Family.

The weighing of God's Omnipotence, Wisdom, Goodness, singly and apart by
themselves, would each of them supply us with a convincing Reason, that we
ought quietly to submit to the Rod of God when he lays it upon our backs, and
patiently receive the Correction he inflicts; much more efficacious then must
the putting of all these Arguments into the Scale together be to satisfy us of
the reasonableness of doing so: For what other Remedy, I will not say, what
better can we devise to oppose against Calamities sent by Omnipotence, than
patiently to bear them; as we do the Rigours of Winter Frosts, or the extreme
Heats of the Summer, or any other Inclemency of the Season or Weather?

Or what can we do wiser, than to acquiesce in the Choice which Infinite Wisdom
has made for us, and take the Lot it has assigned us? Or what can we do more
reasonably, than contentedly to abide in the Station where boundless Goodness
has placed us? Without question we can do nothing better, wiser,
reasonablener, than thus to deport our selves: For Omnipotence is not to be
controlled, much less can our Weakness make any Resistance to it. Infinite
Wisdom cannot be mistaken in its Ends or Measures, nor can infinite Goodness do
an unkind Act. His All Sufficiency makes him the full Possessor of all good
things. His Almightiness able to bestow them; and his Perfection, which knows
no Bounds, willing to impart and communicate them.

And then, why should we absolutely imagine that he who has them to give, and
has likewise Power and Ability, Will and Inclinations to do so, should not
bestow them on us? Could a Heathen Philosopher upon his Principles and Belief
argue thus; our Opinion then must be false, if we conceive otherwise, and our
Practice which follows so blind a Guide must needs be extremely wrong.

But if we have right Thoughts of God in this point, and yet in the mean while
that we believe he dispenses what is best for us, we under that very
Dispensation behave our selves frowardly, we must be at an odd Strife with our
selves, our Actions contradicting our Judgment, which should direct and govern
them; and our Judgment condemning our Actions, whose Approbation they should
have.

(7.) As Afflictions, which are the S. 4. 7. Arg. 7. Patience necessary to
Perseverance, and so to Salvation, because no Perseverance without it.
proper Objects for the Exercise of Patience, are made the necessary Condition
of a Christian Life. (He that will live Godly in Christ Jesus, shall suffer
Persecution; hewn and sawed as Stones are for the material Temple, before we
can be fit Spiritual Temples for God to dwell in) and necessary as the means to
Salvation, (made the Road which leads to it; Through much Tribulation Acts 14.
22
we must enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. We must pass through the Vale of
Tears, before we come to those Regions of Joy; through the Vale of the Shadow
of Death, before we can arrive at Immortality there; must be trod or threash'd
as Corn was wont to before it was laid up in the Granary, before we are fit to
be gathered into the Lords Floor; Sacrificed first, at least to Public Scorn
and Hatred, if not offered upon the Service of our Faith, before we can be
qualifyed as Priests to minister before God in the Tim. 2. 2, 12.
Heavenly Temples; suffer with our Master here, before we reign as Kings with
him; carry his Cross as the Standard of his Warfare; before we can in Triumph
bear Palms in our hands. And there is no question to be made, but some of the
Twenty Four Rev. 4. 10. 6. 9. 20. 4.
Elders whom St. John in one Vision saw standing about the Throne of God, were
such who in another Vision were represented to him to have had their Blood shed
for the Word of God and the Testimony they held, to have been slain for the
Word of Jesus) so the efficacy of them to reach that end for which they are
designed, and are necessarily subservient, depends solely on supporting them
with Patience and Constancy. This Virtue is the Hinge, upon the Practice or
Omission of which turns our whole Future Estate of eternal Happiness or Misery:
For the first is suspended upon our Perseverance in doing well and suffering
ill, and our Perseverance in either or both these Estates is maintained by
Patience.

The Apostle declares our continuing firmly settled in the Faith we have been
planted into, and immovable from the Anchor of that Christian Hope we have once
cast, to be the Dispositions which capacitate us for receiving the Benefits
made by the Blood of Christ; the Qualifications which fit us to be restored to
the good Graces of of his Father, and made whole in the Court of Heaven. You,
says he, writing to the Colossians, who were sometimes Col. 1. 21, 22, 23.
alienated, and Enemies in your mind by wicked works, yet now has he
reconciled in the body of his Flesh through death to present you holy, and
unblamable, and unreprovable in his sight. But all this is upon Terms, viz. If
you continue in the Faith grounded and settled, and be not moved away from the
hope of the Gospel which you have heard.

In the same Apostles Judgment it Gal. 6. 9.
must be Indefatigableness, which must bring us in, and give us the enjoyment
of that Harvest of Glory we look for; We shall reap, says he, in due season,
if we faint not; reap the Fruits, the delicious Fruits of all our Labor and
Toyls; gather in all that rich increase and store which our Hopes in the fair
Blome or tender Blade presaged us, if so be we will but wait till the Season of
Reaping, Harvest, or that of gathering ripe Fruits, Autumn, i. e. till the last
Day of the World, if we shall survive to that time, when we shall all Mat. 13.
39, 40.
stand before the Judgment Seat of Christ to receive in our Bodies according to
what we have done in them; and the Wheat shall be gathered into the Garner, and
the Tares shall be gathered by Mat. 3. 12.
the Angels whom God shall employ as Reapers, and cast into the Fire; the Chaff
and Refuse shall be burnt up with unquenchable Fire; or till the last moment of
our Lives, when we like ripe Corn, shall be cut down by the Fatal Sickle, and
our Bodies shall be gathered to those of our Fathers in the Grave, as that is
carried into the Barn; at what time our Souls which cannot be touched by Death,
shall have a particular Award or Doom by themselves.

They only who defend themselves, and keep their Integrity to the last, against
all the rude Shocks of Temptations without capitulating with them, or
surrendering themselves up to them; shall be made partakers of that Bliss, of
whose Incorruptibleness, Life; and of whose great Dignity, a Crown is made the
Emblem by God's Spirit. Blessed is the man, says that Spirit by Jam. 1. 12.
the mouth of St. James, who endures Temptation; for when he is tried, he
shall receive the Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love
him.

They only who shall preserve their Loyalty untainted to the extreme Gasp,
against all the Blandishments and Allurements spread in the way to corrupt it
(which is probably a nobler sort of Defiance, and a difficulter piece of
Resistance than the former) shall be crowned. St. John was commanded to give
this conditional Assurance or Encouragement to the Angel of the Church of
Smyrna. Be thou faithful Rev. 2. 9.
unto the end, and I will give thee a Crown of Life.

On the other hand, we find the endless Misery which is pressed by God's
insupportable Displeasure, by the aggravation of his Anger, by that being
doubled and redoubled till it be kindled into a fearful Fiery Indignation, is
definitively denounced, shall be the inevitable Portion of them who retire on
their way to another World, or in their Journey thither relapse into their
former abandoned vicious courses, or retreat in the Warfare they have engaged
in, or revolt to the side of those Enemies they have once forsaken and
renounced. The just shall live by Heb. 10. 38
Faith; but if he draw back, my Soul shall have no pleasure in him. For if Heb.
10. 26, 27.
we sin after we have received the knowledge of the truth, there remains no
more Sacrifice for Sins; but a certain fearful looking for of Judgment and
fiery Indignation which shall devour the Adversaries.

But now that Perseverance which is required as a Condition on our parts, that
we may be admitted unto, and instated in the forementioned happiness, or
secured against this Misery, depends upon our Patience in our active or
suffering Estate; for our Hope would quickly flag or sink, if it were not
cherished or sustained by this Virtue, and we should grow faint and weary, not
merely with labor and hardship, but with length of Expectation, if this did
not keep us in Breath and Vigor; our Loyalty and Fidelity be soon shaken, if
not supported by it; and disheartened through the roughness and dangerousness of
the way of Piety, we should be ready to turn back, or out of it, if this did
not keep up our Spirits, and maintain in us a firm resolution of proceeding on
in our Journey, notwithstanding all the Discouragements of the Road; soon be
caught and entangled in the pollutions of the World, did not this fortify us
with a true Gallantry of opposing all Temptations, whether charming or
terrifying ones, to hold out against all their Solicitations, and endure all
the Hardships they may create us, rather than hearken to and comply with them.
It is upon this ground therefore that this single Virtue, as being the support
and consummation of all others, is made the complete Character of an upright
Man how, and such an one who shall have the recompense of his Integrity in
Blessedness hereafter. He is such an one, who having heard the Word, keeps it,
and brings forth with Patience. That the Promise of Happiness is made to this
Virtue in particular, the Reward annexed to it, or to it in conjunction with
Perseverance: He will render to those who by patient Romans 7, 8, 9.
continuance in well doing seek and look for Honor, and Glory, and
Immortality, eternal Life.

He who endures, (or patiently suffers, or is patient) to the end [for Mark
13. 3 (...) Luke 19. 21 (...).
from that Verb, whose Participle we have there rendered, who endures, is
derived from that Noun which we have elsewhere translated Patience] shall be
saved. And its inseparable Connection with the Reward is asserted: For ye Heb.
10. 36 12. 1.
have need of Patience after ye have done the Will of God, that ye may receive
the Promise; the Benefit of it, or the Reward held forth in it.

Or its being absolutely requisite toward the successful finishing of the
Course we are appointed here to run, toward the gaining the Prize which hangs
at the Goal. Wherefore -- Let us run with patience the race that is set before
us.

And again, that Apostasy which shall be punished with the insupportable
Effects of the Divine Wrath is the immediate and necessary Consequent of
Impatience, which makes Men affect Change and Variety, whatever be the
Inconvenience or Mischief ensuing upon it; or grow weary of contesting with the
Difficulties of the Journey, or restless under the Pains they endure, and
incites them to seek a present Relief, though the course they take be never so
dangerous; and at the long run it infinitely increases their Torments. If such
then be the intimate Conjunction between this Virtue of Patience and that of
Perseverance, if they are so closely and indivisibly combined, that the last is
not to be found without the first; and the Recompense of our Warfare, our Race
of all the Labor we take, of all the Pain we undergo, lies at the foot of
Perseverance; or what is the same, of our patient continuance, and that alone
can take it up: There is nothing can more plainly or more strongly evict the
necessity of arming our selves with Patience than this; unless we reckon there
is no necessity of being happy hereafter; or we can, after such a Remonstrance
of the Case, and it is State, choose to be miserable.

And now, if any of these Arguments fetched from Reason and Religion, or all of
them together, have convinced us, that it is our Wisdom as well as Duty under
all Events, to possess our Souls in Patience, to be the absolute Masters of all
their Motions, then like Men convinced we should yield, and no longer
perversely dispute, i. e. Not act contrarily to that we are satisfied is our
Obligation: But our Practice should be conformable to our Judgment in the
Point; and our Deportment on all occasions requiring the special Exercise of
this Virtue of Patience should be answerable to the Persuasion we have of it is
Importance.

For Piety and Philosophy which are genuine, are useful also, and consist not
in believing or knowing what is right and fit, but in doing accordingly.

Now forasmuch as after Conviction S. 5 3d. General Examples to induce us to
the practice of Patience by the force of imitation.
by Arguments of our Obligation, to practice this Virtue, and that its a part
of Prudence to do so; Examples may be of singular use to excite us to set about
it. [For Examples, according to their difference of being good or bad, are
powerful Inducements to engage us either to embrace Virtue, or follow after
Vice. And as they are set by Persons of a more illustrious Eminence than
others, so they are of more force to incline us the one way or the other.] I
shall therefore for my own and others Advantage and Proficiency in this Virtue
propound some of this kind for our Imitation; that looking on them we may be
both inflamed with an Emulation to follow them, and facilitated to exercise
that Grace which appears so amiable while we contemplate it in them.

The first I shall offer for this purpose 1. That of God, produced to stir us
up to the exercise of that Virtue which is an imitation of him.
shall be incomparably the greatest, that of God himself: For though the
infinite Excellency of his Nature makes him proportionably, i, e. infinitely
happy; and its the Privilege of Infinite Happiness to be secure against all
Disasters, which are the ordinary Lot and Portion of Humane Life, because Men
are weak-sighted, and cannot foresee them far enough off to decline them; or
are weak-built, and cannot shelter themselves against them; as also the Subject
in which the Exercise of Patience is most requisite, and she appears most
illustrious) yet is he pleased to show himself Exo. 34. 6.
a Pattern of Patience in another way to Mankind, and to fill up that glorious
Name, which among other Titles he proclaimed of himself of being gracious and
long-suffering, bearing with them while they go on in Wickedness, and thereby
provoke his Wrath; the only thing that is offensive to his Nature, and opposite
to his declared Will; though armed with Power, he is every Moment able to
execute his Anger, and once for all take Psalm. 7. 12
Vengeance on them. For God is a righteous Judge, strong and patient, and God
is provoked every day. Patient, though strong, and Patient, even while
continually provoked; or reading that place as the latest Translation of our
Bibles has rendered it; God judges the Romans 2. 4.
righteous; God is angry with the wicked 4. 13.
every day, yet still he is patient and long-suffering; though he is sensible
of their Offenses as soon as done, yet he adjourns their Punishment to a
further day of Wrath: For it follows, If he Wisd. 5. 13.
turn not, he will whet his Sword, i. e. He shall sharpen his severe Wrath for
a Sword, as it is elegantly both expressed and explained by the Author of
Wisdom. And albeit after the forecited Text it be immediately subjoyned, He
has bent his Bow, he has made it ready, as if he had already done it; yet
that only denotes he is in a prepared Posture ever to do himself right on the
Wicked; he has prepared for him the 4. 14.
Instruments of Death, however he suspends or delays the actual Infliction of
Punishment; or its a piece of Prophetic Language usual in Scripture, denoting
by the past time the certainty of what he will do in the future.

Such a Pattern of long-suffering has God showed himself to Sinners, that many
have taken the occasion thence to persuade themselves and others, there was no
such being as a Deity, because they saw no marks of his Displeasure sent on
those who provoked and deserved to feel it most: Nay, those very Wretches
themselves who are of this number, have drawn a Motive from their own Impunity;
because his Mercy spares them, and his tenderness withholds his hand from
striking, but encourage themselves to proceed in their wicked Courses; Because
Eccl. 8. 11.
Sentence against an evil work is not executed speedily, therefore the hearts
of the sons of men is fully set in them to do evil, and to conclude against the
belief of his Existence.

And indeed, if the Conclusion could have been rightly inferred from their
escaping his Anger, the Confidence they took to sin was very agreeable to it.

Such an one was Selius in the Poet, Martial. l. 4. Epig. 21
who affirmed Heaven was an empty space, uninhabited by any Divine Being, and
proved it by himself, who flourished while he maintained this Tenet against it.
So the Syracusan Tyrant Dionysius made use of his prosperous Voyage in failing
back from Locri, after he had robbed the Temple of Proserpine there, to
Syracuse, for the deriding and exposing the Opinion, that there were any Gods.
And the Cynick Diogenes pronounced boldly, Cic. de Not. Deor. l. 3.
That the long and fortunate Life of Harpalus, who was a Pyrate in those days,
was a standing Evidence against them and their being.

But he has not thought it enough to set himself for a Pattern of
long-suffering under all the Insults and Affronts done to his Majesty, Power,
Justice and Holiness by ungodly Men; but he has likewise set himself an
Example of Goodness and Benificence to the insolent and injurious; so he
manifests himself to be, in causing the Sun, Moon and Stars to dispense their
Light and Heat, and to shed abroad all their kind, benign Influences for their
Use and Service as well as of others, while he exactly divides and
apportionates his healthful, fruitful Seasons to both alike; while with the
same equal Favor he waters the Hills from his Chambers; sends the Springs
to run Psalm. 65. 13
among them, and these augmented into Rivers, to enrich as well as beautify
with their long course the subjacent Plains; commands the Clouds to drop
Fatness on both, spreads the Pastures over with Flocks, covers the Valleys so
thick with Corn or Grass, as that they shout for joy, and laugh and sing; Psalm.
63. 13
causes the Trees bearing Fruit to hang down their Heads loaded and surcharged
with abundance, for the Profit and Exo. 34. 6. Joh. 2. 17.
Pleasure of both. In short, he makes the whole Course and Frame of Nature to
serve and pay Tribute to each with a like respect. Thus he is not only
long-suffering, but abundant in goodness; not only slow to Anger, but of great
kindness.

And now if God patiently endures the daily, the hourly, the constant
Indignities of all us Offenders; yea, even of the haughtiest Sinners, such who
proudly call in question his Being, or peremptorily deny or saucily flout at
it; while he could do himself Justice every moment in our Destruction, choosing
rather to expect, as well as Romans 2. 4.
designing that this forbearance should lead us to Repentance, than utterly to
slay us; if, over and above this, he is several ways kind and indulgent to us
and them, we have the strongest Inducements that Example can afford, or indeed
the strictest Obligations that Justice can lay upon us, so to behave our selves
toward him as he deals with us; and as he patiently bears with our Sins, while
he might immediately send abroad his Judgments, and strike us dead in the
Commission of them; so likewise we should patiently bear the Chastisements he
lays upon us by way of just Punishment for them, but intermixed with kind
intentions of amending and reforming us by them; since besides, if we should be
froward, its still he alone who laid the Rod on our backs, who can take it off;
he only who imposed the Burden, who can remove it.

The next Example which I shall produce, S. 5. 2. The Example of Christ.
shall be that of his beloved Son and our dear Lord and Master Jesus Christ,
who nine Months waited with Patience the forming of a Body in the Virgins Womb;
which he was to put on, that he might be in a capacity by the assumption of our
Nature to make satissaction in it for us, and perform the whole Work of our
Redemption, who after his coming thence into the World clothed with that,
waited several Revolutions of the Sun, and thirteen times as many Courses of
the Moon, Luke 20. 54
till it gradually increased, and he grew up in it to a just Stature and Age;
and after he was so grown, he was content to lie obscure in his reputed Fathers
House, unregarded, working, as it is thought, at his mean Trade, before he
entered upon that Employment, for the Execution of which he was commissioned by
his Heavenly Father to go upon Earth: And then, when by maturity of Age, being
about Thirty Years old, he was fit for the Discharge of it, he was content to
be admitted to his Office by the Ministry of a Servant, to receive the Ceremony
of Initiation, Baptism, from his hands; who ought rather to have been instated
into his place of a Harbinger by our Savior; conscious of which unaptness at
first he modestly refused to perform it -- John forbad him -- saying, Mat. 3.
14.
I have need to be baptized of thee; and come thou to me? Till the Masters
Humility, which would receive no Denial, overcame the Servants, and made him
obedient to take the Honor which was designed him. -- Jesus answering, 4. 15.
said unto him, Suffer it to be so now -- Then he suffered him.

When after this Rite of Consecration he was to be further prepared for the
actual Execution of his Charge by entering the Lists with the Devil; He managed
the Combat with Words only, and he who could have repelled the bold Assailant
with his Power, was content to foil him with reasoning out of Scripture.

This being over, when he appeared in Public, discharging his Function, and
doing the Work he came to do, scil. his Fathers Will; he submitted to
circumstances, which made his Condition not higer than that of a Servant.

In this sense he was under the form Mat. 20. 17, 18. Phil. 2. 7.
of a Servant, and as one that ministered. And during the whole time of his
Negotiation, whether three or four, or more years, he deported himself with
much Sweetness and Patience.

When his Disciples in a Storm betrayed their great Fears, and their little
Faith, and unseasonably awaked him out of Sleep to represent their imminent
Danger as they thought, and tax his Supine Security as it were, and neglect of
them. Master, carest thou Mat. 8. 26.
not that we perish? Disturbed thus, he only gently rebukes their Timerousness
and Infidelity -- Why are ye fearful, Luke 8. 25. Mark 4. 38, 39.
O ye of little Faith? Or, where is your Faith? Instead of severely chiding
them for the same Fault, their being surprised by a needless Fear at his
appearance to them, or cast down by it, and sunk lower in their Courage than
the lowest Depth of those Waters on which he walked, mistaking him for a
Spirit, he raises them out of that Consternation by speaking comfortably to
them, Be of good cheer, it Mat. 24. 27
is I, be not afraid. He rebuked with all Meekness the Drowsiness of his three
Disciples, who were his greatest Intimates, and which seems thereupon to have
had a mixture of Unkindness as well as Humane Weakness, especially after he had
entreated them to watch with him, and that but for an hour, and at a time too
when he was environed from without by the most apparent formidable Dangers, and
he was seized within by the strongest Matthew. 26. 37, 38, 39, 40.
Agonies and Convulsions of Sorrow, What, could ye not watch one hour? And
instead of aggravating this, that they could not deny themselves a little
Slumber for his sake, who was ready to lay down his Life for theirs: Nay, 44.
upon the very instant of doing so, he finds out a favorable Excuse for this,
which another would have taxed for odious Ingratitude, The Spirit indeed is
willing, but the Flesh is weak. And thus he gently reproved St. Peter, whose
Fears arose as the Wind did; and that which made him venture on the Waters at
first, sinking, began to sink his Person, O thou of little Faith, why do thou
doubt?

When the Pharisees, his causless and malicious Enemies, secretly accused him
in their Hearts of Blasphemy, for having said unto the sick of the Palsy, Thy
Sins be forgiven thee; as they were cut to the Heart with Envy, to see him
restore that Paralytick to firm Strength, he only mildly reproved them for
their uncharitable Impeachment and wicked calumniating him. Wherefore do you
think evil in your Mat. 9. 2, 3.
hearts?

And if he seems to depart from this Sweetness elsewhere, and to sharpen his
Reproofs against them with cutting language, Ye fools, and blind; ye blind
guides. Mat. 23.
He uses this Acrimony out of very Tenderness and Campassion; it was to rouse
them out of that senceless Stupidity which their wilful Prejudices against him
had caused, notwithstanding the many Signs and Wonders he had wrought before
them to convince them of the Authority of his Mission, and the Truth of his
Doctrine.

All the time that he executed his Prophetic Office among his own People Heb.
12. 3.
the Jews to whom he was sent, he endured with much Long suffering the
Contradiction of Sinners against himself, Joh. 1. 11.
( for his own received him not) and attended the Correction of their crooked
and perverse Nature, the Reformation of their corrupted Manners.

This good Shepherd sent to seek after the lost Sheep of the House of Israel,
who had gone astray from his Fathers Folds, and the wholesome and pleasant
Pastures of his Providing, into a barren Feeding, a very Wilderness of Thorns
and Briars, who had, swerving from his most excellent Rules and Divine
Instructions, turned aside to the observation of vain and humane Inventions,
followed the Imaginations of their own darkened and misguided Hearts, made and
continued this Inquest to recover them with unwearied Patience.

And when he found them, he did not only lead them back, as a tender Shepherd
does his Sheep which are Isa. 40. Luke 13.
with young, but gathered them with his Arms, laid them upon his Shoulders,
carried them in his own Bosom, as he does his new yean'd Lambs, and cherished
them there.

He patiently sustained to eat and converse with his and his Fathers Enemies,
Sinners, particularly with that Person whom he knew to be disposed by his
Covetousness to betray him; and when opportunity should serve for the
gratifying that Lust, would certainly do so; entrusted this capital Enemy,
though aware of his Perfidiousness, not only with the Bag which held his small
Treasure, but with dispencing the great Mysteries of the Gospel; advanced him
to the highest Dignity in his Kingdom, the Church, that of Apostleship; and at
last, refused him not his Lips, though his Kiss was treacherous, and the Signal
agreed on for the executing the cursed Conspiracy he had entered into with the
Priests to deliver him into their hands, took his perfidious arresting him with
a Gentleness near to Kindness it self, as his demanding of him the occasion and
end of his coming with an armed Force, and the Compellation with which Mat. 26.
50. and 55.
he ushered it in, -- Friend, wherefore art thou come? sufficiently declare.
And if before he was apprehended he prayed thrice with all earnestness in the
Garden, that that Cup might pass from him; though I cannot say with Origin in
one place, that it was, that he might have a more bitter Cup, that he might
suffer a more cruel Death; yet it was not out of Cowardice, and a desire to
decline Death, but proceeded from tenderness: (As the same Origin elsewhere)
That his Death might not aggravate God's Judgments upon the Jewish Nation, or
upon a View, that while it was propitiatory for Mankind, it was yet the Award
of God's Justice against him as their Surety, undertaking to satisfy for their
Sins.

Betrayed thus by his Disciple, and apprehended and led away in Triumph by his
insolent Foes, as a Thief, or some such Malefactor, seized after a Pursuit, and
carried before Justice, with Swords and Staves; first to Annas a Man in no
Dignity at that time, except the Relation of being Father-in-law to Caiaphas
Joh. 18. 19
the High Priest for that year, then to Caiaphas: He, the great Prophet, whom
God had promised to raise up to his People like unto Moses, submitted to be
examined concerning his Doctrine before the little Scribes and Readers of the
Law; yea, he who was Truth it self, and gave the Law to Moses, and spoke by the
Prophets, submitted to be accused before these Depravers and Corrupters of the
Writings of both by their false Glosses as an Impostor; patiently heard the
vile Charge that was given against him of being a Blasphemer, without so much
as opening his Mouth to vindicate his injured Innocence by a Reply. What
Patience in Union with Humility was this, to stand mute to such an Impeachment,
which he could so easily have avoided, and not to say one Word in his Defense,
when he could readily have made such a Justification of himself, as should have
dissipated all the black Calumnies of his Adversaries, and quite silenced and
confounded them? Here he whom the Father appointed Heir of all things, i. e.
Constituted Lord, and gave the Dominion of them into his Hands; who was the
Wisdom of the same Father, and knew what was in the Hearts of Men, without
asking them their Thoughts, suffered himself to be struck by the domineering
Servants of the Jewish Council, and then mocked by their saucy Malapertness,
Prophecy who smote thee? while he Luke 24. 64, 65.
could not only have told his Abusers, but have fmote them with Blindness, or
with Death, and rescued himself out of their Hands, he stood dumb, in his Mouth
were no Reproofs of these insolences: When he was reviled, he reviled not
again; and like one destitute of Power to help himself, returned not Violence
and Outrage with Force back again.

Carried from the High Priests Hall Luke 23. 7, 9, 11.
before the Roman President, and sent from him to Herod, he bore all the
contumelious Despite with which the proud usurping Prince and his rude Guards
treated him, in Silence, the highest sign that his Spirit was not provoked or
exasperated by their usage of him.

Remanded back again by him to Pilate, he suffered the insulting Carriage and
upbraiding Language of that haughty Judge, telling him, That in his hands were
the Issues of his Life or Death; and that he could by his Decretory Sentence
determine the Event either way as he pleased, with such a Moderation, as barely
to answer him, Thou could have no power at all against me, Joh 19 11
except it were given thee from above.

With the same quiet Temper and Peaceableness of Mind he received the Sentence
of his Condemnation; that Sentence, which besides its Injustice in the
pronouncing of it, was aggravated by its being grounded on the Subornation of
false Witnesses, and their disagreement too, and its taking place when a
Robber, a Murderer, and a Rebel was pardoned. And so he bore all the parts of
Scorn and Pain prolusory to the Infliction of it; his being bound, scourged,
spit upon, smote, reproachfully derided with the Mock-Emblems of Pageant
Kingship, a Crown of Thorns, a Reeden Scepter, a counterfeit scarlet Robe, no
better than some Common Soldiers Red Coat of a mean Dye, the false and taunting
Acclamations of Long live the King of the Jews. The scoffing of the bended Knee
before him; his carrying the burdensome Cross some part of the way between the
Judgment-Hall and Mount-Calvary, till probably his Enemies seeing him ready to
sink under it, constrained Simon of Cyrene to bear it the Joh. 19. 17
residue of the Stage, even to the fatal one, the place of Execution.

Nailed to the Cross, and there hanging a sad Spectacle worthy of all
Commiseration, and fit to move it and Sorrow besides in any, whose Breasts were
warmed and softened with the least Humanity; the Priests nevertheless, the
Elders, the Scribes, the Soldiers who Luke 23. 39, 40.
had the Guard of him, the Multitude who stood by to gaze on him, the Thieves
who suffered with him, at least one of them, i. e. Men of all Conditions and
Qualities, as if they had put off their Nature, and with it all Tenderness,
opended their Quivers, their Throats; bent their Tongues, and shot their
poisonous Arrows, even sharp, bitter and reproachful words against him; This
Fellow, this Blasphemer, this Deceiver. Reviled and taunted him; Thou that
destroyest the Temple, and buildest it in three days, save thy self; if thou be
the Son of God, come down from the Cross. He saved others, himself he cannot
save. If Mat. 27. 40. and 42.
he be the King of Israel, let him come down now from the Cross, and we will
believe him. He trusted in God, let him deliver him if he will have him. Thus
reviled, he reviled not again: When he 1 Pet. 2. 23.
suffered this, he threatened not, but committed himself to him who judges
righteously.

And yet he did not barely receive and endure these contumelious Indignities
with an undisturbed Evenness; he returned their Insolence and Scorn, and the
Malice which provoked them to do them with the greatest Token of Affection, the
most fervent Charity of his Prayer, Father, forgive them; for they know not
what they do. Which Act (certainly not to be moved with Injuries, and to
recompense them thus) was a greater Miracle than any he wrought.

Amidst the sharp Pains of the Cross which entered into his Soul, as the Iron
did into his Body, the Nails into his Flesh, his Mind was as serene and calm as
if he had been altogether impassible, and insensible of them. He made no
Complaints of the Iniquity and Cruelty of his Enemies, nor of his Fathers
Severity in permitting them to use him so.

For his Expostulation with his Father about this was with all Sedateness,
Filial Reverence and Submission to his Pleasure, My God, my God, why Mat. 17.
Mark 15.
have thou forsaken me?

All that he besides added amidst his Sufferings was, I thirst, (which too Joh.
19. 20.
was mentioned without repining) the commending the Care of his disconsolate
Mother to his beloved Disciple, and V. 26, 27.
him to her innocent Affections; his comforting the penitent Thief, This day
Luke 23. 46
shall thou be with me in Paradise; his declaring the great Work he came into
the World to do, (his Fathers Will, which was our Redemption) to be completed;
It is finished; his resigning Joh. 19. 30
his Spirit into his Fathers hands, from whom he received it, when he had
prepared and fashioned a Body for him, with all humble Obeisance, Father, Luke
23 46
into thy hands I commend my Spirit; with which form of Surrendry, bowing down
his Head, he gave up Joh. 19. 31.
the Ghost.

Thus he comforted his Disciples by his Example in bearing his Cross, and
bearing it in this wise, to incline them to take it up; and confirmed them in
the resolution of Martyrdom, as well as exhorted them to it.

And as he thus manifested his Patience in enduring in his Life Poverty, and
all the Inconveniences and the Hardships with the Contempt, which are the
Attendants of that low Condition, and at his Death all Pains, and the more
cruel Insults of malicious envenomed Foes; so in the days of his Flesh he
expressed Joh. 19. 31
another sort of Patience; expecting with much long-suffering the Repentance of
his People, the Jews, being extremely desirous to gather them under the Shadow
of his Wings; as a Hen gathers her Chickens in order to save them from his
Fathers Wrath, and their deserved Destruction; and this, even after, and
notwithstanding they had killed the Prophets, and stoned the Messengers that
were sent unto them to foretell and prepare them for this Advent of his designed
to heal them.

Likewise, after he was taken up Acts 2. Acts 4.
from among them who had Crucified him the Lord of Life, and murdered him
their Prince and Savior, and received up into Heaven, and exalted by his
Father to the Right Hand of his Power and Majesty, he gave a signal Proof of
this in waiting Forty Years for their Repentance and Conversion, before he sent
the Roman Armies to take Vengeance of them for his own innocent Blood, and that
of his Saints poured out like Water round about Jerusalem, and for the rest of
their enormous Impieties. And even now at this time, in this state of
Exaltation, while he sets crowned with Honor and Glory on the Right Hand of
the Throne of his Father; he in mercy still stretches out his healing Wings
over them, earnestly desiring they would accept of Covert under them, coming to
him by Faith, and looking for Salvation in his Name, and his alone; in mercy he
defers and prorogues the time of his returning back to his last and eternal
Judgment, out of a special Tenderness and Compassion to them, as well as a
general one to Mankind, willing that none should perish, but willing that all,
even the most obstinate and obdurate, should through the Obedience of Faith,
and softened by Repentance, come to everlasting Life.

But because it may be pleaded in Bar, or pretended in excuse for not imitating
the Example of our great Lord and Master, that the Shine of his Virtues, even
breaking through the dark shroud of his Flesh, is so strong and bright, as they
dazzle our weak Eyes, and we cannot look upon them with a stedfastness fit for
the copying them; that they are too sublime and excellent to be transcribed by
Men subject to, and encompassed with Frailties and Infirmities; nay, made up of
them as much as of Flesh and Blood; though he dwelt among us to set us a
Pattern, as much as to instruct us, and suffered to leave us an Example, as
well as to lay down a Price for our Redemption. (And although St. Peter thought
not his Wife too weak to imitate it in some measure, when seeing her carried to
suffer Death, he encouraged her to it, by reminding her of his Example.) I
shall therefore in the third place propound the Example of one who had no
Advantage of a Nature superior to ours to support him under a burden and
weight of Afflictions, almost immense and insupportable, and aid him in his
Passage over a dangerous, or direct him in his steerage, through a boisterous
Sea of Troubles.

You have heard of the Person and his Deportment, as St. James tells them to
whom he immediately sent his Epistle, and you mediately, it being wrote for
your, and all succeeding Believers Instruction, as well as theirs, -- Ye have
heard of the patience of Job.

This Person is conceived by some to S 5. 3. The Example of Job.
have been brought by God himself upon the Stage, a Stage of Misery and
Calamities, that his patient Behavior V. S. Chrysostom. T. 5. or 27. p. 168. and T.
6. or 10. p. 107. ed. Savil.
on it might stand an Example for all Posterity to imitate in any the like
occasion; showed publicly to the World as the ablest and skilfullest Master of
Defense in that kind, and with design to instruct Mankind how, if they should
be put upon entering the Lists with Adversity, they should combat it; how
appointed they should come, and how they should manage this Defensive Weapon of
Patience.

It is Tertullian's Conceit, that God set Tertul. de Pat. c. 14. p. 167. ed.
Rigal.
him up, raised or erected him to remain an illustrious Trophy of Conquest over
the Devil, whom he repulsed in all the Assaults he made on him, foiled and
vanquished in all his Attempts, though he had been sufficiently battered and
bruised by the rude Shocks of Afflictions he had sustained, before he set upon
him; and like a Trophy hung about with Flags and Pennons, and Banners taken
from a discomfited Enemy, he abides to this present time, and so shall continue
to all succeeding Ages, a conspicuous and venerable Monument of the
Achievements of Patience, and of the glorious Victory that Saint obtained by
it.

The Book, which contains a Narrative Auctor Commentarior in Job laudatus ab
Origene apud Salian. Annal. ad A. M. 2398. Lu. Holsten. l. 1. not in Porphyr.
of his Troubles, and his Carriage under them, was, as it is conjectured by
most, penned by himself with the Truth and Exactness of a faithful Historian,
and an upright Man, in the Arabic or Syriack Language, and afterward
translated into Hebrew by Moses the great Captain of God's People at what time
he led them through Abenezra Comment. in 1 e. Job. Pocock. Praefat. in Miche.
the Wilderness, to the intent that they might conserve in their Memories, and
revolve in their Thoughts so great a Courage and Patience as that of Job's, who
opposed his naked Breast without any covert, except that of these two Virtues,
(or rather one single one) against all the Weapons the Devils Skill or Malice
could forge for the wounding him with, and making an Impression on him,
contrary to his Duty.

Or if it was digested into that Method we have it in now under the Babylonish
Rich. Simon. Castigat. ad Is. Vossium, p. 52.
Captivity, as it is the Surmise of a great Man, still the design was the same
that that People of the Jews having so memorable an Example before them as his,
might by the Assistance of it be supported to bear all the Calamities of that
Exile and Thraldom which then oppressed them.

What Moses the Servant of God in that Version, or any other in the Collection
of the History and Distribution of it into its present Order intended
principally for the Benefit of that Nation under either of those Circumstances,
is left upon Record for our Instruction, and that we might in any cases of the
like Nature accommodate it to our own Use, That since we cannot live in the
World without meeting with Troubles and Crosses of some kind or other, which
are apt through our Weakness and Unpreparedness to create us Disturbance and
Vexation, we should in order to the preventing their working of this Mischief,
often consider with our selves the Example of Job's Deportment, under greater and
more numerous Calamities than have, or ever are in any probability like to
befall us.

This Man, after he had received the News of the utter Devastation and Ruin of
his Estate, the largest and fairest of any Person in the East; the Destruction
of his Family, which if not Royal, and he himself a King, as the Seventy
Interpreters (or rather the Supplement to their Interpretation, to be found at
the end of Job) make him to be, was at least an Illustrious House among the
Edomites; he being reckoned by some the third in Descent from Esau a Prince; by
others the Second; or at least of a very ancient Race, and a great and noble
Extraction, Aristeus laudatus ab Eusebius. Praep. Evang. l. 9. c. 25.
if he was the Granchild of Sem, or issued from the Loins of Nachor, Abraham's
Brother, as others have thought.

After his being sorely wounded in his own Person, as well as he had been
before in his Family and Estate, and having endured the Assaults of Thirty
several Diseases, if Pineda's Computation be allowed, which were continued
without Intermission; they relieving one another, as Soldiers do their Guards,
once in Four and Twenty Hours, and making their Onset by turns, as is the
Imagination of Aristeas; and in this manner making their Pineda and Aristeas ap
eum laudatus ex Eusebius. Praepar.
Attacks, and plying their Batteries incessantly for Seven Years together;
which is the Opinion of St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and St. Cyril of Alexandria.
S. Basil. S. Chrysostom. and S. Cyril. laudati a Salian. ad A. M. 2398. Idem,
Cyryllus memoratus ab Anastasio in quaestion. in S. Scrip. q. 31. To. 1.
Biblioth. Pat. Tertul. de Pat. c. 14. p. 168. ed Rig.
Diseases, whose loathsome Smell was such, at least of some of them, as to
provoke his Friends, that they might get rid of their offensive Stench to lay
him without Doors upon a Dunghill: Diseases, whose Ulcers putrefying his Flesh,
turned it into a Pasture of Worms while it was on this side the Grave, as
Tertullian, followed herein by his Disciple St. Cyprian and St. Basil, writes,
drawing their Conjecture, it is probable, from his own Words, Job. 17. 1 Hebr.
(...)
My Breath is corrupt, my days are extinct, the Graves are ready for me; i. e.
Nothing is wanting to make me dead in all Men's Opinions, but a Grave for my
Burial, which yet I cannot obtain, as the Latin and Seventy in their rendering
the place, illustrate it. After, I say, his being thus harassed, spent and worn
out, he did not not yet behave himself unseemly, nor speak unadvisedly with his
Lips; nor show any Signs of Discomposure by Words or Actions. He then only
broke out into something, having the resemblance of a Passion, when his Wife
(the Instrument of the Devil employed to disorder him, as he had before with
Success used Eve to overthrow Adam in his Innocence) reduced by his Poverty to
a want of Bread, and yet [oppressed with another Passion within, as well as
that external Necessity] ashamed to do it, as St. Basil, St. Chrysostom, and
Olympiodorus have judged, suggested to him that wicked Counsel, that reflecting
both on his own and her deplorable Condition, he would curse God who dealt it;
and having done so, voluntarily put an end to his own Life and Misery together;
or execrating God, he would incense him to kill him.

Then indeed his Patience, which had stood impregnable against all the former
Assaults, unshaken against all the recited Storms and Tempests of Adversity,
which beat upon him, moved him to an Indignation of her Advice, and that
instigated him to give her a sharp Rebuke for it, Thou speak as Job 2. 10.
one of the foolish Women speak.

Then indeed he said unto her, Thou (...). 70.
speak, looking upon her, as the Seventy make the Addition to the Hebrew
Text, looking upon her sternly, and with Eyes full of Wrath, as St. Basil, Ibid.
with a Countenance and Brow bent in Anger, as St. Chrysostom descants Caten.
in Job.
upon the Supplement of the Seventy's Translation, which upon so just an
occasion, so commendable a Contest as the Vindication of God's Honor and the
Equity of his Dealings, is not to be called Anger, but Zeal for his Holiness;
as on the other side, tamely to have born his Wife's Advice of declaiming or
railing rather upon God, and inveighing against the Proceedings of his
Providence, had not been so much Patience in him as Stupidity.

Thus signally eminent was the Patience of Job amidst the severest Trials of
it, and so admirable the Example he has left us of this Virtue.

To this I might add the Examples of other Saints of God, either directly
commemorated, or only glanced at in Scripture, Who had trials of mockings Heb.
11. 36, 37, 38.
and scourges, moreover of Bonds and Imprisonments; were stoned, were sawn
asunder, were tempted, were slain with the Sword; wandered about in Seeep-skins,
in Goat Skins, being destitute, afflicted, tormented, wandered in Deserts and in
Mountains, or were forced to hide themselves in Dens and Caves of the Earth;
such were Joseph and David, Zacharias the Son of Barachias, Elias and the
Prophets under the impious and cruel Reign of Ahab; Isaias, Jeremiah, the
Mother and her 7 Sons under the 2 Match. 7.
Persecution of the Church by Antiochus Epiphanes; and mentioning them I might
endeavor to inflame you, shall I say, with an emulation of their Patience in
sustaining all their Troubles and Torments, or to render you sedate under all
your Sufferings as they were under theirs; and take occasion thence to
inculcate St. James's Advice, which is the most natural Inference which can be
drawn from them, or to urge and press it home upon you from the force of such
illustrious Presidents; Take, my Brethren, the Prophets, who Jam. 5. 10.
have spoken in the Name of the Lord, for an example of Suffering Affliction
and Patience.

But forasmuch as the single Example of this renowned Hero virtually contains
the Efficacy of all which can be alleged: For he grapled with all sorts of
Adversity, loss of Children, Goods, Houses; endured all kinds of Misery,
Diseases, Pains, Revilings, I will content my self with having produced his,
and the recommending it to you, to ponder in your Thoughts, and transcribe in
your Practice the memorable Instances of his Patience; Ye have Jam. 5. 11
heard of the Patience of Job, and have seen the end of the Lord, that the Lord
is very pitiful and of tender mercy. Be ye also patient, stablish your Hearts,
for the coming of the Lord draws nigh. It Is his Example alone which St. Basil
in a Treatise on this Argument (...).
thinks fit to propound to our view: He counsels us to look upon this Champion,
to compute the several Conflicts in which he was engaged and got the Mastery,
to reckon all the Darts the Tempter threw at him while he remained invulnerable
against all, or received no mortal Wound, that we may be enabled to do the
like; to put on the same Coat of Mail, that his Darts may no more pierce us
than they did him. Or in St. Cyprian's Language, to observe the Darts he threw
back again upon this Enemy of his, and with which he galled him sore,
notwithstanding his Spiritual Nature, i. e. the Expressions of Patience he
made, and the Praises and Thanks he returned to God under all his Afflictions;
that we in the like Combats may learn to fight as he did.

But besides, the Example of this Upright Man before the Law, (for he was elder
than Moses, by whose means God published that; though he was not the Grandchild
of Sem, as some have thought, but rather a Descendent from Nachor, Abraham's
Brother; or, what is more probable, from Esau, being the Fourth or Fifth by his
Line from Abraham, whereas Moses was the Sixth) V. and comp. Gen 36. 17. 33. 1
Chr. 1. 43, 44. 1 Chronicles. 5. 1, 2, 3.
and of the Prophets and Holy Men under it, whom I have designedly
pretermitted, or but just pointed at and named, without giving you a particular
Enumeration of their Sufferings, or a Description of their Behavior. I might
set before your Eyes the Apostles and Doctors, the Martyrs and Confessors of
the Christian Church, whose Life was a constant Exercise, and their Death the
noblest, as well as the last Act of this Virtue, and the most convincing
Demonstration that they had been all along before trained up in the practice of
it; were not the going about to enumerate, though the most Illustrious only of
them, the undertaking a Task to compile a Voluminous History; and if Time it
self should not fail me in the pursuit of such a Design, yet your Patience,
which I would procure by them, might very well be tired out in perusing them.

I will therefore withdraw my hand from any such Attempt; only I cannot forbear
to place in a transient Light before you, the Picture of this Virtue drawn from
one of that Sex, whose Weakness we are too apt to reproach, and whom we are
ready to censure as the most unfit for suffering or enduring what God inflicts
with any Bravery. It is of Melania, for the Truth of whose History St. Jerome
who relates it, because S. Hierom. Epist. ad Paulam.
it might look as incredible, appeals to Christ as a Witness; she having lost
two of her Sons, even while her Husbands Body was warm with the remains of that
Vital Heat the Spirit which had deserted it had left behind, instead of
dropping one single Tear, or being any ways moved at this, threw her self at
the Feet of her Savior, and with a smiling Countenance, as if she held him,
thus addressed her self to him, I can now Lord serve thee with more ease and
readiness, since thou have freed me from so great a Burden and Encumbrance as
that of a Wife or Mother.

I might likewise turn aside into profane History, and choose out some excellent
Persons from among the very Heathens, and set them in your view, that you might
copy this Virtue even from them, (if you should despair imitating the Copies of
Martyrs and Confessors, or the Saints of the first and best Ages of
Christianity) such as were Zeno Eleates, Anaxarchus, Theodorus, who with an
immovable Constancy of Mind endured all the Tortures the Tyrants Phalaris,
Nicocreon, Hieronymus could inflict; of Posidonius and Cic. l. 3. Yusc. and de
Consol. Val. Max. l. c. 3. etc.
Zeno the Stoic, who amidst the Torments of Diseases as painful as glowing
Bulls, or Racks or Wheels, cried not out so much as Oh! of Anaxagoras,
Pericles, Dion of Syracuse, Xenophon, Horatius Pulvillus, etc. all as free from
Amazement or Trouble when the news of the Death of their Children was brought
them; or as unconcerned in Passion, as Men are now adays at the relation of
Passages which happened a Thousand Years before they were born.

But I forbear, as loath to disgrace and shame my self and Fellow Christians,
who cannot look back on, or remember them without Blushes and Confusion, to
observe our selves with all the Advantages of more excellent Instructions, and
the encouragement of Nobler Rewards, surpassed and outdone by them who had no
better Assistances to further them in the attainment of this Virtue than Nature
and Reason, the one weak and depraved, the other dim and blear-eyed; nor any
other Incentives to excite them, no other Motives to animate them thereto, than
what a thirst after Glory kindled, or a desire to excel others inspired.

And yet if the very hinting of them does reproach us, they may at the same
time raise in our minds a noble Scorn, a generous Disdain to be out-stript in
this Virtue by Infidels, and thence provoke us to an earnest and diligent
Contention to overtake them in that Path they have trod before, or rather
(because this is too little) to go beyond them, and leave them as much behind
us in the degrees of Acquirement, as the eldest of them has us in time; that
so our Heaviness, our Slowness may not be a Blot on our Names; or what ought
more to be regarded, on that of our Christianity, that we be not a Scandal to
the holy Discipline we profess, or derive any Disreputation upon the Institutor
of it, the Lord Jesus.

Indeed it has been thought by one of as deep and as acute a Speculation as
Tertul. c 5. ad Marty. p. 158.
any of the Christian Fathers, that the inflaming us with Emulation was one of
the primary Reasons why God admitted such memorable Examples of Virtue among
Pagans, as the Secondary was from the great Mixture that was in them of Vanity,
being principled from an Ambition of Glory, and infected with an Itch of it, to
confound us before his Throne of Judicature hereafter, if we should not show as
much Patience and Constancy in suffering now in order to be saved as they did
then to be damned.

Since therefore Examples taken from Men have a more powerful Influence on
Persons than bare Precepts; more 6. The Duty of Patience urged from the
consideration of the Example of God's Saints.
on their Understandings, as enlightening them with the Knowledge of their
meaning, (which by reason of the Words they are expressed in, may be obscure,
or not so very clear; to which purpose St. Isiodore has affirmed, that the
Actions of God's Saints are the best Expositions of his Scripture, and that
which is almost taken for a Rule in Courts, That the Law is to be interpreted
by Practice and Custom) as convincing them of the feasibleness of the things
enjoined by them to be done, or the possibility of suffering what is appointed
by them, whereas these barely order them one way or other, without showing the
practicableness of either; as also a more powerful Influence on their Memories,
making deep Impressions there, whereas those leave no Images behind them any
more than Ships cutting the Water with their Keels, or Birds parting the Air
with their Wings do any Traces in the Elements; or if they leave any
Signatures, they are almost as soon effaced, as Sounds lose themselves or die;
and more upon the Affections too in moving them, as being let in by the
quickest Sense, Sight; or by the quicker and nimbler Faculty, the Imagination,
whereas those enter by the slowest and dullest Sense, that of hearing.

Farther, since among Examples, those of Sufferings generally affect us more
than those of Actions, the Reason of which proceeds from our Humanity, which is
tender and compassionate, I shall make use of this Topic to recommend this
Virtue to your Esteem and Practice, as St. James did the Example of the
Prophets, Take my Jam. 1. 10.
Brethren the Prophets for an example of suffering Affliction and Patience. And
while I exhort you to the exercise of Patience, enforce the Exhortation from
this Head of Argument, Example; which being the Method the Apostle has taken
on this Subject, pressing the Duty after an Enumeration of many illustrious
Instances of it, I cannot better do it than in his Words. Therefore Heb. 12. 1.
and 24.
since we also are encompassed with such a cloud of Witnesses, let us, laying
aside every weight, and the sin which does so easily beset us, with Patience
run the Race that is set before us, looking unto Jesus the Author and Finisher
of our Faith, who for the Joy that was set before him, endured the Cross,
despised the Shame, and is set down at the Throne of God.

Let us run the race of our natural Life, how uneasy and painful soever that
may be through Infirmities and Diseases; how tedious and uncomfortable soever
that may be made by ill Accidents and Circumstances; for an interchangeableness
at least, of Diseases and Health; of Calamity and Felicity, is a necessary part
of our humane condition, and Life was given us upon these terms, and we hold it
upon them, to bear these Incidents of it with Patience, and not be disturbed
with what we cannot by any Care or Provision prevent; nor with any Diligence
and Application remove; and the way such as it is, was laid and chalked out for
us by God's own Providence.

Let us run the race of our Christian Life, how rough, how full of Hardships,
how surrounded with Terrors and Dangers soever it may be, considering it as set
before us by God with an Obligation to run it; that without running it there is
no possibility of obtaining the glorious Prize for which it was instituted. For
Running is pre-supposed as the fundamental Article and Condition to all others
that are to be performed for the obtaining it, and are propounded for an
Encouragement to run; and without running it with Patience, there can be no
more carrying it away; for it hangs upon the Goal, and is to be taken thence by
such only who run as far as that, which is not to be done without Patience;
forasmuch as not supported by her Assistance, we shall grow faint and weary
before we reach thither.

Ye have need of Patience, that after ye have done the Will of God, ye might
Heb. 10. 36
receive the Promise, says the same Apostle; i. e. This Virtue is necessary
even after having done the Will of God in some measure, after having run the
way of his Commandments for some time, that ye may keep on the same constant
Course, and hold it out to the last, to the end ye may be made capable of
receiving the glorious Rewards which he has promised to bestow on such, who
not contenting themselves in the performances of his Pleasure for a Spurt or
Season, continue in well-doing unto the end.

Certainly would we but take so much time as would serve to look round about
us, and view that Army with Banners, which from the Jewish and Christian Church
encompass us; that Cloud of Witnesses which from these two Coasts overshadow
us; them especially who have run the very same Race that is now before us with
Patience, and for having done so, enjoy now a delightful Rest from all their
Labors, never to be disturbed any more; are in the actual Possession of an
indefeasible and inalienable Happiness; or as would serve to look upwards to
Jesus the Author and Finisher of our Faith, the Institutor and Rewarder of it;
and contemplate him, who for having despised the Torment and Scandal of the
Cross, esteemed its Disgrace a Glory, and its Pains a Pleasure, with respect to
his Fathers Will and Appointment, that he should suffer this; and regard to the
Glory he designed him for a Reward of his humble and patient Obedience, is
seated on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty in the highest Heavens, we
should through such a Contemplation be animated to run and finish ours with
Patience, yea moreover, with Cheerfulness.

Let us therefore, my Fellow Christian Soldiers, bravely on after the Captain
of our Salvation, wherever he by his great Example leads the way, not turning
our Backs through Cowardice, or lagging behind through Sluggishness; forasmuch
as on one hand it is a Reproach and a Crime too for Soldiers not to follow
their Leaders; and on the other, having mastered the Toil of a short March over
this Spot of Earth, arrive we shall at Heaven, a Seat whose Mansions (for there
are many) shall yield us everlasting Refreshments.

Let us follow such who engaged in the same Warfare for which we have enrolled
our Names, have gone before us treading in the steps of their, and our great
General; let us, as they did, I mean the Martyrs and Confessors of the several
Ages of the Church, keep close to, and fight under his Imperial Banner, the
Cross; who for having by the Exploits they did, and Hardships they suffered,
acquitted themselves bravely, as good Soldiers of Jesus Christ, are now with
him their Victorious Chieftane, celebrating one endless Triumph of Glory in
Jerusalem which is above, the City of the Living God.

Indeed having Arguments to convince us of the necessity and reasonableness of
this Duty; having such Motives of Pleasure and Advantage to encourage us to the
exercise of it; having Examples on all hands, of the Patriarchs and Prophets
before our Saviors taking Flesh, and dwelling among us; of himself in the days
of his Flesh and Humiliation; and of his Disciples, and all other holy Persons
who have succeeded since the time that he was taken up into Heaven, and
received into Glory even until now, to excite us to the Practice of it; it is
almost impossible, if we will attend to them, but that we should emulate them;
and upon meeting with the same occasions as they did, imitate them in the same
virtue too; and either living possess our Souls in Patience as they did; or
dying, after their Example, so resign them.

That we may therefore do so upon all Emergencies which require it, it will be
needful to have all in readiness beforehand, i. e. The Precedents before our
Eyes, and the Consideration well fixed in our Memories; both I mean, must be the
continual, or at least the frequent Subject of our Meditations.

The Advice then that I would give 7. Directions for the establishing our Mind
in Patience.
you in this matter, and which I am willing my self, by God's Assistance, to
take and follow, for preventing the Disquietude and Vexation which Afflictions
usually cause when they fall upon us, is, That we prepare our selves against
that time and them with antecedent Considerations, as Mithridates for many
years of his Life fortified himself against the Danger and Force of Poison by
an habitual course of Antidotes.

And the first Consideration we should 1. The inevitableness of Afflictions and
Calamities.
be furnished with, is, That Troubles and Calamities are the ordinary and
inevitable Incidents of Humane Life, God having in his Infinite Wisdom thought
good to order it so, as there should be no enjoyment of Life without suffering
Afflictions.

Great Travel is created for every 1. In respect of our Humanity. Eccl. 9. 40.
1, 2, 3.
man, and a heavy yoke is upon the Sons of Adam, from the day that they go out
from their Mother's womb, till the day that they return to the Mother of all
things; from him that sits on the Throne of Glory to him that is humbled in
Earth and Ashes; from him that wears Purple, and a Crown unto him that is
clothed with a Linen Frock, is the Observation which the wise Son of Sirach
made of Humane Condition; or rather, was but repeated from the wisest Man of
the East, who abundantly experienced in his own particular what he affirmed of
Mankind in general, Man that is born of Woman is of few Job 14. 1.
days, and full of misery. Crowded with Misery, as the Chests or Baggs of the
covetous Men are with Money; full of Anger, as the Seventy translate it; or
Commotion, as Junius renders it; i. e. of the occasions of these Passions, as
the crammed Stomach of the Cormorant is of Meat.

We may all take up the Confession of Jacob before Pharaoh, that the Genesis 47. 9.
days of the years of our Pilgrimage are not only few, as they are, and have
been since the great Reduction and Abbreviation of our Age after the Flood; but
those few Evil likewise, as they have always been from Adam's Fall.

It should seem by the Remark of Sirach, which consists indeed in Ninety
Enumerations of the two extreme degrees of Mankind only, but by construction
must comprehend the intermediate ones, which mentions only the first and last
Stages of his Life, but by parity of Reason must be intended to the interjacent
ones, That no Person of what Condition soever, no, not the highest by the
favor of his place and station, is for any time, no, not for that which is
scarce a part of time, is no space of it, a Moment, exempted or privileged
from sore Trouble. And indeed if Cic de Consolat. in hanc mentem.
Man is as much by Nature subjected to Trouble as the Spark is fitted by it to
ascend, it is impossible that any Order of Mankind, their Rank not raising them
above their Nature, should be secured and protected against it.

Man when he is born, comes into the World not so much a Lord and Governor of
it, as a Slave subject to all Miseries and Inconveniences, is what Cicero
observes. Id. ibid.


And as if by a Prophetic Spirit he foresaw this should be his case, he enters
upon the first Scene of Life with Tears and Cries, lamenting as it were and
complaining of his sad Condition. The Son of Syrach has well enough expressed
this first step he and all Mankind make into this Region of Life. The first
voice I uttered was crying, as Wisd. 7. 3, 4, etc.
all others do; for there is no King had any other beginning of Birth: For all
men have one entrance into life, and the like going out of it.

It was the Contemplation of Theophrastus, Cic. ibid.
That the World was a large Theater filled by the Divine Mind, and for the
manifestation of his Wisdom and Greatness beautified with many resplendent
Ornaments; that in the midst of it he placed Mankind to struggle with
Adversity, Sorrow, Poverty, Diseases, Pain, and the like innumerable sad
Contingences, while he in the mean time looks upon them to behold how they
behave themselves, and use that Courage they received from him to be employed
occasionally in such Combats.

No doubt there is to be made, but such a settled Opinion as this Philosopher
conceived of God's bringing us into the World for this very end, to enter the
Lists with Adversity, and his being a Spectator of the Fight, is of sufficient
Force to make us behave our selves gallantly. And what then will not the
Assurance we have from Divine Truth, that it is not only a Consequent, but one
of the Ends God propounds in sending us into the World, to be tried and
exercised by them; and that while we are so, he looks down on the Action, do of
this kind?

The Cyrenian Philosopher finding by common Experience that Foresight of
Trouble mightily impaired and broke its Force; and an expectation of it
beforehand fortified Men to bear it when it came; whereas unlooked-for Cic. l.
3. Tuscu.
Accidents of that nature, and such as surprised them without any forethought,
were apt to sink and overwhelm them, as sudden Storms and Hurricanes are to
over-set the Vessels they find at Sea, wisely advised them to premeditate upon
all Events, at least the usual Issues of Humane Affairs, the common and
ordinary Contingencies of Life as the most excellent and Divine part of Wisdom;
but withal, to suppose nothing impossible to fall out, or wonder at it when it
did. And though the Epicureans opposed this, as if that Evil might never happen,
and it made Men uneasy before their time, and the Affliction it caused when it
did come upon us was enough. I think their Opposition and Exceptions were
causeless.

Cicero, when he mentions this, superadds the like Counsels of Demopho in
Terence, and commends it; which was, that Men in the most flourishing Spring or
Summer of their Condition ought especially to consider with themselves, how
they should be able to bear a sharp nipping Winter of Adversity. A person
returning homeward from hie Journey, should revolve in his mind the Casualties
which might happen there in his Absence, the Losses he might suffer in his
Estate, the miscarriages of his Children, their or his Wife's Sickness or
Death, the Sentence of Banishment which may be awarded against him, and force
him abroad again, to the end nothing might be strange and surprising, and to
reckon what he found otherwise than according to this Expectation he had
raised, for Gain and Acquest.

The Advice though coming from a Comoedian and the Roman Stage, may be of great
use for the Conduct of our Lives; and thence we may learn not only to esteem
Misfortunes and Calamities as the familiar Companions of Humane Condition as
belonging to it is Retinue; but frequently take a prospect of them in our
Thoughts, consider them beforehand as such, that when they actually lighten
upon us, we may be Masters of our selves and our Faculties, possess our Minds
in all Sedateness, neither be disturbed by Sorrow, nor provoked by Anger, nor
dejected by Pusillanimity.

The Poet makes the Personage in whom he intended to give us the perfect Idea
of an Hero to consider all the Dangers and Difficulties he was to run through,
before he could be settled and erect a Kingdom in Italy, and to return this
Answer to the Cumaean Sybil, acquainting him with this part of his Future Fate,
That no Toil could be new to him, nor Danger in any Shape or Dress be
affrightful or discouraging; for he had figured to himself all the kinds of
them, and taken a view of them in his mind.

To this purpose in easy we should think of hard Times, in the Flow of Plenty
and Riches muse of Poverty and Want; amidst the Smiles and Blandishments of
Fortune, as we term the going well of things on our part, to apprehend her
Frowns and Severity.

Hannibal, the better to incline Scipio Live. l. 30. p. 545. ed. Elzevir.
to hearken to the Proposals of a Peace amidst the Current of his good Success,
offered this to his Consideration, That a Man whom Fortune had never hitherto
deserted or deceived, ought in Wisdom to think of it is uncertainty, and the
Chances which may be, and not look back only on what had happened, but forward
also on what might.

In Prosperity we should arm our selves against the stroke of Adversity; as the
Roman Soldiers used in time of Veget. de re milit. l. 1. c. 8.
Peace to carry Baskets of Earth and Pallisadoes, as if they had been to encamp
against an Enemy, to march once every Month Ten Miles a day in their Arms, as
if they had been to fight; and to leap on and off their Wooden Horses, as if
they had been engaged in Battle; in short, to practice all the Arts, and endure
all the Toyls of War, that they might be the more expert to manage live Horses,
and order themselves in a real Fight, and the better inured to bear all it is
true Fateigues and hardships; or as those whom that State entertained for
Mariners to serve on board their Fleet in the time of the first Punick War,
learnt to ply their Oars while their Galleys were a building in their Docks, or
equipping in their Harbors.

While we are encompassed with a multitude of Friends, we should consider that
either they may forsake us upon some Distaste or Disaster; or if their
Constancy be so immovable, as they will not abandon us, yet they may be taken
from us, because they are but Earth animated with a little warm Breath for a
time, and were born to die either before or after us; and that it is no more for
what is mortal sometime or other to die, than it is that a brittle Cup or Glass
should be broken in using at one time or other. And so we are to prepare our
selves for receiving the loss of other things, by thinking upon their Nature,
that they are in themselves corruptible and amissible, and that the Sum of
every man's Life, however it may seem distinguished by variety of Accidents,
upon a just Calculation, will be found to be the same at the foot of the
Account; the frail Creatures who should perish themselves received Goods which
should perish.

And that it is unreasonable to expect to be exempted from the common share of
Misfortunes, absurd to look to be privileged above the rest of Mankind; at the
best, a groundless assuming to our selves to be the peculiar Favorites of God,
and that the Dew of Heaven was to fall upon our Fleeces, while all about us was
dry, that neither our Garments or our Hairs should be singed, or the smell of
Fire pass upon us, while we walked in the Flames, though they should consume
others.

Seeing therefore the Contemplation of the inevitableness of Calamity of one
kind or other, not to be prevented by any Art or Care, prepares us against the
time it makes its Assaults, and puts us into a posture to receive it; weakens
and abates it is force when it actually makes the Impression; and moderates our
Passions so, that they do not aid nor join with it to disturb us; and that the
attending in our Thoughts to God's being a Spectator from on high how we behave
our selves, is what will give us new Life and Courage in the Contest. (For it
was this Thought, Minut. Foel. Dialog.
as Caecilius has observed, which raised the Christians Courage above the
Threats of their Enemies, their Liberty above the Power of Kings and Princes,
their Pleasure above the Punishments and Torments they endured, made them
insult over their Judges as they condemned them, contemn the Grimness and
Horror of their Executioner's Face and Dress, and the affrightful Horror with
which their Death was set out, which all instructed them to gain what they
contended for, the Crown of Martyrdom.) It would be no less advantageous than
commendable piece of Prudence to make the one the frequent Subject of our
Meditations; and to set the other before our Thoughts as an Observer of our
Deportment, in order to be a Rewarder of it as a Judge hereafter.

(2.) Consider we ought that we S. 7. 2. Consid. That we have reduced our
selves to the necessity of suffering Troubles as a Punishment for our sins
have reduced our selves to the necessity of Afflictions as the just and
deserved Punishment for the manifold Offenses we have committed against the
Majesty of God; and we are to look on these as the occasion and procuring Cause
of those. For, as it is well observed by Eliphaz, Affliction comes not out of
the Dust, neither does Trouble Job 5. 6.
spring out of the ground; i. e. Their Original is not fortuitous, as that of
Mushrooms or Weeds, or the like things, (which shoot out of the Earth all of a
sudden in a night, or a Thunder Shower, or things without any Order and Method)
seems to be: Nor yet have they a natural Cause, as Plants propagated from their
proper Seeds committed to the Ground, and formed and actuated by it is seminal
Virtue have; but a moral and meritorious one, which is our sins.

The Transgression of our first Parents gave the first Rise to Trouble, brought
it with it self as a Companion or Attendant into the World, or drew it after
its self as its proper Reward.

Then by way of equal Recompense for having eat of that Fruit God forbad them,
he condemned Man to eat for ever after of the Fruit of the Ground in the Sweat
of his Brow; and the Woman to bring forth hers Job 5. 6. Genesis 3. 16, 17, 18, 19.
(for Children are the Fruits of the Womb) in Pangs and Sorrow.

Their Disobedience administered to N. 1. They are Punishments which our sins
have merited.
their Affliction, and God doomed them to Labor and Pain, as fit Chastisements
for their Luxury, in tasting that Food which lay under a particular Interdict
of his, and used these as suitable means for the avenging himself, and
vindicating his Honor, which they had insolently affronted by going directly
against his express Command.

Immediately upon this, as the Earth by God's Curse upon it for Man's sake
brought forth Briars and Thorns to molest him, which is what the Scripture
affirms; and prickles began to grow up with the Rose-tree to scratch their
Hands if they would gather them, which is what St. Basil and St. Ambrose S.
Basil. in Hexaem. Hom. 13. S Ambros. Hexaem. l. 5. c. 11.
have delivered upon this Point: So Sorrow and Trouble, and Care and Pain began
to disquet and vex, to prick and tear their Minds. This was the first Nativity
of them; and ever since Sin has continued to be the fruitful Parent of them;
and Men cease not to bring them upon their own Heads, Wisd. 1. 12
by the Error of their ways, and the Works of their own Hands. Our ways Jer. 4.
18.
and our doings procure them unto us; as God tells Israel of her Calamities;
Fools (such are all the Workers of Wickedness, and such are we all) because of
their Transgression, and because of their Iniquities are afflicted. Ps. 107. 17.


Since therefore God was provoked at first by Man's Impieties and Iniquities to
treat him so roughly; and the daily renewing of those provokes him now to
repeat the same usage; we ought in all reason to bear the Calamity we have
brought upon our selves by our sins, especially since we have not been only
cautioned against every one of them by a direct or virtual, but plain
Prohibition of them, but had express notice of those very dismal Consequences
being entailed upon them.

For it is very inequal to complain of V. S. Ambrose, ut supr.
God, and murmur against him for having made our selves miserable; to speak
hardly of him for the Troubles we have raised, and the Difficulties we have
created to our selves. The Prophets Expostulation about it implies the
Absurdities of such a Behavior, -- Why does the living man complain Lam. 3. 39.
for the punishment of his sins? Nor is his arguing and thus debating the case
with Man a sharper Remonstrance against the Iniquity of a froward Carriage
under Afflictions, than the Churches Resolution under hard and pressing
Circumstances, as it is declared by another Prophet, to take a flat contrary
Course, and quietly submit under her distressed Condition, a plain Note and
Direction how we ought to demean our selves, -- I will bear, Mich. 9. 3.
says Jerusalem, the Church there, the indignation of the Lord, because I have
sinned against him. I will bear the stroke of the Lord, as the Arabic and
Syriack Translations have rendered it, viz. My Desolation is my own, and my
Captivity and Bondage in a Foreign Land; forasmuch as my Offenses have merited
his Anger, and it was but Justice and Congruity that I should behold the
manifestation of it in all these Tokens, or feel it in all these effects upon
me.

Eli's Resolution to submit patiently to God's Pleasure, the signification of
which was brought him in that terrible Denunciation Samuel had command to
deliver him; That he would judge 1 Samuel 2. 13. and 18.
his House for ever for the Iniquity he knew of; as he declared it in the
Answer he made thereupon, It is the Lord, let him do what seems him good, was
not formed merely upon a Consideration, that by his Power he was able to do all
this, and there was no resisting or opposing that, but was the result of an
inward Conviction, that such a proceedure would be just; being conscious that
his Sons had made themselves vile, and as much as in them lay, the Offerings of
the Lord, and their holy Order, by their Rapine, and Violence, and Uncleanness;
and he had not refrained or checked them for this, by interposing his Paternal
and Sacerdotal Authority as he ought: And the Judgment of that Faculty forced
him to conclude thereupon, That they for the Villainy they had committed, and he
for his tame Connivance at it, had deserved to suffer all that was contained in
the threatening Message.

Hezekiah's Reply to the Prophet Isaiah, when he had discharged himself of what
he had in Commission and Instruction from God to acquaint him with, sc. The
uncomfortable prediction, 2 Kings 20. 19.
That his Imperial City and Palace should be sacked and pillaged, his Royal
Treasury and Wardrobe plundered and emptied; his Posterity and Offspring made
Prisoners of War, and carried away Captive by the Armies of Babylon into a
strange Country, where, in the mean Quality of Slaves, they should be forced to
serve Imperious Lords in the vilest Offices. Good [Gracious] is the Word of the
Lord which thou have spoken. And he said, Is it not good, if Peace and Truth be
in my days? was a magnifying God's Clemency in the Affair, and so was more than
a bare and pure acknowledgment of his Justice in so dealing.

And the very Consideration that the Sentence, which tho in what it concerned
his Posterity it was extremely just, was yet qualified with abundance of Mercy,
as it respected his own Person, staid up his Spirits under the dismal Prospect
of so much Misery which was to involve his Children and People, his Family and
Kingdom, as it were with a Cordial Refreshment. He comforted himself with this,
That Peace and Truth should be in his days.

The 6th. Of those Brethren in the History of the Machabees, who were the
Renowned Martyrs the Jewish Church has to boast of, looked upon those
exquisite Torments that Antiochus and the Ministers of his Cruelty had devised
for his and their Vexation, and to bring them to a renouncing and abjuring
their Religion, as the ill usage which their transgressing the Law of the most
holy God had procured him to permit in Punishment for it, as the due and
deserved Reward of their sins, and making this Reflection, he heartned himself
cheerfully to embrace the Death, and it is Preparatives, which were before his
eyes.

Be not deceived, said he, addressing 2 Match. 7. 18.
himself to both Tormentors and Spectators, for we suffer those things for our
selves, having sinned against God, and therefore mavelous things are done by
him unto us.

The Byzantine History reports of Mauritius their Emperor, that beholding the
barbarous Murder committed before his Face on Four of his Sons by the Traitor
and Usurper Phocas, amidst the dire Spectacles he acknowledged the Divine
Justice, repeating often that of the Psalmist, Righteous art thou, O Lord,
Psalm. 119. 37.
and just are thy Judgments; and with this Meditation prepared himself for his
own Assassination, and with those Words in his Mouth for the last finishing
stroke of it.

And now had we, when afflicted, this firm Persuasion, that the Judgments of
the Lord are true, and that he of very faithfulness has caused us to be
corrected, that it is but the Reward of our own Demerits, that our sins have
made the Provision of all the Evil we feel; and demanded the Infliction of what
we suffer from God's Justice as a reasonable Punishment for what we have done
amiss, or if we were so persuaded, did our Thoughts sometimes dwell with this
Truth, as theirs did, whose Behavior I have recommended to be our Example to
imitate, or our Reproach to shame us, our Courage to meet Adversity and
Troubles, in whatsoever Shape they presented themselves and our Constancy in
supporting them would be inferior to none of theirs.

Origin in the Treatise he wrote to Orig. Exhort. ad Martyr. p. 184.
encourage Christians to undergo Martyrdom when offered them, which it always
is, when it cannot be declined without sinning against God, makes use of this
instance of the young Machabees to provoke us to it, unless we will be shamed
by Children, and appear to have less Manhood than they, who enduring not only
the Torments that were inflicted on their own Persons, but the Indignities
likewise each one of their Brethren, while they were constrained to behold
them, gave the noblest Proof and the most illustrious Mark of the Prowess of
Piety.

But I am not now animating you or my self to Martyrdom, or to put on a
Constancy proper for that Estate: And yet we ought to be always Martyrs in
purpose of Resolution; if I had said desire, I had not been mistaken; and it
being the greatest Honor a Christian is possibly capable of in this World, to
die for his Master, I should think there would be no need of Exhortations and
Arguments to persuade such an one to suffer that with Patience, which he ought
to embrace, in some sense to run upon, with cheerfulness; my Business in this
place is to incline you and my self to receive the ordinary Incidents of humane
Life, how vexatious and troublesome they usually prove through the Indisposition
or Depravation of our Minds, with Patience; and that upon a right sense and due
Conviction, that we have deserved them as Punishments for our sins. But this
Consideration which I use for the introducing such a Temper into our Minds may
be yet farther urged, and pressed closer home for this purpose, That
Afflictions are not Punishments absolutely; (and yet if they were so, and
adequate to our sins, we have no reason to be disturbed for being punished, but
to be angry with our selves and our own Folly, who have deserved to be so) but
Punishments less than our Deserts, and so we ought rather to be thankful for
the Abatement of our Correction, than froward because we are corrected at all.
Ezra, while he had deplored the Calamities that Ezra 9. 13
were come upon his Country and Nation, acknowledged before God, that he had
punished them less than their Iniquities deserved.

They are sent in mercy as well as 2. Albeit they are Punishments, yet they are
less than we have deserved. Psa. 25. 10. Neh. 9. 31.
executed in Truth. All his ways have both these. The Levites on a solemn Day
of Humiliation before God, recognize this, that God while he was just in the
Subversion of the Jewish State, yet did not utterly consume them, because he
was a gracious and merciful God.

Jeremiah reflecting on the Desolation Lam. 3. 22.
of that People, confessed it was mitigated with Clemency. It is of the Lords
Mercies that we are not consumed, because his Compassions fail not. They are
all inflicted in kindness, as well as deserved by Justice. I know, Psa. 119. 75
O Lord, that thy Judgments are right, [Righteousness] and that thou of very
faithfulness have afflicted me, was the Psalmists Acknowledgment. The Rod he
corrects us with is like that of Jonathan's dipped in Honey; and while he smites,
he tenderly compassionates us: And if at the same time that he wounds he does
not heal, nor bind up as soon as he breaks, yet he has all the soft Bowels of
a good Samaritane, and is ready to do all those Offices, as soon as we repent
and turn to him.

The Cup of Gall he gives us to drink is tempered and mixed, and he remembers
Mercy while in Justice he writes bitter things against us. His grieving us is
with unwillingness, for we are the Causes of it, and that is in compassion to
us. Lam. 3. 32.


These two Considerations will make us to do what we ought, and St. Peter 1
Pet. 5. 6.
exhorts us to Humble our selves under the mighty hand of God. And if we have
not these Reflections, our Carriage will be froward and proud; we shall speak
contumeliously of God, and insolently demand, Who is the Lord, that we should
quietly submit to his afflicting hand? Or gently kiss the Rod of Iron with
which he bruiseth or breaks us in pieces? That we should reverence and adore
him while he condemns and executes us?

For that we are inclined thus to vent our Passions against the Deity, and
usually do so while we suffer from him, if our low Opinion of our own Vileness,
and so consequently of our suffering worthily what we do, and less than what we
have merited, restrains us not within the Bounds of Modesty and Decency, common
Experience is able to inform us. And indeed this was long ago taken notice of
by a Philosopher Arian. l. 1. c. 22. p. 141. ed. Cantab.
of great esteem, to be the humor of Mankind, and his Observation has left us
this account of it and them, That upon any great Misfortunes or Calamity they
straight conclude Jupiter has no kindness for them. And then advancing farther
upon that Mistake and wrong Inference, cry out, What have we to do with him?
For either he cannot help us out of our Miseries; or if he can, he will not,
which is worse: And this proceeding from this careless neglect, they at last
arrive at a downright Defiance of him, declaiming against building of Temples
and rearing Altars to him; and take upon them to maintain, That they have no
more reason to worship him than Fevers which molest them, or Ghosts which haunt
them.

Thus those in the Revelation on whom the Angels emptied some of the Vials of
God's Judgments, blasphemed the God of Heaven, because of their Pains Rev. 16.
11
and of their Soars.

But if it were possible to bear the Ills of this Life patiently, without a
profound and humble Sense of our own baseness, such as renders us worthy to
suffer them, and more; yet as this false Gallantry would be but the Counterfeit
of this Virtue, not it; so it would not hold out to the last, but would flinch
and recoyl sometime or other, or betray it is self by its wincing in private, or
by it is open Vanity.

That Philosopher, who unconcerned had bore all the Contumelies and Reproaches
which a Person, who had a mind to try his Patience, could devise to heap upon
him, when he told his provoking Adversary, Now, Sir, I hope you are satiisfied
I am a Philosopher: Received this sharp Retort from him, I had indeed, had you
been silent.

We are farther to consider, That as N. 3. That God may and will punish us
farther for our Impatience.
our Punishments are less than we have deserved, and that God may in Justice
equal them to the proportion and measure of our sins, and by his Omnipotence
can do so; so the not submitting quietly to his hand when it is light in
comparison of our Merits, will probably provoke his Anger to aggravate the
Inflictions, and to create a Punishment on purpose for the Chastisement of a
new Sin, our Impatience. As Masters and Parents are often stirred up by the
Obstinacy and Frowardness of their Servants or Childron to correct them more
severely than at first they designed.

And indeed, if we were not awed through this Consideration, instead of a meek
and humble Deportment of our selves, instead of an even and sedate Temper, we
should be ready in high Discontent and Fury to cast about with our selves,
whether we might not some way or other, in dispight of him, wind our selves out
of our Afflictions.

The Prophet Elisha seeing no end of h^^ Troubles, but like Waves one rolling
upon the back of another, and upon a sudden apprehension of the Danger he was
in of being seized by the King himself, was through Inconsideration of this
transported so far, as to renounce any longer depending or confiding in God,
Behold this Evil is of the Lord! 2 King. 6. 32.
What shall I wait for the Lord any longer?

And if a Prophet of so great Sanctity was thus violently carried away unto a
discarding God as it were, at least from being the God of his hope, it will be
no Marvail if some, nay, if multitudes are so ill-disposed, as the infamous
Person in the Poet was, That when they cannot incline Heaven to ease them, they
will seek for a Relief from Hell, knock at its Gates, and try the Power and
Mercy of Devils either to deliver them out of their Troubles, or rebate them.

When they have suffered their Minds to be perplexed with an anxious
Solicitude of knowing the Event of any Affair they have taken in hand, or of
some important Design set on foot in the World, or the end of some present
Trouble they lie under; to satisfy this, they will be apt to consult Wizards
and Southsayers, as Saul did the Witch of Endor to be resolved of 1 Samuel 28. a
7. ad 20.
the Fortune of a Battle. Or as Ahaziah enquired of the Devil of Ekron,
Beelzebub, whether he should recover of his Fall.

So when they are assaulted by a Disease, whose continued and importunate Pains
makes them restless, prone they will be to resort to Physicians as the sole or
prime Agents for removing them without so much as looking up to him, or at
least without imploring his Benediction, in whose hands are the Issues of Life
and Death, who wounds and heals, who brings down to the Grave, and
raises up again; 2 Chronicles. 16. 12.
as that which has the principal Virtue and Efficacy in all Cures, and makes
their Prescriptions successful; which was Asa's Fault.

But more than all this, besides the considering S. 7. 3. Consid. 3. The
necessity of Afflictions in regard of our Christian Calling. And that (1.) from
God's Ordination.
Afflictions as the inevitable Lot of our Condition as Men; and this
unavoidableness brought upon us by our sins, as Malefactors by their Crimes
bring the Punishments they suffer upon their own Heads; we who are called by
the Name of Christ are to regard the necessity of meeting with them doubled and
trebled upon us from our Calling, from the end and design of it on God's Part,
and the Obligation arising from it on our own.

The Divine Wisdom has appointed N. 1. 2 Timothy 3. 12.
that all who would live Godly in Christ Jesus should suffer Persecution;
Persecution of one sort or other, of the Tongue or the Sword, from Enemies or
from Crosses; it has made this way, Act. 19. 23. Mat. 7. 13.
as it is eminently called, always rough, by reason of its Precepts and
Restraints very irksom and repugnant to Flesh and Blood; and in every part of
it straight and narrow, allowing no liberty to do the least Evil, though the
most grateful and acceptable to our Inclinations or Temper; though the most
profitable and advantageous, and such as shall be compensated with a public
Good; and sometimes extremely dangerous to those who take it, and dare own they
do so, and will not be put out of it.

And he has made it thus, and appointed the taking up of the Cross as a
Condition of our Profession, or of living up to it for the Trial of our
Obedience, which could not be experimented, if every thing he required was
suitable to our own Minds, and the recommendation of it likewise, which would
be very insignificant, and not thank-worthy, if the way of his Commandments was
all on a Carpet, strewn with Roses, and those without any Prickles, or all as
soft as down; yea, hardly deserve that Name, if it were not to be exercised and
manifested in some Instances of Difficulty and Peril. And indeed this last has
been deemed so necessary to our Christianity, that the very Blood which flowed
from the opened Pores of our Saviors natural Body in his Agony, has been
interpreted a Signification and Representation S. Prosper Sentent. ex August.
of the Blood which should flow from all the parts of his Mystical Body, the
Church.

And now what is that Man, who expects God should make a way to Heaven free
from such Hardships for his use only. He is too tender to be a Christian, who
thinks to go easily to Heaven, or too much a Fool in esteeming that Pleasure,
which the World miscalls so.

However it is certain, that we are bound by all the Ties and Force of
Gratitude to lay down our Lives for him in return of his Love, who laid down
his Life for us; and in consequence of that Example of his, without 1 John 3.
16 4. 11.
any particular Precept so to do: For if we ought to lay down our Lives for the
Brethren, reflecting that he laid down his Life for us; much more strongly must
we be ebliged by the Example of so great Love, to lay down our Lives for him.

And this Obligation reaches to two Cases more peculiarly; either (1.) When the
parting with our Lives is the only convincing Argument we can offer in Proof of
the Truth and Sincerity of our own Faith. Or, (2.) When such an Oblation is
necessary for the Service of our Brethren's Faith; absolutely or highly
requisite to sustain their staggering Faith that it sink not, or to preserve
their languishing one, that it does not finally fail.

Upon such occasions as these we are to do what St. Paul did, fill up what Col.
1. 24.
is behind of the Afflictions of Christ in our Flesh, (even by suffering in it)
for his Bodies sake, which is the Church; not as if there was any thing
deficient in his personal Sufferings to render his Satisfaction and
Reconciliation through it complete, and we could supply it; but that we might
help to fill up that measure of Sufferings which his mystical Body of the
Church, (with which he is one Person) was appointed by the Father to undergo by
way of Service, Probation, Confirmation or Example.

We our selves have agreed to carry N. 2. From a voluntary Obligation of our
selves.
Christ's Yoke, how heavy soever he should make it; have entered into
Obligations of suffering all the Hardships of this Warfare, even of resisting
unto Blood: We did so when we took him to be our Master, when we listed our
selves to be the Soldiers of Christ, and so are under a necessity of fulfilling
them. We engaged then to fight manfully under his Cross, even unto Death; for
what else can the continuing his Faithful Soldiers unto our Lives end imply? We
submitted to the Condition propounded by him, of taking up his Cross and
bearing it after him, and following him in the way that he went before, and
promised Performance.

We vowed and devoted our selves, as to all other Sufferings, so to Martyrdom
especially: And as by virtue of that Dedication we ought constantly to be
Martyrs in resolution, while we have not the occasion of consummating that Vow,
and making an actual Oblation of our Blood, as the Blood of the slain Victims
was poured out upon the Altar, and so offered to to him; or of giving up our
Bodies to be burnt, as their Flesh was consumed in the Fire; so when we have
the occasion presented to us, we are bound to comply with it; and at that time
if we do, we shall be accepted as Martyrs by him, and rewarded with their
Crowns.

Upon both of these Accounts then it remains, that we our selves knowing (as
having bin therewith acquainted beforehand by our great Lord and Master) that 1 Thessalonians 3 3
we are appointed unto Afflictions, ought not to be thereat moved; and having
besides submitted our selves to be ordered, we are not to reckon the Fiery
Trial which is to try us, strange, or be 1 Pei. 4. 12
surprised when we are put upon it, or that kind of Question actually
administered to us, as if some strange thing happened unto us.

And if Premonitions and Advice beforehand will leave no room for a Surprizal
with Wonder or Amazement; nor our own Engagements to suffer, any place for Fear
to seize us when Afflictions do actually fall upon us; certainly they will take
from us all manner of Excuse or Color of Justification, if we are impatient
under them; but most infallibly deprive us of the Honor of Martyrdom and its
Reward, whatever be the fair opportunity which invites us to embrace it: For
Impatience in suffering looks to have so much Aversion on one hand, and
Constraint on the other, as is not consistent with Martyrdom, which must be a
Free Will Offering, and a cheerful one, at least not so with that Charity,
which must commend the Oblation of our selves to God's acceptance. The
Sufferings of Man, though they be unto Death, and even for the Cause of
Religion, can never be an Offering of a sweet Savor, acceptable to God, any
more than a Beast that was haled and dragged to the Altar, was ever reckoned of
old to make an acceptable Sacrifice to an Idol.

But besides looking back and considering. 7. 4. Consid. 4. In regard of
obtaining the reward we hope for from our Calling.
the Necessity of suffering Afflictions from God's Appointment, and the
Annexion of them to our Christian Calling; and from our own Engagement to do
so, when we entered upon it; we may, yea, ought to look forward, and so doing
we shall descry the conditional Necessity there is of this, if we would obtain
the end of our Hope; the strict and inseparable Connection there is between
suffering now, and being exalted to the highest Honors and Dignities, enjoying
the most perfect and unmixt Happiness hereafter.

For it is determined, that through much tribulation we must enter into the
Acts 14. 22
Kingdom of Heaven; that we must suffer with our Maker, before we can reign 2 Timothy 2. 12.
with him; be planted into the likeness of his Death (and we know how painful
and how scandalous that was) before we can be into the likeness of his glorious
Resurrection; we must run, we Romans 6. 1 Co. 9. 25. 2 Timothy 2. 5 Luke 13. 24
must strive, we must fight before we can be capable of being Crowned; go
through much Tribulation, before we can enter into Joy: As they who were
arrayed in White Robes, the Habit Rev. 14. 4.
and Emblem of Festivity and Triumph, did.

This is the Order, and but a reasonable one, and such as is observed in all
humane Institutions, that the Performance of the Exercise should precede the
dispensing of the Reward.

And after the observance of this, he has bound himself by his Word, by his
Solemn Promise, by his Oath, to make us that Recompense mentioned; which in
great Condescension to us, and for our encouragement to suffer for so great an
one, he has put his making us a Retribution, though we can never deserve it by
our Sufferings, so altogether improportionable to it upon natural Equity as it
were. It is a righteous 2 Thessalonians. 1. 6, 7.
thing with God, says the Apostle writing to the Thessalonians, to recompense
to you who are troubled, Rest. He seems to make it the same Degree of
Righteousness to deal so with him, as to deal so with them, as to recompense
Tribulation to those who troubled them. I have fought a good fight, 2 Timothy 4.
7, 8.
says the same Apostle, meaning according to the acceptance of the Appointer,
not the strict Laws of the Combat, I have finished my course, I have kept the
Faith. Henceforth there is laid up for me a Crown of Righteousness, which the
righteous Judge shall give me at that day; and not unto me only, but unto all
those that love his appearing.

Indeed, was the Acquest of that Kingdom, that Sovereignty, that Crown, and the
obtaining that Rest free from all Disquiet and Turmoil, (to which all Crowns
here are absolute Strangers, and so much the greater Strangers, as they are
greater in the Compass) to be made without suffering any Labor or Pains, or
running any Danger, without one drop of Sweat or Blood; the easiness of gaining
them was enough to sink them so low in our Esteem, as to make them despicable,
and so consequently to deprive us of them; when from being lessened and
slighted in our Thoughts, they would come to be judged not worth contending
for, or indeed looking after. For it is the Fate of all things which are easily
procurable, to be undervalued, let their intrinsic Worth be what it will, or
as great as can be; while on the other hand, that which is vile in it self, and
of no Benefit but what fond and false Opinion supposes, if it be far fetched,
and dear bought, with Travel and Hazard, is usually prized at a great and
excessive rate.

If then we are ambitious of Reigning, aspire after Kingdoms, and Crowns, and
Scepters, which may be had without Injustice to any, though not without
Violence to our selves; are desirous of Happiness, or pant after a place of
Rest, and would have these Passions satisfied by an agreeable Gratification; we
must fight the good fight of Afflictions, and sustain, endure the Fight, as
becomes good Soldiers with Patience; because the obtaining of those, and
thereby our everlasting Content depends upon this.

We are to carry our Consideration S. 7. 4. We are to consider them not only as
sent from Divine Justice, but by his Clemency to reform us, and prevent the
inflicting more terrible ones.
yet higher, than looking upon them as the necessary Attendants and
Consequences of Humane Life, of our Christian Calling, and as Terms that we
submitted unto when we entered upon it, and view them under another Light,
regarding them what they oft-times are, as the Result and Indications of Divine
Favor, rather than the Effects and Tokens of his Displeasure, that they are
sent to assist us to come to a right knowledge of our selves, for the vigorous
Confirmation of our Virtues, which would languish and decay were they not
raised and quickened by such Contests, for the Approbation of them by himself
after such a Trial, and the Recommendation of them as Examples to the imitation
of others.

A Heathen Philosopher saw the necessity of some such Persuasion as this
toward the patient supporting of Evil Accidents, when he advises Men in those
cases to make these or the like Reflections, and cautions us when we see good
Men haled to Prison, or shipped for Transportation, their Powers small, and their
Fortunes scanty, or perhaps to have neither of those at all, or perhaps fastened
to a sick and painful Bed altogether, against imagining that their ill
circumstances proceed from God's Anger, or are the Marks of it; because, as he
with great Sobriety of Reason, and perhaps with a better of Religion than many
Christians, argues, That Goodness V. Sen. c. 2. de Provid. Arian. l. 3. c. 24.
p. 343 ad. Cant.
in the Deity which restrains him from hating the worst, will not allow him to
abhor and detest the best of Men; or how can his Providence leave the most
considerable neglected or unregarded, when his Care condescends to watch over
the least and meanest of his most numerous Family.

We are to look upon Afflictions as sent by him rather to reform us, and make
us better for the time to come, than to punish us for what is passed and done
amiss; or if sent to punish us with a Retrospect to Crimes committed, yet as
sent in part only for that end and purpose, being sent part likewise in loving
kindness to prevent his being necessitated to commissionate more heavy and
dreadful Punishments if we should go on in sin.

For the Sufferings of this Life are intended as Warnings to make us break off
the course of our Sins, and to turn unto him as the only way we can take to
escape eternal Torments. Blessed is Psalm. 94. 12
the man, says the Psalmist, whom thou chastnest, and teach him out of thy
Law, that thou may give him rest from the days of adversity, that he may not
perish with the World.

We are to believe he makes use of Adversity and Troubles, and bodily Diseases
and Pains, as Chyrurgions do of their Incision Knives, their Saws, their
Lances, their Causticks, not as delighted with the Cruelty of mangling,
lopping, wounding, searing, burning; but because they find a necessity of
taking those Methods for the saving of their Patients Life: So that what seems
Cruelty to his Person, proceeds from a tender regard to the Preservation of it:
For while a corrupted or gangreened Bas. T. 4. Hom. 7.
Limb is thus handled, it is in pity to the rest of the Body, which by this
means is saved from the Contagion and spreading Infection of that part, and
consequently from perishing thereby. Or as Physicians prescribe a Dose of
Aloes, Rhubarb, Scammony, Gentian, or some such disagreeable Drugs to be taken
in Pills or Potions; not that they love to chagrine their Patients, but kindly
design to recover them out of a disorderly habit of Body to a right state of
Health by those Salutary, although disaffecting Receipts.

The Reflection of Tertullian on the dangerousness of his Condition, if God
should not use such a Medicinal course with him as that of Afflictions is, made
him say, He should suspect and be afraid of such an Indulgence of the Lord, as
not a real kindness, and which obliged St. Austin to caution us against
congratulating a who Man prospers in his wicked ways; whom God vouchsafes not
to check by some severe Animadversion; because instead of favoring such an
one, the Lord is incensed to such a degree against him, that he will not let
him suffer; that is, he will not correct him with the Scourge of Adversity.

This put St. Bernard upon praying, S. Bern. hom. 42. in Cant.
That God would take some severe and sharp Method with him here, for his Cure
now, and Safety hereafter; Cut me, slash me, sear and burn me, O my God, here,
was a Petition in his Devotions, that I may not be torn and racked through with
Whips and Scorpions, or broil amidst scorching and unquenchable Flames of
Brimstone hereafter.

To this purpose the good Emperor Mauritius, upon a Monk's carrying a naked
Sword through the Streets of his chief City of Constantinople, and predicting
thereupon his sudden and lamentable end, That he should perish by the Sword,
which had left on his Spirits an Impression as deep as if it were a Prophecy
which came by Inspiration, or a Message sent immediately from Heaven, directed
forthwith Supplications to be made by the Church on his behalf, That God would
be pleased to require from him the Punishment of his Sins in this World, and
not defer the Execution of it to another.

The Authors who relate this Passage Cedron. Niceph. l. 8. c. 35, 36, 37, 38.
P. Diacon. l. 17. Simocatta l. 8. c. 11.
add further, that the great Judge of Mankind, Jesus Christ, appearing to him
in a Vision seated on the Throne of Judicature, and demanding of him where he
would choose to receive the deserved Recompense of his Offenses, the Wages of
his Iniquity, whether in this present or the future state of Life, he returned
for Answer immediately this Request. O Lord, Just Judge, but yet affectionate
Lover of Mankind, inflict the Punishment I have incurred on me now, lay on me
what I have deserved here, and respite not my Execution to hereafter.

Did we consider alike as he did, that the Sufferings we are so ready to
complain of were in prevention of more terrible ones, were Medicinal, not Penal
Corrections; for Amendment, not Executions upon Condemnation, we should not
desire to have the Rod taken off from our Back, for fear lest we should be
barred of our Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven.

Were we conversant with such Meditations as these, that God feeds his own
People which prays with the Psalm. 80. 5, 6.
Bread of Tears, and gives them plenteousness of Tears to drink, Diets them
with the Bread of Wormwood and Water of Gall; that Afflictions are the Signs by
which he discriminates his Favorites from his ordinary Servants, his beloved
Children from the As Paternal Corrections, and so as marks of Paternal
Affection.
rest, from the common general Mass of Mankind, of which he is the common
Parent, that they are the Testimonies of his tender Paternal Affection to them,
and he sends them induced by Charity, not moved in Anger, as Tokens and
Pledges of his Love: ( For whom the Lord loves he chastneth, Heb. 12. 6.
and scourges every Son whom he receives.) And had we, when exercised by
them, sufficient reason to esteem them such to us, the Proofs of our Adoption,
and our being highly favored by our Heavenly Father; certainly there would be
no need of an Exhortation to press us to bear them with a quiet Spirit, it
being the natural Consequence of our Filial Relation, or the Obligation arising
thence to demean our selves so.

I am sure the Apostle to the Hebrews deduceth this as a matter of Duty from
that; Furthermore, we have Heb. 12. 9.
had Fathers of our Flesh; which corrected us, and we gave them reverence:
Shall we not much rather be in subjection to the Father of Spirits, and live?

Nay, the Reason on this side for a patient Subjection to the Father of Spirits
when corrected by him, is of much more Weight and Force, than on the other side
for paying Reverence to our Fathers according to the Flesh, when we are so
dealt with by them; or the Argument concludes more strongly for the payment of
this Duty to him than them. For they, as the Apostle urges it further, for a
few days chastneth us after their pleasure; but he for our profit, that we
might be made partakers of his Holiness.

Certainly, if the Law of Nature, as dark as it was, yet afforded Light enough
to teach us in our Youth, when we were not arrived at the due Exercise of
Reason, to love, if as weak as it was, it had power enough to constrain us to
revere our Parents according to the Flesh, though they corrected us, and their
Corrections many times proceeded from a froward and ill Humor; from a Capricio
and Whimsie taking them in the Crown; tho the Infliction of them was not
conducted by Prudence, or moderated by Clemency, nor desiged for our Temporal
Good, our Reformation; the Law of Grace, the Light of the Gospel must at least
be as efficacious, (not to say more, which I might justly) if we do not
wilfully oppose the one, or obscure the other, especially when our Age has
ripened our Judgment to discern Consequences, to restrain or quell all
Insurrections of boisterous Passions, and keep us in quiet subjection to the
Father of our Spirits, when guided by his own Infinite Goodness and Wisdom, he
exercises his Paternal Authority in correcting us; and does this less than our
Merits require, and always having an Eye in it to our Advantage, our Spiritual
and Eternal Warfare; yea, farther than keeping us in quiet Subjection, they
would have Power enough to oblige us to be thankful to him; that he should
vouchsafe to be angry with us, and reprove us, and use the Discipline of his
Rod, when other gentler Methods for our Amendment had failed; that he should
condescend, after in vain he had showed us Line upon Line, and Precept upon
Precept, to instruct us with his Chastisements; we should esteem it an Honor
and an Happiness to be taught by him; tho his teaching might be as rough, as
that of Gideons was to the wayward Elders of Succeth, Judge. 8. 16
with Thorns and Briars; and considering this, to break out with Job in a
Rapture, What is man? Or what Job 17. 17, 18.
are we, that thou should magnify us, and set thy heart upon us? And that
thou shoulst visit us every Morning, and try us every Moment? Or pronounce with
the greatest Satisfaction concerning our selves? What was Eliphaz his Judgment
of a man under God's Chastisement, Behold, how happy are Job 3. 17.
we whom God corrects!

Were our Thoughts employed in making this Reflection on our Afflictions and
Sufferings, that they are the Instruments subscribed as it were by God's own
hand, certifying his having elected and predestined us to Glory; as that
passage of our Lord to Ananias concerning Paul strongly implies, when having
acquainted him in a Vision, that he was a chosen Vessel of his, he presently
subjoyns, For I will show Acts 19. 15, 16.
him how great things he must suffer for my Names sake; the force of the Reason
couched in it lying thus, either that the Divine Determination was first fixed
upon obliging him to suffer, before it was on glorifying him; or his suffering
for his Name was a Demonstrative Proof of his being Elected by him to Glory:
That they are the Testimonials Signed and Sealed by the holy Spirit of our
present Adoption; and the Bonds he delivers to us in assurance of our future
Glorification, according as this place of the Apostle imports, The Spirit
witnesses with our Romans 8.
Spirit, that we are the Children of God; and if Children, then Heirs of God,
and joint Heirs with Christ. If we also suffer with him, that we may be also
glorified with him together -- That they are the evident Tokens God affords us,
to assure us of our Salvation. So St. Paul calls them, and would have the
Philippians esteem them, because it Phil. 28. 9. (...).
was given them in the behalf of his Name, not only to believe on him, but also
to suffer for his sake: That they are the Marks which the good Shepherd and
Bishop of our Souls sets upon the Sheep of his Flock, those which belong to his
Fold; whereof those Sufferings which are unto Blood resemble those Letters in
Red-Oaker; the rest, though never so black and gloomy, yet while they are on
this side Martyrdom, those in Tarr; with which for Cognizance and
distinction-sake from others, great Sheep-masters are wont to brand their own
Sheep. So St. Paul esteemed his, when he said, I bear about me the marks of the
Lord Gal. 6. 17.
Jesus: For by those marks he meant no other than the Scars of the old Wounds
he received when he was battered and bruised with Stones, than the Prints of
the Irons and Chains he had wore in his several Imprisonments, than the Furrows
those Scourges he had felt for preaching in his Name had made, and left behind
them in his Flesh, there would be no necessity of pressing us to carry about
those Authentic Testimonials, to have those Assurances of our Sonship and
Inheritance to show, to wear these honorable Badges of our great Master, or
the same Livery he did on Earth; mere Patience in sustaining them would be too
mean and poor a Virtue, we should exult and leap for joy, in having received
such satisfactory Testimonies of our being favored of God, such undeniable and
incontestable Proofs and Characters of being his Children.

Our Savior enjoined this Deportment to his Disciples when they should be
persecuted for his Cause, and Men upon that account should revile them, and
separate them from their Company, should reproach and cast out their Names as
Evil for his sake, -- Rejoice Luke 6. 22, 23.
and leap for joy in that day; for great is your Reward in Heaven. And his
Apostle St. James encourages us by his Exhortation to the same, -- My 1 Jam. 3.
Brethren, count it all joy when ye fall into diverse Temptations: And by the
Reason he subjoyns, the Beatitude of such a state, provided it be antecedently
supported with Patience; for otherwise they are no distinctive Cognizance; nay,
they serve only to procure our present Misery, and to charge us with misery
hereafter. Blessed is 4 12.
that man that endures temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive the
Crown of Life, which the Lord has promised to them that love him.

So does St. Peter; Forasmuch as by suffering for Christ, we have not only a
fellowship in his Sufferings, (suffer with him,) but are honored to suffer
what he did; and while we do so, the same Spirit of God and of Glory rests
upon us which did on him, whom God glorified amidst his Sufferings by the
Darkness which overspread the Heavens, and the Convulsions that shook the
Earth, by opening the Graves, and renting the Veil of the Temple; Proofs which
convinced the Centurion he was the Son of God: And besides all this, when his
Glory shall be revealed, we shall appear in the same Glory, and our Joy then
shall be full; the confident hope of all which to come to us in Reversion, is
enough to highten and increase our present Joy.

Therefore rejoice, inasmuch as ye are 1 Pet. 4. 13, 14.
partakers of Christ's Sufferings; that when his Glory shall be revealed, ye
may be also glad with exceeding joy. If ye be reproached for the Name of
Christ, happy are ye; for the Spirit of Glory and of God rests upon you. The
Apostles, filled with such Considerations as these, acted according to those
Rules, they gave for the behavior of all other Christians. After being beaten
by an Order of the Council for preaching Jesus, they departed from their
Presence, rejoicing that they were counted Acts 5. 4.
worthy to suffer for his names sake. This was their constant Frame of Spirit,
while their outward appearance was quite contrary, -- as Sorrowful; but always
rejoicing.

St. Paul did not only rejoice upon 2 Cor. 6. 10
the prospect of the Reward, in the hope of the glory of God, but gloried
(which is a Proceeding farther) in Tribulations; because by a train of
consequences Romans 5. 23, 24, 25
they wrought an assurance that the love of God was shed abroad in his Heart by
the Holy Ghost. He entertained and recreated his Mind with these. He took
pleasure in Infirmities, 2 Cor. 12 10.
in Reproaches, in Necessities, in Persecutions, in Distresses for Christ's
sake.

The Jews converted to Christianity had learnt these Instructions so well, and
followed their Example so close, that they took joyfully the spoiling of Heb.
10. 34
their Goods. And St. Paul prayed, that his Colossians might reach this degree
of Perfection, as to join Joy with their Patience, that they might be
strengthened with all might, according Col. 1. 11.
to his glorious power, unto all patience and long suffering with joyfulness.

And those in the succeeding Ages of the Church came near this Point, who could
thankfully adore God in their Tribulations, (for none can give Thanks for that
which is grievous as such, and affords no occasion for Pleasure or rejoicing on
any account) and they who did so, made it appear by such Considerations as the
forementioned, that they were Signs and Proofs of God's Favor and Affection.

So St. Chrysostom protested he would S. Chrysostom. ep 11. ad Clymp.
never cease ascribing Glory to God for all Events and Incidents, and in that
Protestation particularly respected his Deprivation and Banishment. Philagrius
practiced this, rendering Thanks to God for his Sickness, and the Benefit he
received by it, though the first was involuntary and against his Will. And so
did St. Hierom, that God counted S. Hierom. ep. ad Asellam.
him worthy to be hated of the World. For though only such Tribulations which
are sustained for the Cause of God, are the primary marks of his Favor; yet
the suffering any Injustice, while it is endured with a generous and brave
Courage, and Thanks are returned to him, by whose sole permission the Injury
could be done, is a Secondary mark, and the Person thus suffering in God's
Esteem and Acceptance, is scarce a less Confessor and Martyr, than one who
suffers upon his account, Such a one Job was in his extreme Poverty, to which
he was reduced by the Plunder of the Sabeans and Chaldeans, and a Fire from
Heaven, and in his Solitary Condition, when a Wind from the Wilderness bereft
him of his Children; while he magnified God for bringing this want and
deprivation upon him, Naked came I out of my mothers womb, and naked shall I
return thither; the Lord gave, and the Lord has taken away; blessed be the
Name of the Lord.

(5.) We are to support our selves S. 7. 5. God in a convenient season will
lessen our Troubles, and so ease us, or deliver us out of them.
with this Confidence, for which God gives us ground every where in his Word,
that in a Season which is meet and proper for him to appear in, and the most
convenient for us to receive Relief, will either abate our Troubles, mitigate
our Sorrow, and so ease us this way, or put a Period to our Afflictions once
for all, by delivering us out of them.

Are we in Dangers? Then we ought to exercise as Generous and Noble a
Confidence, that either he will deliver us out of them, or preserve us amidst
them, as Job did; Though he slay me, Job 13. 11
yet will I trust in him. Or as the Psalmist did, The Lord is my light and
Psalm. 27. 1.
salvation, whom then shall I fear? Or as he elsewhere, In God have I put my
trust, I will not fear Flesh, I will not fear what man can do unto me. Are we
poor? We ought to rely on him Psalm. 56. 4. Psalm. 2. 31. Heb. 13. 5.
for Relief and Sustenance; that having such a Shepherd we shall lack nothing;
that according to his Promise, He will never leave nor forsake us; which is
that the Apostle arms us with against Covetousness.

While we are afflicted by him, we should have this Assurance, that when
Afflictions have had that end for which God appointed them, he will put an end
to them: As the Courage of a gallant Man increases as Difficulties grow upon
him, so ought our Trust in God; and so it will, if we are Belivers indeed, rise
in degree, as his Corrections are multiplied upon us.

When we are assaulted with Temptations, we ought to rely upon his Providence
which is engaged, That no Temptation shall happen to us but what is ordinary,
and so requires but an ordinary Force to oppose it; nothing but what is common
to Men shall befall us; and upon the Fidelity of his Word, which he has passed,
that he will not suffer us to be tempted above our strength, above what we are
able; and moreover, that he will with 2 Cor. 12. 8
the Temptation make a way to escape, that we may be able to bear it; that his
Grace, as he told St. Paul when he besought him thrice, that he would 1 Cor.
10. 13.
remove the Messenger of Satan which buffeted him, take out the Thorn in his
Flesh, will be sufficient for us.

When we have reason to believe that God is angry with us, by laying Trouble
upon our Loins, we are to hope, that he will neither suffer his whole
Displeasure, his whole Tempest to arise, nor all his Waves to go over our
Heads; nor yet be angry with us for ever, suffer his Wrath to burn like Fire
for evermore: That the All-merciful will attemperate his Judgments with Mercy,
the All-mindful will not forget to be gracious, nor shut up his loving kindness
in displeasure; the Omnipotent will not absent himself for ever by withholding
the Light of his Countenance, or withdrawing his gracious Influences.

Under Sorrow and Dejection of Spirit we ought to rely waiting on him, Isa. 26.
20.
that his Indignation will soon be overpassed; that if he has forsaken us for
a Moment, (it is no more, however our Computation may extend it into a farther
length) he will return, and with great Mercies gather us.

We ought to expostulate with our Souls, as the Psalmist did with his, Why art
thou so cast down, O my Soul; Psalm. 42. 11
and why art thou so disquieted within me? And then raise them by hope that we
shall have occasion, and resolve with the same Confidence as he did to magnify
him. Hope thou in God; for I shall yet praise him, who is the Health of my
Countenance and my God. This is what St. Hierom writing to Eustochium
prescribed her S. Hierom. Ep. 22. ad Eustochium
for the checking of her Sorrow or Heaviness to argue and debate the case with
her self in his words, why art thou so bad?

The Jewish Church had experience of his soon turning away his Anger, and
thereupon changing her Note, her Lamentation into Thanksgiving, or a Resolution
of doing so. I will praise thee, though thou wast angry with me. Thine anger is
turned away, and thou comfortest me.

Rely on him we ought, that though he has smitten and made us sore, he will
bind us up, and pour Wine and Isa. 30. 6. Psalm. 147. 3 Jer. 31. 13. and 24.
Isa. 61. 3. Psalm. 23. 9^
Oil into our Wounds; that he will bind them up, and heal us if we are
brokenhearted; will turn our Mourning into Joy, and comfort us; satiate our
weary, and replenish our sorrowful Souls; give Beauty for Ashes, and the Oil of
Joy for Mourning; the Garment of Praise for the Spirit of Heaviness.

For if we have not such a Persuasion, such a Faith, or such a Hope, that God
will put an issue to our Trouble, we shall turn querulous and murmur against
him as an austere Master, or a rigorous Judge, and modestly expostulate, as Job
did with him, Will thou break a leaf driven to and fro? And will thou Job 13.
25, 26.
pursue the dry Stubble? For thou writest bitter things against me, and make
me to possess the Iniquities of my youth: Thou put my feet in the Stocks,
etc. and in despair, that he will make no end of punishing, we shall turn
Malcontents, and quarrel against his Mercy and his Justice, and sawcily
demand, How it can stand with the one thus to vex and torment the Workmanship
of his Hands, the People he has made? Or how it is consistent with the other
to be doing this incessantly, to be always using his Flaming two-edged Sword,
and shooting abroad his sharp pointed Arrows against Offenders for slight,
transient, and almost momentary Transgressions of his Law?

We shall pertly and peremptorily argue and debate the Case with him, Why did
thou frame us Bodies raised out of the Dust of the Ground, where they lay as
unconcerned with Trouble, and as insensible of Pain as they shall be when laid
to sleep on those Beds of Dust again? Why did thou breath into these Bodies
the Breath of Life, quicken them with a living Soul?

Was it, that thou might put us into a capacity of feeling and enduring all
thou should think fit to molest and vex us with? But if upon wanting such a
Prospect, we break not out into such boisterous Passions, we immediately
despond and sink.

The Psalmist confesses, that he should utterly have fainted, had he not been
supported with the Expectation of seeing the goodness of the Lord Psalm. 27. 13
in the land of the living; been quite despirited, had not the hope of tasting
how good and gracious the Lord is to those who put their Trust in him, (either
by rewarding their Confidence and Patience here on Earth, which we by a
perverted Figure call the Land of the Living, when it is the Vale, the Hospital
of Dying Persons; or in Heaven above, which is properly the Region and Country
of the Living) been his strong Cordial and Preservative. This was the Butteress
which stayed up the Apostle's Minds, that they were not cast down there, even
while they were cast down by the external Force and Violence of their Enemies
Malice, that while troubled they 2 Cor. 4. 8.
were not distressed, while perplexed they were not in despair.

They who had not, knew what V. ^ic. 2. Tuscul.
it was to trust in God, because they hardly believed such a Being, yet have
thought Hope to be an effectual Remedy for the asswaging of Grief or Pain, and
therefore have ordered it; the whole Epicurean School have done so: For besides
the Avocation of the Mind from the present grievous Objects, which is
impossible, they require Revocation; which was not, as they explained it, a
bare calling to Memory passed Pleasures, but a looking for good things for the
future.

(6.) We should weigh the important S. 7. 6. Weigh we should the Advantagei
gained by Patience in order to another Life.
Advantages we shall reap by Patience, which if considered, would not be more
an Argument to convince us of the reasonableness of this Duty, than of great
Force to incline us to the Exercise of it, and of mighty use to assert us
therein. I will not mention the advantages it has to this Life, those having
been represented in the Fourth Argument, where such who will make their
recourse thither may find sufficient matter for their Meditations on that
Subject, but will only set before you those which concern another.

And since the Evils which administer an occasion for the Trial of our Patience
may be regarded as they are done us by Men, and they are the immediate Authors
of them, or as they are permitted by God, they being but his Instruments, or as
they are inflicted by him immediately. I will begin with reckoning the
Advantages Patience will yield us at the last, if we look upon our Ills as done
us by Men, such as are the Injuries and Oppressions of the lawless and violent.

(1.) If we are buffeted by them, N. 1. The Advantages first of bearing the
ills which are done us by Men. 1 Pet. 2. 19, 20. (...). God will avenge us upon
them
and endure grief, suffering wrongfully for Conscience toward God, and take
all this patiently, the Apostle St. Peter acquaints us, it is thank-worthy, and
acceptable toward God; i. e. if we are causelessly and without any Merit on our
part misused by them, (tho indeed no Provocation can be sufficient to justify
the doing of an Injury) but especially if the occasion of all our hard
Treatment be the conscientious discharging of our Duty toward God, and
suffering those things, which by their Smart cause pain to the Body, or by
their Indignity afflict the Mind, and we behave our selves quietly and
decently, submitting our selves, and commending our Cause to him who judges
righteously: Such a Carriage, though it be but our Duty, is esteemed by him as a
Free Will Offering; he accepts it kindly now, and will return it with large
Thanks hereafter.

When we are injured, and bear our ill Treatment patiently, out of Conscience
toward God requiring this Behavior, we are his Confessors, though the ground
of our Suffering be not Religion; and he is pleased to look upon it as an
Engagement laid upon him, so as to acknowledge himself our Debtor.

I say, with respect to this he condescends to own himself our Debtor, while in
truth we are his by reason of our sins; as one obliged to cancel those Bonds,
by which as by Bonds Signed, and Sealed, and delivered, we rendered our selves
obnoxious to the payment of the utmost Farthing, to suffer the extreme
Punishment due to them, and to discharge us from the Penalty of them, i. e.
entirely to pardon them; and not only so, but to make us satisfaction, (I do
not mean here the satisfaction of recompensing us for the Injuries we have
sustained, but in reckoning severely with the injurious.) He has engaged to
repay home in Vengeance unto those from whom we have unjustly suffered. He has
said, He will avenge the Blood of his Servants, Deuteronomy. 32. 43.
and render Vengeance to his Adversaries.

And I hope this is not an improper Consideration to urge us to the Practice of
Patience, or to facilitate the Exercise of a Virtue, with which Meekness is
inseparably joined, since the Apostle has alleged it for a Motive to quiet
and allay our Spirits, while the sense of the Wrongs and the ill usage we
suffer might stir them up, and incense us to retaliate upon the Authors of our
Grievances.

Dearly beloved, avenge not your Romans 12. 19.
selves, but rather give place unto wrath; for it is written, Vengeance is
mine, I will repay it, says the Lord. The more then we suffer for doing well,
while we take it patiently, the more unreasonably we are buffeted while we
behave our selves with Tranquillity, the more numerous shall the Stripes be, the
more ponderous the Blows with which the Lord, the Avenger of his Servants, (or
of his own Cause indeed) shall adjudge the lawless and violent Men, who oppress
us now, to be beaten at the last.

O with what a measure of Patience is this one single Reflection, sufficient to
endue us with, that by it bearing the Injuries of the unjust, the Insults of
the Insolent, we make him our Debtor, who is so just and solvent, that he will
continue in no Man's Debt, but will pay what he owes upon a gratuitous Promise
with munificent Benefaction; or instead of being otherwise benificent, makes
himself our exceeding great Reward!

O how is this single Consideration, that if we leave our innocent oppressed
Cause in his Hands, without proceeding to vindicate our selves by returning
Evil for Evil, he will take it into Consideration, and do us right upon our
potent Enemies, able to extinguish all sparks of Revenge, and to check and
stifle all desires after it, or even prevent the rising of any such Thoughts as
may meditate upon making such an Attempt!

Will not this well pondered be enough to make the warmest, or those who are
the quickest to resent an Injury, or the promptest to return it, wait quietly,
God's good time for the doing his own Work, i. e. The executing Vengeance upon
those who do them wrong, without taking it out of his hands by a precipitate
carving out of Justice to themselves, since their Adversaries, if they will
permit God to be the Judge between them, will be sure to suffer from him
infinitely more in degree and duration, than they with all their heat and rage
of Revenge could possibly inflict on them?

Common Experience teaches us, Tertul. de Pat. c. 10. 165.
that Princes and Masters of Families are not well-pleased, that their Subjects
or Servants should be their own Justiciaries, do themselves right upon their
Fellow Subjects or Servants, (so they falsely call their taking Revenge of
them:) Nay, they often punish their forward Insolence in this, while they are
ready on the other hand to give them ample Satisfaction for Abuses or Wrongs
done them, if with respect to their Commands and Pleasure they put them up in
silence and quietness, without making or endeavoring a return, and are content
to refer the Estimate and Reparation of them to their Judgment and Sentence. In
like manner our Heavenly King and supreme Master takes it better and kinder at
the hands of us his Subjects and Servants, that we should so deport our selves
in his great Kingdom and Family the World, submit the Injuries we may receive
from others to his Taxation and Compensation of them. And depend we may upon
the Security of his Word and Justice, that if we decline the taking Vengeance
our selves out of respect to him, whose peculiar and unalienable Prerogative
Vengeance is, and devolve the Cognizance of them to his Judicature, That the
righteous Judge will decree us a Satisfaction for our Damages, far exceeding
that we could take, adjudge us Reparations not only above them, but above what
we can ask or think; i. e. above all comparison, since there is nothing that is
pleasing but we have the confidence to ask; and not any one thing simply
possible, but we have Faculties to conceive or imagine it.

Considering this, O my Soul, why should thou be cast down? Or why should
thou be so disquieted within me, upon every imaginary Neglect, supposed
Affront, misconstrued Word, or ill-interpreted Carriage of thy Neighbor? Why
should thou hereupon swell with Indignation against him, and project, as far
as the Storm of thy Anger will permit thee to think or invent, how thou may
be upon even terms, and quit Scores with him?

But why should thou do this, if the Injury and Mischief was real; if there
was the oppression of the Enemy in the case? Will not the meditation that this,
unless repented of, will fall upon his own head; and that God will make thee
the largest Retribution thou can imagine or wish for, if thou art not
overcome of Evil, calm thy boisterous Passions of Anger and Revenge, and make
thee bear even the greatest Outrages, without studying a requital thy self, or
desiring any other than that which he will make thee?

Will not this Thought, That the 1 Pet. 4.
ungodly and the sinner, who set themselves against thee shall appear in
Judgment for this, where they shall not be able to stand, have power enough to
prevail with thee, to commend thy Soul while thou suffer ill and do well,
to the keeping of God as a faithful Creator.

Socrates upheld himself with Patience Teetnl. de Anim. c. 4.
upon this Consideration, merely that he suffered unjustly: For when his Wife
bewailed his Condemnation as illegal, he replied, congratulating himself that
it was so, And what, would you have had me justly Sentenced?

But may be this will be reckoned but a small Advantage, or scarce any at all,
that the Righteous Judge shall vindicate our oppressed Innocence, and punish
our injurious Adversary; and yet this is of Consolation to us in many cases
under filthy and reproachful Language, or contumelious Usage, that we can take
a course with the Authors of these, and that that Court of Justice will give us
at least this amends, that it will punish them; and may be an Inducement to
make us put them up quietly; on the consideration of such a Satisfaction, if
there was no other, (traduced as the meditation of Revenge) only deferred to
another World.

And therefore I am to acquaint you S. 7. 6. N. 2. He will amply reward us.
in the Second place, that there are ample positive Advantages behind, that
besides the calling our Oppressors and Persecutors to an account, and the
severe punishing them, he will make us ample Satisfaction, and largely
recompense us for our Sufferings. He who condescends to make himself our
Debtor, will not be barely just, and make a simple Restitution of what we laid
down on his account, or commended to his Trust, our Name, our Goods, our
Health, our Lives; (restore our good Name, make up our Losses, cure our
Diseases, raise up our Lives,) but will prove our bountiful Benefactor; and as
he is immensely rich, make us a superabundant Remuneration for them.

He will make us a thousand-fold Retribution for Houses and Lands, Brethren or
Kindred parted with for his Names sake; or if we take the being spoiled of
these, though on another account, patiently and submissively, out of respect to
the Will of God, whose pleasure it is it should be so, and Obedience to his
Command enjoining us this Demeanor; he will restore us a hundredfold, either
more than the Principal, by way of Use, or else a hundredfold more in worth
and value than the Principal; and that in this Life, in giving us the Blessings
of inward Peace, and Comfort, and Joy; and a hundred times more than a
hundredfold in another Life, by giving us the possession of an eternal
Inheritance in the Kingdom of Heaven.

His Son, the same with himself, has entered into this Engagement; Every one
who has forsaken Houses, or Brethren, or Sisters, or Father or Mother, Mat.
19. 21
or Wife or Children, or Lands for my Names sake, shall receive a hundredfold,
and inherit everlasting Life, which is much more than a hundredfold
Retribution; or the hundredfold Retribution is infinitely multiplied beyond it
self, by being made everlasting.

The Tribulations of this World, if with patience we pass through them, shall
bring us at last to the Kingdom of God, under whom we shall be invested Acts 14.
in the chief Dignities of that place. The Vale of Tears to a Religion of
ever-flowing Joys; and the Vale of the Shadow of Death, to the everlasting
Hills. The being tried, and enduring the Trial; yea, the enduring that but a
small time, expressed in that Epistle, that St. John was commanded to write
Rev. 2. 10.
to the Angel of the Church of Smyrna, by no longer a Period than Ten days
only, shall be recompensed with a Crown of Life.

Reigning with our Master, as is the Phrase of one Promise; Being glorified 2 Timothy 3. 12.
with him, as is that of another, shall be the reward of our suffering with and
for him; i. e. Joining the Emphasis of both together, our Condition shall be as
great as Sovereignty, and as happy as Glory can render it. Prisons Romans 8. 17
shall be exchanged for Thrones, the darkness of Dungeons for Light too pure to
be beheld by mortal Eye; and Death shall purchase Immortality.

If we have been Sacrificed to public Hatred for the cause of Christ, or
offered up on the Service of his Faith, we shall be Priests to minister before
the most High God in the Temple above. If we bear our Masters Cross Rev. 4. 6.
on our Shoulders now, we shall triumph with him above, and attending his
Triumph, carry Palms in our Hands. If we have had a dark Night of Calamity
here, though it were short as that those Countries have, which lie between the
60th and 70th Degree of Northern Latitude, we shall for it enjoy an endless day
in beholding the Light of God's immutable Glory.

If we have met with frequent occasions of Sorrow and Grief, which yet when
they come thickest, are generally but alternative; That the Waters have gone
over our Heads, and even entered into our Souls; all our Faculties shall be
immerst in, and swallowed up of uninterrupted Joys hereafter.

And as these shall be the Rewards of our suffering patiently, (Rewards passing
all Understanding to comprehend, while by the Condescension of the Divine
Spirit to comport with the Weakness of our Faculties, they are shadowed out by
Kingdoms, Regality, Crowns, Triumph, Priesthood, Light, Joy which shall be
conferred upon us with respect to our Sufferings) so were all the Sufferings of
this present Life united in a Combination to fall upon us at one time, they
would hold no comparison with them. For I reckon, says S. Paul, Romans 8 18.
(...).
that the Sufferings of this present life are not worthy to be compared with
the glory that shall be revealed in us. Upon computing and calculating them
both, I find this Inequality, That if all the Miseries of this could be melted
down into one Lump, they would bear no more proportion with the happiness of
that, than a single Gravelstone does with all the Sand of the Seashore, or the
drop of a Bucket with the Ocean, or the Dust of a Balance with the whole Earth,
because still those Miseries would be but Temporary, at the utmost no longer
than our Lives, which they would shorten too, if not immediately destroy; while
the Happiness is eternal: They could not be drawn down to such a Quintessence
as not to have some Temperament, while the Happiness shall have no Abatement.

And yet as incapable as they are of a Comparison by the Lightness of those,
and solidness of this, the Mixture of those and the Purity of this, the
shortness, even momentariness of those, and the eternal duration of this; These
light afflictions which are but for 2 Cor. 5.
a moment, shall work out for us a far more exceeding and eternal weight of
Glory. Or as it is more emphatically expressed in the Original Text, by the
Singular Number and Present Tense, This light Affliction works for us all
this. Mark well the difference; its a single Affliction only, and that single
one a light one, and that light one but for a moment, a transient moment, gone
even while its named, or as soon; but it is a weight, an eternal weight, an
exceeding eternal weight, a far more exceeding eternal weight of Glory; such a
far more exceeding eternal Weight, that Tertullians eternal C. 40. de
resurrect. p. 408.
weight of Glory from Supergression to Supergression, St. Hierom's eternal
weight of Glory above measure in Sublimeness Verse. Hierom.
are too low and dwarfish Expressions to reach the Height of Emphasis, which
the words in the Original Language have, the Hyperboles added to Hyperboles,
are too diminutive Figures to set forth its greatness.

And now did we in all our Sufferings with a fast and steadfast Eye of Faith,
look constantly forward toward this Weight of Glory which shall be revealed
and laid upon us: Did we with this in all our Afflictions look upwards toward
the Reward which is laid up for us in the Heavens, and that we shall receive
and contemplate them; such a Belief and Consideration, as it would convince us
we ought, so it would enable us according to our Duty to support them with
Patience, when such a Carriage should meet at last with so immense a recompense.

A false Opinion, or an Ambition to be had in reputation for a constancy in
adhering to an erroneous Principle once entertained, has made Men insensible,
or what is near the same, regardless of Pain. Anaxarchus in Nicocreon's Mortar
felt or complained of no Pain, but urged his Tormentors to pound on, because it
lighted not upon Anaxarchus, but on his Case or Husk.

Possidonius, a Noble Philosopher of Cic. Tusc. 3.
Rhodes, would not suffer a Visit which the Great Pompey, returning from his
Syrian Expedition, made him, with an expectation of hearing him discourse of
some Point of Philosophy, to be frustrated by a sharp Distemper he then
labored under; for when expressing his Concern, that the Pain he was afflicted
with would not permit him to gratify him with this Pleasure, this great
Captain would have taken his leave of him: Yes, replied that Philosopher, but
you may have that Satisfaction; for I will never give such way to my Pain, as
it shall render the Honor of your Visit vain, and defeat its Design. Whereupon
tormented as he lay upon his Sick bed, he discoursed upon the great Theme of
the Stoics, That Nothing was good but what was Honest; and though twinged ever
and anon as he was by an acute Fit of the Gout, he persevered in his Opinion,
and pursued his matter, interrupting it only upon those Returns with this
Apostrophe, Pain! thou can do nothing at all; not all the light Matches thou
setst to my Joints, not all thy racking and torturing shall extort from me this
Confession, that thou art an Evil.

Now if such an Opinion concerning Pain either mitigated it, or was able to
raise his Mind above the sense of it; if a Wise Man in Epicurus his Opinion
might by the help of Philosophy be able to say, even in Perillus his Golden
Bull, How sweet is this! How it nothing concerns me! Certainly the having a
firm Belief that Heaven and its Joys shall be the Reward of all the Affliction
we endure with Patience here, and the having our Contemplation fixed upon this,
will either abate a great deal of the Troubles we shall meet on our way
thither, or assist us to endure them; and to perform the Journey throughout,
notwithstanding all the Fateigues of it.

If Empedocles had the Courage Cic. Tuscul. 1.
(whether true or false it matters not) to leap into glowing Aetna, Peregrinus
to throw himself into the Flames, Mucius Tertul. c. 5. ad Mort.
Scaevola to thrust his erring hand into the Fire, and the Patience to hold it
till it should have been burnt off for the punishment of its Mistake. If
Anaxarchus could suffer the being pounded and bruised in a Mortar. If Regulus
had the Patience to endure the nailed Barrel, and the Youths of Lacedemon the
scourging at the Altar: And this their Resolution was inspired, this their
Patience upheld by a Thirst after Glory, and a Conceit that it was to be
purchased at the rate of such Actings and Sufferings; surely the hopes of the
Glory of Heaven; nay, the assurance its to be had upon the Terms of doing well
and suffering ill unto the end, will make as behave our selves as equally
brave, show us much Fortitude, and Constancy and Patience to gain them.

If it was accounted worth the acquiring Tert. c. 5. ad Mart. 158. Rigal.
the Glass, the Pebble of vain and false Glory at so dear a rate as the parting
with Life, or sustaining the Miseries of it amounted to; certainly the going as
far, the paying down or suffering as much to gain the Jewel of true and solid
Glory must needs countervail the Pains, the Cost and Charges.

If the Husbandman, after he has with much Toil prepared the Earth, waits
with much Patience for the early and later Rain to impregnate the Seed he has
committed to it, and with farther Patience to receive the precious Fruit it
will produce; certainly we may with a Patience like theirs at least, after all
our labor and pains endured, after we have sown in abundance of Tears,
patiently expect till the Harvest of Glory be ripe for our reaping; i. e. as
St. James from their Examples draws the reasonableness of this Duty, and then
forces his Exhortation to it, We ought to be patient Jam. 5. 7.
till the coming of the Lord, and establish our Hearts, for his coming draws
nigh.

Who is there on a Journey, who would not be content to travel over a little
ill way, if he pondered with himself, that at the end of it, and that not very
remote, or at some great distance, there lay a place, the transcendent
Deliciousness of which would abundantly requite for the Illness of the Road,
and the inconsiderable Trouble the going over it would cause.

Where is the Man so fond of Ease, who would not willingly endure the Calenture
of a Fever, all the Needles the most sharp-pointed stone can run into the
tenderest and most sensible Parts, all the lighted Torches the Gout can apply
to his Joints, the extremest Pain that any other the most sharp and cruel
Diseases can cause for some few Minutes, if he could make his Composition upon
these Terms, that those moments of Torment being expired, he should ever after
enjoy an easy established Health, a firm and lasting Peace of good Habitude of
Body, secure from the Hostile Incursions of Diseases for the future?

Or where is the Person so addicted to the Pleasures of his Palate, that would
not take the bitterest Potion art can prepare, could he be morally assured,
that his Taste never after should be disaffected with a disagreeable thing? But
such, as are these Cases, is that of our present Life with relation to a
future, and such are our Circumstances. Act therefore as reasonably in this
case we should as we do in others, bear all the Inconveniences of the Road
here, in consideration, that having passed them over, we shall arrive at
Heaven, a place which flows with continual Pleasures, which shall last one
eternal Sabbath, where we shall celebrate one high and endless Festival of Joy,
and quench our Thirst after happiness in Rivers of it, which are always
streaming from the Right Hand of God. Bear all the Pains which disordered
Bodies or jarring Humors may now cause, upon a firm Persuasion that Deuteronomy. 29.
5.
our Bodies hereafter shall be no more annoyed by Diseases, nor incommoded by
our sensual Appetites, nor impaired any more by an Eternal Age, than the
Israelites Clothes and Shoes waxed Dan. 3. 27.
old for Forty Years together in the Wilderness, or the Three Childrens Coats
or Hair which were not so much as singed in Nebuchadnezzar's Furnace, V.
Tertul. c. 58. de Resurrect.
though heated many degrees beyond ordinary.

For all this Privilege and Immunity from whatever does Inconvenience our Body
is imported in the Promise of the Bliss made by Isaiah, or in the Description
Isa. 49. 16.
of it by St. John, in those who Rev. 7. 16.
are the Possessors of it. They neither hunger nor thirst; nor Heat nor Sun 21.
4.
falls on them any more, all tears are wiped from their Eyes; neither seeing
any more, than feeling any misery which may occasion them; we should therefore
cheerfully carry about in our Bodies those Marks which the World reckons when
it imprints them there, Brands of Disgrace, in consideration and firm hope that
they shall be one day changed into Stars or Rays of Glory; nay, that Dan. 12. 3
our whole Bodies shall shine as the brightness of the Firmament for evermore;
Mat. 13. 43
or as the Sun in the Kingdom of our Father; be like the glorious Body of our
Lord, that is now seated at the Phil. 3. 21.
right hand of Majesty in the highest Heavens, whose Face on Earth, when but
transfigured on the Mount, shone like that Luminary in its Meridian Vigor.

The Martyrs and Confessors had this consideration of the happiness of another
Life, the Joys of Heaven; they set God before their Eyes as their great Reward,
looked up with an Eye of Faith to Jesus, who stood ready to Crown them with the
Glory that he himself had; and this made them rather enjoy than suffer those
Torments, which were preparatory to infinite and eternal Pleasures and Honors;
count their Prisons fair Palaces, and esteem their Chains as Bracelets and
Ornaments, as Ignatius did. This made them embrace the Cross, the Gibbet, the
Scaffold with as much Cheerfulness as dear and cordial Friends do one another
after a long Absence, looking upon them as so many several Ascents toward
Thrones, and those in their native Country from whence they came, as Stairs by
which they were to go up to the Gates of the Heavenly Palace, and have
admission there; this made them hasten to their Execution with as much speed as
ever Conquerors in any Games to receive the Prize they had won; because they
looked upon it as that which put them into an immediate Capacity of obtaining a
Crown of Glory. Thus St. Cyprian with such a quickness closed his own Eyes, in
order to receive the Fatal Stroke, as seemed to chide the Executioners slow
delay: So Moses and Maximus looked upon their Execution being delayed as a sort
of Cruelty. Ignatius pressed for the Beasts to which he was condemned; Suffer
me, said he, to be made meat for them. This made them thank their Persecutors
denouncing or inflicting capital Punishments on them, because they afforded
them a ready and safe passage before the Sovereign Judge of the World, and that
person their tender Father as well as a righteous and gracious Judge. In St.
Cyprian's Phrase, Gave them an admission to the kissing and embracing their
Father, as he calls the beholding him. Thus, and for these Reasons Lucius
thanked Vrbicus his Judge for the favor of condemning him. And Justin. Apol.
1. p. 43 de Lucio.
Roman Emperors, and their Lieutenants of Provinces, observing how forward the
Christians were to seek for Martyrdom, with what Address they courted it, and
with what pleasure they suffered it, held themselves necessitated to forbid by
Edicts the executing them.

This made that Sex we usually disparage as tender and fearful, to go upon the
most sharp and certain Death, with as much delight as ever the most gay and
effeminate of them did to Masks, or Balls, or Plays.

This made the ancient Champions of Christianity to find as much pleasure
amidst the Smoke and Flame of their Fiery Ordeals, as ever the most voluptuous
in taking the perfumed Air amidst Groves of Jasmin and Myrtle, or that which
was embalmed by Winds blowing off from the Spicy Coast.

Because they believed their Souls should be carried up in those Chariots of
Fire, and enter Heaven in Triumph, as Elijah was taken up in one, and Body and
all ascended thither. St. Cyprian says, The Flames of the Furnace Epist. 6.
Edit. Oxon.
into which the 3 Jewish Martyrs were cast, (for so they were in resolution of
mind) were Refreshments to them. (The Word he uses in Ecclesiastical Writers,
denotes the place and Joys of Refrigerium.
Souls in Bliss; in Profane, the cooling which persons in hot Countries and
Seasons found by retreating to Grotto's.)

From this Consideration they were as much recreated amidst Chaldrons of melted
Lead, (I think I cannot call it scalding without a Solecism and Contradiction,
as ever Sunburned Travelers were by washing off the Sweat and Dust from their
Limbs in some clear Chrystalline Brook; or even in Ice and Snow, as the Forty
Martyrs of Sebaste, as ever frozen Traveller did by suppling his Limbs in a
warm Bath) because they were forthwith to V. S. Basil. Orat. in 40 Martyr.
bath in Rivers of pleasure for evermore. Hence the Rack and Wheel on which
they were extended and broken was made soft to them as the Down of Swans,
because they knew that expiring on them, they should enjoy a Rest in those
quiet Regions above, whose perpetuity should never be interrupted nor
perfection discomposed: The painfullest Martyrdom was undergone with as much
pleasure as ever voluptuous person drank of a Bowl tempered the most agreeable
to his Palate, because they esteemed it the Cup of Salvation. This Reflection
made the Primitive Christians offer themselves to their Tormentors, and as
fearful they should not obtain the Heavenly Crown, without receiving that of
Martyrs first, proclaim themselves Christians.

So Nicephorus is recorded to have done, and by such a Challenge as it were,
provoked the Magistrate to put him to Death, that so by his Blood thus
generously shed, he might wash out the Infamy which the Cowardice of Sapritius
in recanting the Faith, might otherwise have left upon the Christian Name:
Though this voluntary offering of themselves without any Inquisition, or
previous to any Apprehension was forbid. They wished for Wild Beasts, as if to
be devoured by them for the sake of Christ was the Fruition of a Pleasure. So
Ignatius did, and so he called it; They drew them to them, as if they were not
fierce enough to assail them, so Germanus did, when the Proconsul advised him
to consider he was in the Flower of his Age, and to have so kind a regard to
his Life, as to save it. They defied their Enemies Menaces of Torments, and
stoutly replied, They were ready to entertain them.

But what do I speak of the power of this Faith or Hope in Christians to make
them thus to endure, or thus to meet their Sufferings. The very Jews, whose
hope of a future Resurrection was not so firm, because their Revelation of it
was not so clear, did not only not accept deliverance from Tortures, expecting
a better Resurrection, but underwent some of the cruellest Fleaing, as if it
had been no more than cutting off the Foreskin.

And now if the consideration of the N. 3. The same Consideration of the Reward
will make us bear patiently the Evils which are the common Incidents of
Humanity.
advantageous Recompenses which should be bestowed upon them with intuition of
their Suffering made the Martyrs and Confessors of old endure Prisons,
Torments, Death, with such Courage and Patience as you have heard related.
Certainly, if we would admit the same Consideration, and give it leave to make
as deep an Impression on our Minds as it did on theirs, it would as equally
fortify us against all Sufferings, or support us under them as it did them;
especially those which are the common Lot of Mankind, (and not the peculiar
Portion of Christians; or theirs because stanchly such) and are of God's
immediate Commissionating, without employing the Agency, or using the
instrumentality of Men to bring them to pass, such as are Diseases and Death.

First I say, Such Considerations As first, N. 3. m. 1. Diseases.
would support us under Diseases, which, if they were not engendered by our own
Intemperance, (or that did not bring the Fuel, or light the Flame) I rank under
those Ills which are of God's immediate Infliction, because, (although he may
use the Ministry of Angels in laying this Punishment upon us, as he did in
smiting Job, and filling his Body with Ulcers Job 2.
from the Crown of the Head to the Sole of his Foot; and Readiness Malady was 1 Samuel 18. 10.
from an evil Spirit; and he gave the Egyptians Life over to the Pestilence, Ps
78. 49, 50.
by sending evil Angels among them: And this be the general Opinion of the
Jewish Doctors Commentary on Psalm. 91. 46. That he makes use of them for this
purpose. And the dumb Spirit in St. Mark, which tore the possessed, Mark 9. 17
and cast him into the Fire, and into the Water; and the Spirit of Infirmity
Luke 11. 16
in St. Luke, which held the Woman Eighteen years, are probable Arguments for
the Confirmation of this; yet their Ministry in this being invisible, and we
not being able to discern their hand, while God strikes by them, no more than
his own; we ascribe all those to him, of which we can assign no natural
immediate Cause. So did David, when he prayed, Remove Psalm. 39. 10
thy stroke away from me. I am consumed by the blow of thine hand. Looking then
on these with the Psalmist, as Divine Chastisements. When thou Psalm. 39. 10
with rebukes do correct man for Iniquity, thou make his beauty to consume
away like a moth. Thou have chastned or corrected me, but have not given me
over unto death. (For these Corrections are to be interpreted of Diseases.) And
considering with the Apostle, that God's Chastisements are the most Authentic
Instruments and Attestations Prove. 13. 11, 12.
we can produce of being his genuine Sons, and that to be destitute of them,
Hebr. 12.
which all Sons have, would be an undeniable Token, and incontestable Proof of
our being Bastards. And 7. and 8.
considering yet further with the Wise Man and the same Apostle, that they are
the fullest and clearest Evidences to make out our being his darling Favorite
ones; For whom the Lord loves 46.
he chastneth, and scourges every Son whom he receives. The Collection we
shall make from such Considerations will be, That if we are Sons, we cannot
fail of the incorruptible Inheritance which our Father has laid up for us in
Heaven; and if we are his beloved Sons, we shall taste deep of his Bounty, we
cannot miss of an ample Portion of that Inheritance. And by virtue of such a
Deduction we shall be enabled to bear our Diseases, which proceed originally
from God, and are not the Fruits of our own Dissoluteness and Debauchery, with
Patience at least. If it does not operate thus upon us, but we are restless and
clamorous for being thus treated, we must be more mad than they would be, who
should complain of the trouble of carrying their Deeds they have to show for
proving their Title to a fair Patrimony, and to be rid of this Inconvenience
would throw them away.

The nearer Prospect that Diseases, especially those of Age give us of this
Inheritance, and the consideration that they are taking us by the hand to put
us into possession of it. The nearer view they afford of our Journeys end, and
the consideration that they are bringing us to it as fast as they can, and of
our likelihood to gain our Liberty, while they are making wide and large Chinks
in our Prisons, or unlocking the Doors, or undermining the Walls of them, will
very much conduce to this; or else we must be extremely stupid and egregious
Fools. For what Heir, if he was not so distempered, would be peevish and
disquieted for being within a very little of having his Estate in his hands?
What Traveller that were not so, after being sufficiently wearied and tired,
and his Spirits almost spent with the length of the Journey, would repine for
being nigh the end of it? Or what Prisoner not being so, would murmur that he
had a fair opportunity of getting his Discharge, or making his escape?

Afflicted with Infirmities and Pains, this consideration is enough to make us
bear them patiently, that the recompense of such a Demeanor will be, Our
Bodies shall renew their strength like Eagles, and we in them like Eagles shall
mount up to meet the Lord's coming in the Clouds; and that as they shall renew
their Vigor, so they shall have a perpetual Exemption from all Labor and
Fatigue, be capable of rendering God a Homage day and night, and be no more
weary of that constant Service than Spirits are, and perform it with as much
Agility and Expedition as winged Seraphims fly upon the execution of his
Commands; that they shall be no more troubled with gross feculent Humors,
which by their excess and quantity are the matter and procreative causes of
Diseases and Aches, but shall be refined to a degree of Purity and Spirituality
like that of Ethereal Substances. Are we afflicted with Hunger and Thirst,
which when they are extreme, are of all our sensual Appetites the most violent
and irresistible, the consideration that we are approaching toward that
condition and state of Life wherein we shall not hunger or thirst any more
after that which perishes; and our hunger and thirst shall be after eternal
good; that the one shall be satiated with those Delicacies with which the
Table, at which all the Saints of God who have gone before us, we shall sit
down in the Kingdom of Heaven, is furnished; the other quenched in those Rivers
of Pleasure which are ever flowing at the Right Hand of God, the most pleasant
that Infinite Goodness, which is always streaming out in Emanations of it self,
can make them for the Taste; this thought, if it will give us no ease, will
keep our Appetites from being enraged and inflamed higher by Impatience.

If under the loss of our sight we are not to be comforted with the
Philosophical Hierom. Ep. 32. ad Abigal.
Speculations, that we shall not behold those many offensive Objects we are
every day at most constrained to do in the World, (Violence and Oppression)
that our Understandings will receive thereby brighter Illuminations, and the
Eye of our Soul see the clearer, (for which cause some Philosophers,
particularly Democritus, is said to have blinded himself) our Memories more
enlarged and strengthened, (shall receive more, and return better than before)
Nor under that of our hearing, that our Ears are thereby shut against
Impertinency, Clamor, Obscenity, Blasphemy, whatsoever might grate serious,
chaste or pious Ears: Nor under Dumbness, that our Tongues are bound up from
uttering Vanity and Falsehood, they cannot be employed to the Dishonor of God,
or the Injury of our Neighbor; certainly a sublimer Consideration fetched from
Sacred Scripture, that the recompense of bearing such natural Inconveniences
contentedly, and with all humble Deference to him who thought fit to annex them
to the tenure of our being here, shall be; that our Eyes are opened now to
behold the wondrous things of God's Law, a Privilege peculiar to God's Saints;
whereas Gnats and Flies, Pismires and other Infects enjoy Light in common with
us, and shall be opened to behold the glorious Light of God's Countenance, our
Ears to be entertained with the Music of the Angelical Choire, our Tongues
loosed to join in concert with them in singing the Divine Praises will empower
us to submit and acquiesce.

(2.) The same Contemplation will S. 7. 6. N. 3. mem. 2. Our own Death with
Patience and Courage.
serve to make us bear with Patience that Evil, which of all others is
generally looked upon as the most terrible and grievous, (because it deprives
us of the Enjoyments we taste a sweetness in; and of Life, of which we are so
ridiculously fond, that for the most part we had rather be miserable than be
without it; while we have no Notion, or a very wrong one, of the Souls
Immortality, and no Faith of the Resurrection of the Body; or if we believe
both, we do not attend to that Belief) the Sentence of Death I mean, when God
denounces it, and to meet with Courage the Execution of it.

For setting the future Rewards before our Eyes, we should look upon Death then
as no other than the Goal, at which, the Race being done, we are to receive the
Meeds we ran for; as the Port where landed we are upon the Shore of eternal
Happiness; as a generous Patron freeing us out of a state of Slavery, and the
Prison where we are detained, and raising us to a glorious condition of
Liberty; as a kind Friend, by whose means we are conducted to those Mansions of
Bliss which have been long since provided for us in our Fathers House, as
removing out of a Cottage of Loom and Clay, exposed to the Injuries of all
sorts of Weathers into a Building not made with Hands, i. e. to say, not as
these earthly Tabernacles; into a Palace, whose Foundations, Walls and Gates
are all of precious Stones in the highest Heavens, as a retiring from the
Hardships and Dangers of this present Warfare, wherein we are engaged in
continual Contests with Flesh and Blood within, and Principalities and Powers
and Spiritual Wickednesses without, by whom we are so often and so shamefully
foiled, to a place of perfect Peace and Security, free from the least annoyance
of such Incursions, or such Assailants, or any fears of them; where, having
obtained our great Captains Dismission and License to retire, we shall expect
till he make his return to Earth; after which, his business being done there,
and we having Bodies prepared for us to put on, we shall attend on him when he
makes his second glorious Ascent into Heaven, and be a part of that days Pomp
and Celebrity; as the putting off Rags of Corruption in order to be arrayed in
Robes of State; as that which manageth an advantageous Exchange for us; and by
means of which for Misery and Calamity we gain Happiness; for Tears and Grief,
Joys; for painful Labor and Toil, Rest; for carking Cares, Delights and
Pleasures; for Ignominy, Glory; for Obscurity, Splendour; for a Dungeon, a
Palace; in short, (for nothing can be more said or thought, and that is
comprehensive of all which can be said or thought) Heaven for Earth, God and
the Society of Angels and the Spirits of Just Men made perfect, for the World,
its Vanities and profligate Company.

If they, who, when they stood upon the Threshold of this World, ready to leave
it, had no View, or but an obscure and uncertain one of another confining upon
this, could support themselves with Patience under its prolusory Agonies and
Skirmishes, and fortify themselves with Courage against its downright Attack
and Blow, by the help of such Meditations as these, (That dying was but going
out of a weather-beaten House; a traveling to another place, as Plato; a
Dismission from their attendance here, as the Emperor Antoninus; (the same
Phrase almost by which the Aged Simeon expresses it, when he calls it a
Departure) but a going the way which all must tread, as Horace; but a putting
off the tattered Garments of Flesh and Blood, as Maximus; but a Sleeping, but a
Change, as Arian and others thought) then certainly those who through the
Optics of Divine Revelations have the full prospect of another Life after
this, and by the Evidences of Faith and the Testimony of the Holy Spirit with
theirs, are assured of being Possessors of it, will not only be upheld by
Patience, but receive abundant Consolation against the otherwise affrightful
approach of Death, from this Consideration, That it is but a Passage or
Introduction into Immortality.

This too, as it will sustain and comfort 2. Against the kinds of Death, or the
circumstances of it, which may make the appearance frightful.
us against the Pangs or Terrors of Death it self, so it will do it against the
various Circumstances and Appertenances of it; such I call the Manner, Kind,
Time, Place of our Death; which, if there be nothing formidable, or nothing but
what is tolerable in Death it self, can introduce no such material and
substantial difference, as to render Death in this or that place, at this or
another time, this or that way of dying, contrary to the common nature of
Death, terrible and insupportable.

As therefore it matters not upon the Square, whether we die in Childhood,
Youth, Manhood, or Old Age, sooner or later, any more than it does in what
Season of the year, whether in Spring, Summer, Autumn or Winter; (and if there
be any odds, they seem to have the advantage, who die, having seen least of the
Worlds Villainy, or felt least of the Calamities of Humane Life) whether we die
at home or abroad, since every place under the Sky is a wise and brave Man's
Country, (he being a Citizen and Denison of the World) or none on this side
Heaven is, and every part of the Earth is equally distant from that; whether in
the possession of our Honors in our own Country, or in Banishment in another,
since this may send us into places more benign and hospitable than our own Soil
was, where we may be more esteemed for our Virtue, see more Order, Gravity and
Conduct, and greater Examples of Prudence, Fidelity and Constancy than among
our own People; whether we die at Sea or Land, whether we feed Fish or Worms,
whether we die a natural or a violent Death, whether our Prison Doors fly open
of themselves, or they are broken open by Force; whether we die on our Beds by
a Fever, or by Fire at a Stake; by a Squinnancy there, or by a Halter on a
Gibbit; by a lingering Consumption there, or by the sudden stroke of a Sword or
Ax on the Scaffold; by the Torture of the Stone or Gout, or the Iliack Passion
there, or by being broken on the Wheel; whether we die that which is called a
glorious Death, by the hands of our Enemy in the Field, or that which is
reckoned an ignominious one, by the hand of a Public Executioner, provided the
Cause be not Criminal; for its this alone can make any Death scandalous, as it
is only the goodness of a Cause can make any honorable: Virtue can ennoble
every Death, give Glory to the Scandal of the Cross; and Piety can make the
Person who is hanged, drawn and quartered, an illustrious fulgent Martyr: And
neither the Tree, nor Block, nor any kind of Death can disgrace Honesty, or
shame Religion. Nor last of all, whether after Death, our Bodies receive a
decent Interment, or they are exposed to the Beasts of the Field, or their
Quarters given to the Fowls of the Air; i. e. whether they rot under Ground or
above, (as Theodorus the ^ic. Tuscul. l. 3.
Cyrenaean told the Tyrant who threatened him with the Cross or Gibbet, That it
was all one to him how he died) provided we have not merited this last
Treatment as Malefactors, but it is the ungrateful Return which is made us for
doing our Duty: For then they who have not a Grave, have Heaven indeed Valor.
l. 3. c. 3.
for a Canopy to cover them, or lie under its vaulted Roof; their Quarters fixed
on Poles are the Trophies and Monuments which Malice her self erected to their
Virtue while she oppressed it, the memory of which will embalm their Names to
Immortality, while no Sear-cloaths, nor Unguents, nor Gums, nor any other Art
shall be able to preserve the Bodies of their unjust Judges from Putrefaction,
nor any Vindications their Names from rottenness and stanch, worse than eternal
Oblivion.

I say therefore, as it matters not upon the square what kind of Death, or
where or how we die, if so be we are prepared to die well; so if there was any
real difference caused by the kind, manner, time or place, which might
aggravate one kind of Death above another, or make it more terrible or
intolerable at one time or place than another, yet the just consideration that
the issue of every Death was to every good Man in all times and places the
same, and would certainly determine in his Eternal Felicity, would allay all
the affrightfulness our Imaginations are apt to raise in us, remove all the
Difficulties, correct all the roughness, and mitigate all the sharpness and
pains they are ready to figure to themselves to be in any of the sorts of Death.

Now for the keeping up this assured Expectation of a Reward, on which depends
the meeting of a violent Death, or the bearing a natural one, or the Diseases
preparatory to it, with constancy, that our Hope may enter within the Veil
where this Happiness is kept; a thing very difficult to do, while our Souls
have so much affinity with mortal Bodies, and Commerce with Sense. We are to
consider who it is that has promised to bestow it; he is God; and if the Word
of a good Prince is as great security as a Subject can ask or desire, surely
nothing can be wished for or imagined greater than his who is immutable. And
that while the fulfilling of other Promises depends upon this tacit Condition,
if he sees it convenient for us; the performance of this rests only upon the
Performance of our Duty.

This Consideration of what Death S. 7. 3. m. 3. The death of our friends with
patience and evenness.
is, and what it leads to, as it will thus support us with Patience to bear its
Sentence, or arm us with Courage to meet it when it marches directly against
our selves; so it will uphold our Spirits, that they sink not under the weight
of Grief; smooth them, that they be not exasperated, when its Stings pierce our
nearest and dearest Friends; a Passion, which is many times too strong for
those who have mastered all others; (as St. Hierom acknowledged of the Lady
Paula) because Nature, even good Nature is on her side; rather than lament
their Loss, if we were not corrupted by Interest to bewail our own, in being
bereft of their Society, which was that St. Hierom confesses, swayed them to
mourn for Nepotian, we should rejoice at the important Advantages they have
gained by it, at their being safely landed at the Port for which they were
bound, arrived at that delicious place toward which they bent their Journey, as
being discharged from Prison, manumised out of Servitude, and infranchised of
the noblest Country and City.

We should then regard the committing their dead Bodies to the ground, while at
the same time we know that they shall there rot and crumble into Dust, be the
Food of Worms and creeping things, (a Thought indeed, which of it self, without
proceeding further or looking higher, inclines us to make lamentation for those
who, warmed with a spark of Life, were the Light of our Eyes, and the Joy of
our Hearts) but as a leading them officiously into their Chambers, or their
ceremonious entering into them, and Isa. 26. 20.
shutting the Doors upon themselves; as a resting themselves, and sleeping on
those Beds there for some short time; from which being roused by the Archangels
Isa 57. 2.
powerful Voice, crying, Awake ye that sleep in the dust, and rise; together
with the Blast of God's Trump, and the mighty Shout with which the Lord,
attended by a numerous retinue 1 Thessalonians 4. 26.
of the Heavenly Host, shall descend; and quickened by a living Spirit, which
shall return again to their compacted organized Dust, shall come forth out of
those Dormitories recruited with new Vigor and Activity, like Giants refreshed
with Wine and Sleep; decked and adorned with greater Finery than ever Royal
Brides proceeding from their Bed-chambers to the Temple showed on the day of
their Marriage; more richly attired, and more magnificently set out than
Eastern Monarchs are on the day of their Birth or Coronation; and thereupon
think it as improper to shed Tears upon their Graves, as it would be to weep
upon such solemn occasions of Festivity, as are the Birthday, Nuptials, or
inthronization of our Prince.

Had we this Contemplation at the Funeral of our Friends, that instead of those
vile, ignoble, frail, lumpish Bodies they were clothed with here, and which
were deposited in the Grave; instead of Dust and Corruption, (the Garment that
shall cover them there) they shall come forth thence at the day of the
Resurrection, apparelled in rich Vestures 1 Cor. 15. 42, 43, 44, 45.
of diverse precious Colors gracefully mingled together, i. e. to say, in
Bodies endowed with Impassibility, Glory, Strength, Agility, and that in these
Bodies so nobly qualified, and over and above actuated with Souls more
Celestial than they were, they shall be led into Mansions of Bliss, such as
mortal Eye never saw, nor can; nor Ear heard of by the relation of Fame, nor
are to be comprehended by the largest Heart, as Men's are now, there to abide
forever.

Did we rise higher in our Contemplation, or come nearer to our selves, and
consider that we our selves, if we shall be found alive at that day when that
Honor shall be done them, shall have our Bodies, as we wear them, changed upon
us into that glorious condition; or if we have put them off, and they are laid
in the Grave, we shall have them raised and exalted to the same state; and that
in Body and Spirit conjunctly we shall enjoy the mutual Society of each other
in perfect and interminable Felicity, without the possibility or fear of being
separated again, instead of having our Spirits miserably dejected, as usually
they are, when we are divided from our Friends, or are forced to part Company,
we shall have them exceedingly raised, instead of doleful silence or sad
astonishment, which is our ordinary Behavior upon such occasions, we should
break forth into singing and joy.

Cicero who had no perfect Knowledge Cic. de Consol.
of this Mystery of the Resurrection of the Body, and Reunion both of Soul and
Body, and had only some little glimmering Light let in upon his Mind as through
a Crany, by which he discovered something of the Immortality of the Soul;
thought that the strongest Cordial we could administer to our selves for our
Consolation upon the Death of our Friends, was to be drawn from such
Meditations as these: That they were not wholly taken from us, not utterly
lost, but only for a certain time removed out of our sight and company, to
which when we arrived at the appointed Boundary of our Lives, we should be
restored again, and renew the Sweets of our uninterrupted Acquaintance and
Communication.

But we who have a clearer and distincter perception of the Immortality of the
Soul by that Gospel which brought it to Life, have consequently the benefit of
a stronger consideration thence, where we are taught, that by the mediation of
Death we shall be conducted to the enjoyment of the Society of those dear
Friends, whose Conversation we so highly valued on Earth, when it was not
without its Errors and Failings, which shall be to our highest satisfaction,
because we shall have it in the noblest and perfectest manner; love them to the
utmost pitch of Fervency, and the most refined degree of Purity, for whom we
had kind and unspotted Affections here; and we shall Heb. 11. 39, 41. 12. 22,
23.
have an eternal Vacation from all other employments to do this, to love God
and them, his as well as our Friends, and jointly with them to adore his
infinitely amiable Excellencies, which under any less space than Eternity,
cannot be sufficiently admired or worthily magnified.

But we have yet a stronger Consolation than this, that our Souls which now
only have an imperfect Communication by the assistance, or rather hindrance of
bodily Organs, shall then, disroab'd of such Bodies, immediately know and
correspond with each other, and have a farther discovery by the help of that
Light of the Resurrection of the Body; that the Bodies of our departed Friends,
being raised out of the Dust, and made like unto that glorious Body of our
Lord, which is seated on the right hand of the Throne of Majesty on high; and
being rejoyned by their Spirits, shall be caught up in the Clouds, when he
shall return again with all that Power in Heaven and Earth that was given him
upon his Resurrection, and in all the pompous Triumph that a Train or Guard of
innumerable Legions of Angels clad in shining Light can make up, to judge the
World; and that we who shall be found alive at that day, having in an instant
changed our Weeds, and put on or being clothed upon with Roabs of 1 Thessalonians. 4.
13, 16, 17, 18. 1 Cor. 15. 23. and 25.
Immortality, shall likewise be caught up together with them, or immediately
after them to meet him, and shall, when that business is dispatched, ascend up
with him into the highest Heavens, and be ever there with the Lord, and one
another in Glory.

The Apostle, who began at first with persuading us to dry up our Eyes, and
wipe away all Tears, which might trickle thence through a natural softness, for
such Friends who died in the Lord, in his Grace and Favor; upon a firm belief
that Jesus died and rose again, and an assured hope grounded thereupon, that
those also who sleep in Jesus, parted hence when Death closed their Eyes with a
belief of his Resurrection as passed, and their own as future, shall God bring
to him when he returns to Judicature; that we should not be sorry as men who
had no hope, no hope of seeing them more, proceeds in the next stop to stir us
up to cheerfulness upon the account of this Faith and Hope, and counsels us to
use them for the raising and animating one another, if dejected upon such
imagined Losses. Wherefore comfort 1 Thessalonians. 4. 18.
ye one another with these words.

The Evangelical Prophet Isaiah did before him propound the Consideration of
this Doctrine, (though then but darkly delivered or faintly entertained) for
the same purpose, for the inspiriting with Joy such Mourners in Judah, who were
disconsolate upon the Mortality of their Friends, that their Dead should live
again. His Words are, Thy dead men shall live, together with my dead body shall
they arise; awake and sing Isa. 26. 19.
ye that dwell in the dust: for thy dew is as the dew of herbs, and the earth
shall cast forth the dead. And the sense of them seems to be this: Cheer and
raise up your Hearts, ye whom Affliction has brought low, whose Bellies by
reason thereof cleave to the dust of the Ground, who lie overwhelmed with and
buried under loads of Sorrow for the Slain of your People, whose Bodies lie
scattered upon the ground; or for your deceased Friends, of whom Death has by
other ways possibly than the Sword bereft you; for they over whom ye mourn
shall at the last day, together with my dead Body, be raised out of the Dust or
state of Corruption, enlivened by the quickening Breath that shall return into
them at the Word of the Almighty; even as tender Herbs killed by the sharpness
of Winter Frosts and Colds, shall by those vital Dews and Heat the kind Spring
liberally affords, recover, rear up their fallen Heads, and put on their gaudy
Livery again.

Let us therefore comport with the Apostles Exhortation; instead of consuming
our selves with Grief, which corrodes and eats as much as Envy and Cares do,
for our departed Friends; those I mean, whose Piety and Virtue have made the
Conjunction nearer, and the Cement closer than mere Flesh and Blood could, and
whom we have ground to hope departed hence in the Lord, let us comfort our
selves that they have made so happy an Exit; yea, rather rejoice, considering
their departure hence, not as a forsaking, but a preceding us who survive; not
as a going quite away from us, but as an orderly passing on before into another
World; as a turning out of the ordinary road of Time, wearied with the Journey
that way, into that of Eternity.

Those Persons indeed on whom Death executes the Office of a Sergeant, arrests
them to deliver them up to Divine Vengeance; those for whom Tophet of old was
ordained, for whom everlasting Fire was prepared, ought in just pity to be
lamented, because their departure hence is into that Lake of Brimstone which
burns which burns with this Fire; the mouth of Hell receives and devours
their Souls, as the Pit does their Bodies; and a second Death gnaws on them as
Worms and creeping things do on their putrified Carcases. Tears of Compassion
may be shed for such Unbelievers and wicked impenitent Doers, because they pass
hence into the most sad deplorable Estate, out of which neither our Prayers nor
their own Cries can relieve them, any more than the Tears of either can allay
their Flames.

But we are to exult at the departure of the Righteous, (such blessed ones of
their Father, as had an Inheritance designed for them in his Kingdom before the
foundation of the world, of whom he gave his Angels charge here, commanded them
to serve and attend on them as ministering Spirits to their Salvation, about
whom he gave his Heavenly Host Orders to pitch their Camp to guard them from
Evil) as quitting only their incommodious Tabernacles of Flesh, leaving only
the Miseries, and Disquietudes, and Filthiness of this World to pass into
Mansions of Rest, and Bliss, and Glory provided for them in their Fathers
House; and to which the same Guardian Angels shall take care to convoy their
Souls safe, which at the moment of parting from their Bodies, they commended
into the hands of their merciful Redeemer.

The Thracians thought they had Valor. Max. l. 2. c. 6. Solin. mela.
good reason to rejoice at the Funerals of their Friends, on one part merely of
this consideration, because they were delivered from the Calamities which
environed their Life here. And others, who thought they had reason to lament
the Dead, because they had lost the Light, yet judged there was a Modesty to be
observed in Grief, and a measure set to Tears, the Voluptuousness of a sick
Mind, as well as to other Pleasure.

And if after Death we make Lamentations for them, it ought to be upon a
Reflection, that they were constrained to be so long absent from the Lord,
while they sojourned in Mesech, (either a Country or time of prolongation) and
were confined to the Tents of Kedar, (this Land of Darkness and Blackness, or
these gloomy Tabernacles of Earth) as the same Thracians howled at the Birth of
their own or Friends Children, looking upon it as an entrance upon a woeful
Tragical Scene.

When he makes the Storm a Calm, Psalm. 107 28, 29.
translates our Friends from this Life into another, so that the waves thereof
are still, they are no longer tossed upon instable Billows, nor driven by
uncertain Winds; then as they are glad because they are at quiet, and he
brings them to their desired Haven: So ought we to praise the Lord for his
Goodness to them, that they have got off the tempestuous and dangerous Sea, and
reached their quiet Port. Thus S. Hierom. Ep. 30. ad Oceanum.
the Christians at Rome celebrated the Obsequies of Fabiola with Psalms of
Thansgiving, and the loud sounding of the Hallelujahs upon this occasion shook
the Temple's Roofs.

If we behave our selves otherwise, grieve and make bitter Moan for their
Death, we do them wrong; i. e. (as much as we can do them any, whose Felicity
is incapable of being lessened) by our ill Suspicions, Jealousies and Fears,
(or seeming ill ones) of their condition, whether it be happy or not; or else
our selves by distrusting or appearing to distrust the Immortality of the Soul,
and Resurrection of the Body; as if supposing that the one at the moment of
Death evaporates into Air, and the other after some time shall be irrevocably
lost in the Dust: Upon which account St. Hierom advises Ep. 3. ad Heliodor.
Heliodorus to correct his Tenderness, and repress his Tears for Nepotian, left
what was Affection to his Nephew, might be construed by Infidels as Despair in
God) Or it seems as if we envyed their Beatitude, if we believe they are
possessed of it, and repined at our own Lot, that we are left in a state of
Misery. And we stain the Glory of our Faith, while with the assistance of that
we do not, what Men of Infidelity could, i. e. support the Death of their
Friends without any piteous mourning or Complaints.

And yet it may not be indecent for them to weep for them whom they may think,
or at least cannot tell but they have utterly lost; but its dishonorable for a
Christian to do so, while he knows they live, or but professes to believe that
their Death is a translation to Life Eternal.

Mourning and Blacks are improper on this occasion, and very disagreeable to
their state of Felicity, whom we believe to be arrayed in White Garments and
Palms.

Since then, such is the Advantage accrewing by Patience, that it shall be
rewarded with immortal Happiness, and Diseases lead to the Door, Death opens
it, or is the very Door it self through which we must pass to take Possession
of it, considering this, What can we do more reasonably, than upon a Bed of
Sickness to uphold our weak Spirits, and sustain our feeble afflicted Limbs
with Patience? Then to be armed with it, when we see our last Enemy, Death,
approaching toward us to seize our Persons; and the more, if it be violent,
with how much more terrible appearances Malice and Barbarity have dressed it,
or with how much more Horror it is arrayed by them on purpose to disorder us,
provided always our Cause be good, and we are condemned to suffer it for
Righteousness sake?

Or what can we do more reasonably, than to support our Minds with this, that
they do not droop or flag when Death has removed from us any of our beloved
Friends; if such, whom we may upon sufficient grounds believe to have died in
the Lord, in peace with him, while they died not for him, or laid not down
their Lives for a Testimony to him, or signed his Doctrine with their Blood;
esteeming their Death to have done them the favor of instating them in the
Regions of Bliss; and thereupon looking on the other way of behaving our
selves, of immoderate Mourning for them, as that which betrays either
Infidelity in general of the Souls subsisting after this Life, or too much
suspicion and fear in particular of their happy Estate; or if none of these,
yet too much partial Love to our selves, because they are separated from us for
a time; or something of Envy, while we lament their being made happy before us,
and our selves being left still to combat for that Prize they have obtained.

To this Armor, this Shield of Faith S 7. 7. 5. Ephesians. 13. and 17.
and Helmet of Salvation, as the belief and hope of Eternal Rewards, the
consideration of which I have been recommending, is called, let us in the last
place join the Sword of God's To read frequently the holy Scriptures, and
meditate on the Precepts and Examples of Patience there set forth, and to be
diligent in praying for this Grace.
Spirit, which in the Apostles Interpretation, who advises to take it, is the
Word of God, i. e. Let us be frequent in conversing with the Holy Scriptures,
which inculcate the Practice of this Virtue, that so our Obligation to do so
being fresh in our Memories, we may the more readily comply with it; (whereas
for want of such a renewing as in time it my be effaced there, so we shall be
the more unfit to discharge it) those Oracles put us upon laboring and
striving to get the mastery of our Affections, from which as long as they
remain unsubdew'd, arises all our disturbance, all our intestine Wars and
Fightings proceed, whereas the Conquest of them yields the pleasing Fruit of
Peace, and renders us for ever after invincible; for we can never be baffled,
while we desire nothing but what we have or are, while God's Will is ours, and
the Circumstances his. Providence has placed us in are those which our very
Hearts would wish for; we are not to be disordered by the loss of Goods, Lands,
Liberty, good Name, or when that of Life is threatened us; nor to be transported
with Success, as Children when they have good Luck at Play, or with any
Delights; when we know not how to grieve, but for having offended God, nor how
to rejoice, but for having done him that Service which he is pleased to accept;
while he is our Hope and our Fear, and we neither put our Trust in Man, nor
apprehend what he can do unto us, whose utmost Power reaches but to kill the
Body; we disarm Tyrants, and make their Rage indeed but Impotency which cannot
hurt us; and he only who basely fears or poorly wishes, loses the ground he
should keep, Liberty of Mind; throws away the Shield which should defend him,
and works the Link of that Chain in which he shall be dragged.

Let us be diligent in reading them, (as the Virgins in the Nunnery of Lady
Paula, and the Empress Pulcheria and her Sisters in the Palace did every day a
portion) which from the one end V. S. Crysost 43. in 1 Cor.
to the other, even from the Righteous Abel under the Dispensation of the
Natural Law, unto the Holy Jesus the Promulger of the Gospel; and from the
opening of that by him to the shutting and sealing it up by his Apostle John,
present us with the Examples of God's Saints, exercised all along with
Tribulations, and marching on with Patience, Courage and Constancy, especially
such as were of Christ's S. Aug. tr. 7. in Joan.
Disciples, (for his Kingdom was a Kingdom of Tribulation and Patience) and for
this reason shining now, according to the Inequality of their Trials and
Sufferings, and of Fortitude showed under them, either as less luminous Stars,
or as the Sun, the great Fountain of Light, in the Firmament of Glory, that
animated by the feasibleness of the Duty, or instigated with the Emulation of
them, we may deport our selves as they did. Let us be careful in meditating on
them, which every where propound Noble Rewards to excite and provoke us to the
Performance of this particular Duty, and for our Encouragement while we
discharge it; which God has appointed as the proper Instrument in his own
hands; or what is the same, in those of his Blessed Spirit, to form Patience, or
to get Hope and Comfort in our Souls. For whatsoever things were written in
Romans 15. 18.
former times, whether under the Administration of the Law or Gospel, were
written [for this end] for our learning, that we through patience and comfort
of the Scriptures might have hope.

These were David's Solace and Refreshment; these his Stay and Support under
the Troubles which encampass'd him round about.

His Word was his Comfort in his Ps. 119. 56.
Afflictions, and that quickened him.

He thought upon his Judgments, and 52.
his Soul received Comfort.

His Testimonies were the rejoicing of 111.
his Heart.

His Law was his Delight, and such a one, that he professes, (such was its
Virtue and Efficacy) Unless thy Ps. 92. 103.
Law had been my delight, I had perished in mine affliction. Elsewhere he
extols the Sweetness of his Words, that they were sweeter to his throat than
honey to his mouth; and of his Judgments, that they were sweeter than the honey
and the honeycomb.

Jonathan the High Priest and Prefect of the Jewish Nation in the Letter he
wrote to the Lacedaemonians for the renewing the Alliance between their state
and that of the Jews, that it might not be imagined he implored it meanly, as
if his People could not subsist without a Confederacy with theirs, acquaints
them thus -- For we have the 1 Match. 12. 9.
Books of the Holy Scripture in our hands to comfort us. The great St.
Augustine for this purpose prayed, That the S. August. Confess. l. 11. c. 2. 2.
Scriptures might be his chaste delight. The ancient Christians bewailed it as
the greatest Disaster of their Persecution, which drove them into Dens and
Caves to secure their Persons, that the same Darkness which concealed them
deprived them of the comfort of reading the Holy Scriptures; and they declared
these were their chief delight, and the Joy of their Hearts V. Acta S. S.
Agapes, etc. apud Baron. ad A. 304.
while they lived, and when dying they ordered the Sacred Code should be laid
upon their Breasts, and buried with them.

With reading and meditating daily S. 7. 8. To pray to God for this Grace.
only on God's Word, assiduous and ardent Prayer should always go along, that
God would be pleased to make our exercising our selves in his Law Day and
Night, as the Psalmist did, as beneficial for the comforting us, as it was to
him for that end; who as he was directed by God to call upon him, and promised
that he would deliver him; so following the Direction, found the Issue
answerable to the Assurance: For when he was troubled, as he acknowledges, he
called upon him, and he heard him, and according to the multitude of sorrows
that were in his heart, his comforts refreshed his Soul.

That what therein may more especially conduce thereto, we would set so home
upon our Spirits, and fix so fast there, as never to be plucked up or rooted
thence; imprint or engrave so deep upon our Hearts, as never to be erased or
obliterated; that he would put his holy Spirit into our inner parts, and by him
bring to our continual remembrance, set in a clear Light and a direct view
constantly before us, such Declarations, Commands, Promises, Threats, Reproofs,
Examples, as have any thing peculiar in them to serve to this excellent Design.

This, if at our urgent Request, he shall grant us, or by our wrestling with
him we shall obtain, then shall that come to pass, that being reminded Col. 3.
2.
of our Duty, not to set our affections on things below, which are not within
our reach to get as we would, nor power to keep after we have got them; to lay
up for our selves Treasure in Heaven which fade not away by dispensing part of
our Treasure, we have been by God's Bounty endowed with here, but corruptible
as the Earth out Mat. 6. 19, 20.
of which it was dug, to our indigent Brethren; remembranced of our Duty by our
Alms and Charity to make Friends of our unrighteous Mammon, i. e. Riches, which
if not unjustly got Luke 16.
by Fraud and Oppression, are yet false and deceitful in themselves, that
discharged from our Stewardship, and dismissed hence, we may be received into
everlasting Habitations; of our Mat. 5 40.
Duty to leave all if occasion so require, that we may with greater Expedition
follow our Master when and where he shall call us: As the Lady S. Hierom. Ep.
30. ad Oceanum.
Fabiola, having disposed of all her Worldly Goods before, which was like heavy
Baggage serving only to encumber, made her self the lighter to fly to Heaven;
or as the Apostles, who, though in act they forsook only their Smacks, and
Fisherboats, and Nets, yet in purpose left the whole World, resolving never to
be burdened with any part of it, that they might keep better pace with their
Leader.

Being, I say, thus reminded by the Holy Spirit, of abstracting our Affections
from the Earth, and things which perish both with and without using, gathering
Rust if hoarded, which in time will eat them; and breeding, if laid up, Moths
which will consume them; of communicating and distributing of our Goods, which
is yet less than retaining no Propriety in what we have; than selling our Lands
and Houses, and laying the Price down at the Apostles or their Successors Feet,
to be disposed of by them; it shall then come to pass, that the Casualties of
Losses, or Diminutions in our Estate shall not disturb us, which upon many
accounts we stand bound to part with. Then being reminded by this Spirit, if we
have two Mat. 5. 40.
Cloaks, of giving one to him who lacks; of parting with our Cloak to him who
by Violence and Oppression would take away our Coat, rather than contend in
endless Suits of Law, or before Foreign Judges, for recovering of it, or
Damages, it shall come to pass that the Depredations and Robberies which the
Lawless and Masterless may commit on our Goods, shall not have the force to
disturb us.

Then being reminded by him of our Luke 9. 23, 24.
Masters Admonition, to take up his Cross and follow after him; for which we
have his Encouragement, That if we lose our Lives for his sake, we shall save
them; to rejoice and be exceeding Mat. 5. 11. and 21.
glad when men shall persecute, revile, and say all manner of evil of us
falsely for the name of Christ. More Patience under the edge of the Sword or
Ax, or under the Lash and Scourge of the most cutting Tongue, will seem a Duty
so easy, as not to need any farther recommendation or pressing.

Then being re-minded or instructed by him, that those Diseases by which we are
not given over to Death, are sent for our Chastisement and Correction; and
those by which we are, which tend to our Dissolution, shall bring us to be with
Christ; we shall not fret or vex our selves under Remedies, whose end is to
make us better, or Methods to make us happy.

Then being reminded by him of the Faith into which we were once solemnly
Baptized, and daily make a Profession of, that Christ having died, rose again,
and became the first Fruits of them who sleep, who in due time and 1 Cor. 15.
20, 22.
order shall be awakened and quickened by him; and such who fall asleep in him,
1 Thessalonians. 4. 14.
he shall bring along with him when he returns to judge the world. We should
not be overwhelmed in a Deluge of excessive Sorrow for our departed Friends, as
if we were utterly bereft of all hopes of seeing them more: But on the other
side, raise and comfort our selves up we should with the Belief and Hope, that
they having, upon leave granted, withdrawn themselves from this Warfare for a
Season, shall make their appearance to together with us under the Standard of
the Lord of Life and Glory at the General Rendezvouse of the Quick and Dead;
and that in the mean time, while we are deprived of them, and we our selves
absent from the Lord, we may by holy Offices have Communion with God, and enjoy
him in whom and for whom they were only dear to us, or ought to have been so.

Beg of him we should farther, to send this Spirit to be our immediate
Comforter, by shining in upon our Souls with such direct Rays of cheerful
light, as through all the gloomy sadness of our outward condition we may
discern our belonging to the Election of Grace, and our affliction to be a mark
that we are of that little Flock; read the Deeds of our Adoption that made us
the Sons of God, and the Charter which gives us as Sons, a Title to an
Inheritance reserved for us in the Heavens; by infusing into our Hearts such
Peace, such Joy and Exultation, which are the Fruits that blessed Spirit
produces, where he dwells, upon an insurance from his concurrent Testimony
with ours, that our sins are pardoned, our persons accepted and justified, and
that God for having forsaken us for a small moment, will gather us in great
mercies, Isa. 54. 7. 8.
for having hid his face from us for so short a while, will with everlasting
kindness look upon us; that neither Life nor Death, [neither the Calamities of
the one, nor Terrors of the other,] nor Angels, nor Principalities, nor Powers,
(not the Wiles nor rage of Devils) not things present, nor things to come; (not
those we feel, nor those we fear) not heights nor depths, (neither Precipices
nor Dungeons) nor any Creature whatever, shall be able to separate us from the
Love of God which is in Christ Jesus our Lord. That Love, which, he being
attoned and reconciled to be our Friend by the meritorious Death of Christ has
for us, nor defeat his kind Intentions, nor deprive us of the beneficial
effects of that Love, viz. our Salvation.

To this Frame and Temper of Spirit, if the Holy Spirit the Comforter shall by
any of the forementioned Methods, or his own Operation and Influx upon us,
vouchsafe to raise us, transported we shall be with the ravishing Delights of
Heaven before we shall be caught up thither, be inebriated with its Pleasures,
before we sit down with the Patriarchs, Prophets, Apostles, and the rest of the
honorable Guests of that place, to taste them there; have the Kingdom of
Heaven within us, before we are advanced to one of those Mansions in that above
us; and we shall be prepared to say in all truth as St. Bernard did, We had
rather be in Sermon. 19. in Psalm 90.
tribulation, in the fiery Furnace, having this Comforter with us, than reign
and be glorified in Heaven without him.

And Confident we may be, if we do, beseech him to give us this Spirit, the
Comforter, with that Faith, Ardor and Importunity as we ought, that he who
promised to give him to those who asked, (asked Believing) fervently and
incessantly, will in pursuance of his immutable Promise bestow him upon us, if
not in such high degrees and measures as I have mentioned, yet in such a one at
least as may support us with such a sufficient stock of Comfort as may carry us
through our present Walk, this Vale of Tears, till we come to the Mount of God;
as may enable us to bear our Cross with cheerfulness, till it be taken off our
Shoulders, and erected into a Trophy of Glory.

In this Confidence therefore, that not one Title of his Promises shall pass
away, (while all things else besides his Truth as immovable and unchangeable as
they appear to be, shall do so) without a due Completion; let us, as many as
are afflicted, apply our selves to him for the execution of it, while we are in
trouble, pour out our Heart before him in some such Prayer as this:

A Prayer for Patience.
O God, just and righteous in all thy dealings with the Sons and Daughters of
Men; but withal, abundantly compassionate to them, look down in much pity upon
me thy poor afflicted Servant.

Be not angry with me for ever, nor suffer thy wrath to burn continually like
Fire.

Forget not to be gracious, and shut not up thy loving kindness in displeasure:
But in Judgment remember Mercy, and show it by removing or mitigating my
Sufferings; or if it shall be thy good pleasure to afflict me yet farther by
continuing them, support me by thy mighty Arm to bear them with Patience and
Courage.

To this end give me a Heart to consider, that misery is the common incident of
humane Life; that Calamities of one kind or other attend upon every state and
condition of it, especially on the Christian, and that they who are called by
that honorable Name, abstracting from their hopes of happiness in another
life, are in this of all men most miserable; that they who will live godly in
Christ Jesus, besides the ordinary Evils they are liable to as Men, must over
and above suffer Persecution as Christians: And yet to ponder withal, that none
of those happen without thy knowledge and designation; that my Afflictions do
not come out of the Dust, nor trouble spring out of the ground, but are the
Demerits of my Sins, and the just Punishment inflicted by thee for them.

And then assist me in arguing with my self, how unreasonable it is for me a
Malefactor to complain of being punished according to the deserts of my
Offenses, that I ought rather in all equity to bear thy Indignation, O Lord,
because I have sinned against thee. Convince me likewise, that how harsh soever
thy dealing with me is apt to seem to Flesh and Blood, to which all Correction
is grievous, yet of very faithfulness thou have caused me to be troubled; and
then open my Lips to make this humble acknowledgment, That righteous art thou,
O Lord, and just are thy Judgments toward me in particular.

Enable me to proceed yet farther; and in an entire submission of my self to
thee, and an absolute resignation of all my Concerns to thy Will and Pleasure,
say, Good is the hand of the Lord, let him do with me as seems good to him.

To this purpose make me see and know that thy Chastisements, while they are
always the effects of thy Justice, are not always the marks of thy heavy
displeasure; but oft-times on the contrary, the badges of thy favor, the
cognizance of thy Children, and the proofs of thy Paternal Love to them.

And upon this ground make me not merely to submit my self to thy absolute
disposal as my Heavenly Father, but to adore thee likewise, and return thee all
possible thanks for vouchsafing to use thy Rod for my Correction and
Instruction.

O may I, amidst thy Justice in causing me to drink of a bitter Cup for my
portion, look upon thy loving kindness in tempering this at the same time with
Sweetness, and thy Goodness in administering it too; forasmuch as thy infinite
Wisdom knows the draught will conduce to my Health; may I therefore take it
from thy hand with all Reverence and Benediction of thy holy Name.

O may I consider the end for which thou afflictest me, which is to try and
prove me, to purge away all my Dross, and refine me, to bring me nearer to thy
self; that thou have appointed the way which leads to the Kingdom of Heaven to
be by Suffering, and have ordained me to pass through many Tribulations before
I can enter into it; and withal, the vast inequality, the unaccountable
disproportion between the lightness and momentariness of these present
Sufferings, and the solidity and perpetuity of that Glory they shall work out;
such as will not admit any imaginable comparison.

And then give me such a frame of Spirit, as I may not only bear my lot with
Patience, but exult in it; count it all Joy, that I fall into such Trials and
Afflictions.

O my God, satisfy my Soul fully of the intimate, inseparable Connection there
is between suffering and obtaining that endless Beatitude which thou have
promised for a reward of my Obedience and Service.

And then aid me being so persuaded by thy Holy Spirit to pray with the deepest
sincerity, with the most intense earnestness my Soul is capable of, that thou
would be pleased to cut and wound, to burn and sear me here, so that I may by
this means be preserved sound unto the day of the Lord, and may at that
terrible time escape the being cut asunder with the Sword of thy Vengeance,
having my portion among Hypocrites, or being tormented in unquenchable Flames,
with those who are cursed from thy Presence.

For my encouragement to endure all this here, and enduring to rejoice that I
am counted worthy to suffer; to run with cheerfulness as well as Patience the
Race that is set before me, however encumbered it may be with sharp thorns,
however beset it may be with occasions of troubles and affliction; grant me thy
Grace to have my Heart always fixed in meditating on the great Example of the
Captain of my Salvation, that I may continually have my Spirit elevated into a
devout Contemplation of him, (...) constantly looking up by Faith to the Author
and Finish^^ of my Faith, the ever-blessed Jesus, who for the Joy th^^ was set
before him, endured and despised the pains an^ shame of the Cross; and for
having done so, is now s^^ down at the Right Hand of the Throne of God; and
th^^ I may likewise look round about upon that bright Clou^ of Witnesses
encompassing me, the Armies of Martyrs an^ Confessors, who with invincible
Courage and unwear^^^ Constancy bore far heavier loads of Affliction than any
(...) have hitherto undergone, endured the most violent an^ scorching Heats of
Persecution, and passed through Fir^ and Water to approve their Fidelity to
thee.

Then shall it be, that animated by his powerful Example, who was Life, and
came to give it to as many a^ should believe on, and follow him; provoked by a
noble Emulation of his Followers, quickened by a lively Hope of entering into
those Joys, which our Master is gone before to prepare and take possession of
on my behalf, and of being partakers of the Riches of that Glory, of which they
have received the Earnest, I shall be enabled with Patience, having continued
to do and suffer thy Will; to finish my course with joy, and through this means
shall obtain that Honor and Glory and Immortality I seek for, receive that
Crown of Life thou have promised to give to those, who by enduring unto the
end, and being faithful unto Death, should overcome the world, all its Menaces
as well as Flatteries; its Torments as well as its Pleasures.

Even so be it, O gracious Lord, to thy Servant who prays and puts his
Trust in thee, that he shall be heard for thy own great Names sake, which is
merciful and gracious, and for the Merits and Intercession of thy beloved Son,
in whom thou art well-pleased; while in contemplation of that Goodness, that
thou art, and upon the assurance of thy own Promises made to me in that Son of
thy Bosom, I presume to believe, that thou can not deny me what I ask in his
Holy Name and Words, saying,

Our Father, etc. FINIS.

