Varieties of Villainy: AS, Murder, Maiming, Theft, Perjury upon Perjury.


AND Many other Infamous Matters Set forth at Large, and Published,

IN THE CASE (With its Proofs and Evidences) OF JOHN PRAED, Respondent, To the
Appeal of WILLIAM WAR.

Which came to a Hearing at the Bar of the House of LORDS, on the 27th of
January 1692/3. and went for the Respondent Nemine Contradicente.

LONDON, Printed for Abel Roper in Fleetstreet, and S. Briscoe in
Covent Garden, 1693.

TO THE READER.
I Should here Excuse this unexpected Presumption, if I had not been as unfit
to make Apologies, as I am to Play an After-Game of Reputation, especially in
Print.

But he that cannot Fence so well, is more obliged to Fight, upon Punctilio, and
just Occasion, than the greatest Master of the Noble Science; And though the
Press (by Fools and Knaves) is become almost as Scandalous as the Yard that
goes by that Name, yet some Men will adventure therein, like those that hazard
the Infamy of Hanging to save their Notions of Honor.

But there is little of that the Merchants call Honor to be got, where so much
Interest is lost; and therefore the thing will the better Answer my
Expectation: And I am sorry I must here say that so many of the Merchants (upon
misinformation) have done me all the Mischief that lay in their Power, at the
same time when I was adventuring Life, Fame and Fortune for them; as will
partly appear by some of the following Letters, which I should not insert, but
that (by Order of Court, as they concerned the Case) they were produced before
the Master in Chancery: And a Man (however Modest he otherways may be) will do
as much to maintain his Cause and his Credit, as he would to Preserve his Life,
if it lay at Stake.

And this may be an acceptable time to serve my Country (as well as my own
Satisfaction) since so many of the most Eminent Merchants of London, and so
many other Men, are laying their Heads together to Settle the Trade of the
Nation, and to Obstruct the Increasing Decay of Substantial Commerce.

THE CASE OF JOHN PRAED Respondent, to the Petition and Appeal of WILLIAM WAR.
THAT in, or about, the Year, 1679. the Appellant joined with Mr. Bonnel of
London, Merchant (to whom the Respondent was formerly an Apprentice) to send
the Respondent, as their Factor, to Zant, in Company with one Mr. Pendarves,
who was then Consul of the Morea.

That although the Appellant was then a Member of the Turkey-Company (to whom
the Morea Currants belonged) and had taken the usual Oath of Fidelity to the
said Company; The Appellant's Oath to the Turkey-Company broken.
yet he conspired with one Daniel Gates, then of London Merchant; and in the
Year 1680, sent the Respondent a Free Commission to buy up all the Morea
Currants.

That the Respondent complied with the said Commission, The Respondent to have
8 perCent. for his compliance with the Appellant's Project.
and accordingly shipped all the Morea Currants, on the Ship Old African,
Captain Joseph Waters Commander, the Appellant having ordered the Respondent to
draw 8 per Cent. Commission money, which encouraged the Respondent to disburse
about Twenty thousand Dollars on the account of the Currants aforesaid, 20000
Dollars Disburs'd by the Respondent.
which the Respondent had Orders to draw, by way of Venice, on one Mr. Williams
and Partner, the Appellant's Correspondents there.

That the Turkey-Company after the buying of the Currants aforesaid, made a
Decree, A Decree of the Turkey-Comp. against the Respondent -- under the
Penalty of 20 per Cent.
that no one of them should any more employ the Respondent, under the Penalty
of 20 per Cent. Not that the Respondent was ever employed by the
Turkey-Company, or was he ever a Member thereof; but because he was effectually
faithful to the Appellant (his Employer) who had been so offensively perfidious
to them. And at the same time they turned Mr. Pendarves out of the Consulship
for the Appellant's Fault; Mr. Pendarves turned out of the Consulship.
and because there were False Witnesses suborned, and sworn against him at
Zant, etc.

That, The Respondent's Bills for the 20000 Dollars not paid by the Appellant's
Order.
after the same Ship was laden with the aforesaid Currants, and sent away, the
said Appellant, and the said Gates sent Orders to the said Williams and Partner
not to accept any of the Respondent's Bills; which Orders they complied withal,
for not one Penny of the Respondent's Bills were ever paid.

That at the same time there lived in the House of the Respondent and Partner,
Tavernor formerly an Apprentice to the Appellant.
one Francis Tavernor, who was their Cash, and Book-keeper, and had been
Apprentice to the Appellant, when he formerly lived at Zant.

That at the Respondent's going to Zant, The words of the Appellant's Letter
proved in Chancery.
the Appellant wrote a Letter to the said Tavernor, wherein were these Words:
Now mind your business there, and let me alone for these Asses. And he so
minded the business he was set about, The Value of 30000 Dollars stolen from
the Respondent and Pendarves by the Order and Approbation of the Appellant.
that after the Appellant had ordered the said Williams, and Partner, not to
accept the Respondent's Bills, He the said Tavernor, stole, and run away with
the said Respondents, and Partners Papers, and Books, to the value of Thirty
thousand Dollars, and upwards, which was done by the Order and Approbation of
the Appellant. And, since that, the said Tavernor has suffered for it,
Tavernor put into the Galley for the same.
both in Prison, and in the Galley; though he was let out again by the Venetian
Justices, for Money, and for some Reasons of that State.

That some time since the Proveditore, A Design to Assassinate Pendarves, and
his losing three of his Fingers.
or Governor, of Zant, designed to Assassinate the aforesaid Mr. Pendarves,
because he would not comply with some Proposals against the Interest of his
Principals or Imployers; but he escaped with the loss only of three of his
Fingers.

That after that, there was an intention to Murder the Respondent. Proved in
Chancery, 1. An Intention to murder the Respondent by cutting his Throat. 2.
Two Persons actually murdered. 3. Another Man wounded.

And the aforesaid Tavernor undertook to cut the Respondent's Throat whilst he
lay in his Bed, and had made Provision for th^^ purpose; but his heart failing
him, five others were hired to accomplish the design; and two of them
repenting, discovered the Contrivance to the Respondent, for which they were
both shot and killed. And, some time after that, another Person was wounded,
almost to Death, upon the same Account.

That thereupon the Respondent was forced to leave the Island, The Respondent
forced to fly for his Life.
after he had suffered these and many other Injuries, and particularly a
Petition for his Banishment, The Original Petition for the Respondent's
Banishment, Proved in Chancery, and the Translation read at the Hearing of his
Cause.
because he would not comply with the Venetian Interest, as others did, against
that of his own Country, and had written his Reasons for it, with an Intention
to publish them, because they Above 100000 l. per annum.
concerned this Nation above 100000 l. per annum.

That by the unjust Proceedings aforesaid of the Appellant, The Respondent
disabled to follow his Profession for 10 Years last past.
and his Accomplices, both the Respondent, and the aforesaid Pendarves, have
been utterly disabled to follow their Profession, those ten Years and upwards;
and the more, because that, in all this time, they cannot have Justice done
them at Zant, and Venice.

That upon the Respondent's Arrival in England, The Appellant refused to
account with the Respondent.
the Appellant, and the said Gates refused to come to an Account with the
Respondent, and both bid him take his Course at Law for his Pretensions.

That the Respondent for want of the Papers, The Respondent not able to
Prosecute the Appellant for many years
etc. stolen from him, could not prosecute the said Appellant, and Gates, and
was therefore forced to retire into the Country, where he lived for some Years,
until the Appellant preferred his Bill in the Exchequer, The Suit in the
Exchequer.
against the said Gates, for an Account of the Currants aforesaid.

That in the Pleadings in the Exchequer between the said Parties it appears
that the Currants for which the said Respondent demands Satisfaction, The
Currants came safe to the Appellant's or Gates's hands, and they proved Partners.
came safe to the Hands of the said Appellant, or the said Gates, and that the
said Appellant, and the said Gates were then Partners.

That thereupon the said Respondent exhibited his Bill in Chancery against the
said Appellant, The Respondent's Bill in Chancery.
and the Administratrix of Daniel Gates, The Appellants and Gates decreed to
account with the Respondent, and to pay Interest.
to have an Account, and Satisfaction, for the said Currants; and Witnesses
being examined, this Cause came to Hearing the 1st. of Dec. 1691. Whereupon,
and upon reading the Proceedings in the Exchequer, The Case appearing so cruel
to the Court, they ordered the Respondent's Costs to the Hearing, for
Non-payment whereof, the Appellant stands in Contempt to a Commission of
Rebellion.
the Court was well satisfied that the Appellant was a Partner with the said
Daniel Gates for the aforesaid Currants, and that they ought to account to the
Respondent for the same. And thereupon it was referred to Sir John Francklin,
to examine, and see, what was due to the said Respondent, for the said Currants,
and to compute Interest for the same, and to tax the Respondent his Costs to
the day of Hearing.

That since the said Hearing, Respondent's Charge amounts to 8000 l. whereof
only 1100 Dollars confessed by the Respondent to be paid, and not one Penny more
proved to the contrary.
the Respondent, and Appellant have attended the said Master upon the said
Account, and the Respondent's Charge amounted to about 8000 l. as the said
Respondent has sufficiently proved. And neither the said Appellant, nor the
said Gates, have proved one Penny paid toward Satisfaction of the said Currants,
more than what the said Respondent, has in his Examination, confessed, which
amounts to about 1100 Dollars. The Master of the Ship Old African that laded
the Currants, and the Appellant's own Correspondent at Venice, witnesses against
him, in Chancery.


That the said Master being ready to make his Report, Appeal.
the said Appellant, farther to delay the Respondent, has appealed from the
said Decree, and the several Orders made thereupon.

Part of the Appellant's Case.
THat the Respondent (with the Moneys, and Effects sent him, and Mr. Pendarves
his Partner there, and solely upon the said Gates's Account) did Buy, and Lade
the Ship with Currants, for Gates.

That there is not any Proof of the Appellants being concerned with Gates, in
sending for the Currants to the Respondent.

And the Appellant has denied it on his Oath.

Part of Gate's his Commission to the Respondent.
SIR, London, 25th June, 1680.
HAving Ordered Capt. Waters, Which Letter, together with this Commission, came
enclosed in the following Letter from the Appellant; the Original whereof was
stolen from the Respondent by Tavernor, and since that it came into the hands
of the Turkey Company who have it by them.
Commander of my Ship African, to follow your Orders at Zant, as you will
perceive by the enclosed Letter to him -- Advise me from time to time, what
occurs, the whole Design depends upon Secrecy to all other Persons, but your
Self, and Francis Tavernor. I remain,

Your loving Friend, Daniel Gates.

Part of the Appellant's Commission.
SIR, London, 25. June 1680.
You Will have seen by what I have wrote at large, at present and before, how
very unworthily the Morea Committee have been to honest Mr. Pendarves, and I am
resolved to be quits with them if possible. -- Wherefore to be brief, the Ship
African is ordered to be with you by the 10th of August Old Style; and here
enclosed you have an Order from Mr. Gates to Capt. Waters, to follow your
Order. -- If the Ship loads from the Morea, then she is for account of Mr.
Gates and Company, but let it be specified in the Bill of Lading for account of
whom it concerns, which be sure you send to me, the Bill of Lading to be
delivered in Amsterdam in blank -- As soon as this comes to your hands, consult
with Tavernor privately, and send over Lazari to Capparre all the Morea
Currants, under pretense of buying the Theacra Currants. -- I am sure you can
manage this much better, than I can direct you, and do conjure you to do, what
Man can do, in this Matter. -- You must keep it very privately. -- In fine, do
what Man can do to gratify your Friends in this particular; for the Morea
Committee have affronted that good Man so much, that I cannot endure it. -- You
must not mention one word of this to Mr. Bonnel's. -- Draw 8 per Cent.
Commission if she loads in the Morea. -- If ever you will gratify or oblige me,
endeavor to make this Business take effect -- Leave no Stone unturned, and you
shall see how gratefully it shall be resented by,

Your affectionate Friend (...)

Part of the Appellants Bill, against Gates, in the Exchequer.
HUmbly complaining shows -- that in or about the year 1680, the Orator
William War, and one Daniel Gates, Gates kept all the Ships Cargo, and War
sued him in the Exchequer for his share, though neither of them paid the
Respondent.
having trust, and confidence each in the other, did, in Copartnership, and as
equal sharers, Import from the parts beyond the Seas to London in the Ship
called the African, whereof Joseph Waters then was Commander, two hundred and
sixteen Butts, sixty six Carratels, and fifty Quarter Rolls, to the value then
of six thousand pounds, and upwards.

Part of Gates his Answer to the aforesaid Bill.
THIS Defendant says, that the Complainant being justly indebted to the
Defendant in the year 1679. in the sum of 1120 l. steri. -- the Complainant
afterward in the year 1680. proposed to this Defendant, for the accommodation
of the differences that were then on Foot -- then to become Partner with the
Defendant, in the Lading the African Frigate in the Bill mentioned -- And
thereupon it was agreed between the Complainant and the Defendant, that the
said Ship should be Laden with Currants by Mr. John Praed Merchant in Zant, who
was the Complainants Correspondent, and that what Money the Defendant had on
Board the said Ship, should be paid to the said Mr. John Praed toward the
Lading the said Ship, and the Complainant did undertake to pay the Remainder of
the Money -- And it was then also agreed that when the Currants were sold, this
Defendant should be paid all that was, and should be due unto him -- But this
Defendant says, that though this said Complainant did agree, as aforesaid, to
pay the remainder of what the said Ships Lading should amount to, yet the
Complainant never paid any part of the Money, as this Defendant has been
informed by the said Praed, etc. -- After which former agreements, and before
the arrival of the said Ship, the said Complainant became farther indebted to
this Defendant in about one thousand pounds more, and then the Complainant and
Defendant did agree that the Defendant should sell all the said Currants -- And
that this Defendant should be paid all the several sums in the Sehedule
herewith annexed.

Part of the Appellants Affidavit --
THE said Defendant William War makes Oath that when the Currants in question
were shipped, he this Deponent was advised from Zant, that they cost
considerably less, than the Plaintiff does charge them at -- And this Deponent
farther says, that at, or soon after the time of shipping the said Currants,
the Complainant, or the Complainant and Partner did order Mr. Thomas Williams
and Company, residing at Venice, to draw several sums of Money, at several
times, on this Deponent, on account of the said Ship of African Currants now in
question, which this Deponent accordingly paid, and this Deponent witnesses,
who can prove the sending down the said Money to Zant, to the Plaintiff, and
Partner.

Part of the Deposition of Mr. Abraham Anselme, who was Partner with Mr.
Williams at Venice.
ABraham Anselme Gentleman, formerly examined for the Defendant in this Cause,
was on the 25th of November 1692. sworn, and cross examined, deposes and says
--

To the sixth Interogatory this Deponent says, that during the time this
Deponent was at Venice he cannot remember that he, or his Partner Mr. Thomas
Williams did receive any Orders from the Defendant War, or the said Daniel
Gates, or either of them to send down any sum of Money to the Complainant
Praed, upon his Particular account, or that any sum, or sums, of Money
whatsoever was sent down, or remitted upon the said Complainants particular
account, but says, that very considerable sums of Money were sent down, and
remitted, by this Deponent, and his said Partner, by the Order of the Defendant
War and Gates, upon the joint account, to the said Complainant, and one
Pendarves his Partner -- To the seventh Interogatory this Deponent says -- And
farther says, that he believes, that after the lading the aforesaid Currants,
this Deponent and his Partner did receive Orders from the Defendant War, and
the said Gates, not to accept of any more Bills from the Complainant --

A Letter Written by Mr. Williams to the Respondent.
SIR, Venice 17th July 1681.
WE have yours 10th June, with a Bill on our selves for the 6000 Dollars which
we shall draw forwards on Mr. Dan. Gates, This Money was never sent to me nor
to Mr. Pendarves. And War (by a mistake) produced a Letter from Williams
before the Master in Chancery, wherein Williams wrote him how he had trickt me
about the 6000 Dollars.
and send you the same per Captain Paxton, consigning it to your self.

Part of the Deposition of Captain Waters Commander of the African aforesaid
AND this Deponent farther says, that the price of Currants at the Morea was
then three Dollars, and three quarters per Sack, as this Deponent verily
believes; for that he then paid at that rate himself for Currants he bought
there.

Parts of several Letters from Mr. War persuading me to come Home for several
pretended reasons. Which were never paid.

SIR, London 1st. April 1681.
*THE Moneys you have drawn on account of the Old African should have been on
Mr. Gates, and therefore what you have further to draw on that account, let it
be on him, and that you may be sure of his compliance, His design was under
pretense of Vindicating Mr. Pendarves to have me ruined for a reason, as I may
hereafter show the World.
the Currants you shall load on the Zanteote let come Hypothecated to Mr. Walter
Atwood for payment of the same; though at Venice I am sure* Williams has Order
to accept and pay whatever you draw; -- You will hear how the Turkey Company
have dealt with you upon account of the Morea Commission, they have made a
Decree of Court that no Man of them all shall employ you for the future under
the penalty of 20 per cent.

SIR, London 4th April, 1681. Here he contradicts himself.

WHAT Currants you are to load for Gates consign to Mr. John Banks, And yet
Gates and he protested our Bill then after for 3000 Dollars.
writing a formal Letter with them, and let all come under my Covert. But I
have taken care that there is effectual Credit for you at Venice; therefore do
not hypothecate, but consign the Currants to Mr. John Banks.

SIR, London 8th June 1681.
I Hope this may find you well arrived at Venice, in order to your proceeding
home, which pray prosecute with all expedition, for we shall have a Parliament
speedily, that will smoke off the Company; for they will pay dearly for their
(...) day.

Now you must know that Gates plays the Rog^^ (...) therefore be sure you
hypothicate all his Currants under (...)vert, and then I Will handle him well
enough. (...)
In case you (...) not home your self, send a Procure to Mr. Edward Ambrose to
demand Twenty thousand Dollars of Gates, and Damages, (...) Advice (...), I
should have Paid for my Folly.
and (...) he shall Pay for his Knavery in due time. Be sure you consider well
of this Affair; but if you come in Person, all will be immediately effected,
which I entreat you to do, and to settle all Matters besides; for you see all
Letters are directed to Mr. Pendarves only; therefore pray fail not to come
Home, without one Minutes delay. I will provide When he had broke it.
the House good Business. Be sure you bring all Gates his Letters with you. --

SIR, London, 22 July, 1681.
BE sure you send me two Procures, one in the Name of Mr. Ambrose, and another
in my Name; and send me the Originals of Gates his Letters per first. Another
Project that I might have nothing to show for my Money.
But if you come your self, all will be adjusted in 24 Hours; for Gates plays
the Rogue with me most abominably; Therefore, I say, that you must come Home;
if not, there is nothing to be done with him. --

I have Paid your Bills in near Four Thousand Pounds sterling, And yet he never
Paid one Penny.
and have not received one Penny of Gates; therefore I beseech you to come Home.
Come away immediately, and all will be well; otherwise I must redraw on you. --

SIR, London, 5th August, 1681.
I Do much wonder you continue Drawing, I must Re-charge it on you again. And
though he would not Pay my Bills, I was constrained by my Circumstances to Pay
his.
I have this day Drawn on you 2000 Ducats, payable to Mr. Williams. --

SIR, London, 14th October. 1681.
UNderstanding you are returned from Venice to Zant, and are not coming Home, I
will accept no more Bills. I am almost quite distracted, and know not what to
do, nor what I write, when had you come Home, all had been obviated. Now I know
not what to write, nor what to do. You must make the best shift you can; but
unless you come home, nothing can be done. --

SIR, London, 27th September, 1681.
I Have all yours to the 5th of September, and am quite distracted when I
consider under what Circumstances we all lie, and all by your not coming Home,
as I begged and entreated you; and what should possess you not to do it, I
cannot tell. -- Mr. Bonnel is willing with all his heart. And yet Mr. Bonnel
writ me the contrary by the same Post.
Wherefore I pray, and beseech you to come away -- Once more, I beseech you,
for Gods sake to come Home; for we have a Partner in our Eye, that will bring
good Business to the House. But nothing can be done, unless you come Home, for
Gates plays the Knave so damnably with me, that I cannot help my self, by
reason of your losing That Letter Tavernor stole from me, before he ran away
with the rest of the Things. But there were many Stories made about it.
the Letter out of your Pocket. Therefore you must come Home. I can say no
more, but expecting to see you Home speedily, I remain,

SIR, Your Disconsolate, but ever Affectionate faithful Friend till Death,
Will. War.

Part of a Letter from Mr. War to Mr. Pendarves and my Self, being the last
that he wrote us.
SIRS, London, 30th Jan. 1681/2.
AS this is a very Sad day, so my Subject is more -- And also by the not coming
Home of Mr. Praed, when I wrote to him so earnestly, and told him so plainly,
that otherwise it would be the Ruin of us all. -- After the Ships were gone.
Then I begged you to secure your selves against that Base Fellow Gates, whose
Unfaithfulness in a great measure has been the Occasion of all our
Misfortunes; but your neglecting that, to show favor to such a known Villain,
was a Madness. If my Throat had been Cut, th^^, and the other Pretension would
have stood him in good stead.
I have Paid on Mr. Praed's Bills, l. 4500. Sterling and am not imbursed one
farthing; for this unworthy Ga^es keeps all in his hands, and says, he will
render an Account to Mr. Praed, and I cannot sue him for fear of worser
Consequences. -- For being proved Pe^jur^d to the Turkey-Company.
I hope in God yet, upon Mr. Praed's coming Home, all things may be
accommodated; for, I Protest to God, I am almost out of my Senses, and upon the
Brink of Despair; which might have been all prevented, had Mr. Praed come home.
I have been pursued by the Turkey-Company to the utmost Ruin of Man, both in
Point of Credit, and every thing else. In fine, I am quite distracted, and
(...)eart is quite broke. However, there is a God in Heaven, who knows my
Sincerity to all Men. --

A Letter from Mr. Williams to Mr. Bonnells.
SIR, Venice, 14th October 1681.
MR. Praed you will have seen departed for Zant, according to our Council to
him, This Mr. Williams, in his Wine, confessed the whole Plot to me.
for that we apprehended his going for England might (as you imagined) prove of
Mischievous Consequence; and truly, what then we only suspected, we now fear to
be real. Wherefore we humbly conceive, you will do a worthy part to endeavor
to prevent those Evils threatening him -- We have adventured (as a common
Friend) thus freely to speak our sense. -- We do not question, but your
Prudence will not only bury in secrecy this hint, but likewise direct you to
such Courses, whereby our said Friend at Zant, may have farther Proofs of your
fatherly Kindness for him, and our selves that content of being desirous of his
Good, And yet he did me all the ill Offices that lay in his Power.
and our Friend's Prosperity.

Part of an Intercepted Letter from Mr. War to Mr. Fran. Taverner.
London, 13th May, 1681.
I Have yours under Vitals Cover. -- The African is bound out again upon the
old Design. Wherefore order Lazari to provide his Bows and Arrows, for this
will be a Trial of Skill, and must be managed with dexterity: But Mr. Fendarves
know nothing of the Matter, that so he may always Plead Innocence. And pray
endeavor by all means to keep him a Year or two longer there, that so I may
have time to re-establish all things to yours, and Mr. Yard's Advantage; but if
he comes home, I can do nothing for you.

I am heartily glad to hear that Mr. Praed is coming for Venice. It Is what I
desired. Tell him from me, (as a Friend, if he be not gone off) that, when he
comes home, we will rout Sir Clement Harby, Horse and Foot, and that his Father
(being a Parliament Man) will make a heavy to do in the House about his ill
Usage, as Mr. Pendarves his Father did, when he was like to be Slain by the
Proveditor, who thereupon was made to give him Satisfaction. --

Parts of two Letters from Mr. Gates to Mr. Pendarves and my Self.
SIRS, London, May 26th, 1682.
I Have yours 13th October, and 22th February; and am Sorry you should be any
ways prejudiced for want of a just compliance with what is your due. -- I shall
wait your reply, and if you can give me Satisfaction, I resolve to deal justly,
by the Blessing of God, both with you, and all Men.

SIRS, London, the 20th October. 1682.
I Have yours, 1st October. -- The sole Reason why I did not accept your Bill,
was because Mr. War refused to accept what was drawn on him. And whereas you
hint that I am so great a Debtor to your Mr. Praed, I do not know of One Penny
that I owe him in all the World. What has passed between him, and Mr. War
about the Lading of the Old African in the Morea, Gates kept the Currants, and
War kept the Accounts: and both kept me out of my Money.
I am ignorant of. I still say, I have no Account, Invoyce, nor Bill of Lading
for said Goods; so that if Mr. Praed be any ways prejudiced, he may thank
himself, and at last must find his Effects in the hands of Mr. War; who, I am
afraid has intrigu'd both me, and you too. -- I add no more, but desiring God
to bless you, and keep you, and deliver you well out of the hands of Mr. War.
I abide,

Your Loving Friend Dan. Gates.

Parts of some Letters from Mr. Pendarves to me.
Zant, 2 March, 1682. -- I find Gates and War are both agreed to keep you out
of your Right; and I the rather believe it, because I hear that Gates his
Servant is coming out into Partnership with Warre's Man Taverner. --

Zant, 15 April 1683. -- I writ you also, That Taverner was suddenly bound out
again from England to this place, and that he railed against his Master War
most bitterly; but whether it is in Earnest, or in Jest, I cannot tell.

Zant, 8 June 1683. -- From Taverner there are several Letters to his
Confederates here, still railing (as they pretend) against the ill Treatment of
his Master War; and yet he writes, That Gates his Man is coming out to be his
Partner. They are all agreed, like a Company of etc's. as they are. --

Part of a Letter from Mr. Pendarves, sent by me to Mr. War.
Zant, 20th September 1682.
I Can hear Nothing from you but by daily Protests, as to which I shall say
little, until I hear from the Bearer, who, (let People say what they please)
has done as much as Man could do for you; and if you render him Evil for so
much Good, what in the Name of God will the World think of you? I think, since
the Creation of the World never was the like Action committed by Merchants, as
has been committed by Gates, and you against him. --

And now I shall proceed to another Subject; namely, your Man Mr. Taverner.
Harby, and he are now Sworn Brothers, and the rest of the Fraternity are all
his Favorers, though he has been found Guilty of many Malefacts, and even of
Premeditated Murder. --

First, In designing to kill his Lady, Wife, or Whore, or what you please, two
Years since, though he now lives publicly with her. And this was to be done by
Pattore, and himself at a Salazza. Not. Grantham (then his beloved, and now in
our House) was the first Discoverer thereof. And how many times he has been
the Occasions of her Pissing Bones, is best known to himself. --

And now let me come to tell you of another Plot of this Gentleman's, and that
was to Murder Mr. Praed. And who should be the Men to commit it, but Pattore,
Speri, and Clathi, (Persons well known to your self.) Clathi, with others, was
seen several times about the House, with Pistols, to dispatch him. And if it
could (...) be executed as he slept in his Chamber, and by your Good Man Mr.
Francis Taverner. To which end and purpose, he had made him a Pair of Shoes of
Hat. -- But you may very well question how we came to hear of so many
Particulars of the Business. Why, one of his own Confederates, even Pattore by
Name, confessed all, and was thereafter Killed himself: Whereof the Bearer will
give you a better account, and to him I refer you. --

Part of the Depositions of William Ceely Gent. and of Signieur Eliezer Trevese.
William Ceely Gent. to the 3d, 4th, 5th, 7th, 8th and 10th Interrogatory,
Deposes as follows:

(3.) TO the Third Interrogatory, this Deponent says, That he does know Mr.
Francis Taverner of Zant, and says, that it was publicly reported, That the
said Taverner stole away Mr. Pendarves's, and the now Complainant's Cash-Books,
and several other Things out of their House; And says that he was present, and
heard the said Taverner confess, and declare to the said Mr. Pendarves, That he
took the said Books, and threw them out of a Window to a Porter, or some
Person, who carried them away by his Order: Upon which, the said Mr. Pendarves
asked the said Taverner, why he did so? To which he replied, That he had as
much to do with the Books as the said Pendarves had, for that he was entrusted
by his Master (meaning the now Defendant War) and more says not to this
Interrogatory.

(4.) To the Fourth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That there being a
Combination at Zant, between the said Taverner, and several other Factors
there, to defraud their Principals, and the Complainant refusing to be
concerned in such Ill Designs with them; and discovering the same, the said
Taverner, and several other Factors there, did, as much as in them lay, to
Discredit the said Complainant. And more says not to this Interrogatory.

(5.) To the Fifth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he does know very
well William Wait in this Interrogatory named, and enquired of, who is a
Factor at Zant. And says, That the said Mr. Wait did Inform this Deponent,
That the Defendant (...) to ruin the said Complainant; and the said Mr.
Pendarves. And that there was not any thing done in Prejudice of the said
Complainant, and the said Pendarves, but what was done by the Order, or
Approbation of the Defendant War, or to the very same Effect. And more says
not to this Interrogatory, saving that the said Wait also told this Deponent,
That he had seen a Letter from the Defendant War, to the said Taverner;
wherein he wrote, Be sure you mind your Business there, and let me alone with
the Asses here; or to that effect.

(7.) To the Seventh Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he does very well
know it was generally reported, That there was a Petition for the Banishment of
the Complainant and Partner Mr. Pendarves. And this Deponent the better knows
the same, for that he was at Zant, when the Complainant lived there, as a
Factor; and this Deponent says, That he does verily believe that the Petition
now produced and shown to him this Deponent at this the time of his
Examination, marked No 2. is the same Original Petition. And says, that he
has heard several Persons in Zant declare, That they knew the Handwriting of
several Persons whose Names are thereto Subscribed, was of their own
Handwriting. And this Deponent heard several Persons tell the said
Complainant, and the said Mr. Pendarves, of the said now produced Petition, and
they promised them to get the Petition, if they could, from the Person that
kept the same; which accordingly they did, and brought the same to the
Complainant, and the Deponent and another Person, Translated the same into
English. And this Deponent has read over the said Petition, and does believe
the Contents thereof to be true; It being the Duty of a Factor to act, as much
as he can, for the Benefit, and Advantage, of his Principal; which this
Deponent very well knows the Complainant did: And more says not to this
Interrogatory.

(8.) To the Eighth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he Living with the
Complainant at Zant, does very well know that the Complainant was informed that
the said Taverner, and others, in Confederacy as aforesaid, had a Design to
Kill the Complainant, for that he disvovered their Design of defrauding their
Principals, as aforesaid. And says, That one Pattore (who confessed he was
Employed, with one Spery, and Clathy, by the said Taverner, to Kill the
Complainant) discovered the said Design to the Complainant. And says, That the
said Pattore was, some short time after, Shot, and died thereby, for
discovering the same. And says, That the said Spery did likewise Inform the
Complainant of the said Design (...) they had to Kill him. And says, That
Taverner Promised them a Hundred Dollars to do the same. And further this
Deponent says, That the said Taverner, in Discourse with this Deponent,
touching the said Design of Killing the Complainant, said, That the Rogue
Pattore had already received God's Judgment for his Villainy in discovering the
same, and doubted not but Spery would also, and soon after the said Spery was
Killed. And more says not to this Interrogatory.

(10.) To the Tenth Interrogatory this Deponent says, that he does very well
know Moses Trevese, Vice-Consul for the English at Zant, in this Interrogatory
named, and enquired of: And says, That he has credibly heard, and verily
believes that the said Moses Trevese was Assaulted, and Wounded, and in great
danger of being Killed, for speaking in Vindication of the Complainant; For
this Deponent says, That the said Moses Trevese told this Deponent, that about
five Men set upon him in the Night time, and, if a Banished man Armed had not
come in, he had been Killed. And more says not to this Interrogatory; Saving
that one Alexander Vital, a Jew, told this Deponent, That one Mr. Tho.
Cordell, a Factor, confessed to him, that he was the Cause of the said Assault,
on the said Moses Trevese, and had given Orders for his being Killed, or at
least for the Cutting off one of his Hands; for that he spoke in the Praise, or
Vindication of the Complainant.

(11.) To the Eleventh Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he does very
well know Mrs. Jefferyes, Wife of Mr. John Jefferyes at Zam, in the
Interrogatory named, and enquired of; And says, That he being at the said Mr.
Jefferyes House with him, and Mr. Chester Cordell, the said Mrs. Jefferyes
asked this Deponent if he had seen that Infamous Book of that Infamous Rogue
your Kinsman Mr. Praed, meaning the now Complainant. The said Mr. Praed, having
wrote a Book to the Merchants at London, touching the Design and Actions of the
Factory at Zant to defraud their Principals Whereupon, the said Mr. Jefferyes
her Husband said, He has clawed us all of^ I says; Thereupon Mrs. Jefferyes
said, It is well he is gone for England, otherwise he should not go without
leaving that Arm behind him that wrote the said Book. To which the said Mr.
Chester Cordell replied, Madam Have a care what you say, for if he comes here
again, and any harm befalls him, you may be questioned for your words Unto
which she replied, Here again, No. no, he will never come here again; if he
does, to be sure Ca^sa. and others, whom he has Abused in his Infamous Book,
will be revenged on him: And more says not, etc.

Signior Eliezer Trevese to the 3d, 4th, 6th, 7th, 8th, 9th, 10th
Interrogatories, Deposes as follows, viz.
(3.) TO the Third Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he was Servant to
the Complainant, and lived with him at Zam. -- And this Deponent does very well
know Mr. Francis Taverner. -- And says that it was publicly reported, That
the said Taverner stole away Mr. Pendarves's, and the now Complainant's
Cash-Books, and several other things, out of their House at Zant: And more
says not to this Interrogatory.

(4.) To the Fourth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That the said
Complainant was much discredited when he was at Zant, by the Factory there; for
that he was honest, and just, and acted for the benefit, and good of his
Principals, and refused to act otherwise, and to be concerned with them in a
Combination, or Contrivance, how to Cheat their Principals, and for that he
discovered the same: And more says not to this Interrogatory.

(6.) To the Sixth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That within a Year last
past (as this Deponent remembers the time to be) he, this Deponent, meeting
with the Complainant in London, the said Complainant, and this Deponent went
into the Swan-Tavern in Cornhil, and drank a Glass of Wine; and, as they came
out of the Tavern, meeting with the Defendant War, the Complainant asked him,
if he would drink a Glass of Wine? and the Defendant War said, Yes, with all
his heart; upon which, the said Complainant and Defendant War, and this
Deponent, went into the Swan-Tavern again; and, as they were drinking a Glass
of Wine, the now Complainant very much complained of the Defendant Warre's ill
dealing with him, in keeping his Money from him. At first the Defendant War
seemed to say, That he was not the only Person that wronged him; but soon
afterward the said Defendent War declared, and said, That all he had in the
World, and himself, and putting his hand to his Throat, said, and this too,
lies at your Service. And more says not to this Interrogatory.

(7.) To the Seventh Interrogatory this Deponent says, that he does know, that
it was generally reported in Zant, That there was a Petition for the Banishment
of the Complainant, and Partner, Mr. Pendarves, and this Deponent the better
knows the same, for that he lived with the Complainant, when Factor there: And
this Deponent verily believes that the Petition (...) showed to him, this
Deponent, at this the time of his Examination, marked No. (2.) Is the same
Original Petition; for this Deponent says, That he is acquainted with the
Handwriting of several Persons, whose Names are thereto Subscribed, and
believes their Names thereto Subscribed, are of their respective proper
Handwriting, and the reason of the said now produced Petition was as this
Deponent has heard, and believes; because the said Complainant would not agree
with the Factory, to wrong, and deceive their Principals. And more says not to
this Interrogatory.

8. To the Eighth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That he does know that the
Complainant was in danger of being Killed at Zant, by some Persons, that some
of the Factory had employed to do the same; because the said Complainant had
discovered how the Factory wronged their Principals; and says, That one
Pattore, and Spery, two of the Persons employed to Kill the Complainant,
discovered the said Design to the Complainant; and says, That the said Pattore
was soon after shot, and died thereby, for his discovering the same. And more
says not to this Interrogatory.

(9.) To the Ninth Interrogatory this Deponent says. That the Complainant and
his Servants (immediately after the said Discovery) did go Armed, in order to
prevent the Complainant's being Killed; and this Deponent, as one of the
Complainant's Servants, went Armed with him. And more says not to this
Interrogatory.

(10.) To the Tenth Interrogatory this Deponent says, That Moses Trevese, in
this Interrogatory named, and enquired of, is this Deponent's Father; and this
Deponent very well knows, that his said Father was Assaulted, and Wounded,
and in danger of losing his Life, for speaking in Vindication of the
Complainant, and had one of his Fingers cut off and, if he had not stepped back,
had certainly been Killed. And more, to this Interrogatory, says not.

A Letter from Mr. Pendarves.
Zant, the 5th of June, 1683.
I Am told, that Taverner should Write to his Friends here, that I should
Advise you of the Action done unto Moses, which then I mistrusted only was done
by Mr. Cordell; but now it is certainly known that the said Cordell was the
Occasion thereof for he has not only confessed it to his Friends, but he also
sent a Message by Vital, to Moses in a Vaunting Nature, to tell him so much,
and that he merited more.

A Letter from Mr. Ceely.
Zant, May the 13th. 1683.
YOu may Peruse my former Letters, speaking of the great danger your Friend
Moses was in of losing his Life. About four or five days since, Vital told
Moses, that Cordell confessed to him, that he was the Occasion of that Assault,
and that he had given Orders to Capsa to Kill him, or at least to cut off one
of his Hands, for that Moses had discoursed basely of him to the Captains, and
told them, That there never came such a Man upon the Place as -- for that he
had found out such things, as never were discovered, and now all their Roguery
did appear, and for many other things else, which he, the said Cordell, was
resolved to be revenged on him for. --

A Letter from Sir John Buckworth to Sir Clement Harby, late Consul of Zant.
SIR, London, the 18th of March, 1681.
I Am now to acquaint you, That the Turkey-Company have writ His Majesty's
Ambassadador; That they have chosen you Consul of the Morea, and have desired
him to furnish you with Barratts, and all other necessary Commands; so that,
before we have done we hope to make War repent of his Knavery; and, when
Pendarves comes home, he must expect the like Proceedings against him. -- And
as for Praed, the Company were but Yesterday, very hardly, prevailed with to
forbear making an Order, at the General Court, That no Turkey-Merchant shall
Employ him any more, as a Factor (either at Zant, or any where else) under the
Penalty of Paying Twenty per Cent. on all Goo^s bought by him, and have only
respited that Order for Five Months, upon his Master's Promise, That he shall
acknowledge his Fault, and discover to the Company the whole Truth; which if he
does not, and ask their Pardon, if I hold the Place I am in, I shall miss of my
Mark, if I procure not such an Act of Court against him.

A Letter without Date from M. Simon Baxter, Mercha^^ in London.
I Have Three of yours before me, all Dated in October from Venice, which came
safe to my hands at my Arrival at (...) noua; but I had not time to thank you
for your great Civilitie^ I waited upon your Master with your Letter. He
desired me walk into his Counting House; and having read what you wro^^ he
supposed I could give him a farther Account: At which was much surprised, you
having not acquainted me with a(...) thing you had written.

Then he asked me, what made you come from Zant to V^^nice? I told him, I heard
you were Banished, and, for what could understand, it was for nothing else but
for being too Ze^lous, and Faithful in serving them, and other Friends. I did
(...)large my self upon that Point, and told him how much I w^^ satisfied in
your Justice, and Truth; and that if there was a^ Honest Man living Abroad --
At which, your good O(...) Master smiled, and said, That he was infinitely
satisfied in you Fidelity; and withal told me, That if I could give the same
Account to Sir John Buckworth, as I had given to him, I should (...) you a
great deal of Service. I answered, that I should be ve^^ ready to serve you;
but desired his Excuse in that, as not being so well acquainted with Sir John;
but should watch an Opportunity to Discourse some Member of the Turkey-Company,
th^^ might possibly hand it to him. And accordingly I met wit^ Sir William
Royston, my Kinsman, who is related to, and ver^ intimate with, Sir John. And
one Evening I met Sir William, an^ Mr. George Vanham, when I took occasion to
discourse of you To which Mr. Vanham replied, That the Turkey-Company we^^ very
angry with you, and that a little before, Sir Samuel Dash wood (a Member of
that Company) showed him a Copy of (...) Letter which (if it was true)
demonstrated you to be a very Ill Man, (...) Crime nor my Accuser.
and he feared you could not excuse your self.

A Translation of the Petition for the Banishment of Mr. Pendarves, and my
self, as it was Proved, and Read in the Court of Chancery.
Most Illustrious Regiment, and most Worshipful Magistrates of Zant,
Whereas the Foundation of the Sustenance of the Subjects of Zant, consists in
the Sale of their Currants, from whence the Public Eranio receives to great
Profit, in respect of the Customs, the Public Polity have made many Laws
against the Plots that were laid, and executed by the English Merchants, in
Prejudice of the said Interest.

Amongst the Merchants of that Nation, inhabiting this City, we find Mr.
Pendarves, and his Partner to attend nothing more than to destroy this Trade,
and make themselves Masters of the Livelihood of the People. So much have they
done (omitting their former Actions) that last Year (the Samuel and Henry being
consigned to them) they borrowed Currants already Sold, hoping, for Repayment of
the same, to have them at such inconsiderable Prices, as themselves should
propose.

The Year Current, Mr. John Jefferyes, and Mr. Thomas Cordell, Cappar'd the
Nathalico Currants, for the Morea Company, to be laden on the Britain. But the
Ship, called the Old African, arriving before her, This was a pretension of the
Factors to Defame Mr. Pendarves.
the said Pendarves, and his Partner, sent over Signior Lazari, upon the said
Ship, to load those Currants, and thereby to lower the price of our Currants;
which the said Old African was, at first, intended to load. For the Britain,
being an Unfree ship, was forced to depart, almost empty, to the most Notorious
Detriment of the Public, and considerable Disadvantage of the Private Interest.

Nor did the Coutrivance of that House, against these Islands, This was to stir
up the Mob.
end here, but they had formed a Plot to Infect the People with the Plague,
that to the fear thereo might force them to Sell their Fruit, at Ten, or Twelve
Dollars a Thousand; for a Ship called the Zantiot, which they Threatened, and
would Adventure to Detain until August next, on purpose to lower the Price.
Notwithstanding that, on the Seventh of that Month, Mr. Thomas Cordell bought
By a Sham Contract.
at Nineteen, though the Ship, intended to load them, was not yet arrived; as
that of Pendarves, and Praed was, who declared, that the Ship should stay for
New Currants, if we would not Sell the Old, as aforesaid. The which astonished
the Inclination of the rest of the English Factors, who expected Ships
likewise; and will not only be a great Prejudice to the Price of the New (there
being above a Million and half of the Old) Currants unsold, They pretended at
first 50 Dollars a Thousand, and we bought them at last for 12.
but will also prove a very Considerable Loss to the Public Patrimony; for as
much as the Fischal Chamber will lose much the more of the Public Imposts.

Now the Conspiracies, Villainies, and Intreagues of this Nature, which Mr.
Pendarves, and his Partner, carry on, do make the whole Island Exclaim against
them, and Necessitate Us underwritten to approach the Presence of your most
Illustrious Gravity, to represent the Grievances thereof, making most humble
Instance that Signior Michel Mounigo, and Signior Giacoma Sciuro, Ambassadors
chosen by our most Worshipful Community, may have Orders, from this Magnificent
Council, to appear at the Feet of the Public Majesty, and, in the Name of Us,
and the whole Island, to Implore, that there may be a Decree made by the most
Excellent Senate of Venice, for the Banishment of that House from these
Islands; That so they may never more be Admitted into the Trade thereof.

Constantin Minotto, suplico. Anastasio Siquro, suplico. Zanne Bernardachi,
suplico. Silivestro Raftopullo, suplico. Costantin Macri, suplico. Theodoro
Gubeno, suplico. Michel Mandricardi, suplico. Stellio Raftopullo, suplico.
Draco Matessi, suplico. Antonio Barsso, suplico. Carlo Mocenigo, suplico.
Constantin Logotheti, sup quanto disopra. Nicolo Mandricardi Kr. suplico.
Antonio Boldu, suplico. Nicolo Calofono, suplico. Cosmo Manessi, suplico.
Stamatelo Servo, suplico. Anastasio Micano, suplico. Zuanne Logotheti, suplico.
Zorzi Draco, suplico. Nicolo Sicuro, suplico. Aloisio Soliman, suplico. Zuanne
Soliman, suplico. Anastasio di Garzoni, suplico. Zuanne Agiapostolititi,
suplico. Nicolo Mocenigo, suplico. Diego di Zuffi, suplico. Eustachio
Logotheti, suplico. Andrea de Garzoni, suplico. (...). Aluise Romanzan,
suplico. Anastasio Barbiani, suplico. Gio. Francisco Mendino, suplico.
Eustachio Melisurgo, suplico. Nicolo Barbiani, suplico. Zorzi Sicuro, suplico.
Giacomo Sicuro, suplico. Giacomo Sumachi, suplico. Giacomo Chrisoplevri,
suplico. Zorzi Cacomali, suplico. Giorgio Zeleman, suplico. Marco Venturin,
suplico. Domenico Gambara suplico quanto disopra. Paulo de Zuffi, suplico.
Anzolo Locadello, suplico. Zuanne Lefcochelo, suplico. Baseglio Barbiani,
suplico. Vizenzo Minotto, suplico. Nicolo Logotheti, suplico. Giorgio Rafti,
suplico. Stamatela Russo, suplico. Bortolomeo Belloni, suplico. (...). Zorzi
Rucani, suplico. Strizolio Summachi, suplico. Zuane Trompetti, suplico. Zuane
Belliatti, suplico. Stamati Scordili, suplico. Antonio Da^agliaro, suplico.
(...). Carlo Pupillo Colla, suplico. Nicolo Balsamo, suplico. Bellisario
Catellano, suplico. Anastasio Tuselo, suplico. Giacomo Pellicano, suplico.
Theodoro Stavrachi, suplico. Nicolo Milioti, suplico. Cannello Mauritio,
suplico. Zuanne Motta, suplico. Zuanne Papadopulla, suplico. Aluife Trompetti,
suplico quanto di sopra


Part of a Letter from Mr. War about the Ships Lading, for which the
precedent Petition was preferred for our Banishment.
London, 5th August, 1681.
I Observe what you have resolved on about the Zantiot, which I, and all the
World here, do mightily approve of.

Part of a Letter, from Signior Cosma, (a Cunning Zantiot) sent by me to his
Quondam Friend, and great Acquaintance Mr. William War, when the said Mr.
War Wrote to me to come to Venice, and from thence Home. I suspected the
Importance thereof, and found it was written by the Antiphrasis of his Fancy,
to render my Condition ridiculous to him that made it so; and not according to
the Pretensions of the Style.
Zant, 5 Nov. 1681.
THough you will have all the News from Mr. Praed, the Bearer hereof; yet I
also must tell you, Che per mano del medesimo e della sua gran sapienza (as he
Ironically calls it) habiamo person tutte le nostre sostanze. I also, in
particular, am a Sufferer, by his keeping the Zantiot, about Three Months in
Port, a Trick that was never Played here, to take our Currants from us at so
base a Price. I had thought once to have sent mine to you for my own Account,
Se been tanto mi sarebe andata in fumo Mandarla, They are his own words.
come haverla venduta a questo Signior Praed; Per che tanto sarai scotato
costa, quanto che mi sono Brusato da questo Signiore. -- I recommend it to you,
as a Favor to us, that, at his Arrival, you would procure, by all means, to
keep him there, He spoke and acted better sense and (...) than he writ here.
e darli altri Impiegi, in altri Negotii, piu grandi, per altri paesi; for we
are Poor enough already, and all this Gentleman's Study, and Application, is to
make us more Miserable. When you lived here, we prayed for your Departure, and
your Absence, and truly it happened accordingly, to our great Consolation; but
could you not therefore send us a worser Plague than this, Tanto nel racomando
per gratia, quanto pesso, che nou si lascia a tornare in questa Casa. --

A Letter from Mr. Ceely.
Zant, April the 10th, 1683.
SInce you went hence, and could regain so little Credit at Home, all things
are transacted openly, which were carried on before with so much secrecy, and
Cunning; and it is as Wonderful, as it is Shameful, to see how they value
themselves on their Out-witting the Merchants, and those that have adventured
so far on their Accounts, etc.

The Conclusive Part of a Letter from Mr. Pendarves, written a little before
the Disuniting of The Union, and the The Octo were Eight Merchants, who joined
with the Factors of Venice, and Zant, and made up The Union (as they called it)
to Ingross all the Currants, notwithstanding they were preadvised of an
Intention, at Zant, etc. to trick them, which broke The Octo all to pieces.
Octo; Names well known upon the Exchange of London.
Zant, the 3d of Sept. 1684.
-- And now, or never, is the time for you to make appear to all in England,
the Sincerity of your Actions here at Zant, which by me shall not be done, they
having been already too incredulous to our Reports in times past. --

FINIS.

