AN ESSAY ON THE Coin and Commerce OF THE KINGDOM, Trade and Treasure (Which
are Twins) Being the only SUPPORTERS thereof NEXT TO Religion and Justice.

For the Merchandise of it is better than the Merchandise of Silver, and the
Gain thereof than fine Gold.

LONDON, Printed and Published for the Consideration of the Present and Future
Sessions of Parliament, 1695.

To the High Court of Parliament, and particularly to the Grand Committee of
Trade appointed (Mart. 19 Feb. 94.) to sit every Tuesday, Thursday, and
Saturday, in the Afternoon; and to the Honorable Committee appointed to
receive Proposals for prevention of Clipping and Coining.
SIRS,
SInce I expose the following Particulars for the Public Good, and do most
humbly submit them to your Honorable Protection, I hope no particular Person
will be displeased with me for relating only what some others think fit to say,
etc.

PART I.
I.
SOmetimes before the late Revolution I have heard the S AVH of some other
Countries compare the English in many parallel respects to the Jews and Greeks.

Two Nations very honorable and brave in their Ancestry, but Ignoble and Base
in the Degeneracy of their Descendants, for which they now both suffer, both
under a Heathen and a Christian Yoke, from which Good Lord deliver us.

And it should be the oftener in our Litany, because the Wise Venetians (more
worthily than the others) do value themselves on a prospect of futurity at a
very great distance, and will never (in their Senate) enact any thing as to
day, until they consider, and see what will come of it to morrow, etc.

II.
The Form and State of the Jewish Government was often changed, its Luster
obscured, and its Puissance and Grandeur lessened and impaired according to the
Degrees of the People's Transgressions.

Who drew Iniquity with Cords of Vanity, and sinned as it were with a Cart-rope.

For which their Silver was turned into Dross, and their Justice into Wormwood;
their Cities were burned with Fire, their Lands Strangers devoured it in their
presence, the People were oppressed every one by another, and the rewards of
their own hands were given them.

And at last they were entirely left without a Scepter, and brought under the
Roman Yoke, as our Religion had lately been, had not the Providence of God
protected it by means of his Heroic and most Excellent Majesty, and his late
most religious and Royal Consort of Famous and Everlasting Memory.

III.
And as the Jews were, so were the Greeks, who became first so careless of
their Honor, and afterward of their Countrey's, (minding at last only their
private) Interest, that when they lost Coiro Docastron they laughed at it, and
slightingly said (by way of Preface and Introduction to their future Misfortune
and Distress) That it signified but (as the words do) a Pig-stye.

But soon after the Turks taught them by woeful Experience, to understand what
it is not to understand and redress Grievances in their prime, before they come
to an irreparable pass.

IV.
The great Grievances which now we all complain of (and not a little but much
too late) are our Clipped Silver and Dross-money, and our decay of Treasure and
Trade together.

And since four such sad Calamities have befallen this Kingdom in such a time
of War, let us first enquire into the Causes of them, the knowledge of the
Cause being the first step to the Care.

Now the general Cause of so general a Calamity (not altogether unlike that of
the Jews and Greeks, both in Cause and Effect) must needs be first our general
Degeneracy, and our little regard to Religion, Grievances, Trade and Justice,
for which there are appointed four principal Committees at the opening of every
Sessions of Parliament.

V.
And here it may be noted that the Dutch, etc. have of late Years exhausted
both Money and Goods from us, and have paid us for both but in our own Coin, I
mean (...) Money as they Coined and Clipped for such kind of Commerce.
A particular (and a very considerable) Cause of the decay of our Treasure in
general (I mean of our Money and Manufacture) is the Over balance of Trade,
which the greatest part of the Wiser World have long since gained from us, and
whereby they have exhausted our Treasure, either in Bills, Money, Bullyon or
Goods, which (as some of them especially have managed the Matter) has been
almost equal gain to them, and the like loss to us.

For if (for instance) we import one Year with another, Goods to the value of
Three Millions Sterling, and do export Goods but to the value of Two Millions,
the Nation must yearly lose a Million one way or another, and will be in the
same State and Condition of a Gentlemen, that spends Fifteen hundred Pounds a
Year out of a Thousand Pounds per Annum, if Matters be not remedied.

In Edward the Third's time the English had the Over-balance of Trade in their
favor; and that King having prohibited the Exportation of our Wool, ordained
new Coin for Convenience, etc. having the Advantage of War by that Advantage of
Trade; and having many Volunteers (for Men's Courage sympathize with their Coin
as it is base or noble) invaded France with a Valiant and Victorious Army, and
was the first King that Quartered the Arms of France with those of England.

England, under Queen Elizabeth, had likewise great Advantages in War with
Spain, etc. by means of the Advantage it then also had in Trade, as well as it
has by Nature and Situation.

But in the four latter Reigns which succeeded hers, and preceeded his present
Majesty's, ( in a slothful and drowsy Peace as my Lord Bacon calls it in his
Advancement of Learning) the Princes and their People (like one another)
neglecting first the Reformed Religion, next the Justice, then the Trade, and
at last the Treasure of the Nation (as well as the State of War which Queen
Elizabeth left it in) did lose in general not only their Courage, but so much
of their Coin and other Treasure, as would nonplus the Arithmetic of
Archimedes (who undertook to write the number of the Sands) to cast up an
Account thereof.

For the most modest Computations do reckon (from Matters of the most
Infallible Fact,) that from the First of King. James the First, to the last of
King James the Second, this Nation lost one Year with another above Two
Millions Sterling, by Trading only with two or three other Nations, on unequal,
and disadvantageous Terms.

And King Charles the Second was made so sensible (by Mr. Fortrey and others)
of the vast Advantage which the French then had of us by our so disadvantageous
Trading with them in particular, that he promised the Nation a Council of Trade
consisting of some of the Principal Merchants of each Company, of some of the
best qualified Gentlemen in the Kingdom; and for the greater Honor thereof,
some of His Majesty's own Privy Council; but he promised like a Merchant, etc.

And if One hundred Pounds, As Sir Josiah Child casts it up in his New
Discourse of Trade, p. 9.
laid out for Seventy Years at Ten per Cent per Annum, Interest upon Interest,
will, in that time, gain One hundred Two thousand Four hundred Pounds, what
must this Nation have lost if we reckon only by the Two Millions per Annum
aforesaid?

VI.
Another particular Cause of the decay of our Treasure, together with our
Trade, is our own Exportations of Money instead of Goods; because Money (as it
is, and may be, carried out) pays little or no Freight from hence, and no
Custom at all abroad, whereas it is otherwise on Goods.

For the greater Policy of other Countries have raised their Impositions on our
Goods, to encourage our sending them Bills or Money for their Manufactures,
etc. and to prevent the promotion of our own, which will be our Ruin, if we
are not more, and more aware of it.

1. Because the less our People apply themselves to Manufacture, the more they
will follow such Cheats, as Clipping and Coining, or such Profellions as are
destructive to the Estates, Bodies, and Souls of any People, unless they are
executed with all honest Art, and Science.

2. Because we have nothing in return for our Goods, and substantial Money (for
our Bad they will not take) but consumptive Commodities, unless they recoin our
good Money (as they often do) into such bad Coin (as most of our bad Money now
is,) and convey it us again, not only Clipped, but Cropp'd home, almost to the
Ears of its Image; and yet they have, either Goods for such Money, or better
Money, or Bills of Exchange.

VII.
Another Cause of our Money, (especially our Milled Money,) being Transported
into other Countries, and Melted down into Plate in our own, is, because every
Crown was worth Six Pence more than it went for, when it should rather have
been worth so much less, so that for want of Honesty in the Clippers, and
Policy in the Coiners, the Rewards of our own Hands have been given unto us, as
it was unto the Jews, when their Silver was turned into Dross, and their
Justice into Wormwood.

VIII.
Another Cause of our want of good Coin, Cottoni Posthuma, p. 300.
I take (from Sir Robert Cotton) to be, for that all the Current Silver has
been Culled by some Goldsiniths, and turned into Bullyon, or Transported; which
ill Patriot Goldsmiths, and others, have formerly more endamag'd the State by
Culling, than any others by For Clipping was not so much in Fashion as it is now.
Clipping.

IX.
And the Cause that the Mint remains unfurnished, Ditto. P. 301.
is the Charge of Coinage raised in price so far above all other Places,
constraining each Man to carry his Bullyon, where he may receive, by Coinage,
the less of Loss. And therefore, if it may please his Majesty, to reduce the
Prizes here, to the Rates of other of our NeighbourCountries, there will be no
doubt but the Mint will beat, as heretofore.

X.
And there is another Cause of the Exportation of our Coin; Ditto. P. 301.
and that is, The vast Sums of Money, which the necessary Occasions of War
calls from his Majesty, to the Parts beyond the Seas, where we have least of
Commodities to make even the Balance.

But the War is (as it has been, and may be, more and more, proved to be) of
greater Advantage, to such an extravagant People as we are, than Peace; for the
French, Dutch, and others, do deal with us in time of Peace; and (indeed, as
sometimes we deal with them, in time of War) by Means of our Wool, Tin, Lead,
etc. as the Fowler dealt with the Eagle, when he feathered his Shaft with her
own Quill.

PART II.
I.
HAving enquired into some of the Causes of our decay of Treasure, we are here
to consider of some ways and means to remedy the Effects. And since the Mamers
of Men do so sympathize with their Money: In the first place, Taught by our
Loss, let us the Cause reverse,
And mend those Manners that produced the Curse. Walsh on the Death of the
Queen.



II.
In the next place we must necessarily think of reminting all our Money, both
New, and Old, Weighty, and Light, whatever it costs us, and make it of no less,
nor more value than it must go for.

For if our good Money be worth more than it goes for, it will be exported from
us to other Countries, and we shall have nothing from them for it, but New
Clipped and Dross-money, such as now passes Current amongst us, or else
Excessive, and Consumptive Commodities.

And if our Money is worth much less, than it goes for (as now some Half
Crowns, that go for Thirty, are scarce worth Ten Pence, and some are
intrinsically worth nothing) other Countries will (as they do) Coin, and Import
it upon us to our Ruin, as aforesaid.

For they will not import such bad Money, but they will have good Money for it,
if any is going; if not, Bills, or Goods, which they may have from us, as well
as we can have them from one another, for the like Money. And then what Loosers
and Gainers we, and they, must be, from the first to the last, any Man (that
has Common Sense) may very easily imagine.

III.
And, in the next place, there must be means found out to raise such a Fund,
etc. as will encourage the bringing in of Bullion and Plate.

IV.
Now the Over-Balance of Trade (which has exhausted abundance of our Treasure)
would naturally bring in Bullion and Plate, as it did of late Years to the
French, to their great Advantage in the late Wars.

And it has been made sufficiently manifest, that we have more Materials for
Manufacture, and, by confequence, for getting the Over-Balance of Trade, than
any other Nation in the World; and only want People for Encouragement, and
Encouragement for People to contrive (as the French did) as many various things
as possible, for Exportation; which is the Life of Home-Trade, and Navigation,
and the main means to bring in Money.

V.
And the better to raise Money, for this Fund, within, as well as from without,
True English Interest, P. 8.
the Kingdom, we should enjoin our own People chiefly to use our own
Manufactures; and make them pay treble Custom that bring in any Foreign
Manufacture, that we do make, or may make, at home.

VI.
Home-Trade being our Primary Advantage, and Foreign Trade but a Secondary
Help; and the greater our Exportations are, for the Interest of the Country,
the greater will our Importation be, for the Advantage of the King, etc. (For
Goods must be paid for, by Goods, or Money.) We should (to gain the
Over-Balance of Trade, and, thereby to bring in other Nations Treasure) deal
with other Nations, as other Nations deal with us; that is, lay greater and
greater Impositions on some of their Commodities, and, perhaps, less upon some
others.

The Silk Trade will save us vast Sums of Money, Ditto P. 15.
now sent to France and Italy, and we make it here better, and cheaper; and
then we should have it to furnish our selves, and our Neighbors, and transport
abundance to our Southern Plantations, and bring for it Silver, or such
Commodities as we most want, or pay ready Money for.

VII.
A greater Imposition on Foreign Commodities, which come from such Places as
have the Over-Balance of Trade in their favor, would bring us in, or save us,
a great deal of Money.

1. Because it would prevent the great Importation of Foreign Commodities, or
lower the prices thereof, and, by consequence prevent the greater Exportation
of our Money.

2. Because it would encourage the Importation of some Commodities from other
Countries, that take more of our Commodities from us, as Raisins from Spain,
and Currants from Turkey, where they have as good, and better; and can have, in
a little time, as much, and more than they have at Zant, etc. -- The Turkey,
Spanish, the Guiny, West India Trade, Ditto. P. 10.
are very good to us; but the West India Trade will be the only Advantage to
us, if we fix it rightly, which will vend not only our own Commodities, but
bring us store of Silver, and Increase of Navigation.

3. Because the Places that take so little of our Manufacture, etc. from us,
cannot impose upon us as we may upon them, unless they do (as they often do)
lay the greater Impositions on their own Commodities, the more they find us
inclined or engaged to them.

A People may be undone by some kind of Merchandise; Ditto. P. 12.
for many Merchants, so they advantage themselves, care not what Injury they
may do to the Public; for as they were wont formerly, and do still serve those
of Guiny, to carry them Beads, Looking-Glasses, and such like things, and bring
away their Gold; so they deal often with their own Countrymen: For finding us
fantastical and voluptuous, they tempt us with all sorts of French Toys, Indy,
and Japan Trifles, etc. which fetch away our Money and solid Wealth, etc. --
But it were well if we could manage the East India Trade, as the Dutch do, who
carry no Silver from Holland, but drive the Trade with the Silver they get from
Japan, in Exchange for other Commodities they bring to them; which we may do in
a better, and speedier, way than they can, if permitted by means of the
West Indies, etc.

But as things are now, we are Losers by most of our Trading, Ditto. P. 13.
especially our French, and Canary: We import, as one Author says, of French
Commodities, as Silks, Laces, Linen, and the like, Sixteen hundred thousand
Pounds A Year more than we export of our own; and of Canary Wine, One hundred
and Fifty thousand Pounds worth more than we export also.

Sir Josiah Child in his Book, aforesaid, p. 162. Says, The Trade for Canary
Wines I take to be a most pernicious Trade to England, because those Islands
consume very little of our Manufactures; neither do they furnish us with any
Commodities to be farther Manufactured here: And the Wines we bring from thence
are, for the most part, purchased with Ready Money; so that something is
necessary to be done to compel those Islanders to spend more of our English
Commodities, and to sell their Wares cheaper, which every Year they advance in
Price, or else to lessen the Consumption of them in England.

And, p. 161. he says " The Venetians being a People that take from us very
little of our Manufactures, have prohibited our English Cloth, and from whose
Territories we receive great Quantities of Currants, purchased with our Ready
Money: It seems to me advantageous for England, that that Importation should be
discouraged, etc.

I have too great an Honor and Regard for His Majesty's Interest, than to
speak of prohibiting those Commodities: But a greater Imposition on them here,
would oblige the first Owners thereof to take Commodities for Commodities, and
to lessen the Prices,
and the Impositions, in the Places of their growth: The Duke of Venice having
12 Dollars a thousand, as the King of England has 14 Shillings a-hundred
Custom on the Currants.

And those Impositions, together with the first Cost, and all other Charges,
being to be paid at last by those only who will be pleased to eat Currants, a
farther Imposition on them for the Reasons aforesaid, can be very displeasing
to no particular Person. And the Public cannot think any Ill of it; especially
since his Majesty has so often recommended to his Parliament the Balance,
Regulation, and Advancement of Trade: And since the Venetians will often boast
that they have had above Forty Millions Sterling in Money, by Bills, etc. for
their Merda, as they sometimes take occasion enough to call their Currants,
without the Common Civility of Sir Reverence.

VIII.
All manner of Encouragement to the honest Exporting Merchants, and to the most
Industrious and most Ingenious Manufafacturers, of what Nation soever, would
bring us in much Money, and People. For much People create much Community; much
Community, much Commerce; much Commerce, much Industry; much Industry, much
Ingenuity; much Ingenuity, much Arts; much Arts, much Manufacture; much
Manufacture, much Domestic Trade; much Domestic Trade, by means of
Exportation, introduces much Foreign Money; and much Money, and many People,
improve both the Value and Price of Land.

And as it would improve our Wealth, and the Revenues of all Ranks of Men, so
it would prevent the Exportation of our Wool better than any Laws that can be
executed here in England, whatever might be done in France, or elsewhere; by
which means we should not lose, but gain, those Advantages, which the French
and Dutch have had (of us, and others) by making Cloth of our Wool, as they
made Light of our Weighty Money, and sent it us again for other Money or Goods.

IX.
An esteemable Encouragement to all Men and Women, A great Example would be an
Encouragement good and esteemable enough.
that would wear Cloth, and Stuff, all the Winter; and a general burying in
Woollen, would save us so much Money as would go a great way toward the Fund;
and a Penny saved being of more value than a Penny got, it would advantage us
more ways than one.

For the more we consume of Foreign Commodities, True English Interest, p. 47.
the more we strengthen Foreigners, and weaken our selves, without we over
balance it by our own Exportation; for if we have not Manufactures, and
Home-Productions, had we never so many Silver Mines, they would be exhausted,
as we have an Example in the Spaniard, who consumes all the Silver he has from
the Indies, on Foreign Things he has occasion for.

X.
An Imposition on all the Wearers of Silk, Silver, and Gold, would bring in
Money for the Fund, or encourage the Woollen Manufacture, or both; and the less
Gold and Silver is worn (as well as Foreign Silks) the less will fall to the
ground, and be loss to the Nation.

But I believe the more our People were confined to Cloth and Stuff, the more
Silk, Silver, and Gold they would wear -- If Shimei, when he was confined to
Jerusalem, had the greater mind to go to Gath; if he had been confined to Gath,
he would have had a greater mind to go to Jerusalem.

And we are observed to drink more Wine, now it is raised to Eighteen Pence the
Quart, and Two Shillings the Bottle, by Act of the Vintners, than when we were
more confined to Six Pence a-Quart by Act of Parliament.

XI.
An Imposition upon all prohibited Goods: It being no impolicy to take off the
Prohibition, since it prevents not the Importation, which has been very
prejudicial to the Nation in general, whatever it has been to particular
Persons.

XII.
An Imporsition on all Foreign Lace Imported, and on all our Wearers thereof.

XIII.
The more Money Men paid upon this Account, themore it would be for their
Honor; and the less they paid, the better husbands they would be, both for
themselves and their Country. For the less Silver would liedead, and the more
Coin would be Current in the Kingdom, toward the advancement of the value of
Lands, and the promotion of Manufacture, and the more Agriculture and
Manufacture do flourish, the farther a Nation is from failing.
An Imposition upon all such, as serve themselves in Private, and Public
Houses in Plate; and the more upon Public Houses, because they may bring in
their Plate, at so much on Ounce, toward the re-minting the Money, or to have
New Money for it.

XIV.
An Imposition on the Money Changers, they having been Principals to the
Clippers, as much as Demetrius was to Diana's Silver Smiths. And had their
Tables been over thrown by our Justice, as the Money Changers were by Jesus,
Matthew. 21. When the Jews Silver was turning into Dross, the Den of those
Thieves had not done us so much Mischief.

XV.
A different Imposition of so much A Year upon all Taverns, Inns,
Coffee-Houses, Alehouses, Brew-Houses and Bake-Houses.

XVII.
An Imposition by way of Fine and License, on all those that at first enter
upon those Professions that are unprofitable (or rather destructive) to the
Nation, which would put our Folk the more upon Manufacture.

XVII.
An Imposition on all dilatory Defendants in Law and Equity that ( by staving
and Tailing with Writs of Error, Reverse of judgment and Demurrer) have plagued
the Plaintiffs above a Year and a Day; which is as long as any Suit should last
in Law, or in Equity. And the more Years they have delayed our Justice, and
made it a true and constant Friend to all that regularly offend, the more and
more Impositions should be laid upon them, and upon some others, which (I
humbly think, as I am an honest Subject) is more reasonable and seasonable than

XVIII.
For Letters of Favors;
Either for mitigation, or for dispatch of Justice. Cottoni Posthuma, p. 193.
Of Manner and Means, etc.


Of the first sort, there be many found in Henry VI. and Edward IV's time,
sometimes of Protection, sometimes freeing Men from Arrests, by calling them up
to appear before the King's Council. Sometimes in Cases highly Criminal,
relieving the Prisoner, in commanding the Judges to make stay of all
Proceedings, upon supposal of indirect Practices, until the King was better
informed.

Of the second sort, there are many in Henry VII's time, where the King has
taken Money for writing to the Judges of Assize his Letters of Favor.

XIX.
For maintenance of Religion, and the Church. P. 172.

As in the Year 1166. to Henry II. was given 12 d. in the Pound; and the 18
Edward 1. a Fifteenth was granted to expel the Jews. And Anno 4 Richard II. a
Tenth to the Clergy, and a Fifteeenth to the Commons, for his help, to suppress
the Wicklivian Heresy.

XX.
For Support of the Laws and the Liberties of the CommonWealth. P. 173.


For Redress of Aggrievances.

XXI.
Particular Grants of the Subject, by Loan, Compulsive. P. 177.

So were the Merchants of Florence, Venice, and Luka, compelled by an Order in
Council, 3 Hen III. because they had grace and sufferance du Roy Graunts
privileges and reportants grand lucre pourle Exercise de leur Merchandre en le
Angliterre. And the Persons that refused to lend, were committed to the Fleet;
neither were the English more free, in Anno 30 Henry VI. diverse being enjoined
to attend the Council Table, or else to pay the demanded Loan.

In the time of Henry VIII. Anno 14 of his Reign, he exacted by way of Loan Ten
pounds in the hundred on all Goods, Jewels, Utensils, and Land, and according
to the extremest rate revealed by Oath of the Possessors; notwithstanding there
is a Law, 2 Richard II. that none shall be denied in demand of any Loan his
reasonable Excuse.

XXII.
Kings raise Money, P. 184.


1. By Trading themselves.

Thus did Edward I. Anno 22. seize into his Hands all the Wool in the Kingdom,
etc.

Thus did Edward III. Anno 12. with all the Tin.

XXIII.
Kings raise Money, P. 185.


By Licensing others to Trade in Commodities -- -- -- -- Lawful or Unlawful.

1. Lawfully but solely.

Thus did Henry VI. by Approbation of Parliament, with all the Trade of Allom,
for Two Years granted to the Merchants of Southampton, for 8000 l. and again
for the like Sum to those of Genoa.

2. Unlawful or prohibited.

Thus did many of the Kings, etc. P. 186.


To diverse Citizens of Londin, Henry IV. dispensed for great Quantities of Tin
for Seven Years, paying 400 l. Yearly above the usual Custom.

XXIV.
Kings raise Money. P. 187.


By 1. Farming out of Ships. 2. Raising the Book of Rates. 3. Farming the
Customs.

1. Farming of Ships

To the Merchants, and taking security of them, either to bring in, or carry
out, Yearly as much Commodities as shall yield the King in Customs on, or else
to make it up out of their own Money.

2. Raising the Book of Rates.

This was in some sort done Consensu Mercatorum, by Edward I. and Edward III.
and again in Henry VIII's time; lindx;
of which the House of Burgundy complained, But we seldom complain of the
breach of our Capitulations and Treaties of Commerce in other Countries.
as against the Treaty of Intercourse.

The like did Edward III. Anno 1. Confirming Anno 2. the great Charter for Free
Traffic, etc.

And thus it continued all his Reign, being a time of great Necessity and
Expense, by reason of his Wars, he sometimes taking an Advantage, either to
raise an Imposition, or else to gain Aid from the People in discharge thereof.

XXV.
Kings raise Money, etc. P. 191.


1. By Liberties. P. 193.


And this was one of the usuallest and easiest means to raise Money from the
People, because it lights only upon the best Abilities. And if there were now
but 20 l. taken of every Corporation; of every Person that hold by Charter his
Liberties, 5 l. for renewing them; and of every one, that claims by
Prescription, 10 l. for Purchase of a Charter: All which would be easy, and
acceptable; it would amount to above 100000 l.

XXVI.
By Honors. P. 195.


And that either by Power Legal, or Election.

Of the first, it is only in respect of Land, whereby every Man is to fine when
the King shall require, that has Ability to be made a Knight, and is not: Of
this sort there be plentiful Examples.

The other out of Choice and Grace, as Hugo de Putiaco, Bishop of Durham, was
by King Richard 1. created Earl of Northampton, for a great Sum of Money. And
I doubt not but many of these times would set their Ambition at as high a
price. And for his Majesty now to make a degree of Honor Hereditary, as
Baronets, next Under-Barons, and grant them in Tail, taking of every one 1000
l. in Fine, it would raise with ease 100000 l. and, by a judicious Election, be
a means to content those worthy Persons in the Commonwealth, that by the
confused admission of many Knights of the Bath, held themselves all this time
disgraced.

XXVII.
Kings raise Money by Offices.

But if Justice should be sold now, we should pay dearer for it than we do:
And, God knows, there are Impositions on Justice enough already.
Thus did King John with the Chancellorship, selling it for time of Life to
Gray, for 5000 Marks.

In France, Aemyliusin vita, Lew. 12.
Lewis XII. called the Father of his Country, did so with all Offices, not
being of Judicature, which his Successors did not forbear.

In Spain it is usual; Vasq. Cap. 40. Ex Instruct. Car. 5. ad Phil. 2.
and Vasque, the Spanish Advocate defends the Lawfulness of it.

And Charles V. prescribes it to his Son, as a Rule in his last Instruction,
drawing his ground of Reason and Convenience from the Example and Practice of
the Sea of Rome.

And the like might be of all inferior Promotions, whether Ecclesiastical or
Temporal, and it would honestly raise a great deal of Money.

XXVIII.
Taxes were better raised any way,
than from the Land; True English Interest, p. 68.69, etc.
for that drives the Money out of the Country, which seldom returns, and is
hard to be got to it upon any occasion; but it would be great advantage to his
Majesty, and gratify his Subjects Infinitely, if he could get a considerable
Revenue somewhere from without.

By which means his own People might be eased at home, which would bind them to
him eternally; besides the great Advantage it would be to the Nation, by such a
Yearly income of Silver continually.

And questionless the King of England might have five times the Revenue he
has, brought Yearly to him from the West Indies when he pleases; besides the
vast Trade, which would ensue by it, to all his Subjects.

However there might be ways found out, that no Taxes might ever be laid on the
substantial part of the Nation, Country, or City, Land, or Houses; but only on
the Vices of the People, as in all Taverns, Alehouses, Foreign needless
Commodities, and on debauched Persons.

And also double Customs on all such Goods, brought over, that we might make
here, as Silk, Linen, Tapestry, Lace, Gloves, Ribbons, Paper, and many things
more.

XXIX.
And ( to get a considerable Revenue from without) a Treble Imposition on all
our Consuls, and Factors residing in Foreign Countries.

1. An Imposition of so much per Cent on every English Consul and Factor,
according to his Personal Estate and Yearly Commission, they having paid
nothing toward the War, nor do they pay any thing in time of Peace.

2. An Imposition of so much per Cent upon all Commodities, as they shall send
to England for their own Account; because the more they send, the less will be
the Gains of our Domestic Merchants, who pay all Rates and Taxes, when the
Factors pay neither, though their Advantage of fore-stalling, etc. is very
considerable to our Merchants, and ruinous to the Kingdom.

3. An Imposition (after the Property is altered) upon all Foreign Commodities,
to be laden by any English, or Alien Factors, for any English Man's Account,
for England, or any other Nation; which Imposition (being Foreign) would be
felt neither by the Factor, by the Merchant, nor by any English Man; and it
would be both for the Interest, and the Honor of the Nation.

I. Because it would naturally lower the Foreign Impositions more, than if it
had been a Domestic Tax; which Foreign Impositions are most commonly laid on
the English, by consent of our Consuls and Factors, they being to the English
Merchants much as Lawyers and Sollicitors are to their Clients. And the other
reason, why the Alien Impositions are so much greater than ours on Exportation,
is, because we are naturally (to our unnatural shame be it spoken) more
inclined to Alien Commodities, than Aliens are to ours; though ours are, and
may be, so much better than theirs.

II. Because this Imposition would naturally lower the Price of Foreign
Commodities more, than if it had been a Domestic Tax. Which Price is, most
commonly, higher or lower, the more our Consuls and Factors do agree, or
disagree, to make it so. I have known (and shall prove it) that our Consuls,
and Factors, have paid three times dearer for Foreign Commodities for our
Merchants than they might have bought them for. And the more they pay, the more
they (and the Aliens with whom they combine) do get, and so much the more this
Nation, in general, loses. But a general Loss is little felt, heard, or
understood by particular Persons.

III. This Imposition on the Consuls, and Factors, would be little felt by
them, because the Merchants, most commonly, pay them before they pay for their
Commodities; or if they do not, it is but so much Money laid out, which they
are to be re-paid again with Interst, etc.

IV. It would be little felt by the Merchants, because they pay (in a great
measure though not so great as it should be) for what they import by the product
of their Exportations; which they buy here at Twelve and Eighteen Month's time.
And because they are come now almost to care not what they pay for foreign
Commodities, so long as they can have Credit, etc. from their Factors abroad,
who make them (or rather their Nation) pay soundly for it, and can be
re-imburs'd by their Chapmen at home; which is the reason that Foreign
Commodities have, of later Years so risen to the ruining of this Nation.

When I lived abroad, I thought my self (as I was) obliged, by Oath and
Indentures, neither to defraud my Master my self, nor to suffer any other body
so to do, without informing my said Master; and as I did to him, so did I to
all my other Friends. But when I had suffered all that Malice could inflict
upon me, together with the loss of my Fortune, and the Lives of Two or Three
Men, because I would not combine with our Consul, and Factors, and their
Confederates, to cheat my Country, and my Friends: One of those Friends very
kindly wrote me, that he would not have me trouble my self, and others, so much
for them, because the dearer they paid abroad, the dearer they sold at home,
etc.

V. Because our Country, in general, will feel this Imposition abroad less,
than if it had been laid at home by any means whatsoever; and it will be but a
little General Excise paid there, and received here, with a great deal of case,
and without that plague of the Publicans.

Now if any one should think that these Impositions on our Factors, and on our
own Commodities (for so they are when the Property is altered) in other
Countries, would be a dishonor to our Nation, I may say to him, that he is as
much mistaken both in the Honor, and Interest of this Nation, as those are,
who think it a Credit to the Kingdom to have our Coin outweigh other
Countries; which in reality is as much a Discredit to us, as that their
Exportations to us (their Impositions especially considered) should exceed ours
to them.

And I would fain know which is the greatest dishonor, for us to lay
Impositions on our own Factors, and Goods there, or to permit Aliens to lay
Impositions both on the one, and the other, as I shall prove they have done,
sometimes from One to Twenty five per Cent, besides what they have made our
Factors pay for Contrabanda; for which Mr. Thomas Cordell, late Factor at Zans,
paid Ten thousand Crowns at once to the Venetians, though his Offense was but
small; and our late Consul, Sir Clement Harbye, was the Informer of it: And
besides what they have imposed on our Merchant-Ships, Masters, and Mariners.

Besides, our Alien Factors, that have been unnaturally, and impolitically
employed by our English Merchants, have got such vast Estates, as well as
Esteem from them, and the English Factors, that they will often value
themselves above their Principals; and to make themselves so, two of them (
Celini and Morelli) could lately afford to give above Twenty thousand Pound
Sterling, to be as they now are, Noble Men of Venice.

And all this Money (and twenty times more) which they, and such others, have
gained, having been got more from this Nation in general, than from their
respective Merchants in particular, a double, or treble, Imposition should be
laid on all Commodities, bought by any Alien Factor, for any English Man's
Account.

And the treble Imposition, aforesaid upon our English Factors, is the more
reasonable, because it will take off the Taxes which are imposed upon them, and
their Merchants (and, by consequence, on this Kingdom) in other Countries; and
because so many of them die in other Nations, and do leave, or spend, such
Estates there, which this Nation never was, nor ever will be the better for.

Indeed those are Impositions which were never laid by any other Nation; but
the reason may be, because no other Nation could, as we can, do it; they having
no such Factories here, or any where else, as we have in other Countries,
because they will not spend other Countries Commodities so extravagantly, and
shamefully, as we do.

And these Impositions would let the World see better how we do resent their
imposing upon us, as well as upon their own and our Commodities, to their great
Interest, and our Disadvantage; and would put them more, than otherwise we can,
or do, upon taking our Commodities on the same Terms, and after the same rate,
that we take theirs.

And, whether this takes, or not, if his Majesty's Consuls abroad should keep
an account of all Foreign Exportations for England, and send it home to the
Counsel of Trade, it might do his Majesty some Service; because it would
prevent the stealing of Customs, on which there are greater Impositions (for
the Public Good) in other Countries, than there are in this Kingdom; and why
should any Man be suffered to cheat his King at home, who suffers himself, and
his Country both, to be so basely cheated abroad?

And if those Consuls would likewise honestly keep the like account of the
Prices of such Exportations, they would do their Merchants, and Country also,
the like Service: And I know no reason why it should not be acceptable.

XXX.
The Revenues of Princes as they differ much in Quantity, according to the
Greatness, England's Treasure by Foreign Trade, p. 151.
Riches, and Trade of their respective Dominions, so likewise is there great
diversity used in procuring the same, according to the Constitution of the
Countries, etc.

Some Kings have Customs, Tolls, and Imposts upon all Trade to, and from
Foreign Countries.

Other Princes and States have Custom upon all new Wares transported from one
City to be used in any other City, or Place of their own Dominions: Customs
upon every Alienation; or Sale of live Cattle, Lands, Houses licensed; Money
upon all Victualling Houses, and Inn keepers, Head-money; Custom upon all the
Corn, Wine, Oil, Salt, and the like, which grow, and are consumed in their
Dominions.

All which seem to be a Rabble of Oppressions, serving to enrich those Princes
which exact them, and to make the People poor, and miserable, which endure
them; especially in those Countries where these Burdens are laid at heavy
rates, as Four, Five, Six, and Seven per Cent.

But when all the Circumstances and Distinction of Places are duly considered,
they will be found not only necessary, and lawful to be used in some States,
but also in diverse respects very prositable to the Commonwealth.

For these heavy Contributions are not so hurtful to the Happiness of the
People, as they are commonly esteemed; for as the Food and Raiment of the Poor
is made dear by Excise, so does the price of their labor rise in proportion,
whereby the Burden (if any be) is still upon the Rich, who are either idle,
or, at least, work not in this kind; yet have they the use, and are the great
Consumer's of the Poor's Labor.

Neither do the Rich neglect in their several Places, and Callings, to advance
their Endeavors, according to those times which do exhaust their Means, and
Revenues; wherein if they should peradventure fail, and therefore be forced to
abate their sinful Excess, what is all this but Happiness in a Commonwealth,
when Virtue, Plenty, and Arts, shall thus be advanced all together.

PART III.
I.
WE have now seen some of the Causes of the decay of our Coin, Treasure, and
Trade, which is as inexcusably scandalous, as it is notoriously consumptive to
the Commonwealth in its Effects.

We have also Collected, and Considered, hitherto, some Ways, and Means, to
raise a Fund, or rather Principal, Money, to remedy this our distracting
Disease. And,

In a Paper lately Printed, we find these Proposals humbly offered to prevent
all manner of Abuses by Clipping, Coining, Melting, Transporting, or otherwise
debasing the Coin of this Kingdom.

1. Let all the Money, hereafter Coined, be Milled: And let all Persons that
shall Clip, or any ways Counterfeit, or Deface the same, be Fined Twenty
Pounds, and Banished the Kingdom: And let it be Penal for any Person to receive
any such Money.

Answ. To this I Answer, That when the Money is Milled, there will be no great
fear of having it Clipped, because it will not pass then as other Clipped Money
does now; but it may be so cunningly Counterfeited, that they deserve worse
than Banishment, and Twenty Pounds Fine, that are found guilty of the Fact. And
a Severe Penalty would be too hard upon any one that should be deceived
therewith.

Nothing but exceeding Care and Judgment can prevent their being sometime
deceived. The People abroad have Scales, and Touchstones, to prevent the
receiving of Counterfeit-Money. And before the Jews Silver was turned into
Dross, Abraham weighed unto Ephron the Silver, which he had named in the
Audience of the Sons of Heth, Four hundred Shekels of Silver, Currant-Money
with the Merchants.

2. To prevent Melting down, Let the Crown-Piece be Coined of the intrinsic
Value of Four Shillings and Six Pence only, etc. And let each Piece pass
Current for their respective Denominations.

The Nation will quickly be sensible of the Advantage of this Article; for our
Merchants will never be at the Expense of exporting Bullion, when it will be a
much greater Profit to have it Coined at home.

Answ. To which I Answer, in Sir Robert Cotton's Words, That Money must value
in Pecunia quantum in Massa.

For Silver is a Commodity, as other Wares; P. 197.
and therefore holds its Estimation, as they do, according to the Goodness.

And the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, Anno 1561. when the Current of State-Council
affected an Abasement of Coin, after a grave deliberation, advised the Queen
from it, and never would give way to any such Resolution in his time.

For the Revenues of the Crown being commonly in certain Rents, they must in
true value, howsoever in verbal sound, P. 196.
be abated to the proportion that the Money shall be abased.

But that Benefit, which truly the King might more make of Bullion than now he
does, is, to erect again Cambium Regis, P. 197.
his own Exchange.

An Office as ancient, as before Henry III. and so continued until Henry VIII.
the Profit of it being now engrossed amongst a few Goldsmiths, and would yield
above 10000 l. A Year, if it were heedfully regarded.

And then should the King himself keep his Mint in continual Work, and not
stand at the Devotion of others to supply Bullion: He should never want
Materials, if Two Things were observed.

I. To permit all Men, bringing in Bullion, to trade outward the value thereof
in Domestic Commodities, at an abated Custom.

II. To abate the mighty Indraught of Foreign Manufactures, and unnecessary
Wares, that the outward Trade might overbalance the inward; which otherwise
will, as it has done, draw on this desperate Consumption of the Common Wealth.
P. 198.


Which Anno 27 Edward III. was otherwise; Ex scaccar. inter rememb. Regis, 27
Ed. 3.
for then the Exitus exceeded the Introitus by far; and in the last Times of
Queen Elizabeth: As in Anno 1553.

II.
Cottoni Posthuma, P. 285. etc. How our scandalous Clipping, and scandalous
Coining does do it, is now too notoriously known to all Men.
I cannot but assuredly conceive that this intended Project of enhansing the
Coin, will trench both into the Honor, the Justice, and the Profit of my Royal
Master, etc.

Honor.
Ali Estates do stand Magis fama quam vi, as Tacitus says of Rome, and Wealth,
in every Kingdom, is one of the essential Marks of their Greatness, and that is
best expressed in the Measure and Purity of their Moneys.

Hence was it, that so long as the Roman Empire (a Pattern of the best
Government) held up their Glory, and Greatness, they ever maintained with
little, or no charge, the Standard of their Coin.

But after, the loose Times of Commodus had let in Need by Excess; and so that
shift of changing the Standard, the Majesty of that Empire fell by degrees.

And, as Vopiscus says, the Steps by which that Statee descended, were visibly
known most by the gradual alteration of their Coin.

And there is no surer Symptom of a Consumption in State, than the Corruption
of Money. 1286.


What Renown is left to the Posterity of Edward I. in amending the Standard,
Edw. I.
both in Purity, and Weight, from that of elder, and most barbarous Times, must
stick, as a Blemish, upon Princes that do the contrary.

Thus we see it was with Henry VI. who after he had begun with abating the
Measure, Hen. VI.
he after fell to abating the Matter, and granted Commissions to Missenden, and
others, to practice Alchimy to serve his Mint. The Extremity of the State, in
general, felt this Aggrievance, besides the Dishonor it laid upon the Person
of the King.

When Henry VIII. had gained as much of Power and Glory abroad, Hen. VIII.
of Love, and Obedience at home, as ever any, he suffered Shipwreck of all upon
this Rock.

When his Daughter, Queen Eliz.
Queen Elizabeth, came to the Crown, she was happy in Council to mend that
Error of her Father, and to reduce the Standard to the ancient Parity, and
Purity of her Great Grandfather King Edward IV. Edw. IV. Justice.


To avoid the Trick of Permutation, Coin was devised as a Rate, and Measure of
Merchandise, and Manufactures; which, if mutable, no Man can tell either what
he has, or what he owes: No Contract can be certain; and so all Commerce,
both Public and Private, destroyed, and Men again enforced to Permutation with
Things not subject to Wit or Fraud.

In the last part, which is the Disprofit, this enfeebling the Coin will bring
both to his Majesty, and the Common Wealth, Profit.
I must distinguish the Moneys of Gold, and Silver, as they are Bullion, or
Commodities, and as they are Measure, the one the intrinsic Quality, which is
at the King's Pleasure, as all other Measures; the other, the intrinsic
Quantity of pure Metal, which is in the Merchant to value, etc. What the King
will suffer by it in the Rents of his Lands, is demonstrated enough by the
Alterations since the 18th. Edward III. when all the Revenue of the Crown came
into the Receipt, Pondere and Numero.

It will discourage a great proportion of the Trade in England, P. 292.
and so impair his Majesty's Customs, etc. The Moneys of Gold and Silver
formerly Coined, and abroad, being richer than those intended, will be made,
for the most part, hereby Bullion, and so Transported; which, I conceive, to be
none of the least Inducements that has drawn so many Goldsmiths to side in
this Project, that they may be thereby Factors for the Strangers. And if in 5
Edward VI. 3 Mary, and 4 Elizabeth, it appears by the Proclamations, that a
Rumor only of an Alteration in Coin, caused such Effects, punishing the Author
of such Reports with Imprisonments, and Pillory, it cannot be doubted but the
projecting a Change must be of far more Consequence, and Danger to the State;
and would be wished, that the Actors, and Authors of such Disturbances in the
Common Wealth, at all times hereafter, might undergo a Punishment
proportionable.

It cannot be held (I presume) an Advice of best Judgment, that lays the loss
upon our selves, and the gain upon our Enemies; for who is like to be in this
time the greater Thriver? Is it not usual, that the Stranger that transporteth
over Moneys for Bullion, our own Goldsmiths that are their Brokers, and the
Foreign Hedge-Minters of the Netherlands (which term becomes them well) have a
fresh and full Trade by this Abatement. 293.


Experience has taught us, that the enfeebling of Coin is but a shift for a
while, as Drink to one in a Dropsy, 264.
to make him swell the more; but the State was never thoroughly cured, as we saw
by Henry VIII's time, and Queen Elizabeth, until the Coin was made up again.

I cannot but then conclude, that if the proportion of Gold and Silver to each
other, be brought into that Purity, by Advice of Artists, That neither may be
too rich for the other; that the Mintage may be reduced to some proportion of
Neighbour-parts; and that the Issue of our Native Commodities may be brought to
over-burthen the entrance of the Foreign,
we need not seek any way of shift, but shall again see our Trade to flourish;
the Mint (as the Pulse of the Common Wealth) again to beat; and our Materials
(by Industry) to be a Mine of Gold, and Silver to us, and the Honor, Justice,
and Profit of his Majesty (which we all wish, and work for) supported.

III. The Committee's Answer, (2 September, 1626.) to the Minters Propositions
for enhansing the Money.
We conceive that the Officers of the Mint are bound by Oath, to discharge
their several Duties in their several Places respectively. But some such things
have been lately suspected, that I fear we do not all wish, and work for the
Honor, Justice, and Profit of his Majesty.


But we cannot conceive how they should stand Tied by Oath, to account to his
Majesty the intrinsic value of all Foreign Coins, and how they agree with the
Standard of this State; for all Foreign States, do, for the most part, differ
from us.

But to induce the necessity of the Proposition, they produced two Instances,
or Examples; the one from the Rix Dollar, and the other from the Royal of
Eight, wherein they untruly informed of the Price and Value in our Moneys, and
our Trade of both of them.

For whereas they say that the Rix Dollar weighs Eighteen Penny weight,
Cottoni Posthuma, p. 296, etc.
and Twelve Grains, and to be of the finest, at the Pound-weight, Ten Ounces
Ten Penny weight, does produce in Exchange 5 s. 2 d. Farthing of Sterling
moneys. We do affirm that the same Dollar is Eighteen Penny weight, Eighteen
Grains, and in Fineness, Ten Ounces 12 d. weight, equal to 4 s. 5 d. ob. of
Sterling moneys, and is, at this time, in London at no higher Price, which is
short thereof by Thirteen Grains, and a half, fine Silver upon every Dollar,
being 2 d. Sterling, or thereabouts, being the charge of Coinage, with a small
recompense to the Goldsmith, or Exchanger, to the Profit of England, 3 s. 6. d.
per Cent.

Whereas they do in their circumstance averr, that this Dollar runs in account
of Trade amongst the Merchants, at 5 s. 2 d. ob. English Money, it is most
false: For the Merchants, and best experienced Men, protest the contrary; and
that it passes in Exchange, according to the Intrinsic value only, 4 s. 5 d.
ob. of the Sterling Money, or near thereabout, and no otherwise.

The Second instance is in the Royal of Eight, affirming that it weighs 17
penny Weight, 12 Grains, and being but of the fineness of 11 Ounces at the pound
Weight, does pass in Exchange at 5 s. of our Sterling Moneys, whereby we lose 6
s. 7 d. in every pound Weight. But having examined it by the best Artists, we
find it to be 11 Ounces, 2 d. Weight Fine, and in Weight 17 penny Weight, 12
Grains, and a half, in every Royal of Eight, Pa. 297.
which is the charge of Coinage, and a small overplus for the Goldsmith's gain.
And whereas they say that the said Royal of Eight runs in account of Trade at 5
s. of his Majesty's, now, English Money; the Merchants do all affirm the
contrary, and that it passes only at 4 s. 4 ob. of the Sterling Moneys, and no
higher ordinarily.

And it must be strange to believe that our Neighbors, the Netherlanders,
would give for a pound Tale of our Sterling Silver, by what name soever it
passes, a greater quantity of their Moneys in the like Intrinsic value, by
Exchange; or that our Merchants would knowingly, give a greater for a less to
them, except by way of usance. But the deceit is herein only, that they
continually varying their Coin, and crying it up at pleasure, may deceive us
for a time, in too high a reputation of pure Silver in it, Pa. 298.
upon Trust, than there is unto a Trial; and this, by no alteration of our
Coin, unless we should daily, as they, make his Majesty's Standard uncertain,
can be prevented; which being the Measure of Lands, Rents, and Commerce amongst
our selves at home, would render all uncertain, and so of necessity destroy the
use of Money, and turn all to permutation of such things, as were not subject
to will or change.

And as they have mistaken the ground of their Proposition, so have they upon a
specious show of some momentary and small benefit to his Majesty, reared up a
vast, and constant, loss unto him by this Design, if once effected. For as his
Majesty has the largest proportion of any, both in the Entrances and Issues;
so should he, by so Enfeebling of his Coin, become the greatest loser.

There needs no other Instance, than those Degrees of diminution from the 18.
Ed. 3 d. to this day.

And for us then to raise our Coin at this time, Pa. 307.
to Equal their Proportions, were but to render our selves to a perpetual
uncertainty; for they will raise upon us daily, then again, which if we of
course should follow,
else receive no profit by the present Change, we then destroy the Policy,
Justice, Honor, and Tranquillity of our State at home for ever.

IV. In the Year aforesaid 1626, these Questions were proposed to the
Merchants, Mint-Masters, and Goldsmiths, concerning the Alteration of our
Silver Moneys.
1. Whether the English Moneys now current, are not as dear as the Foreign of
the Dollar, and Royal of 8, in the Intrinsic value in the usual Exchanges,
now made by the Merchants beyond Sea?

2. Whether this advancing will not cause all the Silver Bullion that might be
Transported in Mass or Foreign Coin, to be Minted with the King's Stamp beyond
Sea, and so Transported, and his Mint thereby set less on Work than now?

3. Whether the advancing the Silver Coin in England will not cause a
Transportation of most of that, that is now Current to be Minted in the
Netherlands, and from them brought back again, whereby his Majesty's Mint will
fail by the Exported benefit.

4. Whether the advancing the Silver Coin, if it produce the former Effects,
will not cause the Markets to be unfurnished of present Coin, to drive the
Exchange, when most of the Old will be used in Bullion?

5. Whether the higher we raise the Coin at home, we make not thereby our
Commodities beyond Sea the cheaper?

6. Whether the greatest profit by this Enhaunsing, will not grow to the ill
Members of the State, that have formerly culled the weightiest Pieces, and sold
them to the Stranger-Merchants to be Transported.

V. And at the same time, these general Rules were Collected out of the
Consultations at Court concerning Money, and Bullion.
1. Gold, and Silver, have a twofold Estimation in the Intrinsic, as they are
Moneys, they are the Princes Measures given to his People; and this is a
Prerogative of Kings: In the Intrinsic, they are Commodities, valuing each
other according to the plenty, or scarcity, and so all other Commodities by
them; and that is the sole Power of Trade.

2. The Measures in a Kingdom ought to be constant: It is the Justice and
Honor of the King; for if they be altered, all Men, It Is just now so with our
Guineas, etc.
at that Instant, are deceived in their precedent Contracts, either for Lands
or Money; and the King most of all; for no Man knows then, either what he
has, or what he owes.

3. This made the Lord Treasurer Burleigh, in 1573. when some Projectors had
set on foot a matter of this nature, to tell them, that they were worthy to
suffer death for attempting to put so great a dishonor on the Queen, and
detriment, and discontent, upon the People; for to alter this public Measure,
is to leave all the Markets of the Kingdom unfurnished: And what will be the
Mischief, the Proclamations of 5 Ed. VI. 3 Mariae, 5 Edw. VI. 3 Mariaet 4 Eliz.
and 4 Eliz. will manifest, when but a rumor of the like produced that Effect
so far, that besides the Faith of the Princes to the contrary delivered in
their Edicts, they were enforced to cause the Magistrates in every Shire,
respectively, to Constrain the People to furnish the Markets, to prevent a
Mutiny.

4. To make this Measure then, at this time, short, is to raise all Prizes, or
to turn the Money, or Measure, into Disise, or Bullion, when it is richer by
seven in the hundred in the Mass, than the new Moneys, and yet of no more value
in the Market.

5. Hence of necessity it must follow, that there will not in a long time be
sufficient Minted of the New, to drive the Exchange of the Kingdom; and so all
Trade, at one Instant, at a stand, and, in the mean time, the Markets
unfurnished, which how it may concern the quiet of the State, is worthy care.

6. And thus far as Money is a Measure.

7. Now as it is a Commodity, it is respected, and valued by the Intrinsic
quality: And first the one Metal to the other.

8. All Commodities are prized by plenty, or scarcity, by dearness, or
cheapness, the one by the other: If therefore we desire our Silver to buy Gold,
as it of late has done, we must let it be the Cheaper, and less in Proportion
valued, and so contrary; for one equivalent Proportion in both will bring in
neither. We see the proof thereof by the unusual quantity of Gold, brought
lately to the Mint by reason of the price; for we rate it above all other
Countries, and Gold may be bought too dear. To furnish then this way the Mint
with both, is altogether impossible.

9. And, at this time, it was apparently proved both by the best Artists, and
Merchants, most acquainted with the Exchange, in both the Examples of the
Mint-Masters in the Rix Dollar and Real of Eight, that Silver here is of equal
value, and Gold above, with the Foreign parts in the Intrinsic, and that the
fallacy, presented to the Lords by the Mint-Masters, is only in the Nomination,
or Intrinsic quality.

10. But if we desire both, it is not raising of the value that does it, but
the balancing of Trade; for buy we in more then we sell of other Commodities,
be the Money never so high prized, we must part with it to make the
disproportion even: If we sell more than we buy, the contrary will follow.

11. And this is plain in Spain's necessities; for should that King advance to
a double rate his Real of Eight, yet needing, by reason of the barrenness of
his Country, more of Foreign Wares than he can counter vail, by Enchange with
his own, he must part with his Money, and gains no more by Exhauncing his
Coin, but that he pays a higher price for the Commodities he buyeth, if his
work of raising be his own. But if we shall make Improvement of Gold and
Silver, being the Staple Commodity of his State, we then advancing the price of
his, abase to him our own Commodities.

12. To shape this Kingdom to the fashion of the Netherlands, were to frame a
Royal Monarch by a Society of Merchants. Their Country is a continual Fair, and
so the price of Money must rise and fall to fit their occasions. We see this by
raising the Exchange at Frankford and other Places at the usual time of their
Marts.

13. The frequent and daily Change in the low Countries of their Moneys, is no
such injustice to any there, as it would be here. For being all either
Mechanics or Merchants, they can Rate accordingly their Labor or their Wares,
whether it be Coin or other Merchandise, to the present condition of their
Money in Exchange.

14. And our English Merchants, to whose profession it properly belongs, do so,
according to the just Intrinsic value of their Foreign Coin, in all Barter of
Commodities, or Exchange, except at usance; which we, that are ruled and tied
by the Intrinsic Measure of Money, in all our constant Reckonings and Annual
Bargains at home, cannot do.

15. And for us then to raise our Coin, at this time, to equal their
Proportions, were but to render our selves to a perpetual incertainty, for they
will raise upon us daily then again, which if we of Course should follow, else
receive no Profit by this present Change, we then destroy the Policy, Justice,
Honor, and Tranquillity of our State at home for ever.

If we go on debasing our Money, Manufacture, and Navigation, to make even with
the Dutch, we may now in a very short time undo the Nation; and there is
nothing that can recover us at present, but the Balance, Regulation, and
Advancement of Trade, which the King's most Excellent Majesty has so often
recommended to his Parliament; and by which means Edward III. got that
Advantage of invading France, and dealing with it as he did, to the great
Honor, and Interest of England. VI.
Edward III. having that Game to play with France, either he must win, or lose
it; his Spirit was too big to sit still; and yet, Historical Discourse of the
Uniformity of the Government of England, from the first times to the Reign of
Edward III. Printed, 1647. Part 2. p. 64.
pre-advising himself about the Poverty of the People, and that their Patience
would be spent soon after their Supplies, if they continually saw much going
out, and nothing coming in, he laid a Platform for the augmenting of the
Treasure of the Kingdom, as well for the benefit of the People, as of the Crown.

By Taxes. P. 65. 1.
And although it be true that Edward III. was a King of many Taxes, above all his
Predecessors; yet cannot this be imputed as a blot to his Honor, or Liberty of
the People. For the King was not so unwise, as either to desire it without
evident cause, or to spend it in secret, or upon his own private Interest; nor
so weak, and irresolv'd, as not to employ himself, and his Soldiers, to the
utmost, to bring to pass his Intentions; nor so unhappy, as to fail of the
desirable Issue, of what he took in hand.

So as, though the People parted with much Money, yet the Kingdom gained much
Honor and Renown; and becoming a Terror to their Neighbors, enjoyed what they
had in fuller security, and so were no Losers by the Bargain in the Conclusion.

For the People had, quid pro quo, by the Advance of Trade, P. 66. 2.
wherein the King showed himself the Cape Merchant of the World.

Certainly Men's Parts, in those Times, were of vast reach, that could manage
such Wars, settle such a Government, and lay such a Foundation of a Treasury by
Trade, a thing necessary to this Island next unto its own being, as may appear,
not only in regard of the Riches of this Nation, but in regard of the Strength
thereof, and in regard of the maintenance of the Crown: The two latter of
which, being no other than a natural effluence of the former, it will be
sufficient to touch the same in order to the thing in hand.

Now as touching that,
it is evident, that the Riches of any Nation are supported by the Conjuncture
of three regards.

I. That the natural Commodities of the Nation may be improved. II. That the
poorer sort of People be set on work. III. P. 67. 3.
That the Value of Money be rightly balanced.
1. For as on the one part, though the People be never so laborious, if the
natural Commodities of the Island be not improved by their Labor, the People
can never grow much richer, than barely for Subsistence during their Labor.

And here let me humbly presume to say,
that so long as this Nation is over balanced by others in Trade, we can get
nothing but by one another Loss. 2. The Endeavor were to advance Manufacture,
and principally such of them, as are made of the staple Commodities, amongst
all which Wool had the Precedence, as being the most principal and ancient
Commodity of the KINGDOM, and the Manufacture of Wool of long use, but had
received little Encouragement before these Times.

For that it formerly had been the principal Flower in the Flemish Garden, P.
68.
and nourished from this Nation by the continual supply of Wool, that it
received from hence.

Which was the principal Cause of the Ancient League, between the House of
Burgundy, and this Crown.

But Edward III. was too well acquainted with the Flemings Affairs, P. Ditto.
by a joint Engagement with them in the Wars with France;
and therein had gained so good an Opinion amongst them, that he might have
adventured to have changed a Complement for a Courtesy.

The Staples, beyond the Sea, were now taken away: He now inhibiteth the
Importation of Foreign Cloths; and having gained these two steps onward of his
way, he represents to the Flemings their unsettled Condition, 11. Edw. 3. Cap.
2, 3, 5.
by these bordering: Wars with France, the peaceable Condition of England, and
Freedom of the People.

Then propounds to them an Invitation to come over into England; P. Ditto.
promises them share, and share-like with his own People, with such other
Immunities, as they took his offer, came over, and brought their Manufacture
with them, which could never after be recalled.

So as now the Wool, and the Manufacture live together; P. Ditto.
and like to Man and Wife, so long as they care for one another, both will
thrive; but if they come to play their Games apart, both will be Losers in the
Conclusion.

Another means to advance Trade, was the settling of a Rule upon Exportation,
and Importation, P. 70. 3.
which wrought a double Effect.

I. That Importation brought in more Profit, than Exportation disbursed. II.
That both Exportation, and Importation, were made by Shipping belonging to this
Nation, so far as it did consist with the benefit of this Nation. III. That the
Exportation was regulated to the Overplus, saving the main Stock at home.
1. The truth of the first will be evident from this ground, P. Ditto.
That no Nation can be rich, that receives more dead Commodities from abroad,
than it can spend at home, or vend into foreign Parts; especially if it be
vended in its proper kind, and not in Money.

And therefore the Laws provided, 27 Edw. III.
That no Merchant should export more Money than he imported; and what he
imported, must have been of the New Stamp, which it seems was inferior in
value to the Old.

2. The Second is no less beneficial; for as it is in War, P. 71.
so in all Trades, the greater the number is, that is employed, the more
effectual the issue will be.

3. The Third, and Last Consideration, is as necessary as any of the former;
for if Trade be maintained out of the main Stock,
the Kingdom in time must be brought to Penury.

The last means that was set on foot, in the Reign of Edward III. for the
Advance of Trade, was the regulating the Mint, P. 74.
and the Current of Money.

This is the Life and Soul of Trade; for though Exchange of Commodities may do
much, yet it cannot be for all, because it is not the Lot of all to have
Exchangeable Commodities, nor to work for Apparel and Victual.

Now in the managing of this Trick of Money,
Two things are principally looked unto. P. Ditto.


1. That the Money be good and current. 2. That it should be plentiful.
As touching the Excellency of the Money, several Rules were made, 25 Edw. 3.
Stat. 5. cap 13. 6 Edw. 3. cap. 2, and 3.
as against embasing of Money, against Foreign Money not made Current, and
against Counterfeit and False Money.

For according to the Goodness of the Money,
so will the Trade be more or less.

For the Merchant will rather lose in the Price of his Commodity in Money,
than in Exchange for other Commodities, because the value thereof is less
certain, and the Transportation more chargeable.

As touching the Plenty of Money, that is as necessary to the Advance of the
Trade, P. Ditto.
as of the goodness of it.

For according to the Plenty thereof,
will be the Plenty of the Manufactures, because Handy-crafts having no
Commodities, but their labor, cannot work for Exchange, nor can Exchange
supply rents and maintenance to the greater sort of People.

To this end therefore it is provided against melting of Money, and Exportation
of Silver and Gold. 6 Edw. 3. cap. 2.3. 17 Rich. 2 c 1.


And yet to encourage, or not discourage importation of Silver and Gold,
liberty was given to every man to export so much as they did import, provided
that what they carry away must be of the New Stamp, This is ancient, and I take
it to be true Policy: And see England's Treasure by Foreign Trade, p. 34. cap.
4. That the Exportation of our Moneys in Trade of Merchandice, is a means to
increase our Treasures.
or minted in this Nation.

By this means, Bullion came in with probability that much thereof would remain
in the Nation, in lien of Commodities exported; or if not the greater part, yet
at least the Mint gained, and that was some benefit to the Nation.

And though the Mint was settled by the Parliament, yet the Exchange was left to
the Directory of the King and his Council; because the Exchange is an uncertain
thing, subject to sudden alterations in other Nations, and its necessary that
in this Country, it be as suddenly balanced with the Exchange in other
Countries, or in a short time the Nation may receive extreme Damage.

And lastly to watch the course of the Exchange in Foreign Parts, and to
parallel the course thereof in this Land thereunto;
for otherwise the Public must necessarily suffer so long as private Men seek
their own particular Interest only in their course of Trade.

That there be more of Public Good in Merchandice,
and the Confusion of Trade taken away. It were well the Mysteries of Exchange
were more publicly known; and also that there were a Committee of Trade, mixed
with the chief able Merchants, to continue always, who should still be on the
discovery and study for the Improvement of Trade. English Interest, P. 16.

VII.
For there are open as well as private Enemies to the public Good, as I find
particularly by a Printed Paper.

Entitled,

For encouraging the Coining Silver Money in England, and after for keeping is
here.

Which is a parcel of Pretension, and all stuff as the short Observations
thereon plainly shows. Page 2. 3. and page 4. 5. it affirms, that the Reason
why we have not had more Money come to our Mint, is in short this.

England sending more consumable Commodities to Spain, than it receives from
thence; the Merchants, who managed that Trade bring back the Overplus in
Bullion, which at their return they sell as a Commodity. The Chapmen that give
highest for this are, as in all cases (of buying and selling) those who can
make most Profit by it; and those are the Returners of our Money by Exchange,
into those Countries where our Debts any way contracted make a need of it: For
they getting 6.8.10. etc. per Cent. according to the want and demand of Money
from England, there, and according to the risk of the Sea, buy up this Bullion,
as soon as it comes in to send it to their Correspondents in those Parts, to
make good their Credit for the Bills they have drawn on them, and so can give
more for it than the Mint rate, i e. more than an equal weight of Milled Money,
for an equal weight of Standard Bullion, they being able to make more Profit of
it by Returns.

Suppose the Balance of our Trade with (...) were in all other Commodities
equal; but that in the last East India Sale we bought of them of East India
Commodities, to the value of a Million, to be paid in a Month, a Million must
be returned into Holland; this presently raises the Exchange, and the Traders
in Exchange sell their Bills at high rates; but the Balance of Trade being (as
is supposed, in the Case) equal in all other Commodities, this Million can no
way be repaid to their Correspondents on whom those Bills were drawn, but by
sending them Money or Bullion to reimburse them.

This is the true Reason why the Bullion brought from Spain is not carried to
the Mint to be Coined, but bought by Traders in Foreign Exchange,
and Exported by them to suppply the overplus of our Expenses there, which are
not paid for by our Commodities.

VIII.
In the true English Interest published 1674, 1674.
and fore-quoted, I find pa. 3. and Ca. 2. the following particulars.

1. That Nation that values Money most, shall have most of it.

Answ. Which (as he must mean them) are confuted by his own words immediately
following.

2. Wherefore it is good that the value of Coin be always somewhat higher, than
in our Neighbor Nations, so can we not fail of having it from them.

Answ.
If we, and all Nations, should think so, the World would (to out do one
another) raise their Coin to the highest value, until (to the undoing of
themselves) they brought it to nothing worth, and so to be of no use.

3. Also to keep Money in a Nation, it is good to allay it a little, and to
Coin much small Money.

Answ. Providence has so ordered it for the general good of Mankind, that one
Nations, like one Man's meat, may be another Nations Poison; and that which is
good Policy in Holland, may in England be great Imprudence.

If then his Majesty shall be pleased, Cottoni Posthuma, p. 198. 199.
by advice of his Council, to advantage himself any otherwise by Coynage, it
will be safer to do it upon a simple Metal, than by any Implyant, or better
suit, which well governed States, both Modern, and Ancient used: For Rome in
her Increase and greatest pitch of Glory,
had their Money aere, argento, oaur puto puro; and so have all the Monarchies
absolute at this day in Christendom. Ditto p. 199.
And I believe it may be wrought to his Majesty of good value, and to the State
of much case, if it may be put in practice with discreet caution, and constant
Resolution; for the danger only may be in the venting the quantity, which may
clog the State, with useless Money, or extension of the Example, which may work
in, by degrees, an Embasement of Bullion.

And the Form, and Figure may with an Engine so subtly be Milled, that the
charge will prevent all practice of false play. Pa. 200.


Besides, it cannot but prevent much wast of Silver, Pa. 201.
that is by the minting Pence, and half Pence occasioned, there will be no
cause hereafter to cut any Bullion into proportion so apt for loss.

And as to our Silver and Gold Money. Just so much mischief, Mr. Fleet-woods
Ser. (...) Clipping. Pa. 7. 8. 9.
and injury must needs be done to every individual Man that takes it, as there
is wanting of the usual Weight, and fineness in each single Piece, and so much
is stolen from every Man, as there is less given him, than he should receive:
And this administers occasion to people, either Strangers, or Natives, to cheat
us even with true Silver; for they may Coin a great deal of true Silver; and,
putting it off under the shelter of clipped Money, may gain thereby at least
one third. And what one gains another loses.

But suppose such a Famine should befall us, as befell the Jews, Genesis 42. when
Jacob sent his ten Sons, to buy Corn in Egypt, with Moneyfull weight, and
current with the Merchant; And in this Famine we should be forced to go to
Holland to buy food, from whence so much of our hedgminted Money comes, if we
should carry the same back again to them, we should have but their penny worth
for our penny weight, which would be a very slender provision; and if we should
adventure to put our dross Money upon them, as we do upon one another, we might
chance to be served (in allusion to our Money) as the Messengers were by Hunun
when he shaved off the one half of their Beards, and cut off their Garments in
the middle, even to their Buttocks, and sent them away.

4. Also to bring in the old Gold again, it were well the broad Pieces might go
for 24 Shillings, and the 22 Shillings for 26 Shillings.

Answ. Whatever Gold is gone out of the Nation, has been drawn from us, either
by the necessity of War, or by the overbalance of Trade, and if we should
receive our old Gold again as 24, and 26 Shillings, we should lose as much by
each Piece, as each Piece was overvalued. For the Importers of them would have
Goods in return, or Bills of Exchange, wherein the rest of the World have the
advantage of us, as well as in Trade; and what this Nation does lost by
Exchange,
might be shrewdly guessed at, if our Law was like that excellent Law of
Franch, which does oblige all Bankrupts to produce their Books; and if it was
so in England it would be much for the public Interest, and for the credit of
many unfortunate Persons in particular.

IX.
It is no small sign of a Bank-rupting Nation,
when Silver, or Gold, in a Kingdom, go for more than they are worth: And it is
the Policy of the Dutch, and others, added to the necessity of our affairs,
that make our Guineas go at 25 Shillings, which is a considerable Grievance,
next to that of our light, and dross Money; for the Nation, considering the
Nature of our Exchange, etc. it loses at least 5 s. a piece.

In Naples (a place that was as notorious, as the People that lived in it) the
Coin of the Kingdom was Clipped as ours is, and it had fallen into as deep a
Consumption, etc. had it not been for the Marquess de Carpi, of whom Dr. Burnet
(Bishop of Salisbury) gives the following Account.

And how, (said he,) can a Man expect to find his Religion here, where the
common Maxi^s of Justice, and Mercy, were not so much as known. Letters pa. 166.
An^ ^ can never forget the lively reflection that a Roman Prince made to me,
upon the folly of all those severe oppressions,
which as they drive away the Inhabitants, so they reduce those are left to a
great degeneracy of spirit by their necessities.

Indeed if Spain had been so happy as to have such Viceroys, and Governors,
Pa. 167.
as it has now in Naples, their Affairs could not have declined so fast as
they have done. The Marquess of Carpi, in his youth, intended to have taken so
severe a revenge of an injury, that he thought the late King of Spain did him
in an Amor, that he designed the blowing him up by Gunpowder when he was in
the Council Chamber; but that Crime was discovered in time, and was not only
forgiven him, in consideration of the greatness of his Family, he being the Son
of Don Lewis de Haro; but after that he was made, for several years,
Ambassador at Rome.

He now is Viceroy of Naples, and is the only Governor of all the Places
through which I passed, that is without exception beloved, and esteemed by all
sorts of People: For, during the few years of his Ministry, he has redressed
such Abuses that seemed past cure, and that required an Age to correct them.

He has redressed the Insolence of the Spaniards so much at Naples, P. 168.
that the Natives have no occasion to complain of the haughtiness of their
Masters; for he proceeds against the Spaniards with no less severity when they
give cause for it, than against the Neapolitans.

He has taken the pay of the Soldiers so immediately into his own care, that
they who before his coming were half naked,
and robbed such as passed on the Streets of Naples in day light, are now
exactly paid, well Disciplined, and so decently Clothed, that it is a pleasure
to see them: He examines their Musters also so exactly, that he is sure not to
be cheated by false Lists.

He has brought the Markets and Weights of Naples to a true exactness; and
whereas the Bread was generally too light,
he has sent for Loaves out of the several places of the Markets, and weighed
them himself; and by some severe punishments on those that sold the Bread too
light, he has brought this matter to a just regulation.

He has also brought the Courts of Judicature,
that were thought generally very corrupt, to reputation again, and it is
believed he has Spies to watch, in case the Trade of Brioes is found to be
still going on.

He has fortified the Palace which was before his time so much exposed,
that it would have been no hard thing to have made descent upon it.

But the two things that raises his Reputation most, P. 169.
are his extirpating the Banditti,
and the Regulation of the Coin which he has taken in hand.

It is well enough known, what a plague the Banditti, have been to the Kingdom,
for they going in Troops, not only robbed the Country, but were able to resist
an ordinary body of Soldiers if they had set on them.

These traveled about seeking for spoil all the Summer long;
but in Winter, they were harbored by some of the Neapolitan Barons who gave
them quarters, and thereby did not only protect their own Lands, but had them,
as so many Instruments to execute their Revenge on their Enemies.

This was well known at Naples,
and there was a Council that had a care of reducing the Banditti committed to
them, who as they catched some few, and hanged them, so they fined such Barons
as gave them harbor, and it was believed that those Fines amounted to near 150
Crowns a year.

And thus the Disease went on; only now and then there was a little Blood let
out,
which never went to the bottom of the Distemper.

But when the present Viceroy entered upon the Government, he was resolved to
extirpate all the Banditti; and he first let all the Barons understand, that if
they harbored them any more, a little Fine would not save them;
but that he would proceed against him with the utmost Severity, and by this
means the Banditti could find no Winter Quarters; so they betook themselves to
some Fastnesses among the Hills, and resolved to make good the Passes, and to
accommodate themselves the best they could amidst the Mountains.

The Vice Roy sent a great Body against them;
but they defended themselves for some time vigorously, and in one Sally they
killed 500 Men; but at last seeing they were like to be hard pressed, and that
the Viceroy intended to come against them in Person, they excepted of the
Terms that he offered them, which was a Pardon for what was past, both as to
Life and Galleys, and 6 d. a day for their Entertainment in Prison, during
Life, or the Viceroy's pleasure, and so they surrendered themselves.

They are kept in a large Prison, and now and then (as he sees cause for it,)
he sends some few up and down to serve in Garrisons.

And thus beyond all Men's Expectation, he finished this Matter in a very few
Months; and the Kingdom of Naples, that has been so long a Scene of Pillage
and Robbery, is now so much changed, that in no place of Europe do Subjects
enjoy a more entire Security.

As for the Coin, P. 170.
it is as all the other Spanish Money is so subject to Clipping,
that the whole Money of Naples is now light, and far below the true value; so
the Viceroy has resolved to redress this.

He considers that the crying down of Money, that passes upon the Public
Credit,
is a robbing of those in whose hands the Money happens to be, when such
Proclamations are put out; and therefore he takes a Method that is more
general, in which every one will bear his share, so that none will be crushed
by it.

He has laid some Taxes on the whole Kingdom, and has got a great many to
bring in some Plate to be coined;
and when he has thus prepared such a quantity as may serve for the
Circulation that is necessary; he intends to call in all the Old Money, and to
give out new Money for it.

Thus does this Viceroy set such a Pattern to the other Ministers of the
Crown of Spain, that if many would follow it,
the State of their Affairs would be soon altered.

X.
One of our Historians ( W. Hemingford Anno 1180.) tells us, Fleetwood's Sermon
ab ut Clipping. p. 17.
that in Henry II. time, the Money of the Kingdom was so corrupt, that it was
fain to be changed and called in; it was indeed necessary, but it fell
exceeding hard upon the Poor and Country People: So it was also in the time of
Henry III. upon calling in the Old and Clipped Money ( M. Paris Anno 1240.) by
a Proclamation, the People were more distressed, than if Corn had been at half
a Crown a Bushel; (which was then, I believe, equal to Twelve or Fourteen
Shillings now) for the new Money was not yet come to their great Towns, and
when it was, they received no more new than their old came to by weight; paying
also over and above, Thirteen Pence in the Pound for Coinage; so that besides
the loss of time, and the great Charge they were at, to come to the several
Places of Exchange, they were sent away with hardly Twenty Shillings for every
Thirty, that they brought along with them, Arctabatur Populus, non mediocriter
damnificatus. The People were straightened, and received no small damage; they
lost, you see, one third. The Poor still suffered most, and so it will always
be, for a small Weight is heavy to the weak and faint; and a little loss
grievous to such as have but little.

The Consideration of this, and the preceding passages of the Bishop of
Salisbury, and the Circumstances we are under; made me apply my self to some
Persons, who I thought would give me some account how the Coin at Naples was
regulated; and Mr. Humphrey Levermore did me the favor to procure me the
following Letter, from Mr. William Sealy, who lived a Merchant many years at
Naples.

SIR,
The Old Money at Naples being extremely dipped and falsified, caused the
exchange from all parts of Naples in Iess than two years time, to rise about
25. per Cent. which likewise made a great alteration in Trade, and all Foreign
Commodities to rise proportionably.

To remedy which, there was no way but by making new Money, which they were
about 7 Years consulting and bringing to pass, at last it was resolved, that
the new Money should be made about 10 per Cent. of worse allay than the old
was; and about 10 per Cent. less in weight than the good old Money really was,
and this to prevent the Carrying it out of the Kingdom.

And in order to this, the Viceroy contracted with most of the Principal
Merchants in Naples, for to furnish him with so many Tunns of Silver within a
limited time; and to be re-inbursed with a considerable allowance from the
Customs and other Gaballs in that Kingdom.

So that when a great quantity of Money was made, Proclamations were sent
throughout the Kingdom; that within the space of Three Months, all the old
Money should be brought in, and they should receive a new Duckat for an old
one, though never so much clipped, provided the Coin was good: But if false,
they returned it them, cut a sunder, to make the most of it they could.

To effect which great quantities of Moneys were sent into every Province and
Banks erected; and People appointed in every Town and City, to receive the old
Man and deliver out the new, and if any remained after the above-limited time,
it was to be brought into the Mint, and the Owners to receive only the weight
of new Money for the weight of old.

All this was very punctually observed and performed; and because in the City
of Naples there are Eleven Banks, which keep almost all the Cash of the
Kingdom, and all public payments, either Bills of Exchange or otherwise cannot
lawfully be paid, but by a Note of one of the said Banks, which are all
registered.

Therefore all the Money we receive, we generally pay into the said Banks, and
they receive it, not only by tale, but by weight; and so they pay it out again,
when we come for any; but if any be found of a false Coin or Brass, they cut it
a sunder before your face, and then give it you again to make the most of it.

This New Money being about 20 per Cent, worse than the good Old Money, causes
the exchange to continue still high, and all Foreign Commodities to bear a
Price accordingly, which can never be remedied, but by laying such a Tax on the
People, as will equalize it, etc. which must not be done in such a Kingdom,
where the Peoples Inclinations are addicted to Rebellion.


XI.
By that of the Exchange, the Old Ducats never so much clipped, and the New
ones Ten per Cent. allayed and lightened to prevent their Exportation, (which
looks like Spanish Policy) it may be seen and considered what it is in
consequence to have such little, light, and base Money in a Kingdom, that is
over-balanc'd by disadvantagious Trade, as ours has long been, and under some
other such Circumstances as we are.

We should have been more happy, if other Men's harms had made us more aware of
our own: And when our New Coin comes to be minted (as it must be, tantum in
Pecunia, quantum in Massa, or else this Nation must suffer like the Neapolitan)
we are to take care to receive it, not only by Tale, but by Weight, and to cut
asunder all false Coin, that the Hedg-minters may not make more private
Merchandice thereof; and that their Public Factors may not have a continued
Impudence of Crying, Have you any Brass Money, or broken Silver? in the open
Streets.

What another-gates Cry we shall have, when our Dross money comes to be cried
down, and our Clipped Money to be called in, I cannot imagine; but if I may
judge a little by the last calling in of our Tinn Farthings, and the crying
down the Lead ones, I may fear much (as Mr. Fleetwood says) the Cry will be,
like that of Egypt, P. 17.
loud, and universal; (unless our Coin and Commerce be considered together) for
every Family will be a looser; but it will fall severest upon the Poor; who
from a little can spare none. And therefore they should be the more spared, if
the People in general should come to be taxed toward the re-minting of our
Money.

XII.
But I think, it is great pity, that poor innocent People should pay for that
guilt, and villainy; whereby many rich Men must have advanced very much Wealth,
or no small Gain. Page 19.
For it does not seem very probable, that so much Money should be spent by
those poor and mean Wretches, who are commonly discovered to live by this
unjust and wicked practice. The Sum is much too big for-them, and one cannot
well account, how almost all the Old Silver, that circles round the Nation,
should come into those Clippers hands in the compass of a few Years. It must
come from such as go up and down, whether in City, or Country, to procure broad
Money, P. 27.
and from such as sell these People broad Money for great gain. And since such
great gain must needs have been made by those Mongers and Monopolizers of
Money, it would be well if some Ways and Means could be found out to raise some
Fund on them, for the recoining the clipped and corrupted Cash of the Kingdom,
which (together with the regulating of Commerce) must be done, with more than
Spanish speed, and better policy; or else the whole stock thereof will not be
worth a Chip.

XIII.
And as these Mongers, and Monopolizers of Money; so those of Merchandise
should be likewise taxed toward the re-coining the Cash of the Kingdom; I mean
in an extraordinary manner.

For, Reflections on the East India and Royal African Company, etc. P. 1.
as Mr. Roger Coke says, Monopolies are the most wicked, tyrannical, and
injurious Usurpations over other Men, and the greatest violations of the Law of
Nature of any other; and are so much worse than Robbery, by how much the
quality of them is worse, and the extent farther.

Nor are these Monopolies less impolitick, P. 2.
than they are injurious; for the greatest benefit which any Country or Kingdom
enjoys, is by the employment of the Inhabitants, which being restrained to a
few, the residue become a Burden to that Country to maintain them, and those
also become dangerous to that Country for want of Employment. From whence it
follows, that they must either seek unlawful means to subsist, or flee into
other Countries to get subsistence there, which is as much a benefit to those
Countries, as it is a loss to this.

The Prerogative of the East India, P. 9.
and Royal African Company extend to two thirds of the Circumference of the
Globe of the Earth.

And, P. 10.16
not to take Notice how far the export of our Woollen Manufactures have been
restrained in other Countries of England, the County of Suffolk (before the
African Company was incorporated) vended yearly 25000 Clothes to Africa; but,
about two Years after, the Clothiers in Suffolk, as they did before, endeavored
to have vented their Clothes in the African Trade, but they were not permitted,
and the Company would take off but 500, and those at scarce half the Prizes
they were sold at before.

The Companies returns into England from Africa are principally Gold Dust, P.
11.
which is so much less, as the restraint by the Company is more.

And they raised the Price of Elephants Teeth so high, that the Dutch could
bring them in cheaper, and so work the Manufactures of them cheaper than the
poor English could work them, and this being a Manufacture of Holland, the
Dutch by the Act of Navigation may import them to the great prejudice of the
English Artificers. And whither this be not a grievance, is submitted to
Judgment.

But see what another Coke says of Monopolists, Propounders and Projectors in
the third part of his Institutes pa. 181. Ca. 85.

A Monopoly (says he) is an Institution, or allowance by the King, by his
Grant, Commission, or otherwise, to any Person, or Persons, Bodies Politic, or
Corporate, of, or for the sole buying, selling, making, working or using of any
thing, whereby others are restrained from the Freedom they had before, and
hindered in their lawful Trade.

For the Word Monopoly, dicitur (...), i. solo, (...), i. vendere. -- But the
Law of the Realm in this point is grounded upon the Law of God, which says,
Thou shall not take the nether or upper Millstone to pledge, for thou take a
Man's Life to pledge. Whereby it appears, that a Man's Trade is accounted his
Life, because it maintains his Life: And therefore the Monopolist, that
takes away a Man's Trade, takes away his Life, and is so much the more
odious, because he is Vir sanguinis: Against these Inventers, and Propounders
of evil things, the Holy Ghost has spoken, Romans 1.30. Inventores Malorum, etc.
digni sunt Morte.

PART IV.
I.
I Am no Enemy to our Merchants, having adventured my Life for their Fortunes,
and should be as ready to do so again; for (as the Earl of Northampton says in
the Spanish Grievances) they are a People not only to be respected, but to be
prayed for; they are Vena Porta (says my Lord Bacon in his Essays) and if they
flourish not, a Kingdom may have strong Limbs, but it will have empty Veins,
and nourish little; and Mr. Mun (in his English Treasure by Foreign Trade)
calls them the Stewards of the Kingdoms stock by way of Commerce with other
Nations. A work (says he) of no less reputation, than trust, and ought to be
performed with great Skill and Conscience; that so the private gain may ever
accompany the public good.

But the public good of the Nation can never prosper under the unjust
Stewardship, and ill managery of Monopolists.

So long as we are more restrained than other Nations, and as it were strangled
in Trade, the face of Albion's State Affairs cannot but look black, and lose
its complexion of Nature's white Boy, and Britannia will be called Languent,
(according to the Title of that excellent Book,) until the GREAT is dwindl'd
into Little BBRITAIN.

But now we have a King, that is constantly recommending the Trade of the
Nation (which is the Nerve and Sinew of War,) if we would add Art to Nature,
give Trade its due liberty and property, fullness of People, Manufacture, and
Exportation, (as the French, and Dutch do to theirs,) we should quickly exceed
them both in Trade, as we have naturally a greater advantage for the
over-balance thereof.

II.
England is, (by Nature, and Situation) the Center of Trade; but (for want of
Art, and Encouragement thereunto) it serves, as the Center does, to make the
Circumference. And had it not been Puteus inexhanstus, ubi Multa abundant, as
Pope Innocent IV. used to say of it, it might have been drein'd as dry of
substantial Treasure, as it is of advantageous Trading.

But our People are of a middle Temper (and do still continue so) according to
their Climate, and not (as it should now be) according to the Temper of their
Prince; for when the Majesty of a King is most excellent, Mediocrity in the
Subjects is too mean.

The Northern Melancholy, and the Southern Choler, Hist. Discr. p. 300.
meeting in their general Constitution, do render them ingenious and active;
which nourished also under the Wings of Liberty, inspires a Courage generous,
and not soon out of breath. Active they are, and so nigh to pure Act, that
nothing hurts them more than much quiet, of which they had little Experience,
from their first Transmigration, till the time of King James the First; who,
conquering all Enmity, spoke Peace abroad to his Enemies, and sang Lullaby at
home to his Friends.

III.
It is apparent (says Sir Walter Rawleigh to the said King James) that no
three Kingdoms in Christendom can compare with your Majesty's for support of
Traffic, Remains, p. 185.
and continual Employment for your People within themselves, having so many
means both by Sea, and Land, to enrich your Majesty's Coffers, Which he reckons
up, and shows the King how many thousand Men they might employ, and how many
Millions of Money they would get from the World.
multiply your Navy, enlarge your Traffic, make your Kingdom powerful, and
your People rich.

Yet through Idleness they are poor; wanting Employment, many of your Land, and
Coast-Towns much ruinated, We have occasion now for such a great Man, who could
see things in little, and in their prime.
and your Kingdoms in need of Coin.

Your Shipping, Traffic, and Mariner's decayed. For when this King set up for
an Universal Peace, he laid up his Men of War, and left Merchandise to shift
for it self.


Whilst your Majesty's Neighbors without these means, Whilst this King sang
Lullaby to his Subjects, they slept on; but the French and Dutch were vigilant,
and awake all this whilt; which makes us now sleep the less, and (as it should
behove us) to think the more.
abound in Wealth, enlarge their Towns, increase their Shipping, Traffic, and
Mariners, and find out such Employment for their People, that they are all
advantageous to their Common Wealth, only by ordaining commodious Constitutions
in Merchandising, and fullness of Trade in Manufactury.

God has blessed your Majesty with incomparable Benefits of Copper, P. 186.
Lead, Tyn, Iron, Alum, Copperas, Saffron, Fells, and diverse other Native
Commodities, to the number of about 100. and other Manufactures vendible, to
the number of about 1000. besides Corn, etc. as also Wool, whereof much is
shipped off,
unwrought into Cloth, and Stuff; and Cloth, and Stuff transported undressed,
and undy'd, which does employ near Fifty Thousand People in Foreign Parts,
whilst you Majesty's People want that Employment in England.
And see, p. 191. and 195. how many Millions this Nation has lost for want of
following the full Trade of Manufacture and Fishery.


These Inconveniences happen by Three Causes especially. P. 187.


I. The unprofitable course of Merchandise. 2. The want of full Manufacture.
III. The undervaluing of our Coin.
Our Merchant-Adventurers by over-trading upon Credit, P. 188.
or by Money taken upon Exchange, whereby they lose usually 10 and 12 per Cent;
and sometimes 15, or 16, are forced to make Sale of their Cloths, etc. at
under-rates, to keep up their Credit, whereby Cloths, being the Jewel of the
Land, are under valued, and the Merchants in short time eaten out.

The West Countrey-Merchants, P. 189.
that trade in Cloths to France, and Spain, do usually employ their Servants
(young Men of small Experience) who by the Cunning of the French, Our Merchants
Servants, and Factors do now combine with the Aliens, as the Aliens then
combined with one another, to out wit the Principals here.
and Spanish Merchants are so entrapped --

-- that when all Customs and Charges be accounted, their Masters shall hardly
receive their Principal Money.

As for our returns out of France, Ditto.
their Silver and Gold is so highly rated,
that our Merchants cannot bring it home but to great loss.

Therefore the French Merchants set higher rates upon their Commodities, which
we must either buy dear,
or let our Money lie dead there a long time, until we can conveniently employ
the same.

Wherefore may it please your Majesty to consider these points following. P.
202.


1. Whether it be not fit, that a State Merchant be settled in your Dominions,
which may encounter the policies of Merchant Strangers, who now go beyond us in
all profitable Merchandising.

2. Whether it be not necessary,
that our Native Commodities should receive their full Manufacture by your own
Subjects.

3. Whether it be not fit for your Majesty presently to raise your Coin to as
high rates, as it is in the parts beyond Seas.

4. Whether it be not necessary, We have been since too forward to cheat the
World with our Fish, insomuch that they have left us much upon that Account;
and, as if the Fish themselves had resented the Injuries done to them, they
have as much left us also, under the like Judgment which befell the Jews, Thy
Fishers also shall mourn, and they that spread Nets upon the Water shall
languish.
that the great Sea business of Fishing be not forthwith set forward.

May it please your Majesty, P. 203.
I have the rather undergone the pains of looking into the Policies of the
Dutch, and French, because I have heard them profess they hoped to get the
whole Trade of Christendom into their hands. And how near the French had got
the Trade, and Holland into the Bargain, let them judge that best understand
the Advantage we have by the present War.


IV.
The French King has been disciplining a victorious, Britannia Languens, p.
207.
and mighty Army, and exhausting us by his Trade, with a great addition of loss
by his Capers; and, at last, has (as it were) forced a General Peace.

Wherefore, in order to our future Safety, it is indispensibly, 276.
and speedily necessary to improve, and regulate our Trade to the utmost.

And a complete regulation of our Trade would render it prodigiously
beneficial; perhaps, 286.
more than all the Trade of Europe besides, considering how our Advantages in
Trade will reduce the Trade of our Neighbors, as ours does improve.

If our Trade had been regulated, 291.
the very Dutch would have forsaken those Provinces for England, or if they had
remained, they would have been Carriers for the English, as they have been to
the French, and will rather be so for the future.

The Trade of the World have long courted England, P. 301.
but never with so much importunity, or with so much advantage as now.

This great Lady affecting Freedom and security has no inclination to continue
under the Arbitrary Power of the French.

With France she has resided only as a Sojourner, but is ready to espouse our
Interest and Nation, and with her self to bestow upon us the Treasure of the
World.

But if we will still continue inexorable and stubborn, things are grown to
such a Crisis, that we may have reason to fear, that this is the last time of
asking.

And that she may suddenly turn this kindness for the Kingdom into such a fury,
as we shall not be able to withstand.

Shall we then embrace so advantageous overtures, or shall we proceed in our
present Methods?

I shall leave it here to be computed, P. 279.
how near a Million per An. our French over-balance has been, ever since the
Prohibition; not forgetting the courtesy of our Merchants, who hearing of the
Prohibition, imported of French Goods to the value of about a Million.

V.
Besides those fruitful Islands, Speed 's Chron. P. 1.
that dispersedly are scattered about the Main, like to beautiful Pearl, that
incompass a Diadem, the Isle of Great Britain does raise itself first to our
sight, as to the body of that most famous and mighty Empire, whereof many other
Kingdoms and Countries are Parcels and Members, being by the Almighty so set in
the Main Ocean, as that She is thereby the High Admiral of the Seas, and the
Terrestrial Globe; So seated, as that She is worthily reputed, both the Garden
of Pleasure, and the Storehouse of Profit; opening her Havens every way sit to
receive all Foreign Traffic, and to utter her own into all other parts; and
therefore, as the Sovereign Lady and Empress of the rest, deserves our
description in the first place.

And Mr. Reynell says thus of Jamaica.

Jamaica is the place that will turn to a great Advantage to the English on
many Accounts, English Interest, p. 83.
as by lying so near the Isthmus of Panama, and for several other Advantages
which I shall not now mention. But the very Situation of the Island is
extraordinary remarkable, and it was the greatest Blessing imaginable that we
left the Enterprise of Hispaniola and set on this Island; For if we had studied
an Age to fix in a place, where we might Center the richest Treasure and Trade
of the Indies, here it must be. For Jamaica is Situated so well for Trade, or
Conquest of the Main, if there be Occasion, that no Island in the World lies
like it for Advantage, it being the Key of the Indies, and naturally the Seat
of Riches, and Empire. So that if they had but a Trade once with the Indies
adjoining, they have no way to avoid being the richest Colony in the Indies, it
being wholly surrounded with the main Land, and Islands; lying in the very
Belly of all Commerce in the Inland Sea of Porto Bell, which is in the heart
of America, and near the Mexican Gulf, between Peru and Mexico, facing to the
South and West; the richest Continent in the World, from which not distant any
where much above 100 Leagues. Against it on the North lie the two great Islands
of Cuba and Hispaniola, and a little behither Eastward are the Caribbee
Islands, but this lies in the midst of all, as Queen of the Indian Isles; and
no Ship that comes from the West Indies, but must pass by one End of this Isle,
before they come to the Gulf of Florida, which place all Ships must pass that
come for Europe. And had we but a Trade with the Indies, so near Neighbors to
us, we should vend more Commodities than we could send them, and have in
Exchange store of Silver. 'Twere the Spaniards Interest also to let us have a
free Trade, and share with them of some few Port-Towns on the Continent, to
maintain a Trade, and Neighbourliness between us; so should we not endanger
them, but equally defend the Indies with them, and they by our means have twice
the Riches yearly come home to Spain that now they have.

Now (says the same Author in his Preface) it is a very hard Case, if the
Heavenly Bounty shall by Nature thus furnish us with so great Assistances, and
we should not add to it, and give some Advance by our own Art and Industry;
bringing in whatever Foreign Arts, Trades, or Husbandry, may be profitable to
us.
For doubtless we may Aggrandize our Trade to an inestimable Account, if we
would our selves, and make our Territories as rich and populous as we please,
under so Glorious a King, and Government as we have; had we but that public
Spirit as we ought, and gave Countenance to brave Actions, and industrious Men;
and minded the Business of Trade and Populacy, as much as we do Pleasures, and
Luxuries. And if we were but Industrious no Nation can exceed us, in a home or
foreign Trade; and for foreign Trade England lies so surrounded with our
Neighbor Nations, that it seems designed for all manner of Riches, and for the
Seat of the Empire.

VI.
The Kingdom of Heaven (says my Lord Bacon in his Summary Treatise to King
James the First, touching the enlarging of the Bounds of Empire) is compared
not to an Acorn, or Nut, but to a Grain of Mustard Seed, which is one of the
least Grains, but has in it a Property and Spirit, hastily to get up, and
spread it self. So are there Kingdoms and States in Compass, and Territories,
very great, and yet not so apt to enlarge their Bounds, or Command, and some on
the other hand, that have but a small Dimension of Stem, and yet are apt to be
the Foundation of great Monarchies.

And (in his Considerations touching a War with Spain) He says to King Charles
the First, then Prince. Your Highness has an imperial Name; it was a Charles
that brought the Empire first into France, a Charles that brought it first into
Spain, and why should not Great Britain have it is Turn?

England being by Nature the Emporium of the World, is certainly the fittest
Seat for the Empire of the Universe; as well as that of the Ocean; which (as my
Lord Bacon says,) Is the principal Dowry of the Kingdom of Great Britain, and
is of great Import to us, because most of the Kingdoms of Europe, are not
merely in Land, but girt with the Sea most part of their Compass; and because
the Treasures, and Wealth of both Indies seems in a great part but an Accessory
to the Command of the Sea; and what the Command of the Sea is, we may see by
the Success of the Battle of Lepanto, which put a Ring into the Nose of the
Turk; by that of the Battle of Actium, That decided the Empire of the World,
and by that of our last Sea Fight with the French.

VII.
And as we have a Country so fit for the Seat of the Empire so have we a King
as fit to be Supreme Head and Governor thereof. A Man of War from his Touch
up, and one that is Master of the Four Mistress and Moral Virtues, Prudence,
Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, such a one, as Solomon seems to have
Prophesied of, when he told the World, That the Power of the Earth was in the
hands of the Lord, and he would in due time set over it one that is profitable
And since we have such a King, and such a Goliath to fight our Battles for us in
Person (a Man after such a Countries own Heart) we cannot but solicit Heaven,
and all the Host thereof to send him the Success of David, and the Hearts of
his Friends, as well as the Necks of the Enemies.

For God has been pleased in great Pity, His Grace the late Archbishop of
Canterbury, 4 Vol. of Sermon. p. 78, 79.
to this sinful and unworthy Nation, to raise him on purpose for it, and to
that End did in his All-wise Providence, lay the Foundation of our Deliverance,
in that Auspicious Match which was concluded here in England. This is that most
Illustrious House of Nassaw and Orange, which God has so highly honored above
all the Families of the Earth, to give a Check to the two great Aspiring
Monarchs of the West, and bold Attempters upon the Liberty of Europe. To the
one in the last Age, and to the other in the present. As if the Princes of this
Valiant and Victorious Line, had been of the Race of Hercules, born to rescue
mankind from Oppression, and to quel Monsters.

The House of Nassaw is without Contradiction, Lives of the Princes of Orange,
p. 9.
one of the greatest and ancientest in all Germany. For besides its high
Alliances, the number of its Branches, and the Honor of giving an Emperor near
Four hundred Years since, it has this particular Advantage, to have continued
ten entire Ages, and to boast with the State of Venice (as a Learned man says)
that it is Government is founded upon a Basis of a Thousand years standing.

No Age of all Antiquity has produced a more extraordinary Man, than William of
Nassaw Prince of Orange. Speaking of the Life of William of Nassaw, Prince of
Orange, Founder of the Commonwealth of the united Provinces in the
Neitherlands, p. 1.
Examine all the Heroes of Plutarch, and all those great Men who lived since
that admirable Historian, and it 'twill be Difficult to find any upon Record,
who possessed more eminently all those Virtues, and good Qualities that enter
into the Composition of a brave Man.

The Victories and Conquest of Allexander, and Caesar do not so much deserve
our Admiration, the first was Master of all Greece, and at the Head of a
Warlike and well disciplined Army, the other absolutely Commanded half the
Roman Legions, who governed all the World. With these great Forces and
Advantages, they entered upon the Stage, made their first Victories the
Forerunners to the next, pursued their Blow, and the one overthrew the Empire
of the Persians, and the other the Roman Commonwealth.

But Prince William had equaled the Glory of these great Conquerors, by
Attacking the formidable Power of King Philip of Spain, without any Army or
Forces, and by maintaining himself many Years against him. His Courage was
always greater than his Misfortunes; and when all the World thought him ruined,
and he was driven out of the Netherlands, he entered them again immediately at
the Head of a new Army; and, by his great Conduct, laid the Foundation of their
Common Wealth.

A Prince the best qualified for a Throne, New State of England, p. 122, etc.
Speaking of his present Majesty.
being great without Pride, true to his Word, wise in his Deliberations, secret
in his Councils, generous in his Attempts, undaunted in Danger, Valiant without
Cruelty; who loves Justice with Moderation, Government without Tyranny,
Religion without Persecution, and Devotion without Hypocrisy, or Superstition.
A Prince, undaunted under all Events, never puffed up with Success, or
disheartened with Hardships, and Misfortunes; always the same, though under
various Circumstances; which is the true Symptom of a Great Soul. This generous
Temper of the King is suitable to his Extraction; being descended from an
ancient and illustrious Family, which seems to have been appointed by
Providence, ever since the Reformation, for the Preservation of God's Church,
and a Check to Tyranny.

VIII.
And this Great King, and that Country, which is so honored and happy with
him, calls to my mind Mr. Quarles's Colloquy with his Soul.

So now, Boanerges and St. Barnabas, p. 109.
my Soul, thy Happiness is entailed, and thy Illustrious Name shall live in thy
succeeding Generations; Thy Dwelling is established in the Fat of all the Land;
The best of all the Land is thine, and thou art planted in the best of Lands; A
Land, whose Constitutions make the best of Government; which Government is
strengthened with the best of Laws; Good Laws, but ill executed.
A Land of Strength and of Plenty; A Land whose Beauty has surprised the
ambitious Hearts of Foreign Princes; A Land whose native Plenty makes her the
World's Exchange, supplying others, and able to subsist without supply from
them; That has no misery, but what is propagated from that blindness, which
cannot see her own Felicity; A Land that flows with Milk, and Honey, and, in
brief, wants nothing to deserve the Title of a Paradise; The Curb of Spain, the
Pride of Germany, the Aid of Belgia, the Scourge of France, the Queen of
Nations, and the Empetess of the World.

And being (as he elegantly goes on) begirt with Walls, whose Bullder was the
hand Heaven, whereon there daily rides a Navy Royal, whose unconquerable Power
proclaims her Prince invincible, and whispers sad despair into the fainting
heart of Foreign Majesty. Het Prince might say to us concerning the Empire, as
Joshua did to the Children of Israel concerning Canaan, How long are you slack
to go to possess the Land, which the Lord God of your Fathers has given you?

IX.
But there are three principal things, which in Martial as well as civil
Policy, are first to be better regarded than they are, viz. Religion, Trade,
and Justice.

By Religion, I mean, that which so effectually provides for all those
advantages to Mankind, Dec. of Piet. P. 2.
which the wisest of Men's Laws have in vain attempted: That Christ came to
introduce Religion, which consults not only the coeternal Salvation of Men's
Souls, Sermon on Luke 9. v. 55, 56.
but their temporal peace and security, their comfort and happiness in this
World; and (as Mr. Fleetwood says in his Sermon against Clipping) if there
appears but little Christianity in such a Sermon, it will be to such as
consider not how great a Part, Justice, and Honesty, and fair and righteous
dealing make up of Divine Religion.

Sir Walter Rawleigh says, In his Rules for preserving the State.
that The first and principal Rule of Policy is the practice of Religion; and
the Cardinal de Richlien in his Political Testament, calls it the Establishment
of the Reign of God.

By Trade, I mean, such a free and full manufactured Trade, which the Romans by
all possible Arts ascended to, ever they ascended to the height of Empire,
whose Steps the French lately endeavored to follow by all means imaginable,
and for the self same end, and not such a Trade for which this Nation became so
renowned, as Glaucus is in Homer for changing Armor with Diomedes, with such
palpable disadvantage that Proverbs came of it.

And by Justice. I mean, not summum jus summa Injuria, but * the Policy of
English Government, Prol. to Hist. Disc.
which so far as is praise worthy is all one with Divine Providence.

Such Justice as honors the Religion, and advances the Interest and Trade of
the Nation, that is, such Righteous Judgment as God Almighty himself at first
commanded, Judges and Officers shall thou make, such as shall judge the People
with righteous Judgment.

The summum jus of this Nation is of Humnut, and, I think, of Norman
Institution; and it is yet known, and perhaps, may never be forgotten, that
from the fury of the Normans, was added to our Ancestor's Common Prayer,
against Plague, Pestilence, and Famine.

William the Conqueror ( Jehu like) drove out the Laws of King Edward then in
use, Bak. Chron. Page 28.
contrary to his Coronation Oath, and in their stead, brought in the Laws of
Normandy, commanding them to be written in French; as also, that all Causes
should be pleaded, and all matters of Form disputized in French, upon a
pretense to dignifie the French Tongue; but it was with a purpose to entrap Men
through the Ignorance of the Language, as indeed it did.

And whereas before, P. 29.
the Bishop and the Aldermen were the absolute Judges to determine all business
in every Shire, and the Bishop in many Cases shared in the benefit of the Mulct
with the King, he confined the Clergy within the Province of their own
Ecclesiastical Jurisdiction.

And whereas the Causes of the Kingdom were before determined in every Shire,
and by a Law of King Edward in a Conventicle held Monthly in every Hundred, he
ordained that four times in the Year, for certain days, the same business
should be determined in such places as he should appoint: And finally he
ordained his Council of State, his Chancery, and his Exchequer.

X.
But Edward III. the most Generous, Magnanimous, Honorable, and Heroic Prince
of all his Race and Predecessors, having due regard to Religion, Grievances,
Trade, and Justice, and therein to Martial Policy and Discipline, ordained, and
in some Respects contrary to his Interests,

That no Peter pence should be paid to the Pope of Rome, that (the Service of
God being perfect freedom) his People of England might say their Paternoster
without paying the Penny for it.

That no Wool growing within this Realm should be transported, but that it
should be made into Cloth in England.

That the Walloons should be permitted to Live, Work, and Trade amongst us, and
be naturalized against the Act.

That (...) which we^^ before in French, should be made in English that the
Cliche might understand the Course of the Law.

A blessed Act (says my Author) and worthy so great a King, who if he could
thereby render it also perspicuous, plain, easy, and short, it would be a Work
of Eternal Honor to him, and everlasting Interest to the Nation.

XI.
But our People being a Rebellious People, and undeserving of such excellent
Princes, as Edward III. Henry V. and Queen Eliz. by the Providence of God took
from them, as it did from Judah and Jerusalem, the Mighty Man, the Man of War,
the Prudent, the Elegant Orater, the Cunning Artificer, the Counselor, and the
Judge, so that the People were oppressed every one by another, and every one by
his Neighbor, and their Tongues and their doings being against the Lord, the
Re^^^^d of their own hands was given unto them.

XII.
Yet still the Providence of God espousing us, as it did the Jews, or rather
(as Dr. So^^^ says) as Socrates espoused Xantippe to exercise his Patience
without; He has now sent us a King of Kings, who at his first coming to the
Imperial Crown of England, proposed (against his own present and private
Interest) the Balance of the Trade of this Nation, well knowing the nature of
this Kingdom, for advantageous Commerce, and that a good Father of his Country,
as well as of his Family, will be Vendacem, and not Em^cem, as Sir Robert
Cotton says of him.

And indeed so much, and much more were (in Civil Opinion and Martial Policy)
to be expected from such a Puissant Prince, whose Godly, Generous, Noble, and
Resolute Race, especially from William I. to William III. has been a
successful Series of essential Sincerity toward Religion, Grievances, Trade,
and Justice.

XIII.
His late Princely and Pious Consort (now a Queen of Heaven) was an enamoured
Lover of Religion and Justice, to the eternal Honor of her Majestic and
Immortal Memory.

And since she had laid such excellent Designs for both, I hope the Omnipotence
of God Almighty will see them finished, by means of her Royal and most
excellent Survivor, for his Name sake.

XIV.
The Seat of Government is upheld by the Two great Pillar, thereof, Rawl
Remark. P. 153.
Civil Justice and Martial Policy, which were framed out of the Husbandry,
Merchandise, and Gentry of this Kingdom.

They say, that the goodliest Cedars, which grow on the high Mountains of
Libanus, thrust their Roots between the Cliffs of hard Rocks, the better to
bear themselves against the strong Storms that blow there.

As Nature has instructed those Kings of Trees, so has Reason taught the
Kings of Men to root themselves in the hardy Hearts of their faithful Subjects.

And as those Kings of Trees have large Tops, so have the Kings of Men large
Crowns.

Whereof as the first would soon be broken from their Bodies, were they not
under-born by many Branches; so would the other easily totter, were they not
fastened in their Heads with strong Chains of Civil Justice and Martial
Discipline.

1. P. 154.
For the Administration of the First, even God himself has given direction:
Judges and Officers shall thou make, which shall Judge the People with
righteous Judgment.

2. The second is grounded on the first Laws of the World and Nature, That
Force is to be repall'd by Force.

Yea Moses, in the 20th. of Exodus, and elsewhere, has delivered us many Laws,
and Policies of War.

But as we have heard of the Neglect and Abuse in both; so have we heard of the
Decline and Ruin of many Kingdoms and States before our days.

For that Policy has ever yet prevailed (though it has served for a short
season) where the Counterfeit has been sold for the Natural, and the outward
Show and Formality for the Substance.

Of the Emperor Charles IV. the Wr^^^^ of that Age wit^^^^, That he used but
the Name of Justice, and good Rule, and Order, being more learned in the Law,
than in doing Right; and that he had, by far, more Knowledge and Law, than
Conscience.

XV.
But we will forbear, for a while, to stretch this first String of Civil
Justice: For in respect of the first sort of Men, Husbandmen, P. 156.
viz. of those that live by their own Labor, they have never been displeased,
where they have been suffered to enjoy the Fruit of their own Travels: Meum and
Tuum is all wherein they seek their Certainty and Protection. But Meum and Tuum
is now a long time a trying, when the Defendant runs from one Court to another,
and at last betakes himself to the Resuge, or Assylum, of Summum Judicium.


True it is, That they are the Fruit. Trees of the Land, P. 156.
which God in Deuteronomy commanded to be And here let me note (against the
common Policy and Practice of the Nation) that the Sea and Land, I mean the
Land and Navigation, ought to be Taxed less, and the Faseful and Idle more than
any other things in the Kingdom. To Tax the Land ever-much, and Navigation in
never so little, is to stop the very Vitals of Trade, and by consequence to
decrease our Soldiers, Seamen, and Treasure. The Seamen and Shipping (as they
are the Walls of our Nation) must be encouraged by all means imaginable. And
the Land-men must have Stock by them, to improve their Lands and their
Mansions, and to keep Houses of Hospitality: Which if they do not, they ruin
the poor Laborers, by not employing them. And if they do employ them, and keep
Houses of Hospitality, they will ruin themselves, if their Estates be
over-taxed. So that the Vices, the Luxury, and Gallantry of the Nation, ought
to be mostly considered in that respect.
spared. They gather Honey, and hardly enjoy the Wax; and break the Ground with
great Labor, giving the best of their Grain to the Easeful and Idle.

For the second sort, which are the Merchants; Merchants. P. 157.
as the first feed the Kingdom, so do these enrich it; yea, their Trades,
especially those which are forcible, are not the least part of our Martial
Policy.

And to do them right, they have, in all Ages and Times, assisted the Kings of
this Land, not only with great Sums of Money, but with great Fleets of Ships,
in all their Enterprises beyond Sea.

The third sort, which (...) the Ge^^^y of England, they being neither (...) in
the lowest Ground, and thereby subject to the biting of every Beast; nor in the
highes^ (...), and thereby in danger to be torn with Tempests; but in the
Valleys between both, have their part in the inferior Justice, and being
spread over all, are the Garrisons of good Order throughout the Realm.

XVI.
In the Situation of Countries and Cities, P. 142. Situation for Safety and
Plenty.
there is to be required a Place of Safety by some natural Strength,
commodiousness for Navigation and Conduct, for the obtaining of plenty of all
good Things, for the Sustenance and Comfort of Man's Life, and to draw Trade
and Intercourse of other Nations.

In former times, P. 14. Multitude of Inhabitants.
great Nations, Kings, and Potentates, have endured sharp Conflicts, and held
it high Policy, by all means, to enor ease their Cities by multitudes of
inhabitants.

And to this End, the Rom^^t^ ever furnished themselves with Strength, and
Power, to make their Neighbor-people of Necessity, willing to draw themselves
to dwell at Rome.

Romulus, after a mighty Fight with the Sabines, condescended to Peace, upon
condition, that their King should come with all their People to dwell at Rome.

The same Course held Tamberlane the Great, whereby he enlarged the Great
Samarcanda.

And the Ottomans, to make the City Constantinople rich and great, brought to
it many Thousand Families, especially Artificers out of the subdued Cities.

Religion, Religion.
which is of such Force and Might, to amplify Cities, and Dominions, and of
such Attractive Virtue, to replenish the same with People, and Wealth, and to
have them in due Obedience, as none can be more: For without Adoration of some
Deity, no Commonwealth can subsist. Witness Jerusalem, Rome, Constantinople,
and all other Cities, that have been famous for the Profession of Religion, and
Divine Worship.

Court of Justice with due Execution of the same, Justice. P. 147.
in a City, do much enable, enlarge, and enrich it.

For it fastneth a great liking in a City to virtuous Men, and such as be
wealthy, that therein they may be free from the Violence and Oppressions of
covetous and wicked Men, and there will be rather resort thither, to inhabit or
traffic there, as occasion may minister unto them.

And (...) have C^use of (...) will repair thither,
wh^^e they may be (...) to find Indgment and Justice, duly executed, where by
a (...) City must needs be enriched and enlarged.

For our Lives and Fortunes, and all that ever we have in the
World, is in the Hands of Justice.

So that if Justice be not duly and truly, and without delay,
administered amongst Men, in vain is there any Society and Commerce.


XVII.
Put the Case, as it is mine, That I had been a Factor at Zant, and a Merchant
in London should give me a Commission to lay out 4000 l. for him on a Cargoe of
Currants, and to re-imburse my self on him by way of Venice. I lay out the 4000
l. and lade the Ship, and when the Ship is gone from Zant, the Merchant in
London writes to his Factor at Venice, not to accept or pay any Bills. What
must I do then? why, I must even leave my Profession at Zant, and come home to
follow a Lawsuit in England. And what follows then? That, Sir Josiah Child
tells you.

The want of a Court-Merchant in England, is, New Disc. of Trade, p. 112, 113,
etc.
and ever has been a great Bar to the Progress and Grandeur of the Trade of
this Kingdom: As for instance,

I. A Merchant, happen to have differences with Masters and Owners of Ships
upon Charter-parties, and Accounts beyond Sea, etc. The Suit is commonly first
commenced in the Admiralty-Court; where, after tedious Attendance, and vast
Expenses probably, just before the Cause should come to determination, it is
either removed into the Delegates, where it may hang in suspense, until the
Plaintiff and Defendant have empty Purses and Gray-heads.

Or else, because most Contracts for Maritime Affairs are made upon the Land,
and most Accidents happen in some Rivers, or Harbors here, or beyond Sea, are
not in Alto Mare, the Defendant brings his Writ of Prohibition, and removes the
Cause into his Majesty's Court of King's Bench.

Where after great Expenses of Time and Money, it is well if we can make our
own Counsel (being common Lawyers) understand one half of our Case, we being
amongst Strangers, as in a Foreign Country; our Language strange to them, and
theirs as strange to us.

After all, no Attestations of Foreign No^^^ies, nor other Public Instruments
from beyond the Seas being Evidences at Law, and the Accounts depending, (...)
perhaps of 100 or more several Articles, which are as so many Issues at Law,
the Cause must come into Chancery.

Where, after many Years tedious Travels to Westminster, with black Boxes, and
green Baggs, when the Plaintiff and Defendant have tired their Bodies,
distracted their Brains, and consumed their Estates, the Cause, if ever it be
ended, is commonly reserred to Merchants, ending miserably, where it might have
had at first a happy Issue, if it had been begun a-right.

The Close.
These things being so great a Dishonor to so great a King, and so great a
Disinterest to so great a Country, do highly deserve the Consideration of both
Houses of Parliament. To whom I humbly submit ^^em.

POSTSCRIPT.
I.
HAD it not been for the Diversions of Law, and some intervening Accidents,
this Essay or Collection had come sooner out, to save some Pains that have been
taken, to regula^^ the Coin and Commerce of the Kingdom.

And indeed, if our Commerce be not regulated, together with our Coin, and both
supported by pure Religion, and undefiled Justice, we may stamp our New Coin
with this Superscription, Sec^^ius Bellum Pace Dubia, as the Dutch coined some
Money with the same Motto, when the Treaty of Peace at Breda was broken off.

For the French, having still by them the true Ways and Means to gain the
Over-balance of Trade, in time of Peace, and the most excellent Execution of
Justice, (without which, there is little Martial-policy, and in vain is there
any Society, and Commerce,) they, being very wise (like the Tyrians) will heap
up Silver like the Dust, and Gold like the Mire in the Streets, whilst we cast
away care, and live like the -- People that dwell at Sechem.

But (nothing hurting the English Nature more than much quiet and peace) if we
carry on that vigorous War against France (which his Majesty has begun) with
Prudence, Justice, Fortitude, and Temperance, we may smite their Power in the
Sea, and they shall be devoured by Fire.

II.
IN the the Votes of the House of Commons, Martis 12 Die Martij 1694. I find
the following Resolutions of the Committee, which, it seems, were not agreed to
by the whole House.

Resolved, That it is the opinion of this Committee, That ten hundred Thousand
Pounds is a sufficient Sum, to make good the Deficiency of the present clipped
Coin of this Kingdom.

But our Silver is turned so much into Mixed-Metal, Answ.
and Dross-Money; that, if Six Millions be necessary to circulate, One Million,
(with all Submission) I think it will not be enough to make good the deficiency
that will be be found, for carrying on the Commerce of the Kingdom. Wherefore
(for the present) until we can bring in more Bullion, by the over balance of
Trade, some other Metal should, with an E^gi^e, so (...) be Milled, that the
Charge should prevent all practice of false Play.

III.
To the third, fourth, fifth and sixth Resolution, That the Crown and Half
Crown, hereafter to be Coth'd, shall be of the present Weight and Fineness --
That the Crown piece should go for Five Shillings Sixpence, etc. -- That the
present Milled Crown piece go for Five Shillings Sixpence, etc. I humbly
answer:

1. That it would be for the Honor of the King, (and therein for the Interest
of the Country,) to have all the Money new Minted, and Milled, with his
Majesty's Image, and Superscription; which Honor his Majesty most highly
merits; forasmuch as his Paternal Care for the Commonwealth of the Kingdom,
has (against his own present Interest, and in such a time of War) ecommended
to his Parliament the Balance of Trade; which is the principal Means to bring
in Bullion and Plate.

2. That, to carry on our Commerce with the more ease, we should (I humbly
think, as in the time of Edward 3) Coin our Money for convenience.

And, it would be (with submission) for the greater convenience, and the
easier, and better keeping of all Accounts, that our Crown-piece should pass
but for a Crown; and that our new Coin should be (as near as possible,
respecting the charge of Coinage) as much in Money, as in Mass. For we may (if
we are not wanting to our selves, and to the good Nature of our Nation) keep it
from Exportation, and the Melting-Pot, by the over-balance of Trade; which is
also the best Means to maintain a Vigorou, War.

IV.
Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That it be Penal on all
such Persons on whom Clippings are found.

But that may sometimes fall hard on some innocent People, Answ.
for lately one Mr. Jarvis, a Tobacconist on Cock Hill, having sound out a
Thief that stole some Tobacco from him, the said Thief, or some other Body for
him, conveyed a parcel of Clippings into his House; for which his Wife was
committed to Newgate, and was put to great Trouble, and Charge, before the
could be discharged from thence.

V.
Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That it be Penal on such
Persons as shall Import any Clipped, or Counterfeit Money.

I believe we have had as many Guinea's, and as much Clipped, Answ.
Mixed, and Dross Money Imported upon us, as does now circulate in the Nation.
And to prevent such Importation for the future, the one half, upon discovery
thereof, should go to the Informer, and the other to the King: For when an Act
is just and good, they that inform in favor thereof, should not lose any
Credit by scandalous Titles, or Opinion, but should receive all Encouragement
imaginable. When Rome was in a rising condition, those that Informed in her
favor, were looked on as Men of Honor; but as she went to ruin, and was
exposed by the Soldiers, (who should preserve her) to the Sale of who gave
most, the Informers were looked upon to be only famous for Infamy, as they are
now in other declining Countries.

VI.
Resolved, That it is the Opinion of this Committee, That it be Penal on any
Person to Export English Bullion; and the proof to lie on the Exporter.

I was extremely glad when I read this Resolution; for it will, by some kind of
necessity, put us upon gaining the over balance of Trade; which is the only
thing (next to Religion and Justice) which we want to gain the Empire of the
Universe, as well as that of the Ocean

Religion in Britain has hitherto been, for the most part, Hist. Disc.
maintained by immediate Influence from Heaven.

And the way of Justice and Gentleness, has had more Force in Britain than
Arms.

Under the wise Government of Aurelius the Emperor, mounting into the British
Throne, crowned Lucius, first of all Kings, with the Royal Title of a Christian.

And he was not so much a Vassal, as a Friend, and Ally to the Romans: And,
perceiving the Empire to be past Noon, and their Lieutenants to comply with the
Christians, began to provide for future Generations; and, according to the Two
grand Defects of Religion, and Justice, applied himself to the establishment of
both.

Which Act of Lucius, so advanced him in the Opinion of Writers, that they knew
not when they had said enough of him.

Whereas before, Britain was become a Glut of Wickedness, and a Burden that God
would endure no longer.

The Kingdoms of Christendom, now in being, had their rising from the fall of
Rome; and Vortigern (a Native of this Isle), first established here a free
Kingdom, four hundred and fifty Years after Christ, and so left it to the
Saxons. So England has a great Precedence, in respect of the Antiquity of the
Kingdom, which (as Beda observes) was always a Monarch in a Heptarchy.

So it has the Precedence likewise in respect of the Antiquity of the
Christian Religion.

Joseph of Arimathea planted the Christian Religion, immediately after the
Passion of Christ, in this Realm.

And Aristobulus (one of them mentioned by St. Paul, Dorotheus.
Romans 6.) was Episc. Britannorum; and likewise Simon Zelotes; yea, St. Peter,
and St. Paul himself, as Theodoretus does testify.

The first Christian King in Europe, was Lucius Surius.

And the first that ever advanced the Papacy of Rome, was the Emperor
Constantine, born at York.

Edward the Third, King of England, was ( Anno 1338) created by the Emperor,
Vicarius Perpetuus Imperii. And William the Third, King of England, may be the
greatest Emperor that ever was, if we are not wanting to him, when he is not
to us.

This Kingdom is held of God alone, Cottoni Posthuma, p. 87. Hist. Disc. p. 3.
acknowledging no Superior.

It was long before the Son of God was enwombed; and whilst, as yet, Providence
seemed to close only with the Jewish Nation, and to hover over it, as a choice
picked Place from all the Earth, that, with a gracious Eye, surveying the
forsaken condition of all other Nations, it glanced on this Island. Both
Thoughts and Words reflected on Isles, Isa 42.4.31.3.60.4.66.19.
Isles of the Gentiles, Isles afar off; as if amongst them the Lord of all the
Earth had found out some place, that should be to him, as the Gem of the Ring
of this terrestrial Globe.

And if the ways of future Providence may be looked upon as a Gloss of those
Prophecies, we must confess, that this Island was conceived in the Womb
thereof, long before it was manifested to the World.

No sooner was the Scepter departed from Judah, but both it, and the Lawgiver,
came hither, as if we were the only White that was in God's Aim.

VII
And shall we, after all this (for the sake of Self-interest) be any ways
wanting to Albion, which God has so highly honored, and so bountifully
blessed above all the Kingdoms in the World?

No, sure; for there is nothing expected from our Gratitude toward God, and
our Duty toward the Nation, but what the Honorable Representatives thereof
may make practicable, by means of their principal Commitees of Religion,
Grievances, Trade, and Justice; and the Power they have of sending for Persons,
Papers and Records.

VIII.
And since they are as deeply engaged, as they are highly concerned to regulate
the Coin of the Kingdom, and to turn our Dross into Silver again, I hope they
will raise no small Fund, or Sum of Money for it, In a printed Paper,
entitled, Reasons for not laying any farther Impositions upon Coals, there is
this Particular: Which, in things of Choice and Luxury, may be tolerable; but,
in Cases of Necessity, must be extreme grievous, especially to many Tradesmen.
out of the Causes, and Effects of Extravagancy, and Covetousness. I mean, such
Extravagancies, for the most part, as promote excessive and consumptive
Importations.

And such Covetousness as makes (against the Laws of God, and the World)
Twelve, and sometimes Twenty per Cent, of Money, by Interest, Procuration,
Continuation, etc. It is the Opinion of some others, as well as my own, That
all Masters of English Ships should be Taxed abroad, together with the Factors;
for they are come now to act in half Commissions, etc. with the Factors. And,
to speak with all Modesty, they gain above 12 per Cent. more than the Merchants
do, by more advantageous Trading.
And there are a great many concerned in this Craft, that should refund a great
deal for the present Occasion.

IX.
And, if our Trade and Justice be regulated together with our Coin, and
Religion honestly and (...), our King's most excellent Majesty may use a
greater Style of Sovereignty than this of King Edgar, wherewith (and with a few
other Words) I conclude:

Ego Edgarus Anglorum (...), omnicumque Regum Insularumque Oceani Britannici
circumjacentium, cunctarumque Nationum quae infra eam includuntur, Imperator,
ac Dominus.

And now (I think, from what has been said, or rather shown) it may be seen a
little, how much God and Nature have done for us, more than we endeavor to do
for our selves. And I wish that any part of this Enterprise may answer the Ends
for which the whole was designed, with all Sincerity and Goodwill.

For else I would have robbed and stolen from the Authorities I have
acknowledged, transmigrated their Dispensat^^i^s into the Wrong Appropriation,
and, made those Doctors Opinions pass for my own, who am the most unfit Person
to prescribe any thing for the Distempers of State, in a Corrupted Time.

FINIS.

