A PREAMBLE With the Protestation made by the whole House of Commons the 3. of
May. 1641. and Assented unto by the Lords of the Upper House the 4. of May
WE the Knights, Citizens, and Burgesses, of the Commons House in Parliament,
finding to the grief of our Hearts, that the Designs of the Priests and
Jesuits, and other Adherents to the Sea of Rome have of late more boldly, and
frequently put in practice, then formerly, to the undermining and danger of the
Ruin of the true Reformed Religion, in his Majesty's Dominions established,
and finding also, that there has been, and having cause to suspect there
still are, even during the Sitting in Parliament, Endeavors to subvert the
Fundamental Laws of England, and Ireland, and to introduce the Exercise of an
Arbitrary, and Tyrannical Government; by most pernicious and wicked Counsels,
Plots, and Conspiracies, and that the long Intermition, and unhappier breach of
Parliaments, has occasioned many illegal Taxations, whereupon the Subjects
have been prosecuted and grieved, and that diverse Innovations and
Superstitions have been brought into the Church, Multitudes driven out of his
Majesty's Dominions, Jealousies raised and Fomented, between the King and his
People, a Popish Army leavyed in ^reland, and two Armies brought into the
Bowels of this Kingdom, to the hazard of his Majesty's Royal Person, the
Consumption of the Revenue of the Crown, and the Treasure of this Realm. And
lastly, finding the great Causes of Jealousy, endeavors have been and are
used to bring the English Army into misunderstanding of this Parliament;
thereby to incline that Army by force, to bring to pass, those wicked
Councels; have therefore thought good to join out selves in a Declaration of
our united affections, and Resolutions, and to make this ensuing Protestation.

THE PROTESTATION.
I A. B. Do in the presence of Almighty God promise, vow, and protest, to
maintain and defend, as far as lawfully I may with my Life, Power, and
Estate, the true Reformed Protestant Religion, expressed in the Doctrine of the
Church of England against all Popery: and Popish Innovations. And According to
the duty of my Allegiance to his Majesty's Royal Person, Honor and Estate.

As also the power and Privilege of Parliament, the lawful Rights and
liberties of the Subjects. And every person that makes this Protestation in
whatsoever he shall do in the lawful pursuance of the same, and to my power as
far as lawfully I may, I will oppose and by good ways and means endeavor to
bring to condign punishment all such as shall by Force, Practice, Counsel,
Plots Conspiracies, or otherwise do any thing to the contrary in this present
Protestation contained, and further I shall in all Just and Honorable ways,
endeavor to preserve the Union, and Peace betwixt the three Kingdoms of
England, Scotland and Ireland. And neither for hope, fear, nor other respects
shall relinquish this Promise, Vow and Protestation.

FINIS.
London Printed. MDCXLI.


