A VINDICATION OF MONARCHY AND The Government long established in the Church
and Kingdom of England, Against The pernicious Assertions and tumultuous
Practices of the Innovators during the last Parliament in the REIGN OF CHARLES
the I.

Written by Sir ROBERT POYNTZ Knight of the Bath.

LONDON, Printed, by Roger Norton, and are to be sold by Gabriel Bedell, and
Thomas Collins, at the Middle-Temple-Gate in Fleet Street, 1661.

A VINDICATION OF MONARCHY AND The Government long established in the Church
and Kingdom of England, etc.
CHAP. I. Innovations in Government; Publishing of false News, and Prophesies;
Pretenses of Reformation; Sects and Divisions in matters of Religion; Quarrel
against Episcopacy.
WE find by daily experience that those Rivers which run from the purest
Fountains, the farther they run, the more corruption they gather: and so is it
with the Church and Commonwealth, which have had their institutions,
discipline and laws drawn from the pure fountains of piety, prudence and
equity; yet by the course of time they are carried through the corruption in
manners, defects in government, and in the execution of good Laws, into a
stream of abuses, contempt and confusion. But when the corruptions are such as
are not incurable, but removable, we find it much better to content our selves
with a fair, orderly and prudent reformation, or a temporary toleration, then
by adventuring rashly upon the cure, make the disease worse, or change it into
as bad, through the change of that which has long continued, and may very
fitly be retained, and easily be purged from the corruptions and abuses which
are adherent. For by Innovations, especially sudden, the minds of men are
disquieted, fuel is brought unto fiery and turbulent spirits, and the peace of
the Church and Commonwealth endangered, if not destroyed, which by the
Apostolical precept and practice we ought carefully to preserve. The rule which
Vlpian gives us is worth remembrance, In rebus novis constituendis evidens
esse debeat utilitas, ut ab eo jure quod diu aequum fuit recedatur. It is an
evident sign of a distemperature in the brain, or of great levity, when we
rashly rush upon the change of ancient institutions and customs, if there can
be found no great inconvenience in the use of them. The desire of change is
restless, and like superstition taking hold in the minds of men, when it has
broken the bounds of piety. Alterations are dangerous, although they are
specious, and have some reason to justify them; and oftentimes those are the
most dangerous, which are most specious, especially if they are driven on
tumultuously, or by faction. When the people begin to be divided in Religion,
or to show themselves discontented with the present government, then do the
ambitious and factious spirits (who fish best in troubled waters) lay in their
hooks and make use of the season and opportunity. And it has been often
observed, that those who have had designs upon the State, or to become a head
of a Faction, to raise sedition, or to possess or alter the Government, have
ever pretended Religion or the Public good, or the reformation of abuses, and
the removing of evil Counselors. Pretenses of great efficacy in a discontented
and factious state, abounding with men presumptuous, self-willed, and despisers
of Government, as the Apostle says; Jude.
and prone to cast off all affection and fear of their Sovereign. I need not to
insist upon examples, they are frequent, I will only relate one of our own. In
Anglia non defectiones qu^mp-in um a R^ge Henrico sexto, sed in eos qui apud
eum plurimum poterant, Impetus fac^us erat. Paulatim au. dicis crevit and ducum
inter aemulationes, simuliatesque, ad postremum and Domestica bella exorta, and
in ipsum Regem vis intenta^ur. Paulus Aemilius lib. 10. Histor.
Under this pretense of evil Government, and removing of evil Counselors, and
with great protestations of sincerity and love to his Country, did Richard
Duke of York gain the affections of the people from their innocent King Henry
the Sixth, who stood in his way to the Crown, so as the Duke of Somerset for
his faithful adhering unto that King Henry his Nephew, and for crossing the
aspiring of the Duke of York, had by great cunning contrivance the hatred of
the inconstant and seduced people stirred up against him, under that general
and indefinite notion of an evil Counselor, and an enemy of the Commonwealth,
to the ruin of himself first, and then of his King. Upon this and the like
examples, it seems, that the Statute in the third year of Henry the seventh
did reflect; for the words are, that by quarrels made to such as have been in
great Authority, Office, and of Counsel with the King of this Realm, has
ensued the destruction of the Kings, and the ruin of the Realm: So as it
appeared evidently, when the compassing of the death of such true subjects was
had, the destruction of the Prince was imagined thereby. Per latus alierum
Regem peti, ei. que litem intentari, ut qui capi and opprimi non potuit, is
ametis fidis Consiliariis and ministris, Regis dignitate simul ac liberate
spolietur. Thuan. de Henrico 3. Galli^ lib. 91. Hist.
We find for the furtherance of such designs, two pestiferous means often used
by factious men and Incendiaries to infatuate the People, and to raise them on
their side; the one is the devising and publishing of faise tales and news, as
did Shimei by bruiting infamous Speeches or Libels against King David, calling
him the man of blood. We have made lies our refuge, and under falsehood have we
hid cur selves, Isa 28.15.
The Histories in all times, and the Laws against it in all States, show the
hurt it brings to the Commonwealth. P. Justin hist. of Ven.
The Ven^tians put to death a man who divulged false news, which much
disquieted the City. But those who first related the true news of the defeat
given to the King of France by the Saracens in the East, M. Paris in Hen. 3.
were condemned in France to be hanged. It was an ancient manner among the
Heathen Princes, Eusebius. Eccles. hist. l. 2 c^^
that if any novelty happened, it should be first declared to him who held the
Scepter. The Statute made in the 12. of Rich. the 2. says, That by this means
of news, discord has often risen between the King and the People, and slander
within the Realm, whereof quick destruction and subversion of the Realm may
ensue. Caesar says in his Commentaries, Falsis rumoribus homines terreri, and
ad facinus impelli, and de summis rebus consilium capere cognitum est: Ecclus.
18.14. James 3
A backbiting tongue has pulled down strong Cities, and overthrown the houses
of great men. The tongue sets on fire the whole course of nature, and it is
set on fire of hell, says the Apostle. It is called a sharp sword, by the
Psalmist, gladius acutus; and in Job, flagellum linguae.

The other means used by Incendiaries, is the publishing of Prophesies, or
making use of them to amuse the people, and keep them in the expectation of a
change. New Religions were brought into Rome by certain Books of Prophesies,
which were publicly burned. It was a capital Crime by the Roman Law in him,
Livius. L. 30. F. de Poenis.
Qui aliquid fecerit, quo leves hominum mentes superstitione Numinis
terrerentur: and so was it also in them, Paul. sent. lib. 5. lit. 21. and 23.
tit. Cod. de malesic. and Mathem. Leo descrip. Africae.
Qui divinandi artem exercebant, aut Vaticinii libros habebant. And thus by the
Canon Law, and also by Mahomets Law, Magiam and Cabalisticas arts lege
Mahometica vetitas esse. The Magicians and Southsayers, and those who profess
the knowledge of things to come are more dangerous to a City, says St. Hierom,
then fire, especially those who consult of the state of the Commonwealth, or
of the life and death of the Prince; L. 8. Cod. de Mathematicis. vel Arioles,
atuspices, vaticinat^tes consuluit, cum eo qui responderit, capite punitur.
Paul. senten. lib. 5 tit. 21. Cuiac. ad tit. Cod. de Maleficis.
Qui de salute Principis and summa Reipublicae Mathematicos consuluit, he was
punished by death; And by that Law the crime was equal in both, talia prohibita
tam discere quam docere, in those who did seek to learn, as well as the Masters
of that Art. Cause. 3. quaest. 5. c. 9. Deuteronomy. 18. Lev. 20. and 19.
The Canon Law made all those infamous, Qui ad sortilegos and Divinos
concurrunt infames sunt, nec accusatores, nec testes esse possunt. The divine
Law says, there shall not be found amongst you that uses Divination, or is a
Wizard; they shall be put to death: Seek not after Wizards to be defiled by
them. Confess. lib. 7. c. 6.
Mathematicorum fallaces divinationes and impia diliramenta, says St Austin.
Who so are desirous to search into these vain and impious Prophesies, and to
enquire of things to come, the Devil is ready to answer their curiosity with
strong delusions; Lip^^i monita Posit.
quae turbant animos and ad novas aut magnas spes impellunt. Nunquam curiositas
and cupiditas conjuncta cum avaritia and superstitione cognoscendi res futuras,
Aelian. var. hist. lib. 3. c. 3.
neque Gentilibus, neque iis qui Christiani perhiberi voluerunt, impunis vel
innoxia fuit. The raisers of a dangerous sedition in Yorkshire, Heyward in
Edw. 6.
in the reign of Edward the sixth, took their rise and encouragement from a
dark and deceivable Prophecy, and understood that to be the time to accomplish
that Prophecy, which did fortel the time should come, when there should be no
King, and that the Nobility and Gentry should be destroyed, and the Realm ruled
by the Commons holding a Parliament in commotion. Thuan. lib. 125.
The Duke of Savoy not to condescend unto equal conditions of Peace with Henry
the fourth of France, was drawn by a Prophecy, that at such a time there
should be no King in France; which had something of truth, for the King of
France was that year in Savoy, and in the pursuit of his Conquest thereof. And
yet notwithstanding, such is the desire of men to know things to come, that
these Astrologers and Southsayers gain more credit by foretelling one truth,
then they do discredit by ten falsities; whereas others, if they lie in one
thing, are scarce ever believed in any truth they relate.

Religion and reformation, as was said before, have ever been pretended by
those who have had pernicious designs; and factious and ambitious men have
often taken hold of the dissentions concerning religion, to work the people to
a compliance with them: These men convert Religion under false and specious
pretenses into faction; or use religion like a stalking horse, as did Jerobeam
and Mahomet, Qui nervum potentiae suae in novae Religionis formula ad affectus
hominum inflexa ponebant. Jerobeam usurped and Israel rebelled against the
house of David; Jeroboam changed the public service of God and also the place
from Jerusalem to Bethel and to Dan; for if the people went up to Jerusalem to
sacrifice, he feared their hearts would turn to Rehoboam their King, and the
Kingdom return again to the house of David: and he made Priests of the lowest
of the People, which were not of the sons of Levi, 1 King. 12.
The changes in religion have often wrought great changes in the minds and
manners of men: whereupon the saying is grounded A new religion, and a new
Prince or government. The Popes Nuncio hearing Francis the first of France, use
sharp speeches against the Pope, and saying he would withdraw his Subjects
obedience from the Sea of Rome in things of Ecclesiastical Discipline, the
Nuncio replied, that his Majesty would be a loser thereby as much as the Pope,
for a new Religion, if it took the People in the head, would draw them on to
the desire of changing their King, or Government. Unity in Religion being the
chiefest pillar that upholdeth the joint obedience of the Subjects to their
Sovereign, and to the Laws of their Country. ^or where they are not united in
their Religion, they are not united in their Obedience to their Sovereign,
neither in their affections to their fellow subjects, but are ever apt to fall
into seditions; and of this there are many examples in this latter age. Not to
come nearer unto us, I will rather choose to relate that of the Moors in Spain,
who notwithstanding all the endeavors of the Emperor Charles the fifth, and
his Successors, could never be made good Subjects or Christians: they only
pretended a desire of liberty of Conscience, which they thought they could
never obtain, unless they had a King and Laws according to their will, Fonseca
of the expulsion of the Moors.
whereupon they entered into a most dangerous conspiracy, and took up arms. The
Proverb was true, never of a good Moore, a good Christian. Their King said of
them, that they would never be faithful to God, who would never be faithful to
their King. Hist. of Spain. Curtius.
It was truly observed of such inconstant People, Melius vatibus suis quam
Regibus suis parent, a new Apostle is more precious then King or Laws: How
often, Monita Pol.
says Lipsius, of old and of late times, to the great peril of Princes and
Commonwealths, Pravae aut novae religionis titulo populum concitatum fuisse,
unus aliquis concionator sanctimoniae fama and telo armatus, and eloquentia
aliqua ornatus, quid non patrat? Of such men the Prophets often gave warning,
who flatter the people, and prophecy lies in Gods name. For this cause of
Religion men become wolves to each other: in this fury they abandon all
respects civil and natural: The brother delivers up the brother, Matthew. 10.
and the father the child to death. This made certain Jews bind themselves
under a curse, Act. 23.
that they would never eat nor drink until they had killed St. Paul. Experience
has proved that there is no cruelty comparable to theirs, who have taken on
them the name of the Church, neither any so dangerous evil, as that which
carries the face and pretense of Religion. King James describes such Puritans
as he had long trial of in Scotland, Instruct. to his son.
and says, they are the very Pests of the Church and Commonwealth, whom no
deserts can oblige, neither promises or oaths bind, breathing nothing but
seditions and calumnies; aspiring without measure, railing without reason,
making their own imaginations without warrant of the Word of God, the rule of
their actions. Sermo 66. Cant.
St. Bernard does make mention of the like men in his time, Qui nec rationibus
convincuntur, quia non intelligunt, nec autoritatibus corriguntur, quia non
recipient, nec slectuntur suasionibus quia subversi sunt. Of the like men by
the unsearchable Judgment of God, our King his Son had the like experience, but
with much worse success. It were a work of time, and a labor to little
purpose, to relate the several Sects which now do swarm; for sometimes their
doctrine does differ from their practice, and some of their errors are opposite
to others, although they spring from the same root. And it is meet that errors
should be divided, into sundry serpentine heads, one hissing against another:
howsoever they are tied together by the tails like Samson's Foxes, to set fire
both in the Church and Commonwealth. D. Bernard. Sermo 65.
In cunctis assertionibus eorum licet multae sunt, nec novum quid aut inauditum
audisse me recolo, sed quod tritum est and diu ventilatum inter antiquos
haereticos, a nostris autem contritum and eventilatum. The Ecclesiastical
Histories do mention such Pests to have been ^^ciently in the Church, and these
of our Age seem to be of their seed, and of the same leven and mould. Eusebius
says, that whilst new Heresies sprang up, Eccles. hist. lib. 4. cap. 7.
creeping one upon another, the latter taking place, the former did seem to
vanish, or subdivide into many Sects, changing this way, or that way until they
were destroyed, or grown obsolete and out of request. For the Church being once
divided, they rested not upon any one Schism or Sect, Socrat. Eccl. hist.
but they fell out and severed themselves upon slight and trivial matters.
People divided in religion seldom agree in matters secular: neither can
religion be safe, when the Commonwealth is rent by civil discord; both suffer
together, in, by and through each other. Socrat. Proem. ad lib. 5. Eccl hist.
When the Commonwealth has been tossed with dissentions, the Church has not
been quiet, both at one time out of square, or the ones calamity ensued
immediately after the others. And sometime when the Church began to vary in
religion immediately followed rebellion against the Civil Magistrate. But we
can find none, or very few of those many ancient Heretics, Sectaries, or
Schismatics quarrel with Episcopacy, but all these of our time jump together
in no one point so near as they do against Episcopacy. Those Christians who are
now dispersed in diverse parts of Africa and Asia, although they are of
different Sects, do not admit of any other form in Ecclesiastical Government
but Episcopal; in this they agree. The ancient Heretics and Schismatics, who
were as subtle men as these new, did not quarrel at the Function, so as they
might have had Bishops of their own side, or have been Bishops themselves:
Their envy toward others, or their desire of being preferred before others
made many become patrons of Heresies, to the great prejudice of the Church, and
the peace thereof. Concerning the opposition against Episcopacy and
Ecclesiastical Discipline (wherein full defense has been made by diverse
learned and pious men) I shall not say much, although the matter deserves to
be more fully and exactly handled. Much may be said against the tyranny and
superstition under the Papacy, and against other abuses, and personal faults,
yet may we not thereby infer a necessity of the change of the Episcopal order
and office into Presbytery, which is subject to as many and great abuses, as
they find who live under it. It is not without just cause that those men who
would be reputed learned and pious should receive blame, for their so eager and
bitter contesting against the superiority of one man in Church Government, even
to the rending of the Church in pieces; when they do not define or declare by
the Scriptures, notwithstanding all their labor what is of necessary and
perpetual obligation in this controversy. And of all those things which they
have urged in their own behalf as greatly necessary for Church Government,
there is no one which they have proved to be contained in Scripture, and
enjoined for perpetuity: but in stead of this proof, they obtrude conjectural
and slight interpretations, uncertain probabilities, and as weak inferences in
opposition of the primitive and continual judgment and practice of the Church.
Until the blessed Apostles less the world, there could be but little show of
superiority in any but in them, and in those whom the Apostles constituted
Superiors, as Timothy and Titus: 2 Cor. 8.23.
and immediately after them there was show enough in the Churches planted by
them, if we will give credit to all the stories of Antiquity, and value the
practice of the Primitive Church, when the Scripture was best understood, and
godliness did most abound. Our Savior did approve of superiority in the
Church, so as it were without pride and tyranny, by his saying, Luke 22.26.
He that is greatest amongst you, let him be as the younger, and he that is
cheise, as he that does serve. And that Saint James was established the first
Bishop of Jerusalem cannot be gainsaid. Saint Jerome whom the Presbytery
account most favorable to their cause of all the Ancients, and most against
the granting Episcopacy to be of Divine right, he says, Et Alexandriae a Marco
Evangelista usque ad Heraclam and Dionysium Episcopos, Presbyteri semper unum
ex se electum in excelsiori gradu collocatum Episcopum nominabant. Olim idem
erat Episcopus and Presbyter, sed sciunt Presbyteri ex Ecclesiae consuetudine,
Vide Distinct. 93. c. 4. and distinct. 95. c. 5.
and in toto orb decretum esse ut unus de Presbyteris electus superponeretur
caeteris, ad quem omnis Ecclesiae cura pertineret; and in schismatis remedium
factum est, ut schismatum semina tollerentur; ne unusquisque ad se trahens
Christi Ecclesiam rumperet. The time nearest the Apostles ought to be herein
our best Directory and interpreter: Observantia proxima valde interpretativa,
and dat fidem aut minuit.

The Apostolical and Primitive practice rather then the late discipline and
example of some reformed Churches, who as much of necessity as of election are
fallen for the most of them unto a form of Presbyterian discipline, of which
they find no use nor Character in the Primitive time. And therefore they show
little candor and sincerity, who so peremptorily defend this Presbyterian
discipline, and with detraction and detestation of Episcopal Government, seeing
it has been fully proved by Learned men, that the office and power of a
Bishop, made ever a great difference betwixt him and a Presbyter. Neither can
they conclude any thing for their advantage by the promiscuous use of those two
names at the first, at which they catch. It cannot be called one and the self
same order, where the offices are distinct: Diversi tituli praebent regulariter
significationem diversi juris. Episcopetus est ordo distinctus, in quantum est
officium qu^ddam, ad sacras actiones. Aquinas. Episcopa. tus juxta veriorem and
receptiorem sententiam Canonista. um and Theologorum, ordo est; quatenus ordo
dicitur officium quoddam and potestas, respec^u qua. rundam sacrarum actionum
que sacerdoti non convenient. Conarunias variarum resolut. lib. 1. c. 10.
Amongst Gods selected people there was the high Priest, the chief Governor of
the house of the Lord. Jer. 20.1. Numb. 3 32.
If the offices and things are distinct, it avails little the insisting upon
words and names promiscuously used. There is not one and the same imposition of
hands; and shall not it be a distinct order in it self, from whence ordination
and all other orders do and ever did proceed until of late time. Neither was
the office and Power of a Bishop lessened by the assistance and counsel of
certain Presbyters, called Senatus Ecclesiae, but rather strengthened and
supported by that ancient and laudable course. There does not appear in
Scripture any commission given to any assembly of Presbyters by our Savior to
govern the Church without a Bishop or Superior in whom was the power of
Ordination and Imposition of hands; although by the ancient Canons, Distinctio
24. c. 6. causa 15. qu^st. 7.
Episcopus sine consilio Clericorum suorum Clericos non ordinet, it a ut Civium
conniventiam, and testimonium quaerat. Neither is there any example in
Scripture of any delegation of power of Censures or Government derived from the
Apostles to any College or Assembly of mere Presbyters. If these men will
peruse the Canons of the four first general Councils, which Calvin says,
Institut. 4. c. 19 Et in lege Constantini Imperatoris, sancimus vim legum
obtinere Sanctas Ecclesiasticas regulas quae a Sanctis qu^tuor primis Cenciliis
exposi a sunt. Novell. 131. cap. 1. distinctio: 15. c. 2.
libenter amplectimur and reveremur, they shall find enough to justify the
office and superiority of Bishops, and to give them satisfaction of the
necessity of that Function, if wilful ignorance and the spirit of delusion and
contention does not still prevail. They cannot show that ever any Church upon
the face of the earth has ever been ordered by their discipline, until this
later age, or has not ever been under Episcopal government since the Apostles
time. Exceptis Haereticis Macedonianis qui pro certo tempore non habthant
Episcopum, sed sub solis Presbyteriis e^ant. Sosomen. Eccles. hist. lib. 8. c.
1.
Neither can they by their doctrine and manners, or by any other means induce
those who are in no respect behind them in learning, prudence and piety, to
believe that they and not others have had the clearer lights, and more divine
inspirations. Saint Paul meeting with such men, says unto them, 1 Cor. 14.36.
Luke 11.35.
What came the word of God out from you, or came it only unto you? Take heed
that the light which is in thee be not darkness.

CHAP. II. Of the Presbyterian Government in the Church; The practice in the
Primitive times; Touching the election of Pastors and Ministers in the Church,
and their maintenance by payment of Tithes
AS they would have it granted that their Presbyterian Government is only of
Divine right, so would they also have it granted, that nothing is to be used in
Church Government, but that which has direct and express warrant in Scripture,
and that all discipline and order in the Church, ought to be reduced to the
primary purity of the Church, which is not possible in many things, neither
necessary or expedient in these corrupt times, and latter age of the world. An
exact form for all Church government and discipline is not to be found
expressed in the Scripture. For one cause of so many general Councils in the
first times, and shortly after, was to make Canons and Constitutions for the
external Government of the Church, which had not needed, if such a perfect
Platform had been delivered in the Scripture, as these men do imagine. We find
of necessity, Aliter in constituta Ecclesia, aliter in constituenda. Some
things are sit for the present, which for the times past were not convenient,
according to the old saying, Nunc aliud tempus, alii pro tempore mores. Cicero
had just cause to be displeased with Cato, who living in a corrupt State,
sought to have all things carried as though he had lived in Plato's Common
wealth. New laws may be made, but not new men, neither the present manners of
men altered, or reduced to the old. It was wisely said in the Imperial Law,
That the looking back too curiously into the times of old, and seeking to
reduce the present to that which was past, erat confusionis potius quam
legislationis. Laws look not back, they may well be made to look forward, and
for the future, but they must of necessity be made fit for the present time,
which man cannot overruled. Aul. Gel. lib. 20. c. 1.
Legum opportunitates and medelas pro temporum moribus, and pro rerum
publicarum generibus, and pro utilitate praesentium mutari atque flecti. The
ancient good discipline may well serve for our instruction, which neither may,
nor can all serve for our imitation. Respect is to be had unto the times of
old, and we are instructed by Gods word to ask of the days of old, to remember
the days past, to ask for the old paths, but not enjoined to follow them in
all things, Jerem. 6.16.
and in all times. We find in the Scripture things of Apostolical institution,
changeable, and not appointed for perpetuity. Many offices and ministeries in
the Church at first were soon changed, as the electing of widows for some
services; the manner of instituting and ordering of Pastors and Elders (not lay
Elders) and for the raising their maintenace, which in the primitive times when
the Church was in the Infancy, and under Persecution, before Tithes were
established, did rise from the free Benevolence of men, who were of one heart
and one soul, and sold their goods, Acts 4.
and laid the moneys at the Apostles feet: those who held the unity of the
Spirit in the bond of Peace, and needed not the tie and coercive Power of
Laws: Talem primum Christianorum conventum suisse, D. Hierony. mus.
quales monachi esse imitentur et cupiant esse, ut nihil cujusquam proprium
sit, nullus inter eos dives, nullus pauper: nec confundebant Christiani
dominia; bona egentibus in commune conferebant ut perinde ac domini eis
uterentur, fruerentur. But now how ill would it be, if all kind of standing
provision for the Church, and for the Ministry were taken away and their
estate made dependent again upon the voluntary devotion of men, and subject to
the mutability of times and changes in Commonwealths; as likewise if the
people should now have that power as at first, in choosing their Pastors and
ministers? The people in the primitive times, if they had a great power and
part in the election of their Pastors, they well deserved it in respect of
their great Piety, and moderation. It were very inconvenient they should now
use the same course in their elections, seeing the people are over numerous and
humorous, diversely and contrarily affected and disaffected, as are likewise the
Ministers and Clergy. Such power does not appear to be given to the people by
Gods word, as they who flatter them do pretend. In the Council of Laodicea
those popular elections were forbidden, which prohibition Origin says was in
his time, in respect they were carried with tumultuous clamors, favors and
rewards. Instit lib. 4. c. 3. number. 13.
Calvin writing of the choosing of Ministers, and of those who ought to have
the choice, he does not grant it to the people, but says hujus rei certa
regula peti non potest. And in the Church of Geneva, there is not any or very
small sign of any Popular Election. We find in the Primitive times the Peoples
concurrence by some suffrage or approbation, per signum, sermonem, aut
silentium liberum; and this is as much as is now allowed them by the best
Divines of the Presbytery: Cap. ult. de elec^i^. Duarenus and Alii. D. Cyprian.
epist. 4. lib. 1.
Ita ut omnes audiantur qui ordinationis impediendae causa objicere quidpiam
voluerunt, as in the ancient Canons. But there are varieties of judgments in
diverse Canons concerning the election of Pastors, as whether it must be in the
presence of many standers by, or at the request of the people, or with their
testimony, or with their consent, or by their election and voices. And then it
is a question whether the greater number present, shall by their voices
conclude all the absent who are interessed, although they are the greater
number. Vt sit in Electione Clericorum consensus Cleri, and Plebis and
Honoratorum Testimonium: Imperatcribus vero and Principibus electiones
Romanerum Ponti^icum atque aliorum Episcoporum referendes esse, usus and
constitutio tradidi ^; pro schismaticorum atque hareticorum dissentionibus
quibus nonnunquam Ecclesia Dei concussa periclitabatur. Distinctio 63. cap. 26,
27. Ita erat per vetustiores Canones,
This popular concurrence in these elections is almost universally abolished
(some character thereof may remain in some Churches) and it is swallowed up in
the right of Patronage of Churches; for when Princes and Lords of Manors
erected and endowed Churches, and thereby much disburthened the People by being
thus beneficial unto their Churches and Pastors; those Lords for their bounty,
were called and constituted Patrons of those Churches, and had the right of
Presentation of Clerks to them and their heirs in those Churches. Qui Ecclesiam
aedificat, Novel. 57. and 123. cap. 18.
aut de suo praebet Clericis annonas, jus habet instituendi and substituendi
Clericos, dummodo eos prius commendaverit Episcopo, qui eos admittere debe^t,
si Dei ministerio digni sint, as it is in the Imperial Law. And so by the Canon
Law, Hoc jus nominandi sen praesentandi Clericum competit ^i, C filiis 17.
quest. 7. Dua^. ren. de benefic. and minist. Ec. cle. lib. 5. c. 4.
qui fundavit, vel collapsam Ecclesiam restituit, vel dotavit, vel reditum
certum largitus fuerit. This right of Patronage and presentation to Benefices
the Common Law and Statutes of England do grant, and the laws and customs of
other Kingdoms, as well as the Civil and Canon-lawes. So as the Clergy men are
not constrained to live any longer upon a part of those common contributions
and dividents of moneys raised in the infancy of the Church, of gifts
proceeding from the pious zeal of ancient and venerable Christianity, but upon
their Tithes and Glebe-lands assigned unto them: and the Parishes also being
set out and divided, and several Pastors placed in Churches under the Bishops
of several Diocesses. And yet diverse men through a wild fancy, or to slatter
the people, as they would have the power of electing the Pastors to be in the
people, so would they have their maintenance left unto their will, or to the
mutable and arbitrary orders and decrees of Judges and Magistrates; which would
be a ready way to bring the Clergy into poverty and contempt, as being then
reputed but as Alms-men of the People, or as Tenants at will. Others would have
their maintenance set out and assigned in money, and not in Tithes. Some
quarrel with Tithes out of covetousness, some through ignorance, not
considering that Tithes have been out of much prudence and equity anciently and
universally dedicated to the necessary service of God and his Church, or rather
still continued since the Leviticall Priesthood was abolished, and they will
ever appear upon due consideration had of all times and things, to be the most
necessary, natural and equal, and in all respects the best maintenance for the
Clergy, and subject to least exceptions and inconveniences. And let them also
consider who so little regard Tithes, and think they were due only by the
Ceremonial Law of the Jews, and not by Evangelicall Precept, whether being
since again restored and dedicated universally under the Gospel by positive
laws and customs of nations to the necessary service of God and sustinance of
the Clergy (which is required of us by the express Evangelical law) they are
not now become again a sacred tribute and Gods right. Ananias keeping back a
part of the money consecrated to the service of God and his Church; Acts 5.
Institut. de rerum divisione. L. 1. Cod. de Sepulch. violat. Res quam devoverit
quis Jehovae, sanc^a sanctorum est Jehovae. Lev. 27.28. Covaruvias. Duarenius
and alii. L. 14. Cod. de Sacr. Eccles. sub poena Sacrilegii. Novel. 7. c. 10.
Heb 7.
we find how he was punished for his sacrilege. Quod divini juris est, nullius
est in bonis: Res religioni destinatas, and jam religionis effectas, qui
scienter emere and distrahere non dubit averint, tamet si jure venditio non
subsistit, laesae tamen religionis inciderunt in crimen. Sunt tamen aliquae res
Ecclesiasticae, quae non deputantur ad Altaris ministerium, nec ad cultus
divini celebrationem, ut domus, agri, prata and similia; quae sunt bona
temporalia Ecclesiae quae possunt certis casibus alienari: licet lege imperiali
indistincte dicitur, Patrimonium Ecclesiae, sicut ipsam sacrosanctam Ecclesiam,
illaesum and intactum custodiri. If, they will have a stipend in money to take
place in lieu of Tithes, when the thing it self may as well be had, and with
more reason be retained, what reason have we then to look after the Analogy and
substituting of a new thing of a different nature? The Apostle says, there was
a disannulling of the Commandment for the weakness and unprofitableness
thereof: but this old Law of Tithes cannot be in the rank of the weak and
unprofitable Ceremonial Laws, which were a shadow of things to come. Neither
can they prove that Tithes were only appropriated to the Levitical Prieithood;
God did not found them in that incorporation, but transferred his own right to
that order of Priesthood, which order ceasing it cannot therefore be inferred
that the same right ceased, and did not descend to the Evangelical ministry.
Before the Law given Abraham paid, and Jacob vowed the Tenth part. And the
Gentiles who lived without the Divine positive law, did repute the Tenth part
as a due by a religious Right, as profane Authors do testify. God did call the
detaining of Tithes the robbing of him, and for punishment thereof the Heavens
were shut up from giving rain, Malach. 3.
and the palmer-worm and the grasshopper sent to devour the fruits of the earth.
God is no less careful of the Ministers of the Gospel of his Son, our Savior,
then he was of the Levitical Priesthood: the Ministry of the Gospel being more
excellent in nature, more eminent in dignity, more profitable in use; and
therefore we ought also to account of our Pastors as the Ministers of Christ,
and stewards of the mysteries of God. Plerique dicunt, praece. ptum de decimis
Leviticis solvendis non emnino Ceremoniale, aut Jadiciale, sed morale fuisse,
atque sub lege etiam Evangelica vigere, nec antiquatum fuisse. Ita ut decimas
etiam hodie, Jure naturali, divino a^ Evangelico debitas esse. Alii dicunt
decimas quanlum ad quotam partem, quae vere decima pars est, jure humano
institutas suisse sub lege Evangelica, nec earum institutio est hodie, ex jure
naturali aut divino, quo ad certam quan^itatem, sed ad congruam sustentationem
Clericorum, and in laboris impensi justam mercedem. Covaruvias. The objection
made, that Tithes were due by the Levitical law which is now abolished under
the Gospel, is of little weight: which although it be granted, yet those
judicial Judaical laws do still retain vim exemplarem, although not
obligativam, and cum divinitut institutae fint, in iis ostenditur quid Deus
approbavit, and deservire possunt per modum exemplarium, seu directivum, ad
imit andam prudentiam and equitatem earum in multis: and as Calvin says, lib.
4. c. 4. number. 1. Institut. In iis rebus utile erit veteris Ecclesiae formam
recognoscere, quae nobis divinae institutionis imaginem quandam oculis
repraesentabit.


CHAP. III. The inconveniences that happen by the alterations of Government, in
the Church and Commonwealth; Of Ceremonies used in the Church Service; Of
tender consciences; Of the coercive power of the Magistrate in matters of
Religion.
ALthough it be true that all the Divine Laws extend not their power of binding
in all times, and to all persons; and that positive Laws Ecclesiastical must be
fitted to the times and manners of men, as has been said before, yet great
consideration ought to be taken, of the difference and variations of times, and
of other circumstances, reasons, and inconveniences, before any new Laws,
Orders or Discipline either in the Church or Commonwealth be imposed, or the
old and inveterate Laws and customs repealed and abrogated. Aristotle says,
That to give a sound judgment of a Law, is one of the weightiest things that a
man can take upon him; for we ought not only to look simply upon the nature
and quality of the things in themselves, and in abstract, but how they stand in
relation, and connection with other matters and things of long establishment,
and of great importance, lest by the removal of that against which our fancy
does run, we endanger the shaking, if not the subverting of it, and other
things, which the trial of time has found very profitable and necessary. Tales
leges quas ne usus quidem longo tempore (qui unus est legum corrector)
experiendo argueret: Livius.
tales leges tollendo, caeteras leges infirmari: And so the People learn to
under value all Laws of what kind soever, and to repute them of no weight and
efficacy, longer then they are supported by the hand of Authority. Leges quae
non in tempus aliquod, sed perpetuae utilitatis causa in aeternum latae sunt,
non sunt abrogandae, nisi quas aut usus coarguit aut s^^us aliquis Reipublicae
inutiles ^ecit. Li, vius lib. 34. Non ob quamcunque causam melius quidpiam
adserentem ^utanda est lex, sed tunc quando usque a^to excedit, ut damna
detrimentaque compensat, quae legis mutatio, sua apta natura secum assert. Soto
de Justitia and jure.
Some things which are not unlawful or evil in themselves, are oftentimes well
prohibited, when there is just cause of fear, lest a way be opened for doing of
things unlawful and hurtful: So does it often fall out, that some things
unnecessary in themselves, as to the purpose and end whereunto they were at
first applied, are very prudently still retained, in respect of some new
accidents arising, or by reason of the coherence they have with some other
thing of greater use and necessity, H^^ker. Eccles. Polity. Dio^ys. Halicar.
lest the taking away of the one should destroy the others, and bring disorder
and confusion in the Commonwealth. It was well said by a man of great
Judgment; that he could not approve of the utter abolishing of certain anuent
customs, although grossly abused, seeing the inconventences that thereby would
ensue; but rather that some redress or qualification were sought by the
prudence of those in Authority. Sent^a.
Sapi^ns potius apt at quam mutat. Saint Augustine says, of some evils in the
Roman State which were long settled, tam vetustam iniquitatem convellere,
periculosum erat: for it fares better with that Commonwealth, which does
observe and keep their ancient Laws and customs, although they are not of the
best, Thucydides.
then with those, who have the best, and are inconstant in the use and
observation of them. Julius Caesar said of Cato his mortal enemy, that he
showed himself both a good man, and a good Citizen, by opposing the changes of
the State and Government: Salust.
mutationes in Republica caedes and hostilia portendunt, especially if the
changes and alterations are driven on by violent and pertinacious Spirits, who
if they obtain their desire in having any ancient Laws and customs changed,
their Country shall find the smart, as did the Roman State, Valerius Max. lib.
9. cap. 1.
when the Senate yielded thereunto, quia non providerunt, ad quod tenderet
pertinax studium eorum, and quo se usque effusura esset victrix legum audacia:
Livius lib. 1.
tentari patientiam, and tentatam contemni, ut si jugum acceperint, obnoxios
premat. As some men ask unreasonable things, but to draw others to yield unto
that which is reasonable, so others by granting unto some men more then reason
does require, do imbolden them to press more unjust and insolent demands. The
alterations in the State and Government procured by those who have the supreme
authority, if they are not discreetly handled, and effected by degrees in an
orderly course, and carried still on with the ease and contentment of the
people, they will in short time be disquieted, and either turn back into the
old way like sheep driven, or violently run headlong into some new. Salust.
Jus quod invaluit, quod viget, quod inharet animis hominum, non semel sed
pedetentim tollendum esse, quoniam Populus non facile dediscit aut deutitur
quod insnevit. And therefore those Innovators who try experiments upon a State,
and upon the peoples disaffection to the present government, and thereupon lay
the chief foundation of their designs, without some other stronger assurance,
have often failed, and have found themselves and others with them utterly
ruined, through the sudden and violent ebbing and flowing of the Peoples
passions and affections. The fear of this caused the Roman State, when they had
expulsed their King Tarquin, not to rest upon the Peoples present violent
hatred of the Regal Government, and their oath freely taken, never to admit
Monarchy, but for the future security of their usurped Government, the Senate
gave the People the spoil of all the Kings goods, and of theirs who adhered
unto him, ne quis expers sceleris esset, says Livie, that there might not be
any who had not a hand in that foul fact: and thus to set farther all hope of
reconciliation with their King: yet unto this the Senate added (as the most
effectual means to assure the Peoples affection) their continual carefor
provision of corn, victuals and all necessaries at cheap rates, together with
freeing the Commons from heavy taxes and burdens, and laying them upon men of
most wealth and ability, and upon Commodities superstuous and least necessary.
For the State being not come unto full growth and maturity, might by many
accidents have been destroyed, Livius.
had it not been fostered and trained up por tranquillam moderationem Imperii,
et per multa blandimenta Plebi por id tempus ab Senatu data, by a gracious
Government, and by entertaning the Commons at that time with courtesies and
favors. By which smooth dealing and indulgence of the Senate and Nobles, the
City was afterward kept in liking of their new Government, notwithstanding the
strong opposition of the Tarquines and their party, so as the meanest as well
as the highest who were most engaged and interessed, continued altogether in
the hatred of Monarchical Government, and in the love of the new. The
alterations in the Church and the government thereof how pernicious they are,
we find, especially being wrought by faction, violence and tumults, Vim Patriae
afferri, as Cicero says: These cause great distractions in the minds of men,
raise daily cross and counterspirits, occasion the Religion professed and
established to be traduced, and do open an entrance to Atheism, and to the
weakening of all those facred bonds, which preserve all Laws and obligations in
humane society: For then oaths are not regarded by those men, nor the
consciences of any other men, in their pressing these Alterations in the
Church, neither the conscience of their Sovereign, nor his solemn oath at his
Coronation, which oath is a supporter, and an Epitome of out Magna Charta, the
confirmation of all our liberties. By which oath the King is obliged to save
and keep inviolable all the rights and liberties of his People, and also those
of the Church. This oath they enforce the King to break in as much as
concerns the Church and the rights thereof, and leave the People to the
challenge of their rights and liberties by and from the virtue of this broken
oath. In both Kingdoms of England and Scotland he took an oath, Episc. Winton.
Tontur. Ton.
de conservanda in statu suo illo colendi Dei formula quae public recepta and
utriusque gentis legibus stabilita esset. Their consciences some of them would
seem much to regard this, in which respect, they pretend, that they cannot
admit the Common Prayer Book, neither those Ceremonies in the Church which are
by Law established: and yet most of them although they cannot swallow a
ceremony, they can devour that which is holy, and account it no snare, Prove.
20.25.
even as easily as they can digest their wilful breach and violation of the
oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance, in ordine ad spiritualia, for the
advancement of the holy cause, and the Kingdom of Christ. But Calvin gives
them a rule for their consciences concerning Church Government, and concurreth
with Melanchthon, men in great esteem when their Presbytery was in the infancy,
viz. aliquando aliquod onus and aliquam servitutem tolerandam esse, si non sit
iniquitatis sed pressurae, lest by being over indulgent to our weak and
erroneous consciences, we give an offense to others, violate the Peace of the
Church, and show our contempt of Authority, and of that which has been
established with prudence and piety. We ought well to consider what things are
of Divine right and precept, and what are properly, positive and Ecclesiastical
constitutions; what things are of Divine Right according to the matter and
substance, and are of humane institution according to their forms prescribed:
All are of weight, although not equally: What ought to be perpetual in the
Church, and what is changeable by positive Laws; What is Moral, what is
Ceremonial, lest the defects of our judgment cause us to abound in our own
sense, and lead us into an erroneous or perplexed conscience. Some things are
of Divine institution and right, yet do not always belong unto faith; Bish. of
Winchest. Epist to P. Moulin.
they belong to the agenda or practice of the Church, to the credenda or points
of faith, they may not properly be referred: Somewhat may be wanting that is of
Divine right, at least in the external Government of a Church, and yet
salvation may be had there, and that Church may stand without it. Moreover,
although the constitutions of men, are not of force in themselves to bind the
conscience, yet do men sin in wilfully disobeying such Laws and constitutions,
as are by Lawful Authority established, when they can show no other cause for
their disobedience, but their conscience, neither bring any warrant out of Gods
Word. In the supposed purest reformed Chuches, there are some Ceremonies
enjoined, Psalm 29.
and are not without punishment contemned, and some must be if we will serve
God in the beauty of holiness. Calvin allows such Ceremonies as tend to the
perspicuity of doctrine, as being prositable allusions and iliustrations, and
having divine significations: such Ceremonies, says he, as are paucae numero,
observatione faciles, significatione praestantissimae. In the ministry of the
Church there ever have been some Ceremonies ordained for order and decency, and
also for signification: Ceremonies tending to edification signisie, moral
duties and works are signified. Such rights and Ceremonies as are not repugnant
to Gods Word, neither apt to lead men into superstition and to will worship,
but serving to edification and decent service, so as the Church be not
burdened with the multitude of them, nor the essence of Religion placed in
them, although some of them have been in part used by Pagans or Papists, lest
upon such restraint we press too much servitude upon the Church. We cannot take
in too many helps for our performance of Religious duties, for the exaltation
of Gods glory and goodness, for the more decency in his service, for the
manifestation of our duty of thankfulness, and for the furtherance of our
devotion, so as Superstition and Will Worship be restrained. And in all this if
men should be left to their own wills, the Church of God would always be
perplexed and grieved, and the peace thereof dislurbed with infinite Scandals
both given and taken. A great evil it were that order and decency should break
the Communion of Saints, which has been so piously instituted for the
preservation thereof, and the increase of devotion, and the manifestation of
our thankfulness to God for all his benefits. They ought to find other causes
for their dislike of Ceremonies, then because some of them were used in time of
Popery. The Reformed Churches retain some things used in the Roman Church. And
they use the Churches, which not only the Papists enjoyed, but some Churches
which had been Temples of the Pagan gods. If they quarrel with our Ceremonies,
because they were used in the Roman Church, without any other reason, they are
like those who hate men for other men's sake, or because of the company wherein
they find them. They will not consider that those things which have been
superstitiously abused, may be made useful for the service of God, Judges 6.
who did command the wood of the Grove dedicated to Baal, to serve for the use
of his Sacrifice. And Jericho an accursed City, all in it was to be destroyed
by fire, Joshua 6.
but the silver and gold, the vessels of brass and iron were put into the House
of God. Constantine and other Christian Emperors abolished Paganism, and made
it death to worship their gods, yet they preserved their Temples and other
things, L. 3. and 1.4. Cod. de Pagenis.
as appears by the Imperial Law: Sacnisicia templorum prohibemus; publicorum
operum ornamenta servari jubemus, and festos conventus civium, communemque
omnium laetitiam non patimur submoveri, unde absque ullo sacrificio and
superstitione damnabili exhiberi Populorum voluptates, secundum veterem
consuetudinem, ac ministrarietiam festa convivia, quando exigunt publica vota,
decernimus. Neither ought we to abolish our fellivals in memory of our Saviors
Nativity, Resurrection and of Pentecost, because they are vestigia legis
antiquae Mosaicae, and seem to be borrowed from the Mosaical Rites and
Ceremonies. The verses and sayings of the Heathen Poets dedicated to the Muses,
and to their gods, not only holy men, but also the Apostles used, not so that
our faith, faith the Apostle, 1 Corinthians. 2.
should stand in the wisdom of men, but in the power of God. The use of humane
learning is not to be contemned, by those who would be reputed learned in
Divinity: qui liberales illas arts imbiberunt, carum subsidio adjuti, long
altius provehuntur ad imrospicienda divinae sapientiae arcana. Calvin. Inslit.
lib. 1. c. 5. n. 2. Ad intelligentiam sacrarum Scripturarum secularium peritia
and liberaltum Artium est necessaria. Distinclio. 37. Quicquid de ordine
temperum transactorum indicat historia gentiumplutimum nos adjuvat ad sanctos
libros intelligendos: and quaecunque de locorum situ, naturaque animalium,
lignorum, herbatum, ^liorumve corporum scripta sunt; sendimque cognitionem
valere ad aenigmata soripturarum solvenda docuimns. August. de Doct^ina
Christiana lib. 2. Jalianus Apostata interdixit Christianis usu Poeticae
Rhetoricesque ac Philosophicarum artium; nempropriis, inquit, ut inproverbio
est, pennis configimur, ex nost is enim libris aima copiunt quis but in bello
adversus nos utantur. Theodoreti Ecclos. hist. l. 4. c. 8. An ipse non est
Ecclesiam persecutus qui Christianos liberales arts dosere, and discere ve
^uit? August. lib. 18. c. 52. de Civit. Dei. Licet a ciuore abstinuit, and non
Christianorum corpora occidere, sed ex little animis Christum revellere miris
artibus technisque attentabas, quod est genus persequendi omnjum efficacissimum
and porniciocissimum. Ita effecium est ut plures hac calamitate abcesseriot ab
Ecclefia, quem ulla alia superiore. Lud. Vives.
We ought to take heed of those who under color of Incorformity with the
Church of Rome, and of their desire of the utter extirpation of all relics of
Popery, seek to set dissension in the Church, and to root up some of the most
effectual means which bears up the state of Religion and the pillars thereof,
and so make way to profanation, and to Atheism, to enter and build upon the
ruins of the Church. Our Rites and Ceremonies by law established in the Church
of England, were not such as did peculiarly belong to this or that Sect, but
were the ancient Rites and ceremonies of the Church of Christ, and we have
still the same reason for the use of them, and the same interest in them that
our forefathers had. That our Rites and Ceremonies, which we have common with
the Church of Rome, are scandalous in their nature and institution, they cannot
make appear, neither do they endeavor it more then by their general clamor,
which implies nothing. That some Rites and Ceremonies we retain which have
been polluted, yea, and some peradventure instituted at first for and unto that
thing which was evil, although they can prove, yet in tract of time, and by
prudent qualifications applied, that pollution and impiety may be worn or
wrought out, and a good use may be found without offense. And although diverse
Constitutions and Ordinances in use in our Church were made at first under the
Papal authority, yet they being such as were not repugnant to the Word of God,
nor the Laws and Statutes of this Realm; and some others of those Canons and
Constitutions having been purged from superstition, they appear full of
sincerity and equity, and so were indenized and made English by our Church and
States in Parliament; and are now in that regard no more to be abandoned, then
Wheat, because it is said to be invented by the goddess Ceres, or many
excellent laws of the Romans set out at first by Painims, and by cruel
persecutors of the Christian faith, and are since made of excellent use over
all Christendom. Philosophi and meximi Platonici siqua forte vera and fidei
nostrae accommoda dixerunt, non solum formidan. de non sunt, sed ab ils etiam
tenquam injuflis possessoribus in usum nostrum vendicanda. August. de Doctrina
Christiana, lib. 2. De bono and necessario usu dectrinae and alierum rerum
Paganorum and Gemilium. Socrates Eccl. bist. lib. 3. c. 14.
But let the Lawgiver or Magistrate be never so careful to satisfy erroneous
or tender consciences, he shall never cut out his work to fit every man's
conscience or humor: yet when as things enjoined by lawful authority, are in
themselves indifferent, and without just exception, or that the matter hangs
even, or doubtful, the weight of Authority must turn the scale between the
Magistrate, and the man of a weak conscience, lest the Magistrate by neglecting
his duty bring a scorn upon his authority, and suffer a scandal to be given
unto all others. For although the tender conscience has cast judgment on the
thing as simply unlawful, and just cause may be for a time to give him respite
to rectify his conscience, yet still does his tender conscience draw him upon
the rock of disobedience and contempt of Authority, and giving ill example and
scandal, from all which the following of his tender conscience cannot excuse
him, especially if he be in an error, neither any other pretense, if he may
find the means to rectify his conscience, for he is not then led by invincible
ignorance, which, as the Schoolmen say, is, purae negationis, but rather by a
supine negligence, or an affected ignorance, which is termed pravae
dispositionis. Through ignorance, Ephesians. 4.18.
says the Apostle, Which is in them, because of the blindness of their hearts,
having their understanding darkened. Distinguendum est an pro certo sciat homo,
an conscientia pulsat animum ex credulitate probabili and discreta; an ex
credulitate levi and temeraria, Cap. 44. Decretal de sentent. excom.
ne contra legem, vel contra judicium conscientiae committat offensam. Alberic.
Gentil. and alii.
Insipida est consciemia, quae rationis and scientiae salem non habet: non
debet quis sibi de eo facere conscientiam, quod non potest explicare secundum
rationem very and constantis judicii: nec conscientia dubia, est conscientia;
alias cum dubitare de omnibus possit, ctiam de indubitatis, ae etiam sine
ratione, quid est quod dici dubium non possit? Into these perplexities do men
fall and often draw others by fostering and cherishing of an error, whereby
they seem to take as fast hold of the error, as the error does of them, and
so they fall into the number of those, who do err in their hearts, and not
only in their heads. If our Christian liberty, which ought to be subordinate
to charity, we ought to moderate and restrain, rather then offend the weak
consciences of others; we ought certainly to endure, in things of their own
nature indifferent, the restraint of our liberty by Lawful authority (unto
which we must be obedient for conscience sake, faith the Apostle) rather then
to offend the Law, and violate the Peace of the Church: Qui contra pacem
Ecclesiae sunt, si dignitatem aut cingulum militare habeant, nudentur eis; si
sint privati nobiles, Causa 24. quast. 1. c. 32.
suarum substantiarum proscriptionem patiantur: si sint ignobiles, non solum in
corpore verberentur, sed exilio perpetuo castigentur. If we look for a Church
where there are no scandals given to men's consciences, neither any
inperfections and defects, we must go out of the world; for we shall find none,
but only the triumphant Church in heaven. There may be a true Church where
there are imperfections, so as the essential marks and properties thereof are
not wanting. If amongst the Corinthians the Church did remain, in respect of
the Ministry of the word and Sacraments, notwithstanding their Sects and
corruptions, and which was worst, many of them had even in derision the
doctrine of the Resurrection. 1 Corin. 15. Galat. 1. and 6.4.11.
If also amongst the Galatians great backsliders and full of corruptions the
Apostle acknowledged a Church, wherein salvation might be had, he would
certainly have condemned such men as our new Professors, who for much slighter
causes make a separation, and break the peace of the Church upon dislike of all
Ceremonies and discipline, that is not of their own invention. The Apostles
delivered not express and particular order for all Church Government, but left
most of it to be accommodated to the times and occasions, as might best serve
for edification and the Service of God. And so touching Ordinances and customs
in the Church, which men ought to observe, and those who are contentious, and
given to innovations, the Apostle takes them off with this saying, We have no
such customs, neither the Churches of God. In his rebus de quibus nihil certi
statuit divina Scriptura, mos populi Dei, and instituta majorum prolege tenenda
sunt: and sieut praevaricatores divinarum legum, ^t D. August. Decret. Gratian.
Distinct. 11. c. 7. Qui etiam dat hanc regulam; ut quae consuetudines non sunt
contra fidem, neque contra bonos mores, et habent aliquid ad exhort. tionem
vita melioris, ubicunque institui videmus, non solum non improbemus, sed etiam
laudando and imitando sectemur: Epistola ejus ad Januarium.
ita contemptores Ecclesiasticarum consuetudinum coercendi sunt. But these
innovators are not ruled by any customs and Laws, but such as please them.
They still urge without bringing any proof, that nothing should be established
in the Church, which is not expressly commanded in the Word of God; and that
their Presbyterian discipline is only of divine right: wherein they deal
unjustly in requiring express Texts of Scripture from us, which is not
needful, whereas they in their own cause obtrude upon us peremptorily things
they call necessary, for which they cannot bring any positive, express or
probable warrant out of Gods word, or from thence to be probably deduced and
inferred. They catch at every Text of Scripture as their fancy leads them,
according to the old and usual course of Heretics and Schismatics, to prove
their own, and destroy the old Church Government, without any consideration of
the Expositions of the Ancient Fathers, or Modern Divines, or any regard how
wilfully they pervert and abuse the Word of God, as those who have largely and
learnedly handled these points, have made appear. S. Hierome shows us such
men in his time, qui quicquid dixerint, boc legem Dei putant; nec scire
dignantur quid Prophetae, quid Apostoli senserint; sed ad sensum suum incorgtua
aptant testimonia, quasi grande sit and non vitiosissimum docendi genus
depravare sententias, and ad voluntatem suam Scripturam trahere repugnantem.
Epist. ad Paulinum. The unlearnd and unstable wrest the Scriptures unto their
own destruction. 2 Pet. 3.16.


But seeing they deal thus with the Scripture, it cannot be expected they
should regard humane Laws, neither the power given by God to Kings and to his
Church, and to make such Laws as carry with them both a directive and a
coercive power. Such Laws and Constitutions, I mean, as are in no respect
repugnant to Gods word, but are deduced from the general rules thereof, and
grounded upon the varranty left by our Savior and his Apostles as ^uides and
limits for the Church in all ages. Humane laws are measures, says Aquinas, in
respect of men whose actions they direct and govern, and these measures have
their higher rules by which they are to be measured, which are the laws of God
and nature. Those Laws therefore have the essential parts and properties of the
best positive Laws, which the Laws of God do approve, and are such as are
extracted from the light and law of Nature, and the common and demonstrable
precepts thereof, most agreeable to common equity, and are most necessary for
the preservation of the peace and welfare of the Church and Commonwealth. It
is therefore a false and dangerous doctrine of theirs, that it is not in the
power of the Church or State to restrain and bar men by Laws from their
liberty, which God has granted unto them, no more then it is to take away the
yoke which God has laid upon them, and to countermand that which he has
expressly enjoined. They may find a difference between the liberty granted us by
God and nature, which is restrainable, and the eternal precepts of God which
are immutable. By this doctrine the power of government is so restrained, and
so weakened, as that the frame and pillars thereof are shaken, and the
difference almost taken away between the things of greatest weight, precisely
defined and enjoined by the Word of God to be observed always (as are those
which the Schoolmen call his negative precepts) and those other things of less
moment, which have little or nothing of precise and perpetual commandment, but
more of liberty granted unto men by God and nature, and yet not exempted from
the power of the Church, or Magistrate, to alter or restrain according to
special occasions and variations of times.

In this miserable age wherein we live, we are to deal with men, such as the
ancient times never produced; men who rest not upon the disobedience of Princes
and contempt of Laws Divine and humane, but teach and practice the introducing
of new orders and discipline in the Church and State by sire and sword, and do
destroy those men and their estates who join not with them: Men who gather
themselves together against the soul of the righteous, and condemn the innocent
blood. Psalm 94.21.
Such men are not to be found, save in the time of Antichrist, mentioned by the
Prophet, who shall wear out the Saints of the most High, and think to change
times and laws. Daniel 7.25.
The doctrine of the Gospel, much less the Discipline of the Church, ought not
by such means in any case to be brought in, or established: Apud Christianam
disciplinam magis occidi liceret, Tertul. Bernard.
quam occidere: non est religionis cogere religionem: Religion says Saint
Austin is planted and preserved by instructing more then by commanding; by
admonishing more then by threatening. 2 Corin. 1 24 Cap de Judaeis Dijlinct. 45.
Not that we, says Saint Paul, have dominion over your faith. Praecipit sancta
Synodus nemini ad credendum vim inferri, cui enim vult, Dous miseretur, and
quem vult, indurat. The sword avails little with the souls of men, unless to
destroy them together with their bodies, and to make men desperate, or
dissemblers in Religion, and when they find opportunity, to fall into
rebellion, as there are many examples. The old just and necessary Edicts made
by the best Christian Emperors against Heretics, and those who were of a
contrary religion to that which was publicly received and established, were
but Civil and Political Laws for the tranquillity of the State and People,
quae pacis perturbatorum pervicacia exasperanda sunt, parentium et
obtemperantium bono temperandaet moderanda sunt: Thuan Epiff. in prin ipio Hist.
and this K. James declared, when he set forth the oath of Allegiance. Those
Imperial edicts did not punish men for their diversity of religion, neither
gave them toleration: their scope and end was not to enforce the conscience, D.
Hieronym.
but to preserve the Peace. Aliae sunt Leges Caesarum, aliae sunt Leges
Christi: alind Papinianus, Epist. 48. and 50.
aliud Paulus noster docet. And yet Saint Austin does allow of the punishment
of some heretics by pecuniary mulcts or banishment, as being not repugnant to
Christian lenity, and shows that many of the Donatists were by the terror of
Laws and edicts brought to the Catholic Faith, and to unity in the worship and
service of God. D. Bernard. ser. 66. super Cant.
Aliqui melius procul dubio coercentur gladio, illius videlicet, qui non sine
causa gladium portat. Rom: cap. 13. quam ut in suum errorem multos trajicere
permittantur. Some discreet coercion may oftentimes necessarily be used toward
those who contemn or neglect the service of God, and the preaching of his word,
the means of salvation, The parable of the marriage feast says, Luke 14.
compel them to come in, that my house may be filled. Melius est cum severitate
diligere, quam cum lenitate decipere. Auguslin.
Parcere alienis peccatis quae dedocere and objurgare debemus, hoc est, propter
quaedam cupiditatis vincula, non propter Charitatis officia. But in the ancient
times of Christianity, such means were not used, as might make Heretics and
Schismatics more obstinate, then docible, through the preposterous proceedings
of the Magistrates and Ministers of justice in the execution of penal Laws,
used rather as snares for gaining of money, and pecuniary mulcts imposed,
rather as prices set upon offenses, then as punishments for the reformation of
manners. Such Magistrates administering Justice in such manner are obeyed non
tanquam Rectores morum, sed tanquam dominatores rerum; August. de Civit Dei
lib. 2. c. 20. L. 1. Cod. de secund nup. Tit. Cod. de Caduc. tol.
eosque non sinceriter honorant, sed nequiter and serviliter timent. The Roman
Law herein gives a good direction, ne in iis quae ad correctionem morum
spectant, and inducta sunt, fisci rationem habere videamur: and Lex Julia de
caducis, ultimum locum dat fisco; nam quod communiter omnibus prodest, hoc
privatae nostrae utilitati praeferendum esse. Pliny in his Panegyric says
unto Trajan the Emperor very elegantly, Praecipua tua gloria est, quod saepius
vincitur fiscus, cujus causa nunquam mala est nisi sub bono Principe: sed
nunquam Principibus defuerunt qui front gravi and tristi supercilio
militatibus fisci contumaciter adessent. For this cause of religion and
planting the Gospel, the best Divines do not allow the Spaniards plea, for
shedding the blood of the Indians: Infer bella ac Populos sibi non molestos
cupiditate conterrere ac subdere, August de Civit. Dei. lib. 4. cop 6.
quid aliud est, quam grande latrocinium? They should not so much have used the
sword against the refractory Indians, but rather the rod, the spur and the
bridle of good discipline and example to bring them to Christ; for they had no
dominion over them, neither any offense formerly given by them; dominion and
propriety is not founded in and by religion, but by a just, natural or civil
right acquired: Dominia quae sunt juris gentium, non tollit sides Christiana.
Infidelity does not forfeit inheritance and propriety; and thus the Schoolmen
say, Aquinas.
distinctio fidelium and infidelium in se considerata non tollit dominium, and
praelationem infidelium super sideles. And this did the ancient Christians
acknowledge by their great loyalty toward their Sovereign Princes, heathen
Emperors and cruel persecutors. But our men endued with their new lights, have
found that the ungodly have no right to the Creatures, but are usurpers, and
have made a forfeiture of their propriety, of which they, the Saints, may take
the benefir, and be the sole Judges. The ancient Christians were forbidden by
the Imperial Law, L. 6. Cod. de Paganis.
as also by the Laws of other Christian nations under a great penalty to meddle
with the goods of Jews or Pagans living peaceably. For the goods of the Jews,
although enemies to the Christian religion, cannot for the cause of religion
come by escheat unto Christian Princes under whom they live: for delinquency
they have often forfeited their goods, and been expelled, and sometimes all of
them for the faults of a few; and and thus have they been dealt withal, Regia
manu, and bono potius exemplo quam concesso jure, or rather out of reason of
State, which will not want specious pretenses. It cannot pass with a clear
admittance, amongst all the Doctors of the Roman Church, that the Pope has
power over Infidel Princes to raise Armies against them, although they do
hinder the preaching and propagation of the Gospel, universally authorized by
these words, Ite, praedicate Evangelium omni creaturae, seeing he has not (for
ought can be made appear) temporal authority annexed to his spiritual, either
directly or indirectly, in ordine ad spiritualia, to depose Christian Princes,
or to raise war against them, for the advancement of Christ's Kingdom; but as
for those who are not Christians, the Apostle says, What have we to do with
those who are without? Botero.
It is truly said, that peace, a messenger whereof, an Angel has been chosen
to be, is scarce ever established by the Sword; and the Gospel, the blessed
peace, cannot be published by the sound of the Cannon; neither the sacred Word
be conveyed unto us by the impious hands of Soldiers; neither tranquillity be
brought to the persons and consciences of men, by that which brings ruin
unto Nations. The Jews were guilty of the greatest incredulity, Romans 11.
ingratitude and crime, and yet the Gentiles were admonished by Saint Paul not
to show any cruelty toward them, or insult over them, but to seek to provoke
them to an holy jealousy, and so to gain them unto Christ. When Nathan
reproved David, he said, hereby thou give an occasion to the adversaries to
blaspheme the name of God. The primitive Christians rather chose to endure the
most cruel persecutions, then to disturb the peace of the Roman Empire, and
break the band of their Allegiance unto the heathen Emperors; and this Saint
Paul taught them who wrote his Epistle unto Christians living under Nero, Romans
13.
and yet he tells them, that the Powers are of God, and he that resists the
Powers, resists the ordinance of God and shall receive damnation. D. Augnst.
de Civit it. Dei lib. 22. cap. 2.
Civitas Dei quamvis haberet tam magnorum agmina Populorum, tamen adversus
impios Persecutores suos, pro temporali salute sua non pugnavit, in iis non
erat pro salute pugnare, sed salutem pro servatore mundi contemnere; Quamvis
nimius and copiosus noster Populus, Cyprianus. Grot. de jure belli lib. 1. c.
4. n. 7.
non iamen adversus violentiam se ulciscitur, sed patitur. But when this is
pressed against our new Patrons of Rebellion, they contradict Saint Austin and
the Fathers with a lie, and say, those ancient Christians suffered through
their want of power to make resistance; whereby they do, as much as in them
lies, deprive them of all the glory of Martyrdom, and do injury unto their
most blessed cause, and the glory of God in his Saints sufferings. And yet as
nature does draw us to yield to the unresistable power of a severe Conqueror,
vox est quodamodo naturae, ut subjugari mallent hostibus victoribus, Augustine.
quam bellica omnifaria vastatione deleri; so does the law of nature give
warrant for our resistance, cum moderatione inculpatae tutelae, as does the law
of God give us permission for our slight in time of persecution, when we do not
thereby desert our vocation, nor betray, nor prejudice a just cause.

CHAP. IV. Of the changes in Religion in England; And by Luther; And the
toleration of diverse Religions.
THe Professors of the Protestant Religion, were at first, and have been since
taxed, as seditious and despisers of Government, and advancers of Popular
licentiousness, and that their Reformation in Religion proceeded from faction,
or turned into faction and tumults, notwithstanding all their public
Confessions of their Faith, and declarations of their Doctrine set forth in
detestation thereof, wherein they did fully profess their obedience unto the
Civil Magistrate. Ecclesiastical history.
But it has been very ancient and usual to lay that general charge of raising
Sedition, when the malice has been greater then the matter, and no other
special crime could be found. So Saint Paul was accused for being a pestilent
fellow and a raiser of sedition. Tertullian says, Christians in his time were
called hosts publici, enemies of all Commonwealths; and Suetonius does most
impiously say, Judaeos impulsore Christo assiduo tumultuantes: In vits Claudii
l. 15. hist.
and so Tacitus says, that Nero, Reos quaesitissimis poenis affecit, quos per
flagitia invisos vulgus Christianos appellabat; unde quamquam adversus sontes,
and novissima exempla meritos, miseratio oriebatur, tanquam non utilitate
publica, sedin saevitiam unius absumerentur; thus happens to all a like
measure, who lie under the public hatred. It is true that the change of
Religion in Germany and in other parts of Christendom was driven on in a
tumultuary course, and was not wrought in such a calm as it was in England,
where these changes went formerly in an orderly and quiet passage, under the
conduct of a Royal power, and a prudent Council of State. Religion changed as
it were by degrees and insensibly; all things seeming to remain in the same
course and state as before: and as one observed, it was in those times so
carried with us, ut Catholicam religionem sine sensu Plebs exueret, cultu in
specie eodem manente. The Parliaments in England in those times gave much
countenance and authority to those alterations with the People. The Kings and
Queens would hardly have effected it, Regia manu, notwithstanding their power,
and the love they had of their People. The Parliaments were wrought not only
to ratify, Riba Jinera del Schismad Ingla terra.
but to be petitioners for those changes in Religion. A stranger writes that
when Queen Elizabeth came to the Crown, religion was not altered with violence,
and blood, as in France, Scotland, and the Low-countryes, but changed and
established by Laws, by Royal mandates, and with Parliamentary concurrence,
which says he, has been a subtle and powerful invention armed with the
authority of Prince and Kingdom, for the sure rooting and settlement of sects
and heresies. These quiet alterations formerly were even mavelous in our
eyes, Lord Chanc. S. Albans of the union between England and Scotland.
and as it were a selicity peculiar unto our nation, as was said of that change
upon the death of Queen Elizabeth and the coming in of King James, who
acknowledging to the Lords of England their great loyalty in his coming to the
Crown, said, that it was a success above the course of nature, to have so great
a change with so great a quiet. In Germany, France, Scotland, and other parts
of Europe, many of the Contrivers and Actors in the reformation of religion,
did neither sapere ad sobrietatem neither agere cum sobrietate, especially when
they were strongly opposed, and perceived diverse designs for their destruction:
for some of them had a mixture in their heads of the Anabaptistical leaven, and
were infected with that fury. Insomuch as Bucer a man of great learning and
moderation would often say unto them, that in their great heat of zeal in
rectifying the service of God, and reforming the Church, good order and
discipline failing amongst them, the tumultuous and seditious persons were not
chastised, neither any order and decency in the service of God observed; and
therefore their laudable endeavors would not long last, neither happily
succeed: for the discreet and moderate men amongst them, and those in greatest
authority were oftentimes compelled to suffer many enormities and outrageous
actions, lest by enforeing correction and discipline, they should lose the
assistance and affection of their own party. Tacitus.
The Captains durst not take the boldness to punish, as the fouldiers did to
offend: voluntary obedience makes the command and power weak, as is that power
which cannot subsist by its own streng. Before Luther was in his grave, and
when his reformation was but in the infancy, some who seemed, or were reputed
his disciples, brake out of their pretended integrity through an over zealous
and irregular desire of reformation into abominable opinions and furies,
tending to the destruction of all Government in Church and Commonwealth. And
Luthers doctrine also meeting with diverse of weak and turbulent Spirits, over
greedy of reformation, and abounding with wild zeal, or Spiritual pride, all
the precious liquor they received turned into gall and vinegar, and from these
did seeds soon spring up, which raised a swarm of These Anabaptists then
started up, and declared that they had speech with God, who commanded them to
destroy all the wicked and to taise a new world in which the godly only should
live and reign. Sleidans Comment. lib. 3. Fox Acts and Monuments.
Anabap^i^ts and other fanatic Sectaries, which made themselves a new Gospel
of Licentiousness and Rebellion, and scorned Luther and his doctrine at last.
And although after they had done much mischief they were suppressed, yet they
scattered such seeds as the fruits thereof do now exceedingly afflict the
Church, and cause great disturbance, which to plous men is the greatest
persecution, August. de Civit. Dei. l. 18. c. 51.
for this afflicts their hearts and souls, qui patiuntur hanc persecutionem
non in corporibus, sed in cordibus, and est persecutio intrinseca and
extrinseca. Cause. 7. quast. 1. cap. 48.
By this we may see what has moved Princes and Commonwealths, not to tolerate
diverse religions, or any thing different from the religion established. Platina.
Mahometanaem sectam late sparsisse se, dum religionis nostrae capita inter se
diffident, and sic factum est ut ad Mahometanos partim vi, partim spome
deficerent populi: hinc amissam Ecclesiam Antiochenam, Alexandrinam,
Hierosolymitanam. August. de Civ. Dei lib. 18. cap. 51.
Multi volentes esse Christiani propter eorum diffentiones, haesitare coguntur;
and multi Maledici in his inveniunt materiam blasphemandi Christianum nomen,
quia tales Christiani appellantur: The Devil, says Saint Austin does stir up
Heretics, who under the Christian name do resist the Christian doctrine. The
Romans had ever a circumspect eye, and carried a severe hand on those qui nova
sacra and peregrinos ritus introducebant; and they ordained, Valor. Max.
ne qui Dii, nisi Romani Dii, neque ullo modo quam patrio colerentur. By the
Divine law, he that sacrifi. ceth to any god, saving to the Lord only, shall
be destroyed. Exodus 22. The Prophet or dreamer shall be put to death, who does
entice to the service of other gods. Deuteronomy. 13 5. and the ichabitants and the
city shall be destroyed that serve other gods. Deuteronomy. 13.15, 16.
For as Livie says, the wisest and most skilful in all divine and humane
laws, held nothing so forcible to overthrow Religion, as when the Divine
service is celebrated after some strange and foreign course, and not according
to the ancient custom of their Country. Which consideration moved Numa
Pompilius in the first foundation of their Commonwealth to provide, ne quid
juris divini, negligendo patrios ritus, peregrinosque adsciscendo, turbaretur.
Constantine made a Law, that all Christians should use the same Temples, and
not have different assemblies. And other Christian Emperors did very strictly
command, L. 29. Cod. de Episcop. and Clericis. L. 4. Cod. de summa Trinitate.
L. 8. S. 5. Cod. de Haereticis.
ne de Religione vel Doctrina disputent, velconciliabulis praesint, vel turba
concitata simpliciorum animos seducant. Nemo cujuscunque conditionis de side
Christiana public turbis coadnnat is tractare conetur; ex hoe tumultus and
perfidiae occasionem requirens; ne facultas tribuatur public vel privatim
convocandi coetus, and de haeretico errore disputandi, and perversitatem
facinorosi dogmatis adferendi: nemo hujusmodi libros habere, and sacrilega
scriptorum monumenta andeat servare. Qued siquis de his criminibus fuerit
deprehensus perpetua deportatione damnetur. Variety in opinions of religion
causes several conventicles, evermore dangerous in a Commonwealth, as we
shall hear hereafter; and from variety in religions they fall into factions,
and from all religion into Atheism. Ex schismate haeresin nasci, ex haeresi
plerumque Apostasin. Therefore Julian the Apostate called from banishment the
Donatists and other Heretics, and permitted them and all others who professed
the Christian religion to maintain what opinions they would one against an
other, that by their diffentions the Christian religion might be weakened, and
Paganism the better established. For it fares with the vulgar as with the
Epicurean sect of Philosophers, gross witted and sensual men, who when they
did see such great and continual strife concerning the Diety, took the shorter
way by denying it altogether, then to feign as others did many uncertain gods,
and so fall into inextricable labyrinths and contentions with other
Philosophers, which could never have any certain determination and end. The
Jews are permitted the free exercise of their religion in some Christian
countries, which is denied to those they do account Heretics, and
Schismatics, and the reason is given, because they pollute and violate the
Christian religion which they profess, and disturb the Peace of the Church and
Commonwealth where they live: Haereticorum, Aquin. Alciat. and alii.
qui profitentes ipsum Evangelium illud corrumpunt, infidelitas est omnium
gravissima. De his qui de illa gente Christiano nomini contradixisse sciuntur
dictum a sponsa filii matris mei pugnaverunt contra me: D. Bernard. in Cant.
Inimici ejus sunt ipsius domestici: Haec intestina and insanabilis plaga est
Ecclesiae, pax a paganis, pax ab haereticis, sed non profecto a filiis.
Therefore to conclude this of religion, and the disturbance of the Peace of the
Church: the best Philosophers and Lawgivers did ever repute unity in religion
the chiefest Pillar that upholdeth humane Society, and obedience to supreme
authority, which cannot stand after religion is fallen Religionem cum Imperio
periclitari. Thuan. lib. 116 Histor. Religioni, nist salva Republica consuli
non posse. Thuan. 136. Histor.


CHAP. V. Of the use of Parliaments; Of the danger that comes by the abuse of
Parliaments; and the Factions that therein arise.
WE pass now from the Church to the Parliament, and to those abuses and
corruptions, which both destroy the use and the rights of Parliaments, and the
power and Majesty of Monarchy, two pillars of kingdoms and Commonwealths. As
God has set Kings in the highest place and office, and entrusted them with the
greatest authority on earth, and will therefore take the strictest account of
them, so cannot they escape his heaviest judgments, who are chosen to counsel
him in his greatest affairs, and do not only fail in their duty, but do
intrude themselves into his office, and hinder him in the observation of his
oath, and in performance of his duty to God and his people. As the estates in
Parliament ought to be Conservators of the Rights and Liberties of the People,
so ought they to be of their own bounds and limits, in which if they exceed,
they do also give an ill example to all other inferior Courts of Justice,
(subject to their care and regulation), to the hindrance of Justice and
distribution of common right which turns to the disturbance of the peace of
the Kingdom, and raising confusion in jurisdictions. August.
Si iniquum est transgredi limitem agrorum, quanto iniquius est transgredi
limitem morum? As it is a great crime, by the laws Divine and Humane, to remove
the ancient bounds and landmarks; so is it no less, to remove the Law bounds
and limits of Jurisdictions. Hosea 5.10.
The Princes of Judah are like those who remove the bounds, upon whom I will
pour my wrath, says the Lord, like water. Such encroachments and usurpations,
proceeding from those who should be conservators and reformers, work the
speediest confusion in all Societies: and it shows Gods great indignation,
when that which should have been for our welfare, becomes a snare. It was said
in relation to the Roman Senatots, fallen from their ancient glory, aliorum
vitia intrd ipsos residuunt, nostra late vegantur; ut in corporibut, sic in
Imperto gravissimus est morbus, qui a capite dissunditur. Plinii Epi^^ola^um
lib. 4.
Therefore parliaments when they err thus, they err most perniciously, either
in being ensnared and driven by an overruling power, or by an active faction,
or by violent perturbations reigning in them, and then do they not deserve the
name of Parliaments; for as Cicero says, Rempublicam dici non posse, optimatum
factionem, Populi conspirationem and factionem: tunc esse Rempublicam, id est,
rem Populi, cum been and just geritur; non populum esse omnem catum
multitudinis, sed catus juris consensu and utilitatis communione sociatus.
Cujecius.
Vbi est tyrannis vel factio, vel dominatus alicujus turbae, non tam vitiosa
est Respublica, sed nulla omnino: ubi lex non est, ibi nec Populus est, and si
Populus non est, nec Respublica; nam Respublica est res Poputi. And therefore
Saint Austin concluded, De Civitat. Dei.
that the Roman State when it was subverted by Tyranny, or by the peoples
factions and iniquity, was not a people, in not being juris consensu and
utilitatis communione sociatus; neither could it be called properly an cvil and
corrupt Commonwealth; but rather no Commonwealth, when the State was ruined
by factions, violence and injullice. David said under Saul's government, that
the earth and all the inhabitants thereof were dissolved. And thus they who are
not lawfully chosen and assembled, or do act contrary to their calling and
duty, cannot challenge any privilege proper to that office and calling. The
Roman Tribuneship was reputed sacred, being established for the safety and
benefit of the people: Plutarch in the life of Gracch.
But if the Tribunes do that which is contrary to their office, or cease from
doing those things, for which their authority was given them, their authority
and privileges leave them. Suarez de ligib libro 8. and alii.
Privilegium licet non amittitur per non usum, amittitur tamen per usum
contrarium, and per delictum oceasione privilegii commissum, and per delictum
seii abusum direct privilegii sini repugnans and fundamentum ejus destrmns.
And as there are military privileges, and military offenses and punishments,
so are there Parliamentary privileges, and Parliamentary offenses, which have
had and ought to have condign punishments, agreeable to Justice and Politic
government, and presidents in all times and Kingdoms. They that say a whole
Society or College cannot be punished, as it cannor he excommunicated, do
agree, that not only the offenders may, and chiefly those who are the cause,
but all those also who are members, and did not resist the evil: nisi
pertinaciter re. stiterunt, aique aclis contredixerunt. Gless ad c. 7. causa 10
quast 2. and ad Decretal. de Simonia c. 30. quia officium eorumindividuum est,
and periculum commune, universi sunt veluti in corpore unius formae, and quod
ab uno cemmittitur, quandoque totius corpnis periculo commiuitur; Si tales sint
astus singulorum per quos detegi potest conniventia, seu voluntas tacita
universitatis approbantis delictum.
Although in all Parliaments, Assemblies and Councels, the offenses of the
particular members ought to be distinguished from those of the whole and entire
body, which may also be involved in their crimes, by connivance at them, or by
neglect in punishing or preventing that which lay in their power. Laeditur
personali scelcre ac particulari, causa cunctorum: in Populo Israelitico
saepissime unius facinus pestem fuisse mutiorum. Potestas quae inhibere scelus
porest, quasi probat dedebere sieri, si sciens patitur perpetrari. But more
properly and directly the whole body offends in omitting their Principal
duty, and in committing acts contrary thereunto, una voluntate, praesidente
deliberatione, Augustine.
communicato consilio. And as in the Roman History is does often occur, an
privato an publico cousilio. Si defecerit Populus, Livius.
publico cousilio, dolo malo, sive non, quia delicta vulgi d publica causa
separari. A People, a Cohedge, a Body politic may offend, and are punishable,
and as in the Law, Populus, Cicero. L. 9 F. Quod metus.
vel Curia, vel Collegium hoc edicto ^enentur. Sometimes the offense shall be
punished in their natural Person: sometimes in the body Politic: sometimes in
both. And much dispute there is amongst the Lawyers, quando universitas
punienda sit in suo universali, quando in particulari, quando and quomodo ex
delicto Collegialiter commisso; quando poena laesae Majestatis punienda sit
universitas, quando singuli ob delictum universitatis; all which I pass over,
although worth consideration. The most agreeable course unto Justice is, to lay
the greatest punishment upon the Authors and chief Actors, Liviues
ut unde orta est culpa, ibi prna consistat. Upon these the Law imposes the
damage for the most part, and oftentimes they bear the whole punishment, if
they can be found, L. 6. Call. de vipubl.
in eum supplicium exerceri, qui vim facere tentaverit, and alteri parti causam
malorum praebuerit. It was the Command of God unto Moses to take the heads of
the chief of the People and to hang them up, Numb. 2^.4.
who had consented, dissembled and participated in the common impiety. Liviue.
Causa and origo penes autores, and a quibus contagio. Singulis civibus and
civitatibus tumultnantibus, P. Fab. Seem. lib. 3. c. 16,
atque adeo (si non rebellibus and contumacibus) sed inconsulto ac temerario
motu, vel alieno etiam exemplo, veniam dari. For the multitude or greater
number seldom equally offend in the highest degree; multitudo vix peccat
graviter, sed aut decepta, aut impetu, aut temeritate, as in the Imperial Law;
Novel de Procur. Casar.
or by a fatal fury of the time, seizing on them as a pestilent contagion;
fatali rabie temporis and pestifera comagione, Livius l. 28.
as Mendonius the Spaniard said unto Scipio, in excusing his and his peoples
rebellion, Distinct. 44. c. 1. and distinct. 6. c. 1. de Poenitentia, cum
Glossa.
Multitudo est causa in quam severitas disciplinae exercenda non est; sed si
volunt defenere peccatum quasi ex authoritate, tunc multitudini parcendum non
est. And therefore we find it agreeable with the practice of the best men, and
to the rule given by the most prudent, that the multitude be spared, especially
after the offense committed, although not when they are in the act offending,
non parcitur multitudini in delicto committendo, ubi perniciosior est quies and
cunctatio quamtemeritas, Bartol. de seditiosts.
and nihil festinatione tutius, and magis facto quam consulto opus est. There
may be oftentimes just cause to forbear all punishment of the People, as in the
case of Syracusa, who being charged with revolting from the Romans, they
pleaded for themselves, that their City was undone between the Tyrants of the
one side, who held them under the yoke, Livius lib. 26.
and the Roman General on the other side; so as they stood in the midst as a
prize or reward for the winner, and ought therefore to be rather restored unto
their former estate by the Romans then after so miserable servitude and war to
endure a new addition of affliction and misery.

I have observed that there are two Pests and cankers, which in time has not
only eaten out all that excellent fruit and benefit which Kingdoms have had,
and may reap by the right use of Parliaments, but have also caused that
institution so necessary for the Public good, to prove the bane and ruin
thereof. The one is when Kings absolute in power, and exorbitant in their will,
give that rule to Parliaments, as Xerxes gave to his Counselors, to obey,
rather then persuade, and call their Parliaments only out of specious
pretenses, for getting of money, or to authorize and countenance some sinister
purpose and design, using strong delusions, and giving fair hopes of redress of
grievances, ostentata potius quam data, Paul. Aemilius
nec nisi brevi mansura remedia. Some of the Roman Emperors showed Kings this
way, and obtained their desire, the Senate being fearful and tongue-tyed,
Plinius.
and were called aut ad summum nefas, aut ad summum otium. Senatui praebebat
Tiberius simulachra libertatis, speciosa verbis, re inania, quanto que majore
libertatis imagine tegebantur, tanto eruptura ad infenfius servitium, Tacitus.
This amongst many other ill effects, takes off the affections of the people,
and fillech them with jealousies, and causes them not to give credit and
assistance unto him when they ought. The other Pest or Canker proceeds from
Parliaments; as when they suffer the power and dignity of the Parliament to be
abused and perverted, by a predominant faction, which swayeth all, and cut out
all their work in relation to their own designs, and the authority of
Parliament serves, las do journey-men, to make it up, and acceptable to the
people. This is as bad, if not worse then the contrivance of Lewis the eleventh
of France, used also since by his successors, who finding how tedious
Parliaments were, in their most important affairs requiring most expedition:
Paul. Aemilius: Thuanus. Bodin de Repub Ordines pro ta quam exercent in
Comitiis liberate facile dissensuros fuisse, in quo and majestatem suam
Populis tentandam, aut etiam contemnendam expesuisset Rex, and eorum animos
tanto magis irritasset, quanto ils invitis peregisset: Strada and Bentivoglio
de bell. Belgico.
how apt to fall into impertinent diversions, and into faction, and turbulent
licentiousness, under color of using their just liberties and promoting the
public good; these Kings procured the power and office of the three Estates to
be transferred to certain select delegates taken out of their own body, and so
saved the trouble of the General Assembly, and took away almost all use of
Parliaments, and with it the best means the people had, to acquaint their King
with their grievances, and obtain redress, and to preserve their just rights
and liberties. And although Parliaments are called for just causes, and do sit
in full liberty and freedom, yet does it often happen as in some General
Councils called for the extirpation of Heresies and Schisms, and the
preservation of the Church and the peace thereof, that they being not at peace
among themselves before they came, neither bringing with them the love of truth
and minds inclinable to peace and moderation; the former evils (for reformation
whereof they were called) were not taken away, but strengthened and augmented,
and diverse others raised: for those men are most unfit for counsel who have
their minds wholly possessed with perturbations and jealousies, or their
cogitations bent unto faction, or any smister designs. These bring nothing with
them but the spirit of contradiction, partial and interessed opinions, secret
designs and open animosities. And then it falls out as Tacitus says, quae
apud concordes vincula charitatis, incitamenta irarum apud infensos crant. Non
sic Romani antiqui qui privatas res suas pro Republica contempscrunt,
consuluerum Patriae consilio libero, August. de Civit. Dei lib. 5. c. 15.
Imperator Constantinus scripsit ad Synodum Tyri ut conceptas rixes delerent,
quia secum discordantes non liceret ad divinum cultum adesse, nec munera sua
offerre altari priusquam ad mutuam pacem redterint, ^t lege divina docemur.
Eusebius. in vita Constant.
neque delicto, neque libidini obnoxii.

CHAP. VI. The Right that Bishops have to sit in Parliament.
TO take a more particular view of those things which destroy the state and
essence of Parliaments, we will observe in our passage some particular men of
great estimation, abounding with pernicious hypocrisy, covering their designs
under the cloak of counterfeit sanctity, and having their iniquity supported
and armed with Authority. Vbi Dei numen praetenditur sceleribus; Livius.
Augustine. Livius lib. 24.
ubi nequitiae suae patrocinium de Scriptura sacra requiritur; ubi liberator
Patriae insidiator ipse libertatis habetur, and tyrannos ulciscendo, quae
odissent scelera, ipsi imitantur; Buchan. Scot. hist. lib. 13.
ubi Parricidas publicos qui Regem suum occidissent, ipsos omnis Divini and
humani juris violatores, pro vindicibus decoris publicise ipsos venditare, and
liberatorum Patriae nomen usurpare. Such men's hypocrisy says Saint Austin,
quia illa quae mendaciter agunt, sic agunt, ut populus eos veraciter agere
existimaret, is most pernicious and damnable. When fraud or force have their
influence over Parliaments, the stability of all matters there enacted is
undermined; for such acts prove but the seeds of future evils and immortal
discord. In all well-governed Commonwealths, there has ever been especial
care, that the Councils, Parliaments and Courts of Justice, should be free from
all force and coercion. Lib. 2. tit. 27. de Feudis.
By the Imperial Law, ad palatium vel ad forum nullus miles ferat arma. So by
the Law of the Lumbards, armatum in curia Domini jus non est ingredi, ut sine
rixa and sine suspicione procedant judicia. The Interpreters of the Roman Law
say, that arms ought not to be born in the palace, neither in the confines, nor
near the gates thereof, and so the Parliament of Paris gave judgment, agreeing
with Cicero, judicia nulla sunt, Cassan. catal. Glor. mundi.
dominante vi, vis maxim juri adversa est. And long before did the Roman Law
punish by banishment, as guilty of the Law Julia de vi publica, him, who came
armed unto their Tribunals and places of judicature, or through an evil
intention did disturb and hinder the peaceable proceedings of Judges and those
in authority, qui dolo malo fecerit, L. 10. F. de vi pub.
quo minus tuto judicia exerceantur, aut Judices ut oportet judicent, vel
quominus is qui potestatem habet, jus decernat, imperet, faciat. Amongst others
of the like kind, we find in the tenth year of Edward the third two
Proclamations, Cook Institut. 4.
that none should wear armor or weapons in time of Farliament. When Sylla
brought his army to Rome, and caused himselse to be made Dictator by a Law,
although made for fear, yet with all usual formalities, Cicero declared that
Law to be no Law, but such effects ensued, that the Roman Senate never
recovered their former luster or liberty. Thuan. lib. 23.
The Court of Parliament of Paris gave a severe sentence against some of the
reformed religion (their name being crime enough) and yet the sentence was
reversed, Cause 11. quaest. 3. cap. 89. cum Glossa.
ut per vim and vitiose lata, in respect the Judges were overawed. Sententia
per metum lata nulla est ipso jure. When the Protestant Princes and Cities of
Germany were summoned to the Council of Trent, some of them made their
Protestation and appeal ad Concilium Generale, pium, and legitimum, and diverse
learned men declared, that the Canons of that Council could not bind, Thuan.
and alii.
quia Concilium illud fuit nullum, vitio indicts ^, habitum and terminatum. It
may well be granted that force offered to a Parliament may make void all their
acts, if force of fraud used to procure the absence of one of the members may
make all their acts invalid; C 28. de Elect.
plus nocet unius contemptus, quam contradictio multorum, according to the rule
in the Canon Law; which says also, si eos vocatos non fuisse constiterit, sed
contemptus, infirmanda erit penitus electio taliter celebrata: Stew Chron.
Upon which Gardner Bishop of Winchester his assertion, seems to be grounded,
who being prisoner in the Tower, wrote to the Lords in Palliament, claiming his
privilege of Parliament, and said, that if the Rulers in a General Council let
any man's repair thither, who of right ought to be there, whatsoever is there
concluded, is by a universal Law taken to be of no force, by excluding one
member wrongfully that should furnish the body. The body ought to be entire and
complete. The Interpreters of the Civil and Canon Law, say, when we name a
People, we are understood properly to intend the whole, or at the least the
major part: and when we mention the Chapter, Capitulum, we are presumed to
intend the whole body or number: appellatione rei venit res integra; and qui de
quantitate lequitur de toto loqui censetur, quando natura rei, and subjecta
materia hoc exigit, vel alioqui actus esset elusorius. But seeing all the
members of a Parliament, or of any great Assemby or Corporation cannot come
always together, therefore by a universal Law or custom, the presence or
concurrence of the major part of the whole, or of those who are present, most
commonly does prevail. L. 3. and 4. F. de Decurionibus. L. 3. F. de Decretis,
qui a duabus partibus Cardinelium electus fit Romanus Pontifex habetur. In
aliis electionibus quod fit a majori and saniori part Capituli, valet,
consueta forma servata. De electione cap. 6. Decretal.
By the civil Law there must be in their Senate, Council house and Municipal
Courts two third parts of the whole number present, for pasting any act of
importance, duabus partibus adhibitis Totius, quia illa decreta non valent,
quae non legitimo numero decurionum coacto facta sunt. But those acts had the
force of Laws to bind all men which were examined ab omnibus proceribus in
gratiosissimo Coetu, L. 8. Cod. de legibus.
and collectis omnibus recitantur, and cumomnes consenserint, tunc demum in
sacro nostri numinis Consistorio, recitari; ut universorum consensus nostrae
seremtatis authoritate firmetur. This was the course observed in making their
Laws; for if men when they choose arbitrators, or Lawmakers when they
constitute Judges, L. si. in tres. L. item si unus: F. de recept. arbit^is. L.
Pluribus. F de Pro. curatoribus L. si plutes. l. cum plures. F de Administ.
Tut. L. 37. F. dear judic.
or Princes when they grant a delegated power, in private men's causes, are
never supposed to approve, of that which one man, or the fewer number of them
do order, or decroe, unless somewhat appear to the contrary; but only of that
which is agreed by the major part, all being present at the deliberation and
debate, quia tunc judicare intelliguntur, cum omnes adsint, licet omnes non
consentiunt. There is then much greater reason for the presence of the major
part of the whole number in the supreme Courts, Councils and Parliaments, ubi
de summa Reipublicae agitur. And so may we presume was the intention of all
Lawgivers and founders of Commonwealths, although not expressed, unless
necessity in some special cases and accidents does otherwise require. In such
accidents the Law says, L. 45. Cod de Decurionibus.
paucorum absentia, sive necessaria, sive fortuita non debilitat quod a majori
part ordinis salubriter fuit constitutum. But in Parliaments there is most
reason for the presence of all the members for many respects, and cheifely
because all and every County, City and Borough, who are to send their own
Deputies and Representatives, be not without being heard, bound by the votes of
others in all things, as well concerning their own particular, as the Common
Interest, who are peradventure ignorant, and regardless of their condition, and
men whom they never knew, nor to their election gave their consent. For in
other Assemblies, Councels and Courts, there is not as in Parliament, of all
Persons, states and degrees, either personally or virtually by representation,
and intendment of Law, the presence, and as it ought to be to make a just and
complete Parliament, according to the ancient and continued Laws and customs
of this Realm, and of other Kingdoms. And therefore the excluding of the
Bishops and in them the whole Clergy, ever reputed one of the three estates in
all Kingdoms, and called Brachium Ecclesiasticum seu spirituale, must needs be
injust and prejudicious to the Church and commonwealth, and make a maimed and
dismembered Parliament, the Clergy being barred from having their own
Representatives and Deputies in Parliament: whereby the Commonwealth is
deprived of their advice and assistance which may be, and oftentimes has been
found to be of excellent use, in respect of their great learning and judgment,
wherewith many of them in all times have been amply adorned, and many of them
of great fame for their piety and martyrdom, and have, as appears in
histories, showed their love to their Country, by many acts and testimonies,
and in some times to their own destruction, for opposing the most powerful
persons, when the greatest men of the Laity (who for the most part are of much
inferior abilities) have shrunk off and been silent. I cannot therefore
perceive how we may approve of the opinion of those who hold that good Acts of
Parliament may be made, excluso Clero, and take the example of Edward the first
for a Law, who because the Clergy would not still supply him with money, after
they had given him many great sums, he put them out of his protection, and
then called a Parliament without admitting them. This being the case, it is an
ill argument a tali facto ad jus faciendi. As if we should say the King and the
Peers can hold a just Parliament, and make Laws and Levies of moneys without
the Commons; because long time after the Norman Conquest, Laws were made
without them, which are still reputed good Laws. In England as well as in other
parts of Christendom, in the time of the Saxons, Bishops were called to their
Parliaments, and after the Norman Conquest, they were called as other were who
held by a Barony: Their tenure as well as their function did warrant it. In the
Constitutions of Clarington in the time of Henry the second it is said
according to the Canon Law, Chronic. Gervasti, and alii.
that Bishops as other Barons, who hold of the King in Capite, debent interesse
Judiciis Curiae Regis, quousque pervenitur ad mortem vel diminuti nem
membrorum. Sir Rob. Cot. Treatilc.
Some members of the house of Commons, and others have formerly been lifting at
the removal of the Clergy from their seats in Parliament, in as much as
anciently Ecclesiastical constitutions were often made by Christian Emperors
together with other civil Laws, but those laws were no other then confirmations
of former Canons made by the Church. And in diverse Imperial and Ecclesiastical
Laws it is said, Sicut Leges Civiles non dedignantur Ecclesiasticos Canones
imitari, ita sacrorum statuta Canonum, Principum constitutionibus adjuvantur.
And also they did farther urge, how that in our Parliaments, Ecclesiastical
laws in the time of the Saxons, and since were made; whereas the Parliaments
did but confirm them at the Petition of the Clergy, not frame and dispute them.
And if the Laity entrenched too far, the Clergy usually made their
protestation. And he in the said Treatise also faith, that Church-laws in
Parliament did not move from the Lay-members, and that the success of the Laity
was ever fruitless in all their endeavors to establish laws Ecclesiastical
without the Clergy. Although by the Imperial Law, Churchmen seem to be
generally forbidden to deal in secular affairs and offices, L. 23. Cod. de
Testam. causa 11. q. 1. cap. 29. Novel. Justin. 123. Quod congruit cum
Chalcedon. Synod. c. 16. Cuiacad dict. Novel. 123. Qui divino ministerio
consecrati sunt, hos ab externarum rerum occupationibus and molestiis liberos
esse oportet, ne rebus impuris adhaereant ac in terrenis sordibus volutentur,
ut cautius diviniusque vivant: Constitut. Leonis Imperat. 68. and dtcit
Apostolus, nemo militans Deo implicat se saecularibus negotiis.
and so by the ancient Canons of the Church, Cloricis opprobrium est immiscere
se forensibus negotiis, sou disceptationibus: Non susceptores vel exactores
tributorum fieri debent: nec conductores vectigaliorum, vel alienarum
possessionum, nec actores vel procuratores vel fide jussores esse: Nec Clerici
Justiciarii seculorum Principum esse debent. Tit. ne Clerici cap. 4. Decretal.
yet are Bishops allowed by the ancient custom in Kingdoms, and by the
Judgment of Divines and Lawyers to be Chancellors and Treasurers of Princes,
and to be Ambassadors, to have their voice in Parliaments, and to be of the
counsel of Princes, without any derogation or prejudice to their Ecclesiastical
calling. For the Prelates and Churchmen being brachium Ecclesiasticum ever
reputed as Deputies of the Kingdom, and one of the three Estates of a
Kingdom, as well as the Laity, ratione Ecclesiae quam regunt; and dignitatis
quam in Regno habent, and dicuntur Cives originarii, licet sint alienigenae, as
the Lawyers say. The Priest is a Pillar of the Common wealth, wherein he
faithfully serves God and discharges his duty. Jerem 26 11.
The Scribes and the Prophets and the Priests were admitted into the Public
Counsels, and some of the Levites and Priests, were joined with the fathers of
Israel to Judge in controversies. 2 Chronicles. 19.
Etsi utraque functio civilis and Ecclesiastica, hominem totum requirit, Alb.
Gentil. de nup. l. 1. c. 14.
tamen natura sua non pugnant in uno homine, licet pugnent natura hominis
incapacis utriusque: non esse incompatibile munus Ecclesiasticum and Civil,
been tamen disjuncta retineri, Howsoever thus much may follow the too much
restraint of the Clergy, although it be to keep them within the limits of
their function, that their Persons will be brought into contempt, and thereby
paradventure their function and ministry, especially with the vulgar; and they
themselves will fall into a carelessness in ever seeking the advancement and
welfare of their Country, wherein they scarce find so much favor as aliens,
and cannot obtain those rights, which have been granted unto them by Magna
Charta, in these words Ecclesia Anglicanae habcat omnia jura sua integra, and
libertates suas illaesas etc. Of which none of the least is the having voice in
Parliament, for suffragii lationem cuique homini eripere, est civitatem
libertatemque eripere; Livius. Plin. Epist.
and durior severiorque sit sententia non moveri ordine quam moveri, si honores
ordinis adimantur. And seeing the Clergy are Citizens and Subjects, and are
parts of the Commonwealth and liable to taxes, tributes and other burdens
which are not incompetent, but may stand with their calling; by parity of
reason, they should not be deprived of those rights and privileges which
others enjoy, when the use of them does not derogate, neither hinder the
exercise of their sunction and ministry. So then the absent who ought to have
voice are to be called to the debate of matters, especially of greatest
importance, or else the absent are not bound by Law, neither those who are
present, if they are not the major part of the whole number, much less the
whole and entire body, Bartolus and alii.
Actus minoris partis universitatis, neque istam minorem partem obligat, quia
quasi sic actum fuisse praesumitur ab iis, ut non aliter quam veluti
universitas obligaretur, and ibi non est universitas, absente majore part
universitatas. The authority of the whole is said properly to be transferred to
the major part present, when the matters and things to be determined concern
the community and universality, and are belonging to the entire body, and
concern little or nothing particular interest. But when there is a conjunction
of both common and particular interests, there is a necessity of having those
particular consents, or at least their presence: Baldus and alii.
quod pertinet ad omnes, non tanquam ut ad universos solummodo, sed ctiam ad
particulares and singulos disjunctim, quorum interest ut singulorum, tunc non
sufficit res adprobari a majore part, sed ab omnibus and singulis. When
prejudice may happen to several places and perlons in their own particular,
then the consent, or at least the presence of all is necessary. Platina.
By which reason after the general Councels war ended, the Prelates who were
present at the Councels caused the Canons agreed unto to be sent unto those
Provinces and Churches, whose Prelates were absent, notwithstanding they had
Lawful summons; because those Churches seemed not to be bound by those Canons
unto which their own Prelates gave not their consent. And yet by the Canon Law,
and in many cases by the Civil Law, volum as seu consensus requiritur in ipso
actu, nec possit ex intervallo praestari, maxim ubi solennitas and tractatus
Praecedens, seu consensus vel authorit as requiritur de jure and necessario pro
forma and solennitate actus. Moreover the particular members of a body Politic
or Parliament cannot give their consent or dissent disjunctim and in several
places, unto that which is of public and common concernment and interest, but
when they are assembled in due form and solemnity. We perceive by the judgment
of wise and learned men, and by experience in all times, how precious is the
presence, and prejudicial the absence of Judges, Counselors or Parties
interessed. Plutarch. in Cato.
The Romans were so strict in the case of a private man condemned to dye by one
voice, more then there was for his acquittal, that the sentence was suspended
because of absence of one of the Judges. Sometimes by one man all are brought
from an error. By the Counsel of one man a puissant army has been deseated.
Polibius.
One Ephesius prevailed with the Romans in Council assembled, to send into
Greece to get their Laws, whereupon the Romans did ground and form their
excellent Laws of the twelve Tables, Fons omnis juris publici privatique.
Livius. Act. 5.
Only Gamaliel prevailed with the Jews in their Counsel, and staid they
furious proceedings against the Apostles. The Council of Nice concurred in
their Judgment with Paphnutius. Sosomen.
The Emperor Frederick the second kept diverse Cardinals in prison, and the
Pope dying during their imprisonment, the other Cardinals would not proceed to
the Election of a new Pope, neither could they by law, as they affirmed, until
their fellows were released: Platina. and alii.
and those who were under restraint made their protestation against any
election during the time of their imprisonment, so as the Sea of Rome was void
twenty months. When the Roman Senate discontinued their ancient custom of
having a full number always present, opportunity was given and taken for the
setting in hand a most pernicious abuse and practice, as Asconius observed, ut
per panculos ^aci^bant Senatus-consulta, and ii omnes suae factienis, a quibus
quod libitum erat facile impetrabant: when none were present, but those of
their own faction, they did what they list, and the others who were absent
betrayed their Country, in neglecting their duty. Livius lib. 39.
Quid aequi p^ssit expectari ubi per infrequentiam ^urtim Senatus-consulta
facta sunt? In the multitude of Counselors there is safety, says Solomon.
Thus the Roman Decemviri, Valerius Flaccus being made Inter-rex in a vacancy,
the Consuls being absent, preferred a law, that Sylla should be perpetual
Dictator, and do what he list. Cice. Appian. Livius lib. 3.
when they had settled their authority, they changed their former moderate
course, and had daily secret meetings, like our close Committees, apart and
enclosed from others. At home they determined how matters should pass, and in
open place they pronounced the sentence accordingly. The common opinion was,
that they had conspired not only for the present time to do wrong, but were
confederated, and bound it by an oath to hold the possession of the
Decemvirship for ever.

CHAP. VII. The necessity of having all the Members present in Parliament, or
the greater number of them, and the danger of Confederations, Associations,
Engagements, and other indirect practices, contrary to the Rights of the King,
and the liberty of the Subject.
AS the absence of any of the Members make all their Acts void, or voidable,
when their absence is caused by fraud, force and tumults; so are the Acts of
all that are present void, and their rights and privileges cease, when they
who sit and act, change the Parliament into an unlawful Assembly, and by covert
and indirect practices, conventicles, associations, contrived in close
Committees, endeavor to circumvent the King, or to enforce him, and to abuse
the people and the trust reposed in them; All Associations, Conventicles and
confederations, without warranty from the Supreme Authority, are by all Laws
Divine and Humane void, as being the most effectual means to disturb the peace,
to introduce innovations in the State, and to weaken all bonds of loyalty and
obedience. Qui faciunt ligam vel societatem ad eorum defensionem, Bart. ad tit.
qui srent Rebels Bald. ad tit. quib. modit. feudum amit. cap. 1.
ut Florentini, Perusini and alii: hoc exprimunt, sed aliud in veritate agunt.
Istudest signum proditisnis, and proxime post hoc cadebant ab Imperio Romano,
and pro liberis se tenchant. But those Associations are the worst which being
in themselves unlawful, have the countenance and support of Parliamentary
authority, ut unde jura nascuntur, injuriarum nascatur occasio, when that which
should have been for our welfare becomes a snare, when the Leaders of the
People cause them to err, and they that are led by them are destroyed; like
the authority of the Roman Tribunes of the People, which the People did adore.
But Appius Claudius said unto them, Livius lib. 5.
ye give a favorable ear to all your Tribunes, although they ruin the
Commonwealth, and ye being thus carried away by the sweetness of that
authority, suffer under it to lurk any mischief whatsoever. This power and the
exercise thereof by the Tribunes was the cause of frequent seditions: Quae
authoritas specie quidem tuende Plebis, Blorus lib. 3. cap. 13.
cujus in auxilium instituta erat, re autem dominationem sibi adquirens,
studium and favorem Populi legibus agrariis, frumemariis, judiciariis
aucupabatur; in quibus omnibus incrat species aquitatis, sed haecipsa in
perniciem reotham, and misera respublica in exitium suum merees erat. It was
one of the cheisest articles against Peiree Gavistion of treason, in Edward the
seconds time, that he assumed Regal power in making alliance and confederation
with the People, and took an oath from them to live and dye with them. These
associations and consederations draw unlawful assemblies, and fedition; and
therefore by the Roman Law, he was guilty of treason, L. 1. F. ad leg. Jal. Ma.
L. 3. F. de vi pub. lica. Lib. 2. de Feudis. tit. 53.
cujus conatu catus conventusque sum hominesve ad seditionem convocentur, vel
qui turbae vel seditionis consilium inierunt, And therefore as in the Law,
Conventicula, omnesque conventiones inter Personam and Personam, inter
Civitatem and Civitatem omnibus modis sieri prohibemus, and praeteritas factas
cassamus. And also those who suffered Conventicles in their houses were
punished, L. 15. Cod. de Epise and Cler. L. 8.8.5. Cod. de Haereticis: Novel
and 132.
and their houses confiscate: Publicatur domus in quo siunt Conventicula
illicita: domum vel possessionem ejus in qua convenerunt, sanctae assignari
Ecclesiae, by an other Law; Clerici and monachi conjurantes, vel conspirantes,
aut factiones componentes aliquas, deponuntur and omnino cadunt de proprio
gradu. Cause. 11. c. 21.
By the golden Bull of the Empire, all unlicenced confederations made between
the Princes, Cities and states of Germany (subjects much more at large then
others) are strictly prohibited: for associations and confederations are proper
only to the supreme Powers, are inter jura summa Imperii: unio ab inferioribus
fieri non debet, as in the Canon Law. Jus faderis faciendi, is juris publici
and imperii, and ever so reputed by the Laws of Nations, as well as the rights
of making war and Peace, and of arming and araying of men; of sending and
receiving Ambassadors. No one of which does belong unto subjects, and whosoever
usurpeth this power is guilty of treason; Privatus qui pro potestate
magistratuve quid gesserit, L. 3. F. ad leaeem Juli. majestatis.
or does keep the power longer then he has warrant by Law, or from his Prince;
Ita Patrocinia injusta omnibus modis corrigenda sunt, Novel. 17.2.13.
nec ullus aliorum vitas ac bona patrocinio suo defendere debet: sussicit lex
and favor Imperii: and by many imperial Laws under great punishments,
prohibentur potentiores patrocinium praestare, and alii rem vel litem in
potentiorem transfer. For confederations and protections are coincident and
correlative. By the law no promise or contract can bind, which is against the
public right and interest: L. 27. de Reg. jur.
nulla conventione juri Publico derogari possit: generaliter quoties pactum a
jure communi remotum est, servari non oportet, L. 7. F. de Pactis.
nec tale juramentum servandum esse, quia contra bones mores est: no Oath or
Vow can bind, which is contra bonos mores, L. 112. de le. gat 1.
vel contra vim and authoritatem juris. And such are the vows made by those
who are in subjection, and are not sui juris, ut Filiifamilias and servi,
without the consent of their Fathers and Masters. By the Divine Law, says
Saint Ambrose, Numb. 30
the Daughter is to have the consent of her Father, and the Wife of her
Husband, for the ratification of their vows, without which the Father and the
Husband may disannul them. And so by the Canon Law a man is not bound by his
Oath or Vow without the consent of him under whose power he is. Although we do
not take in all this strictness into the oaths of Subjects, yet we must grant,
that in all obligations, as well as in oaths, the Sovereign power has ever
its reservation expressed or employed. Decretal. de jurejurando. cap. 19. Lib.
2. de Feu. dis tit. 55. and 7.
Cum praedictum juramentum vos excusare non possit, in quo debet intelligi jus
superioris exceptum, ut in omni sacramento fidelitatis, Imperator nominatim
excipiatur; ac etiam tacit id intelligitur, nec ulla quidem indiget
adjectione: so as no obligation can be exempted from the construction, or
limitation of the Law; neither can any Oath or Vow, as the Divines say, be
accounted other then a rash and unlawful Vow or Oath, which is contra
facultatem nostram, vel cum vocatione nostra pugnat.

As those are abominable Associations, Covenants and confederations made
amongst subjects in a Parliamentary form, and under that abused authority, of
which I shall say more hereafter: so are those as bad, which are made with the
concurrence or connivence of the Sovereign, who thereby does lend his hand to
destroy himself, contrary to all Policy, reason of State, and to the rules of
Government, as does appear by the example of Henry the third of France, who
being oppressed by a Civil war, was by the power and cunning of the house of
Guise, and other Associates in the holy League, made in show only against
those of the Religion, drawn at length to submit unto this league, through his
preposterous zeal in Religion, and desire to satisfy the ignorant and deluded
people, abounding in a wilful error framed out of affection, then which
nothing is more violent and furious. The King thus joining in this league,
became but as one of the number, in whom they did not conside; he signified but
as a small figure in the total sum, and was rather an accessory then a
principal, in whom appeared little or nothing of King, but the name; whose
destruction soon after followed, and almost the subversion of the French
Monarchy. King Persius being extremely pressed with hard conditions by the
Romans, his Counsel were of opinion, that in parting with ought belonging to
his sacred rights, and yielding one thing after another, he must make account
to quit the free hold of his Kingdom soon after: Such concessions and
relaxations, Livius lib. 42. Thuanus.
are but invitations and steps to more insolent demands and grievous pressures:
Quicquid de Majestate Regia cesserunt Reges, cum eo simul de summa rerum
periclitandum esse. Inter fortunam maximam and ultimam nihil interest: Seneca.
Tacitus.
Imperium habentibus nihil medium inter praecipitia and summa. It is a strong
presumption that Princes are very defective in their government, when their
subjects are risen to so high presumption, as to make associations, covenants
and engagements in a Parliament against their will, whereby they raise a new
allegiance in the People, and introduce new laws and forms in government
destructive to the old, which produces an Anarchy and confusion. Although for
the making of these they pretend, and peradventure intend the preservation of
Religion, their rights and liberties, and the release and prevention of
grievances and burdens; yet this preposterous course, this indirect and
violent means used toward their Sovereign much weakneth, if it do not overthrow
the justness of their cause, in case their cause were just, and makes the cure
worse then the disease. But oftentimes the preservation of their rights and
liberties is pretended, that the present government and Empire might be
overthrown, Tacitus.
and when they have prevailed therein, then set they forward the destruction of
liberty. The Romans, says Saint Austin, were first stirred up by their love of
liberty, L. 5. c. 12. de Civit. Dei.
and then the desire of dominion seized upon them; for liberty seemed little
worth, unless they had domination and rule. Liberty gotten by evil means,
cannot be kept, but by power, and power cannot be kept and assured without
dominion, and those who prosper in their iniquity continue therein: Seclera
sceleribus tuenda: Seneca. Decret. causa 1 cap. 25.
principatus quem aut seditio extorsit, aut ambitus occupavit, etiamsi moribus
atque actibus non offendit, ipsius tamen initii sui est perniciosus exemplo;
and dissicile est, ut bono peragantur exitu, quae malo sunt inchoata principio.
Many are the examples of Subjects thus perniciously and incricately engaged
against their Prince, and in danger of being reduced under the obedience of him
whom they have so much offended, and could neither trust, nor be trusted, never
did think themselves safe, either by submission or composition, if they
disbanded their forces, and kept not their sword in their own hand. And
therefore to help themselves any other way-rather then to rest upon any
assurance which their Prince can give, if they distrust their own strength,
they have often put themselves under the protection of a foreign Prince, and,
as Bodin observes, from Clients they fall to be Subjects, and soon after from
Subject; they become slaves. But if they do escape from being slaves or
Subjects to their new Patron and Protector, which is very rare, yet they fall
into discontents and jars with him, who never trusts them, and never part
fairly from him, or from any Prince, by whose power they have been supported
against their Sovereign. Moreover those who have been contrivers and chief
actors in a Rebellion, and have affrighted and cheated the People out of their
Allegiance, and quiet estate, and drawn them to their faction, they are like
those Ringleaders in the Rebellion of the Roman Colonie, who when they found
many of their followers inclined to send a supplication to Rome, they could not
endure it, Livius lib. 6.
privato periculo little publicum implicitum erat, they entangled the Common
cause in their own particular danger, and fearing that they at last should
suffer for all the rest, and be made a sacrifice to the Romans wrath, they
turned the Colonie not only from all consultation of Peace, but incited them
to invade and spoil the Roman territories, and by addition of new insolences
to put them from all hope of peace and reconciliation, and so did they engage
all as far-forth as themselves for their own particular interest and safety.

In these great attempts and dangerous experiments upon a state and
Commonwealth, although men do not set, as commonly they do, specious colors
upon foul designs, but do really aim at some good reformation, and intend to
proceed upon justisiable grounds and reasons, or at least so seeming unto them,
yet soon after they have taken the work in hand, begun upon better intention
than warrant, the Scene is changed, and they slip almost insensibly into the
use of dangerous and unlawful means, through the many oppositions and
difficulties which daily do encounter them, and into strange and unthought of
labyrinths, and are driven through hopes and fears, which are great
instigations to violent motions, especially if they are possessed with
pertinacious spirits, to use those means which peradventure at first their
heart did abhor. As if they seemed to take a pattern from those mentioned in
the book of Wisdom, who say, Let our strength be our Law, and let us lie in
wait for the righteous, Cap. 2.
because he is not for our turn, but is contrary to our doings: He that is not
for us, is against us. For ambition, fear, desire, revenge, are passions
without rest or bounds, and if they meet altogether, as commonly they do in
such men, they value nothing that stands in their way, neither think
themselves ever secure, being plunged in these perturbations, and beset and
imbroiled on all sides, but still they carry the faces of men who expect
nothing but revenge on them either by servitude or death, in case they sink
under their burden. And when they have driven their iniquity to the height,
and involved the seduced People in crimes, and at last sinde every man's hand
against them, they regard not if their Country perish with them, and in their
own sight; which unto all men endued with reason is the most horrid spectacle
in the world: Livius lib. 45.
As Theodutus said to his fellow-citizens, tyrannized over by two men of
greatest power amongst them, that he had often heard of men that for the love
of their Country had willingly lost their lives; but those two were the first,
that ever were willing their Country should perish for them. But if these high
flyers prevail, then does their prosperous iniquity kindle in them vast
desires, immoderata, incredibilia, nimis alta cupiebat, Salust.
as was said of Catiline, and they strive as if they would give unto nature a
law.

Yet as their prosperous iniquity is intolerable to others, so are they
requited in having it as unsafe for themselves. Seneca.
Intolerabilis in malo ingenio felicitas est, sed nunquam stetit in solido
superba felicitas: and of this the Divine Oracles gives us an undoubted
assurance: Psalm. 92.
When all the workers of iniquity do flourish, yet shall they be destroyed for
ever. A man shall not be established by wickedness. Their root shall be but
rottenness, Prove. 12.
and their blossom shall go up as dust. Isaiah 5.
He shall bring upon them their own iniquity, and cut them off in their
wickedness. Psalm 94.
The heavens shall reveal their iniquity, and the earth shall rise up against
them. The Royal prophet notwithstanding, Psalm 75.
shows the disturbance in the minds of men, and the great conflict he had in
himself, when he did see the prosperity of the wicked, and the calamities which
fell on those which feared God, until he considered their end, and how God did
set them in slippery places, and cast them down into destruction. By the
calamities falling on just men, and by the prosperity of the wicked in this
life, we may perceive that the great Judgment is to come, and that reward and
punishment are not to be judged by the things of this life, Ecclesiastes 9.
August. de Civit. Dei. lib. 20 cap. 2.
which fall in like manner both to good and evil men: Non magni pendere seu
bona seu mala quae vidimus esse bonis malisque communia, sed illa bona quaerere
quae bonorum, at que illa mala maxim fugere, quae propria sunt malorum. When
men according to their desire have had success in their rebellion and violent
change of Government, and that the lot is fallen into their lap, yet the whole
disposing thereof is of God, who often grants them their desire, but yet for
their greater punishment, and for as great judgment upon a people and Nation.
It was observed that after the Cities of Italy had cast off their subjection to
the Roman Empire, as a burden too heavy, they governed themselves not like
free States, but as a people divided into several factions and Sects, which
drew on them a deluge of evils: for Laws being undervalued and laid aside, they
sought to support themselves by Associations and part-takings; and as one side
grew overpowerful and formidable to the other, and wanting balance for the
weaker side; that side so overpowerfull soon fell into several branches and
subdivisions, and after into such confusion, all of them, that some of those
who were of one party, were joined in some respects and Interests with others
who adhered unto a contrary party. And so they fell into a civil war, which
received no end (as it is most commonly) until one side was destroyed, and
then the whole ruined at last, and tyrannical Government established by the
prevailing party. And thus the Italians became a prey to several Tyrants and
Usurpers almost in every City. And then followed not long after the faction of
the Guelphes and Gybellines, which as Paulus Jovius says, was long
gravissimus, and sum lugubris tumultus; non urbib^s modo atque oppidis, sed
pagis agrestibusque familiis codem insaniae morbocorreptis vastitatem attulit:
cum caedibus incendiisque grassari, cognatis, affinibusque extremam vim
afferre, sacra non secus ac profana violare fas putarent; virtutis and gloriae
loco ducerent, si adostendendum insigne factionis studium maxim crudeles
evasissent. These were the fruits of sedition and part-takings after they had
shaken off their ancient established Government. And thus they made the way
easy for the conquest of them afterward by foreign Nations; as Tacitus says
of the easy conquest made of the Britains, who formerly obeyed Kings, Sed nunc
per Principes factionibus and studiis trahuntur. The Italians in these factions
and seditions succeeded the Romans their Progenitors, the most puissant and
glorious People of the world, who after they had first fallen into factions,
and then into Civil-war, could never be cured of their malady, but by another,
which was the usurpation of Julius Caesar, and the Tyrannical Government of his
Successors, and were compelled to submit unto a Monarchical Government, which
of all other they most hated. Albeit they and others also often found misery
enough, under the Tyrannical Government of many masters at one time, as it is
in a popular Government, of which Bartolus says, De Tyranno, and de regimine
Civitatis.
that regimen plurium malorum, vel regimen Populi perversi non diu durat, sed
de facili in tyrannidem unius cadit, and hoc saepius vidimus. There was no
remedy left for our Country, to appease the discord, but by the Government of
one man, omnem potestatem ad unum confe^re, Tacit. Annal. 1. L. 2. F. 2 de
Orig. jur. Florus. Livius.
pacis interfuit: Necesse fuit Reipublicae per unum consuli: There had been no
safety, nisi Populus ad servitutem confugisset: Into such times we are fallen,
quibus nec vitia nostra, nec remedia pati possumus, they could neither endure
the malady, nor the cure, neither discern which was worst. Thus the Egyptians
long before had given them an example, who after they had fought each one
against his brother, their counsels were destroyed, and the spirit of error
mingled amongst them, Isaiah 19.
and they were delivered up into the hands of cruel Lords, and mighty Kings had
dominion over them. Such as King Antiochus, who took away the daily Sacrifice,
and the place of the Sanctuary and placed abomination, that made desolation.
Daniel 8. verse 11. and Chap. 11 v. 31.


CHAP. VIII. Of Seditions, and seditious Assemblies, and the punishment
thereof; Of the power of the King, in that which concerns the Militia, and
the Arms of the Kingdom; And of other Rights of the Crown.
WE may perceive what are the fruits and events of Associations, Covenants and
Engagements, to wit, Sedition, Rebellion, and Civil war. Seditions have been
the only bane of most flourishing Cities, whereby mighty Empires become
mortal. They are in direct opposition to Justice, Livius lib. 3.
to the Common good, to the peace and unity of the People, which are the
Pillars of all Societies. The Commonwealth, as was said before, is coetus
juris consensu and utilitatis communione sociatus, so as it is manisest, that
the unity which Sedition does oppose, is the unity wrought by the bond of
Laws, for the common profit and welfare of the people. Seditio est res
perniciosissima, quippe quae populi, civitatis, regni unitatem, Aquinas.
justitia and utilitate communi nitentem deturbat and dissipat: est
semperpeccatum mortale de se, and principaliter est in procurantibus; opponitur
unitati and paci seculari, ut schisma, spirituali. And therefore we do find
amongst all Nations, severe laws and punishments against raisers of Sedition.
So great a crime and odious it is, that the Jews when they had strained their
malice to the height against our Savior, could find no crime more capital and
likely to serve for their purpose, Luke 23.
then by accusing him to Pilate and Herod of being a perverter of the Nation,
and one who stirred up the People: And so did they accuse Saint Paul for being
a pestilent fellow, and a raise of Sedition, L. 5. Cod. de hit qui ad Eccles.
Paul. sentent. lib. 5. tit. 22.
The Law says, Nemo conclamationibus utatur, nemo moveat tumultum seu
seditionem sub p^na ultimi supplicii, ubi coetu convemuque facto homines ad
seditionem convocantur, quod incidit in crimen laesae Majestatis. Those who
used clamorous speeches to the Prince or people, L. 1. F. ad leg. Jul.
majestatis. L. 1. l. 2. Cod. de sediti. Cujec. paratit. ead. l 3. S. 1. F. de
vi pub. l. 3. c. 4. F. ad leg. Cor. de fi cartis. L. 28. F. de poenis. L. 1. ad
leg. Jali. Majestatis.
Qui suscipere Plebem tentaverit, qui aliquid petunt a Principe, vel populo
tumultuosis clamoribus; qui coacta multitudine magna vociferatione quid petunt
a Principe vel Populo, tumultuosis clamoribus, ut seditionis auctores puniri.
Seditiosi plectendi sunt capite, si saepius seditiose and turbulente se
gesserint: and nonnunquam puniuntur poena criminis laesae Majestatis. By the
more ancient law of the Romans, before the reign of the Emperors, he was
guilty of treason, Qui adversus populi Romani securitatem crimen committit, qui
convocatis hominibus vim sacit, vis publicae reus est, quia publica pax
turbatur, coadunatis hominibus, and omni armorum motu, publica securitas
offenditur, as say the interpreters of Law. L. 1. F. ad dict. leg. Jul.
Authors seditionis and tumultus, qui concitato populo, pro qualitate little,
aut in cruce tolluntur, aut bestiis objiciuntur, aut in insulam deportantur.
Paul. sentent. lib. 5. de Seditiosis. Hengham cap. 2. Glanvil. lib. 1. c. 2.
Bracton. fol. 118. But there is a difference between those who do only raise
Sedition and War in the Commonwealth; and others who contend for the
destruction of the Commonwealth. In civilibus Dissentionibus, quamvis per eat
Respublica ladatur, non tamen in exitium Reapublicae contenditur; qua sunt
hujusmedi quae non ad delendam, sed ad commutandam Rempub. pertinrent. Cicero.
and l. 21. F. de Cant. and p^st^l Thus the Irish justify their late Rebellion
against the English Rebellion, in that they did not strive to destroy the King,
or the Kingly government, as did the English.
We find in our most ancient Law Books the raising of sedition to be a Capital
Crime. Placita de crimine laesae Majestatis, ut de nece vel seditione Domini
Regis, vel exercitus ejus: ad seditionem Domini Regis vel exercitus sui. I omit
the Laws of other Nations.

When Sedition and Rebellion have found entrance, they presently enter into a
breach of two principal Pillars and rights of Empire, ever accounted inter
jura summi Imperii; the one is, the Usurpation of the power of raising Money
upon the people; the other is, the Arming and drawing together of Soldiers. For
the first, the law porvideth, ut vectigalia nova, Tit. Cod. nova vectig. lib.
10. F de Publicanis. Deciss Rotae Romans L. ult. F. de vi pub.
nullo decreto Civitatum institui possint, nec ultra antequam consuetudinem,
inconsulto principe; nec sufficit quod agatur de communi utilitate seu
necessitate civium, nisi ob damnum inevitabile evitandum: Qui nova vectigalia
exercent, tenemur lege Julia de vi publica, quia vis Reipublicae datur: Force
is thereby offered to the Commonwealth, as much as by raising and arming of
Soldiers, Tit. Cod. ut arm. usus. Lib. 17. Cod. de re milit.
the other apparent usurpation of Regal Authority. Nulli prorsus nobis
inconsultis quorumlibet armorum movendorum copia tribuatur.

This is a universal Law at this day in all Kingdoms and Commonwealths, and
before this Law the ancient Law of the Romans made him guilty of high treason,
L. 1. L. 2 F. ad leg. Ju^iam Majest.
qui injussu Reipublicae bellum gesserit, delectumve militarem habuerit,
exercitum comparaverit, vel quo homines armati cum telis in urbe sint, and with
this agrees the common saying, nemo tractet ferrum, nisi qui sceptrum; the
sword and the scepter go together: Ordo naturalis mortalium paci accommodatus
hoc poscit, Augustinus.
ut suscipiendi belli authoritas atque consilium penes Principem sit. Our Laws
and statutes concur herein, and especially in prohibiting the arming of men,
without the Kings authority, and of this, one proof amongst many may serve for
all. In the seventh year of Edward the first, the Parliament did fully
acknowledge, that in them was no power to deal in matters of arms; the words
of the Statute are, that in all Parliaments men shall come without force and
armor, well and peaceably to the honor of us, and of the Peace of us and our
Realm: and that all the Prelates, Earls, Barons and Communalty assembled have
said, that to us it belongs, and our part it is by our Royal Segniory
strictly to defend wearing of armor, and all other force against our Peace at
all times, when it pleases us, and to punish those which do the contrary,
according to our Laws and usages of our Realm. The Subjects are bound to go
with the King to the wars at home and abroad, Cook Postna^^.
and this shows natural allegiance not to be local, as does appear by the
Common Law, and by diverse Statutes declarative of the Common Law. Cook upon
Littleton.
It is the Kings peculiar right to call all his Subjects to arms, especially
all those who hold by knights service, and to carry them with him, when he
makes a voyage Royal, or send a sufficient man in their place, or pay Escuage.
And therefore there can be found no Law or reason, to justify the imaginary
right of the People or Parliament in the Militia. Salutem Reip. tueri nulli
magis convenire quam Caesari, Deoff. Praefectivigil. F. Salust.
nec alium ei rei sufficere quam Caesarem, qui cohortes militares opportunis
locis constituit: eam esse conditionem Imperandi, ut non aliter ratio constet,
quam si uni reddatur. As there are somethings which a King cannot get from his
subjects, but being either wrested from them, or imposed upon them, do destroy
the essential pars of natural and just liberty, and does render them rather
slaves, then freemen: so are there also some essential rights of the Crown,
which the Subjects cannot obtain from their Sovereign, by any grant or
prescription, without destroying the essential and individual rights of
Monarchy. A King cannot grant by his Charter, neither lose by prescription, as
all the Interpreters of the Laws agree, those rights called the flowers of his
Crown, which are Regalia suprema, and summa jura Imperii, regno tuendo
servientia, inherent to his Royal Function and Politic Capacity, and serve for
the strength and support thereof. And so by the Canon Law, Licet generalis sit
tibi concessa legatio, Decretal de officio Legati cap. 4.
ad ea tamen sine speciali mandato non debuisti manus extendere, quae in signum
privilegii singularis sunt tantum summo pontifici reservata. Illa jura non sunt
in commercio, quae proprie sunt Dominii, Diadematis, Domanii Regii, quae sunt
de bonis and juribus reservatis in signum subjectionis, and recognitio supremi
and universalis Imperii seu potestatis; for by such grant, or release would
ensue, as the Lawyers say, deformationem, demembrationem and turbationem
publici Status and imperii. And such are the rights of making war and Peace, of
having the last appeal unto him, or to his great Council and supreme Court;
and of making leagues, and of dispensing with penal Laws, granting pardons, and
such like. For the exercise of his just rights and the administration of his
Regal office is committed unto him by God, without any permission to suffer the
destruction of them, or any of them. Themistocles declared to the Athenians,
and Cato to the Romans, that man could not usurp or prescribe unto any thing
which was due unto the divine Majesty, neither could private men do the like
unto the Commonwealth. L. 34. F. de contrah. empt. L 6. de contrah. emp. F. L
9. l. 45. de usu cap. L. 7. tit. 37. and 38. Cod.
The alienation of those things are by the Law forbidden, quae natura, jus
gentium, vel mores civitatis commercio exuerunt, ut sunt sacra, religiosa, aut
quorum commercium non sit: praescriptio longae possessionis non concedi, in
rebus sanctis, sacris vel publicis Populi Romani, nec in rebus Fiscalibus vel
Dominicis, quae sunt propriae principis. In the treaty between the King of
Spains Commissioners and the Hollanders in the year 1607, it was often urged
and not gainsaid, for ought appears, that the supreme rights of Majesty and
Empire could not be gotten from the King of Spain by any grant or transaction
between him and his Subjects, Relationes Baudii and Meursti.
neither lost by any prescription or lapse of time. And yet may a King pass by
his grant, and lose by prescription some things of profit, and of his revenue,
and other inferior rights and Regalities according to the Laws and customs of
several Kingdoms. And in some cases prescription does ly in all Kingdoms
against the King, or else controversies would remain immortal. So likewise
grants, alienations and contracts made by the King for just causes and in legal
form, are, and ought to continue valid, lest many inconveniences and much
injustice should follow, and the King be in the worst condition of all men; and
sit quasi exul, qui est omnium praesul. Baldus.
He is tied by the Laws of nations and nature to observe just contracts, which,
as the Doctors say, he cannot make void, and revoke de plenitudine potestatis
suae. The Lawyers affirm, that vectigalia and alia emolumenta ex jurisdictione
provenientia, alienari possunt, and in part praescribi possunt, firma manente
jurisdictionis suae suprema exercitatione apud se et successores suos, Baldus.
ita ut sit sine diminutione authoritatis supremae and derogatione directi
dominii Principis. No Act of Parliament can bind the King from any prerogative
which is sole and inseparable to his Person.
And although some of these Regalities seem to be reserved, yet are they
grantable and subject to prescription, as creare Tabelliones, monetas cudere,
exactiones vectigalium aliquorum, and some others, quae cum sint inter minora
Regalia corporis, summique Imperii, and Patrimonii Regii integritatem non
imminuunt: In his praescriptio valeat contra fiscum. Peregrinus de jure fisci
and alii. Chopin. de doman. Reg. Codex Fab. Sex. tinus de Regalibus. Tributa
and alia publica functio seu collatio nullam temporis praescriptionem
admittunt. Cod. l. 6. de Praescript. 30. vel 40. annorum. Et generaliter res
Fisci non usucapi. l. 2, Cod. communia de usucapi. Institut. de usucap. l. 18.
F. de usucap. temen sunt aliqui casus ubi praescriptio locum tenet contra
Fiscum per leges and constitutiones Imperiales. l. 4. l. 6. de Praescript. 30.
and 40. annorum. Cod. l. ult. C. de Fundis Rei privatae. l ult. C. de Fundis
Patrimon. cause. 16. quast. 3. c. 16. de Tributis aliisque prensitationibus
publicis nullo temporis spacio praedia redduntur immunia; non sic de alio jure
publico, principali seu Fiscali and Feudali. Cujac. consultatio. 54.
Census, tributa and domnium Principis, res sunt inalienabiles, and
imperscriptibiles, quarum vindicatio nulla temporis praescriptione submoveatur.
His ancient and just tributes and customs, and his right of imposing moderate
gabells and taxes, are not alienable, neither within the reach of prescription,
as likewise the domaines of the Crown, called the Royal Dowry; for when these
are taken away, he does lose his peculiar and proper livelihood, and the
ordinary means to support his estate; and the Commonwealth receives much
detriment, when the King has not wherewith to live of his own, but the people
must be continually burdened with exorbitant and illegal Taxes and courses,
used for raising of money, the most usual causes of discord between the King
and the People, often producing Insurrections and Rebellion, and sometimes made
use of by factious and discontented persons to justify or color their designs
against their Sovereign. The Emperor Vitellius unto some men released his
Tributes, Tacitus.
to others he granted overlarge immunities, without care of posterity he
mangled and maimed his Empire. The Common sort accepted these favors, the
fools bought them with money, which wise men accounted void, as being such as
could neither be given nor taken with the safety of the State.

CHAP. IX. Of the Act of Parliament wherein the King was to pass away his power
in the Militia; And that other Act which was made for the continuation of the
Parliament until both Houses should agree for the dissolving thereof. Of fraud
or force used toward the King or any other men, for the obtaining of any
Charters, Patens, or Grants.
BUt we cannot find any grants of Vitellius, or of other Roman Emperors or
Princes subject to more just exception, either in respect of the matter and
things granted, or the means used for the obtaining of them, or the end and
purpose for which they were obtained, then that act of Parliament, whereby the
King was to pass away his power of the Militia, and raising of moneys upon the
People for maintenance of forces by land and sea at the will of the Parliament,
the ready way to out himself of all power of War and Peace, of arming or
disarming his own Subjects, or any others, upon what cause soever, contrary to
the rights and safety of Monarchies, and to the Laws and Statutes of England,
as has been before declared. But this was, as the Psalmist says, to
strengthen themselves in their wickedness, and to work their iniquity by a
Law. The King might as well have granted them jurisdiction over any City or
County of his Kingdom independent as unto himself, and exempt from his
authority and the Laws of the Realm, and without appeal to his supreme Court:
and he might as well have passed away his peculiar right of pardoning offenses,
and despensing with penal Statutes. The Doctors of the Civil and Canon Law say,
that a King in what grant soever cannot abdicare a se superioritatem suam, and
jus illud supremum, Baldus Alexand. Angelus and alii.
quod semper praesumitur reservatum, nec concedere censetur totum hoc privative
quoad se and successores suos: ita ut non possit alteri jurisdictionem dare aut
potestatem, quin ei remanet major jurisdictio and potestas, quam fuerat
translata: neque tamen quocunque modo Regalium concessio fiat, Sixtinus de
Regalib. lib. 1. cap. 5.
ipsius Imperatoris, aut alterius Regis superior potestas ea concessione
comprehensa censetur, sed potius major quam est concessa, illis reservata and
retenta sit; neque potest a supremo Principe, licet velit, ita concessio fieri,
ut superior potestas in alium transferatur. The fairest and the most specious
pretenses, and the strongest and most legal ties and formalities make that
which is evil in it self the most pernicious and abominable; damnabilis est
malitia quam titulus bonitatis accusat: Salvianus.
this Statute therefore being such and so qualified, and so destuctive to that
power wherewith Kings are entrusted by God, and invested by the fundamental
Laws of their Kingdoms; and serving most properly to raise and continue
discord between the King and his Subjects, cannot but appear to all men, to be
as absurd, as pernicious. And like this, was that other act, and of the same
leaven and mould with that act of the MILITIA, which was made for the
continuation of the Parliament, until both Houses should agree for the
dissolving of it. But they did not stay for that agreement; for the Parliament
was dissolved against their will, by the irruption of the soldiers. And yet
before that, they did dissolve it themselves, although besides their intention,
when they deserted the King and his authority, and acted contrary to their writ
of summons, and to the rights of both King and People: But more apparently when
they suppressed the House of Peers, and ran away most part of them together
with their speaker unto the protection of the Army, and so became the Armies
Parliament, under which power they still afterward did sit and act, leaving
the Parliament without any Lawful adjournment, sine die, sine capite, sine
corpore. This Law for continuation of the Parliament, so directly contrary to
the institution, and essence of Parliaments, and the undoubted right of Kings
to call and dissolve Parliaments, was another new and strange Law; Lex nova and
inaudita, as was said of the Roman Law Agraria, from which great seditions took
their first rise, and from those seditions Civil wars, which never were fully
ended, until that Commonwealth was utterly destroyed by the usurpation of
Julius Caesar. Salust. Paterculus.
It was a Law, quae summa miscuit imis; a Law, unde jus vi obrutum erat. For
the iniquity of our two Statutes before mentioned, they may fitly in many
respects be compared to this Law Agraria, which Tiberius Gracchus the Tribune
of the People preferred to flatter the People, to continue himself in his
office, that he might be the more safe from the Nobility and rich men his
enemies, and the better bring his designs to effect. This Law, being very
plausible to the Commons, Julius Caesar revived, to assure the People unto him,
and to obtain their compliance with his usurpation. It was a law seditious in
it self, serving aptly to imbase and make contemptible the Majesty of the
Senate and Consuls, but in respect of the means used to make it pass with
their votes, it was abominable: for tumults were raised on purpose, and such
violence was offered to one of the Consuls for opposing it, that the Ensigns of
office carried before him were broken, Plutarch in the lives of Caesar and
Pompey.
and a basket of dust thrown upon his head, and two Tribunes and some others in
his company were wounded: and soon after came to an end the Roman glory, and
their liberty. Insomuch as many of the wisest, seeing the madness of the
People, and their contempt of Laws and their former government, thought
themselves happy, if the Commonwealth was no worse afflicted, then with the
burden of an absolute Monarchy. It is not the retaining of some of the usual
form and solemnity, as was in the making our two Statutes, that makes a
binding law, if the principal and essential parts and properties of a Law be
wanting. For a Law has no force nor virtue, when the material and final causes
and reasons of a just Law do cease and are determined, and the execution of
that Law would prove injurious or absurd. And so a Law or Grant whose
foundation and ground is laid upon a fiction or presumption of a fact, or thing
which never had any existence and being, Medina. Felin and alii. Ancharan.
Decius and alii, and Decis. Rotae Romans
has naturally no force and efficacy, as having no consent of the will, but
only under an employed and supposed condition, Quae reipsa non extitit, and sic
veritate facti deficiente, totum legis desicit fundamentum: quia haec est
obligatio quasi ex falsa causa, quae nulla est obligatio, cum deficiat voluntas
ejus; qui se obligavit cum aliquo praesupposito, deficiente veritate dicti
praesuppositi: Jus supposititium lex improbat. Moreover if a Law, although it
had at first just causes and reasons for making of it, which after fall off and
cease, does lose its force and virtue, what may we say of our two Statutes and
some others made in this long Parliament, which in lieu of just and legal
causes and reasons were fraudulent pretenses and illusions put upon the King to
obtain his assent, and to abuse the people, for the advancement of evil
designs, and the strengthening of a pernicious faction? In a stipulation or
promise, although, for the making of it there was just cause, L. 2. F. de
except. doli L. penult. F. de condict. sine causa. Cuiac. and alii.
sed nunc nullam causam idoneam habere videtur, vel causa non secuta, aut
finita est, datur contra petitorem doli mali exceptio; quia non refert, utrum
ab initio sine causa aliquid datum sit, an causa propter quam datum sit, secuta
non sit, vel ex post facto redierit ad injustam vel nullam causam, ita ut datum
videatur sine causa: Inomnibus causis quae jure non valuerunt, L. 54 F. de
condict. in debiti. l. 36. de verb. obl.
vel non habuerunt effectum, revocatur quod datum vel solutum erat. All
stipulations are in their nature, stricti juris, and therefore not easily made
void; yet if one be bound contrary to his will by machination and practice, he
may void such stipulation. And so all other contracts grounded upon deceit are
void or voidable, where there is dolus ex proposito, dolus dans causam
contractui, vel ubi res ipsa in se dolum habeat. And the Law does ever provide,
ne quis ex dolo suo lucrum habeat. L. 36. F. de verb. obl.
Exceptio doli accomodatur ei qui aliter obligatus est quam convenisset, licet
alioquin subtilitate juris obstrictus esset, nihilominus repellit agentem ex
stipulatu, ctiamsi nulla sit ab isto adhibita machinatio, dum tamen ipsares in
se dolum habeat. And yet not every deceit, nor every fear will void promises,
contracts and grants: as that fear is reputed sufficient which may overcome a
man endued with fortitude, so that deceit seems by law sufficient which may
deceive a prudent person, so as the fear or deceit were the immediate cause,
without which the man would not have done the act. But how far this fear or
deceit shall extend according to the quality, nature and condition of the
persons and other circumstances; and whether deceit, error and ignorance do
more abolish the consent of the will, then fear or violence, is to be left unto
the Judges, as a question of fact, and so the Interpreters of the Law agree,
after much diversity of opinions amongst them. As in all grants and releases,
fraud is always presumed to be excepted, so shall they not extend unto that
which the party granting or releasing may justly be presumed to have not had
thought, either in specie or in genere; non ad inopiata and incognita
extenditur dispositio, Decis. Rot. Romans Farinacii. Decis. Rot. Romans Lib. 2.
Cod. de rescind. vend. Lib. 7. Cod. Quando provocare.
nec ultra ea pro quibus factum erat: so general words shall be restrained, ad
rationem and causam propter quam fuerunt prolata, and so in case of excessive
hurt and damage per enormissimam laesionem, aut error aut ignorantia aut dolus
ex reipsa praesumitur. A sentence and decree shall not bind, if it passed
through bribery and corruption, per sordes and turpitudinem ipso jure nulla
est, although the Law says, interest Reipublicae non convelli rerum
judicatarum authoritatem; quia rebus judicatis stat status Reipublicae. Neither
shall a Judicial decree prejudice one under age, L siquidem Cod. de Praediis
minorum. Exravag. de reb. Eccl. non alienandis. l. 5. and penult. F. de reb.
eorum qui sub Tut. l. 4. Cod. quib. ex cau. major. l. 35. F. de rejud. Cuiac.
l. 1. F. de just. and jur.
neither the Church if any of the legal solemnities enjoined by law are
wanting, for dolus reipsa praesumitur inesse. Or if such decree be
surreptitiously gotten, then no propriety or right does pass thereby from the
Minor or Church, but still they may have their action real or personal, non
tantum in personam sed in rem ipsam. Pacta contra jus Reipublicae non valent,
and hoc ad Ecclesiam trahi debere, quae in jure semper comparatur Reipublicae,
nam jus publicum, quod ad statum rei Romanae spectat, etiam in sacris and
sacerdotibus consistit. The interpreters of the Law say, Ecclesia, Respublica,
and minores circumventi vel lapsi in integrum restituuntur; ergo and Princeps;
for above all, the law is most favorable unto the Prince. His Patents,
Charters and Grants according to common intendment, and the usual clause
inserted, are to proceed from him ex mero motu, and certa scientia. All his
Grants and contracts, are bonae fidei, Baldus and alii.
rather then stricti juris, and ought always to be interpreted, ex bono and
aquo. He has many singular privileges by the Civil law, and by the Common law
of England. He is not deprivable of remedy against undue forms; as he can do no
wrong, so shall he receive no prejudice through the defects in Legal forms. The
inserting or addition of any words or clauses prevail not against him, when
there is cause to presume, that he was ignorant or deceived. There ought not to
be with any man, but there must not be with him a striving, saeva praerogativa
verborum contra juris sententiam, nec rei gestae veritatem ulla scriptura
mutari, as in the Roman law. If there are legal and strong presumptions
(praesumptiones juris and de jure, quae pro liquida probatione habentur) that
his grant did not proceed from his certain knowledge and mere motion, but was
surreptitiously gotten, no words prevail, but the more forceable they are,
Baldus.
the more fraud they carry with them: Vbi abundantior est Cautela, evidentior
fraus praesumitur: and quod quis ita caute facit, ne fraudem fecisse videatur,
major and periculosior fraus ex eo praesumitur: Clausulae and cautiones
insolitae, ipsum actum magis suspectum faeciunt: Beldus, Decius and alii.
licet abundans Cautela non nocet, tamen quod dubitationis causae tollendae
videtur poni, si sit insolitum, suspicionem inducit, and contractum simulatum
arguit. Injustice, the more it has of the show of legality, the more mischief
it works. That lie is the worst, says Quintilian, which seems to come
nearest unto the truth. Nulla major pestis est humano generi and justitiae,
Cicero offie. lib. 1.
quam eorum, qui cum maxim fallum, id agunt ut boni viri esse videantur. This
clause of certain Knowledge, does not work effectually, nisi circa ea quae
Princeps praesumitur scire, prout sunt ea quae in jure consistunt, secus circa
ea quae in facto consistunt, de quibus saepe praesumitur ignorantia ejus.
Decis. Rotae Romans Farinacii. 656. pars 2.
Neither can that other forceable clause of mere motion hinder a just
exception, and be a bar from making deceit appear, which deceit may proceed
vel ex re ipsa, vel ex part impetrantis, quando ex suggestione ejus obtinetur.
Et cum emanaverit ad supplicationem supplicantis, censetur Papa vel Rex aliquis
se fundasse super narrata, and si narrata non verificantur, Decis. Rotae Rom
Durandi.
gratia, confirmatio, vel rescriptum corruit. Yet notwithstanding a man may be
said to grant of his own proper and meire motion, although he accepts the
petition of the party, when he is not moved to grant, only because the other
desired it, but of a willingness also, and bounty in himself. Decretal. de
rescriptis. c. 20
In the Imperial Law it does often occur nos amoventes quicquid surreptitia
impetratio, furtiva deprecatio, vel potentia alicujus elicuit. Vbi literas
impetrant a nobis per fraudem vel malitiam, L. 2. and l. 6. Cod. tit. si contra
jus vel uti. litatem publicam. Coveruvias var. resol. l. 1. c. 20. l. 3. l. 1.
Cod. de precib. Imp l. ult. Cod. si (...) pubil.
veritate occultata, vel suggesta falsitate. If those acts are void or voidable
by Law, which are defective in respect of the form, or in respect of the
indirect manner or means used for the obtaining them, as force, fraud, false
suggestions, or concealing a truth necessary to be known: ubi mendacium
reperiatur, sive in facti, sive in tacendi fraud, those acts also are
undoubtedly void, in the matter and subject, which are utilitati publicae
adversa, vel juri communi; and such are those which are against the just and
ancient rights of the Crown, against the fundamental Laws, and the just rights
and liberties of the subjects, L. 7. F. de. p^ctis. l. 112. F de legatis. 1. l.
5. Cod. de legibus.
for such are against the common peace and weal-publick. Nec pactum, nec
jusjurandum a jure communi remotum, servandum est: Jusjurandum contra vim and
authoritatem juris, nullius est momenti. But a Law is of greater concernment,
then either the contracts of private men, or the grants and ordinary Charters
of a Prince. If equity be wanting to a Law, the vigor and life of it is
wanting: Legum parens est aequitas: Cicero. l. 90. F. de regulis Ju. is.
in omnibus, maxim in jure spectanda est aequitas. Our Lawyers sinde in their
books, that when an act of Parliament, is against common reason, or common
equity, or cannot be executed without doing wrong, the common Law does controwl
that act and does adjudge it void, agreeable to that rule given by the
Interpreters of the Civil and Canon Law, statutum potius interpretandum ut
nihil operetur, quam ut iniquitatem contineat. And yet notwithstanding all this
that has been said, some of our Lawyers delivered their opinion, being
required by the King, that this Statute for continuation of the Parliament
during the pleasure of both Houses was not void in Law; although by that Law
the King was almost laid aside, or used but as a cipher, and little account
made of his negative voice in Parliament, in respect of their new usurped power
to make Ordinances; so as the Parliament was changed from being the great
Council of the King, and became as the Roman and Venetian Senate; and they
abused that power also of siting during their pleasure, and so made a
forfeiture thereof, if it could have been lawfully granted unto them. Thus
contrary to the intention of both King and People, and contrary to the reasons
on which their rights and liberties are grounded, and contrary to the
fundamental Laws of the Kingdom, and contrary to the office and duty of those
elected members, and to the nature and quality of all delegated power and
authority, Procurators, Deputies or Representatives, became masters of all, and
perpetual Dictators, and did work all their iniquity by a Law.

There is another way of fraud used to circumvent Princes, which is to observe
an opportunity offered them by occasion of some necessities and straits, into
which Princes often fall. Many learned men affirm, that all bindings and ties
of Kings, although by virtue of a Law, upon the only advantage taken of their
necessities and straits in their affairs, makes the breach of that Law
justifiable, inasmuch as any constrained assent, is never reputed a Royal
assent, neither a durable assent. Amongst many examples there is one of our
glorious King Edward the third, in or about the fifteenth year of his reign,
who went roundly to work in such case, and voided certain things formerly
granted by himself in Parliament, alleging that those things by him granted
were contrary to his oath, and the rights of his Crown, which he granted not of
his free will, but that he dissembled at that time, to avoid those eminent
dangers which would have ensued upon his denial. Yet may we not approve
Machiavils doctrine, Cap. 18. of his Prince.
that Princes may without dishonor break their faith, when the observation
thereof turns against themselves, or the cause which urged them to promise
does cease; albeit man's assent or denial is feeble and defective, when he is
surrounded with inextricable difficulties, and oppressed with violent
perturbations, and then to take an advantage thereof, is neither fair nor firm:
for when strong and violent perturbations and affections have possessed the
mind, all Laws allow them for just causes of qualifications of offenses, and
mitigation of punishment in most cases: Sereca.
Non est facile inter magna mala non desipere, and quid mirum est, animos inter
dolorem and metum oberrasse? They who seek to hold Princes, or other men to
the strict observation of promises, drawn by the advantage taken of their
necessities and distress, can never have any sure hold of such promises,
neither of their affections. It will never dye in the Romans hearts, Livius
lib. 9.
but will always be fresh in memory, whatsoever shame the yielding unto their
present necessity shall brand them with. Princes have, or at least they take
unto themselves a larger scope and latitude, then other men can, or may, when
as the freedom of their will is straightned by any coaction or necessity, and
upon reason of State do they proceed, more then upon rules of Law, or axioms of
Philosophy, Plin. Paneg. L 10. F. de condit. Instit. L. 79. F. de Jure dot l.
63. F. de condit and demonst.
and may sometimes do that justifiably, which private men may not, non potest
non nimium esse privatis, quod Principi satis est. Howsoever Princes shall not
be tied, when other men are freed from those stipulations, contracts and
conditions, quae laedunt pietatem, existimationem, and verecundiam eorum; and
generaliter contra bonos mores sunt, quia nec talia facere posse, credendum
est: Id possumus quod jure possumus: Paria sunt impossibilia and turpia. A
Prince when he is injuried or damnified, may, as the Schoolmen say, in his
defense, or in vindication of his reputation (which does much support his
authority) act in a different manner, and proceed to a higher measure and
degree then private men; for the injuries done unto him, and the damages
sustained by him, much differ from those of other men's, both in quality and
extent: Vt gravius peccatur in personam magis Deo conjunctam, Aquinas.
sive ratio officii sive virtutis spectetur; sic quanto aliqua injuria in
plures redundat, tanto gravior est, ut est ea quae fit in Regem, qui gerit
Personam totius multitudinis, and sic redundat in injuriam totius. But Princes,
as well as others, are obliged to the observation of their promises and
contracts by natural equity: Seneca. L. 1. l. 7. F. de Pactis. Baldus.
Pacta conventa, naturali aequitate rata sunt, quae non sunt dolo malo facta,
nec contra leges. Faith is expected more fully to be performed by Princes;
Exuberantior fides ab iis requiritur: variatio, and inconstantia in Principe
maxim reprobatur; debet esse immobilis sicut lapis angularis, and sicut Polus
in Calo. And therefore it is most dishonorable in a Prince, aliquem speciem
juris fraudi imponere, aut frauds and captiunculas miscere, Livius. Lipsius
Cicero. Sleiden. 19. Not. Comes 3. Guicciard. 5. Gentil. de jure belli Lib. 2.
c. 4. l. 2. Cod de legibus.
syllabas and apices aucupari, quod leguleorum est; for which cavillations and
carping at words; two glorious Princes, Ferdinand of Spain, and Charles the
fifth his Grandson, did suffer in their reputation, and so did Lewis the
twelfth King of France, quod non Principibus sed leguleis dignas verborum ac
pactorum interpretationes afferrent: notam infamiae is incurrit, qui ed astute
interpretari voluerit. The Emperor Justinian gave amongst his Laws two good
rules for Princes, the one concerning the observation of their own contracts,
Imperialibus contractibus vim legum obtinentibus: the other for observing their
Laws, digna vox est Majestatis regnantis, Principem profiteri se legibus
alligatum esse; de authoritate juris pendet nostra authoritas. L. 4. Cod. de
legib.
For a Prince by breaking his faith, and not governing his People according to
his Laws draws upon himself hatred or contempt, or both; either of them are
most effectual means to rend in funder the Pillars of his authority, and the
sinnews of his Government, and when either of these have possessed the minds of
men, Florus.
novae libertatis avidi, cupiditate libertatis incensi, they are seldom
removed by any art or industry; and then all his actions good or bad, shall
have one and the same interpretation: Tacitus. Lib 3. c. 5. discur. upon Livie.
Inviso semel Imperio, seu been, seu male facta premunt. Machiavil does boldly
tell Princes, that the same hour they begin to lose their State and Authority,
when they begin to violate and undervalue the ancient institutions, Laws and
Customs, under which they and their ancestors have lived long and happily;
Livius lib. 2.
Imperii omnis vis in consensu obedientium est.

All Laws Humane and Divine are against violent acquisitions, except in a just
war, how just soever the cause be. For in a lawful war there is jus hostium and
fas armorum, Ticitus.
and he who is taken prisoner in such war is a lawful captive, not he who is
taken by Pirates, L. 24. F. de Captivis. Cuiac. ex Cod. Theod. ed c. ult. de
restit. Spol. Decretal. l. 27. F. de Captivis. Cap. 11. Decretal. de Judiciis.
thieves, rebels, or in a civil war; in civilibus dissentionibus non sunt jura
captivitatum and Postliminii: Quae rapta sunt bello civili, dominis, si extent,
restituenda sunt, qui bello civili se non immiscuerunt. Things gotten by
thieves, latrocinio subrepta usucapi non posse, no title does accrue unto him
into whose hands soever they come: non multum intersit quoad periculum animae,
an quis abstulerit rem per vim, ac sciens prudensque rem retinuerit, per vim
ablatam ab alio; quia interdictum unde vi, sequitur quemcunque possessorem,
for, L. penult. C. de acquir. poss.
malae fidei emptor, in vitium venditoris succedit: Possessioni violentae
insistentes, vim continuo exercere dicuntur. Time which wears out all things,
will not wipe out that impression and canker, and raise a just title unto
things gotten by robbery and rapine. Lib. penul. F. de interdict. l. ult. F. de
vi bon. rapt.
Perpetuo persecutio rerum vi ablatarum, rei subreptae aeterna authoritas esto:
And this in respect of a double obstacle, vitium in re seu ex re, and vitium ex
persona, which cannot be purged, and a way opened to prescription, L. 24. F. de
usurp. and usu cap.
until that which was thus violently gotten, return again into the hand and
possession of the owner, or his lawful successor. So odious does the Law render
violent taking, that if the thing perish in the hand of him who committed the
violence, by chance and without his fault, and that in probability it would
have perished, if it had been returned to the owner again, L 1. and 34. and l.
19. F. de vi et vi armate.
yet the violent taker is still liable, etiamsi sine culpa ejus amissa res sit,
aestimationem tamen illius rei per interdictum restituere debeat, quia ex ipso
tempore delicti plu^ quam frustrator debtor constitutus est: periculum rei ad
eum indistincte pertinet; licet involuntarium, si habeat suum ortum ex
voluntario, censetur pro voluntario. Moreover he who keeps one under unjust
and illegal captivity, can gain nothing of him, who during that time can grant
him nothing; for he who offers violence to his Debtor, to get what is his
due, loses his debt, and falls into the compass of the Law Julia de vi for
his farther punishment: L. 12. F. quod metus.
Si quis rem violenter invaserit, si dominus sit, rem amittit, quam abstulit;
sin aliena res erat; non solum eam reddit ei qui rapinam passus est, verum
ipsius rei aestimationem. Si vinxeris hominem liberum, L. 7. Cod. unde vi.
eum te possidere non puto, multo minus per eum res ejus a te possidebuntur;
neque enim natura rerum patitur, ut per eum aliquid possidere possumus, quem
civiliter in mea potestate non habeo. L. 23. F. de adq. poss.
He who has cast a man in prison, ut aliquid ei extorqueret, quicquid ob hanc
causam factum est nullius est momenti: L. 22. F. Quod metus.
Timer vinculorum restitutionem parit: si quis dedit aliquid, vel se obligavit,
ubi in furto, adulterio, vel alio flagitio deprehensus erat, timuit ille mortem
vel vincula. But those promises, contracts and transactions made in prison,
between the Creditor and Debtor, cannot be said to be void or voidable by Law,
as done out of fear, because he is detained in prison; for imprisonment is
ordained for Debtors, and therefore the Debtor is presumed to draw it justly
upon himself, and if he made a promise or contract out of fear, hunc sibi metum
ipse infert. Vt in l. 21. in principio. F. Quod metus
Promises and contracts made through fear of an unlawful restraint are void in
law, which fear is not cleared and taken off, until he be restored unto his
full liberty, and the cause of his fear taken away; for until then, it is still
presumed, that this fear had its influence upon all his actions, although they
seemed voluntary: Eadem causa metus manente, Decius ad reg. jar. 40 and sic
alti. Decis. Rotae. Romans
purgari per temporis intervallum metus non praesumitur, nec per ullos actus
purgatur, nisi tales sint, ex quibus nulla alia probabilis praesumptio capi
possit quam purgationis metus. What is a just and probable fear, is a question
of fact, rather then of Law, although questinos of fact oftentimes draw after
them questions of Law. So as in this of fear, as in that other of fraud before
mentioned, the Judge is to determine, after due proofs and consideration had,
of the quality of the persons, L. 1. l. 5. F. Quod metut. l. 3. F. ex quibut
cause. Maj.
and other circumstances. The Law in general says, that fear is mentis
trepidatio, instantis vel futuri periculi ob causam; And that a just fear, is
timor majoris malitatis, ut timor mortis, vel cruciatus corporis, and does
express few cases of a just fear. I find this to be one cause, when a man sees
or hears armed men come toward him, and flies for fear, L. 3 S. 7. F. de vi
armata. Lib. 3. and 7 de usucap. L. 1. S. 29. F. de vi and vi arm. s. 33. S. 2.
F de usucap. L. 29. S. ult. locati. L. 4. F. de vi publica.
it is presumed he was expelled by force and arms, si possessio fuit ab his
armatis occupata: but another Law says, sufficit terror armorum to make a
forcible ejection; Is qui metu turbae perterritus, si fugerit, videtur vi
dejectus esse: Imo si homines armatos venientes extimuerit, and ita profugerit,
licet nemo ingressus fuerit, vi dejectus videtur; quia in metu non consideratur
eventus, sed justa causa timoris: and ii qui coetum and concursum fecerunt, vel
homines ad hoc accommodaverunt, tenentur de vi publica.

All this may sufficiently serve to justify the King and his party in leaving
White-Hal and the Parliament, after they had been often assailed by a
tumultuous rout, having not power to suppress them, and those that had, did
incite them, and made their advantage by them, qui crimen, Causa 23. quast. 8.
cap. 12 Seneca.
cum potest emendare, non corrigit, ipse committit: and aeque dignumesse pona,
qui ab alio admota vi, ad suum lucrum utitur, ac eum qui vim adhibet. Insomuch
as this clamorous and tumultuous rout, were like that seditious assembly at
Rome, who required the Senate, Livius lib. 2.
rather in threatening, then by way of supplication, and stood about the Curia,
as if they would be Judges or moderators of the Public Council, so as very few
of the Senators could be induced to repair unto the Consuls, and many of the
rest of them were afraid not only to come to the Senate house, but to adventure
abroad into the market place and streets. These our tumultuous assemblies, and
the abominable disorders and contempts by them committed, cannot be excused (if
they had not been encouraged by many of the members of the Parliament) in
saying it was the fact of the vulgar sort, and that delicta vulgi, Livius.
a Publica causa separari; for their offense was not sudden, momentary, and
unexpected; it had tract of time, continuation and iteration, whereby the fact
of a few shall involve those in authority, and had power to suppress, punish
and prevent them. Si non compescimus, aut non ulciscimur, quod est delictum
privatum, fieri potest publicum, and sic non singulos tantum teneri, sed
universitatem illaqueari, as say the Doctors of the Laws; for the knowledge,
the will, yea the command of the superior, or of the whole body, Corporation
and college is presumed, quando delictum non est momentaneum, sed successivum,
and delinquitur iterum at que iterum pluries, and palam. Men in authority draw
guilt upon themselves, by omitting their duty in preventing and punishing
offenses, especially publicly committed: Qui non prohibet, jubet, L. 60. F. de
reg. jur.
and mandare videtur: qui potest prohibere, and patitur peccare, vires
subministrat andaciae: Vox est in jure Canonico frequentissima, Cuiac. ad
Decretal. de Testib. c. 45.
non carere scrupulo societatis, and consentionis occultae qui manifesto
crimini desiit obviare. One other cause of just fear declared by Law, is when
the Master is compelled by popular tumults and acclamations, to set free his
bondsman: In this case the bondsman could not obtain his freedom, which the law
does favor, although the Master did at that time seem willing, L. 17.5. Qui et
a quib.
Qui coactus a Populo manumiserit servum suum, quamvis voluntatem suam
accommodaverit, and mentitus sit, tamen servus non erit liber, L. 12. Cod de
Poenis.
nam ex acclamatione Populi manumittere prohibetur. Vanae Populi voces
audiendae non sunt, nec vocibus eorum credi oportet, quando aut noxium crimine
absolvi, aut innocentem condemnari desiderant: Populus docendus est, non
sequendus. Distinctio. 62. and causa 5. quast. 4. cum glossa. and causa 8,
quast. 1. c. 16. tit. 6. de Electionibus. c. 2. Decretal. Electio ad clamorem
Populi non vales, astamen ad clamorem Populi remittatur alicui poena: Glos. ad
dict. l. 8. quaest. 1, c. 16.
Praesumitur de injusta ejus electione, qui per clamorem and tumultum est
electus. Much more ought we to refrain the condemning of any man, by the
acclamations of the People which did chiefly set forward the condemnation of
our Savior, and it may be, and has often been (as in the case of the Earl of
Strafford this Parliament) an occasion of much wrong and injustice, with men in
authority, void of fortitude as Pilate was. 1 Samuel 15.24.
Saul was brought to ruin by his own ackowledgement, by transgressing the
commandment of God, in fearing the People, and obeying their voice: But in evil
times, good men to avoid a storm, have been driven to a refuge more necessary
then just, as was the case of Aaron, Aug. de Civit. Dei l. 14. c. 11.
qui erranti populo ad Idolum fabricandum, non consensit inductus, sed cessit
obctrictus.

CHAP. X. The Case of Subjects in Rebellion against their Sovereign, and the
error of those that would draw more crimes within the compass of Treason then
they ought; Of Acts made and past under the power of a Usurper.
AS the Kings cause is more favorable then other men's in diverse respects, so
is the condition of Subjects in Rebellion, or guilty of Treason, the worst of
all other Delinquents in all respects, for the Law says, Per mortem crimen
little non extinguitur, L. 7. Cod. ad leg. Jult Majestatis L. ult. F. ad leg.
jul. Majestatis. l. 15. and l. 31. F. de denationib. L. ult. F. ad leg. Jul.
Majestatis.
sed post mortem id crimen instaurari solet, and consiscantur eorum substantia
and bona; post contractum perduellionis crimen donationes factae non valent.
Those who are in Rebellion, qui hostili animo adversus Rempublicam vel
Principem animati sunt, are greater enemies to their Country then Pirates who
are reputed common enemies, and may be destroyed by any man, being put out of
all protection by the Law of Nations, ipso jure diffidati sunt; for they being
violators of all Laws, can have no benefit by any Law; they have not jura
belli, Baldur. l. 24. de Captiv. l. 18. Cod. de Furtis. Bartoli. and Peregrinus
de jure Fisci. L. 7. F. Quod metus. l. 54. F. de Furtis. Peregrin. de jure
Fisci. Tertullianus. Livius lib. 2. L 9. F. ad leg. Cornel. de Sicartis.
captivitatis and Postliminii, due unto just enemies: licitum est navigia,
bona, and res naufragatas little surripere, and sic ab iis qui sunt nobis aut
Christiani nominis inimici. And so a notorious and declared Rebel ought not to
have protection from any Prince, especially from him who is in league with his
Sovereign; for such a Rebel is said to be exposed to the violence of all men,
and he that does kill such a Rebel, it is presumed he did it se defendendo de
illius rebellione. But a Rebel as well as a Thief, if he makes resistance or
defense, may be justifiably slain; liceat occidere furem si telo se defendat.
Talis rebellis in persona sua potest impune occidi, and bona ejus occupantihus
concedi: In r^os Majestatis omnis homo miles est; quem lex aut consuetudo
habuerit pro sacro, non crit capitale, siquis eum occiderit. Sic furem
nocturnum impune quis occidat, si parcere ei sine periculo suo non potuit. In
former times a man outlawed for Felony, Hoveden in H. 2. Augustine. nec potest
privatus agere vicem potestatis alioujus. August.
might have been put to death by any man, nam lupinum caput gerit a die ut
legationis suae. And yet regularly and by Law, nec quenquam scelestum and
indemnatum impune occidi: but in some few cases, the Law gives the sword into
a private hand, especially to suppress and destroy notorious Rebels, if they
make resistance, as likewise public and notorious Robbers and Invaders, L. 2.
Cod. quendo liceat unicuique. l 2. Cod. de desertorib. Faber semest. Cap. 2. de
Privilegiis in Decret.
and such as run from their Colors and Captains in time of War. cunctis
adversus latrenes publicos, desertoresque militiae, jus exercendae publicae
ultionis pro quiet communi indultum est, ut non modo defendendi se, sed
ulciscendi causa propter publicam utilitatem: Ecclisia violentos laicos
coercendo non dicitur contra legem agere, sed legi subsidium praestare.

The reason which does justify this irregularity in proceeding against such
malefactors, is given by Cicero, quia in tanta perturbatioue rerum temporibus
potius parere quam moribus, and the Law agrees with it also, quia latro
manifestus vel seditio praerupta, factioque cruenta moram non recipiant. L. 6
and 9. F. de injusto rupto. Testamento.
Those who are in rebellion against their Sovereign, are in another respect in
a worse condition then all other delinquents, for all their transactions and
agreements made with their Prince, during the time they are in arms, are void,
and so it was declared to Henry the forth of France by men of great prudence
and learning, Thuanus.
and the like was said of the Hollanders some years before: For what Peace and
transaction is that, Ayala de jure bell.
says Cicero, by which nothing is granted unto him, with whom the Peace of
transaction is made? Transactio, nullo dato, vel accepto, vel retento, fieri
nunquam possit. L. 28. Cod. de Trans.
If the King and Commonwealth recover again their former estate, after a
rebellion, although upon hard conditions, yet the Kings condition and those in
rebellion will prove afterward very different and unequal; for whatsoever they
got by arms, they lose in the time of Peace, Th^^n. lib. 105
perit illis, and Regi accrescit, ejusque potiorem eventu conditionem esse, qui
jure potior est, as the Marshal Shomberge said unto Henry the forth of France,
when he persuaded him to make Peace with his Rebels, almost upon any
conditions, quia Princeps ex host fit dominus; and this causes those in
rebellion to be so unwilling to submit, or trust unto any accord, or assurance
given them. The old saying does stick in their minds, he who draws his sword
against his Sovereign must sling away the scabbard: Although these agreements
and transactions with those in rebellion are void, but upon condition they
first submit, and return to their former obedience, Livius.
qui pacem petunt, inermes postulare, and de pace agere debent, was the course
holden by the Romans with those who were not their subjects: Cicero.
Hostibus non aliter pacem concedebant Romani, quam si armis positis eam
petant, sin autem pugnantes eam postulent, victoria pax, non pactione parienda
est. But this Roman magnanimity is lost in this latter age, and Princes are
necessitated oftentimes to wave much of their right, and to treat otherwise
with those in rebellion, for the obtaining of Peace, the most inestimable
blessing upon a nation, and so necessary, that Cicero says, a most unequal
and unjust Peace is to be preferred before the most just war: Princes therefore
ought rather to regard what they ought to do, for the good of themselves and
their People, then what they deserve to suffer who offend: and he seems to do
most wisely, who sets revenge in the last place, and takes it in hand when
all things are made sure. French Invent.
It was observed of Charles the seventh of France who had sharp war with the
English and with his own subject; almost at one time, that his clemency and his
endeavors to obtain Peace did not cause him to neglect just and necessary
severity, neither by immoderate and unseasonable revenge, which is rather a
wasting then correcting, did he dissolve the bonds and cut off the hope of
reconciliation and unity, which would keep the wounds continually bleeding and
festering, and cause new maladies to increase and multiply. Salvianus.
Multo felicius est and laudabilius, suis aliquando etiam immeritis ignoscere,
quam in suos merito vindicari. It is observed that Hannibal was cruel, and
Scipio his adversary was full of Clemency, yet each of them accomplished their
designs, although they took a contrary course to each other. Machiavil. dis.
lib 3. c. 21. and 22.
But men easily slip often into a defect and danger, by the use of cruelty or
clemency, if it be not corrected by an extraordinary virtue, and conducted with
exquisite prudence. It is often observed that by treating with rebels, Ayala de
jure bell. lib. 2. c. 7.
quorum arrogantiam patientia and modes^^a vincere arbitramur, ferociores
reddamus, and priorem ferendo injuriam, invitas novam. Cupiditas istorum
hominum, aliquid tradendo iis, non restringitur, sedinflammatur; and quicquid
concesseris initio, ad ulterius penetrandum sit gradus. Buchanan. Scot. Hist.
I cannot let pass the error of those who are too quick in charging men with
treason; some out of indiscretion, some out of a desire of revenge, or to
advance some designs by taking him away that is an obstacle; some guided by
the votes in Parliament, will have all men guilty of treason (as far forth as
they themselves who are in rebellion) for giving the King ill Counsel as they
pretend, or for executing their authority civil or military in an exorbitant
and illegal course, and so make these to be enemies of the Commonwealth,
destroyers of the fundamental Laws, and liberties of the People, and raisers of
war against the King and the People. Although such Counselors and Ministers
may be in part guilty of some of this, and therefore deserve severe punishment,
yet not the punishment due for high treason and rebellion.

To take in all these crimes into the Crime of high treason would cause a
boundless and indefinite definition and description of high treason, and would
appear contrary to the understanding of the Interpreters of the Laws, and to
the intention of all Lawgivers, and confound the wits of the best Logicians to
make it probable. This doctrine would often hinder the endeavors of the best
and most able Counselors and Ministers, to the great prejudice of the Prince
and State, in making them timorous, and ever uncertain what to advice or act.
And this were also to make him guilty of treason, who resists by force and
arms the execution of any judgment and decree of a Court of Justice, which
would be very absurd: L. 5. F. de Crpit. minut.
Non omnis resistentia armis facta adversus Judiciarii decreti execution^m,
neecum cives inter se tumultuantur, and sit tantum partium and saclionum
certamen, dicitur crimen perduellionis and laesae majestatis, sedubi aliqui
desiciunt ab his quorum sub Imperio sunt; vel cum quid comra salutem and
maj^statem Imperii machinatur, I. 21. F de Capt. and Posslim
and in exitium Reipublicae contenditur. Ins^iciendum sit quid agitur
principaliter: voluntas and propositum distinguunt maleficia. Lib. 1. F ad leg.
Jul. Majestatis.
Statutum de turbante Pacem, imelligitur de eo qui actum simpliciter facit ad
turbandam Pacem, non si ex actu turbatio pacis sequitur, dicunt Dectores. It is
the will and the purpose that does distinguish offenses, not the act only, or
the event: fraudis interpretatio semper in jure civili non ex eventu duntaxat,
Papinion. lib. 78.79. De reg jur.
sedex consilio quoque desideratur: fraudem, eventum habuisse, necesse est, and
consilium praecessisse fraudem. We may not imitate those Emperors who did
bring into the compass of Treason what they list, and were therefore noted with
infamy: addito crimine Majestatis, Tacitur.
quod tum omnium accusationum complementum erat; cuncta quaestione Majestatis
excrcita: Plinius. L. 7 F. ad leg. Jul. Majestatis.
Erat unicum crimen little, qui crimine vacabant. Sed crimen Majestatis non a
Judicibus in occasionem, ob principis Majestatem habendum esse, sed in
veritate, non arripienda quaevis occasio ad adulandum Principem, nisi revera
quis reus sit. Paulus sentent. lib. 5. cap. 29. Cu jac: Ligiumi Principes
subditis us li buis non ut servis imperant: non ex terrore aut crimin bus
Majestatis, re verentiam nomini meo adqairi vole, dicebat Imperator Tiberius.
Although the agreements and transactions made between a Prince and his
Subjects in arms against him are void in Law, yet for the peace and welfare of
the people, which is the supreme Law, they are often confirmed and continue in
force; so for the same reason, diverse Acts and Ordinances made by and under a
Usurped power are observed and continued. Those judicial Acts in Courts of
Judicature in private men's Causes are held valid, after the Tyranny is removed,
and the Commonwealth reduced into the former estate, L. 207. F. de reg. jur.
L. 65 and 2. ad Sc. Trebel. Cicero. L. 25. F de statu hem. Decis. Rotae Romans
Favinacii and Glossa ad cau. 9 quaest. 1. and ad cause. 1. quaest. 1. c. 57.
Cuiac. paratit. Ne sanctum Bapt. iteretur Cod. Aquinas and ^olti.
and this is so, potius ex bono and aequo, quam concesso jure, quia public
interest rerum judicatarum, non convelli authoritatem; status Reipublicae rebus
judicatis maxim continetur: for if the judicial Acts should be disannulled,
peace would always be disturbed, and the common right of men destroyed.
Therefore in many cases, neither the personal defects, neither the want of a
lawful calling in the Minister, Judge or Magistrate, shall prejudice men's
rights, and deprive others of the benefit of their usurped actions and
authority. Episcopus licet excommunicatus, si non fuerit declaratus
excommunicatus, and protalihabitus, gesta ab eo sustinentur. Qui ab haereticis
baptizatiessent in nomine Trinitatis, Catholici non rebatizarent. Placuit
Ecclesiae Catholicae, dicit Augustinus, ne in ipsis haereticis baptisma commune
rescindere: Essectus Sacramentales non excluduntur, propter culpam conserentis
Sacramentum, ubi ignoramter vel ex necessitate, vel in forma Ecclesia
recipitur. Excommunicatio, licet private facultate eligendi tam activa quam
passiva, and suspendit ab efficio and beneficio, tamen si excommunicatus habet
officium publicum, valebit quod per illud faciet ratione and virtute ejus
quousque toleratur. Navari in Manual.
There are many acts of necessity held in force, although done contrary to
those formalities, and to the strictness by positive Laws prescribed, and the
acts allowed, although the persons are by Law disabled who did act. Clodius was
contrary to the Roman law made a Tribune; and Barbarius a bondman, contrary to
the Law, and to the intention of all, through ignorance of his condition, was
made Praetor, yet the acts done by virtue of their office were held firm, L. 3.
F de offic. Plaet.
propter utilitatem eorum qui apud eos egerunt, tamen aliud sit Praetorem esse,
aliud Praetura fungi: non suit Barbarius ita factus aut liber, aut Praetor, sed
acta apud cum confirmantur, propter u^ilitatem aut quietis causam. Cicero.
Common error although it does not create or confirm right, yet does it often
give force and virtue to the actions of those men who are solemnly, although
erroneously elected for the preservation of peace and men's rights: Much is
tolerated of common and public error in favor of the Supreme authority and
common good, and the right of particular men; ita ut tria concurrant, communis
error, Baldue.
Superioris authoritas, publica utilitas: Our Savior did bid them observe and
do as the Scribes and Pharisees required of them, who, he said, did sit in
Moses chair, Mat. 23.
for the lawful Priests and Levites were not then in being. But it was not the
common error, say the Interpreters of the Law, that made this Barbarius a
bond-slave a Praetor: non error simplex, nee publica utilitas simpl x, sed
voluntas, Decis. Rota Rom Farinacii L 2 F. de Judiciis.
quia a populo ercatus crat, qui etiam servo cum honorem dare poterat. Communis
error praestat causam validitati actus, and excusat a prna: and authoritas
superioris licet erretur in jure, tamen causat bonam fidem: error non dat
jurisdictionem, nee facit jus, licet justam excusationis causam praebeat. So
favorable to private and innocent men were the Athenians, that they paid them
the moneys which the Tyrants had borrowed of them upon the public faith, after
they had expelled those Tyrants and reduced the State. Thus when the King of
Naples fled, and lest his Kingdom to the French King Charles the eighth, who
had compelled the Treasurers and others debtors, to the King of Naples, to pay
unto him or to his soldiers all those moneys due unto the King of Naples;
A^flict: dreiss. Neapol. Bodin de Repub. lib. 2. c 5. Bartolus de Tyranno
it was adjudged by the supreme Court of Naples, that the King of Naples being
returned and repossessed should allow of it and discharge them: si Questores
regni, in belli civilis ardore, aut urgente tyrannide, aut legitimis hostibus
invadentibus, pecuniam publicam numcrare coguntur, illud acceptoserre Respub.
debeat.

But as for those acts of the public interest, and are publici juris, they are
for the most part of them reputed void, being made and done by and under a
^yrannical and usurped power; as the raising of taxes and impositions, the
granting of Patents and Charters of Crown Lands, and offices and honors, the
making of Laws and ordinances, especially in derogation of the ancient Laws and
customs. Irritae sunt ordinationes, benesiciorum collationes, and
Ecclesiasticarum rerum alienationes ab Octaviano and Guidone Haeresiarchis
factas: illus vero qui juramentum sponte de teneudo Schismate praestiterunt, a
sacris crdinibus and dignitatibus manner suspensos decernimus. Tit. de
schismat. c 1. Decretal. hrita suntomnis facta a tali haeretic^ qualit erat
Novatianus, neminisuccedent, a seipso incipiens a seipso ordinatus, Cathe. dram
sibi constituens, and P ^imatum assument. Divus Cyprianus, Epist. 6. lib. 1.
The Canons and decrees made during that great Schism in the Church, when
there were three Popes at one time, immediately before the election of Martin
the fifth, were made void by the Council of Constance, nisi ad fidem and benos
mores pertinerem: but some other acts and decrees of those three Popes
Competitors were allowed and ratified, for preservation of the Peace of the
Church, quod jure hactenus ambiguo, fraudi cuiquam esse, non conveniret. Our
acts of Parliament in the first of Edward the fourth, declared all men's private
acts saved, etc. excepting those who claimed by grants and patents of Henry the
fourth, Henry the fifth, and Henry the sixth. And the like voidance declared of
those grants and patents of things belonging to the Crown made by Richard the
third, called Kings in fact and not in right. So also all letters patents made
by the pretended Queen Jane were declared void in the first of Queen Mary,
Platina. Paul. Aeonilius.
but the obligations, contracts and convayances between private persons,
although dated under her name and usurped hile, were allowed. We have a late
president in France in the time of Henry the fourth, Thuanus.
to the same effect. When those of the league made war against him, and
usurping his Regal authority, made many grants, patents and alienations to the
prejudice of his crown and dignity, they were declared void, but not the
judgments given in Courts of Justice for particular men's interest, neither the
acts and assurances passed between private persons, although they were made by
and under that usurped authority, name and style. Quae sunt publici juris and
Corone, separatam habent a jure privato causam and rationem. Ba-tolus and al^i.
Bald. and Gay. lu in ^bierv. Imperial. Cunb. Cuiacius.
Quae tempore Tyrannidis innovata sum, penitus amiquata, cassata and recisa
sunt; And many Constitutiors Imper^^ are extant of Justinian, declaring to be
void such acts as passed under the power or Tyrants and Barbar^ans, as those
gifts and alienations under the Tyrant Totilonus. But without any declaration,
if a City be destroyed by a Tyrant, it is said by the Doctors of Law, to
continue in being, by intendment of law, juris intell^ctu, and si restauretur,
jura and privilegia quae durabant in habitu, ad actum ipso jure reducuntur: As
a Captive taken in war, when he is redeemed and returned home, he shall be in
the same estate and condition, as he was before his captivity; jure Postliminii
in omnem cansam suam residet, and veniet, in qua futurus esset, si captus non
fuisset. L. 6. F. de captivis.
A Tyrant and usurper does preserve the rights of the just owners (as it is
affirmed by the Lawyers, L. 12. F. quemad. servitutes.
by his being in possession and use of them) from the prescription of others;
quia retinetur jus alterius per male fidei possessorem. Bartolus and Decretal.
de Prascript. c. 1. etc. 14. l. 16. Cod. de sac. Ec. cles. Novel. Valent. de
trigint. ann. praescript. Nec Asris, nec Hispanis imputatur temtus quo Vandali
cerum praedia possiderunt. Procop. de bello Vand. Cuiac. p^atis. de Praescript.
30. vel 40. annotum. Tempore hostilitatis non currit praescriptio. c. 10.
Decretal. de Praescript Nec ubi Poganorum vel increduhrum furor in causa est:
causa 16. quaest. 3. c. 13. and 14. Sie si Episcopus fuerit Haeretirus, non
currit Ecclesiae prescriptie, quia tunc Ecclesia quasi (...) unellignur.
Glessa. ad Decretal cap. 1. De prascript.
A neighbor City cannot prelcribe against another City during the time it is
held under captivity and Tyranny. In time of Tyranny in the Commonwealth, or
of Schism in the Church prescription does not run against any man: Tempore
schismatis non currit praescriptio; tempus Tyrannidis est tempus schismatis,
quia scindit communionem: Non currere praescriptionem quamdiu Ecclesia crat
viduata, vel ubi praeerat Episcopus Donatista, vel quo tempore hosts its locis
incubucrunt quibus Ecclesiae constitutae sunt; si non suerit his querum
interest ^o tempore interrum pendae praescriptionis bona copia. And so in time
of a great War and Invasion, or of a raging Pestilence, prejudice does not
accrue through lapse of time; during these times of Gods wrath, non valenti
agere non currit praescriptio: Neither in such times the omission of diverse
legal Solemnities and formalities, enjoined by positive Laws for performance
of sundry acts, shall cause prejudice unto men: For all Laws as well as
promises and obligations, have this exception either expressed or implied, de
vi majori, sen de vi divina, cui resisti non potest: If this be the proper and
immediate cause which did hinder the performance of the act or office, it is a
just impediment, otherwise, impedimentum non excusat, nisi tale sit, Decis.
Rot. Romans
quod removeri minime potuit, and quod causa fuit immediata, propter quam
minime praestitum fuerit, quod praestare debebat. Moreover, Cicero says, that
those laws and public acts of State which passed under the tyrannical
proscriptions and cruel combustions raised by Sylla, as likewise those acts
done after, when Julius Caesar usurped, were all void in law. Yet Quintilian
says, that Cicero was of opinion, that some acts and ordinances made by Sylla,
ought to be observed, quia ita illis Legibus statum Reipublicae contineri, ut
his dissolutis Respublica ipsa stare non potuit. For the endeavor to recover
those goods which Sylla did confiscate, and were passed from man to man, made a
disturbance of the peace of the Commonwealth: for such was the Course of the
time, that those goods and lands thus taken by him, Probus de bello civili
adversus Lepidum.
quamvis male capta, jure tamen says Florus; and eorum repetitionem non esse,
licet male capta, quia expedit Reipub. sedatae and compositae, ut vuluera
rescindantur. Such were the Corruptions in that broken State by their seditions
and Civil war, that what did pass for law, was not just: Fst justum aliqued
legale, seu legitinum, quod non sit justum natural, seureale: and licet nullum
sit aequum, quod non sit bonum, been tamen rep ritur benum utile, Faber adreg.
jur. 90 (...) F de V sucapion
quod non sit aequum: Plura sunt in jure quae habentur bona, licet non aequa:
aequitate derogatur propter publicam util^tatem, ob benum publici Status;
quamquam aliqui dicum, om^e utile publico, idetiam sit aequum: sed proprie jus
est ars boni and aequi, L 1. F. de lust. and jur Aquinas. Faber. ad reg. jur 90.
quia de justitiae font manavit, and justum est objectum justitiae: sed a
ratione juris aequitatis benignitas distinguitur; jas ab aequitate, bonum and
aequum a juris scripti ratione. As (...) had amongst the Laws of Nations some
that are not drawn from that which is properly equal and just, sed usu exigente
and humanis necessitatibus, Institut. de Jusl. and jure.
jura quaedam agentibus constituta sunt. The like is to be said of some
particular Laws made in all ages in diverse Countries and States, which are
not grounded upon that which is simply and properly just and equal, but rather
contrary, and for that reason, usu exigente, and humanis necessitatibus.

CHAP. XI. Against any power pretended to depose Princes; Of the Allegiance of
the Subjects; Of the oath of the King; and of his Coronation: Of strangers
joining in Arms with subjects in Rebellion against their Sovereign; Of oaths
and engagements made to Tyrants and Usurpers.
I Come now from their seditious practices, which I leave to their repentance,
unto the relation of some of their pernicious Principles, which seem to be
their Fundamentals. To relate all those they sometime do mention, if it were
postible, yet were it to little purpose; Errors are prone to multiplication;
one begets another. They affirm boldly that if a King perform not his duty,
his Subjects may compel him to it; and that they are bound to obey him no
longer, then he does govern according to his Laws. That the People may depose
him, from whom he has his power; and such like.

The People who are a Party must be the sole Judges, Witnesses and Accusers.
And they would have it granted, that Kings hold their Crowns but conditionally,
and generally from the election of the People. If these be not granted, their
cause will fall to the ground, for they want proof to support it. The duty we
owe to our Sovereign, to our Parents, to our wives, and which the vassal owes
to his Lord, which is the weakest of these, are neither of them conditional,
upon performance on their part. If this doctrine should be received, all the
world would fall into consusion. Mutual and correlative duties ought not thus
easily and perniciously to be dissolved. It is against Christian Doctrine to
requite evil with evil; neither does the Laws allow (as it does in some cases)
Retaliations, Compensations, or Relaxations of such nature. Cicero says, there
are duties to be performed toward some persons, from whom we have received
injuries. This doctrine were as ill for the Subjects as for the Prince, if they
break the bonds of their duty to him, and he thereupon should put them out of
his protection, and show himself a woolfe, and not a shepherd, and afford them
neither protection, Justice, nor mercy, unto all which he is bound by his duty
to God and his People. The Doctors of the Laws are much perplexed in debating
these two Rules in Law, the one is, that in vain he requires the performance
of a promise or contract, to whom he refuses the performance of that which he
ought on his part to perform: the other is, that a man is not bound to
perform his oath, if that be not performed to him, in consideration whereof he
did swear: and unto these rules they astigne diverse exceptions and
limitations; one is, that regularly, L. incivile 12 Cod. de rei vind. l.
nonidcirco F. De contrah. empt. Bartol. P. decastro, and alii.
ubi contractus est perfectus, and obligatio nascitur ultro citroque, non
rescinditur propter inobedientiam alterius partis; and quod in contraclibus
innominatis non licet agere ad resolutionens contractus data contraventione
unius partis, sed vel ad implementum contractus, vel ad interesse: The not
performance of one party, does not make void the contract, but the Law gives
other remedies to the party damnifyed: for the Law does not favor null.
sications, and requires in cases doubtful, such interpretation, as is rei
gerendae aptior, ut actus de quo agitur valeat, potius quam pereat; Although in
diverse promises and transactions, and in leagues and truces (yet this of truces
is much controverted) the breach of one party is holden to be a dilcharge of
the other from the whole obligation, upon this reason, Accursiue Alexander,
Alciat. and alii voa est juris et legum, frangt posse fidem ei qui fregerat
prius sidem, qualemeunque fidem, nudam vel juratam. Cu^^ius ad D^^etal. de jure
jurand^ cap. 3 etc. 9.
quia siagula Capita conventionis insunt conventioni, per modum mutuae
contemplationis, and correspective positae sunt, we d^bet contractus claudicare
ex una part, ex uno latere: and sidem frangenti, sidem non esse servandam:
quod dictum reserendum esse ad unam candemque conventionem, and ad ed quae una
cademque sponsione comprehensa sunt, and in promissionibus quarum altera
alterius causa facta est, cum connexorum sit unum idemque judicium; sed secus
est in diversis and separatis But notwithitanding all these distmctions and
immations in contracts and obligations Civil, all agree that in those duties
which are mutual by the Laws of God and nature, as between the Father and the
Son, the Husband and the Wife, the Lord and his Vassal, the Prince and his
Subjects, the breach of duty in the one, is no discharge unto the other. Those
have little regard of the breach of Paternal, Filial, or Matrimonial duties,
who regard not their duty to their Sovereign. A against the Father, against the
Husband, against the Lord and against all others, the Laws provide remedies for
injuries, Quintilian.
ne sui quisque doloris vindex sit, but the King is exempted from the coercive
power of Laws, although he is obliged to do right unto all men. When the
Israelites desired a King, 1 Samuel 8.
God commanded Samuel to show unto them what hard and unjust pressures might
fall unto them, from some of their Kings, lest peradventure in being not
forewarned, they should murmr against God, who notwithstanding they were his
selected people, yet he gave them no license in any case to depose, chastise,
or disobey evil Kings. For by the same decree of God, evil Kings are set over
us, by which the authority of all Kings is established: Bonos Principes voto
expectare, Calvin. Instit. Tacitus.
qualescunque tolerare, was the saying of a wise Heathen. Hereupon it is very
aptly and wittily feigned, that when certain people desired of Apollo, Rignalio
di Parnaso.
to be relolved whether it were lawful to kill a Prince a Tyrant, he with great
indignation rejected their question, in respect the people were incomperent
judges, and not capable to discern between a King and a Tyrant: and in respect
of their ignorance, they always gave great advantage unto those who were
ambitious, seditious, and lovers of novelties, or in desperate condition and
estate, with their pencel or false pretenses, and with colors of Hypocrisy,
to paint Tyrants for lawful Princes, as well as Princes for Tyrants, whereby
the world would be filled with bloodshed, and execrable confusions, and so
Apollo sent them away with this admonition, bonos Principes voto expetere,
qualescunque tolerare. David said, against thee, thee only have I sinned; not
but that he sinned also against men: and no excuse, no prerogative, no
acceptance of persons at Gods Tribunal, although in the quality of a King, he
was exempted from any Judgment Seat of men; for David being a King, says
Saint Ambrose, was therefore not under the coercive power of humane laws, quia
Reges liberi sunt a vinculis delictorum; they are freed from the bonds of their
offenses, and are not called to punishments inflicted by Laws, says he,
quiatuti sunt Imperii potestate, they are safe by the power and virtue of
Empire. The Interpreters of the Civil and Canon Laws, in explaining that in
the Imperial Law, Inflitut. tit. qutb. modis Testam. l. 3. Ced. de Testam L. 4.
Cod. de Legibus. Diflinctio. 21. c. 4. etc. 7. Decretal. de Electionib. cap. 20.
legibus soluti sumus, legibus tamen vivimus, do say, that Kings are freed from
the coercive power of Laws, but not from the directive, quia nihil magis
proprium Imperii, quam legibus vivere: Et qui leges facit pari Majestate
legibus obtemperare debet. Non posse quemquam qui minoris est authoritatis, eum
qui majoris potestatis est judiciis suis addicere, aut propriis desinitionibus
subjugare, quia prima seeds non judicabitur a quoquam nisi a Deo. Nee potest
ipse hac in part praejudicium ullum successoribus suis generare, pari
potestate imo eadem post cum functuris, cum non habet par in parem imperium.
The ten Tribes which fell from their King Rehoboam, and chose Jeroboam, we find
were justly condemned for their Rebellion, because they perverted the order,
and violated the power established by God in falling from the house of David.
Hosea 11.
The Prophet shows what they were, Ephraim compasses me with lies, and the
house of Israel with deceit, but JVDAH rules yet with God, and is faithful. In
this Tribe of Judah which remained, and kept the pure service of God, there
remained also the lawful Government in the progeny of David; and all the other
Tribes which revolted to Jeroboam, and sorsook their lawful Sovereign for being
overburdened with taxes, what got they by it? they lost their Religion (which
we have seen in our time to go after the loss of allegiance) and inthralled
themselves under far greater exactions, as most commonly it appears in a new
usurped State, and they had their Rebellion rewarded with Tyranny, as there are
many examples both Ancient and Modern.

If men well consider they shall find, that to help what is amiss in
Government, is not by resisting, or which is the worst of all, by removing the
power or the Persons set over us by Gods decree, and by dissolving the bond of
Kings, Job 12.18.
which God only loses, or by casting contempt upon their Persons, which
draws on the destruction of their authority. It was said by a wise man, vi
regere patriam aut parents, Salust.
quanquam and possis and delicta corrigas, tamen importunum est. For such men
usurp Gods right, and murmr against his decree, and control his wisdom and
justice, and give a check to his divine providence. Such men are pusilli animi,
Seneca.
qui ita obluctantur, and de ordine mundi male existimant, and emendare mallent
Deos quam seipsos. They rather will control the supreme powers, and usurp the
power to help themselves by evil means, then look whether they can find any
fault in themselves. He who resists the powers, Romans 13.
resists the ordinance of God, says Saint Paul: Those who resist Government
are presumptuous and self willed, says Saint Peter; these filthy dreamers
despise Government and speak evil of dignities, says Saint Jude. All three
Apostles teach us allegiance to our Sovereign, which inseparably is annexed to
the love of our Country, both stand and fall together. He who is a Subject by
birth as he is tied unto his allegiance by the divine, so is he by the Laws of
Nature and Nations; L. 14. F. de condict. indebiti. l 2 and l. 8. F. de capit.
minut. l. 95. S. 4. F. de solutionib. L 84. F. de regul Juris. L. 26. S. 12. F.
de condict. ind^biti. l 12. Cod de in jus vocando. L. d Chanel. and Sir Fdw.
Cke, Postnati case. L. 8. F de Cap^^ m^^utis. (...) de jure na and genesis L 2 F
de Iustu. and jure.
but our adversaries who are as presumptuous, self-willed, and as great
resisters of Government as ever were in any age, deny this stiffly, and affirm
that no natural allegiance is due to our Sovereign, which is a vain dream; for
there is a natural allegiance, as there is a natural obligation expressed in
diverse cases in Law: natura aquum; obligati naturaliter; obligationes quae
naturalem praestationem habent: obligatio naturalis quod vincnlo aequitatis,
vinculo juris naturalis sustinetur: is natura debet quod jure gentium dare
oportet: and sic natura libertus obsequium patrono debet; cum naturali
obligatione, seu ratione honor bujusmodi personis deb^^tur. If the Laws have
ordained so many distinct natural obligations and bonds between men, it were
very hard that Princes should be excluded from having any natural obligation
between them and their Subjects. But there is a natural and a local allegiance.
Naturalia jura lex civilis corrumpere non potest: naturalia jura sunt
immutabilia, nec jure gentium tolli possunt, nec Senatus authoritate commutari.
The supreme Laws of nature are immutable, as Religio erga Deum; and ut Patriae
and Parentibus parcamus: And herein is included our allegiance to our
Soveratgne, as it is likewile in the sift Commandment of the Decalogue, by the
judgment of all Divines. There are other Laws of nature of an inferior rank and
degree, not so much concerning our natural duties, as our rights, profits and
liberties due unto us by the Laws of nature originaily, which may be, and have
been, by the Laws of nations, and by positive and Municipal Laws and cusiomes,
L. 64. F de condict. indebitt. Grot. de jur. bell. l. 3. c. 4.
restramed and altered: libertas naturali jure continetur, and dominatio ex
jure gentium imroducta est. Sicut jus gentium permittit multa, quae jure
naturae sunt vetita; ita quaeuam vetat, permissa jure naturae; And we our
selves may relinquish many rights and liberties, which we have by the Laws of
nature and nations, but not our duties; neither may we wave those precepts of
the Law of God and nature, Institut. de jushtia and jure. Cujac. and alii.
as honest vivere, alterum non ladere, suum cuique tribuere. But in many
things natural right and common equity, may by a greater equity be rescrained,
Alia est aquitas simplex, alia aequitas summa; summa seu major aequitas est
quae maxim spectat ad utilitatem publicam, and ad humanae societatis vinculum;
sed tunc jus naturae and naturalis ratio non mutatur in se, sed causa
subjectiva seu materialis mutatur, vel circumstantiae casus variantur; and then
the positive Laws of several nations and customs do and may add and detract
from the Laws of nature and nations. L 6 F de Iustit. and jure.
Jus civil neque in totum a jure naturali vel g mium recedit, neque per omnia
ci servit: accidemia juris naturalis and divini, ut sunt circumstantiae
personarum, temporum and locorum, mutabilia sunt, manente vt ac virtute istorum
jurium immutabili, and he tunc producere pessunt necessariam dispensationem,
limitationem, sen declarationem, dicunt Doctores. Covaruvias.
Declarari humana lege potest jus natural, tolli non potest, limitart and
declarari in multis potest, tam per interpretationem inter jus and aequitatem
interpositam, Navari Manuele.
quam per justam dispensatienem, and per consuctudinem rationabilem: Papa non
potest jus divinum tollere, potest ex causa illud moderari, ac limitare; nam
quod in alio permmitti stculo, in alio vetari, nec justitia ergo varia and
mutabilis, Augustinus C^^^o.
sed tempera non pariter cunt: and multa quae honesta videmur esse natura,
temperibus sunt inhonesta.

As a King cannot be discharged of his obligation to his People, so cannot they
be loosed from their natural allegiance to their Sovereign: The faith between
the Lord and his vassal is mutually obngatory, but much more stronger is the
obligation between the Sovereign and his natural Subjects by birth: Dominus in
his omnibus sideli suo vicem reddere debet. Lib. de fendis. tit. de ^^ma
fideli^^us. Dictinct. 93 cap. esto subjectus. cause 22 quast. 5. c. 18. cum
Glossa. Lucan. L. 4. C. de origin. l. 4. Cod de muntcip l. 1. S. 15. F. de
ventre inspic. Cod. fit si Curi. lis. l. penult. Cod. de reseind. vend. Coke
Postnati Case.
Eadem side tenetur Dominus subdito suo, sicut subditus Domino A man may change
his habitation, but not renounce his country, or allegiance to his Sovereign,
who is reputed the Father of his Country, and the Husband of the
Commonwealth, Pater urbisque maritus. Domicilium commutari, and incolatui
renunciari potest, origini non item: origin propria, neminem se eximere posse;
quia patria nascimur: Impios se esse Patriam vitando demonstrant. The Oath of
Allegiance to our Sovereign, or of sidelity to our Lord, makes not the Subject
or vassal, but it tyeth him more straightly. An Oath is not always of the
essence of the thing whereunto it is applied, for Allegiance does not begin by
the oath taken at the Court Leet. The very oath of Allegiance, works not the
bond in Law: Between the Lord and the Vassal, Juramentum non est de substantia
feudi: Feudatarius est obnoxious praestando juramento sidelitatis, quod licet
remittitur, non tamen remittitur fides and hominium; sed onus subeundi
juramenti, Baldus and Iserna Cujac. ad decretal. Duarenus and alii. Operae
officiales, non cuiquam alii deberi possunt quam Patrono, cum proprietas.
esrum, and in liberti edentis persons, and in Patroni persona cui edantur,
conslitit. l. 9. F. De operib. libertorum, libertus natura operas Patrono
debet: Patronus operas officiales alii delegare non potest, sed sabriles, seu
artis^^ales potest delegare, quia ha operae person Patroni non cobaerent. l.
26. S. 12. F. de condict. Jud. 6. Sic proprie and categorice loquendo Patronus
non potest clientem delegare, vel alii cedere personam vel officium clientela
quamvis possit alii cedere jura pecuniaria a cliente debita: nec Rex Francia
transfer potest in alium jus hoc quod habet in vassallum, sive vassallagium,
vasallo invito. Carolus Molinaeus ad consuetudines Partsienses, cum alus. Dux
Britan^ia noluit pro Rege Gallia Regem Angliae quasi Dominum agnoscere, quamvis
a Rege Galliae deleg^retur Car. Molincus. and Cujac. ad lib. 1. tit 22. De
feudis. Julius Clarus de Feudis. quest. 28 The Duchy of Aquitaine refused to
accept John of Gant for their Sovereign, and said they were of the right, and
of the Dominion of the Crown of England, and by the Coronation oath not to be
alienated. Frosarde History.
quia fides est de substantia non juramentum: hoc juramentum non est
obligationis introductorium, sed confirmatorium, and obligationis efficacioris
gratia: in plus non obligatur, sed efficacius and majori vinculo. So the
Solemnities of the Coronation, and the Oath there taken and given reciprocally,
do not confer and add more allegiance unto the Subjects, or right unto
hereditary Princes, then they had by their birthright: for the right of
Succession was sectled before, and ingraffed in the lineage and family,
according to priority, and proximity of blood, by the Laws of the Country and
of Nations. This Oath Kings ought religiously to observe, because the
administration of Justice, the preservation of Religion, and the welfare of the
People, are the principal parts of this Oath, and of his duty; not that his
estate is hereby made or intended to be but conditional: his person is tied in
conscience and in honor, the Authority cease not, if he fail in performance.
The Oath and the Solemniqes of Coronation makes not the Prince, nor the
neglect thereof does not any way impeach his right: They do declare the Prince,
and do admonish both him and his people of their respective duties, and do
conduce to the perfecting of the pledges and stipulation of each others faith:
Du Tillet.
Couronnement and Sacre des Roys doivent prins, and intendus pur declaration,
on acceptance and submissionau Roy design de Dieu, qui la conserve and fait
le plus proche de la Couronne, non pour aucun droit qux subjects de doner la
Royaume hereditarie per leurs voix ou Election; Gloss. ad decretal. tit. qui
filii ^^t legit. c. 7. Rex Romans nondum coronatus, post electionem concerdem ha
betemaem potestatem; unctio nibil addit. Glossa ad tit. de jureiurando. in
Clementin. Glossa in in extravag. de Majoritate. 1 Samuel 10. 1 Kings 39 Seiden
of Nobility.
But when the Prince is by Election; Electio facit Imperatorem, sed prius suit
Imperator, quam coronam accipicbat a Papa, and gladium ab Altari. Inaugurantur
Reges in Ecclesia, ubi preces pro iis fiant; potestatem iis a solo Deo tradi,
and idcirco Coronam eos accipere ab Episcopo, gladium ab Altari. Samuel
anointed Saul with oil, and said, it is because the Lord has anointed thee to
be Captain over his inheritance. Zadok the priest anointed Solomon, and they
blew the Trumpet, and the People said, God save the King; Anointing at the
Inauguration drew with it a most reverend regard of the Prince. The name of the
Lords Anointed in the Scripture and elsewhere, does often occur: They interpret
that of Daniel, the Anointed shall be taken away of Hircanus, from whom the
Kingdom of the Jews was transferred, and unto whom the original of Anointing is
referred.

The Cities in France which would not acknowledge Henry the fourth for their
King, who succeeded rightly according to the Laws of that Kingdom, but
continued in the former rebellion raised against his Predecessor, they could
not help themselves by saying that Henry the fourth was not Crowned, and that
they never acknowledged him for their King, and therefore they were not to be
reputed Rebels: but they were answered by learned men, that they being
Subjects by their birth, and continuing in their original sin, they added
actual: Neither did Bodins distinction help his Countrymen, Bodin. de Repub.
so much as it disgraced him; in saying, there was a difference between a
universal defection and falling away of the People, and a Rebellion; a
distinction without a difference, but upon better consideration, he said,
neminem patriam repudiare posse, De Repub. lib.
nec subditus potest imperio sui Principis seipsum eximere: Neither can they
raise an excuse for rebellion in a Monarchy out of that in the Roman Law, that
in a Civil war they who engage on either side, are not in the condition of
foreign enemies; L. 21. F. de Caytivis.
Cum cives inter se contendunt, scissa in duas parts Republica, Aristocratica
vel Populari, captos hinc inde non fieri servos, quia non contra Imperii
majestatem machinantur, nec in exitium Reipub. contenditur; ubi non sit tale
bellum, quod Antonius gerebat, quod Casar vocabat non partium certamen aqualis
juris, Ayala dejure belli lib. 1. c. 2
sed defectionem a populo Romano. Thus when the title to the Crown is in
controversy, it may seem hard to punish those, who upon no improbable opinion,
Cicero. L. 9 Cod. de leg. l. 12. Cod. de diver. reg. jur. Decis. Rotae Romans L.
106. F. de Regul. jur. L. 1. F. Quar. rer. ectie l. 6. Cod. deliber. causa. L.
13. F. ad leg. Aquil. L. 1. S. 2. F. decondition. and demon. L. 13. F. de
Policitat. l. 2. S. 44. ed SG. Tirtil. L 13 F. de interdict.
nor inclination to rebellion, join with one side; and believe they are not
rightly Subjects to him, against whom they bear arms; as it happened in the
war between the houses of York and Lancaster, and in that war between Casar and
Pompey, multi dubitabant quid optimum esset, multi quid expediret, multi quid
deceret, nonnulli quid liceret. For although the Law says, leges quae
constringunt hominum vitas, intelligi ab omnibus debent, nec eas ignorare
quemquam, nec dissimulare permittimus, tamen aliter est ubi jus dubium and
intricatum est. The Canonists say that when a divine Law, is not clear and
certain, but has diverse interpretations, and cujus varii sunt intellectus, the
Pope may dispense with it as he sees cause. But men have no more power to
renounce their allegiance then their liberty and freedom, which is
inestimable, or to bind themselves to a corporal punishment, or from marriage:
Quae onerandae libertatis causa facta sunt, non valent: Nemo dominus est
membrorum suorum. We cannot be bound by any covenants and conditions, by which
jus libertatis nostrae, aut jus patriae nostrae laditur: qui sui juris sit,
tamen sui ipsius Dominus non sit: conditiones adjectae utilitati publicae
adversae, remirtendae sunt: quae non a Patre, sed a genere, a rerum natura, a
civitare tribunmur, ca manner incolumia: and many others the like in the Law.
There is that which we cannot put from us, as there is that which none can take
from us. Our allegiance is individual and perpetual. L. 9. F. de obsequiis. L 5
Cod. de obsequiis. L 4. F. de jure Palron.
We may allow no less to the Parent of our Country, then the ^omans did to the
Patrons of them who were manumissed and made free; liberto semper sancta
persona Patroni videri debet: and although the Patron were a person condemned
by the Law, tamen salva sunt jura liberis Patroni and consuctum obsequium iis
semper praestandum esse a libertis. Qui decreto publico deditus sit hostibus,
ut suit causa Mancini, si hostis non recepisset, an civis Romanus manebat;
magna Quaestio erat L. ult. F. de legationib. licet dicitur quod civit esse
desinit, quem civitas repudiavit; aliud est in subdito originali, maturali
licet deditus sit a sua Patria, and Principe: manet tamen sua Allegeancia, quae
ubique locorum subditos ^ales tenet, quia naturalis ratio authoritate Senatus
commutari non potest. l. 2. F. De usufructu. ear. ter.
Our allegiance as it is not so weak, so it is not so narrow, but it is of
larger extent, then these men would have it to be: for there is a local
Allegiance in respect of habitation and residence in another Country, due from
Aliens and strangers unto the Prince of the Country, wherein they reside, and
have protection, and enjoy the freedom of commerce, although they be not there
naturalized, and made Denisons.

And here we may take an occasion to admonish all Strangers, Subjects to any
Prince or State in league with our King, who assist and associate themselves
with our Kings subjects in actual rebellion, for such may and ought to be
punished as Rebels by either Prince, if they have no warrant for it from their
own Sovereign: quia hi ladunt Majestatem sui Principis in laedendo
Confaederatumejus, Alb. Gentilis disput. ad julMajestatis. Gentil. Hispaenicae
advocationit, and ad Jus belli.
nam confoederatio sit tantae potentiae ut de duobus unum faciat. Satis est ad
Peregrinum obligandum, quod dederit se socium, aut Capitancum subditis Regis
nostri, a quo puniri potest ut reus criminis laesae Majestatis; nam talis
peregrinus obstringitur fere ut subditi, and propter hos socios suostembitur
Majestatis etiam ipse peregrinus. Qui seaant in corpus aliquod, isti volunt
teneri cum corpore, ergo and pati debent. Ayala de jur. bell.
Christiani non siunt scrvi nisi militent, aut auxilium praebeant Turcis contra
Christianos, tunc non Christianorum, sed insideltum quibus se adjunxerunt
numero habendi sunt. Such cannot fall into the rank of just enemies, who assist
any rebels, and come in at least as accessories, without a solemn denunciation
of war or a just cause: Those are properly enemies, L. 24. F. de Captivis.
qui nobis, aut quibus nos public bellum decernimus, caeteri latrones aut
praedones sunt. These strangers thus offending can claim no privilege, or
benefit, by any league or Laws, but may justly be punished where they did
offend, for by a universal Law ratione domicilii vel delicti quis efficitur de
foro alterius principis. Habet Imperium Praeses Provinciae adversus extraneos
hemines, L. 3. F. de ossic. Praesu. L. ult. F. de accus.
si quid manu commiscrint. Alterius Provinciae rens apud cos accusatur and
damnatur, apud quos crimen contractum ostenditur, quod etiam in militibus est
observandum. The Laws of every Country give protection, and some privileges
to strangers: Protection draws Subjection, and Subjection Protection, but in
vain he calls for the benefit of the Law, who offends against the Law:
guilt abolisheth all honor and privilege. If a privileged person, according
to the common saying, cannot use his privilege against one equally
privileged, how much less against the Prince, the giver of privileges, and
omnis dignitatis author and culmen? In reos damnatos ex civitatibus nobis
confaederatis animadvertimus: L. 7. F. de Captiv.
Forum sortiuntur foederati in Civitate foederata; and with this agrees the
Laws of nations, and the Law of England, for if an alien living in England, who
is under the Protection of the King and the Law, Coke Postnati case. Deuteronomy. 10.
Levit. 20.
commit treason, his indictment shall be contra ligiantiae suae debitum. The
Divine Law so favorable to strangers, gives us warrant to punish strangers,
if they offend, as well as others. And therefore those who call themselves
Soldiers of fortune, and think they may come into any country where there is
combustion, and fall into any side, like birds of prey, without either warrant
from their Prince, or consideration of the justness of the cause, find
themselves often deceived and neglected by that party which they did assist,
and little pitied whatsoever happens unto them, whether they are slain, or
condemned to die, either by the power or the right of the other party. There
are lately risen up certain Politicians, not so violent, and in show, not so
malignant as others, who affirm either to flatter themselves, or to deceive
others, or to put a scorn upon sacred allegiance, and to give it cunningly a
foil, that when a stronger, although a usurped power, does hold men under a
yoke, they ought quietly to submit; and that all allegiance and former oaths
taken for that purpose, are at least suspended, if not abolished; as if they
were to take for a rule always the example of Issachar, Genes. 49.15.
a strong Ass couching down between two burdens, who did see that rest was
good, and that the Land was pleasant, and bowed his shoulders to bear, and
became a servant unto Tribute. Jerem. c. 27. etc. 29.
Or the extraordinary example of the Israelites submission under the yoke and
captivity of the Chaldeans, by the special and express decree of God, and under
his commination, that what nation or kingdom would not serve the King of
Babel, he would visit that nation with the sword, with the famine and with
pestilence. But we cannot here ground an argument for justifying obedience unto
all Tyrants and invaders of our Country: omnes enim omnium charitates, una
Patria complexa and supergressa est: Vigil.


-- Paterque natos nova bella moventes

Ad penam pulchra prolibertate vocabat: Filius sine seelere proditorem Patriae,
L. 35. F. de Religtos. Ctusa 23. quast. 8 c. 15.
licet Pater suus sit, occidit: In omni tempore bellum gerendum sit pro
defensione sua, and Patriae and legum Patriae, ne videatur homo deum temare.
Some learned men affirm; Tyrannum qui per vim dominatur, nullum habens jus ad
illius Reipub. regimen, posse a privato occidt, Cavaruvies. Cajetan. and alii.
Soto de Just. and jur.
ubi nullum aliud est remedium ad Tyrannidem illam tollendam, etiam veneno and
proditorie. Others say, quod qui sit invasor Regis vel Reipublicae just
intersicitur, nam vim vi repellere licet; and quamdin talis Rempublicam sic
obtinet, perpetuam gern in Rempub. vim and bellum: others affirm, quod quando
nobis non patet legitima and possibilis via liberandi nos a Tyrannide, seramus
ut possumus, and Deo negotium quod omnino ejus est, P. Martyabe. C m and
Calvin. Institut.
permittamus. Vidimus quanta obedientia dominus tetrum and serocem illum
tyrannum Nebuchadnezzar coli voluerit, non alia ratione, nisi quia regnum
obtinebat: id autem ipsum erat coelesti decreto, in solium regni impositum
esse, ac in regiam majestatem assumptum. Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. c. 20. p. 27.
Hoc nobis si assidue ob oculos obversetur, codem decreto constitui etiam
nequissimos Reges, quo Regum authoritas statuitur; nunquam in animo; seditiosae
cogitationes venient etc. I shall leave this diversity of opinions in this
point to the Judgment and discussion of others: I do not require that men
should strive against God and nature, and with unseasonable and unadvised
obstinacy provoke the wrath of the Conqueror: for as soldiers are excusable
when they have done the utmost that wit and power can perform, and duty can
exact, in defense of a City; so are Subjects, if through apparent danger of
death and devastation, they render themselves, and obey the enemy upon the best
conditions that can be gotten; Augustinus.
Vox est quodammodo naturae in omnibus fere gentibus, ut subjugari mallent
hostibus victoribus, quam belly a omnifaria vastatione deleri. Those thus
compelled to take new oaths, some Doctors hold them not guilty of rebellion, or
perjury, and repute those latter oaths contrary to their former, being injustly
exacted, to be void, and at the most, to be but a passive, rather then an
active rebellion. But this cannot excuse men when they are tyrannically, by the
usurpation of any fellow Subject of theirs oppressed, if they submit unto that
yoke, and swear whatsoever is required of them, and do not use all means
possible to recover their liberty, and the rights of their Country. L. 19.
Cod. de Postlim. l. 20. F. de Captivis.
Qui hostilis irruptionis necessitate transductus est, ad proprias terras
festinare se debere, cum hoc solum requirendum est, utrum cum hostibus
voluntate fuerit, an coactus; si sua voluntate apud hosts mansit, non est ei
jus postliminii. By this doctrine that Subjects under the yoke of any Tyrant
and Usurper, as well as of a foraign just enemy, ought quietly to submit, and
take new oaths contrary to their allegiance; our allegiance is a thing left at
large, and made ambulatory, rebellion is cherished, usurpers encouraged, and
men quieted from seeking which way soever the wheel turns, to shake of any
usurped and tyrannical power, by any means lawful or probable. But those
Lawyers are the greater deceivers, who affirm that all the Laws and Statutes,
which do mention the King, and are made for his benefit, and for the security
of him and his Subjects, as that Statute also made by Henry the seventh for the
security of Subjects, when two are in competition for the Crown, ought to be
interpreted for him, whosoever has gotten the supreme power, and that by his
assuming the name of King, which some of them absurdly held necessary, men
ought to submit, although he had no more title then Jobn of Leiden: And thus
may one usurper, if he can, drive out another, find the Laws as beneficial for
him as his sword, and make them serve for any usurper of a Crown, as well as
for any Competitor for a Crown, how good soever his title be. These pernicious
Law-sophisters that excellent rule in Law does control, Nulla juris ratio aut
aequitatis benignitas patitur, L. 25. F. de Legibus L. 6. Cod. de. legib. l.
leg^ta inutilia, F. de adimendis legatis. Reg. jur. Canonici.
ut quae salubriter proutilitate hominum introducuntur, ea nos duriori
interpretatione contra ipsorum commodum producamus ad severitatem: nec inducta
ad unum effectum debent contrariaoperari: quod ob gratiam alicujus conceditur,
non est in ejus dispendium retorquendum; nec jura singularia producenda sunt ad
similia, aut ad consequentiam, licet jus commune trahitur ad consequentiam ex
majoritate, aut paritate rationis, ut dicunt Interpretes juris. These cannot
blame Machiavil for saying, that Princes may break their faith, to preserve
themselves from danger or damage, seeing they teach Subjects to wave their
allegiance, and break their oaths for prosit and quietness: Neither can they
condemn those Jesuits, for saying the Pope can absolve Subjects from their oath
of allegiance, if Subjects can find cause and means to absolve themselves from
that their duty and oaths, or when they take new oaths and engagements, help
themselves by equivocation and mental reservation. Such new oaths and
engagements do avail nothing, unless it be to procure perjury, and the more
hatred on those who procured them to violate their conscience: With whatsoever
cautel or mental reservation, we swear, protest or engage, yet God takes it,
as he which gives the oath does understand it: and if he who swears, means
deceitfully, the interpretation cannot be made according to his fraudulent
intention, but according to his meaning who required it, or else according to
the proper and common acceptance and sense of the words, especially being
given by a Judge or Magistrate: fallit jurantem juratio facta per artem, a
cautelous oath deceives none so much as he that takes it deceitfully; But
when the words are ambiguous, and may receive different significations, as he
may worthily be blamed for taking such oaths, so he that does tender it
willingly, ought not to receive any benefit thereby; nomini dolus suus lucrosus
sit, aut esse debeat, Paulus Juris-Consulius.
nec dolus suus cuiquam per occasionem juris prosit: Pactionem obscuram and
ambiguam iis nocere in quorum potestate ^uit legem apertius conscribere, L. 39.
F. de Pac^is Cujac. and alit ad dict. l. 39. Baldus.
and interpretationem contra eum potius faciendam esse. Omnis oration obscura
and ambigua tendicula est, quae ei qui tetendit potius fraudi esse debeat: sed
interrogationi obscurae vel ambigua, quis respondere non tenetur, nisi
declaretur. Juramentum tunc intelligendum est secundum communem significationem
verborum, si utrique sint in dolo; si a neutro intervenit dolus, tunc
interpretandum est secundum intellectum utriusque, si verba possunt utrique
intellectui adaptari: si ab altero tantum sit dolus, tunc intelligendum est
secundum eum qui recte intelligit: In contractibus and stipulationibus contra
venditorem and stipulantem interpretandum est. They who make an Oath,
Engagement, or a Law obscure or ambiguous, and not clear and perspicuous (which
are essential properties of an Oath or Law) it is presumed, quod sub involucro
verborum, and per occasionem obscuritatis, tendunt laqueos deceptionis.
But in two contrary or incompatible Oaths taken by one man, if the former
were not unlawful, but of things indifferent in themselves, neither good nor
evil, the second Oath contrary to the former is invalid, and can hardly escape
the taint of perjury; but if the first Oath was for the performance of a
necessary and Moral duty, required by Divine and Humane laws, the second Oath
being contrary to the former, although extorted by fear, is clearly void, and
most commonly impious. When we are obliged to the performance of a duty or act,
we as much as in us lies are obliged to withstand and remove all impediments,
which may probably hinder us in the performance thereof: for in a stipulation
or promise, not to hinder an act, is regularly employed an endeavor to have it
performed; In illa stipulatione, L. 50. F. de verb. ob.
per te non fieri, non hec significatur, nihil te facturum, quo minus facere
possis, sed curaturum ut facere possis: and qui spondet dolum malum abesse,
abfuturumve esse, non simplex abnutivum spondet, L. 83. De verb. oblig. L. 21.
F. deregul. Jur. L. 4. F. Quae in fraud.
sed curaturum se ut dolus malus absit: Qui non facit quod facere debet,
videtur facere adversus ad quod tenetur, quia non facit. In a promise and
contract, the nature and quality thereof, and quid actum erat inter parts, and
quid necessario subintelligitur, although express words are wanting, must
chiefly be taken into consideration. The Divines say, that in the sixth
Commandment, Thou shall not kill, is contained our duty, in preserving the life
of our neighbor, as far as our wit and power extends; quia imperantur
contraria officia, dum mala fieri vetantur. Therefore where we are restrained
by our Oath of Allegiance, either from the hindrance of any good to our
Sovereign, or from doing any act, or conniving at any man's act to the prejudice
of his Person, Crown and dignity, it is necessarily employed, that we are
thereby enjoined to use our utmost endeavor for the preservation and
advancement, of both his Person and Dignity. In the Vassals Oath of sidelity to
his Lord, amongst other, these words are, non sufficit abstinere a malo, L. 2.
tit. 6, 7. de Feudis.
nisi fiat quod bonum est, ne aliter censeatur perfidus and perjurus.

CHAP. XII. Of those who only accept of Offices and Employments under Tyrants
and usurpers.
THere is another sort of these men with whom we encounter, and we may join
them to the former, although they are not so subtle, yet do they help to
support the cause either wilfully, or through indiscretion, or want of courage
or conscience, men not passive, but of actual compliance; accessaries they are,
although searce guilty of their greater impieties, nor of the beginning of the
Rebellion; yet they being instruments in several services and employments,
serve for the strengthening of the arm of the wicked, and so do they communicate
in the iniquity, and have fellowship in their works of darkness: These are they
who accept of Offices and places ministerial, and of Judicature and of
Magistracy, under the masters of the mischief, and do act by and under their
authority: These under the pretense of doing good to the People, in their
several callings and offices, join in deluding the People, under a show or
shadow of Justice and liberty: libertatem quum restitui videretur interceptam
esse: Livius. Tecitus. L. 28. God. ad leg. Jul de adul. Augustine.
simulachra libertatis, seu vestigia morientis libertatis, vel praestigiae
versuti juris; non vera jnstitia, and viva moribus, sed picta coloribus. By
these means they endeavor to effect the settlement and continuation of the
iniquity and Tyranny, in seeking to content the People with specious
representations and fictions of Justice, and equity like that which thieves are
constrained to use among themselves for preservation of their society; and this
is to work in the People an affection or quiet submission, to the usurped
Government, and to draw away their affections and cogitations from their Lawful
Sovereign, unto the upholding of that Government, built upon such soundation,
that under it, Peace neither from God nor man can ever be expected; neither the
admittance of men into any places of trust or honor, who are true lovers of
the rights and liberties of their Country, or eminent for virtue or
magnanimity. Salust.
Boni quam mali suspectiores, semperqu^ talibus hominibus aliena virtus
formidolosa est. Those men who are employed under such Government, find nothing
but confusion, they being made instruments only to delude the People, Tacitus.
quia nimo unquam Imperium slagitio quaesitum, bonis artibus exercuit. Both the
Masters and the Ministers walk on in darkness, Psalm. 82.
for all the foundations of the earth are out of course. If the foundations
(Religion and Justice) be destroyed, what can the righteous do? Psalm. 11.
Paterculus.
How can that State ever subsist, ubi Justitia, aequi^as, industria redditae
non sint? ubi vis legibus, judiciis gravitas, magistratibus authoritas, senatui
Majestas restitutae non sint? And although they often pretend reformation in
matters of Religion and justice, and make some attempts, it is but ad faciendum
populum: and although they have really such intention of reformation, yet God
having raised such men, as a scourge of his vengeance upon a Nation, it is not
to be expected, that he will employ or blefs them in such good works, at
leastwise until these men repent, and his wrath be taken away. These men who
are thus assisting, Plutarch. in Cato.
may consider of the counsel that Cato gave to his son, not to deal in public
affairs when Caesar had usurped, in respect that upright dealing, the
corruptions of the time, and in the State would not endure it, and in
time-pleasing, he could not be an honest man. Of these men complying and
assisting, the Emperor says in his law, Novel. Leonis 70.
nisi istorum manus in subsidium praesto fuissent, certe nonita prompte
slagitium perpetrassent, qui majorem operam rei perpetrandae adhibuerunt. These
men are not unlike those who afford aid and receptacle unto thieves, L. 1. F.
de recap^at. L. 50. l. 54 F. de Furtis.
qui in pari causa habendi sunt, for they are as useful and necessary, as
receivers and concealers: Qui opem fert, qui ministerium at que adjutorium
praebet, si sciens accommodaverit, furti tenetur, licet nullum ejus consilium
principaliter ad furtum faciendum intervenerit. Non sunt a culpa liberi nec a
poena debent esse immunes, qui licet fuerunt illius machinationis ignari, tamen
iis quos sicarios esse sciebant, in sarcinis custodiendis ministerium
praebuerunt. Decretal. de homicidiis c. 6. Crimen non dissimile est, rapere,
and ei qui rapuit raptam remservare. l. 9. Cod. de vi publica: Sinum praebere
furenti, perinde habetur atque si manisesti fur^i condemnatus esset. l.
Sacrilegiis and ult. F. de Peculat. crim.
S. Paul did acknowledge his consent to the death of S. Stephen, by his
standing by and keeping the raiment of those who murdered that blessed Martyr.
Moreover some of those who were guilty of the beginning of the rebellion, are
not guilty of so much evil, as some who come since in as accessaries after the
fact, who now do that which the first men did abhor; and those also, who only
act in the offices of trust, and deal not in the State affairs, cannot escape
the falling within the compass of abetting, upholding, and continuing the
rebellion, by administering Justice, and helping those to the benefit of the
Laws, who continue willful in their rebellion, and therefore ought to have
protection and benefit from no Law, as enemies to their King and Country:
Frustra implorat Ecclesiae aut Legis auxilium qui committit in Legem vel
Ecclesiam. Cicero said of Cethegus and Lentulus, Livius lib. 3.
Legem Semproniam quae de Civibus Romany constituta est, ad eos qui essent
Reipub. hosts non pertinere. The Roman Senate when the people of Rome were
quietly fallen under the Tyranny of the Decemviri, and rested so with
contentment, the Senate rather desired an addition of more injuries, then to
ease them of any burdens, that so having in detestation their present thraldom
into which their own error had led them, they might fall to a longing desire
of the former Government under Consuls, and wish the old world were come again.

CHAP. XIII. Of the inseparable conjunction and relation between the King and
his Subjects, which cannot be dissolved by any law or custom; That Kings
cannot alienate their Kingdoms, nor Subjects renounce their allegiance, nor
bar the next successor of the Crown.
Such is the inseparable relation between the King and his Subjects, that as
they cannot renounce or withdraw their allegiance from their Sovereign, Bodin.
Principis aeterna autoritas in subditos; so cannot Kings alienate their
Kingdoms or any part thereof: although they are not restrained by positive
Laws, yet are they by a universal Law, not made, but risen up in the foundation
of all Kingdoms, as the Lawyers say, Baldus, Jason. Casan. Cat. glor. mundi
and alii.
generali omnium Regnorum lege, cum ipsis regnis nata, and quasi jure Gentium:
Lex fundamentalis, immutabilis, cum ipsa rerum natura una viget, consenescit
and interiit. Rex qui in sua Coronatione juravit jura Regni sui and honorem
Coronae illibata servare; postea nihil agere censetur, si quae jura bonave
Regni sui alienaret, Decretal de jurejurando c. 33. and Cujac. ad dic. cap. 33.
etiamsi jusjurandum interposuerit de nunquam revocanda alienatione; liberum
tamen ei esse quandoque revocare; praevalere prius juramentum quod fuit
legitimum posteriori quod illegitimum est. The relation between a King and
Subjects makes a union and reciprocation so strong, that there can be no
admittance of a separation. Correlatum cuilibet relato respondet; uno posito
ponitur alterum: in correlativis idem judicium, and what is disposed in one, is
so in the other, when there is the same reason for either: And so cannot a King
and Parliament and all the Powers in earth bar the lawful Successor from the
rights of Sovereignty, the individual and sacred rights of the Crown; Constagio
del union. di Portugal and Thuan. hist.
neither bind, nor limit the succession. Henry the Cardinal, afterward King of
Portugal, having no issue, and seeing diverse in competition for the Crown,
granted a Commission to some of his own Subjects to determine the right of
Succession after his death, and unto some others he gave another Commission, to
govern the Kingdom after his death, until the right of the succession was
determined. Both these Commissions with the opinions of his own Lawyers for
their justification, were soon after his death overruled by the sword, and
were also held void by Law, because he sought to raise a body in his Kingdom
without a head, and would praire successorem suum, and reign after his death;
Lib. 6. F. de jurisdict. L. 13. F. de jurisdict.
for by his death his jurisdiction and authority was determined, and his
Commissions void: Potestas delegata morte delegantis finitur: No Magistrates
can give Commissions for acting any thing after their death, neither upon a day
which falls after they are out of their authority, whereupon it is declared,
quod qualibet dispositio censetur facta, eo tempore in quod confertur, Baldus
and alii and decis. Rotae Romans 240. and 193. Tom. 3. Farinacii.
nee valet quae in id tempus procedit, quo res non erat amplius disponentis;
quia paria sunt, aliquid fieri tempore inhabili and prohibito, vel tempore
habili and concesso, and conferri in tempore inhabili and prohibito. The
Commission for determining the Succession, made the Portugals who were parties
Judges, for they were of the material part, concerning which the controversy
was: and whatsoever they determined was void; Lult. F de Jurisdict. l. ult.
Cod. si d non competenti Judict.
non paretur jus dicenti, si supra suam jurisdictionem jus dicere velit, and
nemo plus juris ad alium transfer potest, quam ipse habet. The Kings
Commissions and Mandates, as also all Offices, unless it be those which by law
are excepted, are void by his death, especially those which are granted in vim
justitiae administrandae: Mandatum Principis, in vim justitiae datum, Decis.
rot^ Romanae. Cassaneus ad consuetud. Burgund. and alii Decretal. de rescriptis
c. 5. C.S. Tamen. si cuiquam.
morte Principis expirat, secus, si in vim gratiae. Sed gratia data ad
beneplacitum concedentis, per ejus obitum, per quem ipsius beneplacitum omnino
extingnitur, eo ipso expirat. And if he cannot bind himself, then not his
Successors, nisi in casibus a jure and consuetudine permissis, and sunt de
consuetudine Principatus, and de natura officii Regii, as the Lawyers say. By
this we raise a doubt, concerning the validity of many matrimonial contracts
made by Princes, whereby they endeavor to bind or alter the succession of the
Crown, which is not ruled by those laws which are for private men's descent and
inheritance. Whether use and common practice may justify these contracts of
Princes I will not dispute. Gail. observat. lib. 2. Pro bono pacis inter
Principes componenda vel tuendae tolerari matrimonium, quod alias erat
illicitum. Cujac. Comment. ad Decretal. tit. de Desponsatione Impuberum. cap.
2. unde versus, Pax ut servetur, moderamen Juris habetur. cap. 2.
Pacta and Statuta de mutua successione in casu deficientium liberorum
masculorum inter Principes, Comites, Barons Imperii in usu esse frequenti, and
consuetudine hominum memoriam excedente confirmata valere. We find not the like
Laws or customs in other kingdoms, except the Law Salick in France; for the
common opinion is, that Statuta, excludentia faeminas ex haeredationibus odiosa
sunt: Pactum in dotali instrumento, ut filia contenta sit dote, and nullum ad
Paterna bona regressum haberet, L. 3. G. de Collationib.
juris autoritate impr^batur. Et pactum de non succedendo jure civili
improbatur. Si Pater instrumento dotali comprehendit, filiam ita dotem
accepisse, ne quid aliud ex haereditate Patris speraret; eam scripturam jus
successionis non mutasse constitit; privatorum enim cautionem legum autoritate
non censcri; leges non mutare. Lult. F. de suit and legit. haered.
By these contracts Princes please themselves for a time, out of a desire to
advance some designs, and afterward repentance and dissentions do often
follow. Unto this may we add, those accords and transactions between Princes,
for exchange and alienation of some part of their dominions, which come by
descent from their Ancestors.

These alienations have commonly the like success as the former; yet are they
much to be favored, when they pass between Princes upon equal terms, and are
for the procuring of peace and ending of controversies, the consent of the
Subjects on both parts concurring: nam Dominus sine voluntate vasalli feudum
alienare non potest; sic Princeps subditos suos alienare non potest, quia non
tantum praedia sua and domini jus, L. 2. tit. 34. de Feud.
sed sic ingenui homines alienantur, quorum commercium nullum est; sed proprie
tamen non Populus alienatur, sed jus perpetuum eos regendi; non hominum
liberorum fit alienatio, Guide Pap. deciss. Grot. de jur. belli lib. 1. c. 3.
sed jus quod in homines competit transcribitur. The Provinces and Cities of
France declared unto their King John Prisoner in England to Edward the third,
as did likewise those of Gasconie when they were to be turned over to the
allegiance of John of Gaunt, French Invent. Paul Aemilius. Baldus and Chopin.
de dominio.
that without their free consent being freemen born, and not slaves, they could
not be made Subjects to another Prince. And thus when Francis the first was
pressed to the surrender of certain territories, Bodin.
according to the agreement between him and the Emperor Charles the fifth, the
Court of Parliament of Paris did declare, as before, that the King could not do
it; Regium summumque apud Gallos dominatum, Regia jura, minui, dividique, non
licere, non posse. Rex Johannis Angliae, aut alius Rex, alienatione regnorum
suorum, vel servitute imposita, non possunt jus posterorum laedere, nee
subditos suos ad alterius Principis obsequium reducere. Quae natura sua dominio
nostro exempta sunt, Institut. de inutil. stipulat. and 2.
in obligationem deduci non possunt.

By this that has been said, and by that which follows, it will appear how
absurdly some men of more learning join with our adversaries, in affirming that
the People have an original right in them to reform, limit and remove their
King; and that although the Regal power be settled in the Stock and Family, yet
so as the stock and lineage itself is only chosen, and not all and every
branch To prove this wild Chimera, some of their Champions, the better to make
way for deposing of princes, bring diverse selected places of scripture, joining
unto them strange and false inserences and interpretations, with as feeble
arguments deduced; rather to prove themselves seeds-men of sedition, then
sincere Patrons for the Peoples liberty. They regard not their often being
learnedly confuted, but still they will go on with arguments drawn a facto ad
jus, a dicto secundum quid ad dictum simpliciter, raising general conclusions,
drawn from some singular and extraordinary examples, not warrantable for our
imitation, although serving excellently for our instruction. It was never found
in any Author, nor heard of till of late, that any People did choose a King,
and his lineage and race to rule over them, and did or could reserve power to
themselves to take, or resuse, such of his posterity and race, as they pleased
at any time. Without any mention of original right, or reservation of power in
the People, the wife man says, that power is given unto Kings of the Lord, and
sovereignty from the Highest, Book of Wisdom cap. 6.
who will try their works, and search out their Counsels. And another man of
much prudence, and a great favorour of the Peoples rights and liberties, says,
that God had therefore reserved Kings for the greatest punishment, because none
in earth had power over them. Commines:
We find in our ancient Law Books, Britton and Bracton, Our most ancient
Justice Bracton says, nemo Regi recessitatem impo^ere potest, cum superiorem
non habra^ nist Deum; and satis ei erst ad paenam quod Dominum expeciat
ultorem. Tacitus. John Bid of the Right of Kings.
that the Kings jurisdiction is above all jurisdictions, and that from him all
are derived; and so say the Civil Lawyers, omnis jurisdictio vel Principis
esse, vel a Principe manasse. It does not help our adversaries, their affirming
that Princes are appointed for the good of the People, which is true, neither
their disputing, whether a Kingdom, be haereditas, jus, sunclio, ant
possessio, and a King be proprietarius, or usufrucluarius only. These busy
Questionists serve to perplex men's judgments, and to pervert the truth, and are
men, novandis rebus quam gerendis aptiores. Kings are for the People, as the
soul is created for the body, and the head for the members, to wit, in a
superior degree to command, but never to set the feet or the members above the
Head. Kings were anciently called Pastores Populi, the Fathers and Husbands of
their Country, Pater urbisque maritus: Romulus Rex, Parensque urbis Romanae.
Lucan. Livius. L. 62. F. de regul. Jur.
It is certain that Kings have a good estate of inheritance. Haeredit as est
successio in universum jus quod defunctus habuit, and how can this be denied of
a Lawful successor in an hereditary Kingdom? Ad millesimum gradum extenditur
regni successio, Baldus and alii Grot. de Jure belli lib. 2. c. 7.
and in regno successivo, repraesentationi locus est in infinitum. In regnorum
successione distingui debent regna quae pleno modo possidentur and in
patrimonio sunt, ab his quae modum habendi accipiunt ex Populi consensu. This
Royal succession does differ from private men's successions, neither is it ruled
by the subtilties and nice distinctions of the Roman Laws, or the Law of the
Fendes, neither by the municipal Laws and customs in several Countries which
concern private men's inheritance and succession; for as was said before, quae
sunt publici juris and Coronae, separatam habent a jure privato causam and
rationem. Bartol. and alii.
The Interpreters of the Law agree, that the Law Julia and Papia touching the
estates and inheritances of men, does not extend unto Kings, L. 3. Cod. de
Testament, and Cujae. ad dict. Tu. Nevel. 105 in fine, and Gothof. ad dict.
tit. 105 dict l. 3. C. de Test^^ment. l. 23. F. de leg ills. 3.
although the words are general, which in Laws and Statutes sell dome or never
do reach unto Kings: Princeps legibus solutus est, id est, lege Julia and
Papia, non ab omnibus legibus; lex imperii solennibus juris, Imperatorem
solverit: omnibus autem a nobis dictis Imperatoris excipiatur fortuna: Fruitur
Princeps singularibus privilegiis, licet in multis casibus codem cum caeteris
jureutatur: nihil tam proprium Imperii est, quam legibus vivere: decet enim
tantae majestatis eas servare leges quibus ipse solutus esse videtur. Bald. and
alii.
The most learned affirm, Regnum non assimulari simplici deminio, ut pater ex
jure transmittendi regnum ad liberos, jure successionis Regiae; and that does
so appear by many singular rights, that there does competere Regi universale
dominium terrae, which rights are the marks of universal dominion, and did
spring up with the erecting of Kingdoms without any concession of the People,
or any other, although at the first the People did elect their King. Regi
competere universale dominium terrae, Ex libro Jacobi Regis.
satis liquet ex legibus de Thesauris, de iis qui moriuntur sine haeredibus, de
spuriis jus legitimationis non habentibus a Rege, qui solus id confer posset.
Yet although it be said in the Law, omnia sunt Principis, it is qualified with
this explication, Seneca, Cujac. ad tit. Cod. de quadr. pesc. vip.
omnia sunt Principis imperio, singulorum dominio seu proprietate: omnia esse
Principis, id est, fiscalia and dominica sua sunt in suo patrimonio; haec sunt
quasi propria Principis; omnia alia sunt proprie Principis imperio, singulorum
dominio: L. 2. S. 4. ne quid in loco pub. Tertul.
Res fiscales quasi proprie Principis sunt: Sed si omnia sunt Caesaris, quid
erit Dei? It has been often seen, that when the right of succession descended
to the next Lawful heir, who has been barred by former acts of Parliament,
those acts were never held valid to deprive him and his heirs, whom the Law
accounts, Grot de jure belli l. 2. c. 7. Glossa ad cap. cum secundum leges,
and e^si neces se, de ha. red.
successores juris, territorii, and jurisdictionis universalis, tam active quam
passive: and successio Imperii, non est sub jure Imperii. Proximior de sanguine
Regio, non obstante quod crimen laesae majestatis commisisset, and esset
indignus, potest tamen indilate, and absque aliquo temporis intervallo Regiam
Dignitatem assumere, and Rex vocari. King James in his book to his son
admonishes him never to defraud the nearest by right of succession, what
conceit soever he had of his person who was the next: for Kingdoms are ever at
Gods disposition, and in that case we are but life-renters, lying no more in
the Kings, nor Peoples hands to dispossess the righteous heir. All former
defects are purged by the descent of the Crown; and this it seems all Princes
and States who make leagues and contracts with Princes do acknowledge;
otherwise they have been, and may hereafter be deceived, in making contracts
with Princes, who are, and may be declared incapable to grant or receive any
thing, by virtue of an act of Parliament, or by any original or dormant power
remaining in the People, or in any other. For thus should Princes have rather
precariam possessionem, quam legitimum Imperium, whereby a multitude of endless
quarrels would daily arise at home and abroad, to the prejudice of men's right,
and to the disturbance of the peace of Christendom. They who argue that a King
cannot alienate his Kingdom, say, that Kingdoms are not in the full propriety
and patrimony of the Prince, because liberi homines in commercio non sint, and
they add also, that a Kingdom is not only a succession hereditary, but a
right also of primogeniture and proximity of blood, not as simply descending
from the father or Ancester, sed sit etiam successio virtute legis Coronae, seu
consuetudinis inveteratae and immutabilis regnorum. Covaruviae.
Agnati Regum, non tanquam agnati ad successionem vocantur; causam, titulum and
jus successionis, Hotoman. de jur. suc. Reg. and Baldus Carolus Molinaeus ad
consueludines Paris. Grot. dejure belli. lib. 2. c. 7. n. 22.
non a Rege novissime defuncto accipiunt; non jure haereditario, sed jure
sanguinis and stirpis, and consuctudinis regni. Frequens in regnis, est
successio non haereditaria, sedlinealis dicitur, non jus illud quod
repraesentationis dicitur, sed jus in posteros ex primo rege venientes
transiens ordine certo. By an argument drawn from these distinctions in the
Royal succession, Henry the Second of France signified to the Switzers, that he
was not bound to pay all the debts of his father, because he held his Scepter
lege Regia, non simplicihaereditario jure: And so did Lewis the twelfth answer
those who demanded of him Artillery, lent to his Predecessor Charles the
Eighth, that he was not the heir of Charles, but his Successor of the Crown.
Quia in jus Regni duntaxat succedit, and qua talis successor sit, non obligatur
contractibus praedecessoris sui, quia jus non accepit ab co qui proxime
decessit: Tamen hi contractus obligant successorem, si probabilem habeant
rationem, quod in dubio ob regentium autoritatem praesumi debeat: nec res haec
ad naturam negotiorum gestorum exigenda est, ut tum demum ratus sit habendus
actus, si utiliter gestus sit: nam ad tales angustias reipublicae Imperantem
redigere, Grot. de jure belli. lib. 2. c. 14.
ipsi etiam Reipub. esset periculosum. Sed successores tenentur pro utiliter
gestis, quia pro utiliter gestis tempore tyrannidis tenetur dominus verus, and
contractus tum gesti valiant. Gentil. de jure belli. l. 3. c. 22,
Non admittenta est exceptio adversus hos contractus qui sunt Regii; and
successores tenentur, si contractus sint ex natura and consuetudine
Principatus. Birth gives right unto Sovereign dominion in all hereditary
Kingdoms, which right is not holden as of the Patrimony of the People, but the
King has it as a Proprietor independent by the Royal Law, Tillet. Bodin.
and inveterate custom of succession, which custom is an immutable Law, as in
France; Mesdames filles de France, non par la Salique ley escritte pur les
seuls subjects, en sont perpetuelment excluses par costume and ley particulare
de la maison de France: whether this Salick law extends to the succession of
the Crown is a question, In terram Salicam mulieres ne succedant; Paulus
Aemilius. Thuanus and Car. Molinaeus ad Consuetud. Paris.
terram Salicam, regnum, Franciamque interpretabuntur: Lex Salica cum Regno
coepit; ad quam Franci non facti, sed nati, and educati; certissimum Franciae
Palladium: In hoc maxim introducta est haec successio Agnatica in Francia ne
per Faeminarum matrimonia ad peregrinum sanguinem Imperium deveniret. In the
great controversy concerning the Succession of the Crown of Portugal before
mentioned, although the Lawyers did much differ in their opinions upon the
several titles of the pretenders to that Crown, and much perplexed themselves
upon the distinctions inter jura proximitatis, repraesentationis and
primogeniturae, yet they all agreed, that inasmuch as Portugal was gotten at
first by conquest, and not by any election of the people, the people had no
color of right, so many being living of the Blood Royal. Neither was there any
Law or custom for excluding the Prince of Parma one of the Competitors, in
respect he was an alien born, or because his mother from whom his right came,
the eldest sister dyed before her younger sister, the Duchess of Braganza. The
laws of other Kingdoms, as the law of England, does distinguish the rights of
the Crown, jura regalia, jura Coronae, lex Coronae, by which peculiar law, the
eldest is preferred without respect of the whole blood. Neither does infancy
work any disability in the Person of the King, Lord Chancel. case of the
Postnati.
or by being born an alien: and all this in respect of his politic capacity,
adherent to his natural Person, and so all defects are purged, and all
impediments removed by this regal right of succession.

CHAP. XIV. Of the Beginning and Continuation of Kingly Government.
IF this supreme power, as they affirm, be still inherent in the People, and
that they had this supreme and original power immediately from God, or by his
will and approbation; and that the power of rule and domination, by virtue of
the Law of nature is in the community of men and in no particular Person; and
although they do transferr this power, yet they may, when there is a cause,
assume it again: How then can they reconcile themselves with St. Paul, who
says, the Powers are of God, are ordained of God; or with Saint Peter, who
says, whether it be to the King as the Supreme? And how can they reconcile
their doctrine, with that which Aristotle, and other learned men affirm, that
by nature most men are subject and servants to others, minus sapientes, minus
perfecti, natura ipsa sunt servi and sapientibus subditi, ut ab aliis regantur;
and these thus Subject are the greater number. Aquinas.
Servitus est naturalis, ratione utilitatis consequentis, scilicet quod quis
regatur a sapiente; and licet est contra primam naturae intentionem, est tamen
secundum naturam, juxta ejus secundam intentionem: and ita est ordo naturalis
in hominibus, ut serviant aliqui: Persona est domina v^l serva ratione naturae:
Fst utilis servitus, cum improbis aufertur injuriarum licentia, and domiti se
melius habebunt, quia indomiti deterius se habuerunt. Augustinus.
Licet initio homines natura liberi nascebantur, and jure naturali non trant
dominia distincta, in ipso quidem statu naturae primo; non tamen ex hoc negatur
posse jure humano and gentium, hominum crescente malitia statui servitutem, and
fieri dominorum distinctionem, idque ratione naturali factum fuisse apparet ex
eo, Covsruvias.
quod utile valde Reipub. sit and societati humanae. L 19 de Civ. Dei. cap. 15.
And so Saint Austin, Nullus natura in qua prius Deus hominum condidit servus
est hominis aut peccati; verum and poenalis servitus ca lege ordinatur; qua
naturalem ordinem conservari jubet, perturbarive vetat, quia si contra came
legem non fuisset factum, nihil esset p^nali servitute coercendum. Servitus est
contra jus naturae proprie quoed statum innocentiae, quo ad statum post
peccaium non est con tra jus natural; Imo servitus aliqua, saltem quo ad
statum post peccatum, dici potest secundum jus natural, quatenus est quaedam
paena determinate jure humano pro delicto, quod jure naturae castigandum est,
ut sentis Thomas and Navarrus.
Seeing therefore that the best and wisest men are, and ever were, the fewest
in number, and that the greater number are by the law of nature, and ought of
necessity for the preservation of human society to be in subjection or in
servitude, and cannot have a right unto liberty, in respect of those many
imperfections and vices which do reign in them: how can they have a right unto
domination and rule, and to transfer a power, which they never had, neither
were ever capable of it, unless it be such power as they have lately usurped in
our Country, whereby they have out in sunder the reins of As did those ten
Tribes who usurped upon the lawful progeny of David, as they did upon Gods
right, who said unto them, Ye have set up Kings, but not by me, and made
Princes that I knew not. Hosea 8.4.
Government, and brought all things into confusion?

Sin cast us all into servitude and out of this servitude all could not arise
and have a natural right unto either domination or liberty. What power of
domination can we find that God gave at first to his selected people the Jews,
or was in them by nature? In the time of the Patriarchs all supreme,
terrestrial just power, Paternal, Sacerdotal, Regal, was in them: They were
before the Law given in the place of Kings and Priests. What power can we find
that God gave unto his people, or was in them, when he gave Kings to rule over
them, a government most agreeable to nature, and which carries with it the
most appearance of the divine approbation and imitation: a Government in the
infancy of the world proceeding immediately from the Patriarchical,
derivatively and ex traduce? We find in the first age of the world after the
Flood mention made of Kings which ruled every where; Genes. 14. Deuteronomy. 17.
and of the first war, wherein many Kings were engaged; and no mention of any
other Government then Regal. Genesis 36. Deuteronomy. 14. De Civit Dei lib. 16. c 17.
etc. 3.
There were diverse Kings of Edom, and in all the Countries round, before there
was a King in Israel. In the time of Abraham says St. Austin, eminentia regna
erant Sycionorum, Egyptiorum, Assyriorum, and before that time rose up Nimrod,
says he, and factum erat initium regni ejus Babylonici. And here by the way,
we meet with an argument of the Anabaptists, which is, that seeing from such a
Tyrant Monarchy and Magistracy had so evil a beginning, it ought not to be held
lawful. But there is a difference between the powers which are of God, and the
administration, or the evil execution of those powers; as there is a difference
between a lawful power unjustly used, and an unlawful power justly used; for,
as St. Austin says, the malignity of a tyrannical usurpation shall never be
purged and made praiseworthy, although the usurper use all clemency and
justice in his Government, nor the Regal power ever be subject to just
reprehension, although a King become a Tyrant; Causa 14. quaest. 5. cap. 9.
Aliud est injusta potestate just velle uti, aliudest just a potestate injuste
velle uti. Although Tyranny did begin by Nimrod, yet Government and Magistracy
proceeded not first from him: It was established by divine decree before him.
The government of the Fathers of the Families was before Nimrod. All the
Progeny submitted to the Paternal and Regal government of the Head and Founder
of the Family. From hence was the original of Regal government, and a natural
reason and cause for the producing and continuation thereof, which reason had
its operation amongst the heathens; In the beginning were Kings, Salust. Tacit.
lib. 3. Ann.
nam in terris nomen Imperii id primum fuit. But after equality and moderation
were laid aside, and ambition and violence brake into Regal government, and
domination and power prevailed, some People, postquam Regum pertaesum erat,
after they were weary of Kings, as the Cretensians, Spartans, Athenians,
governed themselves by their own laws, and not by Kings: some itching humor
peradventure took them in the head, or they took Aristocratical and
Democratical government as a medicine to cure Tyranny, and that did but change
the malady; for those States were never free from seditions, or from many
Tyrants Reigning at one time, which was worse then the Tyranny of one man, as
they felt it at Rome; Fremebant Populi multiplicatam servitutem esse, centum
pro uno dominos factos esse. Livius lib. 1. Judges 9.2.
Which is better, said Abimelech, to have threescore and ten men to have
dominion ever you, or but one man only? Into this miserable condition were the
Israelites fallen, when in place of one King, they had not only many, but also
one Micah a private man; for all their Judges set up a new Religion, and an
Idol, and disorder upon disorder followed, and the reason is given in sundry
Chapters, because there was no King in Israel. The miserable condition of the
People is declared by the want of a King, and of the exercise of the true
Religion, Hoses 3. Jud. 18.1. Jud. 17. August. Confess. lib. 3. cap. 18. l. 1.
and l. 2. F. de Historia juris.
This desire of changing Monarchy did possess but few People; generale quippe
pactum est humanae societatis obedire Regibus: Reges initio omnem potestatem
habuisse; arbitria Regum pro legibus erant. After the Assyrians and Persians
the Grecians and Romans had the universal Monarchy; what power their Subjects
had, or did ever pretend to have concerning domination and government, does not
appear in any Histories: neither did any of the ancient Lawgivers, and wise
men, Philosophers or others ever mention any such natural, primitive and
supreme power to have been originally, and still to remain habitually in the
People over Kings. There is no doubt but Nebuchadnezzar and his Successors
reigned tyrannically, and yet the Prophet said, that God gave them power and
dominion over men: God never gave, neither any others did ever pretend to have
right to depose any of them for their Tyranny, as being any forfeiture of their
authority.

They would have it granted unto them, that Kings have not their authority
immediately from God, because they are either by hereditary succession, or by
election, gift, contract or by conquest; all which are but humane titles, and
meant of acquisition not divine. But they ought to find a difference between
the power which is immediately from God, and the means used for obtaining this
power, which are humane; Aliud res est, aliud modus rem habendi, the means and
the form must be distinguissied from the authority of governing; forma de
hominibus esse potest, de coelo semper autoritas: and thus say the Doctors of
Law, Principes legitimi sunt, aut Successione aut Electione, vel donatione, vel
jure belli; bos titulos ab hominibus accipiunt: Titulus seu conditio, sive
modus ab hominibus accipitur, potestas and autoritas est immediate a Deo: Sic
Pontisicts Electio sit ab hominibus, sed personae canonice electae Deus dat
Pontificalem potestatem, quam a Deo immediate accipit. By which of these humane
means Princes are advanced to rule, or by what form the Commonwealth is
governed, or in whom the Sovereign power is vested, if they are lawfully
advanced to their callings and estates we must acknowledge them for Gods
leiutenents on earth, and the power they have to be his, and his ordinance, and
who ever resists this power resists the ordinance of God. Those affirm
that the power of rule and government is derived from the People unto Princes,
Soto de just. and jure lib. 1.9.1. artic. 3. Suarez. de legib. lib. 3. c. 3.
and 4. and alii.
and that Reges a Populo creati sunt, in quos suum transtulit Imperium ac
potestatem, and quod potestas dominandi seu regendi politice homines sit ex vi
solius juris naturae in hominum communitate: and potestatem hanc a Repub. ad
Principem manasse: Yet they acknowledge that this Power is not immutably settled
and remaining in the People, Suarez. and alii.
sed per consensum ipsiusmet communitatis, vel per aliam justam viam posse illa
privari and in alium transferri, ut per justum bellum, quod verum titulum and
dominium conferat, So as by the opinion of those who are in part of our
adversaries side, they cannot justify their allegation, that this Power and
right of domination and rule, is always inherent in the People, and in the
whole State of human societies conjoined, although they had it originally in
them; so as they may assume it again, without having the influence of this
their supposed original power barred by any means, as our adversaries affirm.
For we find amongst most Nations, that they have received laws and their
liberties from the grant and permission of the Conqueror, and not he and his
successors their Power and authority from the vanquished people: Neither is
there any authority or right, which any People have or ever have had in matters
of State and government, but it may, and oftentimes has been limited and
abolished, not only by positive laws, and continued customs, but by their own
concession and grant; as the Romans granted all their supreme authority to
their Kings lege Regia, Institut. de jur. not. and gent. and tit. F. de bist.
jur. l. 1. and l. 2.
or else they may be deprived of it by the right of Conquest, especially
proceeding from a just cause and lawful title, whereby the Conqueror makes all
his own which his sword touches, if the vanquished continue unseasonably
obstinate, and do not help themselves by timely surrender or composition.
Deutr. 20.12.
God who gives victory in the day of battle, does thereby give domination and
dominion over the vanquished, and all that is theirs in a just and lawful war.
Lex velut pactum commune est, quod bello capta capientium siunt: Aristot.
Xenopbon. Clem. Alexand. l. 5. F. de acquir. rer. dom.
quae ex hostibus capiuntur jure gentium statim capientium fiunt: So that unto
whom dominion is in this sort derived, the same do they enjoy by the law of
Nations, as rightly as they, who acquire their dominion by the free grant of
the People. The Conqueror had by the law of Nations, and by the Roman law
dominion over the conquered, and might bring them under servitude, yet amongst
Christians the practice and custom is otherwise; for a city taken by
conquest, says Bartol. and Bald. non efficitur serva, sed subdita respectu
jurisdictionis, unde cives retinent bona sua, and habent Testamenti factionem:
But when a City is conquered or rather rescued and redeemed out of the hands of
Tyrants, talem urbem recipi, non capi, and receptam, legibus antiquis and
liberate stabiliri. Livius lib. 26.


CHAP. XV. Of Prescription as well upon Land as Sea; And the Right and
Jurisdiction that the King has in the Sea, and over the Sea.
MOreover a People, as well as a Prince, may lose and be barred of many of
their rights, although not of their just liberty, by custom and prescription,
which is at this day in many things the most usual law between the Prince and
the People, as it is also an ancient and common title between Princes and
nations: L. 28. F. de verb. signif. L. 32. F. de legibus.
Qui non utende rem amittit, vel rem patitur usu capi alienari videtur: Per non
usum and desuetudinem leges abrogari tacito consensu omnium; and nil interest
suffragio Populus voluntatem suam declaret, an rebus ipsis and factis. Sed
aliud est non usus, aliud usus contrarius, qui majorem vim habet, quam simplex
desuetudo, seu non usus. Prescription does, as the sea, take from one shore and
give to the other, straighten the ancient bounds on the one side, and enlarge
the bounds of the other: It has, as we find by experience, a strong operation
upon land and sea: Rex habet de jure gentium privilegia propria, quae de jure
gentium debent esse communia; as in having a right in the sea and over the sea,
in respect of his jurisdiction and protection, Bracton. Bodin. Capolla and alii.
by an ancient and continued usage; L 1 F. de aqua l. 1. Cod. de servitutib. L.
56. lib. de Feudis.
Vetustatem vim legis tenere; longi temporis consuctudinem vicem servient is
obtinere; as to lay taxes and impositions on sishers and on navigators in
certain cases. Reditus seu Gabella piseationis, vel ex his quae in portum velex
portu vehuntur, sunt inter Regalia. And also shipwracks and other escheats and
perquisites reputed in this age inter summa Regalia; whereby much of the
liberty due unto men by the law of nature, and also by the ancient laws of the
Romans is much restrained, through the force of custom and prescription, or
assumed Regalities and privileges Regal, wrought and effected by the changes
in times, and in the manners of men. Antiquitas non hoc jus in maria and
flumina and venationes sibi accipiebant finitimi principes, ut nunc, verum
propter impenses and sollicitudines principum crescentes, merit inter Regalia
reducuntur, qua ab initio erant communia: Tholosanus de Repub. lib. 9. c. 1.
number. 29. Mare and litora maris sunt ad usum communem, jure nature and gentium
proprietas maris est nullius, licet protectio, jurisdictio and Imperium sit
penes Reges. l. 3. F. ne quid in loce pub. piscationis reditus, Gabella, and
vectigalie consueta and moderate, sunt inter Regalia, quasi Coronae debita, ut
laborum praemia, and Regibus, Regnisque tuendis servientia: ut dicunt
Interpretes ad titulum, quae sunt Regalia: in lib. Feudelium, Imperiorum jura,
ut Aristides ait, hujusmodi sunt, ut ea non ex damnoprivatorum, sed expublica
utilitate, Imperii vi and necessitate mesiamur.
All which peradventure may better still be tolerated, then endeavored to be
infringed or altered, in respect of those inconveniences which are likely to
ensue. Unto those we may add the use of granting Letters of Mart, consuetudo
clarigationis, seu jus dandi Represalias, as they call it, which in it self
considered is no better then legitimum latrocinium, or as the permission to
keep Concubines by the Roman Law, termed legitima intemperantia: for it is
against natural equity, and the Rules of Law, that one should be punished for
another: that the Father or Son should be punished the one for the other, or
that a Subject should be delivered a hostage for his Prince against his will:
yet all this must be tolerated, as a calamity or punishment, falling on some
men etsi sine culpa, non sine causa: and although it be against natural equity,
yet as the Doctors say, non omne quod est contra naturalem aequitatem idem and
injustum sit: favor publici Status facit aequa non aequa, quia omne utile
publieo id ctiam sit aequum. They are much deceived who affirm, that these
maritime Regalities, jurisdictions, and customs, because they find the ancient
Roman Law against some of them, are risen up of later time, and would have a
boundless and indefinite liberty in the Sea. We find that whatsoever the
ancient Roman law was, yet the Roman practice was otherwise, as was the
practice of other nations; for Kings and Commonwealths did in former Ages
challenge and exercise such maritime Regalities, although not all which are now
in use: Gothof. and alii. ad L 14. F. de adquir. rer. dom.
Non est novum ut Populus aliquis class potens, in mare imperium exerceat, ut
olim Rhodii, test Strabone, occupationis temporis immemorialis fulcro, licet
non ratione praescriptionis proprie dictae, sed jure praeoccupationis, seu
ratione quasi possessionis, Rhodericus Suarius de usu maris and alii.
ac etiam quasi praescriptionis, non ut modus acquirendi dominii maris
consideratae, sed ut exceptio robur addit: and sic alii dicunt, quod tempore
immemoriali, quod vim tituli and privilegii habet, ac inveterata consuetudine
Veneti jus and dominium in mari Adriatico quaesierunt: Nautica omnia lege
Rhodia deciduntur, L. 9. and Gothof. de lege Rhodia. Livius lib. 30.
non jure Romano; sunt enim legum Nauticarum omnium Rhodiae vetustissimae. The
Carthaginians said unto the Romans, vos terra marique videamus regentes
Imperia, non maris quicquam nostri juris est: Argivi expostularunt cum Athenis
quia suo mari Spartanos Argivorum hosts transire sivissent, Thucydides lib. 7.
Plutarch in Pomp.
ut contra foedus. The Romans gave a large commission unto Pompey against
Pirates, with absolute authority over all the seacoasts, although there were
many potent Princes within that compass, who had jurisdiction or dominion upon
their own coasts by law or ancient custom: Baldus and Glossa.
Mare dicitur in termino, districto, and territorio illius loci cui magis
appropinquat: and inter dictum competere, ne quid in mari, sive litore fiat,
quo statio, iterve fiat deterius: Maris communem usum esse omnibus, L. 1. S.
17. F. de Flumin. L. 3. l. 4 F. ne quid in loco pub.
tamen concedendum id non esse, a Populo Romano, qui imperium habet, quo
deterior litoris, marisve usus futurus sit. The Civil law, as well as the laws
and customs of other nations, do vary and detract from the law of nature, L. 6.
F. de Just. and ju. Guiac. ad tit. F. de just. and jure.
sed quod detrahit non mutat; non in totum recedit jus civil a naturali, nec
per omnia ei servit; nam and in eo in quo recedunt a jure naturali, rationem
habent saepe cum natura conjunctam, ac plerumque publicae utilitatis, quam and
naturae jus suadet anteponi privatae. But now to reduce men to their primitive
liberty, and abridge Princes of these Regalities, howsoever they were at first
gotten, were, as Baldus says, revangare mundum, to turn the world topsidown,
and eripere clavem de manu Herculis, and to raise a universal combustion. Mores
ubique jus gentium subegerunt; Cujacius. Plautus. Plinius. L. 1. F. de just.
and ju. Cujacius.
and leges optimas aliquando in potestatem suam perducunt: Imo vis and Imperium
quod primo erat nunc mores vocarentur. Et jus gentium a naturali jure recedit,
quia non natura sed moribus nititur, and pleraque jura gentium naturali juri
opposita sunt, cum ad necessitates, and utilitates temporum accommodata sint.
The manners of men and their customs are subject to change and vicissitude;
they have their ortum, statum, and occasum, but prescription is permanent.
Prescription and custom, have the force of law, and have wrought more changes
amongst Princes and private men, then positive laws could effect. Tacitum
Populi consensum proplacito and judicio Populi haberi: L. 32. F. de legibus.
Inveterata consuetudo pro lege haberi. Cicero says, much of the Roman law
more constat: institut. de jure gent.
Diutini mores consensu utentium comprobati legem imitantur. Much of our common
law of England is customary law. France est regie par custumes, non par droit
escrit, fors en quelques Provinces par loix Romans prins pour coustume:
Tillet. Duck de usu juris Civilis, and alii.
Consuetudines esse jus commune in Gallia, vel maxima ejus pars. But all
customs are not binding, but such as are just inductae and legitime
praescriptae: qui habent malam fidem, tempore possessionis inchoatae and
continuatae nullo temporis tractu praescribunt, vel in actionibus personalibus,
vel realibus, dicunt Canonistae; but the Civilians hold it sufficient, if it be
begun, bond fide, although not continued to the term required for completing
thereof. Bona fides non sufficit, sed necessa. rio requiritur Titulus etiam,
qui pessessori tribuat causam prascribendi, ubi jus commune contrarium ei fit
vel praesumtio probabilis adversus eum sit. nisi tanti temporis allegetur
praescriptio cujus contrarii memoria non existit: Decretal. de Praescrip. cap 1
Habet velut longae possessionis praerogativam ex eo quod diu usus sit. L. S. F.
De Itinere.
This I pass over, as also what is required for the interruption of the course
of prescription and custom. Prescription and custom can raise a good title
between Kings and nations, as well as amongst others, for ex Regum and
Populorum longa patientia, and sic ex praesumpta derelictione, cum immemoriali
temporis possessione, dominia transferri, by the laws of nations, as the
Doctors affirm, quia per usum temporis immemorialis inducitur praesumptio juris
and de jure, and habet vim pacti, privilegii and legis. Although some are of
opinion, that it was brought in by the Roman laws, but long before those laws
it was in use; for Jephthah did object to the King of the Ammonites, Judges 11.
the possession of three hundred years, and Sulpitius the like against King
Antiochus, and so others. Si jure civili excludantur actiones privatae and
civiles ligitima praescriptione; Livius lib. 35.
quid non etiam belli causae and actiones armatae, cum sit absurdum, ut nec
post secula desit armorum and controversiarum bellicarum praetextus justus?
Gentilis and Grot de jure belli.
The Roman Emperors have been justly barred in many cases from their Claim by
Prescription. It is the common opinion that Princes and other States have
justly prescribed, and thereby acquired their supreme Power, against the Roman
Emperors, in respect of the presumed tacit consent of the Emperors, never
making claim, nor giving them any interruption for a very long time. By the law
the longest time given to the Church, was but the prescription of one hundred
years, that time being elapsed, the claim and rights of the Church ceased, and
were reputed obsolete: Centum annorum curriculo hujusmodi actionem evanescere,
L. 23. Cod. de Sac. Eccl. Novel. 9.
Romana Ecclesia gaudente centum annorum spacio vel privilegio: Centum annorum
lapsu exceptionem Ecclesits opponi sancimus. Id vero quod est de centum annis,
mutatum est in quadraginta, pro tollendis Ecclesiasticis actionibus, Novel.
131. c. 6. Thuanus lib. 101. Molinaus and alii.
Episcopi Galliae se semper tutati sint adversus hujusmodi conatus Curiae
Papalis, praescriptione jurium and libertatum Gallican. The Roman Emperors, as
we perceive, have lost very much of their dominions and Empire through
dereliction and negligence, which other Princes, States and Cities have gained
or usurped, and now to seek the recovery thereof, would cause their endeavors
to appear as unreasonable and fruitless, as formerly their diligence or power
was defective. L. 1. F. de usucap.
Bono publico usucapio vel praescriptio introducta est, ut aliquis esset finis
litium, ne semper dominia incerta essent: for it is against reason, as well as
against Peace, which the laws do more favor then any men's particular loss,
especially through their own carelessness, that no bounds should be set to men's
suits and claims, but controversies remain immortal.

CHAP. XVI. Against the pretended Power of the people to Elect their prince, or
to depose him; Of the Norman conquest of England, and of Leagues between
Princes, and of Aides given to Subjects in Rebellion against their Sovereign.
AFter our adversaries have made their allegations with some verbal flourishes;
as that there is a natural right in all Societies to the power of Rule, and
from the Societies and Communities of People, it is derived to one or more
Persons: and although Supreme and universal Power be acknowledged to be in
Kings, yet not so as to exclude the whole State of those Societies conjoined,
and bar the influence of that power, which they have originally over Kings.
Then for the proof of this they do offer one reason, which is, that every
independent People (if they have or can find any such) being driven from their
Country by any accidents, and scattered upon the face of the earth, being
forsaken by those who had the rule and power over them, if they unite again,
they have a natural right unto Supreme authority, and may constitute such form
of Government as pleases them. As it was the case of the Romans when they came
first from ruined Troy, and planted themselves in Italy. And so the Venetians,
forced to forsake their habitations upon the firm land, and to plant themselves
in those Marshes and little Islands in the Adriatic Sea, where Venice now
stands, there built and fortified themselves against those barbarous People,
which overran the noblest parts of Europe, against whom they could have no
protection from the Roman Emperor, their Sovereign. In these respects they
justly challenge that City, and the Sea with the Dominion thereof. And although
it be farther granted, that a people in such case may choose any form of
Government: And that a people, and commonalty also, have right to choose a King
upon the failing of the Royal line; because Regal Right and Dominion, where
there is none left to inherit it, neither head to rule over it, comes to the
body and commonalty for preservation (...) human society: yet all this helps
not our adversaries. It comes nothing to the proof, that all Kings hereditary
hold their authority as derived from the people, and that it still remains
habitually in the people, and that although Supreme power be acknowledged to be
in Kings, yet not so as to exclude the whole state of those Societies
conjoined, and bar the influence of that power, which they have originally over
Kings. Neither can they draw good arguments, and especially general conclusions
from singular and extraordinary events and examples, or from actions enforced
for the safety of the People, which is the supreme Law. Necessity often finds
a justifyable supply, upon the failing of Gods own ordinances, expressly
enjoined to be observed, if otherwise the most necessary duties would fail to
be performed. Sed quae propter necessitatem recepta sunt, Regulae Juris Canon.
non debent in argumentum trahi: Quod ob gratiam alicujus concessa sunt, non
debent ab aliis in exemplo produci: They cannot prove that in Elective
Kingdoms, the People or Electors after they have once elected, do always
retain such influence of their power over their Kings, as that they may depose,
limit or correct their Kings, unless their laws have so provided. The Emperor
Valentinian being requested by the Army to choose a Colleague, answered, it was
in their power to advance him to the Imperial Throne, but now for ye to meddle
in matters of State, it is improper: it belongs to the Prince, as ye have all
acknowledged, therefore henceforward do as ye are commanded. Authority rightly
settled, is not easily removed, neither by the intermedling of others to be
impeached. Those who have authority of Electing, and transferring power unto
others, have, after those acts are consummated, no power to deal in any thing
appertaining to that Power by them transferred: Non est novum ut qui dominium
non habeant, Z. 46. F. de adquir. rer. dom.
aliis jus and dominium praebeant, vel causam, facultatem, modum jus vel
dominium acquirendi; ut creditor qui pignus habet, pignus vendendo, causam
dominii praestat quod ipse non habuit: So the rules often fail, Qui constituit
est major constituto; and nemo dat quod non habet; quod verum est quum nec
potentia habeat; sed det transferendo, conferendo; Episcopus sic det
Sacerdotia, and Canonici Episcopatum, and Cardinales Papatum, quae nec
proprietate, nec possessione habeant, dicunt Interpretes. When the Romans gave
up their Supreme power unto their Emperor, no part of that power was ever held
to be remaining in the people: Constituto Principe datum est ei jus, L. 2. F.
de. erigine Juris and tit. God de veteri jure enuclean.
ut quod ille constituisset, ratum esset: Lege antiqua, quae Regia nuncupatur,
omne jus omnisque potestas Populi Romani in Imperatoriam translata sunt
potestatem. This power thus translated, was not a delegated power, aliud
potestas delegata, aliud transfusa. This power transferred, remained as
immutable, as the laws of the Medes and Persians, or the sentence and decree
of any Court of Judicature, which being once solemnly and definitively
pronounced, that Court cannot reverse, L. 55. F. de re jud.
amplius corrigere sententiam suam non possit. And so in diverse other cases,
non datur regressus.

If we cannot find by any law or reason, that the Romans, or any other People,
who had in them the supreme power, could after they had transferred this power
to Kings, and elected them, reassume this power again, and when it does please
them depose their Kings, or limit and restrain their power, by virtue of an
habitual power still remaining in the People, as is supposed: then undoubtedly
we can find no right in the People, or in any societies or communities of
People, to depose, restrain or limit Kings of hereditary succession, especially
those who have not their right from the People, but by Conquest, as in England.
From such Kings of hereditary succession and right all jurisdictions do
proceed, and in them reside, and unto them they return, say the Lawyers. Rex
est lex animata, and his office and function is Indesinens Consulatus. Novel.
109.
All other rights and liberties how ancient soever, have been, as in other
Kingdoms, at the will and mercy of the several Conquerors of our Island, the
Romans, Saxons, Danes, Normans. Our rights and liberties contained in magna
Charta, granted and confirmed by diverse Kings, after much effusion of blood,
we, nor our Ancestors did, nor could ever claim, by virtue of any reservation
made by the People or any others, when they were conquered, neither by any
original right inseparably inherent, and vested in the People, and from them
derived. If we could hardly draw from our Kings the confirmation of our ancient
just laws in force before the Norman Conquest, and with much difficulty and
contestation obtain our former liberties often promised and granted by our
Kings, and as often violated: we could not preserve any such original and
inherent right unto any Supreme power over our Kings as is imagined: Huntingdon.
Normanni cito and breviter terram subdentes sibi, victis vitam, libertatem,
leges antiquas Regni concesserunt. Henric. de Kinghton and Joh. de Brampton.
Willielmus Normannus dedit multis peregrinis, qui cum eo veniebant in Angliam,
multas possessiones, Anglis in servitutem redactis, probrosum fuit vocari
Anglicus: He gave to those who served him, terras and possessiones Anglorum,
ipsis expulsis, and modicum quod illis remanebat, sub jugo posuit servitutis.
Although he granted our laws and liberties in use before his time, yet he gave
many Manors and much land to strangers and Soldiers who came with him, and
unto the Church, and kept much to himself as Domaines of his Crown, by which
means many of the ancient owners were dispossessed. Malmesbury.
The Conqueror did in his Charter and grant of some of the Ancient laws and
liberties, lay his claim to the Crown, ex concessione sancti Edwardi, devicto
Heraldo Rege, but no mention of any consent or right of the People. He did (as
other Conquerors) sometimes seem to wave his title by Conquest, lest touching
that string too hard, it would make a jar, and hinder all harmony. But his
concessions and confirmations of the ancient Laws and liberties, proved for
the most part but illusions. Ingulfus. Malmesb.
Some of our Historians affirm, that he changed most of the Laws, and made us
accept his own Norman Laws and customs, delivered in the Norman language, a
mark of servitude imposed by the Romans where they had conquered. Polid. Virgil.
He molded the English customs to the manners of his own Country, and did
forbear to grant the Laws of holy King Edward, Edmeru^. Huntingdon. H^veden.
so often called for: yet at the suit of the Barons, the Laws of King Edward,
correboratae and confirmatae erant, quia veneratae erant prae caeteris legibus
per universam Angliam. And therefore our great Lawyer mentioned in our Law
books, did speak without book, in saying that the Conqueror came not to out
those who had just right and possessions, but those who held wrongfully to the
disherison of the King and his Crown. He had more knowledge in points of Law,
then he seemed to have of matters of fact, so long before his time. As we
cannot find anything, that can manifest this inherent and original right of the
People, so can we not find in any case any color of right in them, to justify
their deposing, limiting and chaftising of their King, as our Adversaries
affirm, saving only some matters of fact which they would have pass for Law,
and according to their usual course, draw their arguments a facto ad jus.

Edward the second and Richard the second were charged in Parliament, for
oppressing, spoiling, destroying and the like, and were deposed; yet those
Parliaments did never rely upon, or mention the Peoples inherent and original
right to justify their proceedings, neither much insisted upon the proof of
those crimes objected against them, as causes sufficient to ground their most
illegal and violent proceedings: Neither did they hold themselves sure, until
they had by a conjuncture of fraud and force, drawn those Kings to a seeming
willing resignation, acted in a form and solemnity abounding both in absurdity
and horror. For if the power and authority of Kings cease ipso facto, as our
new men would have it, for oppressing spoiling, and destroying, so that they
may be deposed by their Subjects; why was this power and right of the People,
never claimed and declared in any Monarchy, when they had sharp disputes with
their Kings, as we have had, for oppressing, spoiling and destroying; but
always we quieted ourselves with a present reformation of pressures and
abuses, and with a new confirmation of magna Charta, which those Kings had no
power and right to confirm and grant, if according to these men's doctrine,
their power was determined ipso facto, and returned to the People, and they or
the Parliament in a condition to reassume and exercise it? If Subjects have no
right, and very rarely or never attempted, to bar the next in succession, when
the right of the Crown descended unto him for any personal defect or crime of
his, or his Ancestors, or upon any former judgment or sentence given in any
Court against him, before the right of succession fell unto him; they have less
color of right to depose him after he is in possession, for any crime then
committed: Turpius ejicitur quam non admittitur.

The old Doctors of law, of great credit in their times and since, could tell
them, that it did belong to the Pope as Christ's Vicar to compel rebellious
Subjects to the obedience of their Sovereign by spiritual censures and
excommunications, and that in the Pope was all the power to depose Princes; yet
so as he ought not to proceed to the deposing of them, except in cases of the
highest contumacy, and for the greatest causes, quae Rempub. Christianam
laederent; seeing it could not be done, but with a great and general Scandal,
and with the perturbation of the public peace. For by their opinion, the
Emperor who is elected, could not, although with his free consent, resign unto
the Electors, but into the hand of the Pope, in respect that a resignation is
properly to be made unto him, who is Superior, and has right judicially to
hear and determine the cause, Innocent. Baldus. Archiadic. ad C. admodum
Extravag. de renunciat. Peregrin. de jur. Fisci lib. 1. tit. 2. and 3. L. 27.
S. 2. L. 22. S. ult. Mandati F. Sote de Just. and jure, lib. 4. quaest. 4. art.
1. Suarez. de legib. l. 3. c. 4. Glossa ad Clement. tit. de Beptismo. Aquinas
secund. secund. quaest. 42. artic. 2. Mariana de Regis institut. lib. 1. c. 6
etc. 9.
and compel the parties to the obedience of his decree: Renunciatio non tenet,
nisi facta sit penes eum qui renunciantem invitum, causa cognita, judicialiter
destituere potuisset: neque sine licentia superioris officia seu beneficia
accepta dimittere licet. Qui mandatum suscepit, deserere promissum officium non
debet, alioquin quanti mandatoris intersit damnabitur: mandatum suscipere
voluntatis, susceptum consummare necessitatis sit. But there are other later
Doctors more bold, who affirm that a King for Tyranny may be removed by the
Commonwealth, or compelled by the Popes spiritual power, quando a Divinis
legibus rebellavit. Others say that he cannot be deprived of his power by the
People, from whom he has his power, nisi quando in Tyrannidem declinet, ob
quam causam possit bellum justum contra eum geri: And they repute him to be a
Tyrant qui in Repub. non jure principatur; cum Princeps tendat ad bonum
commune, Tyrannus ad proprium; ergo Tyrannus non est Princeps, and ideo
perturbatio ejus regiminis non habet rationem seditionis, nisi forte quando sic
inordinate perturbatur Tyranni regimen, ut multitudo Subjecta majus detrimentum
patiatur ex perturbatione consequenti, quam ex Tyranni regimine. And when they
have declared a King to be a tyrant, potest in jus vocari a Republica, (unde
habeat Regia potestas ortum suum) rebus exigentibus; and si sanitatem respuat
Principatu spoliari; neque ita in Principem jura Potestatis transtulit
Respublica, ut non sibi majorem reservaverit potestatem. How can the Subjects
have jurisdiction over the Sovereign Prince qui est fons omnis jurisdictionis,
a quo jurisdictiones per concessiones, commissiones and confirmationes fluent,
ac per appellationes, querelas, and nullitates ad eum refluan? Bald. and
Bracton noster.
Here our adversaries join with some Doctors of the Romish Church, for they
find this doctrine as necessary for them to justify rebellion, and to depress
the authority of Kings, as those Romish Doctors do to uphold the Popes
Spiritual power, which is, as they say, ex institutione speciali pendente a
divina voluntate Instituentis, Suarez de legib. and alii. secund. secundae.
quaest. 10. artic 10. and quaest. 12. artic. 2.
quae ab inferioribus mutari non potest. But the Regal power they will not have
to be ex institutione divina, sed a natura, and ita data a natura and ejus
autore, ut possit in ea mutatio fieri, pro ut communi bono magis fuerit
expediens, quia haec potestas ex vi solius juris naturae est in hominum
communitate: and although both powers may be said to be of God, yet the Popes
Spiritual power is of God immediately, but the regal Power mediante naturae
lege. Aquinas says, that Infidel and Apostate Princes, although they have, yet
cannot retain dominion over the faithful; but being excommunicated for
Apostasy, their Subjects are freed ipso facto from their allegiance: Although
he does acknowledge that Infidelity considered in it self, does not abolish
the right of dominion, which Infidel Princes have over the faithful, because it
is ex jure gentium proveniente ex naturali ratione; Jus autem divinum quod est
ex gratia, non tollit jus humanum quod est ex naturali ratione; and yet
notwithstanding, the Church has power to deprive them of this right, as cause
shall appear. Thus do they labor to obscure and suppress the truth, and
perplex themselves and others with those improbable distinctions, and
pernicious propositions; not regarding how they have been confuted, and that by
setting forth these propositions, they raise Principles of sedition and
rebellion, and leave Kings in the worst condition of all men, by subjecting
them to the amplitude of the power, and to the exorbitancy of the wills of
their two Masters, the Pope and the People, to punish Tyranny and Apostasy; and
to witness, accuse, define and judge thereof. In Rege Ethnico vera potestas est
jure gentium, idque fine ordine ad potestatem Ecclesiasticam: Dominia ut in
fide non fundantur, sic in fidelitate non evertuntur: Privabit Censure
Pontificis, societate fidelium, qua fideles suni, bonum illud Spirituale and ab
Ecclesia; non privabit obedientia subditorum, qua subditi sunt: bonum hoc
civil est, nec ab Ecclesia. Tortura Tor^^: Episcop. Cicestriens.
To set a color upon rebellion, they affirm that the People do but so
transfer their power, as they still retain the habitual power in themselves:
This King James in his Declaration to all Christian Monarchs calls the
Principle of sedition: and unto this may be added another of a more ancient
date, but of the same mould, That allegiance is due to the Politic capacity of
the King, and not to his natural Person. Upon this assertion was grounded the
damnable opinion and practices of the Spencers in Edward the Seconds time: and
very probable it is that this opinion made the way more smooth and easy for
deposing that King, by the infection it infused, and the influence it had upon
that Parliament. Although not long before, Rotula Parlamenti.
those Spencers, were amongst other treasons, charged with publishing in
writing, That homage and allegiance was by reason of the Crown, and not of the
person of the King, which they said did appear, in that no allegiance was
belonging to his Person before the Crown descended, and so they would infer,
that the People had power to depose the King. The many absurdities in this wild
argument, the laying it open does both discover, and carry with it the
confutation, if there had not been enough said against it before. From these
false Principles may arguments be as well drawn, for violation of men's faith
and duties enjoined by divine and humane laws, and for the weakening of the
authority of all Magistracy and power, although it be given by themselves, and
intended to be exercised for their behoof. The Politic capacity of the King
which never dies, never cease, is inseparably annexed unto his natural
person until his death, and both are conjoined at the very instant, that the
right of the Crown descends unto him, which gives a new qualification to his
natural person, and life and virtue to his Office and function. His natural
person est organicum instrumentum, Baldus and alii, cum Legistis Anglicanis
personae ejus intellectualis, publicae seu politicae. The power, office,
dignity considered simply in it self, cum exclusione subjecti cui naturaliter
inhaeret, non est nisi abstractum quiddam remoto concreto. This Politic
capacity considered in it self, is but as the dead letter of the Law without
the conjunction of the natural person, which gives it life and vigor. In
respect both of his natural person and Politic capacity, the King is termed in
Law, Lex loquens, Lex animata, and his authority and office, indesinens
Consulatus. Allegiance is therefore due unto his natural person, to which his
politic capacity, is as it were appropriated and incorporated: both of them
give and receive virtue to and from each other. His natural Person, Coke case
Postnati.
his Politic capacity, his Crown and dignity, in our law books and Acts of
Parliament are taken for one and the same often. Nihil, ne minimum quidem inter
Regem, Regiamque potestatem esse: Thuanus lib. 105.
nec Regiam dignitatem, separatum quiddam extra administrationem Regni dici aut
singi posse, There is no difference between the King and his Kingly Power and
office; by an indissoluble bond are conjoined his natural person, and his
politic capacity: his person and his power, his person and Majesty, his person
and Crown: These all are naturally conjoined by Gods ordinance, and by the
Institution of Monarchy; and a curse is laid on them who separate those whom
God has joined.

The King our Head, and the life of the Law, by the virtue and influence of his
Regal power, he only gives and preserves the benefit of Laws at home, and
Leagues abroad made by him with Loraign Nations. And yet, we see to the
admiration of men, that our Rebellion in England, of the largest extent that
ever was, by an example not the like to be found, has claimed and obtained the
benefit and advantage of all leagues, formerly made by their Sovereign with
other Princes and States; who were in no age so apt to comply with Rebels, for
their profit and advantage, without regard of their honor, neither the
encouragement they give to others of rebellious spirits, or of the evil example
which has, and may justly come home unto themselves. Foraign Princes as they
are not Judges, so ought they not to make themselves parties in those odious
quarrels between Princes and their Subjects. They ought to be peacemakers,
which is one of the most glorious titles that can be given to Princes. Leagues
are made for the conservation of peace, mutual aid, commerce and trade. They
have more of reality in them then to be accounted but as mere personal
obligations, they mutually oblige, as they mutually benefit the Princes, their
Successors and subjects. And therefore to hold that all Leagues are void by
the death of those Princes that made them, is a great and dangerous error.
Imperator percussit foedus, videtur Populus percussisse Romanus, and foedere
continetur. Seneca.
The mutual benefit of both Prince and People is conjoined and involved: one
neither can nor ought to take benefit by them, with the excluding of the other.
When Henry the Third of France was dead, the League made by him with the
Switzers did continue in force; Thuan. lib. 97.
and upon this reason, quia non tam cum Henrico quam cum Corona Franciae
contraxisse, quae nunquam intermoriatur; and ita Rex dicitur nunquam mori, sed
mortuum Regem vivo proximo regnum tradere. These contracts which are juris
Gentium, and juris publici, quia ex publica causa sunt, as are leagues, do bind
each other and their Successors in many cases, Baldus and Peregrin. de Jure
Fisci. Gentil. de Jure bell.
without express mention, quia facta sunt non nomine proprio Principis, sed sub
nomine dignitatis suae and Reipublicae, and sunt de natura and consuetudine
ossicii and dignitatis Regiae, and in figura magis Principatus quam suae
propriae personae. Tenentur successores, aut numquid, nihil est cautio ista
toties usurpata in foederibus. Ayala and Grot. de jure bell.
Tenentur successores per has publicas Conventiones quae non nomine proprio sed
Reipub. incuntur, quae aeque repraesentatur per successores, ut per cos qui
sunt hodie. It were most unjust and absurd to deprive Princes who are the
League-makers and principally concerned in them, of the benefit of their
leagues, by their Subjects rebellion, who to receive any benefit by Leagues or
Laws, is contrary to the intention of all who make them, and destructive to
the Majesty and security of all Monarchies and States: Beneficium quod habeo
propter te, Gentil de legationibus.
non possum uti contra te. Cum Praedonibus and rebellibus non est jus
legationis, and foederum: Delinquendo non acquirenda sunt jura; nam jura
violantibus, jus non violari, sed potius red^i, si non praestetur In talium
scelerum noxios, nullam vim injustam esse. The Romans complaining of the
injuries they had received from the Hircani, who answered the Romans, as did
the Sabines; That they had made a League which Tarquine the Roman King, whom
they having deposed and abolished the Regal Government, Dionys. Halicar. Livius.
those Leagues were determined with the People of Rome: Although the league
might be in force with, and for the benefit of the King expulsed and his Heirs
and Successors; Grot. de Jure belli.
cum Rege initum foedus manet, etiamsi Rex aut Successor regno a subditis sit
pulsus: Jus enim Regni penes ipsum manet, utcunque possessionem amiserit. The
Emperor Justinian answered the Vandals, Procopius.
requiring the benefit of a League, that he would break no league with them,
neither make war against them, but against the Tyrant and Usurper, who had
dispossessed their lawful King, and held him in captivity. The Roman General
Quintus answered the Usurper of Sparta, Livius.
We have made no league nor friendship with thee, but with Pelops the lawful
King: for the very mention of Peace or amity with a Usurper our ears cannot
endure. And thus when Spartacus, such another, had gotten strength, and made
wars by the help of a rabble of thieves against the Romans, he sent to Cressus
to make a league with him, but he rejected it with much scorn, as most unworthy
the Roman name, Tacitus.
quanquam tunc ingentibus bellis labasceret Respub. non tamen datum erat
Spartaco ut pacto in fidem reciperetur; non alia magis sua and Populi Romani
contumelia. So the Emperor Tiberius was exceedingly offended at the
presumption of Tacsarinas the great African Robber, for sending Ambassadors
unto him: Tacitus. Florus.
Indoluit Tiberius quod desertor and Praedo more hostium ageret; for such are
in the rank of those qui foedus humani generis ruperunt. Some are of opinion
that in an Arist^^ a^^cal or Democratical Government, if civil war happen, both
parties seeming to be of equal right and balance (as in that between Caesar
and Pompey, the Guelfs and Gibelines) may send and receive Ambassadors; for
they are not in the condition of Rebels; etsi pereas dissentiones Respublica
laeditur, L. 21. F. de Captivis.
non tamen in exitium Reipublicae contenditur, and qui in alterutras parts
discedunt, non sunt vice hostium, as was said before, when two are in
competition for a Crown. Yet are there diverse examples of Princes and States,
that in this case would decline all dealing with either party, unless for their
own interest and advantage, and answer, as those of Marcelles did unto Caesar
in his war with Pompey, that they being the Allies of the people of Rome, it
did not belong unto them to enquire, which had the justest cause. If either of
them would come as friends to Marcelles, they would so receive them: but if
either of them came in any hostile manner, they should find from their State no
friendly compliance. They were not obliged to aid either Caesar or Pompey,
although they were the Allies and confederates of the Romans; neither ought any
to have engaged themselves in that pernicious faction of the Guelfs and
Gibelines; unless it had been to suppress them. The case was more ambiguous in
the war between the Houses of York and Lancaster, yet so as we may not take for
a rule, that shift used by Lewis the Eleventh, who being required by Edward the
Fourth to send him aid against Henry the Sixth, according to a former league
between them, answered, that the League which was made by him was with the King
and Kingdom, and he held himself obliged to aid him only unto whom the
Kingdom did adhere, Comines. Bodin.
and declare for their King; like that saying of an Earl taken Prisoner at
Bosworth field, who being demanded why he took Arms for the Usurper Richard the
Third, answered, that if the Parliament had set the Crown upon a stock, he
would have fought for it. Camdens Remains.
The Parliaments in those times did not take on them to dispose of the Crown;
and so did the Parliament answer Richard Duke of York, father of Edward the
Fourth, when he pressed them to declare his Title against Henry the Sixth.

Those who affirm that the change in the State and Government does dissolve
former Leagues, seem to affirm it upon such change as is fairly effected, with
a free and unanimous consent of all, or by the immediate hand of God, when none
are left to continue the Succession, and all former rights are extinct; but not
of such change as is enforced by a detestable rebellion. Alb. Gen il. disput.
ad leg. Jul. Majestatis and de jus. belli lib. 3. cap. 23. Grot. de Juce belli
lib. 2. cap. 16.
Rex Regno pulsus, vel in carcere positus ab altero Rege, perdit possessionem
quo ad ali^s Principes, sed non ex rebellion, subditorum suorum; and sic fuit
responsum a Galliae Rege Edwardo Angliae, cum de Regno expulsum ab Henrico Rege
sibi regem non vi^^ ri. Sane cum Rege initum foedus manet, etiamsi Rex idem aut
successor regns a subditis sit pulsus: Jus enim regni penes ipsum manet,
utcunque possessionem amiserit. If the State and form of Government be changed,
as if an Aristocratical Government be changed into a Monarchical, the former
Leagues remain in force, as some conceive, quia manet idem corpus, Grot. de
jur. bell. lib. 2. c. 16. L. 38. F. de solutionibus.
etsi mutato capite: but yet in all stipulations and pronuses this condition is
employed, if it be not expressed (notwithstanding that all stipulations are
stricti juris) tacit inesse videtur, si in eadem causa, si in codem statu res
and personae maneant, lest men should remain obliged contrary to their
intention when they bound themselves, and be by alterations happening, tied to
the observation and performance of that which is injust, impossible, or absurd.
Neither can it be said, says Aristotle, to be the same Commonwealth, if there
be not eadem ratio Reipublicae, sed alia forma Reipublicae. Mutata forma
proprie interremptam esse rei substantiam. Res abesse videtur eujus forma
mutata est; ideo si corrupta redanta sit, vel transfigurata, L. 9. F. ad exhib.
res abesse videtur. L. 13. F. de verb. signif. si sit Identitas materiae;
diversitas formae, res diversa esse dicitur. ut L. 18. S. 3. de Pignorat. act.
si sublatum sit aedificium; and eadem specie and qualitate reponatur alterum,
si quis strictiu interpretetur, aliud est quod sequenti loco ponitur. L. 20. S.
2. F. deservitut. urb.
The Roman Empire often changed in the form, the Empire remaining, as is
affirmed, although it passed to Kings, to Consuls, from the Senate and Consuls
to Emperors, sometimes chosen by the Senate, sometimes by the Soldiers, but
it cannot be said to remain always in eadem specie and natura. The Common
saying of the Divines, when the Preisthood was changed, the law was changed,
mutato Sacerdotio, mutatur jus; and so may it be said when the Commonwealth is
changed, the rights of the Commonwealth are changed, although not abolished.
An idem corpus sit, an eadem quantitas, L. 11. L. 12.13.14. De exceptione rei
Judicatae mutatio personarum aliam atque aliam rem facit. L. 22. De excep. rei
Judicatae.
an eadem causa petendi, an eadem conditio personarum, quae nisi omnia
emcurrunt, alia res est. Whatsoever men's opinions are of these changes in
Commonwealths, and notwithstanding these rules of law before declared, Princes
and Commonwealths have, and they ought to have an eye, unto all changes and
alterations in States and Commonwealths, especially unto violent changes and
usurpations amongst their Neighbors; for men may justly be restrained and
opposed in changing, or abusing their own, when the interest of another is
impeached thereby: ubi capiat aliena Respublica detrimentum, Gentil. de jure
belli. lib. 1. C. 16.
vel siquid iniqui in alios caderet: upon which reason Queen Elizabeth in her
Declaration printed, excused her sending aid to the Hollanders, although that
war seemed to be just on both sides, by that which was delivered in the
justification of both parties: For by her aiding of them she had their
assistance against the King of Spain her enemy, and the more hope of obtaining
a good peace for her self, and those her nearest neighbors, and of her
religion, and the most ancient and continual friends of the English: so that if
their condition were changed by conquest, their ancient trade and commerce with
England, to the great hurt of England, would be cut off and destroyed through
their disability by servitude imposed on them. Pericles in his Oration to his
Contrymen, said, Let us suffer those Cities which are of our association to
remain free, if they continue so, Thucydides l. 2
as they were at the time when we made confederation with them. The Romans in
their Leagues did usually insert this Article, that the confederates should not
suffer the subjects of each other, to bear arms against the other, neither
receive the Traitors fugitives or rebels of each other: and so was it in the
league between Henry the Eighth and Francis the First, but those Kings had in
their league this addition, That if Civil war did arise in any of their
Countries, none of the Confederates should meddle therein, unless the war were
maintained by some foreign Prince. Hist. of Henry the Eighth.
If Princes may have just cause to help the Subjects of another Prince, yet, as
Movillier said unto Francis the First, the act, whatsoever the intention and
reasons are, is subject to much envy and misinterpretation, as appears by
diverse examples: There may be as just cause for a Prince to help another
Prince, especially being deposed, exiled, or oppressed by his subjects, and
with much less envy, and more honor. King Tarqui ^ing expelled Rome, fled
unto King Porsena, and desiring his aid, advised him, not to let pass the new
taken-up course of expelling Kings by their own subjects: adding also, Livius
lib. 2.
that unless Kings would maintain the right of Kings with as much vigor, as
subjects sought to advance their own liberty, there would soon ensue an
universal confusion, and all rights sacred and profane would be turned
upsidedown, and nothing would be endured in States and Commonwealths, which
was eminent above other; whereby would also ensue a total subversion of Kingly
government; a thing both with God and man most beautiful and excellent. Justin.
Thus Darius vanquished by Alexander the great, and afterward murdered by some
of his own subjects, when he was near his death, he sent unto Alexander to
revenge it, inasmuch as it was against his honor to suffer subjects to give an
example so pernicious. Livius lib. 4.
The Romans were so quick when sedition and civil war brake out amongst their
neighbors of Ardea in league with them, that they sent speedily their
Ambassadors to appease the fury, who took off the heads of the Authors, and
confiscated their estates to the Treasury of Ardea: Ovidius.
Proximis a tectis ignis defenditur agree: Paries cum proximus ardet, tunc tua
res agitur and licet aedes demoliri vicini, ne ad nos incendium veniat. The
Romans would not suffer an increase of power by iniquity: L. 49. F. ad leg.
Aquil. l. 3. F. de Incendio. l. 7. F. quod vi aut clam. Salust. Cicero.
Majestatis erat Populi Romani, non pati cujusquam regnum per scelus crescere.
It was none of the least branches of the Romans glory, who were the mirror of
magnanimity; that their Commonwealth might truly be reputed, Patrocinium
orbis terrae, potius quam Imperium; and Regum and Nationum portus and
perfugium. But yet the Romans were seldom losers by protecting and ayding
others, for by that occasion they got much of their dominions: Salust. Cicero.
Populum Romanum sociis defendendis, terrarum omnium potitum fuisse: God gave
them, as some say, universal dominion, for their excellent virtues and laws:
others say it was given them to scourge the tyranny and vices which did reign
amongst other nations, and to end the discord and contentions amongst them.
From the discord of Citizens, Strangers take their opportunity against them.
Livius.
The Carthaginians first passed into Cicily, to take part with one side in a
Civil war, but they endeavored to make a prey of both. For sometimes neighbor
Princes have, as in the fable, played the part of the Kite between the Mouse and
the Frog, and ended their strife, by gaining that and more then that for which
they did contend: as the Turk did in Hungary, when they called for his
assistance. And thus other Princes have dealt with the Italians, at war amongst
themselves, until strangers got all, or spoiled all they left behind them.
Other Princes when their Neighbors have been in Civil war, have endeavored to
break the course thereof, and joined with one side, lest when both were
weakened, the whole should fall into the hand of some potent neighbor or enemy
of theirs. The Roman General Quintius offered his assistance to the States of
Greece, Livius lib. 34.
to destroy Nabis the Usurper of Sparta, lest the contagion thereof should
spread farther, and take hold of the other Commonwealths and Cities of Greece.

CHAP. XVII. Of the King, and of his power in Parliament.
THese pretended Patrons of Popular liberty, or rather of licentiousness and
confusion, can find no way so meet in their conceit, for maintaining their
Plots, as parity in Ecclesiastical Government, which being once established in
the Church, by the example thereof, King James book to his Son.
the Politic and civil State should be drawn to the like. And therefore they
will have an actual power to be jointly in the People with their Sovereign in
making of Laws, which they call their Legislative power in Parliament, so as
they would leave unto the King little or no power with his negative voice, and
would weaken all his rights in Parliament, but especially his right of
dissolving Parliaments. They would make him inferior to the Roman Tribunes of
the people; Livius. Plutarch.
for any one of them by his negative voice could cross that which his
Colleagues proposed to the People, and any two of them could stop all
proceedings, and dissolve all the solemn assemblies of the people, called by
the authority of the other Tribunes. But say what they can, they cannot find
his Legislative power, to be any other thing then the Regal power, and a
principal part and branch thereof, although in many cases it be very justly
restrained in the use and exercise thereof to the Kings sitting in his
Parliament, his Supreme Court and Council, with all the estates of the
Kingdom; but this is not in respect of any power or original and habitual
right inherent in the people. The Commons are called by their Writ ad faciendum
and consentiendum his quae de Communi consilio Regni nostri ordinari
contigerit; as were the people by the ancient Canons of the Church called to
the election of their Pastors and Prelates, Distinct. 63. c. 1. etc. 12. etc.
8. etc. 36.
non quod debent imeresse ut eligentes, sed ut consentientes: nullus invitis
pepulis and non petentibus ordinetur, ne Lpiscopum non optatum, aut contemnant
aut odiant; Is eligatur qui a Clericis electus, a Plebe expetitus fuerit, nec
aliter ascribitur Matthias Apostolorum Collegio, Acts 1.15. and 6.2. Cpyrianus.
nec aliter septem Diaconi creantur quam Populo vidente and approbante: Haec
exempla ostendunt sacerdotis ordinationem, non nisi sub Populi assistentis
conscientia fieri oportere. And thus by the same reason and equity it is, that
Laws which bind the estates and lives of men, and are for the common good of
all and singular Persons, should be made in the great Council and supreme Court
of the Kingdom, by the advice and assent of all the Estates of the Kingdom.
By which course the just rights and liberties of the people are preserved, and
taxes and levies of money on the people imposed, only by Parliamentary
authority, as they ought to be. For thus the People are induced and engaged, to
a willing observation of those laws, and submission unto those impositions,
for the making and raising whereof they have given their consent. It was said
long since by a wise man, that in ancient time and to the honor of England,
Commines.
it was best governed of any Kingdom; the People least oppressed, the Kings
living upon their own revenues; subsidies granted but only for war with France
or Scotland, and the war undertaken by the advice of Parliament: by which means
the King was the stronger and better served: and he adds also that Princes
cannot levy on their Subjects without their consent. If we look upon our most
ancient Statutes or rather Charters of our Kings, and the form and style of
them, we shall find no Character of any legislative power in any but in the
King, neither so much as the Peoples concurrence or consent in any
Parliamentary way. It appears in our ancient Histories, Mat. Paris. Hoveden
and alii.
that during the Reign of diverse Kings after the Norman Conquest, the Kings
when they called their great Council or Parliament, the summons went only to
the Prelates, Earls, and Barons; and in some of those Histories there is
mention of calling the Commonalty, and diverse sage and wise men. In Kings
John's time the first summons upon record appears to the Prelates and Peers,
S. Rob. Cotons collections
and something may be gathered although darkly of the admittance of the
Commons. Before that time every man by his tenure held himself to his great
Lords will, in whose assent his dependent Tenants was included: These were long
after the Conquest taxed and assessed by the consent of their Lords of whom
they held, who enjoyed great Regalities in their Signiories, and were to their
vassalls totidem Tyranni, says Mat. Paris. These great Lords did so curb and
restrain a long time the King, that there was great danger they would have
raised an Aristocracy, or several petty Principalities, so lofty was their
carriage toward their King, which in time would have strangled the Monarchy,
and all under the pretense of the public good, which drew on that long and
destructive war called the Barons war, and made it the more plausible and
popular. After these combustions ended, and the King, the Lords, and people,
were reduced to reason and moderation, which often was wanting on both sides;
then the Statutes made in the time of King Edward the First and Edward the
second, had these words, Statutes made by the King in Parliament, at the
request and petition of the Commenalty, with the assent of the Prelates and
Pears: And so in the Fifth year of Edward the Third, at the instance and
special request of the Commons with the assent of the Prelates and Peers, we
have ordained and established; and so in the succeeding reign of Richard the
Second, and in the first of Henry the Fourth. Thus did the force and efficacy
of our Laws proceed from the Kings Legislative power, acting by and with the
concurrence of the three Estates in Parliament, contributing their assistance,
according to their respective duties and the trust reposed on them. This
concurrence does serve excellently for the direction, regulation, and in some
respect for the qualification, not for the diminution, but for the support of
the Kings power and rights. The absoluteness and generality of this Regal
power, being also in many cases often restrained, in the administration of
Justice, in the inferior Courts of Justice by the Common Law of England, and
by the Laws and customs of other Kingdoms: And therefore the assistance and
concurrence of all the Estates in Parliament cannot amount unto the raising of
any coequality or competition of power: the influence of the Sovereign power is
that which gives life to the making and to the execution of all Laws: both
Houses of Parliament acting according to their duties, and not exceeding their
bounds, the rights and prerogative of the King is neither restrained nor
obscured, but guided, strengthened and carried with greater vigor and Majesty,
for his and the Peoples most good and security. If our Kings had any
copartners in the Legislative power, or were less in Parliament then when they
were out, our Judges have been much out, and deceived him and others in
affirming oftentimes to the Kings, that in no time they were so high in their
Royal estate, as when they sat in Parliament. The Canon-Lawyers say, the Pope
is greater when he sits in a General Council, in respect of the amplitude of
knowledge, and the spirit of discerning. After the Romans had transferred all
their Supreme power to their Emperors, yet did the Senate afterward make
diverse Laws, called Senatus consulta, which were often concomitant, or
subsequent to the Imperial Edicts, yet this was never held to be a conferring
or communicating of any part of the Legislative Imperial power: no otherwise
the Kings of France do grant to the Parliament of Paris, when their arrests
concur with the Kings Edicts, which are there usually ratified: Cujacius, and
Pet. Faber. Semest. lib. 1. cap. vult.
Optimi Principes non dabant ullam constitutionem, sine authoritate and
sententia Juris-consultorum, and Edicta Principum Romanorum, and sic Regum
Galliae plerumque subsequebantur Senatus Consulta. Quod Principi placuit legis
habet vigorem: leges condere, soli Imperatori concessum est: and legis
interpretatio solo digna Imperio est: Imperator solus conditor, and Interpres
Legum est: Institut. and Jura not. and gens. and Lust. Cod. de legibus Tit. F.
de origin Juris. Lib. Feud. constitut Lethaeri. and Fred. Imperator.
licet Augustus Caesar constituit viros prudentes ad jus interpretandum, ut
major juris authoritas haberetur. The Emperors since have made their Laws,
hortatu and consilio Archiepiscoporum, Episcoporum, Ducum, Marchionum, Comitum,
Palatinorum, caeterorumque Nobilium and Judicum. yet this was never holden to
be a communicating of their legislative power. Long time in the French Monarchy
Laws and Edicts were made by the King, and per suum magnum Concilium, as in
England, and so were causes Civil, Criminal, and Fiscal determined and judged
by our Kings, or his Council, or by his delegated poer to others, before the
Courts were established at Westminster, as appears by our Histories and
Records.

The three Estates in France and Spain did never in the former times when they
were most in use and power, challenge any part of the legislative power,
neither did their Historians and Lawyers ever grant it to be in them, for ought
appears. Bodin does acknowledge that in England the excellent institution and
use of Parliaments has longest continued, De. Repub.
and says, that legum rogatio and probatio non arguit Imperii majestatem,
licet autoritatis speciem: Ordines Angliae autoritatis quaendam habeant, jura
Majestatis and summum Imperium est in Principe. And so a learned Hollander,
Grov de Jure belli lib. 1. C. 3.
no slatterer of Monarchy, says, they are greatly deceived, qui existimant,
cum Reges acta quaedam sua nolunt rata esse, nisi a Senatu vel alio caetu
aliquo probentur, L. 8. F. de Constitutionib. L 1. Cod. de legib.
partitionem fieri potestatis. The supreme Senate is (as the Emperor in the
Golden Bull calls the Princes Electors) partem corporissui, columnas and
latera, solidacque Imperii Bases; jus dandi suffragii in Comitiis Imperii
Germanici non trahit secum majestatis communicationem, cum majest as
indivisibilis sit, nec Electoribus, Principibus, aut Statibus Imperii
communicari poterit: Tamen nihil majestati detrahitur, si in partem
solicitudinis Imperatoris invocentur, exemplo veterum Imperatorum Romanorum,
qui et si habuerint summam potestatem, ut quodcunque Imperator Edicto statuit
legis habebat vigorem, nihil tamen magni ponderis sine consilio and consensu
Senatus expediebant. Arumns ad aur. bull. non obstat quod dicitur in L. 1. F. de
constitutionibus. Quod Principi placuit, legis habet vigorem, quia sequitur in
fine legis non quiequid de voluntate presumptum est; sed quod concillo
magistratum suerum, Rege au^^ritatem praestante and habita super hoc
deliberatione and tractatu, recle fuerit definitum. Bracton and Fleta. L. 8.
Cod de Legibus. Bartolus and ali. L. 1. F. de legibus.
Moreover long before the Empire was established in Germany, when the Roman
Emperors granted unto diverse Princes and States of the Empire, that without
them and that form by him prescribed, laws should not be made or held
effectual, nisi supradicta forma observata, ita ut universorum consensus,
nostrae serenitatis autoritate firmetur: etc. It was never holden by the
interpreters of the laws, that the Emperors did or could by his grants pass
away or communicate any part of their inherent, individual legislative power.
The several estates conjoined in Parliament, as the Lawyers say, in other cases
do assist, non per modum limitationis, sed per viam ministerii necessarii: quia
leges condere est maximus meri Imperii gradus, and de reservatis Principis in
signum supremae potestatis. Iusta and legitima lex est quae processit ex civium
concessione and voluntate spontanea: Lex est communis spensio Reipub. quia in
legum observationem quilibet Civium spondere videtur. This rule in law ought to
have place in all Monarchies, as well as in Commonwealths and free States; it
being so agreeable to justice and the preservation of all men's rights. Yet our
Statutes made in Parliament are the proper acts of the Kings legislative power,
with the necessary assistance of the three Estates, sed nec communicato, nec
diviso Imperio. To communicate he ought in Counsel, but not communicate his
supreme rights of Empire: for his Empire is not so much permitted by God to his
absolute power, as it is by him committed to his faithful care, for the
preservation thereof, and the Peoples welfare, and unto him he must give an
account.

CHAP. XVIII. Of the Kings Prerogativ'.
Our Innovators do not rest at the quarrel against the Kings legislative power,
and other his Regal rights; but many of them fly at his whole prerogative: The
very name is odious unto them, through ignorance or malice. The prerogative of
the King, is supported by the Common law of England, and it does often serve to
support the Law, and the rights of all men; both of them do give and receive
virtue and strength to and from each other. The Emperors in their Laws say,
Authoritate juris penact nostra authoritas. The Regal prerogative, Ld. Chanc.
Sir Edward Coke postnati.
is called Lex Coronae, and it has ever been reputed a part of the Common Law
of England, and so lex Ecclesiae Anglicanae, and lex terrae: and this lex
terrae does, as formerly our regular Parliaments ever did, fence and enclose
the prerogative within its just limits, as well for the safety and preservation
thereof, as for the welfare of the people, which being the supreme law is the
scale and measure of the Kings prerogative. For there is great use of the Kings
prerogative, especially when the ordinary course of law cannot afford that
help, or at least so speedily as is necessary, not only to prevent injustice
and wrong unto private men, but also the prejudice or damage of the
Commonwealth, peradventure irremedial. Tacitus.
Oftentimes, tarda sunt legum auxilia. But as the same author says, non
utendum Imperio, ubi legibus agi potest, according to the rule in law, qui
communi auxilio munitus sit, non debet uti extraordinario remedio. The
prerogative is not to cross, and suppress the ordinary course of law and
Justice, if it may be avoided, to the prejudice of the just rights and
liberties of the people: Psalm 99.
the Kings strength loves judgment; he does temper his power with justice:
when the ordinary course of law can be effectual, the supreme absolute power
ought not to be used. There is often use of the prerogative, ex vijustitiae,
for moderating the rigor, and for suppressing the abuse of diverse penal laws,
made for terror, ut metus, non poena ad omnes perveniat; not to be
preposterously used as snares to catch men by those Informers who often become
the Catterpillars of the Commonwealth, and are more evil then necessary,
whereas the best of them are accounted in the number of necessary evils:
Instruments these are made for the draining of men's purses, not for correction
of their evil manners; when the penalties exacted seem rather as a price set
upon offenses then a due punishment of them: Vbi omnis domus delatorum
interpretationibus subverteretur, Tacitus. L. 4. Cod. de Delatorib.
utque antehac flagitiis, ita tunc legibus laborabatur; and graviora remedia
quam delicta erant: omnibus notorium sit hos nunciatores execrabiles esse, qui
consequendi praemii causa aenunciant; adeo turpe est delatoris nomen, L. 3.
Cod. de Injuriis.
ut injuriarum action tenetur qui hominem delatorem appellat. Penal laws thus
executed prove oftentimes as pernicious, and raise as much hatred against the
Prince as the overstraining and abuse of his prerogative, or the exercise of an
arbitrary power in government. As was the case of Empson and Dudley in the time
of Henry the Seventh. Corielanus was banished Rome, ut nimius exactor Legum:
Halicarnase. 8. summum jus summae crux; such men for their reward, are often
made publici odii piaculares victima.


But if a King has not a supreme power, his government will be very defective,
and he is rather to be esteemed a titular King, then a King invested with Regal
Sovereignty: although it is necessary to have this regal power restrained in
many cases by just laws, and by the prudence of Judges in courts of
judicature, for the good of both Prince and People: Ea demum tuta and diuturna
est potentia, Valerius Maximus lib. 4. c. 1
quae viribus suis modum imponit, legitimis vinculis constringendo, ut longius
a licentia, ita propius ad benevolentiam, as the wise Spartan King said: And
yet they are much deceived, who think Kings can be never too much restrained,
and esteem the most limited power the best and safest; whereas the best limited
power, and most likely to preserve peace between the King and his Subjects, is
that power which, as much as may be, is regulated by the foundest, most perfect
and equal laws between the Prince and the people. For the ancient wise men,
philosophers and Lawgivers, did not approve of those governments as the best,
where the supreme power was most restrained, but where the justest laws were,
and the most care for the execution of them: The liberty necessary for the
Commonwealth, Guicciardine
is that liberty which serves as the handmaid of Justice, and is to it applied
and appropriated: Moderata libertas omnibus salutifera, Livius.
immoderata omnibus gravis, and possidentibus eam periculosa. The Romans who
were most careful in preserving just liberty, and enemies to unlimited power
and arbitrary government, Livius Grot. de jure belli.
were oftentimes constrained to constitute a Dictator with supreme authority,
exempt from the legal forms and strictness of positive laws, who in the time
of his Dictatorship by the same power did all acts as a King, neither could any
other make them void, and the reason they gave is, ne capiat Respub. Livius
lib. 2.
detrimentum: Creato Dictatore primum Romae, ut intentiores essent ad dicto
parendum, neque provocatio erat, ueque ullum usquam, nisi in diligemia parendi
auxilium. And may there not oftentimes be as great cause for a King to use his
extraordinary power without the compass of positive laws, as there was for the
Romans to constitute such an extraordinary and supreme Magistrate? For as the
prerogative of the King ought to give place to the public good and safety of
the people; so must the rights and liberties of the people, when necessity
requires give place to the Kings supreme authority: Subditorum jus
supereminenti Regis dominio subest, Grot. de jure belli lib. 2. C, 14.
quatenus publica utilitas desiderat: Nam ut aequitas simpliciter cedit
aequitati summae, ita jus eedit juri supremo; maxima aequitas est, and lex
suprema, dicunt Doctores, quae maxim ad religionem (nam summaratio est, ut in
lege dicitur, quae pro Religione facit) spectat, and ad publicam utilitatem,
and ad hominum societatis vinculum conservandum. Moreover those who would
abolish the Kings prerogative would take away with it one most proper and
necessary branch thereof, which is his right of granting privileges,
dispensations, qualifications, exemptions from the Rigor of positive laws: so
as men shall expect no farther then the letter of the law grants, whatsoever
their case or merits are: whereas there is often as necessary use, and as great
justice in privileges, dispensations and exemptions, as there is of and in the
Laws themselves, and peradventure more. For the most perfect positive Laws
cannot provide for all accidents. The Roman Praetor had power, Cicero. L. 1. F.
de Just and jure.
as equity required (aequitas justitiae maxim propria est) ut juvet jus
civil, ut suppleat, utque corrigat, in private men's cases, and so is it in
Courts of equity: And shall the Prince be restrained from the use of equity,
from helping, supplying, or correcting the Law, when the public good, or the
preventing of injury to private men, requires it, and from dispensing with the
rigor of penal laws, L. 1 l. 9 l. penul. Cod. de legibus Novel. 82. cap. 10.
L. 12. F. qui et ^ quibus. Cuiae. and alii ad dic. l. 12. Faber adregul. Juris.
whose right it is leges condere, and conditas interpretari, duritiamque
ipsarum mollire, lenire, temperare? Judices non debent esse clementiores
legibus: In lege dicitur, quod quidem perquam durum est, sed ita lex scripta
est, and it was not in the power of the Judges to help it, for such a strict
and hard Law, only the Prince could mollify, when the words of the Law are so
clear and precise, that it cannot receive an interpretation ex bono and aequo.
it were very absurd to take away all particular privileges and exemptions from
the general rigor of sundry Laws; and it were infinite to set down those good
Laws founded upon reasons, drawn from the Law of nature: which nevertheless
upon due consideration of circumstances, are justly restrained from their
general force, without any violation to the reason, the life and the soul of
those Laws, as the Doctors say of the Civil and Canon Laws. So as there is a
dispensation of Justice, requisite in point of Justice, as well as there is a
dispensation of Grace, whereby the bond of the Law is not released, the force
and obligation of the Law still remaining; only the reason of the Law, which
is the soul of the Law, in some particular case ceasing, the Law is justly
interpreted in such case not to have place, but to have the influence and
virtue thereof limited or suspended according to the true meaning of it, and
the intention of the Lawmakers, lest injustice or absurdity follow. I grant,
that there is often an abuse of the Law, and of the equity and power given for
interpretation, mitigation and dispensing with Laws under the countenance and
color of equity and justice; plerumque sub authoritate juris perniciose
erratur, L. 91. F. de verb. oblig.
ubi quaestio sit de bono and aequo. And there is an abuse of the Regal power
and prerogative; quid non dominantium cogitavit cupiditas? ubi male agitur
necessitatis obtentu, Plinius.
and licita ex necessitate in argumenta trahuntur, as says the Law. And all
this is acted under the color and pretense of reason of State, which according
to the Italian saying, Ragion di Stato, guasta tutto il Mondo, Reason of State
destroys the whole world: These are commonly called Machiavillian counsels,
State-impostures, stagitia dominationis; as were those which Proculus, Tacitus.
Titianus and Nero used, when they could find neither Law nor reason to
justify their will, ad jus imperii, and ad vim dominationis transibant. And in
later ages the exorbitant actions of Princes are justified by Sycophants, by
reason of State, and by the virtue of their absolute power different from their
legal and ordinary power. Baldus. Innocent. Alciat. ad l. 2. Cod. de in jus
voeando and alii. De plenitudi. ne potestatis Pontificis, non oportet sermonem
effundere, quia superfluum est solemn facibus adjuvare. Extravag. Gloss. ad tit.
1. Plinius ad Trajan. Imp.
Plenitudine potestatis Princeps ad malum utendo, dicitur plenitudo tempestatis
non potestatis; nam clausula de Plenitudine potestatis inserta, intelligitur de
potestate justa, non Tyrannica: Inest enim plenitudo potestatis in dispositione
bonitatis, non pravitatis: posse injustum facere potestas non dicitur, sed
infirmitas and deficientia boni. Plenitudo potestatis non extenditur ad
iniquum, neque exercenda est, nisi praemissa clave discretionis, quae regulanda
est per jura and ex bono and aequo. Sed in Jure nostro nulla est mentio
plenitudinis potestatis. Vt foelicitatis est quantum velis, posse; sic
magnitudinis velle quantum possis. But these corruptions and abuses, are not
sufficient causes, for the abolishing the good and ancient institutions in
Commonwealths, or the proper and necessary rights of Monarchy, unless we will
imitate our late Reformers, who rather have chosen to cut off from the body
that which was necessary, then endeavored to cure any defects there: and have
destroyed the good corn wilfully, when they only pretended to pull up the
weeds. The Ba^ance would be kept even between the Subjects right and the Kings
prerogative, if the Rule in the Roman Law were observed, salva Majestate
Imperii, L. 11. F. de Justitia.
salvoque jure and more majorum; quia ut dicunt Juristae; sicut pendet Justitia
and ratio Tributi and Fectigalis in recognitionem Supremae potestatis, and ob
onera sustinendae Reipub. and ad praestandam securitatem mercibus; ita Regalia
Regibus competere, ut statum Reipub, desendant, sive decus and dignitas, sive
salus utriusque spectetur. Kings have their proper and peculiar rights assigned
by God who commanded Samuel to show the people the manner of the King that
shall reign over them, rationem istam Regis qui regnaturus est super eos: 1 Samuel 8. verse 9. and 11.: And Samuel told the people the manner of the Kingdom,
eloculus est Samuel jus Regni. 1 Samuel c. 10. verse. 25.


CHAP. XIX. Of a Civil war, and of the effects thereof.
I shall now draw toward a Conclusion, and in my passage show the fruits of
our adversaries wit and labor, which have been rebellion, civil war and
servitude; with some examples of their forerunners in other countries, which
they have imitated, being they were more apt to imitate and magnify any example
of rebellion, then to take warning by their calamities, or to consider the
ruin of their own Country, and the great scandal they have given unto the
Christian name. To begin with that which was nearest to us, the late memorable
example in France, where they of the Reformed religion, for their desence, and
liberty of conscience, as they set it forth in their Declarations and
Protestations, made an Association, and took up arms. And soon after those of
the Roman religion, made the like Association, about the year 1576. which they
called the holy League. Thuanus.
Both these produced the most dangerous rebellion and civil war in all
respects, that ever fell upon that Kingdom, or any other Christian Kingdom;
for the people generally fell into such a phrensy, that they deserced their
Allegiance, charity, religion and reason. Into these Associations many were at
the first drawn unadvisedly, through diverse and different perturbations in
their minds, designs and interests: some upon false apprehensions and reports
of the King and others, cunningly raised: Others through discontent, want of
livelihood, hope of raising their fortune, hatred one of another, or of the
present government, or of those of the greatest power therein: and many out of
preposterous and wild zeal. And when repentance found entrance, they could not
find any way out of this Egyptian darkness. The Cathoilck league was carried on
with much subtilty and power, by the chief of the faction, men of great power
in Court, and with the seduced and violent people: Unto this league by ill
counsel, the King Henry the Third gave connivance; and out of a desire to
suppress some popular fears and jealousies of him, and to show himself really
a devout son of the Church, he soon declared himself a party. And finding this
Catholic league overmaster him, he fell to no better shift, then the
confirming and ratifying of it by his authority. But soon after that he
perceived the design of the chiefest amongst them, tended to the weakening and
subordination of his authority, by many of their actions, and chiefly by their
endeavor to get the power of the Militia into their own hands, and all under
the color of defending the Catholic religion, and the extirpation of Heresy.
For prevention thereof, and preservation of himself from contempt (into which
he did run by joining himself to the league) he sought to throw out the devil
by Beelzebub, and all that he could do could not untwist those inextricable
difficulties, in which it pleased God to leave him, although he was a Prince
endued with prudence and fortitude, and, as was said of him, he might have
proved an excellent King, if he had not fallen into such times But he labored
and strugled under the contempt and hatred of his people, either of them being
sufficient to draw destruction upon Princes: and the affection of his subjects
was fastened upon the Duke of Guise, a great Lord in respect of his alliance and
followers, exceeding popular, ambitious, active, and of excellent parts. Under
this new league and association, new officers were chosen, soldiers and money
raised, and war with the Protestants waged. The League was acknowledged to be
the head; the King became an accessory, and not the principal; A preposterous
and deformed government erected; into the body a new head ingraffed, and the
old laid aside, not cut off, but made of no vigor, and so was a hor^id monster
raised. Then did it soon appear, that those arms taken up for religion, by the
actions and the accidents ensuing, were turned against the King, who too late
caused the Duke of Guise, and the Cardinal his brother to be slain, the which
act drew on the Tragedy to the height, for the year after he himself was
murdered. Peradventure it will not seem impertinent, considering the likeness
of our condition now in England, Thuan. l. 100.
to relate the words of our wise Author, who says; Foederatorum factio primo
libellum emisisse constat, quo sumptorum armorum rationem reddebant, ad levanda
scilicet Tributis plebem, quo his inescamentis fascinatam ad suas parts
pertraherent; and novarum rerum cupidos boni publici praetextu ad rebellionem
impellerent: Cum haec non successisset alia via Plebem aggressos, and
religionis causam in horum animis praevalidam affinxisse: and quamvis nemo
religionis observantior fuit, quam Rex Henricus Tertius, calumniose multa in
illum commentata crant, quasi, communicatis cum sectaria peste consiliis,
evertendae religioni incumberet. His successor Henry the Fourth, a prudent
magnanimous and victorious Prince passed through a multitude of difficulties,
and obtained many victories, before he could get the quiet possession of his
Crown, occasioned by the errors and dissentions amongst those of his own
party, as much as by the power and practices of his adversaries the leaguers
and their adherents. And although he did see the death and destruction of many
of them, yet was he driven to agree upon hard conditions, and to grant a pardon
to them, to the great discontent of many, who had served with much courage and
fidelity, for his friends did see many malicious rebels in as good or better
condition then themselves. The Kings excuse was, that he could not help it, for
he was enforced to expel one plague by another. And as it is related in the
History, when the King had effected peace, then did appear the incomprehensible
effects of a Civil war, driven to the height; Religion pretended on all sides
at first, cast out at last, or used but as a stalking-horse: the honest
Families, the Cities and the people generally corrupted in manners, and brought
to poverty: the Nobility most of them accustomed to rapine and licentiousness,
apt still to retain that course of life: Unto those who were oppressed with
debts, or guilty of great crimes, peace the inestimable blessing of God, was a
torment. Others were ready upon all opportunities, to take arms again, to
maintain their prodigality, and wholly indisposed to use any honest trade or
civil course of life: and some to be revenged of their enemies, or to repair
the losses they received in the former Civil wars. And as by the occasion of
the Roman civil war impositions and taxes intolerable were laid, although then
excusable, yet many of them afterward remained in time of peace; and so it
happened in France, after their war ended with the English, and their Civil war,
which then followed, or rather came together. Comines.
But the Kings of France had this advantage by their wars, especially by the
Civil wars, that they got better knowledge of the wealth and ability of their
subjects, and what burdens they could bear, as well in times of peace as war,
of which before they were ignorant. This evil bargain the people have gotten by
the Ringleaders of their Rebellion. And as by the long Carthaginian war the
Romans changed much their Religion, and lost their ancient discipline, and
laudible customs; so did the French, who by the means of their Civil wars have
had the seeds of faction and sedition so scattered throughout the Kingdom,
that they are always apt to spring up, and as men's bodies which by long and
lingering sickness, being grown weak and feeble, ever breed new diseases; so do
vices increase in a Kingdom wasted by war of long continuance, which the Roman
Censors finding ad mores hominum adverterunt, Livius lib.
castigandaque vitia, quae, velut diutinis morbis aegra corpora ex sese
gignunt, nata bello erant. And the French History shows also that generally
good discipline was not only lost, Thuanus.
but religion also, and sacrilege daily committed, and the number of Atheists
and Libertines augmented. Bodin well declares the particular calamities which
fell on men by this war, and says, F pist. ad lib. de Repub.
cum bellorum civilium saevissima tempestate jactati fuissemus, qua multi
naufragium, plures jacturam fecerunt, plerique voraginibus immersi, nonnulli in
littus ejecti, quidam ad scoputos; alii alio abrepti, paucissimi incolumes
evaserant. But the Prophet best describes a Civil war, and the effects
thereof, Isaiah. 19.
I will set Egyptian against Egyptian, every one shall sight against his
brother: the spirit of Egypt shall fail, and I will destroy their counsel, and
mingle amongst them the spirit of error: all the commodities of the Country
shall be destroyed, and I will deliver the Egyptians into the hands of cruel
Lords, and mighty Kings shall rule over them. I will fill all the inhabitants
of the land with drunkenness; I will dash them one against another, even the
futhers and the sons together. I will not have mercy but destroy them:
Jeremiah, 13. verse. 13.14. Polybius. Machiavil. lib. 3. C. 33. discur.


Before we have done with Civil war and the effects, I will deliver some
observations of the causes, which reach and come home to our case. The Roman
Civil war, says Saint Austin, did spring up ex connexione malarum causarum,
and so did the Civil wars in France, and in other Kingdoms. Many of these
causes at the first, are more easily prevented then foreseen. The evils which
proceed from internal and secret causes and corruptions, are with most
difficulty discerned, and cured when they appear. The Physic applied either
for prevention, or the cure of the malady when it is grown to strength, proves
oftentimes equally dangerous; and therefore an excellent prudence and dexterity
is necessary in the conduct of affairs of this nature, where there is danger in
precipitation, although in using the likeliest means, as well as there is in
flackness and delay. The causes also of rebellion are often secret, sudden and
different. It is observed that some men have rebelled against their Prince for
no cause that could be discerned; and others who have received extraordinary
favors, as well as those who have received apparent injuries: As too much
plenty and prosperity does often make men to themselves and to their Country
the greatest enemies; for seditions, says Plato do often arise through too
much plenty, as well as of much want. Tantae calamitatis causa, Flnus. Livius.
cadem quae omnium, nimia faelicitas, quae furores civiles peperit: Non
miseriis, sed licentiae tantum, concitata turba, otioque lascivire Plebem.
Deleta Carthagine, tama de rebus prosperis orta mala, (magno scilicet terrore
Reipublicae Romanae, depulso) and dirupta concordia, prius saevis cruentisque
seditionibus, deinde mox malarum connexione causarum, bellis civilibus, tantae
strages ederentur, tantus sanguis effunderetur. Augustine, de Civitate Dei lib.
1 C. 30. lib. 2. C. 18. and lib. 3. C. 21. It was not poverty and want, but
pride, abundance of all things, and too much ease, that caused the sin, and
destruction of Sodom. Ezechiel. 16.49. Tacitus. Tacitus.
The Prophets do more often record the evils which fell on Gods people, by
plenty and prosperity, then by want and adversity: Plato being requested,
refused to give Laws to a people swollen up with prosperity and pride. Many
men of great spirit, and in great prosperity, carrying their hopes above their
merits, have fallen into rebellion, because they had not preferment before
others, or did see their enemies made their equals: Iniquam iracundiam
flagitiosa perfidia ulcisci, and so of Darius, malo publico verecundiam and
libidinem suam vindicavit: publicis malis abuti ad occasionem privati odii. Let
such Hot-spurs consider, that fortitude does as much consist in suffering as in
acting; and although they pretend unto much magnanimity, see how short they
come (as an ape differs from a man) of many Romans, Carthaginians, Grecians
adorned with true magnanimity, as Fabius Maximus, Scipio, Asdrubal, and of
latter time Gonsalvo called the great Captain, and others; men as famous for
conquering themselves and their inordinate affections, as for subduing their
enemies: who received many public affronts, from their superiors, from their
equals, and from their Country, and endured the smart of envy and detraction,
incident to men of most eminent virtue, without seeking any revenge, whereby
the peace of their Country might be endangered, although they wanted not power
to make themselves as famous rebels as ever were any; but they chose rather a
voluntary banishment, or confinement and retreat, until the predominant
malignant humor was spent, and the storm passed over: so as many of them that
thus prudently carried themselves, survived their enemies and their malice, and
recovered all they had lost, and obtained the highest places of honor and
authority both incourt and camp. Livius. Augustinus.
Thus Camillus licet reus factus invidia obtrectatorum virtutis suae, tamen
ingratam liberavit patriam. Valerius Maximus. Appian. Augustine. de Civit Dei.
Whereas by the Civil war raised by Sylla and Marius striving to destroy each
other, non Reipublicae victoria quaerebatur, sed praemium victoriae res erat
publica; utriusque partis defensores, magis agerent amore vincendi quam aequum
aut bonum quicquam cogitarent. And although Sylla was reputed Captain of that
party which had most reason and justice on their side, for seeking to remove
the corruptions in the Commonwealth, yet was he termed Ingratus Sylla, Seneca.
qui Patriam durioribus remediis quam pericula crant, sanavit: and the revenge
he took of Marius and Cinna was with the exceeding destructions of the
Citizens, and the irrecoverable loss of the Commonwealth and liberty of the
people: August. de Civit Dei lib 3. C. 7.27. and 28.
In so much as Sylla was advised to restrain his hand from slaughter, that the
Conqueror might have some lest of the vanquished to live under his Command.
Those two, Sylla and Marius, men of excellent courage and skill in war, Florus.
decora and ornamenta seculi sui, falling into contention by ambition and upon
punctilio's of honor, began that Civil war which drew on the ruin of their
Country and themselves, by the continual factions and feditions that followed
until the usurpation of Julius Caesar. These two had their greediness of
revenge and of domination and rule requited by a base thraldom, which they
drew upon themselves, for they and those that followed them, were enforced to
endure all insolences of their own licentious soldiers, Plutarch. in Sylla and
Marius.
and of others the basest of men, and to purchase their good will with
donatives and rewards, and to grant unto them the spoil of others who were
innocent and neuters, as of those who did oppose them. Whereas their Ancestors,
would often protest, that they rather would endure to be vanquished by a
foreign enemy, then become slaves to their own soldiers, by the want of power
to chastise them, and means to retain them in their obedience: thinking it more
shame thus to flatter their soldiers, then to fear their enemies.

CHAP. XX. No pretenses whatsoever can be just ground of a Civil War or
Rebellion.
ALthough the cause of a rebellion proceeds not from ambition, revenge, or
the like, but from actions of good intention, for reformation of the Church or
Commonwealth, rebellion and civil war does follow, yet such men ought to
consider, that Sion is not built with blood, Habakkuk.
nor Jerusalem with iniquity: Woe unto him who builds a town with blood, and
establishes a City by iniquity. He who raises a schism in the Church, or a
faction in the Commonwealth, lends his hand to the devil against Christ, for
the devil enters at a breach, and then there follows after a multitude of
others of the same crew, although their purposes and designs are different.
Those men who have been authors or actors in a Civil war, or a rebellion, can
hardly excuse themselves by any pretenses whatsoever. There are some crimes,
that ignorance cannot serve for a Plea: Lex dat coercionem delictorum quae
sponte, vel ignorantia contrahuntur: vel casu fortuito eveniente, L. 1. F de
legibus. L. 11. F de incendio L. 2. F. de Term. moto. Cujacius. Levit. 22. and
Levit. 10. Salvianus
maxim si tam lata culpa fuit, ut dolo sit proxima: tam pessimum factum sit
little qui terminos finium agrorum diruperunt, abstulerunt, licet per
ignorantiam, tamen puniuntur. Cocrectur legibus non tantum conscientia, sed
ignorantia saepe, and error and casus. Puniendus erat qui comederit rem sanctam
per errorem: silii Aaronis offerentes ignem alienum morte plectuntur, licet
facilitate inconsulta, sola mentis inconsideratione peccantes. That pretense of
Religion and Reformation cannot so much avail our adversaries (especially in
respect of the evil means used for the carrying on of their design) as it does
give cause of condemning them of peculiar and selfe-ends, hypocrisy and
faction, because the works and manner in acting were equally evil. A timely
desisting, a hearty repentance, would have been better, then any recrimination,
and accusing of others, to ^over their own guilt, or assigning false or
frivolous causes and reasons to deceive the world under the vizard of
counterfeit sanctity. Salvianus
Medico opus erat, non Patrono. Augmentum reatus est, innocentiam jactare post
culpam: and criminosior culpa est, nbi honestior status est; magis damnabilis
est malitia, quam titulus bonitatis accusat, and reatus impii est, bonum nomen
Facinus prodigiosum est, ubi id ipsum in quo Christo injuriam faciunt, dicunt
se ob Christi nomen facturos, authoremque sui sceleris quodammodo Deum faciunt.
Salvlanus. Aquinas. Covaruvias. Navari Manuale.
. He who affords his assistance to an unlawful act, is guilty of all the evil
which thereby ensues, although it proceeded through his inconsideration and
want of foresight, and was without the compass of his thoughts and intention,
praesertim si eventus illi necessario and per se, aut verisimiliter sequuntur;
quia de culpa quis tenetur, licet culpa sit non ordinata ad casum contingentem,
ubi operam dat rei illicitae: superveniens casus culpam praecedentem non
excusat, maxim si id quod agitur tendat and dirigitur ad malum ex suapte
natura vel intention operantis. When any thing happens by the occasion of an
unlawful act, although the Actor used all the diligence, that he or any other
man could, to prevent the evil, yet by the Canon Law he incurreth the penalty
of irregularity: L. 4. S. 14. F de vi. ben. rapt
qui causam damni dat, damnum dedisse videtur, maxim si dolus malus adfuerit,
vel quoties causa damni per se ad damnum inferendum sussicit, vel dedit
occasionem proximam; si damnum circa rem sit non extra rem; damnum extrarium
non notatur ex eventu: But he is most guilty, si fraus ejus and animus
fraudendi eventum habuerit. Cuiacius. L. 10. F. quem fraud. Crediteris.
Insomuch as he who takes in hand any design just and lawful in itself, and
with good intention, if through his rashness and inconsideration, much evil
does follow, his rashness or negligence shall be reputed at least an occasion,
and an occasion in some cases does pass for an efficient cause, although it be
not properly a causa efficience, Cujacius and alii
first and principally moving; est causa impulsiva, and si minus principalis,
tamen impellit seu movet principale agens ad efficiendum: and circumstat
causam: est accessio causae: and sie si per imperitiam and infirmitatem suum
damnum dederit infirmitas vel imperitia sua culpae adnumeratur, L 8. F ad leg.
Aqaeit.
cum affectare id quisque non debeat, in quo vel intelligit, vel intelligere
debet, infirmitatem suam alii periculosam futuram esse; especially where the
Church or Commonwealth is much concerned, and the peace of either in danger of
being violated. For the errors of this degree and quality may fitly be
compared to an error committed in war, which according to the common proverb,
is committed but once, and that once often serves for all, and destroys all.
This I leave to the consideration of the members of the late long Parliament,
and their adherents, and likewise this difficult question, which has perplexed
many honest men, although few of this age do ever stick at it, Whether by the
laws divine and humane forbidding the resistance of the sovereign authority
justly established, we are thereby restrained from all resistance by arms, in
defense of our goods, estates, just rights and liberties, when the resistance
cannot be made without hazard of other men's lives, and of sedition and civil
war. I will not insist upon the decision thereof; it is a work of long labor,
and not much pertinent. I will add this as a most undoubted truth, that a Civil
war, or rebellion does most commonly produce more pernicious effects in one
year, then either the insufficiency or Tyranny of a Prince can in an age. It
was truly observed that the Roman State suffered more in those seven months of
civil war raised by Sylla and Marius, then in the fourteen years of that bloody
war which Annibal waged in Italy at their own doors, although their loss and
damage was inestimable. Brutus persuaded a wise man his friend to join with him
in the Conspiracy against Julius Caesar; his friend answered him, that the
government under a Tyrant was not so bad as a Civil war. Our fanatic
Politicians who teach men rebellion, and to flatter and deceive the People, and
to effect their own designs, do say, that the supreme power is originally in
the People, and habitually inherent in them, and is derived from them, so as
they may chastise and change their Kings, and assume again their power. They do
not consider how by these improbable assertions they weaken the bonds of all
laws humane and divine, and cut the sinews of all magistracy and government:
how they do incite the People to rebellion, and preserve the seeds thereof
always in their heads and hearts: how they in leaving Kings to stand or fall
according to the changable humors of their own subjects, who against common
reason, they make to be judges, accusers, witnesses and parties; they leave
Princes in the most miserable condition of all men. And the People also, ever
desirous of innovations, and prone to all licentiousness, when the reins are
but slackned, they do expose to the fury of their provoked Sovereign by their
rebellion, and to the loss of their just rights and liberties, and perhaps to
intolerable servitude under the sword of a Conqueror. The Rivers which by some
violent accident have broken their bounds, are destructive to themselves, and
to all round about them: They run on still and scatter themselves, and never
come to good until they return to the right Channel, and are enclosed and
fensed again within their proper and just bounds assigned unto them by God and
Nature. I could not in this discourse insist upon the framing and deducing of
arguments, although they were necessary for confirmation of the truth, and
confutation of falsehood; neither in drawing my matter into an exact method: my
desire was to relate the truth, and to rectify the judgments of the ignorant,
for Gods glory, and the good of my Country, and to convince those who are
perverse, not presuming to teach the wise and learned, unto whose Judgments I
do submit.

THE CONTENTS.
CHAP. I. INnovations in Government; Publishing of false News, and Prophesies;
Pretenses of Reformation; Sects and Divisions in matters of Religion; Quarrel
against Episcopacy. Page. 3. CHAP II. Of the Presbyterian Government in the
Church; The practice in the Primitive times; Touching the election of Pastors
and Ministers in the Church, and their maintenance by payment of Tithes. Page
11. CHAP. III. The inconveniences that happen by the alterations of Government,
in the Church and Commonwealth; Of Ceremonies used in the Church Service; Of
tender consciences; Of the coercive power of the Magistrate in matters of
Religion. Page 16. CHAP. IV. Of the changes in Religion in England; And by
Luther; And the toleration of diverse Religions. Page 31. CHAP. V. Of the use of
Parliaments; Of the danger that comes by the abuse of Parliaments; and the
Factions that therein arise. Pa. 35. CHAP. VI. The Right that Bishops have to
sit in Parliament. Page 40. CHAP. VII. The necessity of having all the Members
present in Parliament, or the greater number of them, and the danger of
Consederations, Associations, Engagements, and other indirect practices,
contrary to the Rights of the King, and the liberty of the Subject. Page 49.
CHAP. VIII. Of Seditions, and seditious Assemblics, and the punishment thereof;
Of the power of the King, in that which concerns the Militia, and the Arms of
the Kingdom; And of other Rights of the Crown. Page, 57. CHAP. IX. Of the Act
of Parliament wherein the King was to pass away his power in the Militia; And
that other Act which was made for the continuation of the Parliament until both
Houses should agree for the dissolving thereof. Of fraud or force used toward
the King or any other men, for the obtaining of any Charters, Patents, or
Grants. Page 63. CHAP. X. The Caese of Subjects in Rebellion against their
Sovereign, and the error of those that would draw more crimes within the
compass of Treason then they ought; Of Acts made and past under the power of a
Usurper. Page 76. CHAP. XI. Against any power pretended to depose Princes; Of
the Allegiance of the Subjects; Of the oath of the King; and of his Coronation:
Of strangers joining in Arms with Subjects in Rebellion against their
Sovereign; Of oaths and ingagemeuts made to Tyrants and Usurpers. Page 85.
CHAP. XII. Of those who only accept of Offices and Employments under Tyrants
and Usurpers. Page 100. CHAP. XIII. Of the inseparable conjunction and relation
between the King and his Subjects, which cannot be dissolved by any law or
custom; That Kings cannot alienate their Kingdoms, nor Subjects renounce
their allegiance, nor bar the next successor of the Crown. Page 103. CHAP. XIV.
Of the Beginning and Continuation of Kingly Government. P. 111. CHAP. XV. Of
Prescription as well upon Land as Sea; And the Right and Jurisdiction that the
King has in the Sea, and over the Sea. P. 116. CHAP. XVI. Against the
pretended Power of the People to Elect their Prince, or to depose him; Of the
Norman conquest of England, and of Leagues between Princes, and of Aides given
to Subjects in Rebellion against their Sovereign. Page 121. CHAP. XVII. Of the
King, and of his power in Parliament. Page 136. CHAP. XVIII, Of the Kings
Prerogative. Page 141. CHAP. XIX. Of a Civil War, and of the effects thereof.
Page 146. CHAP. XX. No pretenses whatsoever can be just ground of a Civil war
or Rebellion. Page 153.
FINIS.

