THE Prerogative of Man: OR, THE IMMORTALITY OF HVMANE SOVLES ASSERTED Against
the vain Cavils of a late worthless Pamphlet, ENTITVLED, Man's Mortality, etc.
Whereunto is added the said Pamphlet it self.

GENESIS 2. 7. Man became a living soul. Ovid. Met. 1. Os homini sublime dedit.
OXFORD, Printed in the year, 1645.

THE PREROGATIVE OF MAN: OR, His Souls Immortality, and high perfection
defended, and explained against the rash and rude conceptions of a late Author
who has inconsiderately adventured to impugn it.

I am the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob. God is not
the God of the dead, but of the living. Matt. 22. 32. Printed in the year 1645.

The Preface.
SO great and sovereign to man has been the benignity of indulgent nature, as
that she has not only bestowed upon his soul, above those of other
creatures, the high and singular prerogative of immortality, but has moreover
imparted to him light whereby he might come unto the knowledge of it, and by
that same knowledge be excited to make a diligent inquiry after the obligations
that follow it, and how also in this life he may make his best advantages and
preparations for the next. Neither is this same truth of immortality any new
discovery, but acknowledged of old by the Heathenish and Pagan nations; of
which thing we in the work ensuing, are to give in a large evidence by our
producing the many testimonies of a full and frequent Senate of ancient Sages,
who being destitute of revelation had nothing but nature to instruct them.

To these I add now, and for a taste in the beginning present my Reader with
only two, the one taken out of the 12 Book of Marcus Antoninus Augustus, the
other out of Simplicius his Commentaries upon Epictetus, one of these
witnesses, a Stoicke Philosopher; the other, a Peripatetique; in performance of
which omitting the Greek citations as a diligence for the most part
unnecessary in an English work, behold the words of Antoninus. Have thou
(faith he) forgotten that the mind or soul of every man is a God? He means
by the word God, only an entity divine and a substance of higher and nobler
extraction, then other forms or souls of creatures inferior. Simplicius in
his Prolegomen. determines, saying, The soul makes use of the body as of
Organs or Instruments, as also it does of the passions irrational, and has a
substance altogether separable from them, and remaining after their corruption.
The self same doctrine is delivered expressly and at large by Porphyry in his
Book De Abstinentia.

Against these powerful impulsives and clearer notions of truth the adverse
party has nothing to oppose but mere surmises or suspicions, such namely as
the Author of the Book of Wisdom out of their own mouths records,
saying, There has not any one been known to have returned from the Grave. Or
else such as Pliny does imagine, who grafteth the opinion of immortality not
upon an innate or natural longing and appetite, as he should have done, but
contrariwise upon a false ambition and greediness in man of never ceasing to
be: Or again, as Lucian, who brings nothing to make good what he conceives,
besides downright impiety dressed up and set forth with facetious scoffs and
derisory jestings, wherewith nevertheless sundry ill affected spirits and
feebler understandings are easier persuaded, then with solid arguments.

The Chorus of Seneca afterward alleged moved as it may seem with no better
or stronger arguments, is driven as by a storm into dark and doubtful
cogitations touching the souls mortality, and so is another Chorus consisting
of Mahumetan Alfaquies in the English Tragedy of Mustapha. By such shadows
also as these a late Philosopher was affrighted, and before him some of the
ancients, so far forth as to be made imagine, that granting the soul should
survive the body, yet that it would not thence follow it were perpetual, but
that contrariwise in tract of time it might decay and vapor it self at length
to nothing, burning or wasting out it is own substance like a torch or candle;
or at least have a period of duration set it, connaturally to the principles of
constitution, beyond which it was not to pass, but at that term or point
presently and naturally, to extinguish or return to nothing.

But if suspicions may come to be examined, we shall find that there be other
of them persuading the souls mortality that seem more hollow and deceiptfull
then the former are; as namely, a depraved appetite or an unbridled and untamed
sensuality that sollicites perpetually to be satisfied, and is desirous,
without fear of future reckonings in the other world, to wallow and tumble
like a swine in the mire of dirty pleasures, and to conceive some shadow of
security for it, that so with the old Epicureans it might merrily say.

Ede, bibe, lude, post mortem nulla voluptas.
Eat, and drink, and play thy fill,
There Is after death nor good nor ill.
Doubtless these latter perswaders seem to be more ruinous and corrupt then
the former, and of more dangerous consequence; And thus we see, that on either
side there want not suspicions as well for concluding of montality as of
immortality, if we will be guided by them. But into this high Court of
judicature wherein causes so weighty and so grave as this are to be decided,
suspicions and dark imaginations will not be allowed for evidence, or be able
to cast the business any way.

To these other proofs which after I allege I add this one which I have
placed in the frontispeice of this treatise, namely these words of Christ,
Matthew. 22. partly recited by him out of Exodus: I am the God of Abraham, and
the God of Isaak, and the God of Jacob. God is not the God of the dead, but of
the living. By force of which Text the Sadduces who denied the resurrection
were convinced, and not only they but this Author also against whom we deal,
for the place proves the souls immortality, as well as the bodies
resurrection, Because if God be the God of Abraham after death, then must his
body one day rise again, to the end that being reunited with the soul there
might result an Abraham; again, if he be the God also of the living then must
his soul continue living without any intermission from death; for as without a
body there is no Abraham, so without a soul there is no vivens, or thing
endued with life. If you object, that it is sufficient if it live then when the
body is to rise, though not before; I answer, that this intermitted living
neither is nor can be sufficient, because then the soul must have a revivall
and resuscitation, for the which we have no warrant any where, and feign it we
must not; or if we do, it will want weight and be rejected. It follows then,
that the soul of man after the departure of it from the body must either
always live or never, and so by consequence seeing the soul must live once
more it must live always, that is to say, not only at the resurrection, as
this Author says, but continually from the time of the separation to the time
of the reunion, and so after everlastingly. And this is the conclusion was
intended. And thus much touching the argument of the treatise following.

Now touching the Adversary I am to let you know, that if the Readers bad not
deserved much more regard then he, and besides if the matter had not required
some elucidation, more then his objections did an answer, I had been wholly
silent and spared all this labor I have taken.

The Contents of the several Chapters in The Prerogative of Man.
Chap. I. The Authors Design, and the occasion of it. Chap. II. His first
Class of Arguments examined and refuted. Chap. III. Seripture no way a
favourer of the souls mortality. Chap. IV. His argument out of Reason viewed
and examined. Chap. V. A refutation of certain shifting Answers given unto
sundry Texts of holy Scripture. Chap. VI. The rational soul of man
ingenerable and incorruptible. Chap. VII. Man's being by Procreation no argument
of his souls mortality. Chap. VIII. A solution of the Adversaries objections,
together with some others of Doctor Daniel Sennertus. Chap. IX. The Adversaries
resurrection of Beasts exploded, together with a Conclusion of the Work.
The Contents of the several Chapters in Man's Mortality.
Chap. I. Of Man's Creation, Fall, Restitution, and Resurrection, how they
disprove the Opinion of the Soul, imagining the better part of Manimmortall:
And proves him (quatenus homo) wholly mortal. Chap. II. Scriptures to prove
this Mortality. Chap. III. Natural Reasons to prove it: with Objections
Answered. Chap. IV. Objections from Natural Reasons Answered. Chap. V.
Objections extorted from Scripture Answered. Chap. VI. Of Procreation, how from
thence this Mortality is proved. Chap. VII. Testimonies of Scripture to prove
that whole man is generated, and propagated by Nature.
The immortality of humane souls asserted against the vain Cavills of a late
worthless Pamphleter, and vindicated from reproach.
CHAP. I. The Authors Design, and the occasion of it.
AS bodies that are foul and do abound with peccant humors be subject to
contagion and apt to be infected by each weak venom, from the danger whereof
cleaner and better tempered bodies live secure, so, in like manner, minds that
be corrupted and all such understandings as have lost the stays and principles
of truth are easily entrapped by every poor and childish sophistication; and
having once left their anchour-hold floate afterward up and down upon the
waves of humane opinations, are dashed against every rock of error, be it
never so low, or contemptible, and, like unto small weak flies, be caught and
entangled, not always by the strongest and most artificially woven cobweb, but
by the very next, though never so rude and slender. This poor and sorrowful
manner of failing must needs be of all other the most hateful, not for the
deadliness of it, but rather for the reproach which follows; for by it a man
loses not truth alone, but withal his reputation and esteem, it being a
judgment very slenderly armed that with a wooden dart can be peirced through.
Experience verifies what I affirm; for of late a sorry Animal, better I cannot
call him, whose soul be himself thinks to be mortal, and whose learning and
capacity is so small, as if indeed it were so as he imagines it to be, a sorry
Animal I say, having stepped into the crowde of Scriblers in the defense of an
old rotten heresy condemned and suffocated by consent of the wise, almost at
the hour of the birth, has met with some souls so unhappy as to be persuaded
by him, and to think as meanly of themselves as the wisest of all ages did of
beasts; and to the dishonor and debasing of their own kind, not elevating
Beasts to the degree of reason, as sometimes Plutarch, Sextus Empiricus, and
some others have sought to do, though vainly, and peradventure more for
ostentation and argumentation sake, then in any earnest; but contrariwise
reproachfully depressing man even as low as brute beasts, and ascribing to
them both a mortality alike.

The old and despicable heresy which this obscure author now labors to
resuscitate and to conjure up, was raised in Arabia about the time of Origin,
and extinguished by his dispute, immediately after the birth, as Eusebius
witnesses l. 6. Hist. c. 30. and according to the division of Rufinus, 27.
such as were infected with this error were termed by Saint Augustine de
Haeres. c. 83. Arabici, by reason of the Province from whence the error first
arose: so that such as now submit unto it may well be termed wild Arabians,
which kind of people by reason of their rude condition and volatile natures,
were ever as ready to be cosened, first, by this heresy, and after, by the
grand Impostour Mahomet, as the Romans prepared to betray their own liberty,
then when Tiberius cried shame upon them for it, saying, O homines ad
servitutem paratos! O men prepared for servitude! who if he had lived in this
age, and noted the pronity of men now adays, to embrace every groundless
fancy and to forgo any ancient and well grounded truth, would have changed a
word or two and said, O mentes ad errorem paratas! O minds prepared for
error! O minds corrupt enough for the receiving and applause of any folly, of
any error, be it never so absurd, disadvantageous unto them, or derogating
from the dignity of humane nature! O curvae in terris animae! About the time of
these Arabici, Tatianus in an Oration of his yet extant seems to have held
with them, and afterward some later Sectaries termed by reason of this their
foolish error Thnetopsychitae, as Damascene relates l. de Haeres.

Upon the consideration of those errors that have of late infected us and
betrayed humane nature, I cannot think it a thing improbable, but that the
infernal spirit which has suggested them and governed the hearts of men as a
predominant planet, in these Northern Provinces of Europe, is that martial
Devil called Apocal. 9. 11. Abaddon, or Apollyon, that is to say, a Destroyer;
for as much as the designs of all such as have disturbed our peace of late
days, are all generally for ruin and destruction; the former acts were for
destruction of Prelacy, or power Ecclesiastical; the latter for subversion of
regality, or sacred rights of Princes: they began with the destruction and
profanation of sacred and religious edifices, now they take the same license
for ruinating of of Cathredrall and Collegiate Churches, and like true
Barbarians, what time and leisure do not yet give them leave to demolish, that
they at least deface and contaminate, leaving behind them nothing but
desolation; neither sufficed it to have been contumelious to their own
ancestors, unless besides they should prove treacherous and false even unto
their own nature, by their divesting and disrobing it of all the chiefest
ornaments, which, according to the judgment of the wisest, do appertain unto
it.

For first, what is the wealth and treasure of man, but the dignity and value
of his actions? of this he has long since been plundered. His eyesight
whereby his steps were to be guided, was his knowledge; but this diverse have
labored to extinguish, by denying, with the old Academickes and late
Socinians, that there is any certainty in it, and by becoming so witty as to
know nothing. His crown and life was the immortality of his better part, as
therein cheifely being superior to beasts and all other living things
irrational; but behold here a privy but a dangerous traitor endeavors to
despoile him of it; so that in fine, if all these treacherous assailants might
have their wills, he shall be wholly mortal, poor, feeble, blind and
miserable, dethroned from his wonted dignity, and cast down unto the lower
class of Beasts. Profecto plurima homini ex homine mala, as Pliny justly
complains, though he himself be one of the Authors of these eevills. Was it
not enough that all inferior creatures do rebel against us, but we must
basely and treacherously conspire against our selves? The man that going from
Jerusalem to Jericho fell amongst thieves, had hard measure offered him, for he
was despoiled and wounded by them, and left only half alive; but those
thieves amongst whom we are now fallen be far more cruel, for they would
kill us outright both in soul and body, and with less then this will not be
contented. But now it is time we examine what urgent reasons, what killing
arguments there were that moved this new author unto so extravagant a course of
rigor against all mankind; for if these be not very urgent and invincible, we
must conclude this man guilty not only of much folly but also of heinous
malice and temerity against the rights and prerogatives of man.

CHAP. II. His first Class of arguments examined and refuted.
HIs first arguments be drawn from man's creation, fall, restitution and
resurrection: the principal is this,

That what of Adam was immortal through Innocence, was to be mortalized by
transgression.

But whole Adam (quatenus animal rationale) was in Innocence immortal.

Ergo all and every part even whole man liable to death by sin.

Upon this bungling argument or syllogism the weight of all his cause must
lean, which as I perceive by the posture it should have been a syllogism, if
the Author could have cast it into that form, but since that might not be, we
will be contented to take it in gross as it lies, rather then pass it over
without an answer. We grant then that indeed all Adam for example, by sinning
became mortal, and all and every part of him, that is to say, he was after so
much of his age expired, to yield up to death and be totally corrupted; or,
which is all one, he was to have his two essential parts disunited, and after
that until the resurrection, neither he nor any of his parts thus dissevered
and disunited to be Adam or a man any longer. All which might be without that,
either the matter of his body, or substance of his soul should perish, or be
destroyed. And forasmuch as concerns the matter of his body, it is an evident
case because matter is a thing both ingenerable and incorruptible, and so
neither produced by his generation, nor destroyed by his corruption; and as by
generation only fashioned and united, so again by corruption or death, only
defaced and disunited or dissolved. And as for the soul the other part, there
is no more necessity death should destroy it, then there was it should destroy
the matter, there being no more reason for the one then for the other.
Wherefore Saint Paul wishing death that so he might be with Christ, did not
desire to be destroyed, as this silly authors doctrine would infer, but to
be dissolved; for surely if his soul by act of mortality was to have been
destroyed, he could not think to be with Christ, during the time of that
destruction, or dissolution which he wished, and so his words and wishing would
have been very vain, seeing according to this Author he should by his being
dissolved, come never the sooner to be with Christ; because according to this
Author, neither alive, nor dead, he was to come unto him before the General
resurrection; nay further, his wish would have made against himself and his
own ends, because he knowing Christ a little in this life, might in some small
measure enjoy him in it; but if by death his soul be killed as well as his
body, he should have no knowledge at all nor comfort of Christ, but be cast
farther off then he was before.

Now, as all agree, that matter throughout all mutations, remains
incorrupted; so also according to the judgment of sundry knowing men and
diligent inquirers into the works of nature and transmutation of natural
compounds, natural and material forms themselves also do not perish at
their parting from their matters, but only are dissolved and dissipated, lying
after that, in their scattered atoms within the bosom of nature, from whence
they were before, by force of the seed, extracted, the result of whose union
was the form. So that the entity of the form remains after corruption,
though not in the essence and formality of a form, or totally and completely.
Thus teaches the learned author of Religio medici, and exactly declares
himself; of the same mind is the famous late Physician Daniel Sennertus in
his Hypomnemata, though sometimes not so fully; as for example, when he
ascribes to forms precedent the full production of the subsequent; assigning a
vis prolifica in every form for multiplying of it self: by which doctrine he
seems to recede from his former principles of Atoms and not to stick
constantly to them, yea and besides to deliver a conceit which is hardly
understood, and which moreover seems to be improbable; for, who can explicate
what one form does when it multiplies another, or what kind of causality it
does then exercise, or by what strange influence that effect is wrought and the
form made up of nothing. This same doctrine of Religio Medici; and that also
which we deliver here touching the Origination of forms was the doctrine of
old Democritus expressed by him in his constitution of Atoms, or minima
naturalia, not that every Atome did contain a form, as Sennertus seems to
think, but rather several pieces for the composition of it; as every simple,
or ingredient of Diacatholicon, for example, is not Diacatholicon, but
conteines something in it of which it is to be made up, and from which as from
differing heterogeneall parcells, collected and united by an artificial
mixtion it results; and for want of putting this difference or restraint,
Sennertus his own doctrine and explication of Democritus may seem defective.
This also was taught by Anaxagoras, when he affirmed all to be in all, or every
thing, and to have a preexistence in the bosom of nature before such time as
by the operation of seminall causes, forms be accomplished and made to appear
in their own likeness upon this theater. This is also the judgment of
Athanas. Kircherius a late learned writer l. 3. de magnete, part. 3. c. 1.
where he shows how rich compounds earth and water be, as Chymique industries
for separation, have discovered, insomuch as in them, as he notes, is
contained a (...) or general magazine; the common matter being from the first
creation, not lean and hungry, but faeta and praeseminata with forms partial
and incompleate. This also is the inchoations of forms and the rations
seminales praeexistent, which many learned men have often favored, and which,
being thus explained, and in which this sense of ours can suffer nothing from
the objections of Gandavensis, or Durandus. This lastly, is nothing else, but
in a good sense, an eduction of forms ex potentia materiae, which is
Aristotle's and his Disciples Doctrine; for, it cannot be thought, that
Aristotle ever intended to press, or squeeze any forms out of the dry
skeleton of materia prima, which matter is a principle only receptive, and no
promptuary out of which to educe a form by virtue of any natural agent
whatsoever; for in such a spare entity as that what fecundity is imaginable?
And so much touching the original of forms, which is one of the abstrusest
and nicest points in all philosophy, and that which by vulgar authors is
meanliest handled, and by the wisest is known but by conjecture.

Thus his maine argument is answered, after which all the rest will fall down
headlong with any light touch, though but of a finger.

Immediately after this he argues out of Genesis 3. 19. where Adam is told, that
for his disobedience, he must turn into that dust of which he was made; out of
which he concludes, that all and every part of Adam must be converted into
dust: which, if it be so, as he says, then not only his earthly particles,
but his aerie, watery and fiery parts must to dust also, and not only his body,
but his soul, if he have any, must be turned into the same matter. See what
fine conclusions follow out of this mortal souls philosophy. It sufficed
then, that so much of his body, or of the whole man was to return to dust as
had been made up of it. And by this alone, the commination of God is
fullfilled without any more ado.

After this he comes upon us with his false Latin, saying as follows. Death
reduces this productio entis ex non ente ad Non-entem, returns man to what he
was before he was: that is, not to be, etc. and by and by, citing impertinently
two or three places of Scripture, falls to another argument drawn from the
resurrection.

As for the Latin word Non-entem whether it be right, or no, we will not
examine, but apply our selves to the consideration of the sense which is as
faulty as the Latin can be: know therefore in breife, that death did not
reduce Adam to non ens, but to non Adam; it did not cause him absolutely not to
be, but only not to be man, or Adam any longer. And forasmuch as concerns his
body, it is confessed and certain, that it was not turned by death or mortality
into nothing, or non ens, but into dust which is an ens, or something; that is
to say, his body was not annihilated, but corrupted; and to dye, is not wholly
to be destroyed, but partially only, which act is all one with dissolution.
Now, if to the total mortalizing of man, it be not necessary that his body be
destroyed, then can it not be needful that his soul should be so, and thus
our adversaries stout argument is more then mortalized, for it comes to
nothing, which man by dying does not.

We will not deny him, but that the soul of man did die and die again, as
much as it was capable of death; for first it dyed by the being separated from
the body; secondly, by being subjected unto damnation, which, as we know, is
called in scripture a second death. But as for the annihilation of it, or of
the body, that is it which we deny; and so to do we have just reason. In fine,
as generation is nothing but the union of the parts, and not the creation or
absolute production of them; so again, Death and Corruption is nothing but the
disunion, or dissolution of them, and in no wise the annihilation, according as
this wise Author would persuade us.

As for the article of the Resurrection, it proves nothing against the
perpetuity of the soul; for we never read of any resurrection besides that of
the body: wherefore, to aver a resurrection of souls were a grand foolery,
and a doctrine never debateable or heard of amongst Christians, till this silly
Author came to teach it. And so much for his first chapter.

CHAP. III. Scripture no way a favourer of the souls mortality?
HIs places cited out of scripture in favor of his error are so impertinent,
as that it were no small piece of folly to examine them one by one; They all of
them signify that man shall dye, or sometimes, that Joseph or Simeon is not,
as Genesis 42. 36. all which how they are to be expounded and understood, may
sufficiently appear by that which has been said in the precedent chapter,
and how again they make nothing at all against the souls immortality.

Touching the words of Ecclesiastes c. 3. the answer is, that they were no
determinations, or resolves, but a history, or an account given of what
sometimes came into his thoughts, and what obscurities and desolations of soul
he had, and what lastly was one of the first difficulties that troubled him and
stirred him up unto a sollicitous enquiry; for certainly this one verity of
the mortality of man's soul is that which is to order his designs, to regulate
his actions, and to put life and vigor into them, this being a truth most
fundamental. We see this one was it which moved Clemens Romans (if he be the
true Author of that which passes under his name) to a serious inquiry and care
Clem. l. 1. recogn.
for the finding out what he was to do, whom to consult, what to esteem most,
and in fine what to fear, or hope most, and how to order all the passages of
his life. This is the question that usually troubles men first of all, and till
a resolution be had, suffers their hearts not to be at quiet, every man at
first suspiciously, as Solomon did, asking of himself, as Seneca gallantly
expresses, saying. Senec. in Troade


Verum est? an timidos fabula decipit
Vmbras corporibus vivere conditis?
Cum conjux oculis imposuit manum,
Supremusque dies Solibus obstitit,
Et Tristes cineres urna coercuit.
Non prodest animam tradere funeri,
Sed restat miseris vivere longius?
An toti morimur? nullaque pars manet,
Nostri cum profugo spiritus halitu
Immistus nebulis cessit in era,
Et nudum tetigit subdita fax latus?
Is it a truth? or that our fears
Have buzzed a fable in our ears?
That man's hovering spirits do live
And their interred corpse survive.
When greived consorts hands do close
Their eyes, and their last days oppose
Our bright Hyperions beamy light,
And drownes the slender shades in night
Then when our bones to ashes burn,
To be confined within an urne.
Be not the funerals our fate
But there must be a longer date
For wretched man? Or does he dye
Entirely, and entombed lie?
Or may he not forthwith consume
And vanish all in slender fume
Then when his wandering spirit flies
And mingles with the aerie skies.
And when the dismal funeral torch
His side insensible does scorch.
After this sort do anxious and afflicted spirits often times argue and dispute
within themselves, laying before their eyes all the doubts and difficulties
immaginable before they descend to the making of any conclusion at all, or to
the determining of any settled doctrine. Thus, and no otherwise did Solomon,
when first revolving in his thoughts the matter of the souls condition, and
touching upon the various suspicious of men concerning it with no small sense
and anguish of mind, at length c. 12. drawing to a conclusion, determines
saying, let the Eccle: 12.
dust return unto the earth from whence it came, and the spirit unto God who
gave it. And this text alone is sufficient to confound the Adversary, and to
confute whatsoever he has endeavored to draw out of scripture for man's total
corruption and mortality.

CHAP. 4. His argument out of reason viewed and examined.
WHat the several fancies were of heathen Philosophers touching the nature and
definition of the soul is not much regardable, sundry of them being so
monstrous and absurd. But it is a thing very considerable, that amongst so many
straggling and wild conceits all, or most of all at least of the noblest and
the best Philosophers have taught the immortality of the soul it self.
Howsoever, in other businesses concerning it, they might sometimes disagree.
Permanere animos arbitramur, says Cecero, consensu nationum omnium: qua in
Cicero Tuscul. l. 1.
sede maneant qualesque sint ratione discendum est, * and again in his
Hortensius, as witnesses Saint Augustine l. 14. de Trinitate. Antiquis
Philosophis hisque maximis ^^ngeque clarissimis placuit quod aeternos animos
divinosque habeamus. We are persuaded by the consent of all nations that souls
remain, but must learn of reason of what quality they are, and in what places
they remain. This assertion of Cicero, for consent of nations and Philosophers
in this truth, has been showed to the eye by the great diligence and learning
of Augustinus Steuchus, commonly called Eugubinus, in the 9 book of his
excellent ^ugubinus l 9. ^e Peren. Philosoph.
work de perenni Philosophia, in which he voucheth to this purpose the
authorities of Pherecides Syrus, who, as Cicero witnesses, was the first that
delivered this verity in writing, also of Trismegistus and the Chaldean
monuments of Plato, likewise Pythagoras, Aratus, Philo, Cicero, Plotinus,
Jamblichus, Hierocles, and sundry others, as also of Aristotle the Prince of
the Peripatetiques, who is judged by the greatest searchers into his doctrine
to have directly taught the immortality, although he has not declared himself
in that point, as in many others, nor as others have done, peradventure
concealing himself on set purpose, because he for want of light from divine
revelation was not able to tell what to do with them after death, nor was he
willing to make up his matter with fictions poetical, as his master Plato had
done. The same Philosophers also are diligently alleged ^less. c. 15. de
^erit. Christ. Rel.
by Monsieur Plessy, in his book de veritate Relig. Christianae, which is
every where extant. Besides, the same doctrine of immortality has been
constantly taught by the learned Aben Sina, or Avicen in the last book of his
Metaphysiques, and also in his Almabad, in which treatise he maintains
constantly the immortality of the soul, but earnestly impugneth the bodies
resurrect ion, and withal which is most false and improbable, defends that
Mahomet in his law never taught it, but only parabolically and for fashion
sake, complying with the peoples rudeness, whereby they were not sensible of
any doctrine teaching a felicity that was spiritual. Another Arabique author
who goes under the name of Aristotle is of the same mind with Avicen: seeing,
says he, it is manifest out of the books of Author secret. sap. secundum
AEgyptios. p. 1, and 12.
the ancient, and already proved that the soul or mind, is not a body, nor
does perish, but remain etc. Thus he l. 1. de divin. sap. secundum Aegyptios,
c. 2. consonantly to other Philosophers, though afterward, in the very next
chapter, most absurdly he affirms as much of the souls of Beasts. Afterward
c. 4. he adds, saying. If our foreelders had been doubtful of the souls
immortality, they had never, for the confirmation thereof by natures dictamen,
made a law against which no man is, but he who is entangled in vice. And a
little after. The soul therefore passing out of this life, and gotten into the
other world, does not at all perish. Lastly l. 12 a c. 10. ad 17. he, by many
arguments assayeth to prove that the soul is void of corporeity. Thus he, of
whose credit and excellency see the judicious censure of Doctor Guiliel. Dunal
in Synopsi doctrinae Peripateticae cap. ultimo.

Next unto this Author I produce Manilius, yet, not as a light Poet, but as a
sage Philosopher, he flourished in the time of Cesa Julius. This same same
Author l. 1. Astronomicon, speaking of the Galaxia and endeavoring to give a
reason of it, writes on the manner following.

Nec mihi celanda est famae vulgata vetustas
Mollior ex niveo lactis fluxisse liquorem
Pectore reginae divum, caelumque color
Infecisse suo, quapropter lacteus orbis.
Dicitur, and nomen causa descendit ab ista.
An Major densa stellarum turba Corona
Contexit flammas and crasso lumine candet
Et fulgore nitet collato clarior orbis
An fortes animae dignataque nomina coelo
Corporibus resoluta suis, terraque remissa,
Huc migrant ex orb, suumque habitantia coelum
Aethereos vivunt annos mundoque fruuntur.
Nor will we hide what ancient fame professed,
How milk that gusht from Juno's snowy breast
In heaven that splendent path and circle drew
From whence the name, as erst the color grew,
Or troops of unseene stars there join their light
And with their mingled splendours shine more bright.
Or souls Heroic from their bodies freed
And earthly parts, attain their virtues meed
This shining Orb, and from their lowly hearse
Ascending high, enjoy the universe,
And live Aethereall lives.
And again,
Iam capto potimur mundo nostrumque parentem
Pars sua conspicimus, genitique accedimus astris.
Nec dubium est habitare Deum sub pectore nostro,
In coelumque redire animas coeloque venire.
Of the whole world we'are now possessed,
And clear behold our Parent blessed,
A part of him, and from these wars
Make our approaches to the stars.
No doubt but under humane breast
A sacred Deity does rest;
And that our souls from heaven came
And thither must return again.
Lo here how he does signify, not only the souls of men be divine and
immortal, but besides, that they had not their original from the earth, or
from any earthly agent, with whom consents a Greek Philosopher Sallustius
Emescenus in his book de Diis and mundo lately published and vindicated from
the moathes by Leo Allatius; This Philosopher c. 8. teaches on this sort.
First says he, let us know Sallustius Emasenc. 8.
what the soul is. The soul is that which makes things living or animated,
differ from the livelesse, or inanimate. Their difference consists in motion,
sense, fantasy, and intelligence. The soul devoyd of reason is a life that
serves apparences and the senses, but the rational, using reason, bears rule
over the sense and Fantasy. Indeed, a soul destitute of reason follows the
affections of the body, for it desires and is angry without reason; but a
rational, according to the rule of reason, contemnes the body, and entering
into combat with the soul irrational, if it get the better does follow
virtue, if vanquished declines to vice. This of necessity must be immortal
because it knows the Goddess, and no mortal thing can know that which is
immortal; besides, it contemnes humane things, as if they were belonging to
some other person, and being it self incorporeall, is a verse from things
corporeal, which bodies, if they be fair and fresh, it languisheth, if old,
it begins to flourish. Also every diligent soul makes use of the mind. (...).
the soul is not generated by the body, for how should any thing that wants
reason generate that which has? Thus Sallustius, out of whose words we have,
first, that the soul differs from the body. 2. That the rational from the
irrational, or the sense; 3. That the rational is immortal and the reason
why. 4. That it is ingenerable and for what cause. With this greek Sallustius
agrees the Roman, who l. de bello, Jugurth saying, Ingeniiegregia facinora,
sicut anima immortalia sunt. The egregious atcheivments of the wit are like the
soul immortal, and, by and by, Omnia orta occidunt, aucta senescunt, animus
incorruptus, aeternus, rector humani generis. All things which rife do fall,
and being ever eased do wax old, the mind is incorrupt and eternal etc.

Our next authority is that of Apollonius Tyanaeus that famous Pythagorean
Philosopher whose life Philostratus Lemnius has writ at Apollonius apud
Philostrat. l. 8. de vita ejus.
large, and amongst other accidents, relates of him how, after his decease, he
appeared to a young man a student in philosophy resolving him as follows. The
soul is immortal and no humane thing but proceeds from the providence
divine. This, therefore, after the body is corrupted, as a swift courser
released from his bonds and delivered from a troublesone servitude, removes up
and down and intermingles with the gentle air. Thus he, to whom consents
most expressly Hierocles in his commentary upon the golden verses of
Pythagoras in sundry places, telling us that the soul is not only
incorruptible, but also made immediately, not by procreation but the hand of
God. See him of the Greek and Latin edition of Paris page 101. 103, 132.

I will add to these the words of the Emperor Marcus Antoninus, commonly
called Aurelius, l. 4. n. 13. according to Merick Casa^bon's division, If
souls, says he, remain how from all aeternity Marc. Antonin. l. 4. de
vitasu^. n. 13.
could the air hold them, or how the earth retain their bodies? As here the
bodies after they have lain a while within the earth are changed, and being
dissipated, leave space for other carcasses; so souls carried up into the
air, after they have been there sometime, whither kindled, or liquefied, are
conjoined to the common (...), that is unto the original mind, or great soul
of the world. Thus he as if he had said with Solomon the spirit returns to God
that made it, for the great soul of the universe, or the original mind of
all, is nothing else. Horace consents, saying, Melior pars nostri vitabit
lebitinam. and Tacitus in vit. Jul. Agric. Siquis piorum manib. locus: sive
sapientib. placet, non cum corpore extinguuntur magnae animae, placide
quiescas. If to the spirits of the pious there be any place remaining, if great
souls be not together with their bodies extinguished, may thou rest in
peace. To these Ovid subscribeth Metamor. l. ult.

Cum volet ille dies, quae nil nisi corporis hujus
Jus habet, incerti spatium mihi finiat avi;
Part tamen meliore mei super alta perennis
Astra ferar nomenque erit indelebile nostrum.
Come when it will my Deaths uncertain hour
Which of this body only has a power,
Yet shall my better part transcend the sky,
And my immortal name shall never die.
The same doctrine is constantly taught by Pythagoras as appears by his
doctrine of Metempsycosis and also both Jamblichus and Porphyry in their
several histories of his life do witness of him, as also Diogenes Laertius.

I conclude this Jury with the judgment of Macrobius, who c. 14. Macrob. in
some. scipio. c. 14.
in somnium Scipionis after he had recited sundry and differing fancies of
several Philosophers touching the nature of the soul, concludes, as
follows. Obtinuit tamen, non minus de incorporalitate ejus, quam de
immortalitate sententia. Nevertheless, the opinion touching the incorporeity
of the soul, as well as touching the immortality of it has been prevalent.
Against all these, therefore it importes little that Dicaearchus Messenius a
Peripatetique Philosopher and Scholar to Aristotle, or as Aristoxenus should,
as Cicero relates in the first of his Tusculanes and in his second of his
Academiques, hold and defend it to be mortal, or that both he, and as Cicero
reports out of him, another more ancient Philosopher, by name Pherecrates,
one of the lineage of Deucalion, did think there was no soul at all, neither
in man, nor beast, and forasmuch as concerns the same Dicaearchus, Sextus
Emp. l. 2. Hypotyp. c. 5. Fr. Picus l. 1. de Doctrine. vanit. Gentium* c. 14.
we read in Sextus Empericus and Tertullian, as also in Joh. Fr. Picus of
Mirandula, he was of the same opinion: for there is nothing so absurd which
some one Philosopher, or other has not maintained. Sextus Empericus was of the
same mind also as he l. adv. Mathematicos acknowledges.

But now by the way, I note how sublimely most of these heathen wise men did
Philosophize, when as they conclude the souls original to be from heaven, and
how much above the low pitch of certain depressed spirits of this age, who
after their continual poring into objects material, and raking in the mudde
of corruptible things, will needs draw out of that dirte the nobler substances
of our souls and natures intellectual by assigning for them no more perfect
principle then generation, of which number this sorry author against whom we
now deal, is one, yea and one also of the grossest that ever meddled about this
business, as by his demeanor in it does appear. Hierocles in express terms
determines saying, It seems says he, that God himself produced the several
souls of every particular man and left the souls of Beasts to be produced by
the hand of nature, according to the judgments of Plato and of Timaeus the
Pythagorean; so he com. in carm. aurea Pythagoreae page 133. of the Greek and
Latin edition of Paris Anni 1583.

I know well, that amongst these ancients the word Anima, or (...), is
aequivocall, because sometimes it is taken only for an exhalation of purer
blood, sometimes again for (...), Men's, or Animus, (...) by which words the
ruling, the spiritual, and intellective, and lastly the immortal part of man
is signified; and not any material or fading exhalation, which here by the way
I note for the avoiding of exceptions and mistakings.

Let us come now unto our Author who would gladly father upon Aristotle,
Nemesius, and Ambrosius Paraeus, that the soul is all the external and
internal faculties of man jointly considered. Which charge is strange, seeing
it is well known that Aristotle defines the soul after no such way, but says
it is Actus corporis Organici, and a substance by which we live, have sense,
and do understand; and if a substance then can it not receive intension, and
remission, as every young Logician has learned. But let us hear further.

All the faculties of man are mortal, as well those peculiar to man, as those
other which are common to him with beasts, and if all those with his corpulent
matter completing man be proved mortal, then the invention of the soul upon
that ground vanishes, which thus I prove.

All elementary compositions or temperatures are mortal. But man's faculties, a
minore ad majus, are temperatures. Ergo mortal.

The minor is denied, namely that all man's faculties be temperatures; for, to
instance, neither the understanding nor the will be temperatures, and yet are
principal faculties of man.

He proves the minor. That which is subject to intension and remission is a
temperature.

But such are all man's faculties, yea those of reason, consideration, science
etc. All that distinguishes man from beast are augmented by learning,
education etc. lessened by negligence, idleness, and quite nullified by
madness. Ergo.

Of this gallant argument there be but two propositions false, that is to say,
both the major and the minor of it, and then what kind a conclusion it has,
we may easily judge. For first, it is false that every thing is a temperature,
universally speaking, which is subject to intension and remission, but such
things only as be subject unto them per se and by their own nature, and not by
accident only, and this appears in the very business now in agitation
between us; for a greater clerk then this man is will hardly ever prove that
the augment, or diminution, which is, found in the acts of knowledge, do arise
from any internal alteration in the intellective faculty, and not contrary
wise from the difference, advantage, and alteration in the organ, or the
species and forms intentionall: for this reason a man may understand better
then a child, not because his faculty intellective is better then a childs,
namely for betternesse in the organe; also a learned man better then an
illiterate, and a diligent then a negligent, because those may have acquired
more species, or forms intentionall, or else have kept them better then these
other that be illiterate and negligent, and not for any intension, or remission
in the faculty* This I say may be reason of the difference and is likely so to
be, and not any variation in the do usually fetch them, which how more or
less valid or perspicuous they may seem, yet have they been held for good by
the wisest Philosophers both Heathen and Christian, and to be concluding. But
howsoever that be, the verity it self has been counted certain and evident,
insomuch as Aureolus himself although he found difficulty in sundry of the
arguments, yet did he not doubt to say, speaking of the souls immortality, in
2 Sent. did. 19. This doctrine of faith is to be held undoubtedly, and it is
the common conception of the mind, ^ureols in 2 ^ent. Did. 19.
and a verity evident of it self, though to give a reason for it it is not so
easy. So Aureolus, with whom consents Cicero when as he said, as has been
before alleged out of him, that it is the consent of all Nations. Now, says
he, if the consent of all be the voice and verdict of Nature, then are we to
think the same. Besides how could so many Heathen Philosophers have
acknowledged unanimously this doctrine of immortality otherwise then by the
light of nature and common reason? out of which it is plain, that natural
reason does teach us this verity. It follows then, that by Ciceroes judgment
whatsoever the arguments be, the doctrine it self is not only true but also
certain and evident; which thing may very well be, for there be many truths
which are not proved easily or evidently, yea peradventure are not to be proved
at all, but be things most evident and indemonstrable; nature and the
understanding acknowledging and embracing them as legitimate, without any
further argument then her own light; and again, many things be knownely false
which nature rejects as spurious and false, although she be not able to
demonstrate that they involve any repugnancy or contradiction; so that in
diverse verities we are to rely lastly upon Tertullian's Testimonium animae.

CHAP. VII. Man's being by Procreation no argument of his souls mortality.
THat man's soul must have the being by generation, because the man himself
has his being by it, is no good consequence; and the reason why some have
been deceived in judging it to be a good one or that of due his soul ought to
be generated as well as the souls of Beasts, has been partly a false
apprehension what the true nature and essence of generation was, and partly
also what was the perfection and essence of man.

As for the first misprision, it was that generation was not only to make the
compositum or whole to be, but also the parts, by the conferring unto them not
only the being parts but also the simple being, or the being Entities, that is
to say, not only the formality of them, but even the naturality; which
conceit of theirs is a false conception and against all reason and principles
of Philosophy. Which clearly teaches us that it is man which is procreated or
made by generation, and not his soul, his body is made or framed by it, and
not the matter of which it is composed. For it is a received maxim and most
true, touching the power of natural causes, and no farther. Quod ex nihilo
nihil fit; Of nothing there is nothing to be made: out of which it follows,
that before generation both matter and forms of all corporeal things must
have before hand a being in rerum natura, at least an incompleate one, and
cannot possibly have it from generation; wherefore by the work of generation
they are not made, or receive any new absolute entity, but only are collected,
ordered, and at last substantially linked and united one with another, which
union is not by a sole approximation, contiguity, or juxta position, that I may
so speak of one of them with another, as it falls out in artificial
compounds, where colors for example, though they be not pictures, yet being
thus or thus chosen, formed and united, make up such or such a picture; but it
is by a continuity or an inward and substantial knot which is in our power
better to conceive then explicate, and yet not to conceive fully neither, for
these principles of generation are natures arcana, her darkest and most secret
mysteries, which like the springs of Nilus she has hidden from our eyes, as if
our seeing of them were a profanation, and to let us know that she is our
mother, and we but ignorant children and such who must not be made much
acquainted with our original.

Again, if the parts also must be generated, I ask whether these parts be
simple or compound entities? If simple, they cannot be generated, but must have
their being by creation; if compound, then if they must be generated, the parts
also of which those parts are made must in like sort be generated; and so
either in infinitum, or else at least, till we come to some parts which are
simple and ingenerable; by which discourse it follows that no parts at all,
neither corporeal nor spiritual, neither in man nor beasts, do receive their
being by generation.

Touching the second misprision or original of error and mistaking, note,
that although it belong to the perfection of an Animal to generate another like
it self, yet is it a perfection only to Animals and Vegetables, and to them
also not simply but only quatenus corruptibilia, so far forth as they are
corruptible, generation being instituted only for reparation of decays, and
to reedify the ruins of corruption; so that wheresoever there be more ruins,
in that place more reedification is needful. In creatures therefore
irrational where there is a corruption more large then in the rational, a
fuller manner of generation is necessary, because there is a greater decay in
the form in the one then in the other, forasmuch as the forms of irrational
creatures be by corruption disformalized and dissipated into their atoms,
which dissipation if the forms were spiritual needed not; and again, if
indivisible were a thing impossible. Therefore generation is to perform more
in one then in the other, and yet sufficiently in both, according to their
several exigences. Seeing then generation is nothing but productio viventis a
vivente in similitudinem naturae; a production of one living thing by another
in a similitude of nature; according to the definition thereof, whatsoever
agent shall do this that same is truly and univocally said to generate, how
much more or less soever it do besides this. A man therefore producing
another man by the only composing and uniting his two essential parts, body
and soul, makes that to be a man which before was none, and does truly
generate a man, although he no more produce his soul, then he does the matter
of which his body is formed and made; for there can be no more necessity for
the production of the one then of the other. And this one instance of matter
will evidently destroy our adversaries argument taken from procreation.

Neither is it, as Argenterius well declares, any imperfection in man not to
generate so fully as other Animals do, but rather a great perfection in him;
for as it is a perfection in beasts to generate totally as much as generation
can do, because they are toally corruptible as much as in nature it is
possible, and as in Angels it were an imperfection to generate, because they by
their nature are totally incorruptible; so in man it is a perfection to
generate as Angels do not do, and also not to generate so totally and fully
as brute beasts do generate, because he is as the Philosopers rightly and
aptly term him, Horizon mundi and nexus naturae utriusque; as it were, the
Horizon of the world and that which knits corporeal and spiritual natures
together by his participating with them both, and not fully agreeing with
either: not being so corruptible as beasts, nor so incorruptible as Angels or
pure Intelligences. By which it follows, that his manner of generation is in
something to agree with the non generation of Angels; and again, something
with the total generation of creatures irrational, that same generation of
his being truly and univocally a generation, because he is univocally and truly
an Animal, and yet not totally so, because in his immortal soul, he resembles
the incorruptibility of Angels or Intelligences. For Modus generandi sequitur
modum essendi: and ideo quod partim est immortale and partim non, partim etiam
gener are debet and partim non. That which is not wholly mortal does not
wholly generate, and therefore neither man nor beast does generate wholly, yet
a beast more wholly then a man.

Constat aeterna positumque lege est,
Vt constet genitum nihil.
Eternal laws do so ordain
That nothing gotten shall remain.
Wherefore if some of him after corruption do remain, there can be no
necessity that all of him should be made by generation; nay seeing something
more of him, namely the form after corruption, does remain incorrupted then
there does of Beasts, for of beasts the matter only remains, something less
of him is to be produced by generation then there is of them, though all of
neither. Whosoever therefore shall affirm that a creature intelligent like man
should generate another of his own kind as totally and adequatly as one beast
does generate another, does not speak like a Philosopher, and besides does
unjustly disparage and disgrace his, own lineage, and violates the rights of
his creation.

CHAP. VIII. A solution of the Adversaries objections, together with some
others of Doctor Daniel Sennertus.
THese former notandums having been premised, we need not dwell long upon
answering of objection, for by them the way is opened already, and that which
before has been delivered will not need any more then application.

Object. 1. Whole man is generated by man, therefore all his parts, both soul
and body, and if both be generated then both are mortal.

Answ. Whole man is generated by man, I grant it. Therefore both soul and body
are generated. I distinguish. That both soul and body are made parts of man by
generation, and a creature produced like in nature to him that generates; I
also grant and do affirm that by doing of this only the complete act of
generation or procreation is performed according to the received definition of
generation before exhibited in the Chapter precedent. But that both soul and
body must be, therefore made and have their Entities or beings given them by
procreation; that consequence I deny as false and absurd, yea so absurd as it
suffers a thousand instances to the contrary in all sorts of Animals. For
example, a whole horse is generated both matter and form; and yet his matter
did not receive any being by generation, and so it falls out in other
creatures. If then it be not necessary that the matter receive the being by
procreation, though the whole Animal consisting of matter and form be truly
generated, what reason can there be why to the generation of the whole Animal,
a new being of the form, by virtue of procreation should be necessary? or why
can one be necessary to generation, when as we see evidently the other is not?
or why again should we exact the new production of either of them by
generation, when without any such act the definition of generation See
Argenter. com. in Aphor. 1. Hippocr.
is fulfilled, and agrees both unto the generation of beasts, whose matter is
not generated, and to the generation of man, whose form is not generated, any
more then his matter is? By force of this solution all his imaginary
absurdities which he labors to fasten upon the non procreation of the soul,
do of themselves dissolve.

If the soul, says he, be infused, then Christ did not take whole humanity
from the seed of the woman.

Answ. He received from the seed of the woman as much of the humanity as was to
be received thence, and that which he took did not come unto him by
procreation, nor was it so to do. As for the fourteenth to the Hebrews which
he cites for his purpose, our answer to it is, that it is not found in our
books, neither Greek nor Latin, neither do the Editions of Raphelengius or
Elzevir contain any more Chapters than thirteen.

If says he, we consist of soul and body, and are not men without both, and
receive not our souls from him, (he means the Generatour as I suppose) then
Adam is the father of no man, nor Christ the Son of man, because his manhood's
constitutive part, even that which should make him a man, could not be by the
seed of the woman, and a man is as much a father of fleas and lice, which
receive their matter from him, as of his children.

Answ. Surely fleas and lice, whence soever they receive their matter, do not
proceed from him in likeness of Nature; as by the definition, they if they
were generated by man, ought to do. Moreover, they are not generated by man,
but of him, neither is he the agent but the patient, and so is of these vermin
no generatour at all proper, or improper. Secondly, men do receive their souls
by force of generation, although they be not generated, and so, notwithstanding
this non-generation of the soul, Adam might truly and univocally be the father
of all men; and also the soul of Christ might come by the seed of the woman,
although it were not made or procreated by it.

If the soul (adds he) be infused after the conception, then there is growth
before there is life, which is impossible, for the soul is made, the
vegetative as well as the motive, sensitive, or rational part.

Answ. I grant, that before the infusion of the soul there may be vegetation,
and this by the sole virtue of the sperme; but I deny that therefore there be
in man more souls than one, that is, than the rational: for this same force
of vegetation which is in the seed holds it self upon the part of the matter
only, and does not perform the office of a soul, or form, the substance and
operation thereof, being no more than to fashion an organicall body and to make
it fit for the reception of the soul and the union with it, after whose
infusion both the vital and animal spirits do but serve as instruments to it,
and to accomplish the body in making it, to be so perfectly organicall as the
eminency of a rational spirit, above other forms, does require to have it.

If the soul be not generated but infused into a dead body, then, says he, it
is lawful to be Nigromancer; for Nigromancy is nothing but putting a spirit
into a dead body, and so it is imitation of God, and God the only Nigromancer,
and all the men in the world but Nigromanticke apparitions, whose spirits when
they have done the work for which they were put into the bodies, desert them
as other conjured Ghosts do.

Answ. See the shallowness of this man who can neither speak right, nor reason
with common sense and probability. He calls Necromancy constantly Nigromancy,
and he supposes that a soul in a dead body makes a living man, and can
exercise vital actions in it, or actions of life, and so, according to his
gross capacity, if the soul be infused God must be a Necromancer and men but
Necromantique apparitions; for this Ignoramus, it seems, knows no difference
between a soul and body that are united and those that are not united, but
together only, nor between a body living by the virtue of the spirit, and by
virtue thereof doing vital actions, and another which is only moved and
inhabited by a spirit, without any union with it or participation of life. But,
supposing all were one, yet were it not lawful to be a Necromancer, because
nothing at all be it never so good, is to be done by superstitious actions, or
by making any recourse unto the Devil, and acknowledgement of his power by any
dependency of him whatsoever, more or less.

It is granted, says he, that the body considered merely sensitive cannot sin
and is but an instrument, or as the pen in the hand of the writer. Therefore if
the soul be infused, then of necessity, the immortal thing and not our
mortal flesh is the author of all sin, and so God's immediate hand the cause
of all sin.

That the body is only an instrument of the soul, is false, for it is a See
Solo of this in 4. d. 43. q. 1. a. 2. Rat. 3.
living co-agent with it, and a partaker both in the good and evil actions,
and so is both rewardable and punishable with it; whether in the mean time it
be created or generated, for this variation makes no difference in this matter
of merit or demerit; neither does the creation of the soul make God the
author of sin, more than the generation of it, that is to say, not at all, for
still the soul and body are authors of their own actions, and the deformity
arises from their misdemeanour, and not from God's creation or concurrence.

Doctor Sennertus, although he admit not of any mortality in the soul, yet he
holds it probable, that it comes by procreation, and that from the first
instance of conception, the seed is animated with the rational soul: which
Doctrine of his, by his leave, inferres mortality: for whatsoever is generated,
is corruptible, and is to go out, according to the ordinary Laws of Nature, at
the same gate of according to the ordinary Laws of Nature, at the same gate of
corruption at which it entered in. Neither is it true, or likely, or lastly, any
way philosophical, to say as he does Hypomn. 4. c. 10. that nothing created is
immortal by the principle of Nature, but only by the free will or gift of
God; because as it is amongst bodies, some are very durable, as Marble and
Cedar, some by and by corrupted, as flowers and fruits, even out of the
several natures of their composition which God has appointed for them, and
not out of the free will of God immediately, without any further relation; so
in like sort, some substances are perpetual out of the nature of their being,
as spiritual substances and bodies that are simple and unmixt, other some, out
of their own Natures, corruptible, as those that are mixed and made up of
Elements, which as by some natural agents they were knit up together, so by
the operation of other some they are dissolvable. Souls then if generated are
compounds, and if so, may be uncompounded by the agency and operation of causes
natural; wherefore to seek an immortality only from a decree extrinsecall,
without any foundation in their natural beings, seems neither to be
philosophical, nor true; wherefore the immortality of Souls and Angels is not
to be reared upon this weak foundation, according to which a Fly may be as
much immortal as an Angel, one by Nature, according to Sennertus, having no
pre-eminence over the other the free determination of God for their perpetual
conservation being equally applicable to either of them.

Conformably to this position of his he will needs have the sperme always
animated with a reasonable soul; but then consider how many Sennertus Hypomn.
4. ca. 10. and lib. de consens. Chymic* cum Arist. and Galeno c. 9.
more souls are cast away without any bodies organicall and humane, then are
actuated and preserved by bodies. I ask what must become of these innumerable
souls? must they perish, or have bodies made them at the Resurreection?
neither of these two can be admitted without great temerity and absurdities.

Besides this, we know God did not inspire Adam with a living spirit while he
was a lump of clay, but when he had a face and a body that was organicall, and
not before. Again, why does the soul depart from the body, but only because
it leaves to be organicall? why then, or with what probability can we imagine
the soul is in the inorganicall sperme? certainly, with none at all.

The wind that did drive Sennertus upon this inhospitall shore was the
necessity of assigning a vis formatrix, or a (...), that is to say, an able
architect, or former of humane body, which though most acknowledge to be the
seed, yet Sennertus sees not how this can be, unless it should be animated
with the soul; his reason is, because the soul only is to build an house fit
for it self to inhabit. But this reason of his is not urgent; nay more, it is
not likely; for eggs and young birds do not build their own nests, but the old
ones for them; so that it must, by this account, be the fathers office to erect
this new building and not the childs. But, how, says he, can the father do
this? easily and well, by sending his sperme as his deputy and officer, Argent.
com in 1, Aphor. Hipp.
to perform that duty, as Argenterius also teaches; which entity has derived
to it from the generatour so much natural strength and cunning as to make a
sufficient architect for the effecting of this work, and all this may be done
with the only form of seed, without any animation of it with a soul. Thus, it
is likely, that the Acorne, for example, without any more form than of an
Acorne, collects fit particles out of the elements and materials about it, and
by a virtue derived from the tree on which it grew, forms out and fashions the
body of an Oak: and for the effecting of this work the seed participates tmch
of the nature of the tree or plant, and has ordinarily much of ^he same
virtue: wherefore in this abstruse question or quere that we may say something
which is likely, and has for the truth thereof probable examples and instances
in Nature, we do conceive that (...), or forming virtue, is the seeds own form
excited and assisted by the breeding, cherishing, and connaturall warmth of the
maternall body, which does environ it; as in the procreation of birds it seems
to be, where the semen of the Cock being cherished and stirred up by the
ambient and incumbent warmth of the Hen, is that which changes the egg, and
forms it into the shape of the bird from whence it came. Neither is it
probable, that in so small a coagulum or seed, which came from the Cock the
soul or essence of a Cock is resident.

Now, whereas he tells us, that by the blessing granted to all Creatures by the
Creator of them in these words, Increase and multiply, force was given to
every soul to multiply another: we confess it to be true; yet this not to be
done by creating of the younger by the elder souls, or by the giving of them
new entities; but rather by doing some other act out of which these forms
should connaturally follow, as material forms they do by a resultancy, and
immateriall by creation from a higher cause, which creation is to follow, and
is due by a regular ordination and exigence of Nature; and so they may truly be
said to be given and communicated, though not made, by the force of generation.
And this is the true vis prolifica, and not that other which Sennertus feignes
unto himself, by which he will have one humane soul to beget another, and on
the instant to become with child of it, no body knows how; neither by what
particular operation, nor from what Mine it should be dug. For this manner
of speaking makes show rather of some empty Magic, than of sound Philosophy,
and seems altogether as hard and impossible as the eduction of them out of the
potentiality of the materia prima, when understood in that sense in which he
himself impugnes it.

If the Parents (objecteth Sennertus) do not give the soul which is the form
of man, they do not generate the man; but for certain, they do generate the
man, therefore they give the soul also; unless they communicate the soul,
like should not generate his like. So he Hypomn. 4. cap. 11. In brief, I
answer, that the Parents do give and communicate both Form and Matter, but
that work they may well do without the making or the producing either of them.
It is certain they give the Matter, and it is as certain they do not produce
it, wherefore the same may be said of the Form without prejudice to the
essence of generation, or which is all one, of one like or simile producing of
another. And that there is true generation, without producing either part,
appears plainly; for Death which is the opposite to generation, and destroys
what the other made, will show us what generation is; but Deach is only a
dissolution of parts united, and not a destruction of them; it is destructive,
not of the matter or form, but of the man: for do but divide a man's soul and
body and he is destroyed, and remains not a man any longer, but loses what he
had got by generation, that is to say, by generation he got to be a man, and by
dying he loses it. In fine, as Argenterius rightly answers, Generation is not
of the parts, but of the compositum.

He adds, if the sperme, from the first instant, be not animated, and See him
in 1. Aphor. Hip.
the generatour dye in the interim before the animation, it might be said, that
a dead man did generate. I deny the consequence, because that Parent while he
was living did that act, by virtue of which all the rest (as their turns came)
did follow, and that one and first act was generation, and not the subsequent.
As for example, he is said to make a fire who first puts the fire to the fuel
and kindles it, though all do not burn of a great while after, because all the
rest did follow in virtue of the first act.

Thus we see that the arguments of Sennertus were not so urgent and weighty as
to be able to hinder a wise Christian Philosopher, as he was, from
relinquishing this tenet of his, and from piously subscribing his Pareamus, by
which act he left behind him an example worthy of great praise, and of all
true students to be imitated. I have added to the Author's Objections, whom I
undertook to impugn, these out of Sennertus who is a Writer of great worth and
substance, to the end that by occasion of his difficulties, the matter in hand
might be explicated with more satisfaction, and for mine own satisfaction also,
who was weary with fighting with a shadow.

CHAP. IX. The Adversaries resurrection of Beasts exploded, together with a
Conclusion of the Work.
IT is usually said, that one folly brings on another, and ordinarily one worse
than it self, and so it falls out with this wretched man against whom we deal
at this present, who after his gross error of man's total mortality, falls
into one which is much grosser, yea, so absurd, as it is to be numbered amongst
the most ridiculous that ever were maintained even by Mahomet the father of
absurdities, and who was better at that work, than any man that went before
him. But at the length what may this error be? I will give it in his own
words, and it is this:

All other Creatures (says he) shall be raised and delivered from Death at the
Resurrection, my reasons and ground for it, be these. First, that otherwise the
curse in Adam would extend further than the blessing in Christ, contrary to the
Scriptures, For as in Adam all die, even so in Christ shall all be made alive,
1 Cor. 15. 22. Thus he, abusing Scripture, as we see, for the upholding of this
his prodigious folly. Surely, the man when he resolved upon these things was
given over into reprobate sense, and permitted (for his greater confusion) in
sight both of God and the world to fall into such an Abyssus of absurdity as
that no man might take harm, or be seduced by him but such only who had a
mind to be deceived.

It seems then by this bestiall Doctrine, that at the Resurrection all the
Gnats and Fleas that ever were shall be revived, all the Toads and Frogs and
poisonous Serpents and other vermin. Certainly, those who are to live amongst
all these are likely to have gallant time of it. His places of Scripture which
he profanes in alleging to prove this need no expositor nor answer to them,
for I think no reader is so simple as cannot do it by himself. Doubtless
both according to the common principles of Christianity, and also those
particulars of this Author, Christ is the cause of our Resurrection, and none
are to rise but those only for whom he died, and therefore since he died not
for beasts, they are not to have any Resurrection.

As for the Assertion, it is grosser and more inexcusable in this Author, than
it was in Mahomet, because this Mahomet made a Paradise and felicity agreeing
most of all to beasts and men of bestiall dispositions, for as it is well
known out of the Alfurcan or Alchoran, and as Theophanes an ancient and
faithful Historian relates. His Paradise Theophan. apud Porphyr. c. 17. and
Jacob. de Vitriaco l. Hist. Orient. c. 6.
was a place of corporal eating and drinking, of wantonness with women, where
there was a River flowing with wine and honey and milk, together with an
incomparable deholding of women, not not these we have now, but of others. Also
long lasting pleasures of obscenity, and other such things full of luxury and
folly. So writes Theophanes. But this man who will seem a Christian might have
learned out of the Gospel a felicity of an higher strain, one purely refined
from all dregs of baseness and carnality, and that the blessed shall neither
marry nor be married, but live like the Angels in Heaven, not enjoying the
felicity of a swine, but a celestial. Wherefore leaving Mahomet and other
beasts with him to enjoy such a felicity as they deserve and feign unto
themselves; I pass unto our Author's last folly, which is his calling it a
Riddle, that the soul immortal is all of it in all, and again, all in every
part, wondering how this should be, and holding it a mere fiction and thing
impossible: but I for my part do not wonder, that a man of so gross a wit and
narrow a capacity, as he in this book has showed himself, should not
understand this Doctrine or saying, especially if he will judge of the nature
of indivisible presences by those that are divisible, as it seems he does. Yet
I have cause to wonder why so stupid and so sorry a fellow as this is, should
dare to hold it to be a Riddle or impossible, only because he with his small
wit is not able to understand it; as if forsooth, nothing were possible to
Nature or to God the Author of Nature, saving that alone which he understands
how it can be done. I am now quite weary of this man, and sick with raking so
long in such a heap of dirt, and therefore at this instant I leave him to
bethink himself about making a timely recantation.

Now, turning with delight unto my Reader, to solace and refresh my self after
all this travail, I desire him to look into Hierocles Commentary upon the
Golden Verses ascribed to Pythagoras, in Hierocles in Carm. Pyth.
which he seems to have discovered the original of this pernicious error,
touching the souls mortality. What availes it, faith he, with perjuries and
murders and other wicked ways to gather wealth and to seem rich unto the
world, and to want those good things which are conducible unto the mind? But
besides, to be stupid and insensible of them, and thereby to augment the evil,
or if they have any remorse of conscience for their offenses, to be tormented
in their souls, and afraid of the punishments of Hell, comforting themselves
with this alone, that there is no way of escaping them, and from hence are
ready to cure one evil with another, and by a persuasion that the soul is
mortal, to sooth up themselves in wickedness, judging they are not worthy to
have any thing of theirs remaining after death, that so they might avoid those
punishments, which by judgment should be inflicted on them; for a wicked man
is loath to think his soul to be immortal, for fear of the revenges that
are to follow his misdeeds. Wherefore preventing the Judge who is below, he
pronounces the sentence of death against himself, as holding it fit that such
a wicked soul should have no longer a being nor subsistence. Behold here the
fountain head of this error opened and purged by Hierocles.

In fine, from whatsoever puddle this error sprung, let us remember what
Socrates (being to die) delivered touching the various condition of souls
after this life. He said, as Cicero relates, there were two different paths
or voyages of souls at their departure Cic. l. 1. Tuscul.
from the bodies, for all such as with humane vices had contaminated
themselves, and were delivered wholly up to lust, with which as with domesticke
vices being blinded, they had by lewd actions defiled themselves, or had
attempted against the Commonwealth any crime, or fraud inexpiable, that these
had a wandering way assigned for them, sequestered from the assemblies of the
Gods; but such again as had preserved themselves entire and chaste,
contracting little or no contagion from the body, having always retired and
withdrawn themselves from it, and had in humane bodies imitated the
conversation of the Gods, these found opened for them an easy way of return
to them from whom they proceeded at the first.

This is the Doctrine both of Cicero and of Socrates, what then remains to do
but to hearken attentively to the wise Counsel of the Prince of Philosophers
Aristotle, and to suffer it to have a powerful influence into all the passages
of our life? His words l. 10. Ethic. c. 9. according to the division of
Andronicus Rhodius be as follow. If then, says he, our understanding, in
respect of man, be a thing divine, so Arist. l. 10. Ethic. c. 9.
that life which is lead according unto the understanding, if compared with
life humane, is divine also; neither, as some persuade, is it lawful for a man
to relish and follow only that which is humane, and being mortal, those
things only which are mortal, but as much as in him lies, he ought to
vindicate himself from all mortality, and to take special care that he live
according to that part which is most excellent within him. Now that which is
best within us is our mind, which though it be small in bulk and weight, yet
in power and excellency does surpass the rest. And with this wise counsel of
the Philosopher I conclude this whole Question, which though the day of every
man's departure will decide and give a final resolution to it, yet in the mean
season, are not disputes of this nature fruitless or superfluous, because if
they be well performed, they are like burning torches, which in the dark
gallery of this life teach us how to direct our steps, and before that black
day come, to help us for the making our preparations beforehand, that so with
better hopes of safety we may meet our deadly enemies in the gate. Without all
doubting for the repressing of brutish, bestiall and unworthy affections; and
again for our encouragement to noble and generous designements, the best
preparatives against Death, there is no consideration so powerful and
efficacious as that one of the high perfection of man's soul, and the immortal
nature and condition of it, for, as Cicero observes l. 1. de legib. Qui se
ipsum norit primum aliquid sentiet se habere divinum, ingeniumque in se suum
sicut symulachrum aliquod dedicatum Cicero l. 1. de legib.
putabit, tantoque munere Deorum semper aliquid dignum faciet and sentiet. He
that does know himself will forthwith find within him something that is
divine, and will hold his understanding as a statue dedicated, and be always
thinking or doing something answerable to so great munificence of the Gods.
That is to say, he will be mindful, that as in upright shape of body and the
perfection of his spirit, he excels beasts and all creatures irrational, so
he will endeavor to do in the condition of his living, by disdaining to stoop
to any thing which is base, or to defile the house in which his soul inhabits
with any unworthy or ignoble actions.

I will seal and sign this whole dispute with the determination and censure
of the book of Wisdom, which book whether it be received into the Canon, or
no, yet is it confessedly very ancient, and therefore by consent of all may
claim a just precedence of authority before any Heathen Philosopher
whatsoever, the words are these, Justorum animae in manu Dei sunt, and non
tanget illos tormentum mortis, visi sunt oculis insipientium mori, illi autem
sunt in pace. The souls of Sap. 3.
the just be in the hands of God, and the torment of Death shall not touch
them. To the eyes of the foolish they seemed to die, but they remain in peace.
Behold here in the judgment of this venerable Author, what kind of people
they are who hold the souls mortality, namely, (...), such as be destitute of
true judgment and understanding. This is not my censure, neither is this
character of my making; for who am I that should presume so far? but it is
the judgment of the ancient Author of the Book of Wisdom, whose years and
credit may deserve regard, even amongst those spirits that be most confident of
their own conceptions, and be the greatest admirers and idolaters of
themselves. In fine, this ancient Sage brands all deniers of our souls
immortality with the self same note of ignominy, that David the kingly Prophet
did mark that wretched mortal who Psalm. 13.
closely and in his heart had said, There is no God. Yet there is this ods
between them two, and worthy to be observed, for though both of them be impious
and absurd, yet one of them had some shame in him and said it only in his
heart. But this Adversary of ours goes further, and had the face to publish his
impiety in Print, or at least the heart so to do it, as he himself might lie
concealed, and his name unknown; which covert way of his though it appear not
altogether so bold and bad, as if he had put his name unto his work, yet was
it an act too bold for any Christian man or true Philosopher to exercise, or to
be an Author of in Print; for alas, after so many great Divines and deep
Philosophers, whose uniforme suffrages we have for the dignity of man, that is
to say, for the souls immortal nature and incorruptibility, how could the
cogitations unto the contrary of this poor worm be a matter any way
considerable with men of understanding and ability?

FINIS.

