The Presbyterian PATER NOSTER, CREED, and TEN COMMANDMENTS.
-- Manerit veteris vestigia fraudis. Virg. The Pater Noster.
OUr Father which art in Hell, magnified be thy name; thy Arbitrary Kingdom
come, thy Tyranical will be done in England now, as it was in Forty One; Give
Us in this our Day a holy occasion of Rebellion; and forgive us our show of
Godliness for thy sake, as we forgive others their holy Hypocrisy for our good
Cause; and lead us not into an agreement of King and Parliament; But Deliver us
from Monarchy and Hierarchy; and then thine shall be this Kingdom, its Power
and Glory, for ever and ever, Amen,

The CREED.
I Believe in John Calvin, the Father of our Religion, disposer of 4 They the
only Saints.
Heaven and Dominion is founded in Gr
Earth; and in Owen, Baxter and Jenkins etc. his dear Sons our Lords, who were
Conceived by the Spirit of Fanaticism, born of Schism and Faction, suffered
under the Act of Uniformity; were Silenced, Dead and Buried; and had descended
into Hell, but that they arose again in the year of Toleration; ascended into
Tub-Pulpits, and now sit at the right hand of the Lord S -- from whence they
are coming to Judge both the Church and the State. I Believe in the Holy
Assembly of Divines, the Holy National Synod, the Separate Meetings, the Act of
Oblivion, the Resurrection from Dead Rites, and Toleration Everlasting. Amen.

The Ten Commandments.
THe same which John Presbyter has spoken in 20 Chapters of his Works; saying,
I am the Lord thy God, which brought thee out of the Land of Antichrist, out of
the House of Ceremonious ^ondage.

I.

Thou shall have no other Gods but Me.

II.

Thou shall not make any Image, or likeness of any Saint in Heaven above,
(except S. Oliver, etc.) or bow down at the Adorable name of Jesus here on
Earth; nor use the Sign of the Cross in the Waters of Babtism; For I the Lord
thy God in my Jealousy murdered the Father, and will visit his Superstitious
Iniquity upon his Children, unto the third and fourth Generation of them that
hate me; but show Mercy unto thousands in them that love me, and keep my
Damnable and Rebellious Commandments.

III.

Thou shall not make the Solemn League and Covenant Vain, nor subscribe the
Declaration; nor take the Oaths of Allegiance and Supremacy, unless (with a
Jesuitical salvo,) to obtain places of Honor and Power.

IV.

Remember that thou keep holy the Remembrance of Forty One. Many years did
thou labor, yet could not do all that thou had to do; But in Forty One
the Lord thy God sent thee a Sabbath of Deliverance; Thou shall therefore now
remember to do all manner of work that thou did then, Thou, and thy Son, and
thy Daughter, thy Manservant, and thy Maidservant, the Brutes and Proselytes
that are within thy Conventicles; For in Forty One the Lord thy God made
ENGLAND and SCOTLAND Rebellious; thou shall therefore Bless the year Forty one,
and hallow it.

V.

Honor Fanaticism thy Father, and Schism thy Mother, that thy Days may be long
in the Land which the Lord thy God will once more give thee.

VI.

Thou shall do no Murder, but upon Majesty, Episcopacy and Loyalty.

VII.

Thou shall not commit Adultry, save with the Holy Sisterhood, to get Babes of
Grace.

VIII.

Thou shall not steal, unless by Sequestration, Composition, or Public Faith

IX.

Thou shall not bear False witness against a Brother, but may swallow
Perjury by a Popish Reservation for the good of Holy Cause.

X.

Thou shall Covet nothing but Crown Lands, Bishops-Lands, and the Estates of
Malignants.

POSTSCRIPT.
THus is our New Religion
Modeled by that of Forty One;
And We must root up Monarchy
To stop the growth of Popery;
And undermining Church and State,
Rome's Practices we'll Antedate;
The better to prevent the PLOT,
Our selves will do what they could not.
We'll cure all fear of French Invasion,
By Ruining at home the Nation.
And since Petitions do no good,
And all our Tricks are understood:
Since He who never used to fail,
Does now, our little Matchiavil;
We'll to the World Proclaim aloud,
The King and Duke Thirst after Blood.
Curtis, Harris, Smith and Care,
Shall Thrice a Week the Kingdom scare,
As if the Devil, Turk, or Pope,
Were just arrived in the Hope.
We'll Authorize Men to Rebel,
By Tales from Hatfield, and from Hell;
And then persuade the silly Nation,
That Treason comes by Revelation:
And that Imaginary Chosts,
Are Envoys from the Lord of Hosts.
Nor will We cease till We pull down,
Episcopacy and the Crown.
Printed for Tom Tell-troth at the Sign of the Old Kings Head in Axe-yard in
King street, Westminster; (...)


