CLARKE Major.
Jovis xxiii die Septembris 1697. Annoque Regni Regis Willielmi Tertii Angliae,
etc. Nono.
THis Court does Desire Dr. Prat to Print his Sermon Preached on the 2d of
September last, at the Parish Church of St. Mary le Bow, before the Lord Mayor,
Aldermen, and Citizens of this City.

Goodfellow.

A SERMON Preached before the Right Honorable the Lord Mayor, THE ALDERMEN AND
Citizens of LONDON, At St. Mary le Bow On Thursday, Sept. 2. 1697.

By SAMUEL PRAT, D. D. Chaplain to His Highness William Duke of Gloucester, and
Minister of the Savoy.

In the SAVOY: Printed by Edw. Jones for Samuel Lowndes over against
Exeter-Exchange in the Strand. School.

A SERMON Preached before the Lord Mayor, etc.
In the first Chapter of the Prophecy of Isaiah, the former part of the 5th
Verse. Why should ye be stricken any more? Ye will Revolt more and more.
THIS Prophecy begins with the Burden of Judah and Jerusalem, in the days of
King Vzziah; and the Condition of the People at that time, was this.

In the Reign of Joash, the last King save one, the People of Judah,
notwithstanding the great Prosperity with which God Almighty had Blessed 'em,
Revolted, and turned back from the Service of God to their Old Sins.

This Joash had been wonderfully preserved out of that fatal time of
Destruction, in which the whole Royal Family had like to have been
extinguished, the Light of Judah almost quite blown out, by the tempestuous
Cruelties of Athaliah: And the remembrance of that Deliverance had wrought so
upon the King and People, that for a while they betook themselves to Acts of
Piety and Devotion; The House of the Lord was repaired, and the Church Service
restored to Decency and Order; for those Sacrilegious Times had alienated the
Holy Things; so you find, 2 Chronicles. 24.7. They had broken up the House of God;
and also all the dedicate Things of the House of the Lord did they bestow upon
Baalim.

But after the Restoration, when Peace and Prosperity had produced Luxury and
Wantonness, the Princes, and the great Men, Ver. 17. followed their own Lusts,
and flattered the King into a liking of their way of living; So the King and
all the People in general, Revolted from God, and returned to their former
Sins, notwithstanding all that the Prophets and Preachers could do; For when
Wrath came upon Judah and Jerusalem for their Trespasses, God Almighty sent
Prophets to 'em, to bring them again unto the Lord, and they testified against
them, but they would not give Ear, Ver. 19.

Therefore God Almighty deals with 'em by Judgments, to see if that will
Reclaim 'em. They were once Spoiled by the Syrians, and afterward by the
Israelites, and humbled, one would think, very severely; but all this would not
soften 'em, their Hearts were hardened, and Judgments could work no more upon
'em than Mercies had done.

The Prophets therefore seem to be at a stand! What will the Denouncing of
Judgments signify, when the very Execution of 'em has had no good Effect?
Thus we find the Prophet Hosea, speaking as from God, about this time, to both
the Nations of Judah and Israel, chap. 6. v. 4. O Ephraim, What shall I do unto
thee? O Judah, What shall I do unto thee? For your goodness is as a morning
cloud, and as the early dew it goes away. They had had Warnings and
Threatenings enough by all the Prophets of those days; thus we find the Prophet
Amos in his 2d Chapter, For three transgressions of Judah, and for four, I will
not turn away the punishment thereof, but I will send a fire upon Judah, and it
shall devour the Palaces of Jerusalem.

But after all the Denunciations and Executions of God's Anger there was still
no Amendment: The Prophet Isaiah therefore here in the beginning of his
Prophecy, having called Heaven and Earth to witness, concerning God Almighty's
dealing with 'em, Hear O Heavens, and give Ear O Earth; and having Exprobrated
their Sins and their Backslidings; instead of Denouncing any more Judgments, he
Expostulates the Case with 'em, as if they were past all the ordinary
disciplining of Providence. Why should ye be stricken any more? To what purpose
would it be if God Almighty visit ye with any of those Dispensations of his
Anger, which he never makes use of but in order to Reclaim, and you alas! seem
to be past all Reclaiming? Let him do what he pleases, and repeat never so
many Judgments upon you, you will still be a sinful Nation, etc. Ye will Revolt
more and more.

So that the words of my Text seem to infer this Proposition.

That the Nation or People, who, when God Almighty, by manifest and sufficient
Signs and Tokens of his Anger, has visited 'em frequently with Calamities and
Judgments, will not Repent, but go on still in their Wickedness, are not to
expect any other Overtures till an utter Ruin and final Destruction comes upon
'em.

And this Proposition, which needs no other Illustration but the Words of my
Text, nor any other Proof but the Reasonableness of the Thing, I shall betake
my self forthwith to apply to this present Occasion.

We are met here together this Day to Rememorate a very remarkable instance of
God's Displeasure against this sinful Nation, exercised upon this most sinful
City, as the Head or Chief-Member of our great Body Politic.

And such a Rememoration is perhaps much more seasonable now at this long
distance of time, than it was formerly whilst the impression of it was more
recent and fresh upon our Minds; because through the long-suffering and
forbearance of God, that which was doubtless designed for a Judgment, or at
least warning to flee from a greater Vengeance, has now changed its Aspect,
and put on the appearance of Mercy, whilst we behold our City to have Risen out
of its Ashes in greater Beauty and Splendour than ever; so that we can scarce
believe that to have been a Judgment, which has conduced so much to a present
show of Prosperity.

But as those among us, who were sorrowful Spectators of that dismal
Conflagration, we that saw the Terrors of the Lord, set in Array against us,
cannot but call to Mind the manifest appearance of the furiousness of God's
Anger then poured out upon us.

So they who now seriously consider the outward Grandeur and Felicity we at
present enjoy, and at the same time the great unworthiness in which we enjoy it
all, cannot but be as much afraid of the consequents of all this long-suffering
and forbearance, as we have been apprehensive of former Chastisements.

I have not met with many Periods of time in History, in which this Nation, and
particularly this City has been so long free from a public Visitation. Either
Plagues, or Famines; or Invasions, or Fires, or Civil Wars, or Persecutions,
did for many Ages together Discipline at shorter distances of time this
Revolting and Backsliding People. Innumerable Methods has Divine Providence
made use of to Reclaim us, till at last the whole Quiver of Temporary Vengeance
seemed to be shook out at once upon us.

After a long devouring Civil War, here happened a most consuming Plague, a
terrible foreign War, and a dismal Conflagration, to fall out all within a
small compass of time one of another.

And if we seriously reflect withal, that having returned back again to our
Sins and Impieties, in as heinous a manner as ever, the Rod of Vengeance has
of late years been shook over our Heads, and by means of a dangerous War
abroad, and of Dissentions and Distractions at home, somewhat like those which
were the forerunners of the utter Destruction of Jerusalem, we have seemed a
while to be near a final Overthrow; yet now at last all these Clouds begin as
it were to blow over, and upon the prospect of a comfortable Peace, and
returning Plenty, and the cicatrising of those Wounds which Parties and
Distinctions had made; we seem, without Repentance, to be restored to Heaven's
favor; Who, I say, cannot but be afraid that the Expostulation of the Prophet
Isaiah is at this time applicable to us! Why should you be stricken any more?
Ye will Revolt more and more. Why should Go. Almighty be at the Expense of more
Judgments to Reform you? Why should ye be Probed and Scarified and Cauteris'd
any more? Since the whole head is sick, and the whole heart faint. From the
sole of the foot even unto the head, ver. 5, 6.
there is no soundness in it, but wounds and bruises, and putrefying sores.

We mistake generally (I am afraid) the Nature and Ends of occasional and
temporary Judgments: They many times carry more of Tenderness and Compassion
along with 'em, than they do of the deepest Displeasure or Resentments.

God Almighty is not at the height of His Anger, His Indignation is not then
hottest when he punishes Men so with National Calamities, as to give 'em time
and opportunity afterward of Amendment: He suffers not at such a time His
whole Displeasure to arise, but He seems to have some hopes of a People, whilst
He is using Means and Remedies, though never so severe, for their Recovery:

But when He lays aside all such means, when He lets 'em settle upon their
Lees, when He seems to give 'em over to do what they will, to fill up the
measure of their Iniquity, and to work all manner of Unrighteousness without
Restraint; then they are in a fearful and desperate Case; then have they cause
to wish for Judgments, and to call upon the Rocks and Hills of Calamity to fall
upon 'em, and to hide 'em from a greater Wrath to come.

And God grant that this be not the present Case of this sinful People; who,
after a long forbearance, are now entering upon a New Scene of Worldly
Prosperity; who have been so long without any sad effects of God's Wrath, that
we can but just call 'em to Remembrance.

But the remembrance of former Judgments inflicted upon us, then when we less
expected them than we have cause now to do, may be still, I hope, of use to the
amendment of our Lives, and the preventing of a final Destruction which may
otherwise fall on us. Nor would there be any need of fresh Judgments if former
ones were so remembered as to bring us now at length to that Repentance for
which they seemed to have been designed.

And in the First Place, Why should we be stricken any more? Those which we
have seen with our Eyes, or heard with our Ears, are great and many enough, to
be a warning to us. We know the Causes that brought 'em; And the Hand that
inflicted 'em; And the Terrors that accompanied 'em.

Every one that knows any thing, that allows there is any such thing as
Knowledge, will easily confess that Sin is the cause of all Evil.

The Words of the Prophet Jeremiah to Jerusalem, may be applied to this People,
Chap. 4. Ver. 18. Thy way and thy goings have procured these things unto thee,
this is thy wickedness, because it is bitter, because it reaches unto thine
heart.

And as the Cause of 'em is plain, so is the Hand from which those Judgments
came.

It has been curiously inquired, and sometimes controverted, by what
Instruments or what Accidents this great Conflagration came to be so fatal: I
would we had been half so busy in finding out by what Sins it came to be
inflicted.

But as to the former Enquiry, the Discovery is soon made, I can tell ye of a
certain Truth, That the Destroying Angel was most concerned in it, He had the
greatest Hand in it, that has a Hand in all the National Calamities in the
World, the Plagues, the Earthquakes, the Famines, the Wars, by what Accidents
do all these things come to pass, Who are we to look unto for these and such
like Afflictions? Are we yet to learn? Why is there any evil in the City, the
evil of Punishment that is to say, and the Lord has not done it, that mighty
God whose Eyes are open upon all the ways of the Sons of Men; To give every one
according to his ways and according to the fruit of his doings. Jer. 32.19.


Nor is it any harder to call to Mind the Terrors that former Judgments, that
of this day particularly brought along with 'em.

There is none here present of us that were Eyewitnesses, and then of any
years of Discretion, but have some dismal Impressions still sealed upon our
Minds if we will turn to 'em: And they who were at the greatest distance then,
may easily trace out at this day, the stupendous Circumference of those Ruins.
So they who know the History, and see the footsteps of that Judgment, may make
the same use of it, if they please, to the amendment of their Lives, as if God
Almighty for their Sakes should repeat it again.

And as for the City's being Rebuilt in such Pomp and Magnificence as creates
Wonder and Amazement in all that pass through it: This ought on the one side to
excite our Obedience to God upon the Article of Gratitude; for his Power alone
has been as Visible in the Rebuilding, as his his Anger was in Destroying it.

And on the other side, to excite our Caution and Fear, lest that which is now
more valuable to us than heretofore, should ever again by our Provocations,
fall under an untimely Fate.

Therefore, Why should we be stricken any more? Why should we provoke
Almightiness to extend its self farther, since returns of Judgment, and returns
of Mercy, have been as sufficient Memento's of bringing us back to our Duty, as
any Nation or People ever had?

Surely, If ever the Judgments of God have been visible upon a City before its
utter Desolation, this Day brings to our Remembrance a very great One upon us:
And there is I think a greater Use which may be made of it now, than could have
been immediately after it; for then, it following a mighty Plague, and coming
along with a cruel War, we lay under the Discouragement of not knowing whether
it was not in order to a final Excision, we knew not whether the door of Mercy
was not altogether shut upon us: But now we see, That temporal Chastisements
are Mercies, or at least tenders of Mercy, though not made use of but in great
Extremities, when Men will not be otherwise persuaded, but by the Terrors of
the Lord, for he does not afflict willingly, nor grieve the Children of Men.

And all the distance of time between one Judgment and another, the tender of
Mercy continues, and ought to be the more efficacious upon our Minds; insomuch,
that the forbearance and longsuffering of God to usward, is like to be of a
shorter continuance, by how much it has had hitherto no very good effect upon
us.

Wherever there is Sin, there must be Repentance, or Punishment following; and
if the use of temporal Punishment is to prevent eternal, Why may we not as well
take warning by Judgments already past, as by those to come? Why not much
better, since we know that they were sent to Reclaim, and we don't know but
others may be sent to Destroy us.

We may flatter our selves, That when a Judgment is turned into a seeming
Mercy, the Offended Party is then Reconciled, That God has then repented him
of the evil, and all is well again. But let us not deceive our selves, the most
we can make of such a Dispensation, without our Repentance, is, That God will
vindicate his Justice when he comes to pour out the dregs of his Wrath, by such
a variety of means first made use of, and such tenders of Mercy in order to our
Reformation.

After that the Temple of Jerusalem had been destroyed it was rebuilt again,
and the Work carried on and improved for many Generations, to the great
admiration of all Beholders, as appears by the Remarks that were made to our
Savior; and this Prosperity made 'em put so much Trust in the Temple of the
Lord, the Temple of the Lord; nevertheless, that second Temple was scarce quite
finished, when a final Destruction and utter Desolation came both upon the
Temple and all the City, insomuch, That one stone was not left upon another
that had not been cast down.

The long-suffering of God to usward therefore ought to excite not only our
Love but our Fear of God, instead of making us presumptuous and unmindful of
his former Judgments.

For Secondly, Why should we be stricken any more? Why should we expect any
other but a final Dispensation of God's Anger?

We were in a dangerous Case, sure, when the tenderhearted Physician came to
such Extremities, as to apply an actual Cautery upon so noble and so sensible
part of the Body Politic; and if that has done no good, but we grow worse and
worse, what can be expected but a Cutting off?

Our Reformation began with Fires of Martyrdom, (let the Proselytes of that
Persecuting Church disown it if they can, with the same Confidence as they seek
to Evade other Charges of that Nature.)

And those cruel Fires did indeed Reform our Religion and Purify our Liturgy;
but neither they, nor any other Fires, have been able to Reform our Lives, to
Purisie our Manners: We seem resolved to continue a wicked People, as we are,
and why then should we be tried any more, till the great Conflagration of all
things, when the Almighty shall sit as a Refiner, to separate the Silver from
the Dross.

God's Spirit will not always strive with Man. The whole World had but One
hundred and twenty years given 'em to Repent in, before the Flood came and
swept all away except Eight Persons; and can our little corner of the World
expect a quarter of that time?

That great and populous City Niniveh had but forty days of trial given it; and
may we not say to this City, as the Prophet Nahum said to Niniveh: Chapter 3.8.
Art thou better than populous No, that was situate among the rivers, whose
strength was infinite? Yet she was carried away, she went into captivity, her
young children also were dashed in pieces at the top of all the streets; and
they cast lots for her honorable men, and all her great men were bound in
chains. Had one of the old Prophets been alive, he would perhaps have gone
farther, and said, Art thou better than Sodom and Gomorrah; is thy Pride, thy
fullness of Bread, and the abundance of thy Idleness less than theirs?

And indeed, Isaiah 1.9.
If the Lord had not left us a remnant, we, as to our City, should have been as
Sodom, and we should have been like unto Gomorrah.

It was easier for us at that time to have believed our Sins deserved it, than
it is now, though our Sins are not at all less; for then we were humbled as far
as we are capable of Humiliation: But it is not the greatness of the impression
that Judgments make upon us which is to be considered, but the durableness of
it; it may be said of us as it was of the Jews, Chap. 26. ver. 18. Lord, in
trouble have they visited thee; they poured out a prayer when thy chastening
was upon them, but as soon as the fiery trial was over, Jer. 6.3^.
we appeared again reprobate silver.

What are we the better for this Judgment? Has it consumed any of the Fuel
that feed our Lusts? Has the Burning of the City lessened our Heart-burnings
toward one another? Have its Flames overcome those of Lust and Wine? Are not
our Tongues as much set on Fire of Hell as ever? Don't the sulphurous stench of
Oaths and Curses, and all manner of Profanation, reak up to Heaven still? Is
not Pride sprung up out of Ruin, and don't we appear dressed up and garnished
for a New Sacrifice? And if we are ever stricken any more, 'twill be I fear
with such a blow, as used to fall upon the head of the Victim, 'twill be as an
Holocaust offered up to Divine Justice. How can we expect otherwise, if after
the severest manifestations of a Divine Providence we shut our Eyes, as if the
flashes of Vengeance had blinded instead of enlightened our Understandings?

Is it not just that God should make bare his Arm, and reveal Himself in
something worse than has yet befallen, if there are found diverse among us that
will believe no other sort of Revelation.

Strange obstinacy of Heart that this Generation labors under! One Bush on
Fire revealed God Almighty to Moses, and yet all the Flames we have seen and
felt have made no impression upon us, unless it be that we seem more hardened
than ever.

Unless it be that we are grown more presumptuous, and continue in Sin, that
Mercy and Grace may abound.

I appeal to any sensible and religious Man, that is acquainted with the World,
and knows the Iniquity of the Times, whether the ordinary Conversation of many
Men does not look, as if seeing they have survived so many Judgments, they had
steeled themselves like Pharaoh, against the apprehensions of any more.

But Oh! Let the presumptuous Sinner take heed, God's Arm is not shortened: For
all this his anger is not turned away, Chapter 10.4.
but his arm is stretched out still. They that are insensible of Temporal
Judgments have reason to look for one Eternal; and then on the other side,
they, who have no sense of Eternity, ought the most of all Men to be afraid of
Temporal Calamities, because their Portion of good things is in this life; and
if any National Misfortune should deprive them of their hopes in this World,
they have nothing else to trust to, no future Comfort in prospect.

It is high time therefore, that we seriously reflect upon our Condition; and
though the Counsels of God are unsearchable, and we can never know the Methods
of His Providence till they are Exhibited; yet we may make a rational Judgment
of our selves, Whether we appear in our Consciences the proper Objects of God's
Mercy, or His Anger.

And though it is not every body's Talent to examine the Case in General, What
as a Nation or People we may deserve, yet every body can examine himself in
Particular; and this being a Day of Solemn Humiliation, it cannot be better
spent than in such a Scrutiny; or rather let every Master of a Family, to whom
the Care of his Household is committed, and entrusted by God, see how the Case
stands with those under his own Jurisdiction, and let the Superior
Magistrates, who have a greater Trust, with so much the more Care and
Watchfulness attend unto it.

They are not the Sins of our Forefathers, but our own, that come under our
Consideration; let us not resume the Jewish Proverb, That the fathers have
eaten sour grapes, and the childrens teeth are set on edge; We have eaten and
drank sour things enough our selves, which have put that sowreness in our
Tempers, especially toward one another; We have the crudities of our own
Intemperance upon us, and the root of Bitterness within our selves. We have not
derived so much malignity from the last Generation, as we are like to transmit
unto the next.

For we don't show them that come after us any great example of amendment. Let
us examine, Whether they are like to be so as we are, or no? Whether our Sons
or Daughters are more Virtuously Educated than we were? Whether lesser Seeds of
Vice appear in 'em?

The young People of this City, (I am afraid) promised much better in former
times than they do now; the first sprouts of Sin had not half that impudent
growth they have now a days.

Then perhaps there was a better sort of Discipline exercised; in those times
they learnt their Masters Crafts or Trades, and not their Humors and Vices;
and when they grew up, they made less failings both in their Manners and their
Reputation. They were Taught then to learn and labor truly to get their own
Living, and to do their Duty in that State of Life unto which it pleased God to
call 'em. There were not so many Beardless Men, who think themselves wiser and
better than their Masters. They were better employed than to dress Fine, to
disguise their Profession, to manage Intreagues, to discourse of Politics, to
be insolent in their Conversation, and all the rest of those modern
Accomplishments which qualify 'em to be as uncapble of any good way of living,
as they are of that for which their Parents design 'em.

It would be more honorable for this Noble City, and more prosperous for the
Nation, if every one would apply himself to his Vocation, and by treading in
all the fair and easy Paths of Humility, Industry, Temperance, Chastity,
Fidelity, and the like, endeavor to raise themselves to the several Degrees of
Honor, and innocently aspire to the Scarlet Robe.

Such a conduct of Life would be a support, if not a defense to 'em in the most
disastrous times.

Nor did the Judgment we now Rememorate much affect the younger sort; but at
the rate they now live, we have cause to fear such Calamities, in which they
shall as much partake, as they do in the Sins of the Nation.

What can we expect when we come to consider these things? We are big at
present with the Hopes of an honorable and secure Peace; But have we made our
Peace with God? Are we Reconciled to Him, who makes Wars to Cease in all the
World?

Are we sure that we are qualified for the Blessings of Peace? Are we as much
proof against the Temptations of Prosperity, as we have been apprehensive of
the Contingencies of Adversity? In vain shall we strew our streets with Palms
and Laurels, if Jeshurun shall wax fat upon it, and kick against God. If, when
we are freed from Foreign Enemies, we become Enemies to one another at home; If
we still carry on the war of our members; If it makes us Proud and
Presumptuous, Wanton and Petulant, Factious and Ungrateful; If we prove to be
of such Tempers that it was only the wolfs being at the door, or Hannibal at
the gates, that kept us at Peace among our selves.

Rather let us not be solicitous about matters that are too high for us, but
let us consider and know, in this our day, the things that make for our
everlasting Peace, before they are hid from our Eyes.

This is our Day, a Day consigned to us by Providence, for the Humbling of our
selves; if peradventure the Lord may be entreated for us; but if we will not
humble our selves in this our day, Is^iah ^2.
know assuredly, That the day of the Lord of Hosts shall be upon every one that
is proud and lofty, and upon every one that is lifted up, and he shall be
brought low.

Peradventure, I say, the Lord may yet be entreated for his People, the door of
Mercy may continue open for a while, as it now stands; ^am 3.20.
For it is of the Lord's Mercy that we are not consumed, because his
compassions fail not: If we betake our selves to Repentance and Amendment of
Life, it is possible that we may not be stricken any more, that when our Enemies
have put up their Swords, the destroying Angel may not draw his upon us.

That whatever becomes of all our earthly Tabernacles, which must moulder away,
for here we have no continuing City, but seek for one that is to come; yet we
our selves, our Immortal part, may be saved, so as by Fire, that is, according
to the easiest Exposition, As a Brand snatched out of the Fire.

We have had Memento's enough not to put our Trust and Confidence in any thing
of this World: The World it self passes away, together with the Lusts and
Desires thereof: We know that we our selves shall be dissolved, and what do we
now but garnish our own Sepulchers or Monuments, and trust to the Mercy or
Prudence of Posterity for the upholding 'em.

But this we know likewise, That this whole City it self must undergo another
Conflagration, When the heavens themselves shall be dissolved, and melt away
with burning heat: And nothing then will remain of any thing we now call our
own, but Probity and Virtue.

But who knows how much sooner this vast and splendid City may come to be
utterly lost in a National Ruin, so as to leave no more footsteps of its
Grandeur, than the Old Babylon, Troy, or Carthage, have remaining at this day;
which the Builders nevertheless thought would endure as long as the Sun and
Moon. No, We must not Build our Glory and Happiness upon Lime and Brick, and
Wood and Stone, but upon other sort of Foundations; these will all crumble
away, whereas Piety, Justice, Temperance, Charity will endure.

It was the Dying Ostentation of Augustus Caesar, That he found the Roman City
of Brick, and left it of Marble; much better had he found it in Ashes, and so
have left it; and much better had we so left ours, if we outvie all the Cities
in the World for Iniquity as we do for Magnificence: Much better that we our
selves should be saved with the loss of all we have in this World, than that we
should be in danger of the Fire that will be never quenched.

We have endured, and we have recovered out of one of the greatest this World
ever saw; Isaiah 33.14.
But who among us can dwell with the Devouring Fire! Who among us can dwell
with Everlasting Burnings!

O that this Judgment had refined our Lives as well as our Streets! O that it
had been like Elijah's fiery Chariot, to have mounted our Thoughts up to
Heaven! O that it might still have that effect upon us! And as the Mercies of
God have given us Beauty for Ashes, we might Worship the Lord in the Beauty of
Holiness! Jer. 31.28.
Then instead of watching over us to pluck up, and to break down, and to
destroy and to afflict, he might watch over us to build and to plant.

Then should we be called, Isaiah 1.29
The City of Righteousness, the faithful City; then should we be made an
eternal Excellency, a joy of many Generations.

Then should we be a name of Joy, of Praise, Ier. 33.9.
and an honor before all the nations of the Earth, which shall hear all the
good that God does unto us.

If we could Repent of our Evil Doings, and Amend our Lives, if we could have
Peace and Reconciliation with God, and live in Peace and Unity among our
selves, then would our Jerusalem be Rebuilded, as a City that is compact
together, Whither the Tribes go up, Psalm. 112.3, 4.
the Tribes of the Lord, unto the testimony of Israel, to give thanks unto the
Name of the Lord.

FINIS.
Books Printed for Samuel Lowndes over against Exeter-Exchange in the Strand.
In FOLIO.
DR. Brady's Introduction to Old English History, etc. -- His Complete History
of England. Mezeray's Chronological History of France. Account of the Rye-House
Conspiracy. Clelia. An Excellent New Romance. Parthanissa. A Romance. By the
Earl of Orrery. The Life of Archbishop Williams, written by Bishop Hacket.
QUARTO.
Poems, written by Mrs. Anne Killigrew. De Grey's Complete Horseman and Expert
Farrier. Sir Philip Medows, Dominion and Sovereignty of the Seas. A Sermon
Preached by Dr. Killigrew. Three Sermons Preached by Dr. Horneck. Dr. Prat's
Sermon. Mr. Perse's Sermon. Mr. Riuely's Sermon. Mr. Taylor's Sermon at the
Lady Bradsheigh's Funeral.
OCTAVO.
Discourse of Government; written by Sir Philip Warwick. Dr. Horneck's
Crucified Jesus. -- His Great Law of Consideration. Saducismus Triumphatus, by
Dr. More, Dr. Horneck, Mr. Glanvile. Lux Orientalis. Written by Mr. Glanvile.
Discourse of Truth. Written by the Bishop of Dromore. Practical Discourse of
Patience. Situation of Paradise found out. Bishop of Lincoln against Popery.
Paul Festeau's French and English Grammar. Claudius Mauger's French and English
Letters. French Rogue. A Pleasant History. Compendious Schoolmaster, by Mr.
Silverton. Compendious View of the late Troubles in this Kingdom. Dr. Horneck's
Questions and Answers. The French and English Catichism.
TWELVES.
Dr. Horneck's Fire of the Altar. The Cry of the Son of God. Cambridge Jests.

