THE PREAMBLE, TO BE Subscribed by all Persons, who shall become Adventurers in
a NATIONAL JOINT STOCK, for the Trade to East India.
THE Committee of the Honorable House of Commons, Appointed to Consider of the
most proper Method for Managing the East India Trade, to a more General and
Public Benefit to the Whole NATION than it has hitherto been; Having Declared
their Opinion, on the 16 th day of this Instant January, That the best Way of
Managing that Trade, is by a NEW COMPANY with a NEW JOINT STOCK, to be
Established by Act of PARLIAMENT.

WE whose Names are hereafter Written, upon the aforesaid Encouragement, and in
Dependence upon such an Establishment, by Authority of KING and PARLIAMENT; as
also in farther Assurance, That the present East India Stock and the Estates
and Persons of the Managers thereof, shall, by the said Authority, be obliged
to Pay and Satisfy all Just Debts and Demands due to the Subjects of the Great
Mogoll and King of Siam, and all other Natives of India; either for Moneys
Borrowed on Credit, or for Injuries and Violences Committed; and That the said
present Stock shall Defray the Charge of making Peace with the said Indian
Princes. DO HEREBY, each Man for himself, severally oblige our selves to
become Adventurers in the said NATIONAL-JOYNT-STOCK, for the particular Sums of
Money by Us Hereunto respectively Subscribed, to be paid in Manner and Form
following: (Viz.)

One fourth part thereof within three Months after the said Act of Parliament
has passed; and those who shall pay in their Money sooner, shall have Interest
allowed for the same.

One other Fourth part thereof within Six Months after the Expiration of the
said Three Months,

And the remaining Half at such several Payments as the Governor and
Committees, to be appointed for the Management of this STOCK shall think fit,
giving three Months Public Notice for the said Payments.

And we do hereby farther Agree, as follows; (viz.)

That the Books for Subscriptions shall lyeopen Sixty Days, from the One and
Twentieth day of January Instant; or until the Sum of Twelve Hundred Thousand
Pounds be Subscribed, and then to be Closed, unless the Parliament in their
Great Wisdom shall otherwise Direct.

That no Person shall be Admitted to Subscribe for himself, or any other, or to
be Concerned in the said Stock, either in his Own or any others Name, directly
or indirectly, any greater Sum than Ten Thousand Pound, or to Subscribe any
less Sum than One Hundred Pound.

That when the Sum of Four Hundred Thousand Pound shall be Subscribed, Public
Notice shall be given thereof, and a General Meeting of the Adventurers
Summoned, for the choosing a Committee, to act on behalf of the said STOCK, for
the mor speedy obteyning the said Act of Parliament, upon such a Constitution,
and with such Powers and Privileges as to the Wisdom of the Parliament shall
seem meet; and to do such other matters as shall be given them in Charge by the
General Court.

That at all General Courts of Adventurers, every Member who has Subscribed
Five Hundred Pound shall have one Vote and that no greater Sum at first
Subscribed, or afterward Purchased, shall Entitle any Adventurer to more than
one single Vote; the contrary whereof has been found so fatally Pernicious to
the Nation and the present Company.

And for the more Regular and Orderly Management of this National Joint Stock
for the PUBLIC GOOD. WE the Adventurers do hereby farther Oblige our Selves,
to the faithful Observance of these and such other farther Rules and Orders for
Managing of the said Trade, during the Continuance of this Stock as shall from
time to time be made by a General Court of the Adventurers, or by a Court of
Committees to be by them appointed.


