PRELACIE IS MISERY: OR, THE SVPPRESSING OF PRELATICALL GOVERNMENT and
establishing of Provintiall, and national Sinods, is a hopeful means to make
a flourishing Church, and happy Kingdom.

Imprinted for a good intent, After Chrismas before Lent: 1641.

PRELACIE IS MISERY.
PRelaticall Government is the Churches Ruin and Misery.
The Argument.
The Argument. THat Government whereby Herisies, Prophanines, Idolatry, and
Superstitions, has great opprotunitie to creep into the Church ^ is the Ruin
and Misery of any Church, Nation, or Kingdom: But Prelaticall Goververment
gives great opportunity for Herisies, Prophannesse, Idolatry, and superstition
to creep into the Church;

First, to prove that that Government whereby herisies, prophanennesse,
Idolatry, and superstition, has great opportunity to creep into the Church
is the Ruin and Misery of the Church Nation, or Kingdom; The Prophet Isay
says The Ancient and Honorable man, he is the head and the Prophet that
teaches lies, he is the tail: for the leaders of the people cause them to
err, and they that are led by them are devoured, Jsay 9.15, 16. And Solomon
says, that Justice exalts a Nation, but sin is a shame to to the people,
Prove. 14.34. And the Prophet Hosea says, Hear the word of the Lord ye
children of Israel, for the Lord has a controversy with the Inhabitants of
the land, because there is no Truth, nor Mercy, nor knowledge of God in the
Land; by swearing, and lying, etc. Hosea 1.2. Therefore (says the Lord) shall
thou fall in the day, and the Prophet shall fall with thee in the night, and I
will destroy thee, verse 5. Therefore says Constantine (writing to the
Nicomedians) if says he, Theodorus in his first book Chap. 19,
there be any Bishop which is inflamed to continue Herisies, his presumption
shall presently be corrected.

Secondly, to prove that Prelaticall government gives so great an opportunity
for Herisies, Prophannesse, Idolaty, and Superstitions to creep into Church, I
lay down these two grounds. First in regard of the Prelates themselves.
Secondly, in regard of the Church.

1. In regard of themselves, whose calling is but an usurpation, and such as is
no ways warrantable nor lawful, but contrary both to the laws of God, the
pattern of the Apostles, the Primative Churches, and also the custom of our
latter reformed Churches.

It is an unbecomming thing for a Minister to be lifted up into places of
worldly Honors and dignities, whose office it is in all humility to Preach the
Gospel of Christ, and to set the Kingdom of Heaven as a mark before him, and
not like those Lordly Bishops who whine after Lordships, and Earldomes, and
Kingdoms, here on earth; which our Savior Jesus Christ forbids, mark
Saint Paul setts forth the true approved Ministers of God not to be such as
lift themselves up as Lords; but such as like the faithful servants and
Ministers of Christ, are faithful Preachers and disposers of his holy word, 1
Cor. 4.1.2. And let our Lordly Bishops plead for Episcopacie as much as they
will. S. Gregory says plainey, In his 4. 38 chap.
that he who shall have a guard of Priests to attend upon him is Antichrist.

2. In regard of the Church, our Lordly Bishops being so willing to be taken
from their calling of teaching, and instructing of their flocks; upon whose
charge the cure of their souls does lie: which made Saint Paul to call to
mind that woe which lies on those Ministers who forbear to Preach the
Gospel, no he will not forbear to Preach in regard of that necessity which is
laid upon them; no looking, and laboring for the things which are seen, but
for the things which are not seen, 2 Cor. 14.18. What can we expect then, but
that our Prelates will be ready to entertain any Heresy, prophannesse,
idolatry, or superstition, so they be established in their usurped Seas, or
adds profit to their estates and Earledomes: of whom Cornelius Brit^o^o
says, In the Chap. of Trident.
would God (says he) they would not go wholly with general consent from
religion to superstition; from Faith to Infidility, from God to perjury, for
they all sought their own, and not for the things which pertain to Jesus
Christ.

The Reason which Prelaticall,

I. If the Bishop himself of any Diocese be infected with any Heresy,
Prophannesse, Idolatry, or Superstition, to bind the consciences of men to
men's traditions, to give liberty to profane the holy Sabbath: be given to
bowings and superstitious seremonies, to have Alters and Images in the Church,
etc. What shall we think will be his dealing with those Churches within his
Diocese? The holy people of the Lord see these things, and are grieved to see
them, but they know not what course to take to reform them.

1. If they complain at the Visitation, they do but like birds, run among
limetwigges: and in stead of reforming the Church, hamper themselves into
troubles. 2. Secondly, if they complain to the Minister of the Parish, either
he is one that will be ready to defend it, or if he be an honest Minister
that would gladly see these things reformed: yet he dares not speak for fear
of suspention; or if he do complain, he is silenced, if not suspended Ipse
facto; yea it may be, and loose his ears for his labor too. 3. If they
complain to the Magestrate, he dares not meddle with it to go about any
reformation, because he will say it belongs to the Church: Oh what a misery is
this for any Church to be under such government where she is constrained thus
to bewail her woeful misery and cannot be reformed.
II. Those Ministers who are under any Bishops Diocese, have their mouths so
stopped by their Lordly Prelate; that they dare not reprove any Heresy,
Idolaty, or wickedness, which the Bishop does either practice in himself, or
favor in others.

III. If any Heresy be in the Church, any Drunkard, Horemonger, or Papist
that can but get into the Bishops favor, either by bribes or friends, or any
other way: then may such profane persons still abide, and go on from time to
time in their filthiness without controulement: and thus the corrupting of one
Lordly Prelate is the misery of all the other Churches under him.

Can not (not only Lordly Bishops amongst the Jews, and in Germany, Cullen,
Mense, with many others, but also) those of our own Nation be a testimony
herein, under whose tirannicall Hierarchical government many faithful painful
Ministers have been silenced, and punished, and some imprisoned, some
suspended, others dyed in Prison, others having their members taken from them,
etc. But Drunkards, Heretics, prophaners of Gods holy Sabbath; Idolaters,
Adulterers, and the like such as these: not so much as once called to any
account for these things? no, the puritanicall Priests as they call them, they
are the men they would root out, that so their kingdom of darkness might
flourish; But the Lord says by the Prophet Hosea, O ye Priests hear this
(says the Lord) and harken, yea house of Israel, and give yeeare O house of
the King, for Judgment is toward you, because you have been a snare on
Mispah, and a net spread upon Tabor, Hosea 5.1. and such shares have the
Prelates laid for the people of God; In his 119. Book.
these are they says Saint Austin who with several burdens, do so oppress
our Religion, (which God of his mercy would have to be free under few and
manifest Sacraments of Divine Service) in so much that the state of the Jews
is more tolerable, for their burdens were under the law of God, but these
burdens are under the devises and presumptions of men.

Object. You will say it may be? how shall the Church then be governed? shall
the Church be without government?

Answ. No, the Church of God has a governor, Jesus Christ the head of the
Church? and under Christ; we have our gracious King, who is governor of all
persons, and causes both Ecclesiastical, and sivill next under Christ, within
these his Dominions.

Object. But what means may then be used for the discovery of Heresies, and
the rooting out of Idolatry out of the Church: shall every Minister teach
freely any thing, whatsoever enters into his fancy, and shall their be no
Church government from the Clargie at all?

Answ. There is better means then to have it governed by Prelates, and that
according both to the Primative Churchs, and also to the best approved late
reformed Churches.

I. For every slocke there may be chosen a Presbiter, as the truth is, the
office of a Bishop is no more; this Presbiter or Bishop set over only one
particular flock; being chosen with an unamimous consent of the people, after
proof being made of him; and he placed there takes to himself the charge of
the cure of those souls, and any Heresy, prophannesse, or Idolatry, or any
such like evils which he sees to offer to creep into the Church, he may
root it out and suppress it; and not be feared by any one particular Prelate
ruling Lordly over him, but sincerely to serve the Lord Christ.

II. Least some corruption should be in the Presbitor, so that these evils
are passed by, and are not reformed, there may be a Provintiall Synod, to
reform what the Presbitor either could not, or would not; unto which Synod may
every Presbiter give an account conserning all matters committed to his chare;
and that there they may be further treated on and examined amongst them
altogether.

III. There may be a National Synod also kept at several times, as shall be
thought meet for the public unity of the Church, and for the reforming of
those evils and enconveniences which the Presbiter or Provintiall Synod shall
escape.

Let any man now consider if it be not more happy for the Church to have
Sinods, then to be ruled by Prelates? and what happiness may come by the one,
and what evil by the other.

Many are the abuses in the Prelates government. 1. They would seclude the
Nobles, the Gentry, and both the Houses of Parliament from having any right to
meddle in Church matters. 2. They Lordly exalt themselves above other
Ministers, contrary to the command of Christ, and the Doctrine of the Apostles.
3. Their Decrees tend to their own ends, and not to Gods Glory. 4. They have
corrupted Courts. 5. They neglect their Studies, and Preaching, to follow
matters of State. 6. They labor to compel men to swear rash and unlawful
oaths. 7. They live in the pomp and glory of the world. 8. They labor to
bring in Popish Seremonies into the Church. 9. They make a gain of such
things, as even by their usurped Hierarchy, they ought not to take money for;
with many other abuses too tedious to recon up in so short a volume: all which
might by Synods be prevented, there being no Lordly Bishops, save only the
Presbitors themselves, being all equal.


Calvin says, On Epist. to Titus. Jn his instin.
that a Priest a and Bishop are all one; as says Saint Hierom. Churches were
before governed by common Counsels of Elders, afterward the care was
committed to one man appointed by men; so that the Bishops are above the
Priests, rather by custom then by the truth of the Lords disposing, and they
ought to govern the Church says he in common together: this is the true and
ancient custom of the Primative Church, and the choosing of a Bishop was no
ways intended at the first for any Lordly Hier, archy as the Prelates now use
it; whose pomp is grown to so great an height.

An example of their pride we have in that Pope who set the Painter at work
in his gallery to draw the pictures of Peter and Paul, who having painted their
faces blushing red, the Pope coming in to see his work, and asking him if
Peter and Paul had such red faces, because he had so painted them; no quoth
he, but if they were here now, and did behold what a glorious rich and
magnificent successor they have, they would blush as red as now you see these
Pictures do, and his holiness was very well pleased with the Painters
conceit, to see himself a brave man^ man then ever poor Peter and Paul were,
whose successor he boasts himself to be, for what else but a sweet fable does
the Pope make of the Gospel as himself said, and surely we cannot think that
Prelates who are the limbs of this great beasts, are of another spirit then
Athiesticall, such as the head himself is of, and which he has derived to his
members.

FINIS.

