PRESIDENTS and REASONS
To be Humbly Represented to the Right Honble the Lords Spiritual and Temporal
in Parliament Assembled, For their Lordships Ordering, the Hearing and
Determining of such Complaints and Appeals after the Recess of this Parliament,
as are now Depending before their Lordships, and cannot be Determined this
present Session, subject to a review in Parliament if Cause.

IN the Parliament held in the 3d. year of Henry, V. a Complaint against the
Earl of Arundel, for Claiming Free Warren in other Men's Grounds; was
Represented by the Commons to the King and Lords; whereunto the Answer was,
That the Chancellor and Justices of both Benches, should have full Power to do
therein, as to Them should seem Just, as appears by the Parliament Roll of that
year, Number 28.

Upon the like Complaint, of one John Bramton, against a Fraudulent Recovery of
Two Manors; It was prayed that the King would Grant that the Chancellor of
England for the time being, might by the Authority of Parliament, have power to
Hear and Determine the Matter; Whereto, the Answer was, That the said John
Bramton should have a Commission to that purpose, as appears by the Parliament
Roll of the said 3d. of Henry V. Number 45.

The like was done, upon the Complaint of Tutbury and Sharp, touching a Ship
that was lost; the Answer was, That the Chancellor, with the Advice of Three
of the Justices, should have power to take Order therein; as appears by the
Roll of the same Parliament, Number 49.

Upon the like Complaint of one Whittington and his Son, against a Release
obtained by Duress; It was referred to be Determined by the King's
Privy Council; as appears by the Parliament Roll of the 4th. of Henry V. Number
15.

In the 1st. of Henry VI. It was Enacted, That all such Petitions, as should
not be ended in that Parliment, should be committed to the Council to be
Determined; as appears by the Roll of that year, Number 15.

The like was done, in the 6th. of Henry VI. as appears by that Parliament
Roll, Number 45. And in the 8th. of Henry VI. as also appears by the Parliament
Roll of that year, Number 69.

In the Journals of the Lords House, of the 28th. of May 1624, which was in the
22d. year of King James I. It appears, that upon the Petition of William
Mathews, against a Decree in Chancery, obtained by George Mathews; The Lords
Committees appointed to examine the Cause, being of Opinion the Decree was to be
Reversed, made Their Report; That there was due to the said William, from the
said George, the Sum of 5260 l. Whereupon, in the Afternoon of the same day,
George Mathews Petitioned the Lords against the Reversing the Decree upon
Petition only, Alleging, that it had been the course of that House, not to
Reverse Decrees, but by Bill Legally Exhibited.

Upon Reading of which Petition, several Lords were appointed to frame an Order
in that Cause, the Parliament being then drawing near to an end: Whereupon They
made an Order, and Reported it to the House the next day, that the said Cause
should be Reviewed in Chancery by the Lord Keeper, assisted by such of the
Lords of Parliament as should be nominated by the House; And by any two of the
Judges, that the Lord Keeper should name; And that the Lord Keeper should be an
humble Suitor to the King from the House, for a Commission to himself, and the
Lords that should be named by the House for the said Review, and final
Determination of the Cause, as to Them should seem Just and Equal; Which Order
being Read, the House approved thereof, and named two Earls, two Bishops, and
two Barons, to be joined in Commission with the Lord Keeper, for the purpose
aforesaid. And by Virtue of which Order, the Cause was Heard and Determined,
and the first Decree Reversed; As appeared by the Register's Book of Orders in
Chancery of Hillary Term following.

The Reasons for Imitation of these Presidents at this time amongst many more,
that might be showed, are, First, For that there are several Appeals in Causes
of considerable value, that are not likely to be Determined this Session.

Secondly, For that the shortest delay of Justice is grievous to those that
want it.

Thirdly, If any Man has gotten any Money, or mesne profits of any Estate, by
means of a mistaken Decree; He that has so got it, may be dead, without
assets, or become insolvent before the next Session, or meeting of the
Parliament; And if so, no Restitution can ever be made.


