Psalm: 139.14 (...)
Transported with THY Excellence! -- Abi Vanitas!

Persuasives from an inordinate Love of ye World to GOD. By Mr BP. 1695.

Pratt Invent: I. Drapentier (...)



A Persuasive FROM THE CREATURES, To a Perfect RESIGNATION OF THE WILL TO GOD's.

By B. Pratt, of Merton Coll. Oxon.

An Inordinate Love of this cheating World, is attended with only Superficial
Joys, which end in Pain and Repentance. Senec. de Beat. Nothing but an entire
Consignation to the Dictates of Right REASON, can make you TRULY Happy. idem
Alib. The Second Edition Corrected. To which is added an APPENDIX.

LONDON, Printed for G. Conyers at the Golden Ring, W. Newton overagainst Saint
Bartholomew's-Close-Gate, and J. Pero at the White Swan, in Little-Britain,
1695.

TO THE Right Honorable The LADY M. H. OF NORFOLK.
MADAM,
THE Honor I receive by Acquaintance with YOU, and the Illustrious Virtues
with which You are, I know [Beyond a Stranger's Credit] so Extraordinarily
Blessed, has [since the Departure of that Friend [in Obedience to whom this
Trifle was at first design'd] peculiarly obliged me to present it at Your
Ladyship's Feet.

I am sorry, for Your sake, it is not as I could wish it Composed, [I have
Higher Thoughts on this Subject, which I cannot yet express.] But Your Honor
will consider, it is a Work of YOUTH; and for several Private Reasons by none
Reviewed till it passed from the Press.

I am not for Tedious DEDICATIONS; in them I had rather speak Less than More
than the Ingenuous Modesty of such Persons as Your LADYSHIP will permit. [For
You are above the want of an ENCOMIUM, and I may be easily thought guilty of
that Flattery I hate,] so I would conclude [with my Hearty PRAYERS to Almighty
GOD, that it may please Him to be still Your GUIDE, till You arrive at Eternal
Rest.]

Your Ladyship's And RELATIONS Most Obedient, Humble Servant, B. P.
Kensington, Jan. 12. 1694/5.
To the Worthy READER.
THE subsequent Introduction is an Apology so sufficient for this slender Work,
that a Formal Preface would, I think, have b en almost Superfluous here,
[though by Custom you should expect it.] But I have further to say,

That, I would ask your friendly Censure hereon. For, I presume, a Piece is
then Accomplished, when it chiefly answers the Understanding of the Person for
whom 'twas particularly designed. -- This Work was at first composed, not to
Teach the Learned, but for Philomuse [though Great, BUT Qualified according to
It Is Language and Sence] my Intimate Friend, to whom I might always be Free: so
that if I Rise and Fall, nay, often change the Style of, and ascend not too
High in this Divine Discourse, the Reasons which cause will excuse --

That the Largeness of Sentences, and seeming Excursions of the Book, must be
imputed to the Vigor of that Unruly Flame which incensed me to This.

That I could not but sometimes Express my self in the sense of some Authors I
have MIXED myself with.

That I have followed the Method of Sir Roger L'Estrange's Seneca, in my
Translation of those select Scraps of St. Austin which end the Advice:

And, That I am truly Yours, B. P.
M. Coll. Nov. 11. 1694.
To the Ingenious Mr. P. On Information of his Design to Attempt [ Persuasives
to God, etc.]
SUch a Discourse from Thee!
Proceed, Aspiring Youth! Be Free,
Accept the Dictates of the DEITY.
Think, in Old Age, and when Thou can not Taste
A Mortal Joy, about to Breathe thy Last,
What Consolation, what Celestial Bliss,
Such Juvenile Performances as THIS
Will then afford thy Soul!
J. M. B. D.

Persuasives FROM THE CREATURE To a Perfect RESIGNATION Of the WILL to GOD's.
Dearest Philomuse!
Conquered by your frequent Importunities, at last I Am Resolved, and you have a
Present of my Attempts, retarded till now, not through want of Reasons to
Please you, you have so much Obliged Me, that I am proud to tell the World what
you, I hope, are sure of, That there is not any Earthly Comfort more affects
me, than Desires that aspire to Serve Philomuse, but a sense of my own
Incapacity to write Worthily on a Subject so Noble as THIS.

So that from admiring before you had not my Pretenses Sooner, you may descend
to wonder Now, in so Nice an Age as This, I dare thus be Rude.

But I would tell you, Though for your sake only I could endure to be in Print,
after long Deliberation, I believe, That since an Occasion has happened which
justly requires this Discourse from my Hands, particularly it is my Duty,
[whereas besides I have been all along Blessed with Extraordinary Favors from
the Divine Goodness] I prosecute that Just Thought first started in my Mind,
then Backed on by your Pious Entreaty.

I think I shall not be so vain to value the Censures of All Men; though
indeed, Philomuse, at first I feared, for me not in Orders, and so Young, to
pretend to This -- 'twas Bold.

But notwithstanding I considered I am not one of, or yet design for the
Clergy, and that ALL I now write may [even to Me] when I Am capable of Better,
appear a Mean Performance, I found not but the precedent Incentives to This,
were still Motives to follow the Design. For,

Since Inanimate Beings (according to the Psalmist, etc.) should Praise God,
Psalm. 148.
and the Age we war in; Philomuse and my Self cannot be too much reminded of
our greatest Concerns. It again occurs, That I fed at the Univers.
Head of GOD's Streams, and above the Classes of Meanest Things, should
immediately (for I know not when my Flight will be) do something for GOD our
Father in this kind, especially to it moved by an Uncommon (methinks) Impulse,
attended on by Convenient Time and Place, be it only fit for such as I [not yet
fully confirmed in a Habit of Inordinate Love.]

But I wave further Apologies for a Design, I hope, will Excuse it self,
(though I might further tell Those that argue against the Need of it, The large
Discourses on this Subject, long since extant, That ALL Men should employ their
Time not as it pleases Others, but their own Genius to a good End. -- And
because some have been Zealous on a Subject for GOD, is not a Reason sufficient
others should desist from the same. The Almighty GOD (whose Glory in all our
Actions we should aim to Celebrate) is so charmingly Excellent (even to us)
when considered, as dissolves the Proudest of his Creatures into a Regret and
Beyond themselves.
Resolutions, makes them, when lost in Admiration of his Wise Dispensations,
not only exclaim with the Apostle, O! Romans 11.33.
the Depth of the Riches! -- with the Psalmist, Oh! Psalm. 107. v. 8, 15, 21,
31. Psalm. 42.1. and 119.5. and 150.6.
that men would therefore praise the Lord! -- but exstasy'd, to pant like the
Heart, for numberless Companions, to leave that fallen World, to know to join
with them in Eternal Halelujah's.

To wave, I say, Sect. 1.
further Excuses: Though I attempt Persuasives from the Creature, I mean not,
we should not use these Creatures of GOD at all. I am not such a Stoic, to
suppose you can or must wholly contemn these Created Goods. Nor believe I,
those things are only to be used which we absolutely need: The Man who can so
Command himself, is his own Master indeed, but no better than his
Fellow Christians. GOD saw that ALL his Creation was good in themselves; Dares
Man then think them not? -- Why should we abstain? 1 Cor. 10.23, 26. Romans 14.14.
ALL things are lawful. -- Were they not, Flesh and Blood would presume
themselves worse then (Pardon the Comparison) Tantaliz'd, showed Things endowed
with Appetites for [unless rid of them by Habits of Abstinence] and Powers to
reach them, then punished by the Indulgent Father of the Universe!

The Most Wise GOD made ALL Things (as was told you) GOOD in their kinds to be
used, Heb. 10.24.
that in the Enjoyment we might more readily be transported with the Love of
Him we cannot duly Admire. But all Things are not Expedient; for the Devil has
helped us to find out many Inventions, 1 Cor. 10.23. 2 Cor. --
(yet if we can use them to the End they were by GOD designed, we are not hurt.)

I intend not to Argue for the Vices of the Times: Lovers of them, are Men
sick, or they would not, like Women with Child, Long, for their Ruin. God no
more created Appetites for those (as all that consider the Divinity, will
affirm,) than He did Death; and yet you see, Philomuse, we [free to act] have
took care to bring them on us.

If it is asked, Why He suffers them? -- For the Trial of us, that we may glory
in the Conquest, Jam. 1.23. ibid. v. 13, 14.
when our Souls shall be free.

No, Philomuse, Sect. 2.
my Design is not, you should not rightly use God's good Creation; but I would
not you abuse that, or wrong your self; I would not have you borne down with
the Thoughts or Enjoyments of the Creatures; I would not have you lose your
self in the Love of them, or rest on what will fall and deceive you.

By the Creatures, I mean, ALL GOD's Works, with their admirable Concomitants,
Learning, Arts, Wits, Good Nature, etc. For they are all Rays of the Divine
Perfection, and come from Him; -- and you should use them not as so many
Fetters to enslave you to them, but as Stars to lead you to the Deity.

Thus (but let not the Witty think I only dissuade Others, like the Tailless
Fox, from what, perhaps, I Have lost my Self, that is too impious --) when you see
a Beauty, with all the Charms a Mortal can have, you should conclude, That (as
a certain Saint did, I remember I have read of, In Anthel. Hist. p. etc.
who Dining with a Person of Honor at Table with his Lady, looked so intently
on her Incomparable Form, that nothing could persuade her Lord to Admiration,
but Knowledge of his Age [a Preventive, sure, against his committing Adultery
in's Heart] why he looked so wishfully on her. He asked? The good Old Father,
with exalted Eyes, Lord! Psalm. 139.13.
says he) if a Creature is so Fine, what art THOU Thy Self! or we shall be,
when at the Resurrection! -- But no further.

All the Oriental Lustres of the Richest Gemms; all the Enchanting Beauties of
Exterior Shapes, the Exquisiteness of Figures, the Lovelyness of Colors, the
Harmony of Sounds, the Light and Clarity of the Enlivening Sun; the Ravishing
Form and Order of All, proceed from GOD. All the Heroic Virtues of the Bravest
Minds, with the Purity and Quickness of the Highest Intellects, Psalm. 100.3
are all (as Sir Owen Feltham somewhere says) but Emanations from the Supreme
Deity, and were by it designed not to enslave and detain our Passions, but to
Refine and Exalt our Conceptions; to persuade us there is certainly in GOD much
more than we can either see or comprehend: And therefore the Seraphick Mr.
Boil assures you, That (to use his own Ingenious Expression) If you would make the
rightest Use of Fading Beauties, Ser. Love.
etc. you must (as was hinted before) consider GOD and Them, as you were wont
to do your Mistress's Picture and its Crystal Cover; where, though that Native
Glass were pure and lovely, and very richly Edged; yet to gaze on it, was not
the chiefest Business of your Eye, nor did you in it terminate your Sight, but
greedily look thorough and beyond it, upon the Adored Image that solid Veil
betrayed.

I cannot Non possum dicere quia nec videre possum, tamen aliquid non
impudenter dice qui ex scripturis dice. Aug. Ser. etc.
here attempt Descriptions on one Ray of the Superlative Excellence; Sect. 4.
-- my weak Eyes are far more able to gaze on the Meridian Sun, than they are
on a Glympse of His Supereminent Beauty, [a The sight of HIM would let in Joys,
and then create Desires too mighty for Mortality to bear. The ravished Soul, if
shown such Excellence as This, forthwith would hate, so eagerly she would break
those Leashes that confined her to the Body, so prevent her Flight to that
Transporting Good she wished to be united with. And therefore GOD tells Moses
(when he importuned Him for a Glance of what he knew was Inconceivable) he
could not see his Face: For, none could see his Face and live, Exodus 33.20.
Beauty so vastly Transporting, that it makes the pretty Cherubs, Isa. 6.2.
etc. veil theirs in a Holy Place. His makes Heaven!] Nor shall I now offer
Tastes of that Milk and Honey which flow in the Land of Canaan. Those Pledges
of a future Happy Eternity, which God vouchsafes to them in this Veil of Tears,
who wholly resign to Him, the Pleasures of their Reatifick State you shall
guess anon.

I should now tell you, Sect. 5.
as a Persuasive from the Creature, That it is as Reasonable, as I shall prove
it Necessary, we set not our Affections too much on Things Below; but make the
Beauty of God's Creatures [what I told you they were chiefly designed for]
Prevailing Incentives to the Love of Him. For the Almighty God, that Supreme
Ens and Wisdom it self, with whom is fullness of Joy, 1 Cor. 2.9.
and at whose Right Hand are Pleasures for evermore, Heb. --.
made us to be supremely Happy, People for Himself. And if we will not make use
of those excellent Means He has been pleased to offer, Heb. 4.1. Isa. 66.24.
that we may be so, an Eternity of Repentance will not reconcile us to the
Heaven we lose, when this World is no more.

But to hasten from so dreadful a Consequence of Disobedience to the Divine
Will, Sect. 6.
that you may be more willingly attracted, Philomuse, to your own Salvation,
consider, the Mercy of God, who not only designed these Terrestrial Beauties,
as Ladders to exalt you to your proper Center of Content, Psalm. 119. Isa. 65.1,
2, 3.
but to demonstrate further, That He did not only at first intend, but still
condescends to desire you should be Happy for ever with him: He has withal made
ALL his Creation, in their fullest Enjoyment, utterly unable to satisfy the
Soul of Man, that so you might never rest till to that Center you arrive.

[And to encourage us on our Way, Ps. 31.21. Isa. 63.3, etc.
He God's Grief at the Sinner is such, as pleased him to offer His only Son a
Sacrifice for Man's Salvation; which, without producing the least Discomposure,
causes Effects of the most sensible Pity.
Grieves when we slip, raises us by Stratagems of Mercy when we fall, lights us
by his Word, dissembles Anger when we wilfully Err, Ps. 30.5, Ephesians. 4.30. Ps.
86.15.
leads us with that Hand might have struck us in Hell; and when forced [to
prevent our immediate Ruine] corrects us with so Paternal a Concern, as would
break our Hearts, might we know.

The Royal Psalmist, after deep Contemplation of this, in an Epiphonema,
pathetically exclaims, Lord! Ps. 8.4.
what is Man, that Thou art so mindful of him? or the Sons of Men, that Thou
regardest them? Surely it is because GOD is the LORD, and changes not, that we
are not rather consumed. -- O! Mal. 3.6. Ps. 19.14, 15. and 107. from v. 1. to
the end. Lam. 3.22. Ps. 18.50. and 89.5. ibid. 9. -- and 34.3. and 40.6. and
66. --
that therefore Men would praise the Lord for his Goodness, and declare the
Wonders that He does for the Children of Men! O Lord! the very Heavens shall
praise Thy Wondrous Works. (For) O LORD GOD of HOSTS! who is like unto THEE?]

Now, Sect. 7.
this Disability of the Creatures for true Satisfaction, with that sad Anxiety
that attends their Enjoyment, though a Subject (as others) has been before
discoursed on, shall, since still I see we disquiet our selves in vain, Ps.
39.7.
by this Mite I humbly cast [as Persuasives from the Creature] be fully
displayed.

I call each Existence under the Sun, VANITY; for, its Fruition disappoints,
and Results cheats.

To confirm you in which, Solomon, Homo (as Victorinus styles him) Hominem
Excedens, the Wisest Man that was, who by a As the word in the Original
signifies, Eccles. 1.3. (...) chap. ibid. ver. 12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17, 18.
chap. 2. ver. 10, 11.
Sedulous Search, and Practick Experience traversed the World, neither wanted
nor spared Means to ransack all, in hope of Happiness Below, with Me
impartially consents.

In displaying this Vanity of Vanities, I shall dissect its several Parts, and
accordingly treat; that on this Sea of Trouble, Philomuse, Mat. 11.28.
you may leave God to steer, who will bring you to the Haven of Eternal Rest.

Man then, Sect. 8.
the LORD of the World, is, [by Nature, since the Fall, so unworthy our
inordinate Love, that we but fling away our Time, to think on Him, unless with
Resolution only to be Enamored of God, or to Beware of Him] when an Infant,
like Wax, to be influenced by every Stamp of Vice: He walks in a vain Shadow,
and disquiets himself in vain; is as inconstant as the Wind, and varies with
every airy Noise: Ps. 39.13. Jer. 4.22. Ecclus. 9.14, 15, 16, etc. 1 Cor. 1.21.
His purest Part's disturbed by's Body's Ills; and a sad Dream, or cloudy Day,
can change this wretched Creature into other Thoughts: An idle Story told him,
makes him part with dearest Friends, and inconsiderately to wish their Death;
nor can he be persuaded (whatsoever they are) but they must merit that!

How ardently we love some common Goods, a Fit of Choler makes us ever hate?
Our own Mistakes makes others bad with us: So easily is Reputation lost!

A Frown, a slip of the Tongue, or some such Nothing, makes us cancel all the
Bonds of Secrecy and Trust, and enter into Leagues with Enemies, not ended ever
they are broke! Our Favorites do, with our Places, change; and we loved that
Before, which makes us sick to Day!

Thus is the Work of Heaven (to speak in general) become (though not their
Scorn [for they are All-good]) its Pity too, who so resents our Best
Performances Below, as Wits of the Age look back on theirs when Schoolboys, --
Novices --

Nor are we [but our Heavenly Father's Love] less Troublesome to Him, Sect. 9.
than to our selves. Corruption mixes with our Purest Acts; we are short in
paying Homage to our God, and sin when we neglect. When Thoughts of Him [who's
All-conspicuous] we pretend, alas! Eccl. 9.16, 17.
we cannot Think aright. -- The Devil, if he offers us the Bait, we take it,
though we knew the Consequence; nay -- many times prevent him by our Eagerness
to Act.

Inclined to Piety, sometimes we rudely seem to teach our Father what we want
[as if He knew not, till we told Him our Necessities, Ps. 56.8. and 139.2, 3.
or when to give us what we truly need] we Clownishly demand what God in Mercy
will not let us have; and beg for present Vengeance on our Enemies He knows
deserves it not, or will be Penitent. However -- we denied, Ps. 53.1.
are sure there is No GOD, or that regards not US.

[ -- But, Let me, LORD, (says Austin) wish for THEE alone! Solil. c. 12.
Allure my Longings with Thy Secret Raptures from Above, those Pleasures which
Thou have reserved and hid, as yet, from them that Trust in THEE, that with
incessant Pantings they may wish for THEE, lest the Inward Relish being
indisposed, may think that Bitter's Sweet!]

We Fear what we should Slight, but never Value what we most should Dread: Like
Birds, false Men of Clouts do fright, are taken yet by the destroying Ginn. Ps.
139.
We care to act our Sins in private, out of Mortal view, regardless of the
Heavenly Judge that sees. We Physic our distempered Carcasses, but mind not
how our Soul's disposed.

Or if we do, not with that Thoughtfulness we ought; or else, relying on our
proper Strength, implore not Heaven's Aid. So we no sooner got in Virtues
Paths, are weary of them quite: Or if a second time, to make amends, like Jehu,
Isa. 64.6,
we attempt with speed; alas! the Journey scarce begun, has tired us. -- We
cease; -- but then dissatisfied, we force our selves a little forward; but with
subtle care we ar'n't exposed thereby.

Thus move we on a Cripple's pace, till unconsider'd Difficulties dark our
Paths, and then, like An Allegorical Description of the general Causes of
Despair. Those wretched People once mistaken, do usually hug their Errors, are
persuaded against others Expositions, and apply every hard Word of GOD to their
own Vexation, Isa. 8.14.
Travelers at Night, on unknown Roads remote, unable to return, or now
proceed, with out-stretch'd Arms we grope, incredulous of Night-Directors; till
at last some harmless Thunder dying in the distant Sky, distracts our fearful
Minds, and we Despair, when in some dismal Forest we are lost, or from a
Precipice in mighty Waters fall.

Our Beauty and our Wisdom too, are vain; Sect. 10.
for they are imperfect, and will soon decay with Us they so adorn. Ps. 39.6,
12. Isa. 40.6, 7. Jam. 1.10. 1 Pet. 1.24.
Though Casualties should spare us, [which they seldom do,] Age of necessity
destroys: Then how perplexed our great Admirers are? A Blow or Bruise on the
Head, may spoil the Learned Master in Philosophy, and subject him to those
before he scorned.

Our greatest Sensual Pleasures are but Vanity. Much Time we throw away in
anxious Cares and Troubles to enjoy; and when we do, we cannot as we would:
our Torch will speedily burn out, and we are vanished from our Earthly Joys:
Says Martial, Quicquid amas cupias non placuisse nimis, etc.
or else our jealous Mind suggests a thousand Reasons for our sudden Loss of
what [possess'd of sully] but effeminates the Efforts of the Soul.

Deprived of what we doated on, our Soul's unspirited, and in a torpid fright
we much bewail the Loss of Satisfactions that before, by long Possessions, and
a near access, [like My Lord The Sensitive Plant in His Honor's Garden at Cue,
near Richmond.
Capel's Plant] contracted all their Charms; we now, as Pictures at a distance
seen, mistake for Excellently Fine; and then it is long before we are our selves
again, or relish other Joys.

You know, my Philomuse, that this and more is true. [To mention, by the bye,
now what may be excused, that pretty -- B.J. ad imp. (Jul 4. N -- 92. M.ob.F.
13. N -- 9. T.
Little Shadow (as I used to call it) of the Greatest FAIR: (I mean, the Person
sojourned with your Friend) [a Sign but to convince that GOD was near] when
with extravagant Affection grasped, Marcus Antoninus di. (...).
proved so indeed: -- 'Twas REASON hid Himself, and it was gone.]

And as the usual Objects of our earthly Pleasures are so Finite in their
Nature, Sect. 11.
they are Few; the compass of these Satisfactions is more short than Life; none
to be had, but what before we loathed. --

-- Versamur ibidem atque Lucret. insumus usque,
Nec nova vivendo procuditur ulla voluptas.
Or those we soon look over, and cast by, like withered Flowers from our Bosoms
we are weary of.

The Sacred Bonds of Friendship, whose Delights alone, even here on Earth,
could they without Cessation be enjoyed, might represent us Heaven, sure would
be declined by Thoughtful Men, but it is an Exercise of Virtues.

We often love our Second Selves (our Real Friends I mean) with such Sincerity
and Care, that Fortune ruins Both, when she strikes One; -- and never gives
Content [whatever Good she sends] but when This is experienced in Perfect
Friendship: Remember David, and his Concern at the dreadful News of his
Brother's Death, 1 Samuel chap. 4. from ver. 17. to the end.
Serene and Free from Jealousies, they are Together Blessed.

Riches and Honors too are also vain; Sect. 12.
they fail us in the deepest Need, and cannot secure us from the Jaws of Death,
nor mighty Stings of Conscience. --

Non Domus aut fundus non Aeris Acervus and Auri Hor.

Aegroto Domini deduxit corpore Febres,
Non Animo curas. --
If we but use our Omnis Pecunia Levis, fugax labilis, anguilarum and serpentum
instar Lubrica. C. Agrip.
Wealth, immediately theyr'e gone; but if we keep them only, then we have 'em
not! They Are winged; and though a while, till they seduce us to Intemperance,
(...). Plat.
we may possess them, they will flee away; and to the Care we had in getting
them, add fresh and greater Troubles then.

But -- I am weary of Descriptions, such as these. If, Philomuse, you would further
be informed, how Vain we are, and what we Toil about, contemplate Me.

Our Life then, Sect. 13.
(to conclue Persuasives, That this World of GOD is vain to try our Virtue, and
that we may aim at Heaven Above,) when but considered, plainly does appear (as
an Ingenious Mr. J.D. in A -- Z.
Author says) a Cheat to All Considering Men: And yet such Fools we are, we
ever hope against Experience; believe to Morrow sure will make amends for
Yesterday's Misfortunes, but in vain! This Day deceives us more than those
behind, lies worse; for whilst it flatters us with hopes of some new
Satisfaction, it robs us of the present we possessed! None therefore would live
over Days are past, yet most (so silly are we) are in Expectation of new Joys
from those which are to come. ('It Is strange! That from the Dregs of Life, we
All should look for Pleasures or Contents the first brisk Running never could
produce!) Why should we dote then on these Fallacies? or not immediately
transplant our highest Love to GOD, by Resignation to his Blessed Will? -- But,

I must desire you to conclude, Sect. 14.
Philomuse, That all I have said to depretiate the Creatures Worth, which is
wont to inveigle the Inconsiderate's Affections from their proper Object, to
Death, was meant rather by way of Preparative, than Motive to conduct you from
the Love of them to GOD [aiming (as was told you by the preceding Discourse)
[not to Abuse the Works of GOD, or those Ingenious Beauties, some of which I
have the the Honor to know, but] to Disabuse those Men which dote on them to
Excess, and rectify their degraded Minds, that with composed and impartial
Thoughts they may judge of the Counsel is advised.] For,

Though by Doting on the Creature, Sect. 15.
you affront it to the degree of Sin, when you give it that Respect which is
due unto GOD, and are accordingly punished; though (I mean) you're convinced,
That to neglect the Commands of GOD, is Death, I would not therefore only you
Resign to Him; that is a greater Fault than any of the World's; for which I
persuade you to shun it, and will prevent you the Charms which do truly please
the Sovereign Wisdom Commands. So that were You and I, Philomuse to reap no
Advantage from Submission to Him, and God incapable [which cannot be granted]
to overrule our Wills; though we were Objects now of his Hate; we have yet
reason to Obey Him: For, 'twas HE which Made us, ( not to do HE is above the
Need of His Creatures Help.
Him Service: Can a Man -- Quid enim Immortalibus atque Beatis, Gratia Nostra
queat, etc. Lucret. ex Epic.
be Profitable to GOD? but) purely out of Love, e're we were. Ps. 100.10. Job
22.2, 3. Rev. 4.10.
[So little could we deserve it, that we might be Happy with HIM.

Indeed, as the Israelites, Sect. 16.
to make them resolve on returning to their Happy Land, stood in need of that
cruel Bondage in Egypt, we often want the harsh Usage of an afflicting World to
undeceive us in its Charms, that we may fly to God; it is not to assure you, we
must therefore only aspire to Him, [as if God needed to be recommended by his
Creatures Defects! and so made them vain, that we might run to Him, to complete
the Happiness of the Most Blessed GOD! Or, it is fit to make Him the Refuge of
a Defeated Passion, whose Transcendencies entitle Him to more than the most
Exalted and Entire! We have made our selves so frail by the Fall, that (as) the
Seraphick Mr. Boil will tell you) we are unfit to procure, and ready to desert
our own Good, and neither God's Excellence is a sufficient Motive to carry our
Addresses to Him, nor his Possession a complete Tie to intercept in us all
Designs of Revolt: And therefore, in Mercy, we are used as froward Children
are, who (on the one side) when their Mouths are out of Taste, and they refuse
what is necessary for them, must not only have it offered, but forced on them,
and be, as it were, made to receive it; and who (on the other side) must be
restrained from Gadding, when the Beauty of the Mansions they may live in,
cannot invite their Abode.]

The Chastisement of God in this Probation-state [as by all before was
suggested unto you, Sect. 17.
is purely designed for our own Good, and is an Effect of that Mercy which
endures for ever, so should transport us, without more to do, through a true
sense of his Super-eminent Excellence, to an entire Resignation to his Holy
Will, [who not only Made us, and has therefore obliged us to Obey, (as before,)
but continues to Love, us, though His Enemies.] By whose generous Favors He
condescends to assure He counts them none, unless they vanquish Obstacles, as
well as want Motives from us.

By Resignation Sect. 18.
(to which I earnestly persuade you from an Inordinate Love of the Creature,
which you see is Vain, Inconstant, and not to be Relied on, Deceitful, of no
Continuance, and therefore impossible to satisfy the Soul of Man,) I mean, a
Universal Submission or Consignation to the WILL of GOD, so as not only to
acquiesce, with as much Satisfaction as you can, under every Accident or
Affliction in the World, with a steadfast Belief they proceed from that Unerring
Wisdom, and Paternal Hand, whence no Stroke lights sooner, or falls heavier, or
stays longer than the Occasion that extorted it exacted; but to Rejoice, and be
exceeding glad at ALL that Pleases GOD; using This World as not abusing it,
(that is,) living in it, as seeing Him which is Invisible.

It consists not with my Degree, Sect. 19.
to Philosophize on the Nature of GOD, or from thence to prove GOD is the
Head-Sourse of True Content, and Man's Proper End, into whom 'till he joins, he
can never have perfect Rest, and so to confirm the Possibility and Necessity of
Resigning to Him: It has been the Business of some former Leaves to declare it.
And besides, That this is a Life of Probation, in which we are to fight out our
Salvation by the Rules of GOD, or we shall perish at last, and have not Leases
of our Lives, is by all of Sense most seriously owned. [Let it suffice to say,
in Contradiction to Unthinking Men, That GOD is the Absolute First Being, and
has therefore in his Rich Essence all the scattered Excellencies of Inferior
Ones, in a more perfect manner than themselves have, with some peculiar
Excellence of His Own besides; and is therefore to be granted the Supreme Good,
if so He is, that supports himself on the Basis of his Own All Sufficiency, and
is therefore His Own End and Center, and is as Willing as Able to be also
Man's. For the Nature of GOD involves, as in Notion and Conception, in Truth
and Reality too, (as the Ingenious Mr. Norris, in his Coll. of Miss. p. 316.
whence this Argument, in effect, is borrowed, does affirm at large,) Absolute
and Infinite Perfection, and consequently includes a Benificent and
Communicative Disposition; for this is a Perfection.

Nor does the Supreme Excellence of Almighty GOD only evince him Communicative,
but to be the most Communicative and Self-Diffusive of All Beings: For, as all
Kinds, so all Degrees of Excellence must of necessity be included in a Being
infinitely and absolutely Perfect, such as GOD. Therefore, HE is not only the
most Communicative of All Beings, but will also communicate Himself in such an
ample Measure too, as perfectly to content the most Aspiring Wish of Man. And
this Willingness of God, That Man should partake of His Fullness to the highest
degree, we are further assured of from express Revelations: First, By Words;
Wherein He declares Himself As I live (says Almighty GOD) [when His Paternal
Threats, through misconstruction had caused the foolish Israelites to despair
of His Love] I desire not the Death of a Sinner, but that the Wicked would turn
and live: Turn you! Turn you! [How affectionately spoke!] from your Evil Ways,
for WHY [O! most endearing Condescension, that THOU should Reason so with
Us!] WILL you DIE, Oh! House of Israel? Ezekiel. 3.11.
Passionately desirous of the Salvation of Man. Secondly, By Two Signal Acts:
The consigning to the World a Copy of His Will: And, The sending His Beloved
Innocent Son from the Mansions of Ineffible Bliss, to suffer that Ignominious
Death on the Cross, [a vast Incentive to our Love of GOD: By it He revealed the
severest Justice, and the highest Mercy; the greatest Hatred of Sin, and most
fervent Love to Man,] that we may again enter in, if we please, to the Joy of
our LORD.] Sect. 20.


I should now further discourse on that Supereminent Excellence of GOD I before
mentioned: For [though I have already proved, It Is your best way to Resign to
Him, or you cannot be in perfect Peace, or see Him Above; and, as another
Incentive to your present and continued Union with HIM, I have assured you, He
Loves you without Ends; That our Best Attempts rather need his Pardon, but
cannot Profit Him, to whom we must ever be in debt, and after All, should
conclude we are unprofitable Servants, and that our Righteousness is as filthy
Rags,] Isa. 39.6.
I find it Needful, e're our mistaken Minds will do themselves Right: For, not
the Knowledge only of our Exemption from Misery, by this happy Compliance, will
sufficiently attract our Crossgrain'd Wills; we must be often reminded, That
there is in GOD what will replenish with Joys.

HE is then, that Immense Ocean of Overflowing Good, that Eternal Supreme
above All Virtues, that Father of Lights with whom is no Variableness, Jam.
1.17.
neither Shadow of Changing, whom the Most Dignified and Sensible Beings, the
Holy Hierarchy of Angels, and Departed Souls, who cannot Lie, Rev. 4.10, 11.
grant to be the only Just, and Wise, and Great God, is HE at whose Feet the
Elders of Heaven, All-sensible of their own Unworthiness, compared with HIS
(even to Them) inconceivable Worth, cast their glorious Crowns, rejoicing to
confess HE is the LORD, Eternal Maker of ALL: HE it is of whose mavelous
Worth the Courts of Heaven do continually ring with Ecstacizing Airs from the
Hearts of Ten thousand times Ten thousand, Rev. 5.11, 12.
and Thousands of Thousands of its most Charming Happy Choir [who for ever thus
delight to Celebrate their Light and Life] Chapter and Ser. etc.
those Lovely Harmless Little Officers of GOD, whom the Prophet saw as much
They were ashamed, at their Comparative Deformity, and therefore they are
represented as veiling their resplendant Faces before the Presence of the more
Transporting GOD, Isa. 6.2.
ashamed as pleased to stand round the Throne of GOD, dissolved with Love of
Him, shouting out, by turns, Holy! Holy! Holy! LORD of HOSTS! do intimate, by
their frequent Repetitions, their Impossibility of doing Justice to GOD; and
that they can never satisfy themselves enough in singing Praises to HIM! HIM!
who besides, is (as HE calls Himself) The LORD, Exodus 34.6, 7.
the LORD GOD, Strong, Merciful and Gracious, Long-suffering, and Abundant in
Goodness and Truth, keeping Mercy for Thousands, forgiving Iniquity, etc. that
will by no means clear the Guilty; and is so far beyond Descriptions, that the
loftiest Hyperbole's, and most exquisite Figures of Rhetoric used by Men as
well instructed as inflamed and transported by that inaccessible Light where
JEHOVAH dwells, cannot arrive so far as I say, not to reach but so much as to
approach the Subject they would pretend to solemnize!

But from this short Descant on the Excellence of GOD, Sect. 21.
as the strongest Incentive to your Resignation to HIM; let me now inform you,
Philomuse, of those Troubles you will be raised above, and the Inestimable Joys
you will, even in this Life feel, by an entire Consignation to that Holy WILL;
only think it no Digression that I tell you first; That, besides a Preparative,
the due Contemplation on that most happy Object I ventured to discourse of
above, will be to the Reception of those unutterable Joys you may be blessed
with, it should provoke you to a careful avoiding of all Sin.

Indeed, the Heroic Heathen could tell you, Senec.
that, Licet sarem Homines ignoraturos and Deum ignosciturum tamen peccare
nollem ob peccati turpitudinem: Though I were certain Men could never know, and
God would furely forgive, I should How he hated Wilful Sins!
scorn to Sin, for the Foulness and Dishonesty that attends it. Doubtless,
since it is directly contrary to the Nature of GOD, there can nothing more unfit
our Intellects for Sublime Satisfaction, than the Transgression of that Law
enjoined by GOD; or more Unman us, than the Commission of what makes us so
vastly Err from that Perfect Ens we should be most ambitious to imitate! -- Oh!
Genesis 39.9.
how can I do this great Wickedness, and sin against GOD? was the Just Question
of the Right Noble-Spirited Joseph to his importunate Mistress. I observe, it is
the Sin, not the Punishment he sticks at; as one that would have abominated the
Crime, though there had been no Hell. And whereas, though the LORD himself had
prepared the Prophet Isaiah for that Vision wherein he was Blessed (as much as
Mortality would permit) with an intuitive View of the Divine Majesty, Isa. 6.
--
and a Hearing the Seraphick Spirits Harmonious Anthem, and thereby (though
Mortal) he was so highly sensible of the Almighty's Worth, that he would fain
have joined [though he wanted Skill] in Consort with the Heavenly Host; he
dared not, because he was impure; nor could he enjoy that mighty Satisfaction
would have flowed from thence, had he been free from Sin; but was reduced to
exclaim, by the dismaying sense of his Dissimilitude from Them, Woe is Me! Isa.
6.5.
for I am undone, because I am a Man of polluted Lips, and I dwell in the midst
of a People of polluted Lips; for mine Eyes have seen the KING and LORD of
HOSTS! I am led to conclude, That we must be as free as possible from wilful
Transgressions, or we cannot enjoy the Beatifick Sight; and should be terribly
afraid to presume on pleasing our selves by Anthems to God, unless we are first
rightly prepared as HE has ordered and expects.

When you have once, Sect. 22.
through a due Contemplation of what has been wrote, submitted (as is told you)
to the Divine Will, you cannot be ensnared by any Earthly Good: for you will
know them well, and on their Excellencies then look down with Eyes as
unconcerned as Eagles, you may fancy, cast on silly Glowworms, after they have
newly gazed on the Meridian Sun.

You cannot Sin with Pleasure, Philomuse, or Wilfully; and therefore you will be
free from those Tormenting Stings of Conscience trouble most, from servile fear
of a Discovery, and inward mighty Shame. --

You need not dread the Horror of a Dying State, from sad Reflections on your
vanished Days, or that you have not lived as GOD commanded you: No Accidents of
Providence, how dark soever, will surprise your Mind; nor can you be, with
Reason, long Concerned (or ever Discomposed) for any Loss Below.

For, Sect. 23.
by this near Conjunction of Your WILL to GOD's you will, in time, find it
nothing, to Deny your self; since thereby you will be wholly devoted to GOD,
and perfectly cleans'd from all that basest Dross of Selfishness, or Ends with
which before you were unhappily alloy'd. So that it is impossible any thing
should happen to cause your immoderate Grief; for you enjoy all your Desires in
General and Bulk, though not always, perhaps, in Retail. And whereas your
greatest Wish is, That God's Will be done; your Assurance, That it is HE is the
Supreme and Uncontrolled Disposer of Events; does persuade you, All Accidents
that can fall on you, are but exact Completions of His Divine WILL, and
therefore of Yours, so far as it is comprised in His: And therefore His
Dispensations to you, are, in effect, but the Acts of your own Will, with the
superlative Advantage of their being directed by Him who is Wisdom, Power and
Love.

Then you will be convinced, Sect. 24.
That GOD is Just in All, and that you have reason to Bless HIM, with Job. --
Your Thoughts will then be such as these; Job 1.21.
-- HE takes but His Own, and he lends us All. -- chapter 2.10.
-- Shall we receive Good at the Hand of GOD, and shall we not receive Evil? --
Well! 1 Samuel 3.38.
It Is the LORD, let Him do what seems Him good. Isa. 63.9.
-- He grieves not the Sons of Men willingly, but in all our Afflictions is
HIMSELF Afflicted! -- and will give us Grace to help in time of Need. Heb. 4.16.
-- However, Though HE Kill me, Job 13.15.
yet will I Trust in HIM!

You will not be Concerned, if you have not an immediate Return suitable to
your Prayers to GOD: You Will remember the Parable told by Christ, Luke 11. from
v. 5. to v. 14.
-- That HE is your Father, your peculiar Friend: That it is easier for an
Affectionate Mother to forget her Darling and Firstborn Child, than for God to
forget You: Though She should, yet cannot HE, He tells you so. Isa. 49.15.
--

The Heathen Satyrist, Sect. 25.
by Natural Reason, was so sure of this, that after deep Contemplation thereon,
says Juv. etc.
he (what I would not have disliked, for being forgot in it is proper place) --
Permittes Ipsis Expendere Numinibus Quid
Conveniat Nobis, Rebusque fit utile Nostris:
Nam pro Jucundis Vtilia queque dabunt DI,
Charior est Illis Homo quam Sibi -- etc.
Cast All your Care upon the DEITIES,
THEY Love us Better than we do our selves,
And will, for Pleasant things, what is fittest give.


I ascend now to that highest Advantage from Resignation to GOD, Sect. 26.
the Enjoyment of HIM.

But as you cannot by a Book of Anthems be justly enamored of their Harmonious
Sound, or the Delights they can cause, if you are not skilled in Music, or at
least, have not heard them sung, it is wholly impossible I should, by all I can
say, let you know so much of those inexpressible, exquisite Pleasures
(resulting from that Union with the GOD of Love) as will in the least degree
Transport you [as you ought] with a Desire for Them, unless you were capable to
Enjoy, or had before Felt them.

An Illiterate Man may believe, indeed, when he sees a Famed Author's Learned
Book, it is certainly Fine; but he is no more capable to Enjoy, (less, sure, to
be affected with a bare Information that the Work is Great, (a Scholar's first
degree of Pleasure therefrom,) the Satisfaction it affords an Intelligent
Reader) than the World is, by only All the brave Expressions in it, the
Comforts which proceed from the Presence of GOD.

However, since, Blessed be GOD, (though as Men born Blind, cannot, by the best
Descriptions, be made truly sensible of the Difference of Colors, or the
Comforts of Sight, no one in a wicked State can taste the Pleasures of
Resigning to GOD) All Men may conform, if they will, I shall now, I say [having
persuaded from thence] use my utmost Endeavor, we may, in some measure,
conceive what I promised you should, to excite thereto.

Those Happy People then, Sect. 27.
who are so united to their GOD of Love, (though not able to enjoy a full
Fruition of HIM Below,) have their Eyes so fixed by Contemplation (that
excellent Vehicle of the Mind, by which, like Moses in the Mount, Exodus 34.29,
30, etc.
by an assiduous Converse with God, it acquires a Lasting Luminousness) on
their Future Those (...), whereof who can here conceive?
State, [where they will be perpetually swallowed up in the perfect
Comprehensions of GOD, and incessantly, for ever, be supremely Ravished with
the inconceivable Glories of His Divine and Superlative Beauty,] (that in their
Voyage here to Heaven, (though they are Naturally frail as we, they are so
pleased therewith) that the greatest Excellencies here on Earth can at no time
make 'em glance aside from that mighty Object of their Faith; but on it, with
as much Intension their Eyes remain, Ye men of Gallilee, etc.
as Christ's Disciples on their Ascending Savior did, who were diverted
therefrom, neither by the Presence nor Reproof of even ANGELS themselves.

Those Blessed Persons do possess their Souls in Peace; They shall not be
afraid of Evil Tidings; Psalm. etc.
for their Hearts are fixed, and they enjoy the Contentments of an innocent
Piety; are sweetly bedewed with the Influences of the Holy Spirit, and the
Transports which shoot abroad in their Qualified Minds.

They are only troubled that they cannot Love GOD more, and are unable to
contribute something to the Happiness of HIM that is so Good to All. It grieves
them, indeed, to find themselves reduced to be only Passive, and Receivers in
the Commerce; but whereas they know HE has All things at Command, and is in The
Divine Nature [as the Epicurean Lucretius could own] is Privata dolor omni,
privata periclis. Ipsa suis pollens opibus, etc.
HIMSELF Supremely Happy, their Concern is turned into Joy, and they breathe
out their Souls in such following Strains of the Holy St. Augustine, (till their
Corruption has put on Incorruption, till they are launched into the Ocean of
Eternity, and they Putas qualis TUNC erit splendour Animarum, quando Solis
Claritatem habebit Lux Corporum! Aug. Ser. 12. in Verb. Apost.
shine like the Sun in the Firmament Above, when they are surrounded with the
GLORY of GOD, and will fully Hear and Enjoy those Semper omnibus in mentem
veniat HAEC Aeterna faelicitas de cujus Excellentia si omnia dicta fuerint
quibus omnium Hominum linguae sufficiant vix tamen infima ejus particula
delibata fuerit. Calv. Instit. l. 4. c. 25.
Pleasant Things which Eye has not seen, 1 Cor. 2.9
nor Far heard, neither have entered into the Heart of Man to conceive.)

S. August. Med. Lat.
O Lord! Sect. 28.
thou King of Saints, these mighty Goods are the Rewards of those that Pant for
THEE, Thou Hope of him that saints! Thou Comfort of the Helpless Man! Thou
Crown of Glory for the Conqueror! and Everlasting Satisfaction for the Man that
will Deny himself for THEE!

When I consider how Unreasonable it is for us to look for Heaven, who take
Delight in All on Earth, my Soul refuses Comfort here Below, [my Dearest GOD!]
that I may live with Thee!

O Gracious Father, help me to contemn these worldly Toys! Make all things
taste to me like Gall, but Thee, thou Everlasting, Only, Pleafant Good! whose
Presence made the holy Stephen estimate those Stones by which he died, as
sweet: For whom St. Lawrence willingly expired upon the burning Coals; and the
Apostles from the Counsel of the Jews departed, Act. 5.41.
greatly pleased that they were worthy to endure Reproach for Thee. St. Andrew
joyfully was crucified, because he would haste to Thee. Therefore, the Chief of Thy
Apostles chose the Cross; the other loved the Axe. St. Bartholomew, enamored
of thy Beauty, willingly was Flayed alive: And John, disdaining Death, drank up
the Poisoned Draught immediately. When Peter tasted Thee, forgetting all
inferior Things, like one beside himself, acknowledged to be There, was good;
and talked of Making Tents for Those Above, that he might view Thee still! -- A
Sight of Thee, O Lord, creates Delights ineffable! -- When Peter was made
sensible of Thee, how he contemned all other Things? -- But, Oh! had he but
seen THEE as THOU art, or those Great Things Thou have laid up for Deficated
Souls, what would he then have said! -- Surely he tasted of that Spring of
Life, who, in an Ecstasie, exclaims, Oh! how Great is that Goodness which Thou
have laid up for them which Fear THEE! -- And so had he who passionately said,
Oh! taste and see how Good the LORD is! -- In Hopes of this my Maker, GOD, we
always are at War: For THEE we are Killed every Day, that We may Live with THEE!

Again:

I am in Love with Thee, Sect. 29.
my Dearest GOD! and vehemently Long to Love Thee more and more; for truly,
LORD, You Are Sweeter than the Honeycomb; more Nourishing than any thing that
is, and more Resplendant than the glorious Sun; and therefore all the purest
Gold the World contains, the finest Silver, and most precious Gemms, I value
less than Nothing, in respect of Thee! -- Now I am Ravished with Thy
Excellence, and Thoughts of the Sublime Delights the Beauty of Thy Palace will
Transport Me with. -- Oh, how I scorn these counterfeit, destroying, greatest
Goods Below! -- Oh, Everlasting Mighty Flame of Love! Inflame Me, yea, Inflame
Me wholly with a Perfect Love of Thee! -- Oh, wretched is that Man, unless he
loves the Creatures, purely for Thy sake! -- Oh, that I could but Love Thee as
I would, because Thou love me first! -- Can Men or Angels justly Praise the
LORD? or any thing declare Thy mighty Love to Me! -- Thou, out of Nothing,
made Me much above the Sensible and Things Inanimate, a little lower than
Angelical Existences, after Thine Own Incomparable Form, and breathed in Me Thy
Breath, my SOUL; created'st All Things for my Use, and still continuest (though
I Have often forfeited) my Life, that I might come to Thee!

Again:

How Happy is that Soul that is once let free! Sect. 30.
that is out of Prison, rid of that depressing Load, its Body! -- swifter than
Thought, 't would fly, and pierce the Clouds, but to be linked to Thee! --
where She would eagerly for ever Gaze on Thy Transporting Beauty, LORD of
Lords! where She would overlook the Ravished Cherubims as they are
passionately singing HALELUJAH's to the GOD of LOVE! and join in Consort with
the Mighty Host, till She Is Intoxicated with the Glories of the Place, the
Pleasant Odours, and Transporting Sounds rebounding in the Vast Celestial
Courts, in Praise of THEE, O GOD of JESV, Savior of the World! -- O Blessed!
Blessed are the Citizens of Heaven Above! How the Communion of Saints would
Comfort me! There we should think what Troubles we endured on Earth, but how
Rewarded Now, where we shall never be offended more! What Instruments! What
Anthems! What Divine Melodious Compositions of the Heavenly Symphonists will
THERE be ever heard! [And, Oh! how Charming do the Angels look, whilst They are
Ravished with their Object, GOD!]

There is no Want, no Shame, no Discontent, no Need of Pardon, Fear or
Punishment: But There is Perfect Peace, and Love, and Joy; for there is GOD,
Rest, Everlasting Satisfaction in the Holy Ghost! -- Oh! that I could but hear
the Angels Antiphones to HIM! But more than Happy should I be, if I could chant
forth one of those Exhilerating Songs of Sion to the LORD! -- Oh! that the Time
was come, when I might so employ my self!

Again:

Most Merciful Endearing Father, GOD! Sect. 31.
who have so Loved, so Enlightened, so Exalted Us, how Sweet are Thoughts of
Thee! -- The more I do Contemplate Thee, the Sweeter and the more Admirable
Thou art to Me! and therefore I do love to often Think on Thee! incessantly
desire to See Thy Beauty in this Vail of Tears, and be Beloved by Thee!

O Lord, Thou have Inflamed Me, and I Burn! I greatly Long to come and be with
Thee! I am beside my self, almost, with vehement Desire to See Thy Face! -- I
am resolved to stand upon my Guard, to keep my self awake, and always sing away
the Time in Praise, in Praise of Thee! -- I Will pierce the Skies with my
Entreaties, and will fancy I am with Thee Now! Only my Body, then, can be in
Pain, my Heart is with my Dear Beloved Treasure there Above!

But, Lord, I am Dissatisfied, I cannot Comprehend Thee, by my deepest
Thoughts, aright! Thine Honor, Thy Divine Resplendency, Thy Might, Thy Glory
and Thy Majesty, Thy Goodness and Thy Mercy! -- every thing of Thee exceeds the
Highest Intellect!

Again:

My Soul! Sect. 32.
were we to suffer daily Torments here on Earth; nay, were we for some Ages to
endure the Fire of Hell, that we might see at last Christ Jesus, and the Glory
of the Lord, that we might be among the Saints at Rest, with what Content we
should accept of All!

Let Hell, or all the Devils in it, do their worst then, to me here: What though
I Am Tempted, almost Starved for Want, Naked, constrained to Labor with my
Hands, or Beg; if I can never Sleep, am always Sick, and all the World Abuse
me; I shall see my God; and then shall shine with Everlasting Light, when HE
has made His Jewels up, to be with Him in Endless Joy!

Again:

My Conscience tells me, Sect. 33.
Lord, that I have sinned exceedingly; but yet I don't Despair: For though my
Crimes abounded, GRACE abounds more. -- That Miserable Man that fears he
never shall be Pardoned, does deny that GOD is Merciful, so wrongs the Holy
One. The Father of the Universe is Love, is Powerful, is Truth; so that I faint
not, though I went astray. -- I doubt not of his Love, but He Will accept of Me;
nor of His Truth, but He will keep his Word; nor of His Power, but He can
Redeem. -- Sometimes the Enemy, indeed, will make me question, Why, but what am
I, that I should look for such a Happiness as Heaven? Why should I hope for
what I never yet deserved? But I have thought again, I know in whom I Trust:
GOD has adopted me his Son; His Promises are steadfast, He can never change, and
is Omnipotent. I am not terrified with a Reflection on my Wicked Life, when I
consider, that Christ Jesus died to save such Men as I: -- Surely, my Sins do
not exceed his Sufferings; the Nails by which He hung upon the Cross, the Spear
that pierced his Blessed Side, cry out to me, Fear not; if you will Love the
Father, he is thoroughly Reconciled to you: Longinus Opened me a Way to
Satisfaction, by the Wound He made. -- O ye of little Faith; But, Love the
Lord! Love turns Fear away. -- Christ stretched out His Arms upon the Cross,
to signisie, He Is ready to Embrace Returning Prodigals. --

Again:

Oh, Sect. 34.
Thou Incomprehensible, Eternal Source of Good! let Thy Abundant Mercy flow on
me! -- Rouse up, my Soul! uncloud thy self, and with thy utmost Understanding
labor to Contemplate what a Sea of All Sufficiency [how Beautiful and Happy]
is the LORD! If every several Thing be so Delectable, how Pleasant! how
Delightful! certainly, is That Almighty Being, God! which in Himself enjoys the
QUINTESSENCE of every Real GOOD! If Creatures are so Charming, Lord! what
Mortal can endure a Sight of THEE, and not be melted down! THOU Maker of ALL
Things. --

Oh! Philomuse! -- the Rays of the Divinity do now break in upon my Soul, -- I
stagger, -- and have lost my self; -- I only can spare Time to ask you -- If
the Spouse's Bowels were so moved, when CHRIST,

Si Momentanea DEI visio tantum potuit apportare laetitiae cumulum; Quid potuit
visio EJUS Aeterna? Gerhar. Med. 48. her Lover, did but put his Hand (here)
thorough the Hole within the Door; how will her Soul be Ravished, when she sees
HIM as HE is, thoroughly, at once, without a Prejudicial Vail between, in that
Celestial Paradise of GOD! -- Think not, Oh, Think not more of these Delusive
Joys on Earth! Immediately Resign, and be with GOD! -- There you shall hear not
those Harmonious Flourishes from Instruments played on by Men, which used to so
Transport you from your Self on Earth, but Finer, much beyond Conception, --
Angels Compositions for the KING of Kings, the GOD of Melody! Exceeding what we
can expect should ebriate the Perfectness of Beings, SAINTS Above!

Farewell. (...).
( M. Coll. October. 3. 1694. Oxford.) [Ae. M. 18.]
FINIS.
AN APPENDIX.
BY what has been said, we find it truly Reasonable that, even for our own
sakes we set not our Affections too much on Things Below, but Resign up our
Wills to the Will of GOD, for thereby we shall in THIS Life be Blessed with
that PEACE which the World cannot give, and may be infallibly assured that we
shall perfectly enjoy the Superlative Good in HEAVEN. HEAVEN! a Composition of
such Eternal Charms as are beyond the Skill of ANGELS to Express! to Men? nay
ONE ANOTHER perfectly, tho they are most Intelligent! HEAVEN! a Place of
Ecstacy so great, as yields us every Real Good but Tongues to tell our Joys! --
We are so full of them! HEAVEN! I say! at which when we are once arrived, we
shall not so much as fancy amongst our then transporting Pleasures, that it is
HEAVEN's the Seat of Them! so far our NOBLEST Thoughts of IT on Earth fell
short of what we see!

Now, The Way by which we may consorm our Wills to the Will of GOD, is by
having an Humble and True Opinion of our own Nothingness compared with the
unconceivable Majesty of Almighty GOD which may restrain us from every Sin.

That we might Thus think of our selves, was the Design of some part of the
METHOD in the former Discourse, yet the Question still is HOW, after we have
this Humble Opinion of our selves, we may be perfect in our Resignation to GOD
as much as Mortality can without Danger of Revolt? or, How a Habit of Sin may
be perfectly Broken?

In general then, and to be very Brief, according to St. Paul's Advice, and the
Opinion of the Church. By a constant Mortification of our selves. By always
denying our selves principally that Evil to which we seem most inclined. By
ever avoiding the Incentives to Vice, Evil Conversation, and Excess in the
Necessaries or Reasonable Diversions of this Life. Or thus: By living only in
perpetual Temperance: Contemplative, according to the Excellent Example of the
Holy JESUS and the incomparable Rules which GOD's Wisdom in the Scriptures
Enjoined.

Without These, we may in vain talk of the Folly of Vice, and inveigh against
the Licentious Man! The next new Assault like a Torrent over whelms OUR Sense,
and WE are Born away from our Use of Reason, with the tempting Cheat!

I heartily wish we would all live Thus: Certainly we should not only be freer
from corporal Pains, but those frettings of the Soul which attend a less
heedful Life. We should be delivered from that Curse of God: which cuts us off
ever half our days are spent, and be made happy with those inward mighty JOYS I
so often mention. That PEACE which Exceeds the greatest Pleasure from the
strongest and most lofty Lines of Sense! more charming than the most Exalted
Ravishments of the finest Strains! Nay! than the Comforts of Friendship in
Perfection! A PEACE --? -- Ineffable!

B. Pratt.

Reader, The Author not being consulted 'till too late, some literal Faults and
Mispointings have still escaped sight, which you are desired to censure
friendly, and with these correct

EPist. Ded. p. 2. l. 3. r. have. p. 26 l. 9. for its r. their. ibid. l. 10. r.
resent. p. 61. for perfect Ens. r. compleatest Being. p. 34. by the word FAIR
in the margin, r. GOD. p. 60. l. 11. r. Seirem. p. 70. l. 6. r. qu que. p. 85.
l. 17. r. O! p. 95. l. 17. r. poterit. p. 96. l. 2. for through r. by. p. 97.
l. 6. r. PERFECTEST. in post. p. 6. l. 8. after contemn r. and want it not.

* Dele [s] superfluous at the ends of Words, and contract others for their
better sound.

* These Crotchets [] are used here as they ought; i. e. when the Sense is
particularly to be observed.

THE POSTSCRIPT.
A LETTER from, and its ANSWER to a Critic who perused the Written Copy of
this Book, without the Author's Knowledge, through the Gentleman's Pleasure to
whose Care the Impression was consigned. They are both as follows:

Mr. P -- tt,
MY Knowledge of YOU, was the Reason I Importuned and Prevailed with the
Unwilling Mr. M. for a Sight of the Book you were about to Print. -- I tell
you, Sir, you are a Gentleman, indeed, of an Admired Life, Ingenuity and
Language, but not well acquainted with the World, or a Lady's Humor yet: All
the Sex love to be [tho' they know they are] Flattered, and I never heard of
one yet, who was above an Encomium from You -- I Dislike too that Expression in
your Proem to the Piece. viz. You shall not value the Censure of Men: -- You
should Value All that Good Men say, and I wish you had been Plainer on a
Thought or two in this Pretty Work; I cannot comprehend them well at first.

Pardon (if it be needful) this Effect of a Hasty Survey; I had the Copy but a
Night, and could not have an Opportunity to interrupt you in time, before now I
am least prepared.

I am, Truly Yours, -- L' S.
Sion Coll. Land. 94/5.

The Author's Answer.
SIR,
I Thank you for your Last: I never yet saw a Book so Excellent, but by an
Hypercritick [such as you] it might be Cavil'd at. You expected not, sure, to
see Mine without Fault. --

As to your particular Objections, I tell you, Sir, first, [with leave,] you're
Mistaken: There are some of the Female Sex to whom Flattery is as Nauseous as
it would be to you, or that Expression of yours to most of them, who Value
themselves only on their own Deserts, and are above an Encomium, though from
you your self; for they Contemn it, (as you may know, if you please.)

You tell me, in your Postscript, you surveyed the Book in Haste: I Believe
you, [so do most of Your Excellent Parts:] I Am sure, had you deliberately
perused the Page 3.
Expression [I think I shall not be so vain, to value the Censures of All,] and
considered then, that in the Epistle to the Worthy Reader, [ I desire Their
Friendly Censure thereon,] you would not therefore have found Reason to
Dislike, or from thence conclude, I contemned the Censures of the Good.

I referr you to the Preface next; (let what has already been said, suffice for
this Manual here.) -- Those Thoughts you complain of, may with Ease be
understood by Considering Men: If it had pleased you to suspend Reflection till
you had read them a second time, you had been better prepared to judge, and
needed not to ask Pardon of Obliging,

SIR, Your Servant to Command, -- P -- tt.
Oxford, Jan. 21. 1694/5.
THE END.
READER, These following Faults have escaped the Press.
IN the Epist. Ded. page 2. line 12. read have: p. 15. l. 17. r. through: p.
38. l. 2. r. couclude: p. 42. l. 11. after please a period, no point after
Commands in l. 2: p 53. l. 7. r. Ineffable: p. 56. l. 3. a Colon after Great,
no point after God: p. 60. l. 11. r. scierem: p. 80. l. 7. a period after
Draught, no point after immediately in l. 8: p. 81. l. 2. put a comma after
THEE: p. 85. l. 17. r. O! JESU!


