PRESIDENT OF FEMALE PERFECTION.

Presented to the serious Meditation and perusal of all modest WOMEN, who
desire to live under the Government of Virtue, and are obedient to her Laws.

Containing an Historical discourse of the Best and pincipallest for Holiness
and Virtue of that SEX.

Illustrated with sundry Poems and Figures, pertinent to the Story.

By a Person of Honor.

-- Luke 1.28. Hail, thou that art highly favored, the Lord is with thee:
blessed art thou among women.

LONDON, Printed by J. L. and are to be old by Austin Rice, at the Three Hearts
in St Paul's Churchyard, near the West end. 1656.

TO THE MOST Happy Mistress of all imaginable Graces, which beautify and
ennoble both body and mind, the Lady Theophila Coke.
Madame,
MY Motives for the Dedication of this ensuing Treatise to your Ladyship, are
three; your Knowledge, your Virtue, and my own Obligation. For the first; as
it is to you a singular Ornament, and Content, so is it to me a special
comfort; for you cannot delight more to understand, then I do to be
understood. Had I written to your Ladyship in the Roman Language, the French,
the Italian, or the Spanish, they had been almost as familiar to you as this
your native Tongue, in which you are Mistress of so great an Elegancy, that no
words are so fit as your own, to eternize your own actions. But these are
only the conveyances of Learning, the vast body whereof you have fathomed, and
in every several part of it are Mistress of as much, as the want of an
Academicke education, and the manifold divertments incident to your sex,
permit. And of this inestimable treasure, Modesty keeps the key, and shuts out
Ostentation, not suffering a word to issue forth without a Grace to attend it.
Hence it comes to pass, that as it is impossible to handle perfumes without
bearing away part of their ^ent; so to converse with you without savouring of
your goodness. Nor does your Discourse a^one relish of your sweet Disposition;
for you read not of a virtue, which you ^orthwith put not into ^ct, and add
to it a greater beauty, then it had in the example from which you derived it.
The consideration, Madam, of these your Excellencies confirmed in me a belief,
th^^ this portraiture (thoug^^ imperfect) of the prim^^ President of femall
Perfection, would prove Present most acceptabl^ to your Ladyship, (...) whose
innocence yo^ make as near an approac^ as any thing mortal ca^ do. Should I
say yo^ are without sin, (...) should impiously contradict the Scriptures;
should I say you have any, I should unjustly go against mine own knowledge;
for neither I, nor I think, Envy her self could ever yet discover in you the
least imperfection. Sure I am if you have infirmities, they are intestate,
unless you place your own Conscience for a witness, which it will not better
become come to judge it self, then it will do my Charity to clear it. Nor is
this purity of yours froward and formal, but gentle, free and communicative.
You show the world that there is a christian freedom, o^ which we may lawfully
partake. By your fair Demeanor you clearly demonstrate, that sanctity may be
without Austerity, and virtue securely sociable, and that she is more
fruitful in society, than in solitude. This testimony, Madame, Truth, and the
people (whose Register I am) commanded me to give You, and commend to
Posterity. I cannot descend to such baseness, as to flatter you, yet (if I
should,) would not you be flattered, who are like a sweet Instrument, that
sends forth a delightful sound without being sensible of its own Harmony. No,
no, heaven forbid my lines should be like those Sacrifices, out of which they
used to pluck the heart, but leave the tongue behind. I seriously protest,
that if you were Empress of the World, and were with all as eminent in Vice,
as you are in Virtue, I would not give you the least praise in exchange for all
your large possessions; for no gold shall ever win me to guild sin. And I
freely confess that if within the large circuit of my Conversation, or
Reading, I could have found a feminine Example, fairer then your own, to her
perusal, if living, I had commended this Treatise, if dead, had bequeathed it
to her memory. Such a prostituted Eloquence, as made Apologies for Messalina,
and Quartilla, are to me odious. But we must warily distinguish between a
gross Flattery, and a due Praise; the latter of which, Plinius secundus in
Epist.
says Pliny, no man contemns till he has left to do things praiseworthy.
As we cannot over-worship the true Deity, so we cannot over-praise a true
Piety. It only now rests, that I offer up to your Ladyship, two Petitions;
the first of which is, that you would vouchsafe to permit this Book, under
your gracious Patronage, to do that where you are not, which you perform
where you are; that is, to confirm the good, and convert the bad. The next is,
that your Ladyship would be pleased to accept of my submissive Gratitude which,
though great, can be no way proportionable to the infinity of you favors.
These I would endeavor here to sum up, were I not deterred from the attempt
by Impossibility, and your no blessed Nature, to which nothing is more
displeasing, than thanks for an old (...), nothing more pleasing, than the
conferring of a new. I choose therefore rather to be argued of Ingratitude,
than of offending your Ladishippe, whose service next to that of GOD, I justly
glory in, it being the only Honor now left,

Your Ladyships most humble, loyal Servant, ANTH. STAFFORD.

To the Feminine READER.
You are here presented by an extreme Honourer of your sex, with a Mirror of
Femall perfection. It is not a Glass wherein a Babe, a Fool, or a Monster may
see it self, as well as you. By this you cannot curle your hairs, fill up
your wrinckles, and so alter your looks, that Nature who made you, knows you
no more, but utterly forgets her own Workmanship. By this you cannot lay spots
on your faces, but take them out of your souls, you may. By this you cannot
compose your Countenances, but your Minds you shall, and give them a never
fading Beauty. In this you may discern all Virtues, and all Graces at their
full growth Here you may discover Charity distributing, Temperancy abstaining,
Patience suffering, Humanity yielding, Chastity resisting, Valor combating,
and Prudency assisting all these. Here any ornament v^ts already have you may
better* and any you have not, you may ^ur ^^^e at the easy rate of reading and
imitating. Here you may learn to transform your ugly Vices into as amiable
Virtues. This Glass will not flatter you nor if you be angry with it for
showing your Deformities, can you break it. Both the matter, and the
reflections here are all internal, and therefore not tangible. This is she,
whose Emblem ingenious Antiquity made an Unicorn, laying his head in the
lap of a Virgin. This is the fair tree, whose lovely fruit once tasted,
expels not for a time only, but for ever the venom of the most deadly sins.
This is she, who was on Earth a Confirmer of the good, and a reformer of the
reprobate. All her Visitants were but so many Converts, whose bad affections,
and erroneous opinions, the sweetness of her discourse had rectified The
Leprosy of sin was her daily cure, and they (whom vice had blinded) were by
her restored to their inward sight, and their prostrate souls adored divine,
Majesticall virtue, residing in this sacred Temple. The conference with her
raised them above themselves, and enfranchised their souls till then, chained
to their bodies. The knowledge of her, humbled the most proud natures, for the
luster of her Merits, rendered their own obscure. O make the emulation of this
chaste Turtle your only study! and not in words only, but in deeds also show
your selves Proficients; for Virtues meditated, and not acted, do but puff us
up the more, we easily believing, that we are what we resolve to be. On this,
ground your belief, that she amongst you who shall constant tread in her
paths, shall at lengt^ arrive at the Celestial Paradi^ which now she inhibits,
and (...) receive this salutation, not from an Angel, but from God him self;
Welcome thou fair soul, full of Grace, enter into the Glory, I have prepared
for thee.

To the Masculine READER.
FOr to you also (though of a different sex) this book belongs, to whom the
sacred subject of it brought the same eternal benefit, she did to her own
kind. Neither does she only require your Gratitude, but your Imitation, whose
meanest perfection far excels all your so long vanted masculine merits. I
doubt not but by the more, and less knowing o^ you, I shall be diversely
judged. The first will argue me of indiscretion in that I chose not a Matter
of a higher nature whereby to make a demonstration of my sufficiency. To these
I shape this answer, that my Invention could not soar higher, for whether we
regard her person, or her divine G fts, she is in Dignity next God himself.
There is nothing of so sublime a strain as Virtue, which enters Heaven, when
Subtility and Curiosity are justly excluded. It is virtue must save us; for in
knowledge the Devil himself far exceeds us There is no Argument, as I take
it, so important, or concerns us so much as that of our salvation. These men
would have me busy my self in the Physics, to find out of what, not
wherefore I am made: Or in the Mathematickes, to learn how far it is to
Heaven, not how to come thither: Or in Divinity, to be inquisitive whether or
no Christ's miraculous feeding of so many, w^ by augmentation, or mult^plication
of the Loaves an^ Fishes: Whether or no the^ who were born with sight,
afterward lost it, being restored to it again by Christ, sa^ better after the
Cure, tha^ they did before their blindness; And whether or no the Dead, who
rose with our Savior, ascended with him, o^ were again reduced to dust To
these needless accute follies (...) not. How many are there now in Hell, who
while they lived here, were esteemed the Organs of the Sciences, the Temples of
Wisdom, nay Oracles, as if they had been formed in Heaven, and sent down
hither full fraught with Gods own secrets, yet now detest their former vain
Knowledge, as much as the Darkness they lived in? But in this kingdom of Woe
and Horror, none of virtues subjects ever resided. Let them therefore censure
on, they shall not so much as shake my security; for I know it fares with
universal Learning, as with the Universe, wherein there are more Delinquents
then Judges. The opinions of these can well tolerate, because they proceed
from Science, though erroneous But there are some whom I have heard to pass
their casting verdicts on the most meriting Authors, who deserve themselves to
be hanged for so often violating their own mother tongue, did not their
ignorance plead their pardon. Let these poor wretched things, who what they
hear in the last company, vent for their own in the next, share amongst them
my scorn, and pity, as being far below my anger. I am not ignorant that he
who fears the pale meager Family of the Zoili, must only write to his own
Lar. If to the truly virtuous, the truly understanding, I can approve these
my humble endeavors, and draw any one soul, but one degree nearer to
goodness, my holy ambition, and my no small labor shall receive an ample
satisfaction.

It now remains that as to these latter, I seek to approve all my actions, so
to them likewise essay to justify thi^ present work. I am the first (to my
knowledge) who has written in our vulgar tongu^ on this our blesled Virgin
drawn thereto I confess b^ the strength rather of affection, than of ability.
Yet with all I profess that I am her admirer, not her Idolater, and that I no
way allow of their profane custom, who robb^ God of his Honor, and bestow it
on her. But this I will say, that though I impure no^ the late troubles and
affliction of the Protestant party in Germany, to the small reverence there
paid her (many of Gods judgments according to Saint Austin, being secret, none
unjust) yet truly I believe that the undervaluing of one so great, and dear
in Christ's esteem, cannot but be displeasing to him, and that the more we
ascribe to her (setting Invocation apart) the more gracious we appear in his
fight. I have been as cautious in the penning of this Treatise, as possibly I
could, and (in imitation) of Virtues own self) have kept the mean. But all
pretenders to Divinity know, that without the help of Ecclesiastical History,
we can speak little of her life, or death, so sparing is the holy Writ in the
mention of her. The scholasticall and Ecclesiastical Writers inserted in this
Book to trust, or distrust too much, is alike erroneous, and therefore I
refer all to the discretion of the Reader. I will only add this; that since
the finishing of this story, I have read a book of the now Bishop of
Chichester, entitled Apparatus, etc. and am glad to find that I have not
digressed from him in any one particular. I conclude with this protestation,
that if I have swerved in any the least point from the tenants received in the
English Church, I shall be most ready to acknowledge my self a true Penitent.
Farewell.

Meditationes poeticae and Christianae in annunciationem beatae Virginis, W. A.
Aue Maria.
GAvisa es quondam, perque omnia secula gaude,
Omnia quae gaudI secula tempus habet.
Stipasti quae laetitia castum aluear alui.
Aequum est laetitiae mella ut in aure bibas.
Tu gaudI verbum peperisti, and dicit Avete
Omnibus: atque omnis terrarevibrat Ave.
Sed tu salvificum genuisti in secula Salve:
Nostra echo nudum nomen honoris, Ave.
Gratia plena.
Quam sunt plena suo distenta alvearia melle,
Quod flore evario Chymica stillat apis:
Quam plena est adamante suo, teres area gemmae,
Quae quod non recipit, prensat amore decus:
Quam plena est radijs solaribus aurea luna,
Oppositum toto cum bibit orb jubar:
Quam plena est Charitum, Charitum modulata chorea,
Tam plena est decoris virgo Maria Dei.
Invide quid fontem crispas? mirabile non est
Si gravida est Charitum, qua gravidata Deo est.
Dominus tecum.
Humani lapsum generis sub tristibus umbris
Luxerat Angelici curia tota chori,
Et reparari iterum coniuncti numinis ansa
Virgineo optavit posse videre sinu.
O homo quam sit grata salus tibi propria! quando
Angelica exultat turba salute tua.
Benedicta tu in mulieribus.
Morborum mors intravit longo ordine mundum,
Faeminea quondam solicitata manu.
Sic Charitum Vita intravit longo agmine mundum,
Faeminea Mariae solicitata fide.
Fons nobis vitae, vita^ pariendo fuisti:
Nosque erimus laudis fons, benedicta tibi.
Nam dignum est per quam caepit benedictio vitae,
Vt sit prae sexu ter benedicta suo.
Et benedictus fructus ventris tui.
Eructasse bonum pleno de pectore verbum,
Divino sese praedicat ore pater.
Hoc Christus verbum est, quod de bonitatis abysso,
Effudit casto virgo Maria sinu.
Gratum est, and iustum pariter, Benedictio ut ipsa
Fusa repercusso sit benedicta sone.
Spiritus sanctus superveniet in te
Vt Zephiri teneris ubi sibilat halit^^ hortis,
Dulcis adoratae depluit aura rosae:
Spiritus at flori tam molliter oscu^ libat
Vt non virgineos explicet ore sinu^
Sic Mariam sanctus Deitatis spirit^^ afflat:
Numina and castus flumina fund^ onyx.
Nec tamen aeterni solvit tibi clausti^ pudoris:
Statque tuae implicito culmine turl^^ rosae.
Christum illibata de virgin cre^i^^ natum;
Sic illibato est cortice natus odor.
Et virtus altissimi obumbrabit tibi Epigramma dissertum.
Vt genuit magnum pater extra tempora natum:
Tempore sic natum virgo Maria brevem.
Prodijt in mundum sibi par, substantia dispar:
Vt sine matre Deus, sic sine patre puer.
Grande puerperium Deus est: maiusque videtur
Non eguisse viro, non eguisse Dea.
Casta fugit lucem, virgo paritura sub umbra:
Et paritura umbram praestitit ipse Deus.
O condescensus nova gratia: luminis Author
Ipse creaturae vertitur umbra suae.
Vtque invisibilis lucis pater au^^^ habetur.
Sic est visibilis virgo Maria gen^^
Visurus numen Moses penetravi^^^ umbram:
Tunc Christus numen tunc pa^^^ umbra fuit.
Migremus tenebrae ad lucem, dum^^^ mine verso,
Proque die tenebra est, pro teneb^^^ que dies.
THE GHYRLOND of the blessed Virgin MARIE.
HEre, are five letters in this blessed Name,
Which, changed, a five-fold mystery design,
The M. the Myrtle, A. the Almonds clame,
R. Rose, I. Ivy, E. sweet Eglantine.
These form thy Ghyrlond. Whereof Myrtle green,
The gladdest ground to all the numbred-five
Is so implexed, and laid in, between,
As Love, here studied to keep Grace alive.
The second string is the sweet Almond bloome
Ymounted high upon Selinis crest:
As it, alone, (and only it) had room,
To knit thy Crown, and glorify the rest.
The third, is from the garden called the Rose,
The Eye of flowers, worthy, for his scent.
To top the fairest Lilly, now, that grows,
With wonder on the thorny regiment.
The fourth is humble Ivy, intersert,
But lowly laid, as on the earth asleep,
Preserved, in her antique bed of Vert,
No faith's more firm, or flat, then, where't do^ creep
But, that which sums all, is the Eglantine,
Which, of the field is clep'd the sweetest brier,
Inflamed with ardor to that mystic Shine,
In Moses bush, un-wasted in the fire.
Thus, Love, and Hope, and burning Charity,
(Divinest graces) are so entermixt,
With odorous sweets and soft humility,
As if they 'ador'd the Head, whereon they are fixed.
THE REVERSE on the back side.
THese Mysteries do point to three more great,
On the reverse of this your circling crown,
All, pouring their full shower of graces down,
The glorious Trinity in Union met.
Daughter, and Mother, and the Spouse of GOD,
Alike of kin, to that most blessed Trine,
Of Persons, yet in Union (ONE) divine.
How are thy gifts, and graces blazed abroad!
Most holy, and pure Virgin, blessed Maid,
Sweet Tree of Life, King David's Strength and Tower,
The House of gold, the Gate of heavens power,
The Morning star, whose light our Fall has stayed
Great Queen of Queens, most mild, most meek, most wise,
Most venerable. Cause of all our joy.
Whose cheerful look our sadness does destroy,
And art the spotless Mirror to Man's eyes.
The Seat of Sapience, the most lovely Mother,
And most to be admired of thy Sex,
Who made us happy all, in thy reflexe,
By bringing forth GOD's only Son, no other.
Thou Throne of glory, beauteous as the Moon,
The rosy Morning, or the rising Sun,
Who like a Giant hasts his course to run,
Till he has reached his twofold point of Noone.
How are thy gifts and graces blazed abro'd,
Through all the lines of this circumference,
Timprint in all purged hearts this virgin sense
Of being Daughter, Mother, Spouse of GOD!
B. I.
A Pannegyricke upon the blessed Virgin MARY.
What eye dares search the brightness of the Sun?
What Pencill draw it? what conception
Is clean enough thy pureness to descry,
Or strong enough to speak thy Dignity
Blessed Mother of our Lord, whose happy state,
None but an Angels tongue did first relate?
Thou were on earth a star most heavenly bright,
That did bring forth the Sun that lent thee light.
An earthly vessel full of heavenly grace,
That broughst forth life to Adam dying race:
For God on earth thou were* royal throne,
The quarry to cut out our corne^ stone,
The chosen cloth to make hi^ mortal weed,
Soil blessed with fruit, yet free from mortal seed.
In marriage bands thou ledst* Virgin life,
And though untouched, becam^ a fruitful wife.
Though thou to aged Joseph were assured,
No carnal love that sacred leagu^ procured,
All vain delights were far from your assent,
For chaste by vow you sealed your cha st intent.
Thus God his Paradise to Joseph lent,
Wherein to plant the Tree of life he meant,
To raise a birth miraculous, and by
His sacred ways of power disclose that high
And holy Mystery, which Angels
(though So full of light) desired to peep into.
When thou thy Maker did bring forth, and he
Whose age had been from all eternity,
Was borne an Infant from thy blessed womb.
He lay enclosed in that narrow room,
Whose greatness heaven and earth could not contain.
Who made the world, and nature did ordain,
Was made of thy flesh; he, whose opened hand
Feeds all the Creatures both by sea and land,
That even to thee thy life and being lent,
Did from thy breast receive his nourishment.
His birth no humane tongues were fit to sing.
The Angellike Quire did greet their newborn King,
So bright a consort, and so sweet a lay
Made night more fair and cheerful than the day,
And little Bethlem with more glory filled,
Than all the Roman Palaces could yield.
How wondrous great is then thy happiness
That were his Mother? but who can express
So high a bliss? when we desire to fame
Some other Maid or virtuous woman's name,
When we of other Ladies write the lives,
Of chaste Maids, happy Mothers, constant Wives,
Such as best Writers have renowned of yore,
When we have told their noble virtues over,
We draw examples, and besides their own
Fair stories, praise them by comparison.
But in thy life we cannot; thou alone
Can not at al admit comparison.
So far thy happy name and honor lives,
Above all other Mothers, Maids, or Wives,
That 'twere a sin, when we thy story tell,
So much as once to think of Parallel.
We Will let thee in thine own pure titles live,
And speak no praise of thee but positive,
As when we say all ages, nations all
Shall thee most happy among women call,
That of the greatest blessing God ere sent
To sinful man, thou were the instrument.
T. M.
A Panegyricke on the blessed Virgin MARY.
I Do not tremble, when I write
A Mistress praise, but with delight
Can dive for Pearls into the flood,
Fly through every Garden, wood,
Stealing the choice of flowrs, and wind,
To dress her body or her mind,
Nay the Saints and Angels are
Not safe in Heaven, till she be fair,
And rich as they, nor will this do
Until she be my Idol too:
With this sacrilege I dispense,
No fright is in my Conscience,
My hand starts not, nor do I then
Find any quakings in my pen;
Whose every drop of Ink within,
Dwells as in me, my Parents sin,
And praises on the Paper wrote,
Have but conspired to make a blot,
Why should such fears invade me now,
That writes on her? to whom do bow
The souls of all the just, whose place
Is next to Gods, and in his face
All creatures and delights does see
As darling of the Trinity;
To whom the Hierarchy does throng,
And for whom Heaven is all one song.
Joys should possess my spirit here,
But pious joys are mixed with fear.
Put off thy shoe, it is holy ground,
For here the flaming Bush is found,
The misticke Rose, the Ivory Tower,
The morning Star, and David's bower,
The Rod of Moses, and of Iesse,
The fountain sealed, Gideons fleece,
A woman clothed with the Sun,
The beauteous Throne of Solomon,
The Garden shut, the living spring,
The Tabernacle of the King,
The Altar breathing sacred fume,
The Heaven distilling honie-combe
The untouched Lilly, full of dew,
A Mother, yet a Virgin true,
Before, and after she brought forth
(Our ransom of Eternal worth)
Both God and man, what voice can si^
This mystery, or Cherubs wing
Lend from his golden stock, a Pen
To write, how heaven came down m^
Here fear, and wonder so advance
My soul, it must obey a Trance.
A Panegyricke dedicated to the eternal Memory, and glorious Fame of the
blessed Virgin MARY.
LEnd me Elias Chariot to inspire
My feeble Muse. Wheels of celestial fire
Bear her from Earth, purge every looser thought
This duller air, or that gross Dunghill wrought.
Let all her strains be pure, cloa^^ her in white,
And innocent wit; let her cha^^^ soul delight
In no adulterate line, no want (...) sense,
Let all her knowledge be her I^nocence
As Adams ere he fell; then w^^^ she raise
A maiden spirit to chant a Vi^gins praise.
Yet let her not be barren, b^^ bring forth
Zeal to each ear she strikes, shall her worth
Shine like the Saint she sings o^^ wonders do,
And be as she a Maid, and M^ther too.
Instruct me you nine Orders ho^ to sing,
Or let a Cherubin pluch me from his wing,
A quill to write the story, or entreat
Your brother Gabriel from his blessed seat
To visit Earth, and teach me, lest I miss
To salute MARY in a voice like his.
Sleep on your eyes fair Virgins long has staid,
Rise, and to Bethlem run to see a Maid.
Rise Matrons, in your arms your infants bear,
To Bethlem haste, and see Gods Mother there.
Matrons, and Virgins run, haste all to see,
Both joined in one a fruitf^^ Chastity.
Then every Matron this gr^^^ wonder tell,
And every Virgin chant a Ca^ticle,
Sing blessed Mary's praise, s^^^ that for her
Jehovah rivall'd with a Carp^ter.
Mary derived from two most gl^rious Springs
The blood of Levies Priests, a^^ Judah's Kings,
Which did as in a Type for show her story, Austin, Baronius, and others, hold
that she was descended from the Tribe of Levi, which the late Bishop of
Chichester opposes.

To be the Mother both of Gra^^ and Glory.
Sing of her birth, how not (...) deemed with prize,
Her Father paid her as a sac^^fice
Due to his God, when others ransomed be
With Shekles, as it were a slavery
To serve their Maker, and the Parents fear
To trust him with the wardshippe of their heir.
But the blessed Maid, whom Angels now admire,
(Glad they have got her to increase their Quire)
In childhood first her Virgin task begun,
And in the Temple prayed a pretty Nun;
That the first breath she sucked was holy air,
And the first word she learned to lispe, was prayer.
There might you see an Infant Saint outvie
The Levites in Devotion, and a^ eye
Cast up to heaven ere it the ear^^ had known;
Whole showers of tears in pio^^ sorrow shown
For Eves offense, not hers, she did begin
To learn Repentance ere she knew to sin.
Each morning strove the early Lark, and she
Who first should chant their sacred melody.
He that had seen her might by very sense
Have prophesied an Age of Innocence
Reborne with her. I should have thought her one
Of the great Cherubins sent from its throne
To breed a race of Angels, and supply
Their room that fell by proud Apostasy.
Thus she grew up in zeal, and holy fears,
Yet still Devotion would out-bid her years,
Till The opinion of Mantuan, how true I know not.
at fifteen (when others holier fires
Grow to more wanton, and unchaste desires)
The Priests bethought a husband for her bed;
But Mary's thoughts all unto Heaven were fled.
Yet was she Joseph's Spouse, not with the intent
T'unloose her Virgin Zone, but to prevent
The suits of others, and enjoy more free
The treasure of unspotted Chastity.
Who will believe the wonder have said?
Mary a husband took, to live Maid.
Dare not thou Joseph to approac^ too near
This heavenly Arc, thy God inhabits there.
Touch not that sanctified, and ha^low'd womb,
Whence thy salvation, and the worlds must come:
For it is not, Carpenter, thy A^^ that can
Repair the Fabric of selfe-r^^^ in'd man:
Mary must Bride to thy Creator be,
And clad in flesh part of the Tr^nity.
See God has sent from his eternal sphere,
Blessed Gabriel, his fire-wing'd Messenger,
Who crowned with Glory, and a wreath of Light,
Salutes the Virgin, doubtful of the sight,
And courts her thus. Hail Mary full of grace,
(Wherewith a blush rose in her bashful face,
And verified his words) the Lord, quoth he,
Has left his Heaven, and comes to dwell in thee;
Blessed amongst women, in thy sex divine;
For every breast salvation sucks from thine.
Suppose a King had some gay favorite sent
With powerful Rhetoric, and Court complement
To win a Country Girl. What could she guess
But 'twas some scorn on her unworthiness?
So Mary ignorant what her Virtue was,
(For she had made Humility her glass)
Doubts what the words should mean, wonders to hear
This salutation, and mistrusts her ear.
And when the Angel tells her of a Son,
To sit on Princely David's royal Throne,
To rule the house of Jacob, and to be
A sceptred Prince to all Eternity,
Her modest soul no vain Ambition swayed,
She rather chose to live an humble Maid,
Then a Queen Mother. How can I, quoth she,
Who nere knew man, and am a Votary
Nere to know any, teeme with such a birth,
Who would not for the treasure of the earth
Be false unto my vows? My love is prayer,
And piety all the sons I mean to bear.
But when the Angel did Gods will relate,
That he would get a son that might create,
She yields a Handmaid to her Lords desire.
O I but think how such strange news would fire
Some Ladies hearts with pride when they should hear
Gods grown enamored on their beauties were!
How they would think themselves worthy the bed
Of their Creator, and advance their head
Above Mortality, promising their eyes
To be made Stars to glorify the skies!
But Mary's zeal swelled higher then her pride;
Nothing moved that, not when old Zachary's Bride
Felt the Babe dance, and leap within her womb,
For joy the Mother of his Lord was come,
But blessed her God regarded her estate,
And sung not to her self, Magnificat.
Nor when the Shepherds did relate their story
That was as full of wonder as of Glory,
But took the Angels Hymn, and chanted then
Glory to God on high, good will to men.
Nor when three Kings did to her Cratch resort,
Did she conceive her Stable turned a Court,
When to a Priest, a Prophet, and a King,
They several brought their several offering.
She took not to delight a wanton sense.
The precious Myrrh, and odrous Frankincense,
Nor did with covetous greedy eyes behold
The Eastern wealth (the third man's treasure) gold;
Her Son, and Saviors honor to prefer,
Was Mirrhe, was Frankincense was gold to her.
Her life was all Humility, Must make haste
To sing her Death, and how he life being past,
Heaven entertained her; for their Hymns divine
Are fitter to relate her praise, tha^ thine.
Thou have not power t'unfold with what a fear
She fled to Egypt, and continued there
To save her Infants life, not skill to tell
How much she joy'd at every Miracle.
Presume not thou to number what her eyes
Shower forth in tears, as on the Cross she spies
Her Son, and Savior, nor what care she showed,
To gather up the drops of blood that flowed
Pure Balsome from his side; nor venture on
To write with what a violent zeal she run
To beg with Joseph he a Tomb might have,
By whom we all are ransomed from the Grave.
Me thinks I see how by his Cross she stood,
How her sad eyes vide tears, he dropped blood;
Her eyes more sad, cause they rained their sight,
And could not do as Heaven di^ loose their light.
Her arms express the Cro^ whereon he did,
As if she too meant to be cruc^fide.
I see her veil rent; for it cou^^ not be,
The Temple should expres^ more grief than she.
Me thinks I hear her plaints. Christ that I
Should give thee flesh; for else thi^ could not dye!
Divinity is from all passion free,
That thou can suffer torments, w^ from me.
Wherefore thy Virgin Mother here vows all
^er hours to prayers, till thy last trumpet call.
And here I crave no pardon, if my pen
tabbe those presumptuous, and over curious men:
Whose bold Disputes dare into question call
What sons she had, and whether Christ was all.
As if a mortal durst to Mary come,
And court Gods widow, to profane her womb,
As if the Mother Maid that style gave ore,
To be a Mother, but a Maid no more,
Or she that God and man hat^ borne, would be
A Mother now to bear Humanity,
As she from heaven to earth, he thoughts had cast,
And could love Joseph, that ha^ God embraced.
No, having layne, great heaven immortal King,
Under the shadow of thy gratio^^ wing:
She Turtle like would a chas^ widow be,
And vowed to love no other Dove but thee,
But ever mourned thy absence, til^ her eyes
Had spent her soul in tears, an^ love-strain'd cries,
Cracked her poor heart strings Having cast away
The roylesome burden of unweldy clay,
With pure, and ayrie pinions, hence she flies,
And forsakes earth, to seek thee in the skies.
When she arrived where her blessed Mate does dwell:
What Poets, Priests, or Prophets rage can tell
The entertainements, welcomes, joys have been,
Unless in Pathmos he had Visions seen.
We may suppose that Angels clapped their wings,
Powers and Dominions showted, all the strings
Of Seraphins tuned high, loud Hymns did play.
A troop of Virgins on the Milky way
Met her in snow-white robes, a^^ Convoy had
Legions of Martyrs, all in scarl^^ clad.
Iosuah with Captains, Dav^^ sainted Kings,
All tendered their respects. The Palace rings
With acclamations, Eve runn^ forth to see
Whence sprung the fruit, cured the forbidden tree.
Sarah makes haste, her Ladi^ womb to bless,
Without whose birth, the curl^ of barrenness
Had lain upon her, though she had a son,
And had brought twenty Isaac^ forth for one.
Rebecca with the better of he^ twins,
And Rachel with her Joseph too begins
To chant her praise. The brave Bethulian Dame,
Victorious Judith, to her welcome came
With troops of Amazons. The Sheban Queen,
(Who now the new Jerusalem had seen)
Runs to the sight, and wistly gazeth on
The Mother of the mightier Solomon.
There met with Saints, and Angels, all desire
To bid her welcome, thus, in a full Quire.
Come blessed Virgin, fix thine eyes upon
This glorious Throne,
And on the right hand, there behold thy Son.
Behold his hands, his feet, his pierced side,
That for us did,
Whose very wounds in heaven are Deifide.
Those glorious lips, which once drew milk from thee,
Shall one day be
The doom of souls, to bliss, or misery.
Blessed womb, the mysteries that sprung from hence,
Dazzle our sense,
Whose only Essence is Intelligence.
Finite thou were, yet infinite in thee
We treasured see,
Mortal, yet Mother to Eternity.
Thy Son made of thee, made thee. Faith aspire
One ladder higher,
Elder then is Mother, ancient as his Sire.
It Is strange thou should both Maid and Mother be;
Stranger to see
In one soul both God, and Humanity.
As he was God, thou still art Maid. Who can
This wonder scan?
He made thee Mother, as he was but man.
Thou succkl'st him upon thy breasts, and he
To ransom thee,
Opened his side upon his passion tree.
(...) me blessed Virgin, and receive thy Crown
Of full Renown,
Where Death, and Time have laid their Scepters down.
There sing with us, how three do sit upon
The glorious Throne;
One of which three is two, yet all but one.
THus, holy Virgin, have I shadowed over
Thy Picture in a rude unpollisht score,
That wished to have limm'd it with as lively grace,
As ever Painter drew the sweetest face.
Yet would I not idolatrize thy worth,
Like some, whose superstition sets thee forth
In costly ornaments, in clothes so gay,
So rich as never in the Stable lay.
These make thy Statues now as famous be
For pride, as thou were for Humility.
I cannot think thy Virgin bashfulnesse
Would wear the Lady of Lorettos dress,
Though far more glorious robes to thee were given,
Meekness, and Zeal on Earth, Glory in Heaven.
Take then the honor thou have justly won,
Praise above Angels, but below thy Son.
Faults escaped in Printing.
PAge 74. line 4. read, glorious. 10^ in the margin, read, not only mar^
Modern. 128.14. for it, read, is. 16* 16. for penurious, read, poor. 182.1^
Lambertus. 194.14. in stead of, si^ read, from. 205.6. Jdelphonsus. 213.1^ for
consent, read, concent. 246. f^^ Christ's, r. Christ. 247. for brought,
broughtst. 248.11 for silent, r. a silen^ 248.13. dele, but.

This Blessed Virgin had the grace divine
To be derived from IESSE 's blooming rod
And rijse elect from DAVID 's golden line
To be the Daughter, Mother, Spouse of GOD


THE FEMALL GLORY: OR, The life of the Virgin MARY.
HIstory offers to our view, Myriads of holy Virgins in Beauty, and virtue
equally attractive, whose due praise the Catholic Church does at this day
solemnly sing, but with a more elevated voice (as duty on our part, and merit
on hers commands) the laud of that most excellent Princess, the Virgin Mother
of God. There be who affirm that what ever the Creator saw beautiful in
heaven, or earth, he bestowed in the limming of this rare Piece, not that she
might be styled the most fair amongst the daughters of women, but by a
heavenly prerogative, the alone Fair, the alone Lovely. Look how many parts,
Her external Beauty.
so many arts you might discern of the Celestial Limmer. And this is no way
repugnant to reason it self; for if Christ was fair above the sons of men,
Galatinus.
should not she be so above their Daughters, since from her alone he received
his flesh? Gregory Nazianzen proclaims that she surpassed all women in
loveliness. Andraeas says that she was a Statue carved by Gods own hand.
Others of those first, and purer times not without admiration, observe that God
was almost fifty Ages in the meditation of the structure of this stately
Palace. And truly our belief may easily digest this, that his omnipotency
would make her fit to be the Mother of his Son, Empress of this lower world,
and the blessed Conduit through which should pass the mystery of man's
Redemption. Yet find I a ridiculous description of her in Epiphanius a Priest
of Constantinople, who affirms that her Face was of the color of Wheat, her
visage long, and her nose suitable, her hair yellow, and her eyebrows black.
But what authority he has for this, neither I, nor I think he himself can
well tell; for surely simple Antiquity was not either curious, or skillful to
deliver it by tradition, or picture to posterity. I verily believe he had it
from his own dreams, or rather fancy. Mopsa is as much beholding to our
incomparable, and inimitable Sydney for a delineation, as is my divine subject
to this curious Impertinent. Whether, her beauty chiefly consisted in color,
in Symmetry of parts, or both I know not: sure I am the stream of other more
judicious, pious Authors carries me not into an opinion, but a strong belief
of her heavenly form. Cardinal Cajetan, and Galatinus, (with what truth I
cannot say) certainly with more probability then he, maintain that her
excellent temperature, her conformity of members, her firm and constant
Complexion freed her from all contagion and diseases. And Dyonisius goes,
further, affirming that she was no other then a walking Spring. Such variety of
sweet odours her very pores breathed out on all that came near her; as we
read of Alexanders living body, and the Egyptian Carcasses which by a thin
spare diet observed in life, even after death sent forth a most sweet perfume.
Sylvanus Razzius recounts a pleasing story of a certain Clerk, who by many
prayers implored, and obtained the blessing of her fight, but with this
condition, that he should see her but with one eye, and that one he should
lose. He willingly embraced it, but when she appeared dressed in all her Beams,
not being able with one eye to take a full view of her, he opened the other
also, choosing rather to forfeit his sight for ever, then to loose one minute of
the inconceiveable content he enjoyed in the sight of so glorious a spectacle.
Were this true, it would make a brave example of a devout soul ravished with
the view of a divine object.

Her internal Beauty.
If the Inn was so splendent, so sumptuous, what may we think of the amiable
guest, that lodged in it, her mind, beset with thoughts clear, and radiant as
her own eyes? He that dares attempt the expression of these her internal
gifts is ignorant of her sublimity; he who dares not, knows not her humanity,
her sweetness. As no style can ascend so high as her exalted worth, so on the
other side none can descend so low as her Humility. Encouraged therefore by her
meekness, not my own sufficiency, I shall endeavor to limme her soul in
little (since in great neither my time, nor ability will let me) which will
appear an enterprise as hardy, and vain as his who should strive to limmit
the light, or circumscribe the Air* Know then, modest Reader (and receive this
knowledge with the same ecstasy, and zeal I write it) that her internal
luster was far greater then her external, like in this unto the Tents of
Kedar, as soon covered with dust, and almost burned up with the heat of the
Sun, as soon beaten, and shaken with tempestuous weather, but in the mean
time inwardly all glittering with glory, and magnificence. O ye Angels, to you
it is only given, not to sin, but on her is conferred what you cannot merit,
to bear, and the reparation of man's ruin. The Apostles, those holy Tapours of
the primitive Church sometimes burnt dim, and were obscured with the fogge of
sin, but her brightness nothing vicious could lessen, much less utterly
extinguish. She was, indeed, virtues prime, and great example, and all the
accomplished women of the Ages past, present, or to come have grace, and
happiness to the full in being called her imperfect Coppies.

Here my Invention treads a Maze, and my heart is divided between an earnest
desire to praise her to the height, and a holy fear lest in that praise I
should trench on Gods own peculiar Attributes. That she was no way inferior to
her Son, according to the flesh, I dare not with some avouch, who magnify
her in a phrase that violates her modesty, and makes her blush at her own
exaltation. Her lowliness was such that it was nearer the rejecting of all
commendations then entertaining a comparison between her self, and him to
whom she had professed her self an handmaid. And no less is her shame, or
rather, indeed, her trembling when pens profanely prodigal ascribe that
honor to her which is only proper, and due to that Deity from which she
received her grace, and being. I will not, with Lipsius ascribe as much to her
Milk, as to her Sons Blood. Neither dare I side with those who aver that
she is half of that sacrifice that ransomed us, and Gods partner here. Nor is
my pen so impiously valiant as to justify that God made himself the
pattern, and communicated to her by Gra^^ whatsoever he had by Nature Nor am
I of his bold opinion wh^^ says, If man had never sinned, y^^ Christ should
have taken flesh t^ honor her. These men would have her in all things equal*
Christ himself. Neither her m^desty, nor mine will admit of the blasphemous
flattery. I willing allow her to be the vessel, but n^^ the fountain of
Grace. I am much taken with his Tenent who hol^ that God made all things for
the use of Man, because he would apply furnish him with matter nough to busy
his head, lest should be so audacious as to equire into his secrets, and
encroac^ upon his prerogatives. We nee^ not (thanks to his infinite goodness)
be so dangerously venturous, since he affords us a large scope, and ground
enough safely to extol this his Favorite, second to none that ever bore flesh,
either in her own desert, or his esteem.

To begin with her birth; it was miraculous, Her Birth.
as it always falls out where Nature fails, That Ioacimus and Anna were her
parents is an undoubted truth received by the Church, as we find both in
Baronius and Bishop Montacute in his Book called Apparatus, etc.
and God supplies, as he did here in Anna the blessed mother of this more
blessed maid. And here by the way I must insert an observation derived from
Gods sacred Word, that for the most part the children of sterility are
fruitful in sanctity, and all goo^ works. Samson was the sonne^ barrenness,
and kept the peop^^ in obedience. So was Isaac, an^ gave precepts to the seed
of Abraham. So was Samuel, and foretold the misery of servitude to the Jewish
Synagogue. So was Joseph, an^ with his counsel governed all Egypt. So was our
hallowed subjec^ who brought forth the Sons glory. The slaves of the Tyri^^
rebelling against their Master and having subdued them by a g^nerall consent,
decreed, that he amongst them who the next mo^ning could first discover the
Sunrising should be their King. O^ of them of a more gentle dispo^tion then the
rest, having hidden his Master (by name Strato) from the others fury, secretly
asked h^^ advise in this so important affair who bade him look into the West;
for there he should sooner discern the approach of the Sun then they who
sought him in the East. This wise counsel he obeyed, and while the rest fixed
all their eyes on the East, he from the highest part of the City, by his Rays
in the West, first discovered his ascension in the East. So in Anna (the happy
mother of this wonder of women) being then in the occident, or set of life the
prophetic world foresaw the brightness of the dazeling light she then teemed
with. At length the worlds greedy expectation was satisfied; and this Cynthia,
this chaste Star was delivered of a Plannet far greater, and brighter then
her self; of whose all gladding shine the first man participated, and the last
shall. I may as properly as dolefully call them Plannets, since they never
rested, but were in perpetual motion while in this lower orb the^ ran their
fatal courses, in which they were often clowded, never quite eclipsed. The day
of the Nativity of this most perfec^ of Saints, I find thus describe^ by
Nicolaus Vernulaeus a late Writer, and a professor of eloquence The description
I only insert for the elegancy; for I must condem^ it as guilty of Levity and
Vanity and no way suitable to the Majesty, Gravity, and Modesty of thi^ our
sacred subject. The Sun, sai^^ he, this day burnisht his face, the better to
illustrate the world, and to appear gracious in her sight, who carried in her
breast a fire purer, and clearer than his own Rays. The ear^^ put on her
freshest green, and the flowers spread their dainty leaves and made a sweet
exchange of odours with her, yet hung their heads to see themselves both in
color, and sent so far surpassed. The trees advanced their curled heads, and
composed their looks within the Christ all streams, who seemed to dance after
their own mumur. Amongst the Beasts their King laid by his fierceness, and
not one of his subjects was found savage, or polluted that day. Then was the
Proverb crossed; for the Worm being trod on, would not turn again, lest she
should prove unlike her meekest Mistress. In the very bowels of the earth, the
minerals and the stones more precious, assumed their quicker sparks, as
Emblems of her splendor. The Ocean had not a wrinckle in his face, thousands
of Halcions hovered over his head, and his Tritons blew so loud, that their
notes sounded the very bottom of the Deep. Within his vast Dominions was no
disco^^^ that day; for the greater of the (...) forsook their prey, and the
smal^ swumme in that security, that (...) Sprat bearded the Dolphin, and pl^^^
with the nose of the overgrown Wh^^^ The birds sung their choicest aires;
t^^fowles flew nearer the earth to sal^^her, and their Towering Lord (...) Eagle
brought his young ones to^^^ their eyes at this newborn Lig^^^ The air it
self was like her, gen^^^ and being invisible, came to steal^^ kiss from her
cherry lips, soft a^^ smooth as were his own. The win^^ (conceiving their
silence would b^ please) kept themselves within th^^ dens; only Zephirus was
let loose fan the Pinke, and Violet, a^^ play the wanton with the Rose. Th^^
far Vernulaeus. Of all things c^^ated man alone, to whom, bei^^ sick, she
was to bring a soverai^^ Antidote was found least joyful, least grateful. Yet
were there some, no doubt, of Gratitudes children, who lay prostrate before
her, and did homage to their sweetest Lady, who might better be called the
Mother of the living, then Eve; since she, like a Murdresse, gave her children
death ere birth; and defaced those Images whereon God had set his own stamp.
She was no wiser than a poor Fly, who, enamored of the beauty of the flame,
longs to try if it be as sweet as fair, and is consumed with her own folly.
Had our blessed one supplied her room in Paradise, the forbidden fruit had,
perchance, been yet untasted, and man uncursed; for she was altogether void of
curiosity, proper to that weaker sex, and the very bane of it. Our dearest
Princess therefore was deservedly a Queen ere borne, received a Crown sooner
than sight, an^ found her Throne seated upon the threshold of life. And wha^
Crown was she presented with* Not one to compose which the East, and the West
joined their treasures, but a Crown in the making whereof every virtue, an^
all the Graces had a hand. No^ did any vain mortal place it o^ her sacred
Temples, but Go^ himself, who thought nothing too dear, nor omitted any
ornament that might embellish thi^ goodly edifice wherein himself meant to
reside. Having thus adorned and honored her, h^ placed her in this lower world
for the good and admiration of all for the conversation of a few. Though borne
on earth she lived here like a Native of Heaven.

Her infancy.
As we may guess at the neatness of a house by the entry into it: so we may
judge of her life's remainder by the very beginning. Sabellicus affirms that *
she no sooner saw the light, Sabellicus sets down how she disposed of every
particular hour.
but she adored the Creator of it, and lifted up her heart and eyes to the
great Infuser of all her incomparable excellencies. She loved God ere she had
seen man. The defect of her tongue could not hinder the operation of her
soul, in which ere she could speak, she acknowledged his unspeakeable
goodness. In her Religion preceded the use of reason, and she apprehended Gods
mercies long ere she was capable of his nature, and wisdom. Ere she could
utter holy words, she made holy signs, by which she made known the sanctity of
her heart. The first word she learned to lispe was Jehovah. She sent forth many
a sigh for sin, not having committed any, and bewailed that of which she was
utterly ignorant. The rolling of the cradle put her in mind that she was newly
entered into the tempest of this life, the infinite dangers whereof to escape
she made Virtue her Pilot.

We will not here with some Writers of her Life, dispute whether or no she had
the same ordinary Education with other children; nor with them affirm that she
entered the Temple at three years old, and lived close by the Altar, and was
fed miraculously by an Angel; as also that it was there revealed to her that
she should be delivered of the Messiah. I will not make one step out of Gods
own path, from which I never yet saw the greatest wit to swerve, but it was in
danger of sticking fast. Yet has a pious charity often swallowed more than all
this. If from the hand of an Angel she there received food natural, or
supernatural, sure I am the wonder is not so great as that of the Incarnation,
where the womb included the Word. And why should we with difficulty believe
that this white spotless soul was illuminated with Revelations by the divine
object of her chaste vows? who undoubtedly deserved to be rapt up if it were
possible, a story higher than was Saint Paul. It is likely enough, says
Mantuan, God would have the Temple of his Spirit to dwell in the Temple of his
service. The same Author affirms that she there lived a pretty Nun, and
Spunne, and wove the sacred Vestments till her eleventh or twelfth year, when
her prudency, and shame, and the care of her Reputation, forbade her to
accompany even the very Priests themselves, men whom God had selected out of
the Mass of the vulgar to teach his Will, to instruct his people, and to sing
his praise. These curiosities, and bold conjectures let us rather believe then
contest with the broachers; for it is wisdom to grant what we cannot confute.
Let us then imagine that this holy Recluse confined her body to this sacred
solitude, and a spare diet, and warily kept her soul from the surfets to which
carnal delights invite all things humane. And it is consonant both to reason
and truth, that her exercise there, was pious like the place. They who go
about to take away her writing, and reading tongue are impiously ridiculous,
since it evidently appears that she was well read in the Scriptures by her
divine Hymn uttered in Zacharies house. Ancient and eminent Authors affirm
her to have been learned in the Hebrew tongue, all which you shall find
quoted in Cedrenus.
On her reading attended Meditation, on her Meditation Prayer, or her Prayer
Action, as the lovely fruit of the precedent. Thus busied, the day left her,
the night found her. Her sleeping cogitations we may suppose were suitable to
her waking, and her very 1 dreams divine. She had not a thought that was her
own, all belonged to God. She was slow to speak, says Sabellicus, but ready
to obey all holy advice. He^ tongue was not so swift as he^ Wit, which made it
follow for direction in all the requisites (...) speech. In a word, she might
wel^ usurp that of the Church, When (...) was a little one, I was pleasing to
the most high. When upon matur^ deliberation she left the Temple she still
lived as if she had been^ in it. Though in body she was sociable, she fettered
her soul from wandering abroad, her true conversation being in heaven. Thi^
flourishing Vine planted her self amongst the Olives. She was more choice of
her company then of her food, or raiment, both which, God knows, were course
enough. She knew temperancy to be Gods, and Natures Favorite, in that it
conduces to the service of the former, and the preservation of the later. She
therefore made this heavenly virtue judge of her Appetite, lest it should long
after excess, the mother of all uncleanness. Her soul gave laws to her body,
which it could not infringe without the injunction of a strict penance. She
devoured Gluttony it self, and made the flesh subject to the command of the
spirit. Her fare, says Cedrenus, required no vessel, nor need she to wash her
hands after her greatest meal. Her diet defide the fire, as of no use. From
the Earths face, the Cows dugge, and the Fountains brimme, she readily fetched
her sustinance. She was as ignorant of the Persian luxury, as the superstition.
To this her clothing was correspondent, for which her back was beholding to
her fingers. Her hands were the purveyours to her other members. She had one
eye fixed on heaven, and the other cast upon the earth, being intentive on the
Glories of the one, and the Necessities of the other, and at once acted Martha,
and Magdalene. It is very credible that she sowed, and spunne, and maintained
life with labor. He who gives life to all things, suffered his then adopted,
and since natural mother, to gain her living with sweat, and care, that her
example might give pride the check, and teach Majesty Humility. In her he made
manifest that mortal felicity is not the parent of the immortal. She was not
solicitous for the feather, the looking-glass, or any outward bravery, being
only careful to cover her shame, and at once to expel two deadly enemies to
her soul, and body, pride, and cold. Her outward simplicity was in all things
answerable to her inward.

Her betrothing.
Well, now she began to write woman, and her fifteenth year approached, and
hand in hand with the increase of time went the acquisition of all Graces. Her
least perfection would render another most accomplished. In her all virtues were
at strife, all overcame. Nothing was here mean, she being no other then an
union of s^perlatives. Charity, obedience, p^etie, virginity, all were in her^
height. Nothing in her was wa^^ing but the Deity it self. Yet w^^ not her
vainglory such, that s^^^ desired with Dina to visit the daughters of other
Regions, an^ to enlarge the renown of these her Excellencies, being only
st^dious in the government of h^^ own little, inward common wealth. Her fixed
resolution wa^ not only to confine her person but her fame, which (had it pen^
trated foreign Countries) King would have come suppliants (...) her cottage,
and on their kne^^ have petitioned for her love. B^^ the bonds of her Matrimony
we^^ already asked in heaven, and no impediment found why she might not wedde
God himself. Yet at the earnest solicitation of the reverend Priests, says
Mantuan, was she content to be betrothed to Joseph; not that he should do the
office of an husband, but serve as a bar to the importunity of other Sutour,
that so she might the more freely enjoy the inconceiveable pleasure she took
in her vowed virginity.

Lu^t The Salutation.
28. And the Angel came in unto her*
and said, Hail thou that art
Highly favored the LORD is with thee,
Blessed art thou Among women*


The salutation.
But now the time is come when she must be (to the astonishment of the world) a
Mother, and yet remain a Virgin. The marriage between God, and Nature is
concluded on in heaven, and Gabriel the Ambassador concerning man's Redemption
prepares himself for his journey decreed from all eternity. He receives
instructions from the hands of Gods own transcendent Mercy; and therefore, no
doubt, but they are gentle, and pleasing. Clad in white, (as an Emblem of his
innocence) he sets forth without any other guard then his own right Arm able
to destroy Legions. The Chaldaeans carried in their Ensigns a towering Flame,
the Babilonians a Dove, the Scythians Lightning, the Persians a Bow, and
Arrows, the Romans an Eagle. And this extraordinary Ambassador of peace,
(being to descend from the higher to the lower world, from the Creator to the
creature, an Angel to men) bears along with him in his very name the sign of
his Power, and Fortitude that sends him. The gates, says Vernulaeus, of the
celestial palace stand wide open, and the sacred Trinity gladly beholds the
departure of this divine Messenger. The Angels clap their wings, and make the
heavenly roof ring with Haleluiahs. The Saints attend, and send their vows
after him, that his presence may be without terror, and his swee^ delivery win
consent in the hea^^ of their glorious Empress. The vaste space between the
Poles is filled with troops of holy spirits, who give a convoy to this their
fellow servants graced above the rest, in having so important an affair as the
worlds salvation committed to his charge. The Stars put on new, and brighter
aspects, as seeming to foretell what they foresee not. The Earth bedeckt with
all imaginable ornaments presents him with variety of sents, and colors even
to her self new, and lays her prime dainties under his feet. Only her stupid
Inhabitants, whom his Embassy most concerned, were altogether unsensible of
his arrival, and of the eternal benefit he brings them, receiving him rather
like an Herald then an Ambassador. And (which increased his wonder at his
entertainment) his first approach was unwelcome to the Saint whose Votary he
was. He found her (as some think) alone, separated as well in body as mind
from the world. She was not ignorant that piety was nearer pollution in society
than solitude, and therefore to shun infection, she avoided company. She well
knew that the holy Ghost himself had dwelt with the Prophets and Apostles in
Caves, Dens, and Dungeons, and there penned the all-saving Writ* That which we
call good fellow ship, and sweet conversation he^ conscience assured her to be
a^ best but a sociable folly. In neighborhood she feared proximity in vice.
Well, if alone he foun^ her, questionless she made a divine use of that
privacy, and meditated how in a corrupible body to preserve a spirit
incorruptible. The celestial agent having demanded, and obtained audience,
spoke the oration he made not; for he was but Interpreter of the holy Spirit,
in which office he justly gloried. The speech assuredly was modest, and suitable
to the sacred cares it was to enter. The beginning of it, no doubt, consisted
of a reverent applause of the perfections God had imparted to her. Hail Mary,
said he, full of Grace, the Lord be with thee: blessed art thou amongst women,
etc. How she took this the Text following declares. And when she saw him she
was troubled at his saying, and thought what manner of salutation that should
be. No doubt the Angel no sooner pronounced, Hail Mary full of Grace, but a
blush arose in her bashful face, and verified his words. But this color was
not fixed, it went quickly back to fortify her noble heart against the fear
that invaded it. She saw her self alone with one altogether a stranger to her,
whose face she neither knew, nor his intent. True it is, his language was
smooth, and even, but as fair words as these, have often proceeded from a
foul heart. She trembled at his salutation, thinking him to be a That the
Angel appeared to her in the form or shape of a man is the opinion of S.
Hierome. in Epist. ad Eustoch. de cust. Virgin. and of S. Ambrose, lib. 1.
offic. cap. 18. An^ that which Damascen has, lib. 2. de fide orthod All the
learned approve of; to wit, that the Angel are transformed, and appear to men
according to the pleasure of the Lord, and reveal his divine Mysteries. And
that Angels appeared in the old Testame^^ in the shape of men is certain: and
for many reason it is very probable that Gabriel assumed the form^ a man when
he came to the blessed Virgin. Chryso logus sermon. 140, is of opinion that the
Angel appear* in a shape, and habit most pleasing and gentle, and that the
Virgin was not troubled at his person, but his speech, in that it is said she
marvelled what sayings those should be.
mat subject to abhorred Lust, and therefore feared violence: but when she once
knew him, and his Embassy, she then undaunted, discoursed with him as an
Angel, whom before she quak't at as a man. I conjure all modest souls that
shall peruse this passage by all things dear to them, to dwell long upon it,
as worthily deserving both their admiration, and imitation. Though she received
from him extreme and heavenly praises, yet she was afraid, because she was
alone. O Savior of the World! Purity fears an Angel, shall not Impurity then
suspect a man though in the shape of an Angel when his complement, and
discourse are sensual. Virginity cannot be too heedfull, which makes it
practice the doubt of things safe, that so it may accustom it self to the
fear of things dangerous. If heathen women have by nature so abhorred
pollution, that they have chosen death before it, how odious must we judge it
to the Angellicall innocence of Gods own Mother? Well, what course took she?
She rejected these his commendations not with her tongue, but her looks, which
put on a dislike of all he had said. She had heard that when Castles come to a
parley, it is a sign of yielding, and therefore thought it her safest way to
involve her self within humility, and a sober silence. But the Angel quickly
delivered her our of this Agony into a greater; out of this fear into a more
tormenting care. Fear not MARY, says he, for thou have found favor with God;
for lo thou shall conceive in thy womb, and bear a Son, and shall call his
name JESUS. He shall be great, and shall be called the Son of the most high,
and the Lord God shall give unto him the throne of his father David. And he
shall reign over the house of Jacob for ever; and of his Kingdom shall be no
end. To this her answer was, How shall that be, since I know no man? It is
true, it is true, most blessed Virgin, thou know no man; but let thy modesty
rest secure; for the operation of God, and not of man is here required. God
should never beconceived in thee, were thou not a Virgin, nor borne of thee
should thou not remain such. Thou can not be spotted with the conception,
or birth of an issue so immaculate. This fear is as needless as that of
defiling thy fairest fingers with the purest fountain. If Obededon having
received the Arc within his walls, was so enriched with all manner of
Treasure, that Felicity was voyced to have descended from heaven into his
house; what shall we judge of thy supreme bliss, O glorious Virgin! who art
not to be the receptacle of a wooden Arc, but of his only Son? With
confidence therefore consent to thy own happiness, and the Redemption of all
Humanity.

But, indeed, I do not wonder at her astonishment, when I consider her
bashfulnesse. Me thinks I see her now casting her eyes up to heaven, now
fixing them on the earth, and now again on the Ambassador himself, resolving
to give up her soul rather then her virginity. Harsh must the word
(conception) needs found to her who was a votary nere to know man, whose only
love was prayer, whose only child was piety. But when the Angel urged Gods
will, she forthwith yielded a handmaid to her Lords desire. Let us intentively
listen to the text. And the Angel answered, and said unto her, The holy Ghost
shall come upon thee, and the power of the highest shall overshadow thee;
therefore also that holy thing that shall be borne of thee shall be called the
Son of God. And behol^ thy cosen Elizabeth, she has als^ conceived a son
in her old age, an^ this is the sixth month with her wh^ was called barren. For
with God nothing shall be impossible. And Mary said, Behold the handmaid of
the Lord, be it to me according to the word. See here united an incomparable
humility, and an obedience even unto death. For the consenting to be the mother
of God wa^ not easy to her, in that a meek, an^ humble spirit with greater
difficulty ascends the highest step o^ Honors Throne, then a proud descends
thence to the bottom, (...) being a thing in nature far hard to climb then
to come down. (...) any man shall yet rest unsatisfie^ and shall make a
further enqui^^ after this difficulty, he may pleas^ to consider that her
humility ballanc't her Sons exalted, and her own dejected estate; and as
well meditated the care, the diligency, the reverence, and obsequiousnes, as
the dignity, and excellency of her whom God would vouchsafe the most glorious
title of Mother. She wisely weighed that the Angels were not worthy to wait on
him, and therefore the service of her whole life must as far exceed, as the
name of Gods Mother did excel that of Servant, or Angel. If Saint Peter, yet
in the dawn of Grace, could so clearly discern his Masters greatness, as that
he cried out, Depart from me a sinner, as deeming himself unworthy of his
presence: If the Centurion for the same respect thought his house too base to
receive him, what should she think who was not to take him into her ship, or
her lodging, but into her womb, where he was to remain not a visitant, but a
dweller? Full well also she understood that her consent was not only required
to be the parent of the Almighty, but the Spouse also of his holy Spirit, to
whose inspirations she ought a greater obedience then others, having received
from the same spirit a greater measure of grace, and honor. She clearly
foresaw that she was not only chosen to conceive the Son of God, Many ancient
Writers hold that she had the gift of prophecy.
to bring forth, to nurse, and govern him, but also perforce to yield him up
(such being the divine pleasure) to a three and thirty years persecution, and
lastly to the cursed death of the cross, the salvation of others depending on
his destruction. And that she did foresee all this, plainly appears by the
speech of the Angel to her, who (after he had foretold the conception, and
birth of Christ) added, And he shall be called Jesus, that is, a Savior. An
awful reverence, and an inconceiveable joy divided, without doubt, her
all-holy heart when she contemplated her future being a mother to the Messiah.
Can a man imagine any thing more difficult, more bitter for humane nature to
overcome? Yet did her active virtue vanquish all these impediments, and with an
humble, ravished soul she expected the entrance of him into her sacred womb,
whom already she had surely seated in her heart.

Here before we proceed to her conception, we must observe two things not
amply, and fully enough expressed, very remarkable in the Angelical
salutation; First, the dignity of the Ambassador, next the worth of her to
whom his Embassy was directed, together with her many virtues equally eminent
in this divine Dialogue.

Concerning the first; he was not a man, but an Angel; neither an Angel of an
inferior order, but of the supreme Hierarchy, which choice and pure spirits
having received infinite ornaments and graces from their Lord and Master,
retained still his favor, Hom. 34 in lect. Evang.
and ever stood before him. S. Gregory styles him a principal Angel, treating
of principal things. Some have not feared to call him the supreme Angel, as
Damascen, and others. Sermon. de Virginis assump.
Truth will answer for him, that amongst all the celestial spirits, none are
so predicated in holy Writ as he, and Michael, to whom the Declaration, and
Exposition of so high Mysteries so often were committed, as in Daniel, Zachary,
and Mary is specified. Some will have his name to signify God, and man, and
that this Etymology contains a miraculous mystery. Amongst these is Proculus
Archbishop of Constantinople. Geber, says he, signifies man; El God, In 1
cap. Luc.
alluding to his Embassy, which treated of his approaching birth, who was both
God and man. Saint Bernard judges the servant of Abraham to have been a type
of Gabriel; In parvis. sermon. Genesis 24.
for he was sent by his Master not to seek an^ Virgin that came next to hand
but such a one as the Lord Go^ had prepared for the Son of hi^ Lord. Hom. de
incomprehensibili Dei natura.
This Gabriel, says Sai^^ Chrysostom, the Painters present to us winged; not
that God create: him so, but to denote the sublimmity and agillity of the
celestial Nature, as also to admonish us that with grateful hearts we
acknowledge him (...) have for our cause descended from (...) highest
habitation. And sweeth Chrysologus; An Angel treated wi^^ Mary concerning our
salvation, because an Angel had dealt with E^^ touching our damnation. Sermon.
142. Sermon. 1. de not. Virgin.
This blessed Spirit, and Saint John the Evangelist, Damianus compares to two
Lions which carefully guar^ this our sacred subject. I will n^ here seeeke to
satisfy the overcurious, and needless doubts of Luther, and others, whether
she knew Gabriel to be an Angel, or no, nor whether or no he entered her
chamber the door being shut, nor whether he appeared to her in a gentle
familiar shape, or in his full splendor, as when he so much amazed Zachary,
and struck him dumb. These questions serve rather to busy curiosity, then
inflame zeal. Neither has all that tender sex (to whose good I dedicate this
discourse) received an education that renders them capeable Judges of such
disputes. And I freely acknowledge that in this Treatise I have not so much as
used any one word not frequent, and familiar, because I would make the sense
clear to the Femal Readers. Withal I profess my scope is not to sharpen
their wits, but to beautify their lives, and to kindle in their fair bosoms
an holy ambition to aspire to the perfections of that devout life, which this
our incomparable Lady led, and ended with the applause of men, and Angels.

Laying aside therefore these superfluous arguments, I will proceed (as my
method commands me) to deliver her inestimable worth, and sober demeanor
toward the Angel, which no eloquence can so well express as (...) silent,
and reverent admiration. Much I need not say of her of whom I never can speak
enough, especially having already produced so many ancient, and learned
extollers of her excellencies, to which my vote would add no more then a dim
lamp to the glorious eye of heaven, or an obscure gloworme to a starry night.
Yet since at the Altar of this meek one (sweet and chaste as the Incense there
daily burned) a single grain sent from a simple heart is acceptable, I will
not fear to pay her a due oblation, though it come as short of her value, as I
of her goodness. May it please thee then, pious Reader, gratefully, with me to
acknowledge that this is she who gave flesh to him by whom all flesh is saved.
This was the Dove that first brought to us the Olive of our peace. This is the
Rainbow, or first sign of our reconciliation to the divine Majesty. And (to
shut up all in a little) this was the Tabernacle, and Throne of the Almighty,
whence (his Majesty obscured) his love shined forth to all humanity. But in
that a plain delivery of her virtues adorn her more then can all the flowers
of Rhetoric; I will (though in an inelligant phrase) set such down as shall
appear most eminent in this unparalleled colloquy, wherein were handled the
profound mysteries of the sacred Trinity, as of the Fathers omnipotency, the
holy Ghosts efficacy, the Sons excellency, and in him the propriety of both
natures.

Her prudency.
Her Prudency shall take the first* place, not as the greatest, but as the most
diffusive, because clean through this Dialogue it blends with all the rest.
First, she awfully, and advisedly gives him full audience, and at once both
observes the laws of patience, and the custom of good manners in quietly
attending the period of his salutation. Many of her Sex would have so cut him
off at every word, that he should never have peec't his speech together
again. Being more mistresses of their tongues then their ears; The common
sort when the Moon was eclipsed thought her to be enchanted, and with basins
and other things made a hideous noise to bar her from hearing the charmers
voice.
they would never have given him hearing till they had been weary of talking.
One of these, Iuvenal makes mention of in his 6. Satyr, who made a din able to
free the Moon from the power of the enchanter

This virtue of an opportune silence few women obtain, if they do, it comes to
them the last of all other. Their tongues are clocks which, once wound up, few
of them go less then sixteen hours. But this wisest of Saints in a
seasonable silence, and caution of speech, was alike admirable: Insomuch that
through the whole Bible we find not that she spoke above five times. Her
opportune silence and caution of speech.
Twice to the Angel Gabriel, as How shall this be? and again, Behold the
Handmaid of the Lord. Next in the encounter between her, and her cosen
Elizabeth. A fourth time to her beloved Son after long absence, Why have you
dealt so with us. Lastly, when she becomes a petitioner for the poor, Because
they have no wine Here in this place she intentively hearkens to the Angel,
whom she hears twice ere she replies once. She made two pawses usher her
answer, which she framed with such care, and sobriety, as if Modesty had sealed
up her bosom, and lips, and that without her special warrant they were not
to be opened. And though her thoughts were perplexed and troubled, yet she
apparrell'd them in such a clear, smooth calm of language, that it would have
gentiliz'd Barbarism it self. When her Chastity is called in question (which
she esteems above health, liberty, or life it self) she positively denies
nothing in that strange, and to her impossible assertion of the Angel, but
answers with an humble inquiry, How shall that be? Well might she make this
demand, since she knew by humane power it could not be effected, and the Angel
had not yet revealed, that such was the divine will. Though never soul endured
a greater conflict then hers, and that Fear had stretched the strings of her
heart to their utmost extension, yet chose she rather that they should break
in sunder, than she into Intemperancy. Some women (though chaste, yet cursed, and
hasty) having once heard their chastity brought in question, would have omitted
all interrogations, and have given the Angel a Sermon for his salutation, and
have reviled his name, if not offered violence to his person. But in this
sweetest of creatures, mildness and modesty kissed each other; so that
nothing could flow from her that was not pleasing and gentle. Yet could not her
amazed looks conceal her fear, which afflicts far more than grief; for we
grieve only for what is past, but we fear all that can happen. The merciful
Angel reading in her forehead the perplexity of her mind, resolved presently
to rid her of the tormenting doubt she was in, and to banish Fear out of
that Face reserved only for Beauty, and the Graces to dwell in. He therefore
hides this great secret no longer from her, but expounds to her the manner and
means of her conception, which no sooner entered her ears, then consent her
heart; and with a prostrate soul she made her will conform it self to Gods;
Behold, says she, the handmaid of the Lord, etc. In this consent of hers we
may discover almost as many perfections as words. Some draw hence an
observation, that the salvation of mankind depended upon her consent, and
consequently the damnation upon her refusal. My meditation dares not climb so
high, not being able to conceive how possibly the searcher of hearts should
receive a repulse from his chosen one, nor how his omnipotency can be confined
to one only means in the Redemption of mankind. It shall suffice me to
derive hence three of the greatest Christian Virtues, her Faith, her Obedience,
her Humility.

Her Faith.
Faith is the hand whereby we lay hold on Christ, and his Merits, without which,
says S. Austin, all moral virtues whatsoever are no better than gorgious
sins. The dignity and necessity of this supernatural gift cannot but evidently
appear to the meanest understanding, in that no man is ignorant that without
Christ we cannot be saved, and without Faith we cannot apprehend Christ, nor
apply his deserts, and passion to our polluted souls. In this which excells
all other perfections did this happy Mother of our Emanuell surpass all other
creatures, as here in brief, and hereafter more at large I shall demonstrate.
S. Austin both in knowledge and authority infinitely exceeds me, Lib. de sanct.
Virg. cap. 3.
and therefore I desire you would hear him for me. Strengthened by a singular
Faith, says he, she made Gods Son hers, more happy truly in conceiving
Christ in her mind, then his flesh in her womb. Endued with this faith she
feared, and reverenced him whom she bore, whom as soon as she brought forth
she adored, and was the first beholder of the glory of his resurrection. Would
I muster up my forces I could produce many other Champions of the same worth
and antiquity, that with an indefatigable zeal, do vindicate the faith of
this blessed Virgin against some of these latter ages, who accuse her as
defective in that wherein she was most accomplished. Their objections have been
long since answered by Saint Austin, Saint Ambrose, and diverse others of those
Primitive times. Saint Austin distinguishes thus between Zacharies demand and
hers. Lib. 16. de civit. cap. 24.
Zachary when he says, Whence shall I know this? or, By what means shall I
know this, I, and my wife being so aged? he spoke this out of despair, not ^y
the way of inquisition. But Mary when she asks; How shall that be, since I
know no man? she uttered this enquiring, not despairing. Wherefore to Zachary
it is said, thou shall be dumb because thou believe not; but to her the
cause is expounded, because while she does question, she doubts not of the
promise. And to the same purpose, and almost in the same words speaks Saint
Ambrose, whose testimony I omit, lest I should prove tedious, and obscure to
the tender sex, to whose profit this weak Essay of mine is chiefly intended.
Yet my zeal to her whose true admirer I am, compels me briefly to deface all
those aspertions, which the adversaries to her, and piety have laid upon her.
And I am wholly transformed into wonder as often as (...) consider how malice,
and he^ spawne can be so frontlesse as grossly to deprave the meaning of the
Text only to detract from her, and should be so audacious as to contradict the
holy Ghost himself, who by the mouth of Elizabeth pronounces her blessed,
because she believed. True it is, their expositions give a light to the
Scriptures, but it is such a one as we receive from lightning, which brings
with it rather terror then comfort.

Her obedience.
Here her obedience calls upon me to cut off, I cannot say, this digression, but
vindication of her honor. Though she deserved soverainty, and command, yet
delighted she in nothing more then in this submissive virtue proper only to a
Subject, and was a diligent practitioner of it through her whole life in
imitation of him who was obedient even to an ignominious death. Her faith, and
obedience were of equal speed; for she no sooner heard the Angel relate that
the Almighty had ordained she should bear the worlds Redeemer, but she
believed, and consented that it should be so. She had learnt in her infancy,
that obedience with God is better then sacrifice, and therefore she was as
swift as thought in agreeing to the divine ordinance, that so posterity might
distinguish between her obedience, and that of others whose Wills, and
Understandings have a combat before they can be brought to a consent. But this
was only a lovely branch of that beautiful tree, her humility, on which a
perpetual Autumn attended; for it continually bore fruit.

Her humility.
Of this Virtue I must treat more at large then of the rest, because it is
extensive clean through all the actions of her life. Of this there are many
sorts, whose several countenances, and shapes we will here draw to the life,
lest the Reader be imposed upon, and verily believe he enioyes the true one,
when, indeed, he is only possessour of the adulterate.

natural humility
We will begin with the Natural Humility, which is to be found in many, who
being basely borne, and bred, and poorly spirited, aspire not to greatness,
but rest fully contented with that sordid calling Fortune has allotted them.
This Humility is none of those that virtue does warrant. There is another kind
which we may call sensual, Sensual humility
and this makes men refuse honors, not that they do not desire them, but for
the trouble, care, and danger that attend^^ them. This Humility is base, and
degenerate. There is a third proud one of the Hypocrite, Hypocritical humility
who though he be ambitious of dignities, and seeks them by all cunning, and
undermining ways, yet (to be reputed humble) he seems to fly them. This
Humility is false, and fained. A fourth there is philosophical, Philosophical
humility
and moral, and this consists in the knowledge of a man's self, and his
miserable condition, so that by a natural light he can see to humble himself,
and be serviceable to all men, yet no further then the dignity of his estate
allows, and humane reason requires. So that in this man's opinion it should not
be humility, but baseness in a Gentleman to pardon an injury done him, or to
place himself in an Hospital as a servant to attend the sick, and needy.
This Humility will not endure the Christian Test. A fifth Mosaicall, Mosaicall,
or Judicial Humility.
or Judicial, offers it self to our consideration; and this has a near
resemblance of the true one; for by the perusal of the written Law we come to
know our selves more perfectly then all the Philosophers of the world can teach
us. To this purpose Saint Paul says; From the Law comes the knowledge of
sin: and in another place, I had not known concupiscence to be a sin had
not the Law said, Thou shall not covet. In this Mirror we discern our
original corruption, and all our disordinate passions, and affections,
together with our ignorance, and frailty. By this Touchstone we find all our
moral philosophical virtues to be but counterfeit. But this carries with it a
very detrimentall discommoditie; for it leads us beyond hope of salvation, and
there leaves us. For when a man shall consider that an unattainable perfection,
and an exact observance of the Law is required at his hands (wherein he is
commanded to honor God with all his soul, and with all his might, and to love
his neighbor as himself) and yet withal shall discover in himself an utter
disabilitie to execute these holy commands, a frozen dijection will so benumme
all his thoughts that not one of them will be of force to uphold it self from
sinking into the bottomless pit of despair.

But with the true Christian Humility it is otherwise which (having first made
a submissive acknowledgement of its own ingratitude, The true Christian
Humility.
pride, avarice, injustice, impiety, and infinite other imperfections) by a
strong apprehension lays hold on the mercy of God in Christ. And this
goodness of God toward us makes our sins more odious even in our own eyes;
no otherwise then the tender kindness of his Father made the prodigal child
more clearly see his own error, and disobedience. For this makes that speech
of God to the Jews, When you come into the Land of promise, then you shall
know your sins? as if he should have said, How often have you distrusted me,
and not only murmured against me, but abandoned me, and adored Idols, making
them your guides, and attributing to them the benefits you have received from
me? so the regenerated Christian being once entered into the spiritual Kingdom
of Christ, sees more clearly his sins, then he did before his calling, as
having received a greater Light. The excellency of this virtue in a Christian
is beyond humane expression. Not amiss a learned Father of the Church styles
this the Treasurer of all other virtues. Hieron. in Epist. ad Celant.
The ancient Christians commonly usurp Humility for virtue it self. Christ
calls it poorness of Spirit, and discoursing of man's Beatitude, sets it in the
Front. This and Pride are at endless odds; for this is sociable, and loves
company, whereas pride affects solitude, and is for the most part alone. In the
Empire of Pride, two cannot stand quietly together, whereas in the dominions of
Humility, an infinite number may be placed without either combat, or strife.
Pride is never void of fear, and doubt, whereas this stands secure with Jonas
in the bottom of the Sea. Pride is ever ambitous of the first seat, this of
the lowest, and therefore is as much extolled by all men, as the other cride
down. Pride assumes all to it self, and is full of self-love. This refuses
even its own due, and undervalues it self, as knowing that it can justly call
nothing its own, but sin. Pride storms at an injury received; this
embraces all occasions that may exercise its patience. Pride (like all things
puffed up, and light) is wavering, and blown here and there by every gust of
Fortune; this in stability is a rock, not in hardness, being soft, and white
as the Down of Swans. Yet though this Virtue be of all other the most
innocent, and submissive, it is withal the most powerful; for, as nature, so
God abhors vacuity, and therefore (finding the humble utterly empty of
affectation, presumption, and what else is derogatory to his honor) he fills
him with his grace and spirit. What should I say more? Humility is fearelesse
in danger, free in bondage, rich in poverty, quiet in persecution, noble, and
gloriorious in ignominy, lofty in lowness, joyful in anguish, and happy in
the midst of misery. This made Moses speechless, Abraham to acknowledge
himself dust and ashes, John the Baptist to esteem himself a mere Voice, and
Saint Paul to account himself the greatest of all sinners. This Jewel was so
fair in Christ's eye, that to purchase it, he underwent not only poverty,
misery, and all indignities, but even execration, and malediction. What would
we judge of a great Prince, who, in stead of enlarging his Territories, should
abase himself so far as to become a poor subject? Why this did Christ, who
(being of all things the greatest, and best from all eternity) by humility
became of all the lowest, and descended even to the profession of service to
the meanest of his creatures. It is also an evident mark of his humility, that
he chose to be borne of simple and obscure Parents, whereas he might, if he
would, have allied himself to the greatest Princes. This gave occasion to the
Jews to mock him, saying, Is not Joseph his Father, and Mary his Mother? True
it is that he was of the House of David, but when he was borne, it was in its
declination, and of no repute. As the Moon fourteen days together, to our
sight, increases, and fourteen again diminishes, till at length it be seen
no more: so in the fourteen generations from Abraham to David, the House of
David received advancement in honor, and splendor, and was in his time at the
full height; but in the fourteen following generations it was in the wane, and
in the days of Christ near utter extinction. And whereas he might have
inserted Sarah, Rebecca, and many other Saints in his Genealogy, he placed
Tamar, Raab, Ruth, Bersabe, and others of an incestuous race, to show the
world, that, though he hated sin, he abhorred not sinners. What man is there
who, having a lascivious wife detected of whoredom will take her again? Yet
Christ, having espoused the adulterate soul of man, receives her into grace
and favor after she has committed millions of adulteries. To this effect
says the Prophet, Though thou have committed fornication with many Lovers, yet
return, and I will receive thee. Who is there that being injured will not
only forgive the Offender, but seek his friendship, I, and lay down his life
for him? All this did Christ, who (being grievously and hainously abused by
man) not only demanded his pardon, as if he himself had been faulty, but
made an oblation of his own heart-bloud to quench the wrath of God justly
conceived against him. Another admirable act of his humility was, that (God
having given him all power in heaven and earth, in so much that he could at his
pleasure have destroyed Judas, whose treason he foreknew) all the revenge he
took, was to wash his feet, and to call him Friend when he came to apprehend
him. To these I may add his living in obscurity from his twelfth to his
thirtieth year, in all which time we read not any thing of him. I will
conclude with all the crosses and calamities he endured, of which in his life
he never reaped any fruit, and at his death had his Innocence only predicated
by one, and that one a Thief. In a word, during his abode here below (whether
you consider his Doctrine, Actions, or Passion) he was not so much delighted
with the exercise of any virtue, as of this gentle, meek one, that so he might
imprint it as his own sacred stamp, or mark in those minds which he would
have known to be his. And, above the rest, into the chaste bosom of his dearest
Mother did he send this divine gift, before his birth by infusion, and
afterward engrafted it there by example. Her humility.
And this we may well perceive by her so closely following the pattern that
she precedes all but himself in this mild, offencelesse virtue. In this rare
quality as she had an unequalled Master, so she proved a matchless Scholar.
He who is ignorant of the excellency she has artain'd to in this one
perfection, Idare pronounce him withal ignorant of Gods holy Writ, and
incapeable of all goodness derived thence. Yet some sacrilegious thieves there
are, who rob this beautiful Temple of its prime ornament, this sweetest
Garland of its fairest Flower. They maintain (me thinks the earth should shake
it self, and them when they utter it) that she was humbled, not humble. These
I may more properly aver to be learning, not learned. They may with as much
justice deprive the Rose of her blush, the Lilly of her white, the Violet of
her purple, and the Crystal of its clearness, as her of this precious
ornament, which she obtein'd by a studious pious imitation, and preserved with
a holy care. But my wonder is the less when I contemplate the continual
Antipathy between Impudency, and Innocence. Whosoever shall settle his
meditation on her discourse with the Angel, her pilgrimage to her cousens
house, and her divine Hymn there (though he have sworn himself the slave of
prejudice) he will break his chain, and reassume so much freedom as to
declare her truly humble. Sure I am if they would have her half a degree
humbler, they make her wholly abject. To my thinking these six words alone
(Behold the handmaid of the Lord) are able to convince of error six thousand
such shallow Authors. To those who are placed in an extreme height, all things
below seem far smaller then indeed, they are, but to themselves they appear
the same; but here it falls out otherwise, where the introducer of one pregnant
blessing that contained all other into the world (and therefore worthily placed
above it) thinks all things under her far greater then her self, and above
her in value. Certainly all the ancient Fathers with one consent affirm that
she deserved to be Empress of all others, who humbled her self below them
all. For my own part, I am so transported with the meditation of her meekness
that me thinks I hear her thus expressing the humility of her sanctified heart
to the heavenly Nuntio.

Is this a delightful dream, or a pleasing vision that thus ravisheth my
soul? What a lovely prospect is this? What do mine eyes behold? Cedars
stooping to shrubs? Mountains to valleys? The Occan courting a Riveret? I
discover more then all this. I see Heaven descending to Earth, the supreme
Majesty to humane misery, a blessed Angel to a wretched mortal. True it is I
am the structure of Gods own hands, but an edifice not clear, not fair
enough for the habitation of his only Son. Alas, alas! I am a vessel too
unclean to enclose a Deity. Is this flesh of mine pure enough to clothe purity
it self? I am not worthy to be reputed his child, much less his parent. Oh
lend me thy harmonious voice, thy heavenly Rhetoric, thou celestial Orator,
that I may render him thanks, and praise; though not equal, yet nearer to the
grace I have received. I deny not but we see his Name written in every thing
here below, but in obscure Characters, like the discovery of the Sun in a
puddle. Thou art nearer him in essence, in presence, in goodness, in knowledge,
and can find out wor^s more suitable to his worth. Wherefore I earnestly
beseech thee in thy best phrase to present the unfeigned gratitude of his most
humble Handmaid, who esteems her self unworthy to touch, much more to
conceive him. Neither shall thou thy self depart without most humble thanks
for the eternal honor thou have done me by this visit.

It is probable enough she said much to this purpose, this form of speech
being agreeable to her disposition, and demeanor. To conclude this point, six
clear demonstrations of her Humility eminent above the rest, the holy Writ
offers to our serious, and reverend consideration. The first in this submissive
conference with the Angel. The second in the house of Zachary, where the more
her virtue is predicated by her cosen, the more she humbles her self. The
third in her delivery, where she meekly submitted her self to all wants, and
inconveniences. The fourth in her Purification, when she observed the custom
of other unclean sinful women, and rankt her self with them. The fifth in
betrothing her self to a Carpenter, and in paying as great an obedience to him
as ever woman did to husband, and in joining with him in labor to get a poor
living, to maintain themselves, and their Son. The sixth in having a care of
the poor, and in associating them at all times. But of all these I shall
treat more at large in the course of this divine story, whose order now brings
me to the mystical conception of her blessed Son, our only Lord, and
Savior Jesus Christ.

The heavenly Ambassador having executed his great Masters command, Her
conception.
departs, leaves God, and Man in the womb, and the Son of Righteousness is
now risen in the virginal orb. For this is the This point is much
co^troverted, and I leave it to the discreet Reader what to believe. Lib. 18.
Moral. ca. 27.
tenent of the true, and ancient Catholic Church, that she conceived
immediately after the Angels speech, whom I had rather follow, then accompany
many of these later times who oppose it. I will only produce a few
testimonies, and that of Gregory the great shall be the Leader. The Angel,
says he, declaring, and the Spirit approaching, instantly the Word is in the
womb, and presently in the womb the Word is made flesh, the incommutable
essence coeternall to him with the Father, De Symbol. ad Catechum.
and the holy Ghost still remaining. Him secondeth Saint Austin, of all the
Fathers the most subtle and sollid. These ensuing are his own words. When the
Angel saluted the Virgin, then did the holy Ghost make her fruitful, then did
that woman conceive a man without a man, then was she replentsht with grace,
then she received the Lord, that he might be in her who made her. And in
another place he writes thus. Make no delay, Sermon. 2. infesto Annun. Domin.
O Virgin, say but the word speedily to the Messenger, and receive thy Son,
give thy Faith, and feel the virtue of it. Behold, says she, the Handmaid of
the Lord, be it to me according to thy word. Here was no delay at all, the
divine Agent returns, and Christ enters the Virginal womb. The mother of
God is suddenly made fruitful, and is predicated happy throughout all ages.
She presently conceived the Divinity of the Word without the fellowship of a
man. In this celebration of the Nuptials between God and nature, while my
affection advances one step, my reverence retires another. Here Reason is
transformed into Admiration, Eloquence into silence. Some are rather solicitous
to search into the profundity of the Mystery, than humbly to acknowledge it,
and by Reason seek to pry into that which excludes all reason. What was before
time it self, This conception was predestined before Time, from all eternity.
is believed, not comprehended by man; for that transcends the understanding of
man which was before his nature. No eyes but those of Faith, can penetrate this
Wonder. All things in God are above reason, nothing above Faith. Here a Virgin
conceives without the loss of Chastity, a Maid remains an immaculate Mother.
Eternity is here encompassed by time, glory masked in misery. A thing finite
contains Infinity, a mortal encloseth eternity. Here the Son is as ancient
as his Father, elder than his Mother, and is made of her whom he made. Here is
a concurrence, or a congregation of Miracles. It is a miracle that in the
forming of such, and so great an issue the aid of man should be utterly
excluded, and that as he was man, he was only made of the pure blood of the
Virgin. It is a miracle that the ordinary number of days required in the
forming of a humane body is not here observed, but in a very moment without
succession of time a body is framed, and animated. But a greater miracle than
all these is that at the same instant wherein the soul is joined to the body,
the Divinity and Humanity are united in one person, and the eternal Word is
inseperably linkt with the flesh; so that the Son of God and man is the same in
the Virgins womb. As for the manner of her conception, I do not more mervaile
at the supernatural strangeness of it, then I do at the daring inquisition,
and sensual expression of some, who relate it in words as gross as their own
understandings. I only wish I could free the most learned, and ingenious
Erasmus from the just imputation of a lascivious folly in the Essaying to
unfold this sacred Mystery. He compares God to a Woer, the Angel to a
sollicitour, and Mary to the beloved, and proceeds further than either the
divine Will, Eras. in Annotat. Lei in Appendice ad Antapologiam Sutoris.
or humane modesty permit. He treates of this venerable, this stupendous
encounter between the Divinity and Humanity in the same amorous phrase with
which the Poets describe the wanton meeting of Dido and Aeneas in the Cave. I
will not rip up the particulars in which he is faulty this way, lest I run
into the same error which in him I reprehend, and imprint a blush on the
cheeks of my bashful Readers. This conception was as spotless, and as clear
from all pollution as is a sweet Odor when it enters the sense. Here, says
Saint Austin, Sermon. 11. in natal. Domini.
the Word is the Husband, the Ear the Wife, in this glorious splendor is the
Son of God conceived, in this purity generated. Of the same clear, Lib. 1.
de operib. spiritus sancti. cap. 9.
and clean sense is Rupertus on this very passage. When the truly believing
Maid, says he, opening at once her mind and mouth said, Behold the Handmaid
of the Lord, be it to me according to thy Word; in the very instant (to make
good the words of the Angel) the holy Ghost came upon her, and entered through
the open doors of her Faith. What part did he enter? first the Chapel of her
chaste bosom, then the Temple of her holy and incorrupt womb: her bosom,
that she might be made a Prophetess, her womb, that she might become a
mother. Now for the time of this conception, whether or no it were precisely on
the 25. day of March, I will not strive to chain any man's belief to a
resolution herein, though I find many old and great Doctors of the Church to
have held it for a truth. Many questions here arise which I have neither time,
nor desire to discuss. I will only look into the deportment of this
incomparable creature after that she knew she was become the receptacle of a
Deity. The mere apprehension of such an unheard of honor in other women,
would have begotten pride, arrogance, and disdain, not only of all their
sex, but of mankind it self. They would have repined at their breathing of
common air, and (scorning the earth they trod on) have nourisht an ambition to
walk on the battlements of heaven. But this Maid above imagination excellent,
the more she was graced and dignified, the more she was humbled. When all men
admired, and even adored her, and judged her worthy to be presently assumed
into heaven, she was ready to creep into the center of the earth, and there to
hide her, thinking that every one pointed at her, as undeserving that supreme
dignity conferred on her by God himself. And whereas others would have studied
nothing but rich Tissues, and embroyderies to wear, and the most costly
Persian Carpers to tread on, she meditated simplicity in apparel, and a good
pain of shoes to bear her afoot journey over the steep and flinty
mountains, intending to bestow a Visit on her cousin Elizabeth.

Lus. The Visitation.
39. And Mary arose in those days, and went into the Hill Country and.

40. And entered into the house of zacharias, and saluted Elizabeth.

41. And it came to pass, that when Elizabeth heard ye salutation of Mary, the
babe leaped in her womb.



Her visitation.
Many of her kind, and in her high estate, and condition would hardly have
acknowledged, or received their kindred, much less have trotted over hills, and
dales, to make a tender of their duties to them. Here is a rare spectacle,
Humility climing, a thing as contrary to the nature of it, as it is to things
ponderous of themselves to fly. ^his sovereign of her sex havir^^ the
celestial Monarch includes the narrow compass of her womb, made haste to
pass those steep, stony, and rugged hills, the willingness of her mind
enabling the feeblenes of her body. And, to say the truth, whether should she
(whose worth exalted her above all things else) go but to places as eminent in
situation as she in sweetness of disposition? Whither should this Eagle fly,
but to the summity of the world? Sure I am she could not sore above the pitch
of her own value. She forsook the sweet embellisht valleys, where with ease
she might have walked, and betook her self to the craggy mountains, which
not without infinite labor, and pain she could ascend. By these rough, and
uneven ways, have the holy Martyrs themselves mounted the promontory of
virtue, and have found the end of their journey as sweet as their travel
bitter. Overtue the minds that travel to thy Indies how rich they return!
They come back laden with those precious ^naments that beautify this life,
and those Panchayan odours that sweeten the deprivation of it, and perfume
posterity. True it is that thy seas are rough, and to him that lancheth into
the deep, appear at first terrible, but if with confidence and constancy he
plows them up, and with a fixed patience endures the frowns of an angry sky,
he shall at length discover a calm smooth as thy own forehead, on which
Fortune, Time, and vice could never yet imprint one wrinckle. Under thy sacred
safe conduct has many a superstitiously devout distressed femall pilgrim
(after the endurance of heat, and cold without, of hunger, and thirst within,
and other miserable accidents innumerable) arrived with comfort at the supposed
shrine of this our blessed Saint, who here (having no other guard than thy
potent self) exposes her dainty feet to the known cruelty of flints hard,
and sharp alike, and her sacred person to labor, and infinite hazards
incident to the poor Traveller. She who meriteth to sit under a cloth of
state, beset with the earths most precious stones, and a presence thronged with
Empresses, as happy waiters graced in this attendance does here commit her self
into the hands of solitude, and danger. Thus did the Spouse of the holy Spirit
overcome the narrow, and difficult paths of these steep mountains, Charity
leading her by one hand, and Humility by the other. And if we diligently peruse
Gods sacred Word, we shall there find the Mountains honored with many
notable acts. Where did that parent of an innumerable issue, Abraham, prepare
the immolation of his only son? On a mountain. Where did Moses receive the
Tables of the divine Law? On a mountain. Where did Christ, (his Humanity
concealed) transfigure his face into a countenance of eternal glory? On a
mountain. Where did he shed his purest blood, and lay down his dearest life
as an expiation for our heinous and manifold sins? On a mountain. But why
these famous Acts were performed on mountains rather then in valleys, Reason
has not a sight strong, and quick enough to discover. But this is evident,
that God has not placed Heaven it self on the one side of us, or under our
feet, but over our heads, that we might erect our looks, and fix them on his
eternal habitation, and aspire to enter the celestial Canaan; indeed our true
country, out of which while we live, we lead but a dying, and a slavish life,
and are no other then unfortunate exiles. And surely the very sight of sublime
places breeds in us high thoughts. We commonly look down on things
despicable, the eyes of admiration are bent upward.

The cause why she took this journey, I shall endeavor to relate so briefly,
that I will strive to avoid even long syllables. Yet do so many pious
doctrines, and uses, flow from these two Christalline springs, that they alone
are sufficient to compose an entire book of a vast volume.

The Angel that he might beget, and strengthen a belief in Mary of what he
had said confirms this miracle with another, and tells her that her Cosen
Elizabeth also in her old declining age had conceived a son, and that this
was now the sixth month of her being quick. These glad tidings, no doubt,
delighted much our blessed Ladies mind, where they could not stay without
rendering a fair increase of fruit, first in meditation, then in action.
Questionless, she no sooner heard them but her soul was delivered of a twinne
of vows; the first was, to praise God, that he out of his best pleasure, and
infinite goodness had vouchsafed to crown her cousens fruitful virtue with
the blessing of a child, she being now in years, when despair had chased all
such hopes out of her breast, and barrenness (as the world conceived) had
sealed up her womb. The other was, all impediments set apart, to give her
cousin a visit in her own Country, and habitation. Having performed the first,
her thankesgiving for her, she undertakes the latter, her journey to her. Nor
was she long about it, but with all speed possible set forward, lest she might
seem not readily to obey the incitation of the holy Ghost, or be wanting to
her cousin in any good office she could do her. Neither could the
consideration of her own Majesty, of the teeming estate she was in, In
concione de visitat. Mariae.
of the disasters to which Travelers are subject, of the unevenness of the
way, or of the From Nazareth to not many affirm.
length (which Melancthon affirms to have been twenty Dutch miles) deter
Jerusalem, where that Elizabeth dwelt, modern Divines but S. Austin, and Beda
her from undergoing this tedious pilgrimage. And as she readily undertakes it,
so she makes haste in it. She well understood that delays in spiritual
affairs were as dangerous as relapses in bodily diseases.

Her Charity.
Behold here a prodigal Charity that has no respect of it self, being only
intentive on the good of another. It was charity that withdrew her from her
beloved privacry into the public view, which till then she had ever shunned. It
was Charity that added wings to her feet, and armed her heart against all
sinister accidents that could happen. It was Charity that emboldened her to go
to her cousin without any invitation, not being expected by her, or, happily,
by face known to her, and with confidence of welcome to enter her house. It
was charity that caused her to tender service there where it was due to her
self. It was charity that cheered her up, and sent her on this congratulating
Embassy. Lastly, it was Charity that invited sanctity it self enclosed in this
happy Maid to hasten to the sanctification of the child in the womb of
Elizabeth.

Having patiently passed the troubles and annoyances of her voyage, she with
joy at length arrives at her cousins habitation, into which she no sooner puts
her head, but the reverend Prophetess (having no other revealer, nor prompter
than the holy Spirit) immediately knows the Mother of her Lord to be there
present, and knowing does acknowledge it, and acknowledging does magnify her
perfections, and professes her house blessed in being graced with her
vouchsafing to be in it. She at first sight discernes in her so many, and so
great concealed virtues and mysteries, that a man would judge she had been
present at the enterview of her, and the Angel. Nor did she conceal these her
excellencies, but did describe them with such skill and zeal, that Fame was
even proud to repeat them. Could the domestical servants think you (having
heard their Mistress predicate her divine qualities, and transcendent
condition) contain themselves from divulging a joy which a narrow humane
bosom is not capacious enough to receive? Could they abstain from justly
boasting that a beauteous blessed Maid resided then in their house, which
together with their souls were by her glorious presence enlightened?

But I can no longer withold my pen from setting down the journey it self,
and their mutual salutations in the same words wherein the Text commends them
to us. And Mary arose in those days, and went into the hill-Country with haste
to a City of Judah, and entered into the house of Zacharias, and saluted
Elizabeth. And it came to pass as Elizabeth heard the salutation of Mary, the
Babe sprang in her belly, and Elizabeth was filled with the holy Ghost: and she
cried with a loud voice, and said. Blessed art thou amongst women, because the
fruit of thy womb is blessed. And whence comes this to pass that the Mother
of my Lord should come to me? For lo as soon as the voice of thy salutation
sounded in mine ears, the Babe sprang in my belly for joy. And blessed is she
that believed; for those things shall be performed which were told her from the
Lord. Then Mary said; My soul magnifieth the Lord, and my spirit rejoices in
God my Savior; for he has regarded the lowliness of his handmaid; for behold
from henceforth all generations shall call me blessed. Because he that is
mighty has magnified me, and holy is his name. And his mercy is from
generation to generation on them that fear him. He has showed strength with
his arm, he has scattered the proud in the imagination of their hearts. He
has put down the mighty from their seats, and has exalted the humble and
meek. He has filled the hungry with good things, the rich he has sent empty
away. He has upholden Israel his servant, being mindful of his mercy. As he
has spoken to our fathers, to wit, Abraham, and his seed for ever.

In this salutation of Elizabeth, the springing of the Babe in her womb at the
sound of our sweetest Ladies voice requires not only our observation but
astonishment. He that was greater than all the Prophets as yet not borne, and
enclosed in the narrow compass of the Womb no sooner heard the charming voice
of this heavenly Nightingale, but he leaped for joy, essaying then, and there
to exercise the office of the Forerunner of his Master* The asseveration of
some that this was not an effec^ of the Virgins virtue, S. Bernard says, that
if an Jnfant was so over-joyd at the sound of her voice, what will the joy of
the Celestial inhabitants be, when they shall see and hear her? Sermon. 1. de
assump. Mariae.
but of the Word incarnate^ may be admitted for good, if we only have an eye
to her Virtue, and exclude the aid, and power of the divine Grace. But all
Wisdoms Children are by Truth, her self informed that many things are
lawfully attributed to secondary Causes, the primary and efficient cause not
rejected. And this way we may impute to Mary, what work soever God with her
cooperating has wrought either in the house of Zachary, or else where for the
benefit, and instruction of us poor mortals Neither will any sound, and sollid
judgment attribute any thing to the conspicuous merits of the Virgin Mary, or
any other Saint, without the concurrence and predication of the divine Grace,
who by those Saints that serve, and fear him, distributes his gifts, and
favors to Mankind. That sentence of Christ is no way obscure; Ioh. 14.
He that believes in (...), shall do the works that I do, and greater. By many
examples the Scriptures do confirm the coming of Saints to any man's dwelling
to confer upon him both Grace and Happiness. Three Angels came to Abraham,
Genesis 18.
whom he entertained taking them for pilgrims, when the Patriarch forthwith
with became fortunate in the obteining of that for which so long he had offered
up vows to God, namely a son; his wife and he, being by the course of nature,
past the generation of children. Genesis 19.
Again, two Angels came to Lot, and lodged in his house at Sodom, and saved
their host, and his two daughters from being reduced to cinders with their
City. Jacob visited wicked Laban, Genesis 30.
to whom God granted a singular blessing for that idolater, in so much that he
himself confessed it, saying, I have learned by experience that God has
blessed me for thy sake Elizeus to express the kindness he received at the
hands of his hostess, 4. Kin. 4.
the Shunamite, restored her dead son to life. The Apostles themselves
brought peace, and felicity to all hospitable men whose dwellings they entered.
And shall the arrival of Gods own mother at the house of Zachary prove only
vain, and fruitless in bringing no divine consolation to her kindred? Yes
surely, Elizabeth tasted the fruit of her all-gladding presence; for she could
not conceal the pleasure conceived in her heart, but uttered it in the best
words she could. John himself also tellisht it, and by his motion gave what
signs he could of the content, and worship he received, and paid. Neither
could it otherwise be but the Mansion of Zachary and the adjacent country were
both delighted, and sanctified by the three months residence of her, who bore
not about, but in her, the Author, and consummatour of all piety. Their joy,
questionless, was beyond imagination great, in that they had never before
seen Gods gifts, and graces passing through so pure an organ of his Spirit.
But the aged Prophetess her self, doubtless was in a holy delitious Trance
at the very first step she made over her threshold, and thought her house,
but half blessed till the other foot was in. Their mutual salutation surely was
low, and submissive, which I cannot better express then by the supposition of
the encounter of two shades softly creeping ore the face of the earth. The
Evangelist delivers only the Compendium of their conference, which could not
be but as long as serious. They treated surely of deep miraculous Mysteries,
as of the incarnation of the Word, of the persecution of her, and Gods only
Son, as also of his passion, and the salvation of Mankind. And here it will
neither be a thing impious nor impertinent (binding our selves strictly to the
substance of their short discourse) to aim at the amplification thereof, by
which happily it may come to pass that the supposition of what they might say
may turn to a Truth of what they said indeed. This then, or like to this was,
or might be the speech of the holy Matron to the more holy Virgin.

What looks shall I put on? What words shall I assume, what entertainment shall
I find out, O Princely Virgin! to give thee a welcome answerable to thy merits
who art Superior, to the Saints in Heaven, and the prime glory of thy Sex on
Earth? I am wholly transformed into shame when I consider every way thy
Excellency, and my unworthiness. Alas! what is there in miserable me that
should invite the mother of my Lord to afford me a visit, who am the meanest of
his Creatures? What equality is here? Thou who art full of Grace, come to me
void of it: Thou who art famous for thy Fertility to me who have been a long
time infamous for my Barrenness. Thy Charity and Humility made thee forget thy
sublime and my low estate, and conducted thee to my poor Cottage no way fit to
receive thee. Most of thy Sex having attained to thy supreme condition (who
did conceive and nourish the Creator and Redeemer of the world with that
thy clearest blood of which he was made) would have advanced their heads above
Mortality, and disdaining all inferior Conversation would have demanded as
their due, to be assumed into the imperial Heaven. But in thee, one heat has
expelled another, the flames of thy zeal have utterly consumed those of thy
Pride (if any thou ever had) and thou art so far from vaunting, that thou
by all means seek to conceal that dainty Fruit of which all Posterity
shall taste, and never be satisfied, and for which all Generations shall call
thee blessed. But from others thou may hide it, from me thou can not, to
whom the Spirit has revealed it, and the springing of the Child in my womb
has testified it; and if the Children of Israel should be so dull, and
unhappy, as not to apprehend it, God would give the stones an articulate voice
proclaim it. The Lord of me, and all things else, has firmly seated
himself in thee, and chosen thee for his mother, to the end that the seed of
Abraham may break the head of the Serpent, and the Son of David bring
relief to his forlorn and distressed Church, straightly beseiged by the
Prince of Darkness, and his infernal Troops. True it is, I am above thee in
years, but in desert infinitely below thee, and therefore ought to have
prevented this thy painful joyrney by coming first to thee to congratulate
thy happiness, and not only in the behalf of my self, my kindred, and
Nation, but in the name of Gods selected people to tender thee most humble
though not condign thanks for so readily assenting to bear, bring forth, and
educate their Sovereign Lord and Redeemer. But thou having gotten the start of
me in goodness, art come to me ere I could set forward toward thee, and now
thou art here, Irepine at nothing more that at my disability to serve thee.
Thou who meritest to have the earth, the water, and the air ransack't to
please thy pallat, shall have nothing here but the simple viands of Nature
prepared by as simple an Art. But trust me, what ever is here is truly thine
own, and my self to boot. My willing heart to wait on thee, and obey all thy
Commands, shall supply all other defects. Such is my desire to attend, and
please thee that do but signify thy pleasure by the least beck or nod, and
thou shall see how nimbly I will bestirre these aged limbs, and place before
thine eyes a plain and evident conversion of Impoteney into Ability. I shall
not think any pains my weakness can endure too great, nor any cost my purse
can compass too dear for thee. Wherefore I earnestly beseech thee to bless
me, and my house with thy long abode, and let not our course and slender fare
make thee hasten my death in thy sudden return. O my brightest Star! envy me
not thy comfortable shine, but let me Live in it till I exchange it for a
brighter in Heaven. The days of my Pilgrimage are even now at an end; O leave
me not then, who art the Staff and Solace of mine Age! but stay the arrival
of my last minute, and with thy fairest hands close up these my dim eyes. So
shall I bid farewell to this world with content, and enter the other with
glory. Thou my sweetest Princess who have verified the Prophecy of Esaias, and
being an unspotted Virgin, do conceive and bring forth to the world our
Emanuell; grant this my first, and most humble request. O thou daughter of
Abraham! who have surpassed thy Fathers Faith in believing things which seem
more impossible to humane Reason: if in this rude speech of mine I have
over-talked my self, or underspoken thee, impute it to my declining and doting
years, and grant me thy Pardon. Thus I end, but not without adding to those I
have already given thee, a Myriade of Welcomes, and a million of Aves more.

The virtuous Maid undoubtedly was not here mute, but divided her speech
between God and her Cousin. She directed (with I know not whether greater
Piety, or Prudency) her praise to the former ere she would vouchsafe to make a
reply to the latter. An answer without all peradventure her humanity afforded
her, and to this purpose for ought we know, might it be.

Dearest Cousin, your own wisdom will plead my excuse, in that I rendered him
laud to whom it belongs, ere I accepted of it my self to whom it is not due.
You magnify me, and I my Creator. Your sacred issue moved with delight at the
sound of my harsh voice, and my spirit rejoices in the Mercy of my sweetest
Savior. You give me attributes more proper to my Maker than to me, not unlike
those Heathen who take off the heads from the Images of their Gods, and fasten
them to the shoulders of their Princes Statues. Your commendations fit your
self better than me, and resemble those resplendent rays which return into
the radiant body that sent them forth. In a word, you have subscribed my Name
to your own Character. The humbling and undervaluing of your self is a strong
argument of your virtue; for^^ in a field of Corn we see the empty ears to
hold up their heads, the fuller to hang them down. I am in my Spring, you in
your Autumn; I produce the Blossom, but you bear the fruit. What the most
penetrating Eye can discern in me, the most partial Tongue will call a
superficial ornament, but the dimmest sight may soon discover that in you,
which the most detracting Pen must be forced to style essential worth. Thus
dignified, give me leave to tell you, sweetest Cousin, that you offer me an
affront together with your service. A seemly sight it were surely to behold
decrepit age waiting on active youth, wisdom on vanity; a venerable Matron on
a simple Girl. The scope of my journey is to attend you, to lend you my
strength, now your own fails you, and to serve you through all the offices of
your Handmaid. Do but intimate your will by the least sign, and you shall
see me fly to perform it. Your Invention cannot devise any thing so
impossible, which my will (ambitious to please you) will not judge most easy
to be executed. Whereas you entreat me to stay long with you, you transgress
the Laws of Friendship in petitioning her whom you may justly and boldly
command. A thing strange to me it is, that you should think me so stupid and
senseless, as that I should need an invitation to be made truly happy. Before
I had the honor to see you, I envied those that enjoyed your sweet and divine
conversation, and thought they enricht themselves with my loss; wherefore a
staff to beat me hence is more requisite, than Oratory to keep me here. Ever
since the blessed Angel imparted to me the news of your being fruitful, my
desire to see you has been restless, and next to God I have only meditated
you and your goodness. O my best Cousin! whose fervent and devout prayers
obtain victories, whose Fasts abundance, joy^ with me in thankesgiving to God
for the grace which I shall never be able to conceive, much less to express
or deserve. Him with al^ my heart and with all my soul I invoke, that
blessings may fall upon you before, and above your wishes, and that you may yet
long live to his glory, and my Comfort.

Had their three months demeanor each to other, together with their godly
discourse, and pious practice of it, been penned to posterity (had all other
Books been burnt save that and the Bible) the Femall sex in these two should
have found matter ample enough to exercise both their Meditation and action.
Sure I am the Romish Church, Sess. 43. Council. Basileen.
as in an honorable menoriall of this their Charitable Encounter, has
ordained the Annual Celebration of a solemn Feast. And the Council of Basil
of what authority in other things know not certainly in this one particular
very commendable) has decreed the solemnization of this Festival day in these
very words.

The Blessed Virgin being instructed the celestial Messenger, and conducted by
the Holy Ghost, ascended in haste the mountanous Country, and entered the
humble house of Zachary. For JESUS who was in her womb, wade haste to bless
John as yet in his Mothers Belly. And the most glorious Virgin visiting her
Cosen Elizabeth, was pleasing to her both in her loving visitation, and
fruitful Colloquie. The Consideration of this Excelling Mystery ought to
delight the minds of the Faithful, wherein these two glorious Mothers (who
bore about them the comencement and accomplishment of our Salvation) did so
familiarly communicate their joys, and wherein the most excellent Virgin Mary
of the House of David, and Elizabeth the most venerable amongst the Daughters
of Aaron discoursed together. The first of these had enclosed in her womb the
Creator and Redeemer of us all, the latter his Forerunner. These Saints being
made Mothers by a Miracle conferred together of the Divine benefits they had
received. The meeting of this worthy pair was most happy, and illustrated
with great, and glorious testimonies of the divine Grace. The one conceived by
the cooperation of the holy Spirit, the ^her by Miracle in her old Age, and
both their issues foretold by the celestial Angel. John as yet imprisoned in
his Mothers womb does worship his Lord borne to him in Mary's Belly; and
Elizabeth filled with the Holy Ghost does congratulate the Conception of the
Son of God, and the Savi^^ of Mankind, and prophesying declares her Cosen
blessed in believing, and contemplating the mysteries revealed to her. On the
other side Mary full of unutterable joy, laid up all these sayings in her
heart, which before she had heard from the Angel, and now from Elizabeth, and
breaks out into a Song of Thanksgiving to the Lord. Who can sufficiently praise
so great Mysteries? Who can declare those joys to the full? John not yet borne
rejoices, Elizabeth is delighted with the arrival of the Virgin, Mary is
extremely pleased in the Mysteries, the Savior of the world is acknowledged
by his Forerunner, not only the Angels, but Heaven and Earth resent the
pleasure, and the whole Trinity is glorified with new praises. Wherefore the
greatness of these joys is to be extolled with especial commendations, and
with singular solemnities to be celebrated, and the Lord in the womb, the
Virgin that bears him, the barren that conceives, and the Forerunner that it
sanctified ought to be presented with all imaginable praises and honors.

With this pious and grateful ordinance of the Church I conclude the
visitation of our incomparable Lady, and now proceed to her Deliverie.

Her delivery.
We read in holy Writ of three supernatural Productions, the one of Adam, the
other of Eve, the last of Christ, which as most miraculous we are now to treat
of. Here in his Nativitie, as before in his Conception, let us turn
Inquisition into thanksgiving, and with one spirit and voice sing aloud, Ps.
118.22.
The stone which the Builders refused is the head of the corner. This was the
Lords doing, and it is mavelous in our eyes. This is the day which the Lord
has made, let us rejoice, and be glad in it. This is our wedding day, wherein
by the Son we are joined to the Father. This is the day of the new union,
wherein he who is God remains the same that he was, yet for our sakes is
borne, and made what he was not; wherein he that was every where without a
Body, is made present to us by a Body, that what God has by Nature, men might
receive by Grace. This is a great, a joyful, a fortunate, a desired day, the
end of the Law, the end of the Prophets, the beginning of the Gospel, nay the
Gospel it self. This is a day of State, ushered by the Angels, followed by
the Apostles. Let our Minds remove the distance of Time and place, and dwell a
while with our all-holy-Lord and blessed Lady, lest we loose the pleasure of
this day, the least Accident whereof is Mysterious. What a brave assembly of
Visitants of all Conditions resorted this day to this place, which then might
rightly be called the Randevous of the Saints? Would you see those who are
above men, but below him who is borne? Behold the Angels singing his birth. Do
you desire to behold the married? Here you have Zachary and Elizabeth. The
unmarried? Here you have Symeon. Widows? Here you have Anna. Priests? Here
again you have Zachary. Wise men? Here you have them from the East. Idiots?
You have here the Shepherds. But here is to be noted, that these keepers of
Beasts hear the voice of the Angels before any of the other, first receive the
Gospel, and first divulge it. And in this they were more happy then Augustus
himself, who (though he had made a firm Peace by Sea and Land, and had now
the third time shut up the Temple of Ianus) yet was he ignorant of the blessed
Peace concluded on betwixt God and Man. O how much sometimes Ignorance avails
in Divine matters! Kings, Potentates, the Rulers of the Earth, and the wise of
this world are asleep while Christ is borne. These most simple of Mortals, and
innocent as the creatures they tend, watch all night, and therefore are first
made partakers of these joyful news. As their own wool not yet dipped in any
dye readily drinks in any color they please to bestow on it: So their minds
void of all humane wisdom, greedily sucked in the Divine; Faith is the
Compendium of Salvation, and humane knowledge of times the obstacle of Faith.
Aristotle having confined to Heaven, the Maker, and Moover of it, would never
have believed his birth here below. Plato would have derided this miraculous
relation, who the more he attributed to God, the less would he have expected
his so humble coming into the world. Neither would the Stoics who held God to
be a fire, nor Hipocrates who thought him to be a warm'th, ever have looked for
him clad in flesh and blood. Wherefore they are here elected witnesses of this
strange truth, whose Science was of ability strongly to believe, not wittily to
dispute. O what proficients in Faith did these rusticall Swains prove in a
moment! What a profound secret is imparted to them? Let us examine the verity
of this by that infallible Touchstone, the text. And there were in the same
Country, Shepherds abiding in the field, and keeping watch by night, because
of their flock, and lo the Angel of the Lord came upon them, and the glory
of the Lord shone about them, and they were sore afraid. Then the Angel said
unto them, Be not afraid; for behold I bring you tidings of great joy that
shall be to all the people: That is, that unto you is borne this day a Savior
which is Christ the Lord. And this shall be a sign unto you; you shall find
the Child swadled and laid in a Cratch. And straight way there was with the
Angel a multitude of heavenly Soldiers, praising God, and saying; Glory be to
God in the high Heaven, and Peace on Earth, and toward men good will. And it
came to pass that when the Angels were gone away from thence into Heaven, that
the Shepherds said one to another; Let us go then unto Bethlem, and see this
thing that is come to pass, which the Lord has showed unto us; so they came
with haste, and found both Mary and Joseph with the Babe laid in the Cratch.
And when they had seen it, they published abroad the thing that was told them
of that Child.

Here three things especially are remarkable:

First, their forwardness in believing:

Secondly, the speed they made to see what they had believed, and

Thirdly, to publish what they had seen.

That they quickly believed, appears by the haste they made to see. They no
sooner saw him, but they found him to be the King of Israel indeed, yet
withal to be a Shepherd. They instantly discern this to be the Shepherd,
who was to lay down his life for his flock. The Prince of all Shepherds
whose sheepe-fold is the world: The Shepherd that was to separate the Goats
from the Sheep. They discovered this to be the immaculate Lamb that was to
take away the sins of the world. They disclosed this Lamb to be the greatest
Lion of the Tribe of Judah. Whom now they look on in the Cratch, Saint John
shall hereafter behold on his Throne. These men in whom there was no guile as
they could not deceive others, so they could not in this be deceived. They
needed not suspect any fallacy, and therefore might safely relate this divine
wonder to all they met.

The second witnesses of this Miracle are the Wise men. After God had laid open
the Treasure of his divine secrets to Idiots, he shows them also to the wise.
It seems the Earth at this time was become the Book of Gods greatest
Mysteries, and Heaven the Index. In this they find the Star of this King of
the Jews, which (having been before the declarer of his Nativity) they now
make their guide in their journey. The Star performing this duty to its
Creator, at length brings them to Bethlem, where they view him in the Crateh,
whose Nativity before they had found in the Heavens. To him they do Homage,
tender adoration, and pay Tribute, and opening their Treasures, make him an
oblation of Gold, Incense, and Mirrhe. Whom before they had in vain sought in
the Heavens, they now find on the earth, and in the most sorded part of it, a
Stable, full of several stinkes; where he (to whom none are worthy to be
servants) had two dull Beasts for his Companions.

Return now you Sons of wisdom to your own home, by much more learned, by
more than much more happy than when you set out. Heaven is now set open to you,
which before your unbelief kept shut against you. If you be Chaldaeans or
Persians, or both, spread through those Nations the fame of that which you
have seen. Publish in all places this the greatest mystery of Piety, which God
is only able to produce, ^^ly faith can apprehend. Of all ^reatures to man
only belongs the ^ift of Reason, by the rule whereof he ^asures all things.
But doc not you ^e so, lest you fall not only into an ^rreparable, but a
damnable error. follow you the instruction of Faith, and where ere you come
with a holy ^ide, proclaim that God is manife^^ed in the flesh, justified in
the Spirit, ^^ene by Angels, revealed to Shep^^ards, found out and adored by
you ^our selves, and hereafter to be assumed, and to sit in glory far above
those stars you daily read. Go, and give out that there is nothing greater
in Heaven, than what you have found in a Stable. Yet ere you depart, convince
the stiff-necked Jews of their lofty, but gross error, in diligently
seeking to know God in that part wherein he will lie hid, a^^ in taking no
notice of him i^^ that part wherein he would be known: in looking for (...)
Savior from The Jews when ever it lighteneth, set open their windows: for
they hold their Savior shall come in lightening. On this read Buxdorfius.
Heaven, wh^^ is already borne on earth Yet now I consider their obstinacy
better, I wish you t^^ spare your here fruitless advise: for the ears of this
wicked generation is stopped, their hearts obdurate, and they are as fully
resolved to go on in their wickedness, as you in your journey.

Having proved his Nativity by these holy Testators, let us now enter our
selves, and view this pretty one in his narrow lodging, lay our selves
prostrate before him, worship him, and re^^ate our selves with the lovely
^bject. And that our delight may (...) the greater, let us first behold (...),
and his sweetest Mother a ^^art, then both together. But ^et us here shut out
the Pharisees, and bar them the sight of this ^eavenly Infant, who urge the
^aw, and reject him the Author ^^it. Let us exclude the Arrians, ^ho deny his
coequalitie with the ^^^her, and the Sabellians who ^^n found the Trinity, of
which ^^^is distinctly one, and hold that ^^ere is in it one Essence, and one
^^^rson: and the Samosatenians, ^ho derogate from his Nature, and avouch the
Word (which tru^^^ he is) to be no other then a va^^hing sound. Nor let us
only ^^epe out these, but the whole swarm also of Atheists, and Heretics.
Let the Philosophers too stay without, who not so impious, yet more ignorant,
cannot dive to the bottom of this Mystery. But to all those who are honored
in the assumption and profession of his glorious Name a free access is
granted. Enter then you little flock, you few whom his Father has bestowed on
him, and see him, who when he gave the Law appeared in Fire, now he offers
Grace involved in Hay. Yet in this dejected posture, in this course manner
while he lay, he wanted not a whole Army of Angelical spirits that declared
his Birth to Men, and they who had before chanted his praises as he sat in
Glory, now sing his goodness lying in the Cratch. Though he have a hoomely
roof over his head, ^e East observes his approach. Though the poverty of his
Humanity obscures his Deity, the Stars in Heaven make it known. ^ehold him
who came humble to ^he humble, for the humble, and ^et his humility is above
all sublimity. Reverently and intentively ^ook on him who descended from Heaven
to Earth, who came to you, into you, who is borne in the ^ight, borne in the
midst of Winter, and borne (after the wretched humane condition) naked, and
^one offer him assistance. Swad^ling clothes are wanting, some ^agges are found
out, a Cradle is missing, a Manger is at hand.

Here he cries to you, and holds up ^is pretty hands to Heaven, which he calls
to witness that he can humble himself no lower. Can you view this humble,
this merciful spectacle, and not weep your selves into marble? O speedily put
on sackcloth! besprinckle your selves with Ashes, kneel down in the dust and
dung under the Manger where your Lord lies, knock your selves on the bosoms,
fetch sighs and groans from the bottom of your hearts, repay him the tears he
lent you, and by your sad gesture and deportment demonstrate how much you are
bound to him who suffered for you even in his Birth.

Having seen the Son, now steadfastly place your eyes upon the Mother. Behold
the unpolluted Maid (a great part of the wonder) sitting near the Manger,
being void of all lust, chaste in Soul and Body, who does now confess that of
which she is not capable without a miracle, to wit, that she is a Mother, and
with fixed eyes expressing now joy, now admiration, sees her self wedded to
Heaven. She beholds her self a Mother delivered of her Parent, a handmaid of
her King, and Master. She to her astonishment finds that she has brought forth
an issue more mighty then David, more ancient then Adam. And now she feels the
tender, and ardent affection of a Mother, but the old love she has borne her
virginity gives it an allay. Here the Mother, the Midwife, and the Nurse are
one and the same, lest any thing less pure should handle him then her who
brought him forth. And now she nurseth this Heavenly infant with her pure
milk, which flows from no mortal lust, but from the Celestial Grace. Her
breasts white as their own milk pressed by her delicate fingers, as white as
either, he softly pats, and plays with. Sometimes he repaires to them for
sport, sometimes for necessity, and he who feeds all things else draws thence
his nourishment. He casts up now one eye, now the other, and with a pleasing
look gives her a sweet smile, not unlike to that which Zephirus imprints on
the cheek of the Rose. She returns him another, and her infinite, but chaste,
affection she divides between her Son, and her virginity. And now her
ecstasy being a little over, she calls to mind that she has often read her
own story foretold by the Prophets, That a Virgin should bring forth a Son.

Fly, O fly far hence you Monsters of women, who carry leprous souls in
polluted bodies, and have not one virtue to rescue you from the Legion of our
vices. Depart hence you who are lives to Lust, whose fetters you have ^orne so
long, that they have made a ^^pe impression in your minds. You (...) have
spent your time in the ^^rch after alluring dresses, and in ^^^on dalliance
shall have no en^^nce here. You who have received ^^th delight one warm
Masculine ^^sse, shall here be excluded. Nay you ^^ho have had only one
unchaste ^^ought, shall not here be admitted, ^thout being prepared by a
cleansing ^^rty Repentance. This is the lodging (...) Purity, into which
nothing must come that is unclean. But you whose chaste eyes have never sent
out lustful beams, nor received them in, whose Bosoms have been of proof
against the fierce assaults and Batteries of Temptation, you are so far from
being forbidden to come here, that you are earnestly invited hither. You who
have lived spiritual Amourists, whose spirits have triumphed over the Flesh,
on whose Cheeks Solitude, Prayers, Fasts, and Austerity have left an amiable
pale: You who ply your sacred Arithmeticke, and have thoughts cold, and clear
as the Crystal beads you pray by: You who have vowed virginity mental, and
corporal, you shall not only have ingresse here, but welcome. Approach with
Comfort, and kneel down before the Grand white Immaculate Abbess of your
snowy Nunneries, and resent the all-saving Babe in her Irmes with due
veneration. Never ^hinke more of the Faecunditie of Vedlocke, since you see
here that God himself is the fruit of Virginity. ^ou who have tied your selves
in holy bonds, from which you wish never ^ut by death to be freed, who have
those rather lawfully to yield to the ^bellious desires of the flesh, than
un^^fully to subdue them: you who in sdelity and simplicity of life have
^^ictly imitated Christ and his spouse: you whose Fertility is blessed, ^onely
in preserving and propagaing the humane Race, but in augmening also the number
of the Saints in heaven, to you a free and open access given. You widdowed
Turtles, ^ho have lost your Mates, and either ^^ve vowed never to match again,
^pray'd to God that when you do, it may be to his glory; you also shall have
admittance. Virgins, Wives, and Widows, join hands, and encircle this the
most perfect pair that ever graced the earth: Behold to your astonishment, and
also to your consolation a mild and gentle Maid, in whom neither Childe-birth
defaceth Virginity, nor Virginity fruitfulness. Feed your eyes with the ^^ght
of her whose mind is a Paradise without a Serpent, on whose looks, words, and
actions, Modesty is a diligent attender. And now in Feace do you depart too,
but take this charitable Admonition along with you, that (in emulation of this
your dearest Mistress) you lay up all her graces and perfections in your
hearts, and withal continually meditate her patience, which contented it self
with bad lodging, and worse accommodation, the sad ^emembrance whereof has
made me ^ser since I read this passage, not to ^^e very solicitous where, or
how I ^^e.

22. And when the days of her Purification, according to the Law of Moses were
accomplished they brought him to Jerusalem, to present him to the Lord:



Her Purification.
Having waited on her in her Delivery, we will now attend her to her
Purification. This day (the celebration whereof is instituted by the Church) is
called Candlemasse, as much as to say, the Day of Lights, on which (while Mass
was singing) very many Tapours were burning in the Church. The Lustration of
houses was yearly usual with the Romans in the month of February, from
whence this custom in the Church is derived. Innocentius thus propounds and
solves the Question. In sermon. de Purif. B. Mar. Virg.
What is the reason, says he, that on this Holy day we use so many Lights in
the Church? The cause of this institution is twofold. The first is, that a
Heathenish custom may be converted into a Christian Right or Ordinance, and
that which was performed by superstitious Idolaters in honor of Ceres and
Proserpina, may be turned into the praise and glory of the Virgin Mary. The
second is, that they who by Grace are purified, by this Ceremony may be
admonished to imitate those prudent Virgins, who (as the Evangelicall Parable
testifies) came not without their Tapours lighted to the Nuptials of Christ
their Spouse. This day the Church used to pray, that as the visible Lights
chased away the darkness of the night: so the hearts of the Faithful might
be illuminated by the Invisible flames of the holy Spirit, and (being cured of
their blindness brought upon them by vice) might with pure and clear eyes
discern those things which are pleasing to God, and necessary to their
salvation; and having passed through the sad, dark, and dismal accidents of
this world, might at length arrive at Heaven, where they shall behold, and
enjoy a Light everlasting. This day is not only made Holy by the Purification
of the Mother, but by the oblation also and presentation of the Son, of whom,
as of the more worthy, we must first discourse.

It was truly a great abasing of the Son of God (for which by the Prophets
he was styled a Servant) who being not a debtor to the Law, but the Lord of it,
and the only Firstborn free from sin, yet endured and underwent with other
Children, both the Jewish Circumcision and oblation, and at once publicly
honored nour'd his Fathers house, and (to use the Prophets phrase) filled it
with glory. There offered by the Virgin hands of his Mother, he was to his
Father a most pleasing oblation, being the end of the Law, and all the ancient
Sacrifices. Neither was the longing of Simeon and Anna only satisfied with his
aspect, but the ardent wishes also of many others, in whose minds the old
spark of Faith now burst out into new and bright flames, which did not only
illuminate their own, but other Bosoms also. Not a few, questionless, at
Jerusalem, marked this day with a white stone, and did celebrate it with joy
and thankesgiving, in that the Light foretold by Esaias then arose, and comforted
all those to whom the shine and warmth of it extended. Israel had never seen
her Messiah, till then when she had free leave to kiss, embrace, and dandle
him in her Arms, and therefore her joy must of necessity be more than
ordinary. Yet some of her inhabitants were deaf, and could not hear the
Prophets proclaim his coming; others were blind, and could not discern him
being come, nor were sensible at all of the Honor they received in the
venerable presence of him, and his incomparable Mother.

I now come to our sweetest Lady, the time of whose Lying in being expired, she
fets forward to the Temple. I have read some who poetically set down her going
thither, and compare her to Aurora, whom the Poets describe sitting in a golden
Chariot drawn by a Pegasus, her yellow hair spread over her milky shoulders,
with a Torch in her hand enlightening this inferior world. For my own part
(though of all humane studies I am most taken with Poesy yet both by Nature and
Grace I abhor to write of things divine in the style of the stage. But this
Religion and modesty will license me to aver, That when she went to be
Purified, she was in all things the very figure and resemblance of Sanctity it
self. No doubt but she was accompanied with a Beavy of Shee-Saints, of which
she was the Chorus. Neither was Joseph absent, who as before he had been a
guardiant of her, and her Infant in her Delivery when he was not capable of the
Miracle; So now he is altogether incapable of his own Felicity in attending
his fairest Mate, and dearest Master to the holy Temple. And who doubts but
this blessed one joyed more in this Journey than Joseph or any other. Saint
John and Saint Luke testify that it was a religious custom amongst the very
Heathen from remote pleace to come to Jerusalem, John 12. Acts 2.8
and in the Temple thereof to perform their devotions. Do you think this
pious Maid can be out-stripped in the performance of a holy duty by the
Gentiles? Can you imagine she could neglect and loose the occasion of time and
place offered her, to commend to her Maker in her best words the vows and
prayers of her prepared heart? She came to Jerusalem (for certainly she dwelt
not there) with far greater speed and joy, questionless, than to her
Counsins house, this being a business that much more concerned her, in that
she was by more and stronger ties bound to serve God than Elizabeth. And here
by the way we must not omit her Humility and Charity. Her Humility.
Of the first whereof we have a clear demonstration in this, That what other
women did out of fear of the Law, she was persuaded by a perfect faith, and an
humble obedience to perform. For that her Purification was necessary, I
believe no man will affirm, unless in this sense, That the Rites and
Ceremonies imposed on the purified by Moses, were with decency to be observed
by her who had borne him that came to fulfill, not to destroy the Law. She
could not be maculated in conceiving, because she knew no man, nor in bearing,
by reason it was without a man. Why should she be solicitous to redeem her
Son, who was himself the Redeemer of the world? This was assuredly an act
produced by her Humility, as was also her refusing the company of the rich, and
her associating the poor and needy, Her charity.
though most impure, and abject. And she her self was so penurious, that she
had not wherewithal to buy a Lamb, whereof to make oblation. Whereas the Rich
hide and hourd up their wealth, she draws forth the This is the observation of
Dammianus, Dammascen, and many more.
Treasure brought her by the Wise men, and with alacrity distributes it amongst
those whose wants required it: yet was part of the present gold, which upon
charitable uses surely was consumed; for her Frugality and Temperancy were
such, that in so short a time she could not possibly have spent the value of
it. But these perfections are not to be wondered at in her, who being a
Doctresse, scorned not to be a Disciple, and strongly to endeavor the
attaining even to those virtues which by Nature were innate, and by Grace
engrafted in her. Ravished in soul with these her Excellencies, me thinks I
see her Majestically pacing on to the Temple, and hear her thus speak to
those who accompanied and met her on the way.

My dear friends, Sisters, and fellow servants, I have ever desired and
endeavored (as near as Humane frailty will give me leave) to imitate my
sweetest Son, whose profound Humility and perfect obedience can never
sufficiently be extolled. Full well he knew Humility to make the first step to
eternal life; Obedience the second; the former of which to teach all men he
descended from Heaven, the latter to demonstrate, he became obedient to his
Father, even to the suffering of the cursed death of the Cross. Would you see
me a Proficient in both these supernatural virtues? Behold me who am
unpolluted, (as not having conceived by humane means) going like one vicious,
and impure to be purified. I who am free from the observation of the Mosaicall
Laws and Ceremonies, have subjected my self to them. I who am void of all
wilful sin, willingly go amongst other sinful and unclean women, that I
may be to all an Example of Charity and Humility, to none a president of ruin.
I thought it not enough that my fruitful V^rginity had produced Salvation to
the world, unless by Example also I taught how this Grace (applicable to all,
applied but to a few) by you also might be obta^ned. This is my way to the
attainement of celestial glory, and let it be yours to purchase your selves
eternal salvation. Do thus, live thus, that you may shine holy Tapers in Gods
m^lita^^ Church, and glorious Stars in his Triumphant.

She with her devout train being come unto the Temple offered her gift to the
Priest, and received a propheticke Benediction from Symeon. Whether this old
man were a Priest, or a Layman, I will not here dispute; certainly he was a man
blessed above all the Patriarchs and Prophets, in that he saw God face to face,
and may be styled the most profound of all Divines, Timoth. presb. ierosol. in
orat. de Propheta Simeone.
who (being the last just man of the Law, the first of Grace, a lew by
Religion, in Thanksgiving a Christian) comprehended so many Mysteries in so few
words. This holy Man (the Scribes and Pharisees dreaming on ^o such matter) had
long since seen his Savior coming, whom he no sooner saw borne into the
Temple by his mother (who then resemble Modesty supporting sanctity) but he
snatched this pre^ti^ Babe out of her Arms into his own, and not able to
contain his joy, in a divine Rapture Swannelike (his death being then at hand)
sung this his sweetest Ditty. Lord now let thou thy Servant depart in
Peace: for mine eyes have seen thy Salvation, which thou have prepared before
the face of all Nations, a Light to lighten the Gentiles, and to the glory of
thy people Israel. And he blessed them, and said unto Mary his mother, Behold
this Child is appointed for the fall and rising again of many in Israel, and
for a sign which shall be spoken against, yea and a sword shall pass through
thy Soul, that the thoughts of many hearts may be opened. And Anna a
Prophetess confessed the same to all those who looked for the Redemption of
Israel. Luke 2.
If the viewing and embracing of Christ so dilated the spirits of the old man's
heart, and made him so sensible of this his great felicity, that he would
expect here no greater, but desired rather a dissolution then the fruition of
any thing else on earth, What may we judge her content to be, who conceived,
bore, brought forth, and brought him up? Whose affectionate looks, kisses, and
embraces he had by day, the two later of which the night it self could not
bar him of. Her greatest detracters surely cannot imagine her so stupid as
not to be apprehensive of the delight, the Comfort, the happiness, the honor
his presence did impart, nor so unthankful as not to acknowledge, and to her
power express her gratitude. Certainly her soul was in a heavenly Trance when
she contemplated the grace and felicity she had in Gods own house, and before
an Assembly of his elected people to acknowledge her gratitude for the
inestimable benefits he had vouchsafed her, but especially for this, that in
his glorious eyes she seemed worthy (though in her self undeserving) in her
own name, and that of his chosen to present him with such a sacrifice, such a
gift as exceedingly surpassed in excellency, all Hosts, Sacrifices, and
Sacraments whatsoever, being indeed, their only scope and end. Anna the Mother
of Samuel is praised for her diligence in Prayer, the fruit whereof she reaped
in her dispair'd of Fertility. And of our admired Virgin, we read that she
carefully frequented the Temple, of which (being wise) she knew the
institution, and (being pious) the custom, which she most religiously
observed. Wherefore this day of her Purification, and at all times else,
without all peradventure, she much excelled Anna, and her whole sex in the
fervency of her Orisons, in the ardency of her love, in purity, and sublimity
of mind, in holiness of life, and divine contemplation. We may boldly
conclude that she poured out her prayers here in greater abundance than she did
in Zacharies house, where she could not suppress the flame of her zeal from
breaking out into the praise of God her Savior, in whom she rejoiced. To this
effect, happily, here she prayed.

O eternal and gracious God! I am below other women in merit, but above them
all indebted to thy supreme Majesty, for making me the Tabernacle of thy only
Son, the Temple of thy Spirit, and for this special honor done me in the
Temple of thy Service, the congregation whereof makes me the only point
wherein the lines of their affection, and admiration do meet. If women be
respected for their fertillity, needs must I be in great esteem with all men,
who (by thy eternal Predestination, and fatherly providence) have brought
forth thy only Son, their Redeemer. With a bowed heart, and bended knees I
acknowledge that thou have faithfully and mercifully fulfilled all those thy
favorable promises made me by thy Angel Gabriel, my Cousin Elizabeth, and thy
holy Prolets. Thou who can neither de^eive, nor be deceived, have made me
the virtue of thy Spirit operating) Mother, my virginal integrity still
^eserved. That long longed for Emanuel, (than whom nothing grea^^r, or better
could be given by thee, (...) taken my me) I have at length pro^^c'd to save
all those that believe in him. This magnificent immense, in^^haustible,
unvaluable Treasure, ^his beloved Son of thine in whom thou art well pleased;
This Saint of Saints, by whom all things in Heaven and Earth, are
re-establisht, this Savior of the world I here present to thee, as a gift most
acceptable in thy sight. He whom all Nations, and the Fathers themselves have
so much thirsted to see: The Angel of the new Testament, the seed of Abraham,
the son of David, the King of Israel, in whom all generations are blessed,
the Lord of the Temple is here come to illustrate his own house. O merciful
Father! open the eyes of the dim sighted Israelites, that they may see the
glorious Light that now shines on them, and not only acknowledge, but worship
their Messiah, and embrace him in their hearts, as I do in mine Arms. Neither
let the Rays of this newborn star reflect only on them, but on all those
also, who sit in darkness, and the shadow of death, that to them it may
restore life and luster. So shall they acknowledge thee, and him whom thou have
sent, CHRIST JESUS, and be made spiritual dwellings for thee to reside in,
there to rece^ve due thanks and praise for ever and ever.

Between her Purification, and passion of her Son, she is not of^^ mentioned
in holy Writ, but ^^en she is, it is still to her praise ^^d honor: As when
her care for ^e poor made her petition Christ (...) Wine to revive, Her charity.
and refresh ^^eir drooping, fainting Spirits; and when she said to him, Why
^^ve you used us thus your Father ^^d I have been to seek you. Whence all
women may learn ^umility, motherly care, and con^gall Faith. She who was
without ^emish, as being Gods own Mo^her, whose chaste bosom no car^all
thought had ever entered, who ^ookt on all men with the same in^ocency and
simplicity with which the beheld Statues, deigned to call apoor rustical
laboring man Husband, from whose dear company, no flight, Her motherly care,
together with her coningal Faith and obedience.
terror, travail, no^ pains could separate her. B^ what the Scripture
omitteth, m^^^ be supplied by our charitable imagination, which cannot but
co^ceive all those her Actions burie^ in silence, to have been of the same
pure thread with the rest o^ her life. The truth of which w^^ find confirmed in
her perseverance in goodness, even to he^ sons end, and her ow ne.

Her demeanor at her Sons death.
At his death we read she was pr^sent, and there stood (says the Eva^gelist)
by the Cross of Christ his No^ther and her Sister Mary Cleopho^^ and Mary
Magdalen. When therefore Jesus saw his Mother, and his beloved Disciple
standing by, he said^ his Mother, Woman, behold thy So^ and he said to his
Disciple, Behold thy Mother, and from that time he took her for his. His
pardoning of the Thief is not a greater argument of his Mercy, than his taking
care for his Mother was of his Piety. He gives Temperancy the custody of
Chastity, and commends these to each other who were resolved to live and dye
Virgins. Saint Bernard says these words of Christ to his Mother, included much
bitterness, for they put her in mind that she was to make a dammageable
exchange of Christ for John, of the Servant for his Lord, of the Disciple for
his Master, of the Son of God, for the son of Zebedaeus. And this was the
reason (if we give belief to Mantuan) that he called her Woman, not Mother,
lest the very sound of that dear word should make her more sensible of his
approaching loss, and force her into an immoderate grief. But sorrow was no
Noveltie to her for that saying of Christ, In this world, you shall have
affliction, was in her verified, whose life contained more miseries then
minutes, which she patiently underwent, knowing that the more distressed she was
here, the more blessed she should be he reafter. And if we shall add the light
of Reason to the Evangelicall Truth, we shall soon perceive that a fatal
sadness haunted her from the birth of her only Son to his burial. When she
was great with him, and ready to lie down, the inhumanity of the Bethlemites
was such, that they confined her, and the Lord of all things to a Stable, and
would not supply her with as much as Linen; a Mantle, and other necessaries
wherewithal she might defend her self, and her sweet Babe from the moisture
of the night, the sharpness of the winter, and other intolerable
inconveniences. When her Child was eight days old, she saw him loose blood in
his Circumcision, which her divining soul misgave her to be a Type of the
dear remainder he was to shed. Then again her mind was infinitely vexed for
the butchery of those guiltless Children which were murdered for the sake of
her own innocent Infant; of the sorrow and misery of whose Mothers, her
tender compassionating heart was a most competent Judge. From this bloody
Massacre to save her Savior, she was constrained (without taking leave of her
friends, or disposing of what was hers) to take her flight with him, and
through danger, Vernulaeus says that those who fly from danger, travail most
by night, and therefore it is likely our blessed Lady did so.
darkness, and horror, to make her way into Egypt. When he was twelve years
old, she lost him, an Accident more grievous than any of the former; for
heretofore her study had been to preserve what she had, now her care was to
find what she had not. What an Agony her soul suffered at the lamentable
tidings of the beheading of her Sons Forerunner, I leave to the consideration
of all thankful souls; for she could not without being stained with
ingratitude, but mourn for his absence and violent departure out of the world,
who had received so much joy at her presence before he came into it. But above
all these, the unequalled Treachery of Judas, who delivered this Lamb of God,
as a prey to these Wolves; the infidelity of his other Disciples, the malignity
of his Judges, the crucelty of his Executioners conspired to make her
miserable. Nor is it unlikely that she bewailed the ingratitude, the obstinacy
and impiety of her Nation, who reviled him that blessed them, and tortured him
who came to save them. With what amazement and sadness was her heart surprised
think ye, when the news came of her Sons being apprehended? But when she saw
him forsaken by his friends, bound by his enemies, accused before the high
Priests, derided by Herod, despised by the people; scourged, and tortured by
the command of Pilate, his body trembling, torn, and pierced, besmeared with
his own blood, and hung between two Thieves; then, and never till then did the
Sword foretold by Simeon, pass through her Soul. Luther says this Prophecy
of Simcon was spoken to her, not to Joseph, for on her alone the whole weight
of sorrow was to be laid. True it is that many differ about the interpretation
of this Sword. To clear all doubts, we must take notice that the holy
Scriptures mention four sorts of Swords.

The first is a Corporal, or material sword, and of this Christ speaks to
Peter, All that use the Sword, shall perish with the Sword.

The second is a spiritual Sword, of which Saint Paul makes mention, when he
says, Receive the sword of the Spirit, which is the word of God.

The third is a Sword of Scandal or Ambiguity, with which the Apostles
themselves were stricken, when they forsook their Master.

The fourth is the Sword of Grief or Tribulation. Psalm. 33. Ps. 105. Genesis 37.
With this the Prophet David averres the Soul of Joseph to have been pierced
when his death was plotted first by his treacherous Brothers, next by his
incontinent Mistress.

That this Sword whereof Simeon Prophesied, could be no material one, is
evident, in that we read not of any violent death she suffered. That it could
not be the sword of the Spirit, is manifest; for the word of God was her daily
delitious food at the same time when Simeon made this Prophecy. Origin indeed
will have it to be the sword of Ambiguity or Infidelity: which erroneous
opinion of his, is refuted by many great Fathers of the ancient Church, and by
Franciscus Lumbertus, an accute Protestant Doctor of the modern in these
words. In exposit. Evang. Lucae cap. 2.
Those, says he, who will have this to be the sword of Infidelity, are not to
be hearkened to; for (besides that they can produce no proof of this their
opinion) it is contradictory to the Text, most rash, and most untrue. How can
it be that the sword of Infidelity should penetrate the breast of Gods sacred
Mother, into which, infidelity never made the least impression? From the
leginning, her Faith was most firm and entire. Let therefore those Blasphemies
and wicked slanders of canall men be put to silence. I will attribute nothing
to the blessed Virgin, but what I read in the holy Writ, where she is
pronounced blessed, because she believed. We have many testimonies of her
Faith, but of her Infidelity not one word is extant in the sacred Scriptures.
Yet this profane assertion is not a whit strange, or to be marvelled at in
Origin, who held that Christ dyed for the Angels, and the Stars, and whose
soul was, indeed, no other than a Mynt of Heresies. Her passive Fortitude, and
Patience at the Death of her Son. Melan. in cap. 27. Matthew.
Melancton affirms, that her sorrow was much assuaged by her faith, which
assured her of his Resurrection. She knew she had borne the Messiah, whose
blood was to wash away the sins of the world. Wherefore she might well be
amazed, distrustful she could not be at all. The holy Spirit certified her
this was not a destroying death, but a triumphing. Her Faith, the oftener it was
tried in the furnace of affliction, the brighter still it showed. She stood
with the affection of a Mother, the passion of a woman, but with the constancy
and fortitude of a man, in beholding her own blood spilt, her own flesh rent,
and mangled before her face. With an unshaken confidence, and a true internal
valor, she beheld his body naked, and scourged, his hands and feet nailed to
the Cross: yet sometimes the strings of her relenting, mournful heart were
ready to crack with the very thought of his cruel tortures and afflictions;
but as often again they were strengthened and comforted with a full assurance
that he should overcome them all, and death it self. She stood here (her Son
only excepted) the prime pattern of a sollid Faith, and constant Patience to
all posterity, in that neither the fear of Tribulation, of persecution, of
the wrack, of the scourge, or death it self could divide her from her Christ.
She committed not that error most incident to women, many of which gentle sex
perish in the midst of their Lamentations, and will neither admit of Counsel,
nor Comfort. She did not tear her hair, scratch her face, batter her bosom,
seek to stifle her self, or gave any other desperate sign of a ragefull
sorrow, nor did she curse her enemies, or make imprecations for Vengeance, or
so much as murmur against them; but attended the sad event with the same
calmness of mind with which this meek Lamb did his end. Her arriage was
beyond the Level of Censure, and in all things suitable ^o the modesty and
gravity of such a Matron. She feared not at all the fury of the Jewish
Souldidiers that environed her, but stood lecure, and faced danger. Though she
was an eye witness of his passion, and saw his Limbs distended, and wracked,
yet did not the evils she saw, wound her so deep as those she heard. The Roman
Fencers used to have Wards, or Covers to save their Ears: She had greater need
of such to bar the entrance of blasphemies able to provoke God (if his
mercies were not above all his works) utterly to deface Nature, and reduce the
world to its first Chaos. She heard him called a Drunkard, a Blasphemer, a
breaker of the Sabbath, both, a lover of Publicans and Sinners, nay a very
Devil; who was her and Gods only delight. Yet did not all these killing
objects, these impious slanders, drive her into the merciless gripes of
despair; for she was confident that the two persons of the Trinity would not
forsake the third. Melan. in loco praedic.
Melancton commending this dismal story to our sad and serious contemplation,
advises us, That when Tribulations and Death it self come upon us, we should
imitate this holy Virgin, who mixed a heart killing sorrow for his death with a
joyful assurance of his Resurrection. Consider, says he, what a Conflict the
Faith of Mary had. There was in her an extreme grief linked with Faith and
Hope. Let us in our death thus comfort our ^elves, and harbor the same
^houghts with Mary, still fix^ng on God the Eyes of our Faith. And verily we
must ^eleeve that no small measure of Belief was required to temper and
assuage ^o great a Sophronius. ser. de Assump. Beatae Virg. maintains that she
suffered more than all the Martyrs, in that the passion of the mind is greater
than that of the body, and she in soul felt most, because her love to him was
above all others.
sorrow. If we ^onceive that she was so without bowels, as not to grieve for
the death and passion of her dearest, and only Son: we must withal believe
with the Maniches, that he had a phantasticke body, not made of his Mothers
flesh. No doubt, when (after man had left, and betrayed him) she heard him cry
out that God himself had forsaken him also, her tears, her sighs, her
groans, her countenance, her very posture, her doleful voice, all united
their forces to express the greatness of her sorrow. Listen and you shall
hear her thus lament.

O my dearest Son, Her Lamentation is also expressed by S. Bernard, Sermon. qui
incipit, Signum magnum.
that thou who healest others, should thy self be wounded! That thou who
freest others, should thy self be bound! That thou who art the Fountain of
Life, and Creator of the waters, should thy self be thirsty! That thou who
cloathest all things, should thy self stand naked! O my dearest Master, how
have thou trespassed against this obdurate Nation! that it should so thirst
after thy precious blood? Thou would have covered them under the wings of
thy gracious Providence, as Hen does her Chickens, but they those rather to
perish, than to come thither for shelter. With them the lead are more sensible
of thy passion, than the living, and their devouring Sepulchers more merciful
then they themselves. O my Son, my Son, that I should see thee suffer, and
not be able to succor thee! O that I were an oblation as spotless, and as
grati^us in thy Fathers sight, as thou thy self, that all thy afflictions, all
thy torments might be mine. Were my power correspondent to my will, I would
rescue thee from Legions of thy enemies. But alas I am a weak woman, and all
my strength lies in my tongue, which will only serve me to deplore thy loss,
and that I truly do from the very bottom of my heart.

Thus, or to this purpose, questionless she bewailed him dying; but when she
once beheld him dead (Love and Beauty being banished that face) and saw withal
their malicious cruelty survive him, when she viewed his very carcass pierced,
and water together with blood flowing thence, when she had leisure to embrace
his dead body, to number his wounds, to kiss them, and to Essay with the holy
water of her eyes to wash away his stripes: she then was so wholly oppressed
with anguish of soul, that she ardently at that instant desired her soul, if
possibly, might transmigrate out of her living body, into his dead one. True it
is that many affirm she felt not those torments which other women endure in
Childbirth, who are liable to the malediction laid upon Eve: But if at his
coming into the world, she was not sensible of any pain at all, certainly at
his going out, the griefs of all women contracted into one, equals nothers
alone. And assuredly her sorrow was much increased when she saw Mary Magdalen,
and the other women so vehemently to grieve, whom his death not so nearly
concerned as it did her, nor were they so able as she to judge of his value.
Then questionless in this, or the like phrase she renewed, and redoubled her
complaints.

O my sweetest Son! I bewail mine own, and the wretched condition of all
those, whose souls thou have feasted so many years with thy mellifluous
Language. My grief is answer able to my affection. If Samuel lamented the
death of a reprobate King, if David wept over wicked Absolon with this
exclamation, Absolon my Son, O my Son Absolon; can my tears be too
prodigally powered upon thee, who art Son to me, and Righteousness it self?
Who shall forbid or hinder me for crying out, Jesus my sweet Son, O my sweet
Son Jesus? If thou did weep over Jerusalem, as lamenting her destruction
then at hand, shall I not bewail thy near approaching end? Thou did then
compassionate the future Ruin of those very stones, which now with a silent
grati^^de seem to condole, and weep for ^hee. When thou came to the Tomb
^f Lazarus, thou were so far from ^prehending the tears of others, that ^hou
wepst thy self for company. Thy ^^ne example then warrants the just^sse of my
grief; for when thou were ^wing, the small pain thou felt'st in (...)
sleeping of thy foot was, and ought (...) be more to me, than the eternal
^epe of Lazarus could be to thee. and as thy tears for him weretokens (...)
thy humane nature, not signs of by diffidence (in that thou knew'st (...)
would forthwith arise) so are mine (...) thee, witnesses of my wretched elate,
not of my distrust, who am as^^red of thy speedy resurrection. Nor be I only
grieve my own grief for (...) for man's sake, I rejoice in thy Fathers Grace,
who delivers thee to death, and in thy Charity who do suffer it: So likewise
in man's behalf I am grieved that he should be the cursed cause of those thy
extreme torments: for as not to joy in the benefits thy death has brought with
it, would argue his ingratitude, so not to condole for the tortures that attend
it, would demonstrate his cruelty. And here I faithfully promise thee, that
both I, while life, and thy Church, while the world does last, shall yearly
spend this doleful * time of thy Tragical expiration in Prayer, S. Bernard
calls this Hebdomadam poenosam, the week of penance; and the high Dutch, Die
Martyr Wocken, the Martyrs week.
fasting, severity, of discipline, maceration of the flesh, and contrition of
the spirit, as becomes thy mournful Mother, and ^^y grateful Spouse to do.

Thus condoling, thus bemoa^ing hers, and the general loss, ^e attended his
hearse to the Se^^lchre provided by Joseph, where ^ever man was laid before; for
it ^as not fit that Incorruptibility should succeed corruption in the ^^me
lodging. This fragrant ^lower was no sooner set in the ^^ound, but she sent
many a dear ^^op after it to fasten it at the ^oot; for she knew within three
^ayes it should spring up again, ^ot to grow in the earth, but to be
^^anslated into Heaven, there for ^ver to flourish, and perfume the ^elestiall
habitation. Nor were ^er eyes, says Damascen, closed with his Monument, but
watched themselves almost blind with a greedy expectation to see the temple of
his body built up again, which three days since was destroyed. After many a
longing look she espied the Tomb to open, and her only joy to issue forth,
whom full well she knew by the countenance and figure of his Humanity, but
far better by the clear proofs of his Godhead; for the Graves delivered up
their dead, many of which appeared to their friends in the holy City. Some, and
those of great authority in the Church affirm; that after his Resurrection,
she of all others saw him first, and whereas the Scripture seems to infer
that Mary Magdalen first beheld him, they thus expound it, That the Evangelists
would not make his Mother the first witness of his Resurrection (though indeed
she was) knowing that her testimony by the Jews would be more suspected than
that of Mary Magdalen. I dare not positively conclude any thing herein, but I
may safely maintain that this her delight for his Resurrection, counterpois'd
her grief conceived for his death. In her was now made good that of the
Psalmist; According to the multitude of the griefs of my heart thy Comforts
have rejoiced my soul, and that of her Son, Blessed are they that mourn,
for they shall be comforted.

And who makes question but that she who with such unutterable pleasure
discovered his Resurrection faithfully, and closely waited on him, till his
Ascension* She who was as inseparable to him as his shadow, without doubt, was
on the Mount Epiphanius contra haeres. and libel. Aetij.
Olivet, with other of the faithful, when in the sight of them all he
ascended. She heard, doubtless, his last words, received his last benediction,
and her sight waited on him till the clouds embraced him, which it in vain
essayed to penetrate. What Soul not it self transported with the view of a
heavenly object, can suppose, much less express what her contentment was when
she saw her own flesh fly above the reach of Envy, into the Arms of Glory?
When she beheld this high Priest, (his Sacrifice ended, and God fully appeased)
enter Heaven there to sit on the right hand of his Father, and to be the
uncessant and eternal Mediator betwixt him and man? With bended knees,
erected hands, and eyes, she worships him ascending, and when her sight fails,
her adoration continues. Her zeal passes all the orbs between him, and her
with greater facility, and subtility then the Lightning shoots through the
Air. Great is the vigor and force of the Spirit, when all things else set
apart it is wholly intentive on the Meditation of its Creator. When by
contemplation it is separated from the body, it thinks only on him, lives
only to him, and is (as it were drowned) in an inundation of his love. When it
has extinguished the scorching lawless desires of the flesh, and kindled the
holy ones of the Spirit; the body rebels no longer, but becomes obedient to it
in all things. When it has once fixed its eyes on this beloved object, it
never removes them thence. When it is once illuminated with the beams of the
holy Ghost, it is presently turned into all Eye, all Spirit, all Light, no
otherwise than those things the fire once lays hold on, are turned into fire
it self. Of those who live in Wedlock, it is said that they are two in one
flesh; and why may it not be said of Christ and the Soul wedded to him, that
they are two in one Spirit? And if ever it might be reported of any, surely of
this Holy Virgin, who (though she was divided from her Redeemer in Body) yet in
soul she was united to him. When her eyes were grown dim with her so long
dwelling on that part of Heaven where they left, and lost him, she cast them
down on the earth, the poverty whereof she commiserated in that it was
deprived of this one Jewel, in value above all it had left. And now She
returns into the holy City not disconsolate, and dejected as other women are
when they lose their only child; but with a cheerful look for her Sons
victory, who had triumphed not only over the Jew, but death and hell it self.
She made her will lacky Gods, and though she desired to be dissolved, and be
with Christ, yet since it was his best pleasure she should continue longer here
below, she readily assented, resolving by her example on earth, to furnish
heaven with Saints. Dammianus says, that after her Sons decease, she
remained ten days in Prayer and Fasting, expecting with a fervent longing, the
promised coming of the Spirit. Saint Luke witnesses that six score men and
women were assembled in one rome, and joined in hearty prayer, of the which,
Mary the Mother of JESUS was one. And as he names her last, so her wonted
Humility persuades me that she had the last, and S. Bernlard. In sermon. de ^erb.
Apocalyp. Signum nagnu^.
lowest place, and sat beneath the other sinful women of inferior quality,
in remembrance of her humble Lord now exalted. And it is more than probable
that she was present with the Apostles, when the Holy Ghost came upon them, and
that she there received the first fruits of the Spirit. After which time we
read no more of her in holy Writ. For where, and with whom, how strictly, and
how piously she lived after the Ascension of Christ, Sermon. 5. de Assump. Virg.
till the hour of her death, says Idelphonius, is only known to God the
searcher of hearts, and to the Angels her diligent Visiters. The reason which
many allege why neither the rest of her life, nor death are penned by the holy
Evangelists is this, that the Apostles were so busied about the conversion of
the Jews and the Gentiles, and enlarging of the Christian Church, That they
had no time to set down the particular Acts of her life after her Sons
Ascension, nor the several Circumstances of her death, as where, when, and how
she dyed. Some Authors peremptorily maintain (upon what ground I know not)
that she lived to her seaventieth year, and to her last hour dwelt in
Jerusalem, near to her Sons Sepulcher. Damascen. ser. de dormit. Virg.
Others upon no better warrant aver that she went with John into Asia, and
continued with him at Ephesus till her death, and urge the authority of
Ignatius, who affirms that she wrote to him in these words, I will come with
John to see thee, and thy friends, etc. Concerning her death, Some avouch that
the Apostles, and the most eminent of the Primitive Church, were present at it.
Sermon, de dormit. Virg.
Damascen says that Christ was also there in person, and that he thus spoke to
her: Come my blessed Mother into the rest I have prepared for thee, and that
she thus in way of answer prayed to him: Into thy hands, O my Son, I commend
my Spirit: Receive that dear Soul which thou have preserved free from all
rebuke. As I will not justify all these their Assertions for true, so on the
other side I will not condemn them as erroneous, not being able to convince
them of untruth, and for ought I know, they may have passed by unwritten
Tradition from man to man. I will therefore affirmatively say nothing but this,
that most assuredly her death was welcome to her, in that she had so often both
meditated and practiced it, having many times by austerity, and contemplation,
departed this life ere she left it. If that of Seneca be true, that to dye
well, is to dye willingly, then certainly she dyed the death of the Righteous.
She was not ignorant that Death to the just is no other than a delivery from
prison, a laying down of a burden, the end of a Pilgrimage, the unmanacling
of the Soul, the discharging of a due debt to Nature, the return into our
true Country, the door that opens into a never fading life, the entrance into
the celestial Kingdom, and the Usher that was to conduct her to her blessed
Savior, with whom she had mentally conversed ever since he left the earth:
Since which time there be who avouch that she never willingly saw any man.

The Assumption.
What honor could to this great Queen be done,
More then be taken up, to heaven high
And, there, have GOD for Father, Spouse, and Son.
The Angels wait, the World stand wondering by


Her assumption.
The same modesty I have showed in treating of her death, I shall reserve in
discoursing of her Assumption, which by many of the Fathers, all of the Romish
Church, and some of the Reformed is held for an undoubted truth, though upon no
sounder proofs than the former produce concerning her departure hence.
Bullinger directly backs this opinion. Lib. de origin erroris, cap. 16.
We do believe, says he, that the womb of the God-bearing Virgin, and the
Temple of the holy Ghost, that is, her sacred body, to have been assumed into
heaven. Brentius leaves it indifferent to us to believe whether or no she
ascended in Soul, in body, or both. It might well be, says he, that as Enoch
was translated in body into heaven, and as many bodies of the Saints did rise
with Christ; Homil. 1. in Die Assump. Virgin. See Athanasius on this very
point, a Father of great repute, both with the Latins and the Greeks in his
sermon. in Evang. de sanctissima Deipara. And Johannes Rivius in his Book de
abusibus Ecclesiae though he dares not maintain her corporal Assumption, yet
he will not deny it, as being a thing probable enough.
So Mary also might in body be assumed into Heaven. But most certain it is that
she obtained everlasting Felicity. And some there be who demand why God might
not manifest his power by her, privy to so many divine secrets and mysteries,
as well as by an Angel, or as by Elias, who after long prayer, was taken up in
a Fiery Chariot. Some again, (who hold that the dead who arose with Christ,
ascended with him into Glory, and were not again reduced into Ashes) think
the Assumption of Mary altogether as likely.

Damascen says, the works of the Deity are therefore possible, because
omnipotent, and that there are some things, which though they are wholly
omitted in holy Scriptures, yet upon evident reasons they are believed, and
exemplifies his position in the Assumption of the Virgin Mary. Dammianus argues
thus, That as conceiving without sin, she brought forth her Son without
pain, a curse laid on all other women: so might it well be that she who was
without sin, might overcome Death, the reward of it. Some go about to prove
it by the Text, Ps. 131.
Arise Lord into thy rest, thou, and the Arc of thy Sanctification. Nay, I
have read a modern Orator, who thus elegantly describes the manner of it:
When, says he, the Soul of this Sweet one, reactuated her body, she arose in
Triumph from her Sepulcher, and was assumed into Heaven. In her passage
thither, the orbs bowed and bended themselves to make her a triumphant Arch
through which she might pass in greater state. The Sun with his brightest
beams embraced her, that it might be said, A woman was clothed with the
Sun. The Moon stooped to her, that it might be divulged the Moon was under
her feet. The brightest of the Stars intermove themselves to make her a
radiant Crown, etc. But this description is no more theological, than the
consent of the orbs is Philosophical, and is no way correspodent to the
dignity of our Sacred subject, on whose triumphant entry into Heaven, having
been a faithful, and reverent Attender, I will now return to vindicate her
honor here on Earth, and make an Apology to Christians (with shame and horror
I speak it) for Christ's own Mother.

It may please then the gentle Reader to understand that two questions arise
amongst the Modern Divines. The one whether or no she merited to be the Mother
of God; the other which way she could deserve that greatest of Glories. For the
first, they affirm that never any Creature merited so great a blessing as the
incarnation of Gods own Son. For he sent, say they, his Son into the
world, not urged thereto by our merits, but out of his own mere Grace and
Goodness. It was a work of his Charity, and condescending, not of
retribution, or obligation: and therefore that he chose not the Virgin Mary to
be the Mother of Christ, as she was a Virgin, humble, obedient, adorned with
Faith, Charity, and other divine virtues, but because God had decreed her to
bear his only Son, therefore his best pleasure was, she should be Mistress
of perfections suitable to so high a Calling. Wherefore Saint Paul says,
Because God has predestined us, therefore he calls, justifies, and
glorifies us, and not because we are just, therefore he electeth us. Again,
they argue thus, that all our merits depend on Christ, and are derived from
him, and therefore she was without all desert before her Son had imparted it
to her. That this was well known to her, is manifestly proved by her divine
Hymn, in which she acknowledges all good to proceed from him, and therefore
to him ascribes all honor and glory. Others her Champions, who courageously
fight, not only for her heavenly, but earthly triumph, confess that she was
not preferred to that supreme dignity by desert, but by Congruity, as they call
it: that is, not that she was absolutely worthy of so great a grace, but that
since God had fixed a decree to send his dearly beloved Son amongst us, she
of all others was the fittest to conceive and bear him. But here again they
differ about the way, in that so many ways they hold her capable of this
inestimable Diadem. Some give the preheminency to her Virginity, and say, the
love of that drew the Son out of the bosom of his Father, into her hallowed
womb; and therefore the Text says not, that a faithful, an obedient, or an
humble shall conceive, but a Virgin. Others attribute this supreme favor to
her Faith, by which (as Saint Paul demonstrates all the miraculous works of
the old Testament have been begun and perfected: Wherefore her Cousin
Elizabeth said to her, Blessed art thou, because thou have believed. Some
ascribe this infinite honor done her, to her Humility, to which all other
virtues flow, no otherwise than the waters naturally run to the lowest
places. This caused her to say in her grateful Hymn, Thou have regarded the
lowliness of thy Handmaid. Others impute the conferring of this greatest
blessing on her, to her obedience, in that she committed all to the will of the
highest, with this protestation, Behold the Handmaid of the Lord, be it to me
according to thy Word. Others give her Charity the uper hand, which as Saint
Paul testifies, gives life and spirit to all other virtues, they being without
it no other than dead Images. Lastly, some there are who will not award the
Crown to this or that peculiar virtue residing in her, but to the united
Harmony of them altogether; for they say, it is not this string, or that, makes
the Music, but the accord, and consent of all. For my own part, (Divinity
not being the sphere wherein my studies move) a modest inquisition will better
become me, than a bold and peremptory Conclusion in any point of Controversy.
Wherefore I most humbly submit this, and all things else divine, by me handled,
to the Censure and determination of the Church of England, whose not Connivence
alone, but approbation I know I shall have in boldly affirming that she was a
transcendent Creature, not to be ranked in respect of her worth, with any of
her sex, but to have a place assigned her apart, and above them all; being not
to be considered as a mere woman, but as a Type, or an Idaea of an Accomplished
piety. They who uphold the latter of the aforesaid opinions, err not so much
in my judgment, in the adoring extreme, as some too severe maintainers of the
former, do in the neglecting. They are so far from praising her themselves,
that they most unjustly deprive her of the praise given her by others. The
Puritans in general, but especially the obstinate non-Conformists of this
Land, are those I mean, who as in their Course oratory they called Queen
ELIZABETH, Queen Besse, So they give this Holy Virgin no higher a style, than
of J have both heard these irreverent speeches, and read them censurd in a
Manuscript of a most learned Doctor of the English Church. And this is very
credible to al such as hear and peruse their illiterate Sermons, full of
invectives against the ancient Saints, and Fathers of the Church, and abounding
with predications of their own ignorant Brethren.
Mal, Gods Maid. They reject all Testimonies of her worth, as Hail Mary full
of Grace, The Lord is with thee, and, thou have found grace with God, and, He
that is mighty, has magnified me, and All generations shall call me Blessed,
and, Blessed is the womb that bore thee, and Blessed are the paps that gave
thee suck, and whence comes this that the Mother of my Lord should come to me?
and, Blessed art thou amongst women, and, Blessed is the fruit of thy womb.
They abhor to hear her called Domina, Lady, or Deipara, God-bearing, few of
them being so learned, even in their own Faculty, as to know that they who so
style her, think not that the Godhead proceeds from her, but that she brought
forth Christ, in whom was the union of both Natures, and therefore they being
inseparable, she must by strong consequence be delivered of both God and Man.
And why are they deterred from giving her these honorable Epithites? Because
forsooth they challenge to themselves a greater measure of knowledge, but a
lesser of Piety than did their Ancestors. By disclaiming words, and phrases
familiar to Antiquity, and by inventing new less reverent, and significant;
they give all men to understand that they had rather be reputed good
Grammarians, than Christians, and had rather give names to the Church, than
accept them from her, and cherish profane Novelties, rather than allow of
Reverent Antiquities. They wrest many places of Scripture to prove that Christ
himself slighted and rebuked her, which depravations of theirs (were my
Readers Turks) I would draw into the Light and lay their deformity open to
all; but it is needless (I trust) to inform a Christian, that he who has
said, Honor thy Father and thy Mother, would surely never break his own
Commandment, and by slighting his Mother, trench upon a sin of all others
most detestable in his sight, Ingratitude. Of one thing I will assure them,
till they are good Marians, they shall never be good Christians; while they
derogate from the dignity of the Mother, they cannot truly honor the Son.
They are I confess, much more favorable to her, than the Jews, but by far
more detracting from her than the Turks, which Assertion of mine is
strengthened with evident proofs both out of the Jewish Thalmud, and Turkish
Alchoran. The Jews call her Thlua, as much as to say, Butcheresse, or the wife
of a Butcher, and Sono, a public sinner, and Thmea, one polluted with all
manner of unclean and filthy lust. And all of their Religion are enjoined in
solemn Prayer made in their Sinagogues thrice every day to curse Christ, his
Mother, and all the Christian Sect, as is to be found at large in the third
Book of the Thalmud, wholly composed of ridiculous Fables, gross Errors, and
horrid Blasphemies. True it is That the Turkish Alchoran now acknowledges
Christ to be God, and now again denies him, taking him in at the fore-dore,
and shutting him out at the back, yet do they hold him the greatest of
Prophets next their Mahomet. But his Mother they magnify above all women that
ever breathed this Air. Let us hear this Oracle speak, in all things else
false, but in this most true. These ensuing are the very formal words of the
Alchoran. O Mary, excellent above all men and women, who perseverest in the
study of God only. And in another place, O Mary, God has chosen thee, and
purified thee, he has elected thee to make thee famous above the women of all
Ages: and again, Mary by behaving her self wisely, is guilty neither of
Malice, nor any wickedness, which caused us to breath our soul into her.
Lastly, that Many men have been perfect, but no woman was ever found perfect,
but Mary the Mother of Jesus. But though truth is to be embraced where ever we
find it, yet it will appear more graceful in the mouths of Christians,
whose most learned, most eloquent, and most judicious. Doctor, we will
produce, giving this Testimony of this our dearest Lady. S. Austin lib. de not.
and great. cap. 36.
Except (says he) the holy Virgin Mary, (whom for the honor I owe my Lord and
Master, I will not name when sin is my subject) whom to have had grace
infused into her, wholly to subdue sin, we know by this, that she was
thought worthy to conceive and bring forth him, who assuredly was without
sin: This Virgin, I say, excepted, if we could Recall, and Assemble together
all the Saints departed, and should ask them, if they were without sin, they
would unanimously thus answer: If we should say we have no sin, we deceive
our selves, and there is no truth in us. But because the Fathers are no way
suspected of neglect toward her, we will spare their verdicts, and chiefly
insert their Commendations of her, who were the first Reformers of our Church.
Luther shall be their Leader, who faith, That none but the Virgin Mary either
was, or ever shall be so holy: That the fruit of her womb shall be blessed,
since no other conceives without pleasure and sin: and again, In this is
Mary blessed, That so great gifts are given to her, as surpass humane
understanding. For hence all honor and beatitude proceeds, that in the
Universal humane race one person should be superior to the rest to whom none
should be equal, because one and the same Son is common to her with the
heavenly Father. This he applies to that saying of Mary. He that is mighty
has magnified me, etc. The same Author in another place says, Mary is our
Mother, Christ our Brother, and God our Father, and that all this is true, the
Faithful by effect do find. Calvin calls her his Mistress. We willingly,
says he, take Mary for our Mistress, to whose doctrine and precepts we are
obedient. Though Erasmus was not a Reformer of our Church, yet he is much
suspected by the Romish Church, and most serviceable to the Protestant in the
setting out of the Fathers.
Erasmus styles her his Savioresse. Oecolampadius thus delivers his approbation
of her. I trust in God it shall never be said of me, that I did oppose the
dignity of Mary, toward whom to be never so little ill affected, I hold to be
a most certain sign of a Reprobate mind. She who is above all, Queen of
all, whom God above all has honored, should not she be esteemed amongst all
the most eminent? Bucerus protests, That a godly mind will not judge but
charitably and piously of her, who brought forth Christ our Lord: Bullingerus
concludes; If Mary be blessed amongst all women, and to be pronounced blessed
by all Nations, most cursed are the Jews, who never cease to revile and
slander her; and most unhappy are those Counterfeit Christians, who (being
little better than Jews) rob her of the praise due to her. Needs must she
be endued with a singular most select, and perpetual Virginity and purity, who
is especially chosen by God to be the Temple of his Son, and the Mother of
the most holy. Now if any of these contradict themselves by pulling down in
other places those Trophies of her praise which here they have erected, they
are to be answered as the Satyr did the Man with whom he said he would no
longer converse, because he saw hot and cold breath to issue from the same
Mouth. But to leave them; All parts of the world have produced Admirers of her
worth.

Syria has brought forth Ephraim. Antiochia Saint Chrysostom. Capadocia Saint
Basil, and Saint Nazianzen. Constantinople, Germanus and Proclus. Dalmatia,
Saint Hierome. Germany, Rupertus, Albertus, and Agrippa. England, Baeda.
France, Bernhard. Spain, Alphonsus. Italy, Aquinas and Bonauenture. Afric,
Saint Cyprian, and Saint Austin. Greece, Dionysius Areopagita, etc.
To these succeed famous Christian Poets, ancient and Modern, who have written
Pannegyricks upon her, as Baeda. Gregorius Nazianzenus. Innocentius Pontifex.
Actius Sanazarius. Adam de Sancto victore. Alcimus Avitus. Antonius Muretus.
Aurelius Prudentius. Baptista Mantuanus. Claudianus. Franciscus Petrarcha.
Godfridus Viterbiensis. Hieronymus Vida. Paulinus. D. Philippus Menzelius.
Rudolphus Agricola. Sedulius. Venantius Fortunatus.


To these I add many Emperors, Princes, and Princesses, and a world of devout
great ones, who have been her professed admirers, as Constantine the great.
Charles the great. Pulcheria Augusta. Henry the second, Emperor. Alphonsus the
chaste in Spain. Edovardus in Hungary. Bolislaus in Polonia. Venceslaus in
Bohemia.


All which are Canonized for Saints, and have erected and dedicated Temples to
her Memory. Neither have the Princes of this our I Will been defective in doing
her all possible honor, and in Consecrating Chapels and Temples to her
Memory. Frederick the third Emperor, made the Contemplation of her, almost
his only food. Stephanus, King of Hungary, called his kingdom the Marian
Family. In this glorious Family, whole kingdoms and Commonwealths have
enrolled themselves. My Arithmeticke will not serve me to number all those who
have Registered their names in the Sodalitie of the Rosary of this our blessed
Lady, the original of which is derived from the battle of Naupactun, gained
by John of Austria, and the Christians, which victory was attributed to her
intercession with her Son. The Colonian Sodallity first instituted, had out
of Lovaine, 4000. out of Brabant, 30000. out of Gueldria, 4000. out of Holland
and Zeland, 7000. etc. Many holy Orders also are of this Sodality, as the
Benedictines, the Cistertians, the Franciscans, the Carthusians, and many
others. If all these Testimonies and Examples of great worthy and pious people
will not move us to honor her, we shall be judged both unworthy of this life,
and ignorant of that better to come. For shame let not us alone deny her that
honor and praise which all the world allows her.

After these impartial witnesses ^f her worth, we will place those ^ivine
privileges imparted to her ^y the Almighty, for which we ^ave (if that alone
were sufficient) ^he Authority of many pious, ^^arned men.

1 Privilege.
First, they affirm, That her Chaste eyes sent forth such divine ^eames that
(though her Loveli^esse moved not only all minds ^o honor her, and all Eyes
to gaze ^n hers) yet they never kindled an ^nholy fire in the most Adulterate
^o some. A sacred privilege pe^uliar to this Saint alone; for it was the will
of her omnipotent Son, that neither Sath in nor his Ministers should conspire
the overthrow of that chief Temple of his Spirit, which his flesh had
inhabited so long, nor any impure thought aim at the mudding of this purest
Fountain. Whether her prophetic Soul foresaw the snares of the ungodly, and
so shunned them, they say not, once for certain they aver, that Temptations
aimed at her, broke like Hail against a Rock, nor could all the Engines of
the world, the flesh, and the Devil hurt her more, then can the vapors
arising from the earth, reach the holy inhabitants of Heaven. And this opinion
(for ought I know, I submit it to better judgments) may without, or
profanation, or blasphemy, be admitted into all honest bosoms: for if beyond
the power of nature he preserved Jonas entire in the Whales Belly, if he
protected Daniel from the ravenous Lions, should not he secure her from
Corruption whom he had adorned with so many virtues and dignities?

2 Privilege.
Next, they hold that she was not only without blemish, but her very looks
sent forth such heavenly rays, that whosoever beheld them, drew thence a
vestall fire that never went out, and vowed an everlasting Virginity. If this
be a truth, it is a curious one, and it is not material at all whether or no
it be believed, or rejected.

3 Privilege.
Thirdly, that she conceived and bore her Son, not only without pain (the
common Curse annexed to Childe-bearing) but with infinite delight. This also is
a Curiosity, and of no importance whether it be swallowed or no.

Fourthly and lastly, that she had a Frigidity of Soul, which quenched in her
all heat of carnal concupiscence. This last privilege is employed in the
first, and may perchance safely be received. The truth is, we may securely give
her all humane attributes (not encroaching* on the divine) for she was in
dignity above all, but God himself. Faith and Charity, the fullness of the Law
were in her at full. She was in an active and contemplative life, admirable.
The Tongue esteemed the worst part in a woman, was in her the best, which well
might charm Ears, offend them it could not. Her Soul weighed her
Conceptions, and gave them a raiment of virtues own hiew; for certainly so
clear thoughts were apparelled in as fair words. She who both after her
conception, and at other times is commended to us by the sacred Scriptures, for
laying up all holy Sayings in her heart, can we imagine that she could speak
amiss? Neither could she commit any undecent Act, who lived in a Light to
others in^ccessible. They who maintain that for a time the whole Militant
Church was in her alone, have probability to back them; for I know not in whom
else it could remain, when his Apostles, Disciples, Friends, Kindred, and all
others forsook Christ, she only excepted, who would not leave him, who from
before his birth, had stuck to her. I will conclude with this Assertion, That
if ever the Soul of any mortal enjoyed here on earth the embraces of her
heavenly Spouse, and took from him a kiss sweeter than all the Eastern
Odours, this was she.

Apostrophe Authoris.
And here, O blessed Virgin! J leave to discourse further of thee, and direct
my speech to thee. O thou eternal glory of thy sex! had the Queen of Sheba
seen thee, as she did Solomon, she had not so soon been delivered out of
the Trance into which her Admiration cast her. In thee she might have
discovered all the perfections of which woman kind is capable, who were
indeed vertually thy sex In thee Aspatia might have found her Modesty, Livia
her Prudency, Sul^^i^a her Majesty and Gravity, Cornelia her Patience,
Lucretia her Chastity, Porcia her Fortitude, Tanaquill her Industry, Plautina
her frugality, and all these in eminency. But why talk I of the Heathen to
thee, who did not only outstrip in manifold virtues all the Femall, but the
Masculine Saints themselves? Thou did excel Abel in Jnnocency, Abraham in
Faith, Isaac in Obedience, David in Gentleness, the Prophets and Apostles in
Piety, and the Martyrs in Patience. O thou whom Heaven would have of the same
constancy, purity, and sublimity with it self, thou art so far from having
an equal, that all thy sex cannot afford a worthy witness of thy
Excellenties! O thou Mother of the true Moses, who never put on the yoke of
Pharaoh, but stood free in the midst of E^ypt! Thou rod of Iesse, always
straight, who broughtst forth the fruit of life! thou were here a terrestrial
Paradise, whereinto Serpent never entered, on which Gods malediction was never
imposed, and have no doubt, now in the celestial Paradise a conspiouous seat
above all the Angelical orders, and next thy glorified Son himself. For if
Christ's promise to all his fellow feeling members, that if they suffer with
him, they shall reign with him, if they dye with him, they shall live with
him; what eminent place in Heaven sh^lt thou have assigned thee, who i^ soul
did suffer for him more, than all his Martyrs? O thou bashful Morn that
did pr^cede and produce our Sun! Thou Circumscription (if J may so say) of
the uncircumscribed! Thou root to this Herb of Grace! Thou Mother of our
Creator! Thou Nurse to him by whom all things are fed! Thou Comprehender of
the incomprehensible! Thou bearer of him whose word sustaines the Globes! Thou
who did impart flesh to him, who wanted nothing else! Thou Sarah, thou Mother
of many Nations, who brought forth our Isaac, our Laughter, when a just sorrow
conceived for a loss esteemed irreparable had clouded this inferior world! O
pardon, gracious Princess, my weak endeavors to sum up thy value, which
come as short of thee, as my head does of Heaven. Nothing that is not it self
glorified, can express thy glory to the height. Thou deserve a Quire of
Queens here, and another of Angels in Heaven to sing thy praises. Were all the
Earths brood, the drops, the sands of the sea, and the stars of heaven
tongued, they could not all express thee so well, as silent ecstasy. I
confess, O my sweetest Lady! that now I have said all I can of thee, I have
but but done like Timanthes, a great Master in his Art, who being to express
the vastenesse of a Cyclops in a small table, drew only his Thumb, by which
the spectators might judge of his large proportion. To give thee an estimation
answer able to thy merit, is a thing impossible: J must therefore be content to
do by thee, as the ancient Heathen did by the Imag^s of their Gods, on whose
heads, when by reason of their height, they could not place the Crowns,
offered to their Deities, they humbly laid them at their feet.

FINIS.

