THE PRESENT and FUTURE CONDITION OF GERMANY.

Giving a full ACCOUNT 1. Of the Turks Advance into Christendom, and the
Grounds of those Disturbances in Hungary, which occasioned it. 2. A Description
of the City VIENNA, and the Siege thereof. 3. The Grand Seigniors Nativity
Calculated, and the Success of this Expedition probably conjectured. 4. Several
Predictions relating to the present Posture of Affairs in Europe.


LONDON, Printed for J. A. and Entered according to Order. 1683.

THE PRESENT and FUTURE CONDITION OF GERMANY.
AT this time, when Christendom is alarmed with a dreadful Invasion from its
Common Enemy, and the Imperial Eagle trembles under the Gripes of the Ottoman
Fury, who is not curious to inquire both into the occasion of this Incursion,
and what may rationally be expected as the Consequence and Issue thereof?

The disturbances of Hungary have a long time made a considerable Figure in the
Gazetts of Europe: A great part of that Kingdom has been subject to the Turk
ever since its Metropolis Buda yielded to the victorious Arms of Solomon the
Magnificent, in the year 1536. the rest (with the Title of King of Hungary) was
claimed by the House of Austria, and so became annexed to the Empire of Germany,
under Ferdinand II. Anno 1624. But having formerly been an Elective Kingdom,
the Inhabitants still challenged certain Privileges and Immunities, and the
same were from time to time promised and confirmed to them by the Emperors;
which being much infringed and violated (as they alleged) some years since,
they (being a Warlike People) betook themselves to Arms.

But tho the greatest part of them are Protestants, yet it was not upon the
Account or pretense of Religion, that the first Insurrection there began, but
for their Civil Liberties; and the most eminent Conspirators were of the Roman
Communion; however, the same being pretty well crushed and suppressed, the
Jesuits (too prevalent in the Imperial Councils) contrived to take an
advantage from the Vmbrage of this Rebellion, to destroy and root out all those
of the Reformed Religion in that Kingdom; and stimulated the Ministers of State
to practice diverse intolerable Rigors and Pressures upon them; the Nature of
which may partly appear from the Memorial of Count Oxenstierne the King of
Swedens Ambassador, presented to his Imperial Majesty in the year 1674. wherein
are these words.

The Protestant Ministers, especially in the Cities of Leopoldople, Capuarina,
Camara, and others, have been most violently seized on, pillaged, and
insolently abused; flayed with stripes, starved with hunger and nakedness,
thrust down into most loathsome and horrible Prisons, amongst Snakes and Toads;
and so bound and manacled, that they want all means of defense to help
themselves against the Venomous Creatures: And where they are most favorably
dealt with, and suffered to live above ground, they are compelled to
Employments, not only servile and laborious, but the most filthy and noysom
that can be invented; loaded perpetually with Chains, more cruelly than those
that are guilty of the most grievous Parricides or Treasons, without out all
Commiseration, without any satiety or end of mocking and abusing them; so that
they lead a life, than which Hell it self may seem more tolerable.

Thus was their Condition remonstrated by that great Minister of State, but
little amended or alleviated for his solicitations; for the persecution was
still carried on fiercely, and a great number of those Protestant Ministers
sold for Gally-slaves, were in Chains; diverse of them perished, and some that
survived were at last released by the Mediation of the Dutch Admiral. To
preserve themselves from these Outrages, finding nothing less than the
destruction of them and their Religion were designed, several of these
Hungarians gathered together, and stood upon their own defense; and have some
years been headed by Count Teckely, a Nobleman of that Kingdom: And tho several
Overtures have been made for accommodation, yet all being frustrated, and
finding that their Brethren enjoyed under the Turk fairer Quarter than they
could hope for under the Papists, they made their Complaints to the Port,
submitting themselves to that power from whence they might expect protection:
And as their Disloyalty and joining with the Infidels is justly to be
condemned, so neither can those Councils be justified for Prudence or Piety,
which by unnecessary Severities reduced them to that despair, and the extremity
of such a Choice.

But the Grand Seignior regarding them now as his Vassals, begins a Quarrel on
their behalf with the Emperor, and taking the advantage of these distractions
to inla^ge his Dominions (for amongst Heathen Princies, whatever are their
pretenses, Ambition and Glory are the Grounds of their Wars) employs his Vizier
with a mighty Army of above an hundred thousand men, to enter Christendom;
which like an irresistible Torrent, carrying death and desolation before it,
has lately advanced to the Walls of Vienna, the chief City of Germany, and
residence of the Imperial Court, which he invested on the fourteenth of July
last, and continues to Besiege; the Emperor being forced to abandon the same
for his safety.

This City is seated on the Banks of the Danubius, (one of the greatest Rivers
in the World) in the Arch-Dukedom of Austria; it contains in Circuit about 5000
Geometrical Paces, and is famous for its University, and for its Cathedral
dedicated to St. Stephen, (the Steeple whereof is 465 Foot high, of hewn
Stone, curiously carved into various Figures) but especially it is renowned for
the Repulse given to the Turks Ann. 1526. of whom two hundred thousand under
the conduct of Solomon the Magnificent, beleaguered it for a long time; but by
the valor of Frederick the 2d. Elector Palatine, and other Princes, they were
forced to raise their Siege, and retire with the loss of fourscore thousand
men. And whether the Turk at this time may have any better success against it,
is a question; the Fortifications being much improved, a discreet and valiant
Governor placed in it, and 18 thousand Soldiers in Garrison, besides the
Scholars and Burghers, and good store of Provision and Ammunition laid in; yet
the Vizier attacques it with all imaginable fury, and is prodigal of the lives
of his Soldiers; it being affirmed that he has already lost 20 thousand of
his men before it. Nor are the Christian Princes wanting to gather together a
strength to repel these Mahumetans: The Duke of Lorrain has a considerable
Force not above a day or two's March off; and only waits the coming up of the
Auxiliary Troops, and especially of the valiant King of Poland, who is resolved
in person to endeavor the relief of this Imperial City, and is now upon his
March; and when once they are joined, it is not doubted but we shall soon hear
of a Battle, the fate of which will be of a vast importance to Europe: And for
a good Omen we have already tidings, that the Duke of Lorrain, and part of the
Polish Army have defeated some of the Turks, and Teckley's Troops, and forced
them to retire with considerable loss.

For the Satisfaction of the Curious, I shall here subjoyn the Nativity of the
present Grand Seignior or Emperor of the Turks, as the same was communicated by
a good hand from Constantinople, diverse years since, and rectified by several
remarkable Accidents; the Scheme, or true Position of the Heavens at the moment
of his Birth being as follows.

Natal chart (astrology)

This Figure affords (according to the Rules of Astrology) diverse Arguments of
Grandeur, and illustrious Achievements. All the Planets are in the Ascending
part of Heaven: The Luminaries posited upon the Ascendant in Sextile of the
Medium Coeli: A Reception between Saturn and Jupiter: And indeed the Scheme is
very much with that of the great Augustus Caesar, and in some respects more
mighty and powerful, This Puissant Monarch at 17 years of Age (when his
Horoscope came to the Sextile of Mars, Lord of the Angle of Sovereignty) came
to the Throne; and when the Moon came to the like direction in the twenty
second year of his Age, he invaded Germany: Since that time he has for some
years indulged himself in the soft delights of the Seraglio, and the diversions
of the Plains of Adrianople; But now his Ascendant approaching by Direction to
the Body of Jupiter, like a Lion rouzed up, shaking off that Trance of
Inglorious Sloth, he begins again to threaten the Repose of Christendom.

It Is observable, that this Inroad of the Turks was predicted some considerable
time before it was undertaken: Witness, Mr. Holwel's Catastrophe Mundi, where
in page 63. we have these words. -- About the year 1531. began the Ottoman
Family, under the Gubernation of a Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Gemini.
Now is this Conjunction in Leo, 1682. in Sextile to that Conjunction preceding
the Rise of the Ottoman Family: This shall cause that Monarch to thrive much;
besides, he at this time has very good Directions in his Nativity; and
forasmuch as the Conjunction favors that mighty Prince, and afflicts the Roman
Empire, therefore may it be conjectured, that he shall dismember the Roman
Empire of some of its Territores, and shall continue so doing for some years.

And before in p. 46. -- If the Ottoman Family had their Rise under the
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in Scorpio, as it is verily believed, then
shall that people afflict a great part of Christendom; for he has lately, or
will very shortly change his Aphelion into Virgo; which does show, that those
People shall move out of their own Country in way of Conquest, and shall
continue so doing for some years to come; even till they have made themselves
Masters of a great part of Christendom. And again, p. 79. speaking to a potent
Neighboring Nation, he says, -- Thou have been one cause of the Turks entering
Europe; he will hardly return until he has endangered thy Crown; and thou will
repent when it is too late, for thy own Subjects will betray thee. -- This was
written in the Summer, 1682. when there was no News or Prospect of the present
Invasion.

The same Author in his Appendix is more positive; and averrs, That the Transit
of Mars through Libra, does threaten Austria with great Devastation, and also
the taking of Vienna it self; and the general Conquest of the East part of
Germany. And afterward he threatens the Lillies to be blasted by the
Influences of the Crescent. And thou O Italy, have a great share of this Cup of
Gods Wrath; for great will be the Scarcity that shall be in thy fruitful
Country; and the Turk will destroy with Fire and Sword, a great part of thy
Famous Towns and Cities, and come even to the Gates of Rome, and sack it as bad
as the Gauls did, and will keep possession, and destroy it with Fire, and strew
Salt upon it: Then will the Pope be forced to fly from place to place; and soon
after there will be no more such Cattle in the World.

Thus that Author, with much more to that purpose, especially as to the
declining Fortune of France; to whose Book we referr the Reader, as we do for
the verity of those predictions to Time, the Midwife of Truth: And indeed, who
knows how far Providence may suffer these Infidels to be a Scourge to those
nominal Christians, who by their Idolatrous Ceremonies, and lewd Practices,
have almost utterly subverted the substance of Religion, and real Piety?

I shall conclude with the Divine Herbert, (for Poets are a sort of Prophets
too) who in his Church Militant seems to threaten a Transmigration of Religion
from the Old into the New World, in these latter Ages; which he thus expresses.

-- It shall every year decrease and fade,
Till such a Darkness do the World invade
At Christ's last Coming, as his first did find:
Yet must there such Proportions be assigned
To these Diminishings, as is between
The spacious World, and Jury, to be seen.
Religion stands on Tip-toe in our Land,
Ready to pass to the American Strand:
When height of Malice, and prodigious Lusts,
Impudent Sinning, Witchcrafts and Distrusts,
(The marks of future Bane) shall fill our Cup
Unto the Brim, and make our measure up.
When Seine shall swallow Tiber, and the Thames
By letting in them both pollutes her Streams;
When Italy of us shall have her Will,
And all her Calender of Sins fulfill:
Whereby one may foretell what Sins next year
Shall both in France and England domineer:
Then shall Religion to America flee;
They have their times of Gospel, even as we.
My God!, thou do prepare for them a way,
By carrying first their Gold from them astray:
For Gold and Grace did never yet agree;
Religion always sides with Poverty.
Yet as the Church shall thither Westward fly,
So Sin shall trace and dog her Instantly;
That when they have accomplished the Round,
And met in the East, their first and ancient Ground,
Judgment may meet them both, and search them round.
Thus do both Lights, as well in Church and Sun
Light one another, and together run.
Thus also Sin and Darkness follow still
The Church and Sun with all their Power and Skill;
But as the Sun still goes both West and East,
So also shall the Church by going West
Still Eastward go, because it draws more near
^o'th' Time and Place where Judgment shall appear.
FINIS.

