The praise of the merry Month of MAY; In which our Royal Prince Charles was
born, which graced that Month, and made glad the hearts of all true and free
born Subjects of England.
Come Passengers and hear what I shall say,
In the praise of the merry Month of May
For in that month our Sovereign Charles was born.
Which many years exiled has lived forlorn
Each Creature in this month rejoice and sing
With heart, and cry God preserve the KING.
The Tune is, Prince Charles Birth day, or the Subjects hearts to cheer.




NOw welcome in thou sweetest month of May,
Fresh beauties does with thee partake,
Love makes with thee a solemn Holiday,
All hearts rejoice for Charles's sake;
Hearts ease will grow
To mssery and woe.
On the twenty nine it does apear.
King Charles was born I understand
And his Subjects do now report
That in this month he will come to Court,
his Subjects heart^ to cheer.
Thou art sweet May the Month of Majesty.
Right dear art thou, and so is he,
Even like to a tractive Sympathy,
So pleasing all thy beauties be,
All flowers fair
With colors rare.
Now does our glorious Star appear,
Which long has been out of the Land,
Every Meddow flows with Balm,
Harmonious Birds sing such a Psalm,
and Charles our hearts will cheer.
This Month did first bring forth this Nymph of ours
In him shall last our Lands fair Spring,
He Crowned shall be with Garlands of flowers,
The which are ever flourishing.
Angels attend
Him to def^^^
An^ Nations now both far and near,
Shall blaze on t^y antiquity,
Great joy shall ^hen be on the Seas,
And English m^^ ^^all live at ease,
for Charles (...) ^^arts will cheer
Sweet Ros(...) of the Garden, Queen of flowers,
And bea^^^^^ (...)irest Charaer,
The swe^test musk-Child of the Springs young hours,
Best jewel that the earth does wear,
In Gardens green
Shall now be seen,
Englands great King like form does bear
Even now ye illustrious sun draws near
It shows that beauties Rose indeed
Now in this age shall them excoed.
for Charles our hearts will cheer.


EAirly shall rise the cheerful mounting Lark,
That does in merry noats delight,
Then gently stint a while, my pen and hark,
And learn of her for to indite,
And then complete
Will be his seat,
When he does mount into his Sphere,
Exceeding great in worth and fame,
Will be his name so much renow'nd,
When he over this Land is Crowned.
his subjects hearts to cheer.
Loves Querester that sits amidst the thorn,
(The Nightingale so sweet a singer)
Records his same from Even until Morn,
More then Apollo's voice or finger,
Does sweetly sing
of Charles our King,
For he our cloudy day will clear.
Heaven never had a Star more bright,
Like to the purest form of gold,
Not to corrupt till heaven wax clear,
our heavy hearts to cheer,
He is a pious Prince and fit to reign,
By love he will rule more then by law
And all our rights he will so well maintain
Whereby our hearts to him we will draw,
We shall have peace
And wars shall cease,
And vanished shall be all fear,
Reward does sit in his right hand,
In his left hand wherein should be,
Naught but the sword, sits Clemency,
his subjects hearts to cheer,
If we can learn how many drops it rain^,
Or count their numbers numberless,
Or sum up the many flowers and Augusts grains;
Then we his virtues may express,
He Is so devine
That he does shine
Like unto Phoebus in his Sp(...)ts,
In all the Regions under heaven,
There Is not a Prince more fit to reign,
That will our rights so well maintain.
our heavy hearts to cheer.
Princes of Europe, Earths sweet Paradise,
Enter into this Pilgrimage,
Let all thy Kings that would learn to be wise
Sail hither and observe his age,
His loyalty
None can deny
His actions wise his title is clear,
Europe affords not a wiser Prince
All there Nations to con^ent,
With the King and Parliament:
Our heavy hearts to cheer.
Sweet MAY as first in thee this flower did spring,
And was unto perfection brought,
So once more send us in our lawful King,
Which we honor in deed and thought.
We will him Crown
With much renown.
For why he is out Sovereign dear,
That he once more in peace may Reign,
The Bells shall Ring, and we will sing
For joy, and cry GOD save the KING.
and this our hearts will cheer.

