THE REGULATING Silver Coin, Made Practicable and Easy, TO THE GOVERNMENT AND
SUBJECT.

Humbly submitted to the Consideration of both Houses of Parliament.

By a Lover of his Country.

LONDON, Printed for Henry Bonwick, at the Red-Lion in St. Paul's Churchyard.
1696.

THE REGULATING Silver Coin, etc.
VVRiting on so curious, and intricate a Subject, I have great Reason to
bespeak the Candor of the Reader.

A Book of this Nature cannot but expect to meet with great Opposition, and
it is very probable from Two sorts of Men especially, viz. Those that know
little of the Subject Matter, and those that know much.

They that know little are Jealous, and they that know much Opiniatre, and
whilst one will not take Pains to comprehend a thing, another takes too much
to overthrow it.

But as I hope I shall say nothing here, to be pitied; so I am on the other
side pretty secure from Envy, because, the greatest Credit that can be gotten,
by a thing of this Nature, Mr. Lowndes.
does already seem to be engrossed by a late learned and industrious Writer
upon this Subject.

It was, I must needs say, a prudent piece of Service the Lords of the Treasury
did the Nation, and more particularly the Parliament, under whose Judgment this
matter justly falls, by employing so able a Pen to clear the way, in giving a
true, and entertaining Account of Matter of Fact.

But I must do my self that little piece of Justice too, as to acknowledge the
main Design of these Papers was laid before I could have a sight of that Book:

And now I am ready enough to confess my own Weakness, and Insufficiency, for
so great an Undertaking; nor do I pretend to write a Style equal to that
experienced Minister, but am contented to be understood without shining, and to
offer Mathematical Reasoning, without polishing and Ornament.

When I at first formed the whole Scheme, I had more Leisure, by much, than
when I put it in Writing, and I can better answer for my Design, than for my
way of expressing it; and therefore all the Favor I expect or ask, is, that
the Theorem, which is the main of the Work, may not suffer for the
Inartificialness of the Problems that lead to it.

I affect Truth and Plainness, and a sincere Love to my Country.

Whatsoever I have read or heard on this Subject, has brought the Matters to
this Dilemma, that either Coin must want of its intrinsic Value, so as to
disatisfie most of the King's loving Subjects, and endanger a fatal stop to
Trade; or if it is to be made of near an intrinsic Value, according to the Rate
Silver shall go at in the time of Coining, then upon every little Rise of
Silver higher than that Price, we are in danger of having it exported and
melted down; and so every Parliament may meet with the same Difficulties we at
present labor under in the badness and scarcity of Silver Coin.

That which I pretend to, is, to obviate both these Dangers, or otherwise I
confess I might have spared my Pains; for he who has provided for one and not
the other, has at the best but done half the Work.

There are three Terms of Value, upon the right Understanding of which, much
depends, viz. Extrinsic, Intrinsic, Real.

DEFINITIONS.
EXtrinsic Value of Money is the Denomination and Power, that is given it by
Authority.

Intrinsic Value is the necessary and Natural Value, always and every where
inherent in the Species.

Real Value is a Certain Value more or less than Extrinsic, or Intrinsic,
adherent to the Species, with respect to time and place.

TWO things are now under Consideration. 1. The Badness of our Silver Coin.

2. The Scarcity of it.

CHAP. I. Of the present badness of our Coin
BY Current Coin, I mean not that which is Current by Law, but by Custom; that
which People are forced to take for want of better, to the great Grievance of
the Subject, Dishonor of the Kingdom, and Obstruction of Trade.

For every Man now is destitute of a sufficient Pledge and Security for his
Personal Estate, unless he will take Personal Security, or find out a Mortgage,
or rely upon a Bank.

Personal Security is now less than ever, the public Banks have so drained or
so engaged at least the Traders in Money.

Mortgages are very hard to be found, for small Sums, and much harder for
great ones, since the establishment of the new Banks.

And as for a sole reliance on the Credit of the new Banks I leave that for
other Hoads to discuss; I am of the Opinion it was never intended that they
should be the only Security for Personal Estates, and that People should carry
in their Money to 'em out of necessity, and not choice.

And how dishonorable it is to the King and Kingdom that our Money should be
so suddenly debased to such a shameful Degree, foreign States will soon
determine:

Now that it does not become so by public Authority but by Connivence of the
Sovereignty, or Necessities of the Nation, is not stating the thing at all less
Dishonourably.

For Connivence at a Fault discovers either an Ignorance of it, or Inability to
correct it, or design in making use of it.

It Is plain enough the Government is not Ignorant of it.

His Majesty in His Speech to both Houses of Parliament, shows He has no
design in making use of it, because He recommends the redressing of it to their
Consideration, and therefore the not redressing it, can be only imputable to
the Weakness and Poverty of the State:

And what Inferences, not only the French, but all other Politicians may draw
from thence are very obvious.

The finest Clothes that our Soldiers can put on, in the Field, would not at
all dazzle the Eyes of the Confederate. Princes, nor strike any despondencies
into the Minds of our Enemies, if they shall all come to know that the whole
Power of England is at this time held up by the imaginary Value of Birmingham
half Crowns and Shillings.

It will hearten our Enemies, and discourage our Friends, very much, when they
shall come to know that the Nummary Wealth of England is almost vanished, the
Silver Coin gone, and the Royal Mint at a stand.

No Body will believe that we can long subsist at this rate; and indeed it is
impossible we should, for if it is now much harder to redress than it was a year
ago, and that means cannot be yet found out to do it, what Hopes shall we have
of ever doing it 'till the War is ended? and what Hopes shall we have of
bringing our Enemies to Terms, whilst they are sensible of our great Poverty.

The only way, sure, to bring the French King to Reason, will be by showing him
we are Able to continue the War as long as he can possibly be Willing, which he
can never believe, so long as he sees our Money, by which he judges our Wealth
to be imaginary only, and not real Silver.

Besides all this, we are in apparent Danger hereby of being more effectually
and suddenly ruined by our Friends.

For if this Sessions of Parliament should break up without regulating the
Coin, what Consequences may possibly ensue?

It is not impossible that Foreigners in all parts of Christendom should
imediately set themselves to counterfeit our base Money.

There are beyond Seas as good Chemists, and Black Smiths as at London, or
Birmingham, and it is not impossible that they should secretly Import as much
base Money, resembling that which goes current among us, and which has not the
intrinsic Value of One Shilling in Three, as if they please may not only buy up
and Export Two or Three Millions Worth of our Staple Commodities, affording 'em
Cheaper abroad than we can at home; but as much Worth of our imported
Commodities, even Gold it self, if they like that Trade better.

Such an Importation of Money would I fear, be of worse Consequence than all
our Exportation of Silver and Gold can prove.

If what cost our Merchants a Shilling, they should sell for a Groat, or if
they shall buy of us an Ounce of Gold for Three or Four Ounces of Silver, or
supposing 'em to buy it at 6 s. 6 d. per Ounce, they shall buy an Ounce for as
much Counterfeit Money as shall not have 7 Peny-Weight of true Bullion in it,
this would give our Balance of Trade, such a Terrible Swing, as no true Hearted
Englishman would be willing to see.

This is a Danger which the easiness and small Charge of counterfeiting old
Clipped Money threatens very much, unless it be speedily cried down.

And in the mean time, let us consider the Condition of the other Coin among
us, not counterfeited, but Clipped, filled, or otherwise diminished.

It Is plainly demonstrable by the Receipts of Money in His Majesty's Exchequer,
that one half of the Silver is already Clipped away, and there is no Security
why half what remains wo'n't be taken off too.

The Laws are severe enough made, and put in Execution, and yet Newgate is
perhaps now as full of Clippers as it was Three or Four Years ago.

Nothing but a Sense of Religion does restrain Men from profitable Sins, and
the Ordinary of Newgate can inform us, how little the Guilt of Clipping
affects the Criminal's Conscience.

Nor will preaching do much Good, upon those that never come to Church.

Clipping is the gainfulest Sin that ever was invented, and sits the easiest
upon the Sinner's Mind, and it is never to be remedied but by making it
impracticable, which Milled Money only (and no other to be current) can do.

And what a perpetual Discontent and Confusion must it end in, if People shall
come at last to proffer a Groat for a Shilling?

This must increase still vastly the Value of Guineas; this must raise the
Price of all Commodities, this must make it impossible to expect any Money at
all, either for the King's Use, or Balance of Trade; and this will not only
force us to recall our Troops from Flanders, and by a natural Consequence let
in the War upon us, but it would put a sudden and universal stop to all Foreign
Trade.

And what fatal Consequences may it have in the mean time at home let us
consider.

It may very well be supposed that a Dragooner may proffer to a Corn-Chandler 2
s. for a Bushel of Oats, and that the Corn-Chandler seeing that there is not
Three Penny with. or 9 Penny worth of Silver in both the Shillings, should not like
the Bargain, what is now to be done?

Should There be a Law with Penalty for refusing clipped Coin, as there is for
cracked Six pences, this would encourage Clippers to leave nothing remaining in
a Shilling but the Figure XII.

Should the Law prohibit the passing of all Silver clipped within the Ring,
than two Thirds of the present Money of England would be immediately cried
down: Then the Loss of clipped as well as counterfeit Money would be very hard
upon the Proprietors, and we should have two Thirds less Money for carrying on
our Trade:

And now we have two Thirds less than we should have, and if that two Thirds,
which is cried down at the Owner's Loss, should be carried to the Mint, and new
coined, it would scarce yield a twelfth Part of what we should then want.

If the Law should put down all Silver Money but of such a Weight, then
certainly all Money above that Weight would be clipped down to it, and every
Man must carry a pair of Scales in his Pocket, and we are still subject to the
Consequence of the former Paragraph, as that former Paragraph would be to the
first Conclusion of this, viz. That all Money would be soon clipped down to the
public Standard.

Let the matter be canvas'd never so much, it must at last come to this
Conclusion.

We cannot subsist either in War or Peace if the Coin of England be not
speedily regulated.

CHAP. II. Of the present Scarcity of Silver Coin in England.
NOw let us consider, that if all the current Silver Coin of England were
passable and unalterable, yet we have vastly too little in Tale for carrying on
the Trade of the Nation.

And this will appear several Ways, but chiefly by the high Price of Guineas
and the Causes thereof.

Guineas have risen from 21 s. 6 d. to 30 s. either because the intrinsic Value
of Gold has risen near in Proportion to the Diminution of the intrinsic Value
of Silver Coin, or by reason of the Scarcity of the Silver Coin, or the
Uncertainty of it, or partly by Reason of one, and partly the other, which I
believe is the Truth, that the Badness and Scarcity of Silver Coin has
occasioned an extravagant Rise of Gold.

Now if so much as concerns the Scarcity of Silver be granted me, then I have
nothing to do upon this Article, but show that the present high Price of Gold
is dangerous to the Nation, and more dangerous will a farther Advance of the
Price thereof be.

And to them who think the Badness of our Coin the greatest Reason of the
present high Valuation of Gold, I shall in the mean time say, that if the Price
of Gold has risen, suppose 4 s. or 5 s, in a Guinea, upon the Account only of
the Baseness of our Silver Coin; then in handling that Notion we must look upon
Gold not so much a Coin as a Commodity, and so indeed it is at this Present;
because the Price of Gold in the Oar or Ingott has risen almost proportionably
to that which is coined; so that a Man does not take a Guinea rather than 29
clipped Shillings, because the King's Impress is upon it; for so it is upon the
Shillings; or because Authority has made it pass so, for that Authority is
wanting; but because it is of a greater intrinsic Value than is in 29 Shillings
of clipped or counterfeit Money, which is now most current: So that the
Valuation of the Commodity Gold has increased as the intrinsic Value of our
Silver Coin has decreased.

And if so, then it is to be suspected that the Price of all staple Commodities
have increased in equal Proportion, or that they are in such a Proportion now
higher than they would have been; for Gold and Silver being reciprocally the
Standards and Measures of Proportion of one another, are so of every thing
else; and if I can now buy as many Ounces and Penny - Weights of Silver for a
Guinea, as I could have done formerly, then is not Silver Risen more then Gold?
and if I can buy as many Grains of Gold now with an Ounce of Silver as I could
formerly, then is not Gold risen more than Silver. And this is, perhaps more
than a Supposition: For when Silver was 5 s. an Ounce, I could buy 4 Ounces 6
Peny-wt. with a Guinea, and so I can now, that Silver is 6 s. 6 d. per Ounce.
Again when Gold was about 3 l.. 14 s. an Ounce, I could buy an Ounce of Gold
with 15 Ounces of Silver, and so I can now, or near the Matter: So that the
Commodities of Gold and Silver answer one another as they did, or near
thereabout, abating only for the Portableness of Gold and its Coinage; whereas
no Coinage is now allowable for those Pieces of Silver wherein the Coinage is
defaced and spoiled; and if those two Commodities are so much higher than they
would have been: For they are the Measure and Rule of Proportion of all. Then
when the Value of Gold and Silver rises, the intrinsic Value of all Commodities
rise with 'em:

For supposean Eastland or Hamburgh Merchant brings over a Barrel of Mum, which
he (when our Money was old Standard) sold for 3 l. he disliking our Money now,
sells his Mum, not according to the extrinsic Valuation of our Money, which is
risen since he was here last; because the Intrinsic is diminished, but
according to the common Value of Gold and Silver in the World; and therefore
requires now 4 l. because he judges our Silver to be a fourth Part worse than
it was, or if at 5 l. he judges it to be 2 Parts in 5 worse.

Again, suppose he sells his Mum for Gold, or is to exchange his Silver for
Gold, that which he was wont to sell for 3 Guineas, he expects 3 Guineas for
still; or if you are to pay him in Silver, he expects as much as he can change
for 3 Guineas, he will not be fobb'd off with less: So the Merchant sells as cheap
as ever; but we pay more, because what we pay, is dearer than it was.

You Will object against this way of reasoning, and say it is the Risques of the
Sea, and Obstructions of Trade now in Time of War, makes all foreign
Commodities dearer.

But I hope I don't err in saying, that the Merchant notwithstanding the War
would take less of our Silver Coin for the same Commodities if it were better,
and less Gold of us if it would buy as much Silver in his own Country.

And there are Reasons which may balance the Dangers of the Seas in Times of
War in Reference to our Commerce with the Subjects of Neutral Princes.

On our side Taxes are great, and the Subject cannot afford to buy so many
foreign Commodities as at other times: And on their side they have not so good
a Vent as they had; so their Commodities must stick on hand unless sold so
cheap as may make amends for the Hazards of the Sea, and the Cheapness of
Commodities would be the natural Effects of Scarcity of Money, if our Money had
the same real Value as formerly.

Again a Collier who trades to Newcastle is wont to receive a Guinea for every
Chaldron of Coals he brought into the River at such a Time of Year, and so he
does still, and no more; and who can say Coals are risen and Mum it risen? No
such thing; but Gold and Silver are risen: And when we give the same Gold and
Silver for a Commodity as we did, we wrongfully say the Commodity is dear, when
it is not that but the Gold and Silver which costs us more. We give the same
Labor, the same Leather, the same Malt, for the same Quantity of Gold and
Silver which we did.

And now it is the Country Gentlemen, Artizans and Day-Labourers have the
hardest Bargain of all

The Farmer sells his own Corn and Cattle according to the Value of Gold and
Silver, and the Mercer his Silks, and the Draper his Cloth, and the Tanner his
Leather; but the Farmer in the mean time pays his Rent, and Husbandmen, and
Artizans, according to the Value of our present Coin, and when he paid 28
Guineas a Quarter formerly, twenty shall serve turn now; and the Scrivener buys
the Country Gentlemen's Lands, according to the Valuation of Coin, and not
Metal; and the Land which cost the Father 600 Guineas, is now sold by the Son
for 430; and half a Year hence it may be proffered for 300. This is nothing but
Ruin and Confusion to the Landed Men of the Kingdom.

But if the Buyers of Land, as the Merchants, Bankers and Scriveners are, were
Sellers too, we should find Land rise in Proportion to every thing else.

And whereas you will say that Farmers and Grasiers are no Merchants, and would
be as well contented with passable Coin as old Standard, it is very true, but
they keep up to such Prices as their wholesale Chapmen can afford to give 'em;
and when a Factor sells his Cloth at Blackwell-Hall, he considers the Necessity
of the Buyer, as well as Expense of the Clothier; when a Merchant can make a
better Profit, it is expected he should give a bettter Price.

But this with some unthinking People is the Effect of War; and because some
things are dearer upon this Account than others, therefore every thing else
that is dearer must have the same Cause assigned; but a general Cheapness of
things should, methinks, be the Natural Effect of our War, if our Money with
which we go to Market were as it should be.

The War consumes but little of our Product and Manufacture; it carries a great
many Mouths into Flanders, and that would naturally make Provisions cheap:
Many of these Mouths had idle Hands, and so they are not missed in the
Manufacture; but instead of them, a great many industrious Foreigners come
among us who eat little and work much.

The Taxes, as I said, are great Inducements to Frugality, and the Advantages
People have of late made of Money, have been no less.

These and other such like things if the Price of Gold and Silver had not
risen, must have occasioned a Fall of most other Commodities.

And now let us consider the Danger of the high Price of Gold as it stands at
present.

Coin is the most portable Commodity, and Gold the most portable Coin; but we
have run it up high, and therefore do'nt at present fear Exportation; but then,
if it is considerably higher than among our Neighbors, there is great Reason to
fear too great an Importation may be as dangerous, as a disadvantagious one
does already prove.

It seems to me so curious and nice a Commodity that always there may be Danger
in it.

If in the great Thirst that is now upon us, we take in too much that will
occasion a still more dangerous Rise of Silver: For considering the present
Balance of Trade, the more Gold is imported, the less there will be of Silver;
and if we import too little, we leave our selves destitute of a Way of Trading.

And if the Gold which is our present Support should by the Craft of Foreigners
or necessities of the War follow the Silver out of the Nation, we should be
left, I doubt in a very bad Condition.

And if its Value should rise as it must needs do if the Silver Coin grow worse
and worse, then by how much it rises, by so much more all the Inconveniences
and Dangers of its late Rise among us will increase.

What those Dangers are at present is no great Mystery, the English Metchants
will make none of it if they may be heard.

The melancholy Letters which their Factors abroad daily send 'em makes the
Case plain.

That a Guinea in Holland and Flanders is now but 26 s. or to speak more
properly and plainly too, so many Rials, or Dolars and Stivers as bear
Proportion to 26 s. of our Money

At that Rate they there buy our Guineas of Officers, which they cannot be
hindered carrying over in their Pocket; then the Holland and Flemming Merchants
send back to us the same Guineas to buy therewith our Staple Goods and
Manufactures.

Here they are received at 30 s. And their Factors here who buy our
Manufactures as cheap of the Clothier or Stocking-Seller as our own Merchants,
send back for 1000 Guineas. (for Instance) Received from Holland 1500 Pounds
worth of our Goods, which when the Dutch or Flemming Merchant receives, he
finds by his Accounts that these Goods stand him in no more than 1300 l. So
that he has received beyond Sea the like Goods for 1300, etc. which has stood
our English Merchant in 1500 l. The English and Flemming Merchants then ship
off each their Goods for Spain, Turkey, the East or West Indies, and there they
go to Market to sell these Goods, and the Flemming under sells the English 13
per Cent. even in these Commodities which are the Product of England.

And now what is the plain Inference? but inevitable Ruin to the whole Trade
of the Nation. Here Is an End of Merchandise, and (in Time of Peace) all Use of
Shipping.

This I think is the natural and the present Effect of the Rise of Guineas.

But to return to my proper Subject, fare it as it will with Gold, the current
Silver Coin of England is, by 3 Parts in 5 too little for our Inland Trade,
and must ruin in Process of time all those Traders who are wont to make
several Returns of their Money in a Year; for the Scarcity of Money occasions
the giving of longer Credit than is usual, and the giving of Credit hinders the
Frequency of Returns.

Again, the Want of Silver Coin occasions the taking of Gold at such high
Rates; and the Value of Gold Coin being uncertain, which Silver Coin has not
hitherto been, the Receiver will always allow himself for a probable Loss:
(which would be the certain Effect too of making the Valuation of Silver Coin
alterable and uncertain) that Allowance makes things bought so much the dearer,
and that Dearness puts a Damp upon Trade.

So that the Scarcity of Silver is not only at present too visible, but so long
as the Balance of Trade is lightest on our Side, is like to be more and more
felt.

Yet the great Naval Stores we buy from abroad, the great Remittances to be
provided for the Subsistence of our Armies and Fleets, are things inevitable,
and it is impossible to hinder the Exportation of Bullion.

But it is very easy to hinder the Exportation of Money.

And as we shall do well to consider, that although our Plate may serve us once
at a dead Lift, as the French King showed us the Way, yet it cannot serve us
above once, and when that is gone after the rest of our Silver, what are we to
do next?

We must not only stop a present Gap, but provide for the future, and so I lay
it down as a Conclusion.

That we are under a very great Want of Silver Coin to carry on the necessary
Trade of the Kingdom.

CHAP. III. Of the Importation of Silver.
THat which encourages the Importation of any Commodity is the Certainty and
Quickness of a Market at a good Price.

But notwithstanding Silver is dear in England, at present we are but dull
Traders for it.

For the Mint and the Silver-Smiths being the chief Buyers, these cannot go to
Market.

The Mint cannot afford to buy and sell to lose; if an Ounce of Silver cost the
Warden of the Mint 6 s, 5 d. he cannot afford to make a Crown-Piece of it.

And the fear of Plate's being called in, to the Disadvantage of the Owner,
puts too great a Damp upon the Silver-Smiths Trade.

And the actual calling it in, upon such Terms, would very little mend the
Matter; People will not be very fond of buying more, for fear at least the same
Trick should be served 'em twice.

And yet our Coin being altogether insufficient, we must provide for a
considerable Quantity more.

The Quantity we want must be imported according to our Occasions, or what we
have already, be augmented, by altering the Species, or by coining out our
Plate.

It cannot be soon enough imported in such great Quantities as we at present
want, and yet if we could immediately buy it from abroad, we could not afford
to coin what we buy, without altering our Coin from the old Standard, seeing
our Necessity of having it, will make its Price rise abroad.

Therefore I shall referr what I have more to say, concerning Importation, to
the Chapter of Exportation, and first speak of altering our Coin, for it is
evident we must alter our Coin, as well as coin our Plate, or otherwise our
Plate will last us but a little while, and in the mean time we may admit this
Conclusion.

That England must be as good a Market for Silver as other Countries, or we
shall have little imported, be it never so plentiful abroad.

CHAP IV. Of Altering our Coin.
THere are Three Ways of altering our Coin.

I. First, By not altering the Species of the Money, but the Value. of it, as
making a Crown Piece go for 6 or 7 s.

II. Secondly, By diminishing the Matter, but leaving the same Name; and there
is no essential Difference between these two Ways.

III. Thirdly, by abasing the Fineness with more than ordinary Allay.

This has been judicially and fully stated by Mr. Lownd's, Mr. Lownds's Report.
p. 28. and onwards.
who has shown the undeniable Expediency of keeping up always our Silver Coin,
to the present Fineness, as that illustrious and solid Writer Sr. Robert Cotton
had likewise showed, and therefore I will say nothing on this Topic, lest I
should seem to build upon other Men's Foundations; and I the rather omit it,
because all that has, or can be said, against the raising of the extrinsic
Valuation of Coin, above the real Value, is applicable to the abasing of it by
Allay. And I fully assent to that Axiom, That the debasing our Money, by Allay,
and raising the Value of the Standard, is only doing one and the same thing,
(to most Intents and Purposes) by two several Ways or Means.

Suppose then but two Ways of debasing it, by Quantity, or by Quality, and
still that is all but debasing of it, that is, giving it a Value in Name, of
more than it has Intrinsically or Really; for this more than Intrinsic Value,
is merely Extrinsical, supposed, or denominated: in short it is a fictitious
imaginary Value, and not a real one, above the intrinsic.

And this, to say no more of it, is the reviving of that Monster which Q.
Elizab. Cotton's Posthuma. p. 287.
is of Happy Memory so gloried in the subduing; and I doubt we have Monsters
enough to deal with, without reviving more

This is such a devouring Expedient as will immediately swallow down a Part of
every Man's Estate, and at last consume the Nation.

The Price of every thing will rise instead of falling.

For if we were willing to submit to this at home, yet there is such a
Combination, between our Foreign and Home Trade, and the Relation between 'em
is so inseparable, that let the State give it what Name it will, it will pass
for no more at home than it does abroad, unless the heavy Balance of Trade was
on our side the Water; and it will pass for no more abroad than it is really,
not Extrinsically or Imaginarily, worth at home.

An Act of Parliament can as well make a Scotch Pound pass for an English, as
half an Ounce of Silver in England to go for an Ounce in Holland, without some
Consideration as may Balance the Difference.

Let us call a six penny-Weight of Silver a Crown Piece, as loud and as long as
we will, yet we shall never buy a Pound of Nutmegs with Four of 'em, unless
you will give the Dutch Merchant a Yard of broad-Cloth, or something else into
the Bargain.

It Is a plain case, that when the real Value of Money is lessened, the Price of
every thing will Rise accordingly, be the Extrinsic Value what it will.

Two Crown-Pieces do not buy a Yard of Cloth, because they contain Ten
Shillings, but because they contain almost two Ounces of Silver.

Gold and Silver are the universal Pledges and Security of all Trade, in every
Nation, and what is wanting in their Value must some way or other be made Good,
more than in Name or Supposition.

It Is True, in Holland and elsewhere, they have a base Under-Money, and there
is not an Ounce of Silver, perhaps, in as many Stivers or Schillings, as are
Equivalent to Ten Shillings in our Money.

But if in Holland, you can exchange so many of them, as have not an Ounce of
pure Silver in 'em, for as much of their better Coin, as contains two or three
Ounces of good Silver, then doubtless you can buy as good Commodities for
those, as you can proportionably for their better Money; as here you might
formerly have bought as much Pack-Thread for 48 Tin Farthings as for a Silver
Shilling; the Reason is, because there was a recourse; and base Money will have
a proportionable Value to Good, in that place where it can be changed into
Good; but that is a very different thing, from debasing the whole Species of
Money throughout the Nation, so that a Man shall be forced always to take
Under-Money, without any prospect of remedy.

I have nothing to say against an inferior sort of Money; a Verna Nummus,
provided there be a Regina Pecunia too; and it is indeed a dishonouring him,
whose Image and Superscription our Money bears, if we shall make use of our
Money to cover over a Fraud; it is a respect we owe to the King, not to suffer
his Impress upon any thing but what is really Valuable; and it is for the
Nation's Honor that the vilest of our Coin has a real Value; but if the
Wisdom of the Parliament should think otherwise, yet there is a vast Difference
between having the under. Money, and all the Money of the Nation of an
Imaginary Value.

The Arguments that may be made use of against such an imaginary Valuation of
Money, are perhaps invincible, and almost innumerable; but were there no other
but this, I think it might be sufficient without any more; considering our
present Case.

We must have an Army in Flanders or a War in England

I would I had nothing to do but to make out that.

How must we pay this Army? The Royal Bank of England, it is said, have
established there a Mint for Coining of Money to pay the Army; I desire then to
know if they will be contented to receive here an undervalued Money, and pay
there our Army in Money which the Flemmings will take; If they do, the Cap lies
between the Flemmings and them, I will not award till I know more.

I rather think that the Hollanders and Flemmings will raise their Money
proportionably to what we raise ours, and then in all Respects we are just as
we were, till we rise higher than they, and then they higher than we; which
will beget perpetual Wranglings and Wars in Trade.

I thought now to have done with this Article, but cannot omit one thing.

Which is that when you raise the Value of Money, you Naturally raise the Value
of Silver, which is high enough already; and then indeed England will become
the Best Market for Silver, because all Countries will sell it to us and get
sufficiently by the Bargain: they will buy good peny-worths of our Commodities,
giving us high Valued Silver for it, till we have a glut of Silver and the
Price of Silver falls, and then I suppose the Intrinsic Value of the Money
falls too: Though I confess as bad Consequences may follow too great an Intrinsic
Value.

I speak nothing of the Confusions and Jealousy which will arise from hence,
but there is a long Chain of ill Consequences, and therefore I hope it will be
allowed as a Maxim.

That if our Silver Coin has less than a real Value, it will not answer the
Intentions of the Government.

CHAP. V. Of Exportation of Coined Silver.
IT IS too well known, that when the Balance of Trade comes to be examined, we
fall short of several of our Neighbors very considerably: By this Means the
Exchange does not only fall very low, but will become altogether insufficient
for our present Occasions; so that as long as the War continues, there is an
absolute Necessity that we export so much Silver and Gold in Specie as the
Balance wants on our Side.

But this Exportation would not be at all prejudicial to us, if the Importation
could be made equal to the Exportation, and a Balance in this Particular only
would do our Business.

In vain therefore we labor to find out a Way to force a National Trade above
what the State of Europe in general, or our own Nation in particular will
allow; if that were not the Case, where would be the Inconvenience of a War?
This is an Evil never to be cured, but in Times of Peace. But our Comfort is,
that even in these Times of War the Nation notwithstanding the balance of
Trade, appears as wealthy as ever, excepting only in the Article of Coin, so
that it is not only fruitless but very needless to speak now of the balance of
Trade either in general, or upon any Article but that of Money: Besides if we
should begin at that end it would be a round about way, and so long in
compassing, that we may be at the last gasp before we attain our end. He would
be accounted no good Physician who in the case of an Haemorrhage when the
danger is very present should talk of Diet Drinks and Alteratives, whereas an
actual and immediate application to the part affected, or a sudden revulsion is
more to the purpose. But be the balance of Trade in general how it will, it is
impossible it should be suddenly remedied, f^t all during the War.

But if we can balance a little between that Article of Trade which relates to
the Importation of Bullion, it will be soon much better with us than it is at
present, it is something if we can give present ease, and not increase the
Danger; and more if we can lessen the Danger which the want of ease seems to
threaten.

Suppose for instance then the whole Trade of England to all parts of the World
to be carried on by two Merchants, one at London, and the other at Amsterdam,
and the only Commodities to be Cloth and Silk. Suppose he at London Exports
every year 1000 l. worth of Broad Cloth and no more, and he at Amsterdam
Imports hither 1500 l. worth of Silk, that here is an inevitable necessity of
the Londiners Exporting every Year 500 l, in Bullion cannot be denied, and if
this continue year by year it, will be, you will say, of pernicious consequence
to England, and it will be a wonderful hard matter at this time to help such a
Case.

But if we can at present so order it, that instead of importing 1500 l. worth
of Silk we shall import 1000 l. worth of Silk, and 500 l. worth of Silver we
shall be no losers in the Article I am upon, and which is the only thing I have
undertaken to look after, viz. That the Nation shall never want Money be the
Trade what it will: for if 500 l. in Silver be Exported and as much Imported
every Year, we can never have a Penny worth of Bullion less than we have.

And if other Nations must get by us, they had better get any thing than our
Money; if what they get by us they must be forced to spend among us, 'twill
lessen I hope the Calamity, as will appear more hereafter.

Now this is not to be done by giving our Coin a Nominal, fictitious or
extrinsick value only above its intrinsic: Foreigners are not such Fools to be
dealt with at that rate, as to pay you a Rex Dollar of 18 d. weight 18 grains
in Amsterdam or Brussels, for a piece of Money of 15 penny weight in London.

Turn the Tables, and suppose the King of Spain should advance his Real of
Eight weighing but 17 Penny Weight 12 Grains to double the value it now bears,
Sir Robert Cotton's answer of the Committee. September 1626. Page 306.
and yet needing by reason of the barrenness of his Country more of Foreign
Wares than he can Countervail by Barter with his own; he must part with his
Money and not gain by enhauncing his Coin. One Real of Eight would not then buy
of us as good a Yard of broad Cloth as two does now, and why should we think to
over reach them more than they us.

But then again, suppose the Money to be Coined shall be (as our Milled Money
and diminished hammered Money is) pretty near the Intrinsic value of the
Silver in each piece, and this will doubtless facilitate Exportation. If a
Foreigner for instance bring to London and sells 40 Bales of raw Silk, or 40
Tun of Wine, and meets not here with such a Market for the buying of other
Commodities to be Transported as he expected, perhaps those he wants are not of
our Growth or Manufacture, or it may be he is in have, or the Season calls him
home; how easy is it for him to sheer away, and go to another Market, having
Money in his Pocket passable every where, at the rate he took it, that
inconsiderable allowance for Coynage only excepted!

This I think is plain, but as yet there is more in it than so; and suppose it,
any other Nations turn to want Silver as much as we now do, and Silver should
be there at an higher price than with us, then our Money becomes good
Merchandice, and he gets most who carries most over: And the lower the value of
our Coin is the less Foreign Commodities we shall have for it.

You Will Prohibit you will say the exporting of it, and so you have upon pain of
Death prohibited the Exportation of our Wool, yet to the comfort of our
Grasiers it is still Exported, though it is very bulky Ware. But Money lies in a
small Compass, a Sea Captain knows very little of his chief business if he
knows not where to stow a 1000 l. undiscovered.

And if after all we should be very severe in the execution of such prohibitory
Laws, it would put such a damp to Foreign Trade as every body is not a ware of.

And indeed if Money were not allowed to be a commodity, yet it is a Pledge and
Surety of every Traders Property, and I am not reconciled to the Justice of
that Law which forbids a man to take his Pledge along with him.

Such a Law makes money nothing but a Commodity, and then we must pay dear for
what we buy of Foreigners, for most men will sell Cheaper than they will Barter.

This Article needs I think no more illustration, if it does the Merchants can
tell more of it than I, and I hope they will grant me this Conclusion.

That if our English Money will pass in any other Country for as much as it
does here, it is impracticable to hinder the Exportation of it.

CHAP. VI. Of melting down the current Coin of England by our Goldsmiths and
other Artificers.
ANother great grievance of the Nation in the matters of Coin may be thought
the melting of it down.

This has been a vile and great practice for many Years.

The Criminals have been under two temptations:

1. The inequality of the Mint in all the hammered money; some milled Pieces
were of more Intrinsic than Extrinsick Value, and some of less, so that in
culling out of the bigest, they made an evident advantage.

But that sort of money being almost all gone and never like to be coined
again, I shall altogether wave the consideration of it.

2. The other Temptation is the great Intrinsic Value of our milled money,
most of which was coined when Silver was 5 s. 2 d. 5 s. 4 d. or 5 s. 6 d. per
ounce, and the price of Silver rising, a Crown piece has now the intrinsic
value of 6 s. or thereabouts, this is a mighty temptation to melt it down.

Titius owes Sempronius 10 l. and pays him in milled money, Sempronius owes a
third man as much, but first melts it down and sells it to a Goldsmith for 12
l. and so puts 40 s. in his Pocket. This might have been prevented you will say
before all the milled money was gone; by crying down all other money, for if
the Goldsmiths had given 12 l. in milled money for an Ingot melted out of ten
Pounds, they must at length have been ruined; and therefore the Crying down all
other money must have brought down the price of Silver necessarily, or none
could have been sold:

If 5 s. melted down would not have yielded a Crown Piece, who would have
melted 'em; and if they would have yielded more, the money of the Nation how
much soever must soon have vanished, for more could not have been coined, till
the price of Silver should fall: But how could the price of Silver have fallen
so low in England, as not to be worth any man's while to melt down the milled
money, if Silver should at the same time of its melting bear an higher price in
other Countries than it did here at the time of its Coining: So that the Crying
down of base money would at any time have been so far from helping us, that it
would have immediately ruined us, it being impossible to Coin more upon the old
Standard, if the price of Silver is higher beyond Sea than it was when that old
Standard was Coined: And 'twill be impossible for us to Coin new money after
the old Standard (till we can bring down the Foreign Price of Silver) so fast
as it will be melted down.

To make this plain upon which so much depends, put the Case thus.

Suppose you called in by compulsion and Coined all the Plate of England, and
suppose it never so many Millions, and all after the old Standard, when the
Plate is all gone people will have more Plate, and Silversmiths must still have
work, and Goldsmiths their Trade, unless by prohibiting the use of silver Plate
we proclaim an hypocrital Beggary to all the world, and ruin many thousand
Families of Artisans. The Silver then of which you coin your new Plate must
come from abroad, or be procured out of your money;

The Goldsmith will go the cheaper way to work, and rather than he will give 5 s.
10 d. to a Merchant for an ounce of Plate, he will fling in a Crown and 6 d. into
the melting Pot, and though the Laws against melting down Coin be never so
severe yet people will venture any thing for gain, as you may see Clippers do
daily; especially if their Consciences don't check 'em, and few men's
Consciences will scruple making the most of their own.

And as the accurate Mr. Lowndes observes, notwithstanding ever since Ed. 3d's.
time prohibitory Laws have been against melting down Coin, page 68. and the
profit of melting it sometimes very inconsiderable, page 69. the practice
hitherto was never prevented. But it may be said money shall be coined of an
intrinsic value or near thereabouts (Coynage only allowed) in proportion to
the present value of Silver, be it more or less as it shall alter from time to
time, and so the abatement for Coynage shall always keep the Estimate of the
Coin above the Intrinsic value of the Silver, but instead of bringing remedy
this will make the Case tentimes worse, for then upon every rise of Silver the
Goldsmiths and others will melt down all that was Coined at a lower Price, and
if the form of the Coin don't direct 'em to be dextrous, the Prentices shall
follow the old Trade of weighing money Night and Day too.

So that without going farther upon this Topic, I may lay it down as a
Conclusion or Maxim.

That if the Intrinsic Value of Coin be subject to alteration the Coin is
always in danger of being melted down.

CHAP. VII. Of Hoarding up of the Silver Coin.
PEople who have several uneasinesses upon 'em at one and the same time, are
very apt to attribute 'em all to one, which is the most hated, the most
invidious, or at least the most visible cause, though in reality every one may
have sprung from a several and very different root.

Thus our present War with France is to some few people odious, to many
invidious, and to all visible, and this therefore must be the cause of all
National Calamities.

Whereas many things are better with us now than if we had no War; a frequency
of Parliaments, an universal vigilance, a care of Shiping; a choice of able
Ministers, (and not unskilful Favorites in most places of greatest Trust;) an
entire Alliance with the most useful Neighbors; an honest employment for all
dissolute Men; an hononrable provision for younger Sons of Gentlemen; a
perfectunderstanding between the King and his People; an almost total
desistance from an unreasonable and disadvantageous Commerce with France; a
more brotherly Correspondence with the Dissenters (being all equally engaged in
the Public danger) We have great Honor by the Bravery of our Arms, and the
most important assistance we give to all Christendom against French and Turk
Our King is become the Generalissimo of Europe, and his Fleet give Laws in all
Seas.

These and many more to the better part of the Nation are the advantages of
this necessary the expensive War.

But there are some that look upon it with an evil eye, and then the badness of
money, and the scarcity of it, and the Exporting and melting down, and hoarding
it, and the rise of Gold, and the dearness of Commodities, and the badness of
Trade are all as evident effects of the War as the Taxes are.

Though in truth this is all Humor and Caprice, and none of it more rdiculous
than when the hoarding up of Money is imputed to the War, which is the mere
effect of the dearness of Silver, as the dearness of Silver in England is the
natural effect of its dearness abroad, and its dearness abroad to the
obstructions of Trade, which would be if only France and Spain were at War,
since Spain is the Silver Market of the whole World.

Ever since the extraordinary abasement of Coin by an unparalleled Counterfeit
and Clipping, people have hoarded up Money a pace, not knowing how far the
debasement would run; and fearing if they put their good Money out they should
at the long run be forced to be paid back in they know not what themselves.

Nor has the beauty and rarity of uncorrupted and undiminished Coin, added a
little to the humor of hoarding it up.

Undefaced and weighty pieces are now as so many Medals, people think it a
great happiness to have a store of 'em. And as the Coin degenerates these are
more charily preserved, and will be so till the intrinsic value of 'em
diminishes. I could give a shrewd guess where this weighty Money is to be found
in great quantities, but be it where it will as I said before, I think every
man has a right do what he will with his own, so far as it is his own.

All that I at present aim at is to show.

That Coin which has an Intrinsic value above the Extrinsick, and is with-all
rare or uncommon will inevitably be boarded up, and continue so to be.

CHAP. VIII. Of Regulating our Silver Coin.
TO give an exact Estimate of what Silver Coin is necessary for the carrying on
our Trade in its full Vigor, is a task I am not at present willing to
undertake, but the least I can guess at is 5000000 l. considering that great
Sums will always remain in the Exchequer, and Banks; for I look upon the Banks
not as Channels only, but as great Receptacles likewise, wherein money must rest
and wait for opportunities of disposing it.

None of Hypothesies depend upon definite or determinate Sums, and I shall beg
nothing essentially necessary to the carrying on of my design, but I desire for
the present working only of my Proposition, that a few Postulata be a while
granted me.

It matters not much whether any of 'em be true for they may easily be varied
Mutatis Mutandis.

POSTULATA.
1. THat the Current Silver Coin of ENGLAND ought to be at least 5.000.000 l.
Sterling.

2. That there is not in England at present above 4.000.000 l. Sterling.

3. That there passes not publicly above 3.000.000 l. Sterling.

4. That the hoarded Silver Coin is about 1.000.000 l. Sterling.

5. That the present Current Counterfeited Coin is about 1.000.000 l. Sterling.

6. That the present Current Silver Coin not counterfeited, but clipted or
otherwise diminshed is about 2000.000 l. Sterling.

7. That the Current Silver Coin in daily use, not counterfeited but cliped or
otherwise diminished is not intrinsically above 1.000.000 l. Sterling.

Now the Axioms I shall build upon are chiefly these.
AX. I.
THat a way to induce the Subject to a voluntary compliance with the
necessities of State, is preferable to any manner of Compulsion.

And by this I intend to obviate two Projects, viz.

1. That the Clipped Money be all called in without giving full satisfaction to
the Proprietors; and this I take to be a piece of Injustice, because this Money
was at first given out to us by the Government, as a sufficient pledge and
unalterable Security of our Properties, and it was at first issued out of the
Mint in such various and undesigned Shapes, in respect of the Peripherie or
Circumference in which it has been debased, and so various withal in the
thickness and weight of each respective piece, that 'twas almost impossible for
the Subject to distinguish the diminutions, which a first were so Curious, so
Subtle, and small as was not to be easily suspected; and it has been by
gradual and sensible approaches that the present abasements are so considerable.

But this cannot be so well urged in behalf of Counterfeit Money, it is not any
thing we have received of the State, it never was given to us, as a Plegde and
Security; and so never was Money properly so called, but a False, and
Counterfeit sort of Ware which every man Bartered for at his own Peril, and to
such Caveat Emptor might properly have been said.

But if the wisdom of Parliament things fit to make Compensation for all the
Counterfeit Money, I have nothing to say against it: They are the proper Judges.

Or if they shall not think fit to give a full Compensation for the Clipped
Money, I have nothing to say, it would be great presumption in a private man to
dictate.

In the method I shall tender, I shall make provision for a full Compensation
for all the clipped and diminished money of the Royal Standard; at the small
expense of 250.000 l. which is vastly less than I have heard yet proposed, I
reckon three quarters of the money may be paid back in good Milled Coin
forthwith, as fast as it can be coined.

The second Project I designed by the former Axiom to obviate is,

The compelling of people to supply a present exigence by bringing in their
Plate into the Mint:

Which would be an attempt I doubt of pernicious Consquence, and instead of
that I have made a provision; whereby questionless as much Plate will be
crowded into the Mint with all the speed imaginable, as shall make up in tale
the two millions of Pounds Sterling of clipped money which when melted down
produced but one; and then I presume the extraordinariness of the encouragement
may, and ought to Cease.

AX. II.
THat our coin cannot be secured against Exportation, Melting down, and
Hoarding up, unless it have either a real, or extrinsick value above the
intrinsic.

AX. III.
THat a real value to make up the want of intrinsic given to Money, will be
^^^re satisfactory to all His Majesty's good Subjects (...) a mere extrinsick
value above the intrinsic.

AX. IV.
THat the real value of Money ought to be more than the intrinsic, and equal
to the extrinsick.

AX. V.
THat Money cannot have a real value over and above the intrinsic, unless that
over and above value be settled by an unquestionable Security applicable to
every particular persons Use.

PROPOSITION.
Now I humbly propose to the Consideration of better judgments the doing of
these things.

1. The speedy calling in all the clipped and diminished Money of the old
Standard, and entirely satisfying every Proprietor, by paying them 75 l. per
cent. back in Specie, and ascertaining to 'em the remainder by Parliament
Security.

2. The leaving as small an interstice of time as is possible between the
calling in the old Money and issuing out of New.

3. That therefore vast Encouragement be given for the speedy bringing in three
or four Millions of ounces of Plate to the Mint, to answer the present
Necessities of the King and People.

4. That the Exportation of Silver Money beyond the Permission of the King and
Parliament, be effectually hindered.

5. That a Provision be made as shall leave no Temptation for the melting that
down which shall be Coined.

6. Nor for hoarding it up.

7. That the Importation of Silver from all parts be encouraged, and the
Current Silver Coin of England increased to Five millions of Pounds Sterling.

8. That the Standard, in respect of Allay, be kept to its old Purity.

9. That the Denomination of the new Money be equal to the old.

10. That every one of the aforesaid Articles be accomplished at no more
expense to the Public than Two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds at present,
and a Land Tax of a Penny in the Pound during the War, or, at the most, Two
Pence in the Pound.

Theorem.
For the effecting all the aforesaid Articles,

Let a Competent Authority immediately Call in and Cry down all Clipped Money
under such a weight, supposing it to be all that Money which has lost full
half the original weight.

This may conveniently and safely enough be done before any new Money be coined.

When this is new Coined, let it be re-deliver'd to the respective Proprietors
in proportion, by Tale, to what every one brought into the Mint by Tale.

Then let all the rest of the Clipped Money be Called in by such a Day, and Cried
down.

And supposing in all 2000000 l. Postulat. 6, 7.
Sterling so melted down, and the Product, after Melting, be half as much, or
about 3500000 Ounces of Silver, there may out of this be Coined 1250000 l. of
New Money, of the same extrinsick value it now has, and of such an intrinsic
value, as that a Crown Piece shall weigh (now that Silver is 6 s. 6 d. an
Ounce, or 3 l. 18 s. the Pound Troy) Twelve-penny weight, and about three
grains, and have in it the intrinsic value of 4 s. So that the Government has
already saved Two hundred and fifty thousand Pound.

Then will it be known in how short time 1000000 l. can be Coined.

According to that time, supposing it (many Mints being set up at once) to be
Two Months, let a Proclamation be issued out, encouraging the bringing in
4000000 Ounces of Plate into the Mint, at Four respective Days or Weeks.

For the first Million, till the end of the first fortnight, shall be paid 7 s.
4 d. per Ounce, which amounts to 366666 l. 13 s. 4 d. till the end of the
second fort night, shall be paid 7 s. 2 d. an ounce, which comes to 358333 l. 6
s. 8 d. till the end of the third fortnight, shall be paid 7 s. an ounce,
amounting to 350000 l. And for the last Million 6 s. 10 d. an ounce, amounting
to 341666 l. 13 s. 4 d. in all 1416666 l. 13 s. 4 d. So that for one ounce with
another, the Government has paid 7 s. 1 d. an ounce.

It may be thought, that a great deal of this may be saved, and perhaps
Sixpence in an ounce, which amounts to One hundred thousand Pounds, and that
Six shillings and seven pence would be Temptation enough, when the Price of
Silver is like to Fall.

But I am now providing for the worst Contingences, and the severest
Suppositions that may be.

Yet the Frugalest way, I presume, would be, to leave the Management of this
Article wholly to the Lords of the Treasury, who, by public notice, may vary
pro re nata, the Praemium for bringing in Plate, and perhaps may think it
expedient nevertheless to begin high, and to abate the Praemium according to
the quantity brought in; and after one or two Abatements, People may perhaps
bring it in the faster, fearing a greater Fall: Where, as if the Lords of the
Treasury should begin low, and afterward be forced to raise the Praemium
higher. Peoples Hopes of their still advancing of it more, would restrain 'em
from making so much haste as the necessities of State require.

We suppose then this Silver to be Coining every Day as fast as possible, and
that the 250000 l. saved by the Government out of the first Million, shall
begin to pay for the Plate, as it comes in.

Then three ounces of Silver at 6 s. 8 d. an ounce, Coins 20 s. of the new
Standard, allowing 2, 3, or 4 d. per ounce for Coinage seeing the setting up so
many several Mints more than ordinary must be very chargeable.

And here must be noted, That let Silver Rise or Fall as much as it will, it
Alters very little the process of the Theorem, for it need have no other
effects than making the Money bigger or less, unless the 3d Corolary following
be admitted.

At this Rate then when 3500000 Ounces of this Plate is Coined into MONEY it
will produce after the aforesaid rate 1166666 l. 13 s. 4 d. to which add the
250000 l. paid before hand for it, and now there is paid in all for the 4000000
of Ounces of Plate 1416666 l. what it Cost; and the King has 500000 Ounces of
Plate by Him, which at 7 s. 1 d. an Ounce stands the Government in 177088 l. 6
s. 8 d.

But because it cust the King dear for his present Necessities, the Lords of
the Treasury cannot allow more for it than it will produce when Coined.

And if the necessities of State require that this Silver should be sent and
Coined in Flanders, that it may go farther there than it can here for the
immediate use of the Soldiers, then the Commissioners of the Accounts will
probably account for it, according to its Value beyond Sea; and then the
Government shall still be a greater Loser by it; so the Lords of the Treasury
cannot allow for it more perhaps than 150000 l. what ever it be more or less,
the case will stand thus at the least.

There is now of New Money Coined, 2416666 l. 13 s. 4 d. and this last 150000
l. being Advanced to the King for his present Necessities abroad, either to
Coin in Flanders, or to send over in Bills, will go toward the payment of the
Million of Clipped money. But if it be probable as Mr. Lounds seems to intimate,
That People may Voluntarily bring in a great deal of Plate at 6 s. 6 d. an
Ounce; then it is much more probable, that they will be qucker in bringing it
in at 6 s. 7 d. an ounce; and if so, the Government Saves out of my Proposals 6
d. an Ounce, which in 4000000 Ounces comes to 100000 l. And then there will be
250000 l. paid in recompense of the Clipped Money, and there is but 750000 l.
Remaining.

Or put the case Shorter and Plainer, the Government wants 1000000 l. worth of
Silver, and is willing to give 25 per Cent. more for it than the common price.

If that vast Allowance be made for fear of a sudden and fatal stop to all
manner of Trade for want of Money, yet the 250000 l. Saved out of the Clipped
Money, will make good the Bargain.

And then Four parts in Five will Coin a Million of Money, and still there will
be another 250000 l. worth left toward the paying of the Clipped Million, and
but 750000 l. remains Unpaid.

And upon this Easier supposition we will proceed; because it is likewise
cheaper to the Nation than the Buying of full 4000000 ounces of Silver.

Then if the Parliament Orders 'em to be paid 250000 l. more, which is all that
the Nation is Burdened in the Bargain: The Proprietors of the Clipped Money are
Reimbursed 75 l. per Cent. of what they brought to the Mint, which is more by
25 l. per Cent. than the intrinsic value of it was; and the other 25 l. per
Cent. is coming toward 'em apace. For now the present Necessity and the
Dangers of it are obviated, the price of Silver begins to Fall and Settle, as
the prospect of a Plenty draws nearer; though we can never suppose it will fall
lower than in other Countries, or much lower at all, during the War between
France and Spain. And be it at what price it will, the Merchant will from all
Parts bring his Silver to the Tower, because the Market is here Quick, and he
is sure of Ready-Money for what he Sells; the King can afford now to Coin,
which he could not do of late Years; And therefore a Third and Fourth Million
will be soon bought and Coined, and the Government out of every Million bought
will save a Fourth part.

For the New-Coin'd Money must bear a proportion to the price of Silver, as
four to five, and 800000 l. worth of Silver is to be in 1000000 l. of New Coin
no more nor less, and out of the four Million-worth of Silver, besides the
Million of Plate the King will have Saved a fifth Million, by which gained
Millions, the Clipped Money will be entirely Satisfied for at no more than 250000
l. present Cost to the Government, q. e. d.

For the case will stand thus: There will be 5000000 l. of New Coin. viz. out
of the Clipped Money 1250000 l. out of the Plate 1250000 l. (or if the last
250000 l. be not Coined, but Exported, then there will be out of the Plate out
1000000 l.) and out of the last Two Million worth of SILVER Coined 2500000 l.
So that there will be in the Nation at least Four Millions, Seven Hundred, and
Fifty Thousand Pounds New Money.

The King, after all this, buys 750000 Ounces of Bullion, and coins it, without
Profit, into 250000 l. This makes up 5000000 l. complete, and then the Royal
Mints is to be at a stand (as at present) until the Parliament shall have
resolved what more is to be done; our present Necessities are supplied, and
this, which we shall have, will not be diminished.

These Five Millions now want a fifth part of the Intrinsic Value of the Coin;
and unless a Real Value be given it to make amends for the want of the
Intrinsic, and to Equal the Extrinsick, I have, after all, I confess, done
nothing, according to my Fourth Axiom.

I humbly therefore Propose, That a Land Tax may make it good, if it do not
exceed Twopence in the Pound.

But after what manner it is to be made good, is the great Question.

If they, into whose Hands the newcoin'd Silver shall first come, should be
allowed for the Intrinsic Want of it, then, in the paying it out again they
must transmit the Allowance the State gives; or else the First Receivers would
be Savers, and the rest Losers: But if the State must immediately give the Full
Allowance, then it might as well have Coined to the full Intrinsic Value. But
the Intrinsic Value is lessened, and the Real given, because the Government is
better qualified at present to pay Interest than Principal.

Therefore an Interest is to be paid equivalent to the Extrinsick Value, and
fully satisfactory for the Want of Intrinsic; that so the Subject may be no
Loser, and the Government put to no Difficulties.

Beside, that Money would return to its Intrinsic Value, if a Shilling were
always to be tacked to a Crown or Four-Shilling Piece; which is One of the
chief things we are to avoid.

Let this Interest be 5 per Cent. and let it be looked upon as a sufficient
Interest, as it better will appear to be, when I come to answer the Objections,
which may be made to this Method.

The Interest of a Million of Pounds Sterling, which is wanting to make up the
Real Value of the New Coin at 5 per Cent. amounts to Fifty thousand Pounds per
Annum.

But, to Ease the Nation of half this Charge, let it be duly and carefully
considered,

That if the present Possessor of an entire 100 l. be entitled to this
Interest, and not of a less Sum, every less Sum will have such a Value Real, as
the Possessor of an entire 100 l. can make of it, and will allow for it.

And there will be no occasion for the Government to pay Interest for lesser
Sums, because the valuation of lesser Sums will always bear that proportion
which Merchants, Goldsmiths, and Bankers will receive 'em at, from the least
Sum to the greatest.

If I pay in, for instance, to a Goldsmith Fifty pounds to day, and Fifty
pounds to morrow, he will no more scruple to give me a Note for One hundred
pounds, than if I had paid it in at once: And, if I pay my Brewer Five pounds a
week, as he brings in my Drink, for twenty weeks together, he will look upon it
as good Pay as if I paid him at the twenty weeks end One hundred pounds
together; and if Five pounds will pass from me as the fifth part of an Hundred,
why not, by the same Rule of Proportion 20 Shillings for the hundredth part?
That which has the Value of Five pound Lumbard-street, has the same in
Paternoster Row, and the same likewise at Brentford, or elsewhere: And there
can be no Instance or Reason given, why Money of the like weight; Intrinsic
and Extrinsick Value, should not be as passable in little Sums as in great,
since there is an easy Resort, and at hand always; in which, without any
distinction, they daily determine.

Where an Hundred pound will be Received, there will Ninety nine, and Ninety
eight, and so downwards (for, where can you stop?) to the single Penny.

And of the Running Cash of England we may reasonably suppose, that one half is
not in Sums exceeding Twenty Pounds, and they who have less Sums than that,
will have no great Encouragement to look after Interest.

The Fifth Part which Twenty Pound wants of its Intrinsic Value, is but Four
Pounds, and that, at 5 per Cent. is but Four Shillings a Year; from which the
trouble of Receiving by entering into Combination with others, will for the
most part take off, and not make it worth the while.

So that the whole Money of England, that is New Coined, not amounting to above
5000000 l. and but half that to be paid Interest for, viz. 2500000 l. and there
wanting but a Fifth Part of that, viz. 500000 l. the Interest of 500000 l. at 5
per Cent. amounts to just 25000 l. per Annum.

But then, supposing that Interest be demanded for 3/5 of the New-coin'd Money,
and that by an unexpected Combination every Sum of Five Pounds should be
brought in, yet then the whole Interest amounts to no more than 30000 l. per
Annum.

And the Case stands thus:

The Parliament has Borrowed of the whole People of England a Million of
Pounds Sterling, and no more, to be repaid at the end of the War; and in the
mean time, till it be repaid, they give Five Pounds per Cent. Interest upon a
Land Tax.

Thus the Clipped Money is all Called in, and Satisfied for; there has been
little time between Calling back of the Old, and Paying back the New, by
bringing in 1000000 l. worth of Plate speedily and voluntarily into the Mint,
an effectual Stop is put to the Exportation, melting down, and hoarding up of
Coined Money; Importation of Silver from all Parts Encouraged, the Current Coin
of ENGLAND Increased; the Purity and Denomination of the Coin Continued; and
all at the present Expense of Two hundred and fifty thousand Pounds, and a
Yearly Land Tax of One Penny in the Pound during the War, q. e. d.

The only Difficulty that remains, is, After what manner the Interest shall be
paid.

But, if there is no more than Difficulty in it, I desire it may be Considered,
What Great Difficulties the People of ENGLAND at present undergo, in the Want
of such a Regulation: What Difficulties are in every Market-Shop, and House of
Trade; and what Great Disorders are Daily like to ensue: Let Bankers,
Goldsmiths, Merchants, and Cash-keepers, consider the Difficulties they lie
under at present, and the much greater Disadvantages they must be subject to,
if the Coin of England should not have a Real Value.

But, to make the Difficulty seem much less than may at First be imagined, I
humbly propose this following Method.

Let the Days of its Payment be fixed by PARLIAMENT, either Quarterly,
Annually, or Triennially. If the Established Interest be Five Pounds per Cent.
then, perhaps, Annually will be thought most expedient, in some Month when the
Days are long. If the Wisdom of Parliament shall think fit to give more
Interest than Five Pounds per Cent. then there is Visible Reason, why it should
be Quarterly. If less than Five Pounds per Cent. a Triennial Payment may
suffice. But suppose it Yearly.

Let Three hundred Commissioners be named by Parliament, One hundred of which
for London, Westminster, and Southwark, the Two hundred for the Country, to be
not above Twenty Miles distant from one another, so that no body can live
farther off than Ten Miles from one Commissioner or other.

Let these Commissioners be the most Substantial Gentlemen or Citizens in the
most Popular Towns and Cities in England, giving in sufficient Security to the
Government for Performance of Their Trust.

At the Day appointed let the Money be brought to the Commissioners Houses in
Hundred-pound Baggs, and there opened and weighed, and then sealed up with the
Proprietor's Seal, in the presence of the said Commissioner, Entering down in a
Register every man's Name in one Column, the Weight of the Money in another
Column, and the Interest it amounts to in a third.

Let none be Received after Twelve of the Clock at Noon, and none Re-delivered
till One of the Clock, to prevent Frauds in bringing the same Money twice for
the same Interest.

Then, in the Afternoon, let every man's proper and individual Money, Sealed up
as aforesaid, and Weighed again in the sight of the Proprietor, be delivered,
with the Interest due for it.

For which One Days Trouble in a Year, I do suppose, the Government may allow
the Commissioners Twenty Pound a man; which amounting to Six thousand Pounds
per Annum, for all the Commissioners of ENGLAND, and suppose Three of the Five
millions, whereas I supposed at first 2500000 l. only to demand Interest, it
will amount to but Thirty thousand Pounds per Annum, and this Six thousand
Pounds per Annum for the Commissioners added, makes but Six and thirty thousand
Pounds per Annum.

Now, whereas a Land Tax of Four Shillings in the Pound amounts to 2000000 l. a
Tax of a Penny in the Pound amounts to 41666 l. 13 s. 4 d. so that 5666 l. 13
s. 4 d. per Annum Remains.

Allow the Commissioners then Thirty Pounds apiece, and there remains 2666 l.
13 s. 4 d. for a Superintendant, Auditors, Registers, Register-Books, and other
incident Charges; and the whole matter is brought within a Tax of a Penny in
the Pound, q. e. d.

Now, as to the Hoarded Money, the Milled and Hammered Money of Full Weight, I
humbly am of the Opinion, That no Notice at all be taken of it by the
Government; and my Reasons are: That it will have an uncertain Value, according
to Peoples Opinion; and, that Uncertainty of Estimation, as well as the
Intrinsic Value, will cause it, without any any Edict or Precept, to be melted
down.

For, a great deal of it is now kept up, only to see what things will come to;
and what Advantage can be made of it: But when People see the Parliament has
Conquered the Difficulty, and that there is a great Plenty of Money stirring
about again, they will be balked of their Expectations, and take Advantage of
the First of the Market; this will conduce to the Cheapness of Bullion, and
cause a Plenty: And if any continue still hoarded, it will be by People only
who have an irremediable Humor that way; and it is better they should hoard
that for which the Government pays no Interest, than to keep Unemploy'd Money
by (...) at the expense of the Public.

And as to the Paying of our Armies Abroad, I humbly propose, That the
Parliament may always give His Majesty such an Allowance for that Use, as His
Majesty may be enabled to Export so much Uncoin'd Silver as is necessary to the
carrying on of so Glorious a War.

Which Uncoin'd Silver will for the most part find its way back again, because
the carrying over so much every Year will glut that place to which it is
carried; so that Silver will become Cheap there, and they must disgorge at the
best Market; which England, in all probability, will be. And the effect of that
Overbalance which Foreigners must, as cases now stand, get by us; cannot be
carried out of the Nation, but in other Commodities besides Silver.

For Silver Uncoin'd they Sell, and Silver Coined they cannot afford to carry
away; So that our own Commodities are like to be bartered for Silver, and that
conduces to bring the balance of Trade even.

And here I go no farther, but leave the Question to better Understandings.

Quest. Whether Silver bearing an higher Price here than elsewhere, and coming
to a Quicker Market, will not naturally and easily force an Exportation of our
own Commodities, when it shall become altogether impracticable to Export our
Coin?

Corol. I.
Note, That the Price of Silver Bullion being subject to Vary, the difference
between the Intrinsic, and the Real Value, ought to be Considerable; Because,
if they should be too near one another, the Additional Value would be so Small,
that when Silver Rises, the Goldsmiths would be Tempted to Melt down the New
Coin, when they can get almost as Much by that Practice, as they can do by
receiving Interest, or by passing it away for Principal.

Nor must the Two several Values be too far Different one from the other, lest
Foreigners be Tempted to Counterfeit our Coin.

I don't mean by sending Us over such a Counterfeit as shall be of Les^
intrinsic Value than our Own; bu^ they can Afford all the Charge of Curious
Coinage, and Pure Silver, and Full Weight, and Hazard of Importing it contrary
to all Laws that We can Make; If any more considerable Sum, than Twenty per
Cent. could be Gained by such Importation* But no body can afford all the
Charge and Hazard, if the Profit be no Greater, and the Punishment Capital.

Corol. II.
Nevertheless, provision may be Made, that all Counterfeit Money shall be
Confiscated by a Summary Process, to be Tried by a Jury of Moneyers, for every
Sum above Five Pounds; and for Less Sums, able and substantial Goldsmiths shall
be Commissioned and Authorized to end Disputes, Cutting it Asunder before the
Owners Face; and Charging themselves in a Book kept for that purpose, as
Debtors to the King for the same individual pieces, which at the General
Quarter Sessions they shall deliver for the KING's Use.

Some such Method as This, would make people more Cautious in taking
Counterfeit Money; whereas now they Take what they themselves Know to be so,
which has given great Encouragement to Counterfeiters.

And if I may be Well Heard, I don't at all Question, but to show a Way; how
all Counterfeit Money may be easily Known; let it be Washed, Plated; of mixed
Metal, or pure Silver; Which is the next piece of Service of this Nature, that
I design my Country, GOD continuing my Life and Health.

Corol. III.
I humbly Propound to the Disquisition of Better Judgments; Whether the New
Coin ought not always t^ be of the same continued Weight, not withstanding any
Variations in the Price of Bullion; and that not the Weight of Coin, but the
Aforementioned Interest be Varied from Yea^ to Year according to the Price o^
Bullion.

The Advantages and Convenience of what I have Proposed, is, I hope by this
time, somewhat Evident; bu^ before I Reckon 'em up, it may perhaps be Expected
that I should Faithfully and Heartily set down all tho^^ Objections which have
Occurred to me whilst I have been Writing these Papers.

The most Material I will: And they are These.

OBJECT. I. Now, if it be Objected, That Five Pounds per Cent. for want of
Silver, in an Hundred Pound is too little, seeing an Hundred Pound Bagg-full is
entitled to no more than Twenty Shillings a Year:
I Answer,
THAT if a Man be contented to put in his Money into any of the New Banks, at 3
l. per Cent. it is better worth to lend it at 5 per Cent. per Annum, upon as
good Security.

If it be replied, That a Man may take it out of a Bank when he will, and his
Money is always at Command: I answer, It is much more so when he has it in his
own Custody; For, he who shall have Four hundred Crown-pieces by him, can make
as much use of it to all Intents and Purposes, but of Melting or Exporting, as
if it were of an Intrinsic Value; and then sure he who having Four hundred
Pieces of Money by him of a Real Worth, and applicable to any Lawful Use, can
make Twenty Shillings a Year Advantage by Keeping 'em; has much the better of
him who has Four hundred Pieces of other Money by him, of no more Real Value,
nor more transferrable, and has no Profit by 'em, whilst they are in his Hands.

And whereas it may be said, No Man can be entitled to the Interest of that 20
l. due to him from the Government, unless he keeps 80 more dead by him, as a
Vehicle to convey the Interest of the 20 l. to him. I answer the Government
does not intend to give Encouragement that Men should keep more Money by 'em
than they have, or may have Occasion for.

That is a sort of hoarding which we are to prevent.

And therefore this 5 l. per Cent. is not given as an Interest for dead and
unemploy'd Money, but to ascertain universally the real Value of it, and to
take off all the Objections that are made against a mere extrinsick Value.

But if the Wisdom of the Parliament thinks fit to give 10 l. per Cent
Interest, whereby every 100 l. of new Coined Money will be entitled to 40 s.
per Annum Interest; then the whole Interest of 500000 l. which the 2500000 l.
half of the 5000000 l wants of intrinsic Value, amounts at 10 l. per Cent. but
to 50000 l. per Annum.

Or suppose by Combination 3/5 of the 5000000 l. demand Interest, then will the
whole Interest amount to but 60000 l. per Annum, which with all the incident
Charges, will be defrayed for little more than a Three-half-penny in the Pound
Land Tax; and for much less than 2 d. in the Pound.

And I am not at all against an Interest of 10 l. per Cent. because beside the
present Advantage it gives, it does ascertain to the People of England, not
only a Promise that the Parliament will; but that there is a reason of good
Husbandry likewise, why the Parliament should as soon as possible save the
Nation that Annual Charge, by the paying of the principal Million that is
wanting.

Object. II. These Ends may as well be pursued by transferable Notes or Bills
with Interest.
I answer that they cannot in the least, because here is 4 l. in 5 l. better
secured than any Notes in the World can pretend to: for every Man has so much
of his Money in his Pocket; and that, for which the Security is given, is
divisible into the 5th. part of a Sixpence, which transferable Bills cannot be.

Object. III. That if this Method will hold, the intrinsic Value of Money may
be but half as little as I propose, and the Subject will be always in fear of
farther Alterations.
Answ. This I confess would be a very material Objection against Mr. Lound's
Method, but has no force in ours, because the Government saves nothing by
lessening the intrinsic Value; for what it saves at present, it must pay
Interest for, and Principal too at the long run; besides, the Government aims
at nothing but to rectify the Coin, and keep it from being imbezil'd.

Object. IV. The Money of England will be too much for 300 Men to receive in
one Day.
Answ. It is but 10000 l. a Man one with another; i. e. but 100 hundred
Pound-bags, which may very well be weighed and sealed up, and entered in a Book
in 5 hours time; viz. 20 in an hour; and as for the great Banks and Cashes of
England, such as the Royal Bank, East India Company, and the like, they need
not remove their Money at all; but Commissioners may be sworn and sent to their
respective Treasuries, taking sufficient Security of the said Treasurers and
Cashiers, that none of the said Money shall be removed or touched in 24 hours.

Object. V. It will be a great Trouble to carry 100 l. 10 Miles for 20 s.
Answ. It may not be 100 Men's Case in all the Nation, and no Man is forced to
carry it; and he who don't carry it, has lost nothing but what he might have
gained.

For this is all clear Gains to every Man, who as soon as he has received his
20 s. can keep the 20 s. and pay a Debt with the 100 l.

Object. VI. The want of a less Intrinsic Value, than 20 l. per Cent. will
answer all the aforesaid Ends.
Answ. Less will not secure it against Exportation.

Foreigners have a knack at raising the price of Silver to draw over our Money
to 'em; and I hear they can afford what they now daily do, viz. To Export,
rather than fail, Clipped Money; and the only way to keep our Money at Home, Is
to fix, during the War, one considerable part of its Value to the Kingdom; and
when those Foreigners who must deal with us, cannot Export our Money, but with
great disadvantage, they will be forced to take our Commodities in lieu of it,
and be as industrious to make 'em valuable abroad as we are. And as to that
Notion that we must not glut the Markets abroad with our Commodities, it is a
Vulgar Error unless we make this distinction, That it is dangerous when our
English Factories glut the Market; for when Foreigners see the Market full,
they combine together to keep down the Price, knowing that we must Sell; but
then Foreigners who are better acquainted with their own Markets and Fairs than
we are, and can spread a Trade much farther than our Factories can do, when
they Export our Commodities and cannot Trade at all with us without exporting
'em; they can shift from one place to another, and open secret Passages of
Commerce, not yet found out.

If the Portugueses for instance could not have Money for their Wine, would
they (I desire to know) rather leave of Trading with us, than take our Cloth
for their Wine. Or if heretofore we had drank no French Wine, but what we had
paid for in Tin, would they have found a Vent for our Tin, or ploughed up their
own Vineyards?

Object. VII. This will be forcing Foreigners then, to Export our Commodities.
Answ. Not at all: For if the Balance of Trade shall continue after all, to
our disadvantage, here is nothing in all this matter that hinders our exporting
Bullion.

But if it is absolutely necessary to export Bullion to make good the Balance
of Trade, then we should take the more care, not to export more than is
absolutely necessary; and whilst we carry on our Trade abroad, not to let this
at home be at a stand, but secure Money enough for the Nations Inland Trade,
and to pay the Taxes without pretense of impossibility.

Object. VIII. Five Millions will not be half enough for our Inland Trade.
Answ. And I am clearly of that Opinion; and that Ten Millions is little
enough, or else what need had there been, to have Coined Fifteen Millions in
three Reigns, as the most industrious Mr. Lounds has delivered to us?

But we are providing for a present necessity and not abundance.

And yet should we Coin five Millions more, in all Ten Millions; less than 2 d.
in the Pound Land Tax, would pay Interest for all, and the Million gained out
of it would save 2 s. in the Pound that Year, which is making a very good
Bargain for the Government.

But you may vary the Postulata, as I said before, how you please.

Object. IX. The new Coined Money will appear very small to the Eye.
Answ. Go which way you will, it must be smaller than it was, or of greater
value, because Bullion is dearer than when the Milled Money was Coined, and if
the new Coined Money were to have an Intrinsic Value, it must necessarily be
less than it now is, and according to these Proposals it will be but about.

Supposing Silver at this extraordinary Price, I don't see how it can possibly
be larger than as 8 to 10, and this Proposition is as 8 to 12.

Object. X. The Mint is the Pulse of the Commonwealth, Cotton Post. p. 294.
and this would discover us to be in a weak Condition.
Answ. It will discover us doubtless, to be in a borrowing Condition upon good
Interest and Security; but that is the worst of it; whereas if the Mint should
only give us an imaginary Valuation, then we are discovered to be in an
imaginary Habit of Wealth.

CHAP. IX. Advantages and Conveniences most of which may be expected from this
Method.
1. THE Subject will be assured by the giving entire Satisfaction for Clipped
Money, that the Coin of England Minted by Authority, is an inviolable and an
unalterable Property which the Parliament will for ever maintain, even in the
worst of times; the Consideration of which, will give the real and additional
Value of the new Coined Money, a Credit throughout the World. And People will
be the better able to pay Taxes if they are at no loss by their Clipped Money.

2. The Denomination of the Silver Coin will not hereby be raised above the
real value.

3. The Trade and Circulation of Bullion in and out of the Kingdom, will not be
at all hindered, so that as much Silver and Gold may be yearly transported into
Flanders, as the occasions of the War require, without loss of Coinage; and
Money which is the Vital warmth of Inland Trade, by which People are enabled
to pay Taxes, always preserved among us.

4. The frequent Rises and Falls of Money beyond Sea, will be no longer an
effectual trick to cheat us, as it has hitherto been.

5. If it should after all be exported, it will be 20 l. per Cent. more to the
Exporters loss, than if it had a full Intrinsic Value.

6. That 20 l. per Cent. which the Exporters lose, will be gained by the
Government; because for what is exported, no Interest will be paid, nor no
Principal at the end of the War.

7. The Coined Silver of the whole Nation, may in times of Peace be reduced to
the old Standard, and Intrinsic Value, without recoining or altering the
Species.

8. Those who hide and hoard up their Money, to defeat the Intents of a Tax
upon it, will be disappointed of their Ends, and become greater Losers than by
producing it; whereby Money may be affected by Taxes, which now cannot so
easily be done.

9. All the Benefits and Advantages which can be proposed by a raising of the
extrinsick and denominated Value of Money, will be hereby secured, and all the
Inconveniences of that Method obviated.

10. All the Advantages which can be proposed to the Public by Coining after
the old Standard, will hereby be effected, at a very inconsiderable present
Expense, and no more than one Million at the end of the War.

11. Guineas will hereby fall in their Estimation, by an easy, natural, and
gradual Abatement.

12. The Plenty of Money will be much greater, the Intrinsic Value more, and
the Certainty of what a Man takes clearer than is at present.

And the real Value of our Coin, as great as ever, to all Intents and Purposes,
but of Exporting, Melting-down, and Hiding

FINIS.

