A Woman Pope (as History does tell)
In High Procession She in Labor fell,
And was Delivered of a Bastard Son;
Thence Rome some call The Whore of Babylon.
depiction of the Whore of Babylon

A Present for a Papist: OR THE LIFE and DEATH OF POPE JOAN Plainly Proving Out
of the Printed Copies, and Manuscripts of Popish Writers and others, that a
Woman called JOAN, was really POPE of ROME;

And was there Delivered of a Bastard Son in the open Street, as She went in
Solemn Procession.

By a LOVER of TRVTH, Denying Human Infallibility.

LONDON, Printed for T.D. and are to be sold at the Ship in St. Mary Axe, and
by most Booksellers, 1675.

The PREFACE.
THe Author of this following Treatise is many years since deceased; a great
Lover of Truth, and one who had been highly prefered in the Church of Rome,
could he have dispensed with her Sons profitable Sin of lying and equivocation.
In his time he was looked upon as a man of a very acute Wit, a great Virtuose,
yet of a meek and modest temper, one who valued Truth so much, and the World so
little, that all that knew him, could do no less than approve and applaud his
writings before they read them; and truly, as to the confirmation of his
assertion, proving that there was a Woman called Joan, who was Pope of Rome, he
needed not the use of Lying, since he had so great a cloud of Witnesses to
manifest the Verity of the Story, and not a Protestant among them, but all
eminent Pontificial Writers, (Propugnacula Romanae Ecclesiae) whose Volumes he
laboriously read over, and has quoted them faithfully, in which quotations you
will find none of the meanest of the Sons of the Romish Church have
acknowledged, that there was a Woman Pope, and several to this day, to their
own shame and confusion, must confess the truth of this Story.

The Book was first published in the year 1602, Dialogue wise, between a
Protestant and a Papist, wherein all the arguments that can be produced to
prove the nullity of a Pope Joan, are fully and plainly answered; but the Book
proving exceeding scarce; and the Reprinting thereof much desired, I have taken
the pains to alter the method only, but not the matter, and the only addition
(in a manner) is Pope Joans life translated, as it is briefly described by B.
Platina in his lives of the Popes; and indeed, all who have writ of her, have
done it in so few words, that you must not expect the Tith of this Lady Errants
Story in this small Volume; not but that I am apt to believe that a Woman of
such eminent learning and excellent parts, wherewith she was endued, must
perform many memorable actions in the World, besides what were contained in her
lascivious Ramble with her lusty Gallant to the City of Athens, and from thence
to Rome, in which place she behaved her self in all respects, in masculine
apparel, like a learned and a Holy Man, till female frailty disgraced her Papal
Dignity with a Bastard, of which she was shamefully delivered in the open
street, as she was going in Procession, and both ignominiously died instantly
thereon.

Our Author has given no very large account of her Life, supposing a full
Relation would take up more Paper than learned Tostatus his Works, who has
troubled the World with two sheets for each day in his Life. But I conceive he
writ this (as one wittily observes) to undeceive such as took Rome for the
model of the Heavenly Jerusalem, and the Pope and Cardinals, for the Mayor and
Aldermen of the Corporation. The proofs herein alleged for the Vindication of
this Story, seem so apparently undeniable, that not only I, but many more of
good credit, are clearly persuaded there was such a Woman. If matters then have
gone thus at Rome, (the people there having been most intollerably abused, not
only by this Female Pope, Donna Olympia, Sister in Law and overruling Miss to
Pope Innocent the Tenth, and others of the like Masculine Gender) what hopes of
Infallability? Let Children and Fools be pleased with Baubles, I hope the more
rational sort of men will not be imposed on, and exempt the Pope from the
determination in the Text, Every man i^ encompassed about with Infirmities. He
that believes the contrary, to his peril let him do it, and to the obstinate,
who shall persist in this folly, I shall only say, Si Populus vult decipi
decipiatur. He that will be an Ass may; I wish all good Christians to have a
care of being such credulous Cocks-combs, and so

Farewell
A Present for a Papist: OR THE LIFE and DEATH OF POPE JOAN, etc.
JOhn English or Pope Joan, as you may read in Platina's Lives of the Popes,
was born at a place called Mentz in Germany, who concealing her Sex in a
Masculine habit, being a young Woman, traveled with a man of singular Learning
to Athens, whom she infinitely loved for the excellency of his parts, having
sufficient ingenuity to qualify her for a judge in that particular. Such was
her desire of knowledge, that for some time she wholly banished her thoughts
from every thing that had the least appearance of what was sensual, and
applying her self solely to her study, in a little time she so improved her
self in all Arts and Sciences, by conversing with the Learned of those times,
with the assistance of her no less Learned Companion, that in Philosophy she
had few Equals, and a while after coming to Rome, in Theology she had as few
Superiors. By her indefatigable reading and acute disputing, she soon obtained
so much good will and Credit amongst all sorts of Persons, that she was not
only cried up for a great Wit, but a man of unimitable holiness and piety, and
this vogue ran so uncontroulably general among the wiser sort, that Leo the
Fourth deceasing, by the consent of all, as Martinus says, she was chosen
Pope. Being hardly warm in her Papal Seat, her Piety gave place to her
Leachery, insomuch, that admitting either her learned Fellow-traveller, or one
of her Menialls, as some imagine, into her loose embraces, she conceived with
Child, and as she grew bigger and bigger, every day produced new inventions to
conceal her inpregnation, so suptly contrived, that this growing infamy was
known to none but him that was the cause thereof: but mischief on it, not
dreaming that her time approacht so near, as she was going from the Vatican to
St. John Laterans in Procession, between Nero's Colosses and St. Clements, she
fell in Travel, and was Delivered of a Son, and dyed in that very Place, having
sat as Pope two years one month and four days, and was buried without the
least honor and solemnity.

Jacobus Bergomensis differs little in opinion from the aforesaid relation, a
Man whom Trithemius (Lib. de Ecclesiasticis Scriptoribus) applauds for being
well read in Scripture, a famous Historiographer, and one that was witty,
eloquent, and of a good life and Conversation, and therefore we may dare credit
such a Person, who says, Supplement Chron. lib. 11. ad Anno 858. Impres.
Venetiis. An. 1486.
Johannes Septimus Papa, natione Anglicus post Leonem Pontisicem, Pontifex
factus sedit, An. 2. Men's. 5. Hunc tradunt fuisse faeminam, etc. John the VII.
by Country English, was created Pope after, next after Leo, and sat two years
five Months; they say this was a Woman, and that she went very young out of
England to Athens with a learned man that was in Love with her, and that
thereby, hearing good Professors, she profitted so much, that coming to Rome,
she had few like her in Divinity. Whereupon by her Reading, Disputing,
Preaching, and Praying, she got her self so much favor, that upon Leo his
death, she was Chosen Pope in his Room, (as many men say by common consent; but
see the luck of it, a while after, she was got with Child by one of her
acquaintance, and was delivered thereof in the time of her Papacy; for going
from the Vatican to St. John Laterans in Procession, between the Colosses and
St. Clements, e're she was aware, Childbirth Pangs seized her e're she was
aware, and was delivered in the High Street without the help of any Midwife,
but she dyed presently, and was buried without the least solemnity in the same
place, with her Bantling lying by her. Now in detestation of so foul a fact,
and for the continuing the memory of so lude an action, the Popes to this day,
when they go in Procession, to show their dislike to the place of her Travel,
which was in the midst of her way, forsaking it, do turn into by-lanes, and
by-streets, till they have left that on their backs, and then returning into
the same street again, they go forward with their Procession. And for avoiding
the like mischief for the future, it was decreed: that none should be
consecrated Pope, before the youngest Cardinal Deacon had tried by touching,
(whilst the Person to be consecrated sat on a Close-stool) that he was a man.

I am not ignorant how incredulous this story appears to the Romanists, and
how fabulous and rediculous some have endeavored to render it by their
sophistry and forgery, which shameful practices we need not wonder at, if we
consider how customary it is for them to avow manifest untruths, and deny known
truths, especially if they produce any advantage to the vanity of their Popish
persuasion; all which is as easy to prove, as to object against them; which
though it may be demonstrated by diverse particulars, viz. By Parsons and
Bishops, denying that they call the Pope their Lord God: by Bellarmins denying
that any Jesuit had any hand in the Gunpowder Treason: by their general denying
that Pope Honorius the first was an Heritick, etc. Yet most apparently their
impudence appears, in denying the report of a Joan that was a quondam Pope of
Rome; which I shall endeavor to prove by a Cloud of witnesses, not any of our
own Brethren, but the sons of the Romish Church, which purposely I have done
for the greater confirmation of my arguments; for as Novatian says, de
Trinitate firmum est genus probationis quod etiam ab Adversario sumiter, ut
veritas etiam ab inimicis veritatis probetur; that is a strong proof which is
wrung out of the adversary, when the enemies of truth are driven to bare
witness unto the truth. And as Vives de Instrument. probabilitatis.
another, Amici contra amicum et inimici pro inimico invincibile testimonium
est. Which sounds thus as I conceive; the testimony of a Papist against a
Papist, and the testimony of a Papist for a Protestant, is without exception.
If I have given an impartial and true account of this Joan, the Woman Pope,
manifestly proving there was such a Person who sat in the Papacy, and dyed
therein with infamy, against the surmises and objections made to the contrary,
by Robert Bellarmin and Caeser Baronius Cardinals, Onuphrius Harding, Saunders,
Cope, Genebrard, Bernartius, Florimondus, Papirius, Maso, Parsons, etc. I would
then have the Romanist lay aside all prejudice, and bare Witness with me, if he
can bring more solid arguments to the contrary, I am ready to be convinced,
being content to learn of him if he can better inform my judgment, as Lib. 2.
Retract. cap. 18.
St. Augustine did of Tychonius the Heretic. To conclude my proaemium with all
sincerity, I profess, that though it may be gathered out of Campian a
Tiburn-martyr, and the Papists Champion, that they believe one Heaven cannot
hold them and Protestants; though Fieri nequit ut Lutheranus, Jehennam, evadat,
ex externis ignibus eripiatur. Si mentior damner ipse cum Lucifero, says
Costerus, Resp. ad Refutat. Lucae Osiandri Proposit. 8. page ult.
Costeras wish strangly that he may be damned with the Devil to all Eternity if
any of us be saved; yet their uncharitableness and cruelty toward us from time
to time extended causelessly shall work no such effect in me, but on the
contrary, I wish them well, and shall constantly pray for the welfare of their
Souls; that they may have eyes to see the truth, and ingenuity to acknowledge
it.

Give me leave now to come to the Proof of this famous History of Pope Joan,
and by the way, methinks I hear some opinionative obstinate Romanist say that
the whole story of Pope Joan is a fond, vain, and mere fable, a ridiculous
fiction, and so known to the more learned sort of Protestants among you, but
that you will not leave deluding the world with it for want of other matter;
besides, there are so many improbabilities and moral impossibilities in this
Tale; as no man of any mean judgment, discretion, or common sense will give
credit thereto; but will easily see the vanity thereof. In a word, I say
Impudentissime ficta, stultissime credita. Fernartius de utilitate legendae
hist. lib. 2. p. 105.
he was a Knave that invented it, and he is a Fool that believes it,
espetially if he compares it with what is written on the same subject by
Buchingerus in Germani, by Charanza in Spain, by Onuphrius, Bellarmin, and
Baronius in Italy, by Tarianus, and Bernartius in Belgia, by Pontacus in
Aquitania, by Genebrard and Papyrius, Massonus in France, by Saunders, Cope,
Harding, Father Parsons, and others which were English men.

To all those particulars, and what else has been objected, to prove the
nullity of this History, I shall endeavor to answer and refute as mildly as
the subject will permit, and first, did it not pass for current, sans
contradiction, till within somewhat more than a Century of years, viz. Till the
year 1566. That Onuphrius the Friar began to boggle at it; he was the first
that ever by reason endeavored to discredit the report of it, and yet
confesses that many worthy men as well as vulgar, believed it for a truth:
Multos and magni nominis viros historiam hanc suscipere eam quoque vulgo verum
existimary. Besides, it is to be found in Marianus Scotus, in Sigibert, in
Gotefridus Viterbiensis, in Johannes de Parisiis, in Martinus Polonius, in
Petrach, in Boccace, in Ramulsius Cestrensis, in Johannes Lucidus, in Alphonsus
e Carthagena, in Theodoricus de Niem, in Chalcocondilas, in Platina, in
Palmerius, in Nauclerus, in Sabellicus, in Trithemius, in Voleteranus, in
Bergomensis, in Schedel, in Laziardus, in Fulgosus, in Textor, in Gassarus, in
Mantuan, in Crantius, in Caranza, with many more of the Papish faction; some
Grecians, some Italians, Spaniards, French, Germans, Polonians, Scots, English,
and yet not one of them a Lutheran. If these Authors added no weight to the
verity of this History, yet methinks her Image might, which is set up among the
rest of the Images of the Popes in the famous Church of Siena in Italy, and is
to be seen there at this day; which the Bishop of that place would not suffer
to be defaced at the last repairing of that Church, though the Jesuits did urge
him much to do it. Moreover, was there not made of old for fear of such like
cheats and abuses a stool of easement, on which Popes were set at their
inauguration, for proof of their humanity? was their not a Marble Image fet up
as a Monument thereof, in the place where she Miscarried, viz. In one of the
chiefest streets in Rome, which Monument was likewise to be seen within this
few years, no longer ago than in the time of Pius the fifth. Lastly, is it not
written by men of their own persuasion, that all Popes when they go in
Procession, refuse to go through that street in detestation of that fact, but
go further about. To this the Romanists do answer, it is not so much in
detestation of any such supposed fact that they leave the straight and nearer
way to the Lateran Church, but because that street is Augusta and anfractuosa,
a narrow winding street, and in that respect unfit for so great a Train as
ordinary accompanies the Pope to pass orderly through, as Onuphrius, Bellarmin,
and Remondus have observed. But if it be true what Philippus Bergomensis has
registered, this observation is false, In Supplement Chron. ad Annum 158.
eo omisso (says he) speaking of the Popes turning out of that place of the
street wherein Madam Joan was delivered without the benefit of a warm Bed,
Midwife, Nurse, or Caudles to comfort her, Declinat ad diverticula vicosque, et
sic loco detestabili postergato reintrantes, iter perficiunt quod caeperunt:
that is, leaving the way, they turn into by-lanes and by-streets, and as soon
as they are beyond that detestable place, they turn into their way again, and
so go on to the perfecting their Procession. Now, if upon their leaving that
street, they enter into by-lanes, etc. And having past that ominous place, they
turn in again; the reason why they leave that street cannot be because it is
narrow and winding in and out, for doubtless those by-lanes are as narrow. And
by their turning out and returning into the same way again, they wind as often
in and out as if they went along through the same street, though it were very
crooked. In confirmation whereof De vitis Pontif. in vita Johan. 8.
Platina, who knew Rome very well, and was desirous enough to cover the Popes
nakedness herein, as much as he could with any honesty, confesses that this is
probable enough.

As to the Marble Image erected in perpetuam rei memoriam Lib. de privilegiis
and juribus Imperii.
Theodoricus de Niem, who was formerly a Secretary to a Pope, says adhuc vetus
Statua marmorea illic posita figurative monstrat hoc factum, unto this day an
old marble Image errected in that place, shows the matter under a figure. Now
observe what a slender evasion the Romanists make use of, in acknowledging
there was such a Statue but resembled not in the least a Woman lying In, nor
was the Boy engraved by her like a Child in Swadling-Clouts, but like one of
some years.

This exception is to little purpose, for that age was an ignorant, illiterate,
witless age, and therefore perhaps had no more Skill in Graving, Carving, and
Painting, then they had, whom Aelian mentions, who were forced to write over or
under their Pictures, Hic est Bos; ille Equus; haec Arbor; this is a Bull, this
an Horse, and this a Tree; that men might know what creature it was they
Painted Aeneas Sylvius pointing to a more ingenious time than that of Pope
Joan, condemns the Painters and Carvers thereof for notorious bungling
Botchers, saying thus, If we could take a view of engraved or painted Images made
two or three hundred years ago, you would find them pourtraed not like men, but
Monsters and hobgobblins; such an artist probably had the handling of Pope
Joans statue; however as ill framed as it was, Pius Quintus thought it as it
stood, that it discovered more than he willingly would have known, and
therefore removed it and cast it into the River Tyber, not because it disgraced
the street, but, ut memoriam illius aboleret, that he might extinguish the
memory of that shameful action, and this is not only witnessed by Travelers,
that were in Rome, but by Elias Hist. a Jesuitici Ordinis cap. 10. de
Jesuitarum Patre and Matre.
Hassenmuller formerly a member of the fiery order of Jesuits.

Bellarmin in lib. de Romans Pontif. will not allow of this Stool of Easment; for
says he, of a stool of easment to try the Popes Sex, there is no where any
mention; Onuphrius averring that it is but a mere toy, and an idle conceit of
idle people; yet Philippus Bergomensis, a man of great learning and esteem in
his time, (as Trithemius attests) records it as an undeniable truth, that there
was such a thing; for upon mention made of Pope Joans story, Ad evitandos
similes errores statutum fuit (says he) ne quis de caetero in B. Petri
collocaretur sede priusquam per perforatam sedem futuri Pontificis genitalia ab
ultimo Diacono Cardinale attractarentur: for avoiding like error for the
future it was decreed that no man should be held for Pope, till the youngest
Cardinal Deacon had found by trial, while he sat upon a stool of easment,
that he was a man; which is likewise testified by De rebus Turcicis lib. 6.
page 98.
Laonicus Chalcho condilas; for upon relation of that story he thus proceeds,
Qua propter ne decipiantur iterum sed rem cognoscant neque ambigent Pontificis
creati virilia tangunt and qui tangit acclamat: Mas nobis Dominus est: that is,
least they should be deceived again, they make proof of the Popes manhood by
feeling, and he that feel-makes it known by crying our Lord and Master is a
Man. And Sabellinus writing the same matter, says, There is to be seen at this
day in the Popes Palace a Marble Chair wherein the new Pope presently upon his
election is set down, that as he sits, the lowest Deacon may make trial of his
humanity by touching or feeling.

As much may be read in William Brewin, who lived in the year 1470. for in
Capella Salvatoris (says he) In the Chapel of our Savior, there are two or
more Marble Chairs with holes in them, wherein in (as I heard) there they make
proof whether the Pope be a man or no.

The Romanists confess there is such a Chair, but never intended for the use
before recited; for (say they) he sits not therein in a corner, but in the great
Church of St. John Lateran, where a vast concourse of People come to see him;
where he is attended by the whole College of Cardinals, with many
Ambassadors of Kings and Princes; whereas a closer place was fitter for that
Purpose, and they might more conveniently have made trial of his humanity in
the conclave, wherein he was chosen, and so they did it seems; for presently
upon their electing of him, before they proclaimed him Pope, they sat him in a
Chair in their Conclave, as you may read in the book of holy Ceremonies,
dedicated to Leo the tenth, whereby you may see how idly Lib. 3. de Romans Pont.
cap. 24.
Bellarmin, talks (if I may be so bold to speak so of so great a Cardinal) who
taking upon him to clear the Point, never speaks of his sitting in the chair in
the Conclave, but only of his siting in other Chairs at St. John Laterans, as
though he had been chaired only Publicly, and not in private, and that he
himself had said sufficiently to the Point in question, by proving, that in
Public there was no such conclusion tried with the Pope; whereas the
conclusion was tried in secret. Now, should you ask the question of any of them
to what end does he set in such a Chair in Public, I warrant you the reply
will be, that thereby he may be put in mind, that he is not God but Man: in as
much as he stands in need of a Close-stool as well as others; so says
Florimondus: and indeed I think he has need to be put in mind thereof. For
though some Papists deny it shamefully, N. D. in his Warnword to Sir. Fr.
Hastings encounter, cap. 2. fol. 30.
yet there have been popish Parasits, who have in plain terms called the Pope
(as St. Thomas termed Christ, Joh. 20.28.) their Lord, and God; and there are
still such, who give him such titles as are due to God alone, and rob God of
some part of his power, to bestow it on him. See Stapleton princip. fid.
doctrine prefect. ad Greg. 13. Plane supremum in terris numen.

But methinks they should not need to have set him in such a Chair, to such a
purpose, for his own necessity would have compeld him to set himself thereon
ordinarily every day; and his Chamberpot would have served to put him in mind
of his humanity sufficiently: thus Autigonus the elder (as Part. 2. Moral. lib.
de Iside and Osiride.
Plutarch relates) was convinced that he was a Man and not a God. Besides,
methinks they should not have intended such a Mystery by such a Ceremony,
because they set him therein before he was in his Pontificalibus: for till he
be Mitred, till he be Crowned, till he have received the Keys, whereby is
denoted his power to bind and loose; and a Rod whereby is signified his power
to punish; I say I should think there should be no fear of forgetting himself.
Again, had it not been better think you, if they had aimed at any such mark,
to have caused a Boy to come every morning unto the Popes Chamber door (after
the example of Philip King of Macedon) who should have whoopt him out of his
bed, and bid him remember that he was mortal.

And now see how industrious the Romanists are, by endeavoring to obliterate,
or remove what ever may assist the continuance of the memory of this Pope Joan;
for as Pius Quintus threw into Tyber her marble Image which stood in the street
where she was delivered, so by Clement the eight, by the persuasion of Cardinal
Baronius, her Image in the Church of Siena is defaced; now if the present Pope
will but burn all the books too, which are writ of Pope Joan, all evidences
then would be totally lost, it would be easily for them then to prove that
there never was such a Pontificial Woman. I but (says the Papist) what if her
Image had stood still, is there any sense, that because of such a portraiture
we are therefore bound to believe there was such a Pope; if we believe
Painters, and Carvers we should make find work indeed; and so we shall indeed
if we believe their Painters, and Carvers. For we find the Trinity painted by
them in the likeness of a Man with three faces: sometimes like a Man with two
heads having a Dove between them; both which fashions of painting the Trinity
is monstrous in Lib. 2. de Imag. cap. 8.
Bellarmins opinion. We find our Savior Christ painted with long hair, as
though he had been a Nazarite by vow, which conceit is controuled by For
Nazarites must drink no Wine Numb. 6.3. yet our Savior did, Mat. 11.19. and
26, 29.
Holy writ. We find him set on a Weathercock on the top of the Temple of
Jerusalem, as though the Temple had aspire-steeple like ours, which is false.
We find the Virgin Mary treading on the Serpents head, which the Scriptures
foretold Christ himself should do. We find her richly apparel'd in a Gown of
wrought gold, whereas, questionless her habit was very mean and ordinary; and
with a pair of beads in her hand; whereas a thousand years after Christ, beads
were not used throughout the world. Besides, their Painters recommend unto us a
Saint on horseback, whom they call George, and another on foot, as big as a
Giant, whom they call Christopher, and a She-Saint broken on the wheel, whom
they call Catharine, and a fourth drawn in pieces by horses, nick-nam'd
Hippolitus: whereas in all antiquity there is no mention made of any such
Saints. Thus you see we have no reason barely to believe painting and carving,
but if Book-proof, or Tradition concur with them, we may give some credit to
them. Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 11.
Bellarmin himself is of the opinion, that there can be no error in substance,
as long as (besides book-proof) there are Monuments of Stone or of Brass for
the proof of any ancient report: thus if he speak the words of truth the truth
is with us; for, besides Monuments of Stone, we have the Testimonies of many
authentic Writers: amongst whom, Charanza a Spaniard, who, Florimondus says,
disproved the story of Pope Joan before he undertook the task himself; but he
belies him; for these are his words, In Sum. Conc. p. 370. Edit. Paris, 1564.
Johannes 8. Papa 105. sub Petro sedit An. 2 Men's. Dies 4. de hoc ferunt, quod
malis artibus Pontificatum adeptus est, quoniam cum esset faemina, sexum
mentitus est; et postea a servo compressa, doloribus circumventa, mortua est:
in English thus; John the eight Pope. 105. Pope from St. Peter, sat 2 years 1
month 4 days. They report of this Person that he got the Papacy by evil means,
because he feined himself to be a man, whereas in truth he was a Woman, who
being afterward begot with child by one of her servants, fell in travel and
dyed therein.

z. Krantius, who is recommended by Pontanus for a famous Historiographer, and
one that writ before Luthers times, and is therefore the less to be suspected
for partiallity, says thus, Johannes Anglicus ex Maguntia mulier, mentita
sexum, etc. John English, Mitrop. l. 2. Edit. Colon. 1574. and Francof. 1590.
a Woman of Mentz, dissembled her Sex, and being of a quick wit, and voluble
tongue, and one that could talk Scholastically, she won the hearts of all men,
so that she arrived to the dignity of Pope, no Man knowing any other but that
she was a Man, save one of her Servants, who afterward got her with Child:
they say she was delivered near the Colosses, before she had sat too years
complete.

Mantuan, who is commended by Trithemius for an excellent Theologist, a knowing
Philospher, and a famous Poet, the only man in all Italy in his time, has this
story in his description of Hell, and describing what manner of Persons were
there, says he.

Hic pendebat adhuc sexum mentita virilem
Faemina, cui triplici Phrygiam diademate, mitram
Extollebat apex and pontificalis adulter.
Here hangs a Woman, once who past for man,
Who truckt for Breeches, Peticoats, and Fan.
By her great parts she gained, with much renown,
The Phrygian Mitre, with the triple Crown.
Here hangs that Lecher too, by whom it is sed
The Woman Pope did lose her Maidenhead,
And in the Street 'thout Midwife brought to bed.
Achilles Gassarus in his Epitome of all Histories, and Cronicles, collected
out of the best Historigraphers, writs thus Achilles Gassarus, in Epit. Hist.
etc. Antwerp 1536.
John the eight, by Country English, by calling a Pope, yet by Sex a Woman,
sat shamefully as Pope two years and six Months.

Ravisius Textor, in his Officina writs thus; Scitum ex Chronicis, and a
Majoribus Scriptum Johannem Anglicum ab Ephebis sexum verilem simulasse, et
tandem fato nescio quo, aut Fortuna certe volente, ad pontificatum pervenisse,
in quo Annos circiter duos sederit post Leonem quartum, neque prius innotuerit
facti veritas, quam a quodam ex domesticis impregnata, tandem emiserit partum;
It is a thing well known by the Cronicles, and written by our Ancestors, that
John English, from her youth upward deported her self in every respect like a
man, and at length, by I know not what destiny, certainly by very great fortune
she became Pope, and sat about two years after Leo the fourth and no body know
this fallasie and deceit till she was with Child by one of her menial Servants,
De dictis factisque memorabilibus lib. 8. cap. 3 Tit. de faeminis quae doctrina
excel.
and delivered thereof: and Fulgosus, who was a noble, and learned man, and
sometimes Duke of Genua affirms the same story for a truth, saying, that John
the eight was at length detected to be a Woman.

Laziardus is of the same opinion; so is Hartmannus Schedel a Doctor of
Physic, yet not ignorant of holy Scriptures, nor atheistically inclined, as it
is bewailably common for such so to be, yet by Florimondus he is accused for
being one of the brood of the Hussites, and lived in Nurimberge when that City
was infected with Husses heresy, and therefore would fain persuade his party
that no credit is to be given him, because whatever he writ concerning the
Popedom of Joan the Woman was partial. In answer to this, I rather believe
Florimondus to be one of the brood of abominable Liars; for Hartmannus Schedel,
born in Nurimberg, was Ego Heart. Schedel, Doctor Patavinus, etc. circa Anno
1440. f. 252.
student in Padua, where he was created Doctor of Physic by the great
Matthiolus, and he was so far from Husses opinion, that in the same book quoted
in the Margent he has inserted one whole Chapter about the heresy of the
Hussites, and their original. Anthropologia lib. 22. page 503. edit. Basil.
1556.
Volateran, an Historiographer of good note, makes no doubt of the reality of
this story; and Trithemius Abbot of St. Martins Monastery in Spanheim, a
reverend, well read, and very learned man writes thus, In the same year that
Pope Leo died, John English succeeded for two years and five months. Now some
say she was a Woman, and that she was known so to be but to one only, who was
her servant, by whom at length she was begot with Child, and thereof delivered
in the open street. For this cause some would not reckon her among the number
of Popes, disliking this villainous action: with whom, in matter of fact,
corresponds Sabellicus, a man Sabellicus vir undecunque; doctissimus claret
hodie apud venetos maximo in pretio. Trithemius lib. de Script. Eccles.
of great esteem in Venice, yea the most famous in his time for all manner of
learning; of whose books, Pius the Third professed he valued as much, as
Alexander did Homers Iliads.

Wernerus Roleunick, who is reckoned by Paulus Langius among the most famous of
the Order of Carthusians, and commended by Trithemius for a man of profound
learning, and singular devotion, in confirmation of what is aforesaid, writes
thus: Fasciculus Temp. aetate 6. ad annum 854.
This John, by Surname, English, by his Country, of Mentz, is reported to have
sat as Pope about this time; and she was a woman, but went in man's apparel.
She profited so well in Divinity, that she had no fellow, and so was chosen to
be Pope; But after a while, being great with Child, as she went in public
Procession, she was delivered thereof, and dyed. And this seems to be the Sixth
Pope to this day, which was called Holy and proved naught: And therefore he was
plagued by God, as the rest before him were plagued, Neither is she in the
Register of Popes. Hence some say, because she was a Germane, a Germane is not
permited to be elected Pope, but this is manifestly false; for since, several
Germains have been advanced unto the Popedom.

Mattheus Palmerius, an Trithemius de Script. Ecclesiast.
Italian, and one of the choicest men which were at the Council kept by
Eugenius, the 4. against the Council of Brasil; Pontifex 106. Johannes Anglicus
(says he) sedit An. 2. Men's. 3. fama est hunc Johannem foeminam fuisse, et uni
soli familiari cognitam, qui eam complexus est, et gravis facta peperit Papa
existens; quamobrem inter Pontifices non numerant quidam, ideo nomini numerum
non facit; that is John was a woman, yet not known so to be, but to one of her
familiars, who lay with her, she was delivered in the time of her Papacy, and
because some reckon her not among the Popes, there are no more John's for her,
than if she had never been. The account that B. Platina gives of this Learned
Whore, (or as Mr. Fox calls her the Whore of Babylon) is contradicted by some,
and supposed to be never written by the Author aforesaid, but foisted in, so
Bernartius conjectures; and to confirm his groundless supposition (says he)
Bernartius de utilitate Legendae, hist. lib. 2. p. 111.
Antonius Hetweeld, a man of good report, and Alderman of Lovaine told me, that
one Engelbertus Boonius, a reverend Germain Dean had often times told him, that
he had seen many ancient Manuscripts of Platina in the Zatican at Rome, and
persued them diligently, and yet found not any mention made of this Pope Joane.

Surely this reverend Dean had the luck on it, to light on such ancient
Manuscripts, as the Alderman of Lovain informed Bernartius of, but how comes it
about, that neither Onuphrius, Platina's Commentator, Bellarmin, nor Baronius,
who have had as free access into the Vatican Library, as any, could never light
on these Manuscripts as well as he? And how comes it that none since Bernartius
thought good to except in that manner against Platina, the acknowledgment of
those too Pillars of the Romish Church, Bellarmin and Baronius, with Onuphrius,
that this Story is originally in Platina induces me to believe, that, either
Bernartius, belyed the Alderman, or the Alderman belyed the reverend Dean, or
the Dean made a Fool of the Alderman, and made the other so too by consequence:
for questionless had there been any such Manuscripts, some of them would have
found them out, and made them public to wipe off that infamy they more than
barely stand suspected of. For they are glad of narrower Fig-tree-leaves to
cover their Nakedness withal, than such Manuscripts, could they be produced.

Now since it is evident, that Platina did write the life of this Lady Errant
Joan, who coming from Athens became at Rome a teeming Pope, the Romanists have
endeavored to find another hole to creep out at, denying that he writ by
public authority, and did not take his History out of the public Registers of
the Church. The belief hereof is an error, and a gross one too; for Prooemio
lib. de Vitis Pontif. in Epistola ad Zistum. 4.
Platina himself professes, that he writ by the command of Sixtus the fourth;
and Onuphrius confesses, that he followed Damasus, Anastatius, and such
Historigraphers, as had written before of the same matter. I but says
Florimondus, Platina reported it rather to show his reading, than for that he
thought it true, for, (says he) had he imagined it true, he would have
exaggerated it, and made the worst on it, that thereby he might have revenged
himself of the Popes, at whom he was grievously incensed. For Paul the Second
(continues he which all men know) racked him, and divested him, of all his
dignities, and justly casting him into Prison, kept him there as long as
himself lived. To this I answer; that he was racked, and imprisoned by Paul the
Second, is true, but that it was justly done, is false; for Trithemius charge
that Pope for so doing with cruelty.

Yet suppose all were true, does it follow in Florimondus Logic, that because
Paul the II. wronged Platina; ergo, Platina hated all Popes? and why not then;
Sixtus the fourth gratified Platina many ways, setting him at Liberty, and
restoring him his dignities; ergo Platina Loved all Popes for his sake? If one
man's Kindness could not work Love toward all, it is not likely that one man's
unkindness should breed hatred or Heart-burning against all; wherefore
notwithstanding this we may well think, that Platina wrote what he thought, and
the rather for that in the words following, he professes, Apparet ea quae dixi
ex his esse, qui fieri posse creduntur lib. 6. page 98.
that such a thing may likely happen.

That I may not seem deficient in the production of testimonies for the farther
probation of this story, give me leave to insert some more; amongst none of the
meanest, observe what Chalcocondelas says, It is well known that a certain
woman was made Pope, by reason they knew not her Sex. For all (almost) in the
Western parts of Italy, shave their beards. Now when she was great with child,
and came abroad to solemnize some day, or to say service; as she was at
service, she was delivered of a Child in the sight of all the People. Wherefore
lest hereafter they should be deceived in like sort, they make trial of his
manhood by touching, and he that touches proclaims, We have a man to our
Pope.

These words are allowed by them to be in the Latin Translation, but Annal.
Tom. 10. ad annum 853. number. 66. Quamvis apud Chalcocondilum Latin redditum
ejusmodi fabula reperitur esse descripta; non tamen ab ipso Authore positum
scias sed ab Impostore Clausere fraudulenter appositum.
Baronius will not admit of them in the Greek; for, (says he) Clauserus, his
interpreter, added in his translation this story, which is not to be found in
the Greek Copy: and for further persuasion, to make men believe it, he says,
that Florimondus has excellently well discovered the cousonage of Clauserus,
for comparing Clauserus translation in Latin, with a Frenchmans translation of
the same in his Mother Tongue, by that he found the Tale was not in
Calcocondilas; for there was not one word of it in the French translation. But
why I pray may not the French man leave it out as well as Clauserus; it may be
objected (but how truly I know not) that this French man was a faithful
translator, and durst not have left it out, if he had found it in the Greek, as
Florimondus notes. And why may we not hold Clauserus as faithful an interpreter
as the Frenchman, yea more faithful, seeing the French man was a Papist: for
Gretser lib. 2. de jure, etc. prohib. lib. malos cap. 10.
Papists hold it Lawful in translating to omit offensive matter, and so does no
Protestant. If Florimondus, or Baronius could have informed us where a man
might have seen a Greek Copy in which it is not, they had said something to
purpose, but to go about to disprove it by a translation of one of their own
creatures, they argue ridiculously, and if any of them gainsay that in the
Western parts of Italy all (almost) shave not Fidus Interpres praetermittere
non ausus fuisset, si in Graeco Exemplari exeratum invenisset.
their Beards, as some have made that vain opposition, it is easily answered:
for by the Popes Canons, the Italian Priests, yea all the Priests of the
Western Church are to be shaven; so says Chronogr. lib. 2.
Pontacus, hic Papa (Anicetus) Clericos comam and barbam radere in signum
clericatus jussit. Pope Anicetus commanded the Clergy to shave both their heads
and their beards, in token that they were of the Clergy. And, Occidentalis
ecclesiae clerum, ab ipsis ecclesiae Christianae primordiis barbam radendi
morem tenuisse, asserit Gregorius 7. Pope Gregory the seventh avouceth, that
from the Apostles days the Western Clergy did shave their beards, to whom
Rational. Divin. Offic. lib. 2. de Ministris, etc.
Durandus who lived about the year 1280, subscribeth: for he acknowledges that
before, and in his time, they were shaved, proving the lawfulness of it out of
Ezechiel, and showing the mysteries that are imported by it. Johannes Pierius
Valerianus, attests the same, imputing the Error of electing Pope Joan to the
ordinary shaving of Beards, because by that means one could hardly know a man
from a woman, which custom is shamefully revived in these fantastical times
among our gentry, whose close shaved withered Countenances, are no ways
distinguishable from an antiquitated Gentlewoman, but by their long Wigs, which
seem to hide those imperfections which attend on age.

For further proof of the verity of this story, it well be expedient to give
you an account what Theodoricus de Niem (Secretary to a Pope) relates: De
Privilegiis and juribus Imperii.
John, called English, was a woman born at Mentz, and she studied at Athens,
apparel'd like a man, where she profited so well in the Arts, that coming to
Rome she read there the liberal sciences and was held, so sufficient a Reader,
that many of the better sort became her hearers; afterward with one consent
she was chosen Pope, and lived in that dignity two years, and upwards: But
taking her self more than before to idleness, and pleasure, she could not live
so continently as she did, in her mean, yet studious condition: whereupon one
day as she went with the Clergy, and People of Rome (according to the custom
of that time) in solemn Procession, being attired in the usual Papal ornaments,
she was delivered of her first begotten son (the Father whereof was her
servant) near the Temple of Peace, which stands in the City; as it is evident
by an old Marble Image which stands there to this day, to denote so much in a
figure. And hereupon it is that when the Popes go from the Vatican to St. John
Laterans, and back again, they go not the direct way thither but by other
streets farther about, and so make their journey longer.

I shall relate nothing what Petrarch, Boccace, Lucidus, and our Countryman
Higden says to this purpose, since there are none so obstinate, but will
confess they all have writ thereof, but only a little touch upon what Trithem.
de Script. Eccles. and Possevinus in Apparatu Sacro verbo, Johan. Parisiensis.
John of Paris writes as to this matter, who lived about the year 1280. and
read publicly in the University of Paris, with great, and deserved
commendation, as well in Divinity, as Humanity: he showing how sometimes a man
may lawfully dispute, and take exception against the Pope, in respect of his
Person De Potestate Regia and Papali.
notes, that such a Person may be chosen as is not capable: ut si ess et
foemina, vel Haereticus, sicut fuerunt aliqui qui ob hoc non enumerrantur in
Catalogo Paparum. As for example (says he) if he prove a Woman, or an
Heretic, as some have done, who in that respect are not reckoned in the
Catalogue of the Popes.

What an infinite number of witnesses could I produce to verify this story
whose Testimonies though ever so clear, yet the Romanists, the opposers of
truth, will cavil at. Martinus Polonus, because he has writ the truth
concerning Pope Joane (for no other reason that I can find) they call him
simple, ignorant man, given to vanity, and only famous for fables, for that is
Martinus Polonus fabulis tantum celebris, caetero obscurus homo.
Bernartius his censure of him. See the rashness of our later generation of
Papists; for Archiep. Cofentinus and Paenitentiarius Papae. Possevi^. Apparatus
sacer verbo Martinus Polonus.
Polonus was an Archbishop, and Penitentiary to the Pope; he was learned in
the Holy Scriptures, and not ignorant of secular learning; he was one, whom
Platina relied on much for matter of history and applauded by him for a man of
a good life, and conversation. He was the man, whom the Author of Fasciculus
Temporum, and Jacobus Bergomensis, two good Historiographers, professed that
they followed especially; and yet he is abused with undeserved titles of
ignorance, for speaking the truth.

The premises considered, one would think there needed no other quotations for
farther proof of a matter so notorious, however since we have such plenty of
Testimonies, it will not be irrequisit to insert some more, that may for ever
stop the mouths of Truths objectors and opponers: and first, Marianus Scotus,
who was born in the year 1028. Ab omnibus honor habebatur and non sine
opinione sanctitatis sepelitur, Trithemius de Script. Ecclesiasticis.
a man of estimation whilst he lived, and when dead, was held a Saint, and by
Baronius was styled, Nobilis Chronographus, a worthy Chonologer; in his
Chronicle, thus we read, Leo Papa obiit Kalend. Augusti, huic successit Joanna
mulier An. 2. Men's. 5. dieb. 4. that is Leo the Pope dyed in the Kalends of
August. after him succeeded Joane the woman, who sat 2 years 5 Months and 4
days: Lib. 4. de^ Romans Pont. cap. 24.
Bellarmin contradicts this, saying, that he who published Krantius Metropolis
at Colen in the year 1574. does witness; in antiquissimis exemplaribus Mariani
Scoti non haberi Johannem Papam foeminam: that in the ancient copies of
Marianus Scotus, there is no mention made of Pope Joane the woman: What this He
should be, that gives this Testimony, I never yet could learn, nor that he was
a man of any credit, besides, there is no reason that a nameless Sr. Mr.
Anonymus should be credited against all printed Copies, especially if it be
true, which Lib. 4. de Romans Pont. Cap. 13.
Bellarmin says in another case: Author sine nomine est sine authoritate: a
man without a name is without credit; and Canonus a concilio cujus ne nomen
quidem extet facile contemni potest: a Canon out of a Council, whose name is
not known may very well be slighted. But would you know the reason why
Bellarmin did not name him? you may suppose, not because he was ignorant of his
name, but because he was but a mean fellow, a Printer, a poor Batchelour of the
Law, a man of slender reputation; for he is named in the first page of the Book
Gerwinus Calenius Lippiensis: and what was such a fellow to run away with a
story of this consequence upon his bare word in this manner; n quae hic Author
de Johanne foemina refert, in odium Romanorum Pontificum confict a fuisse ab
illis quos ipse deceptus sequitur ut alios omittamus quos Onuphrius in Platinam
scribens recenset, testantur Marianus Scotus and Sigibertus, quorum quae
supersunt M. S. exemplaria fraudem illorum detegunt, qui eorum impressis
voluminibus id inseruerunt. That this which the Author hereof reports touching
Pope Joan is but counterfeit stuff, devised to make the Pope odious; to say
nothing of such proofs as Onuphrius gives in his Annotations on Platina,
Martianus, Scotus, and Sigibert, Annotat in lib. 2. Kran^ tii Metrop.
do testify; whose manuscripts remaining on record discover their falsehood who
have chopped his tale into their printed volumes; which Bellarmin, nor any other
durst or dare avouch, the contrary being confessed directly by Baronius: In
chronico ad An. 184 Printed at Paris. 1513.
Sigiberts words are these, The report is, that this John was a woman, and that
one only, who laid with her, knew so much: and that at length, even in the time
of her Papacy, she was delivered of a Child. Whereupon it is that some reckon
her not among the Popes, and that there is not one Pope John the more in number
for her. Notwithstanding this, the Romanists deny that there is any such thing
in the ancient, true, and approved Copies of Sigibert, and if there be any such
thing found, some paltry fellow, (as Bernartius notes) has been tampering with
his writings, and that Sigibert never writ it is fully witnessed by Genebrard.
Pray here observe, the Canonists (when Popes allege Popes for proof) do note,
that it is familiaris probatio; meaning, it may be as much as that in the
Proverb, Ask my fellow if I be a Thief. But say they in the Monastery of Gemble
in Flanders there is extant the Original of Sigibert, which wants this Story,
and for proof hereof, they have the oath of one Protasius a Franciscan, who saw
it, and there (as he says) Sigibert lived, there he wrote this Book with his
own hands, there he left it after life as a Monument of his love. There it is
shown by the Monks to such as come thither for a piece of excellency and rarity.

Now judge you whether this paltry Friar is to be believed before Trithemius,
who 0436 0106 V 3 (says he) lived not there when he writ the Book; for he writ
that, and many others in the Monastery of St. Vincent within the city of
Metensis.

The Monks showing this Book as Sigiberts own to all comers, is De Scriptoribus
Ecclesiasticis Sigibertus cum in Caenobio. 8. Vincentio Metensi ad instruend.
puerosesser positus scripsit. Hist. lib.
a very slender argument to prove that it is his: for I have read of a
Vergerius Annot. in Catalog. haeret. Romae conflatum An. 1559 fol. 17.
Monk who gave out that he had brought from the East some of the sound of the
Bells which hung in Solomon's Temple, and ibid.
that he could show among other relics, some of the hairs which fell from the
Seraphical Angel when he came to imprint the Five wounds of Christ in St.
Francis's body, and I have Bellonius obser: lib. 2. cap. 33.
read of others who show the Pilgrims who go to Jerusalem a three cornered
stone, assuring them it is that very stone whereof David spoak, saying, The
stone which the Builders refused, is the head of the corner. Psalm. 118.22.

Now as Monks and Papists cosen others, so they are often cheated themselves;
for many of them do verily believe they have that which they have not. Do not
many of them persuade themselves that they have that Syndon wherein Christ's
body was lapped, when it was interred, wherein (as they say) is to be seen to
this day the Picture of Christ. Others think they have the Nails wherewith
Christ was nailed to the Cross, and in like manner are they deceived in a
thousand several sorts of relics.

But grant that this story of Pope Joan is not to be found in some Copies of
Sigibert, that does not argue that it was never writ by him; it is probable it
may be left out by some, who have transcribed his Manuscript, which we may as
well be induced to believe, and upon as good grounds, as that the words of
Aelfricus, which oppose Transubstantiation were cut out of a fragment of an
Epistle of his in the Library of Worcester, as Act. and Monum. allegations
against the 6. Articles, Page 1304. edit. 1570.
Mr. Fox does prove apparently. Thus is this story of Pope Joan cut out of a
very fair Manuscript of Ranulfus Cestrensis which is now to be seen in the
Library of New-Colledge in Oxford: we need not wonder at such unjust
proceedings of the Papists, since they give direction, that, Index lib. prohib.
per Clementem 8. de Correct. lib.
qua famae proximorum, and praesertim Ecclesiasticorum, and Principum
detrahunt, corrigentur, atque expurgentur. That such things should be altered,
or put out, which tend to the Discredit of the Clergy; and does not this touch
their Ecclesiastic estate to the very quick? does not Possevin advise, that
the Joh. Nevison Sylva Nuptialis. page 319.
note in John Nevison the Lawyer, which makes mention of Pope Joan should be
razed out? Dele (says he) quia Johannes haec foemina Chimaera est, and
impostura calumniatorum; blot it out (says Possevin) because John this Woman
was a mere Chimaera, and a forgery of Calumniators.

For further proof that this John was a mere fiction Cardinal Baronius would
make us believe, that those of the best Credit in History, and who have writ
most of her, do not positively aver that there was such a Woman Pope, but make
their report of her with a sic aiunt, or an ut asseritur, but he brings no
other proof thereof than test meipso: which however it may go for proof among
Princes, yet is no proof among Scholars: and for my part without proof I will
believe nothing, let who will be the assertor, especially if he be a Papist.
For as Rerum Memorab. Paralipom. Hist. Abbat Vrsperg. annexa. page 394.
Sigismund the Emperor said of Julian the Cardinal Legate at the Council of
Basil, when one commended him highly to him; tamen Romanus est; yea but he is a
Roman; so I may say of any Romanist reporting things unknown, yea but he is a
Romanist, or Papist.

And now I pray suppose it be so as Baronius says it is, why may it not be
true though it be delivered with an ut asseritur? It may be objected that Lies
and false reports are midwiv'd into the world after that manner with, so some
say, and thus it is said. I confess that many lies, nay gross ones too, pass in
such general terms: as for example. Men say (says the Popish Golden Legend)
that St. Patrick drove with his staff all the venomous Beasts out of Ireland;
and, that he obtein'd of the Lord, that no Irish man should abide the coming of
Antichrist: the former of which Harpfield Cope confesses to be a Lie, and so
I think all understanding Papists acknowledge the latter; else why do none of
the learned Clergy of the Church of Rome alledg it, to clear the Pope from
being Antichrist. Men say (says Nangiacus, as Genebrard reports) that
Kentish men have tails like bruit Beasts, because their Ancestors mocked Austin
the Monk when he came to preach among them; nay by some this is believed as a
truth to this day, for but lately a Kentish-man traveling with a Fleming, and
being constrained to lie together, the Dutchman would not go to bed till he had
satisfied his Eyes with the truth, or falsehood of a Kentish-long-tail; that
this is a lie, there is nothing more evident and yet this is reported with a,
so it is said. When Boniface the Martyr was demanded whether it was Lawful to
use a wooden chalice at the administration of the Lords supper; it is said he
answered thus (says De sacris Ecclesiast. benefic. ac Min. lib. 2. cap. 4.
Duaren) Olim aurei Sacerdotes ligneis vasis, nunc lignei aureis utuntur: In
former times Golden Priests used Wooden Chalices, now Wooden Priests use Golden
ones: in like manner it was written that Pius the 2. was wont to say, Marriage
upon just reason was forbidden Priests, but now upon better reason to be
restored to them again: of which saying of his there is no question to be made,
as may appear by this, that Pisanus de Continentia cap. ii.
a Jesuit only thus replies, That it was recanted by him, and denies not that
it was spoken by him. That Alexander the third trampled the Emperor Frederick
under his feet, and commanded one to say, thou shall walk upon the Lion, and
asp, the young Lion, and the Dragon shall thou tread under thy feet Psalm.
91.13. Duaremus de sac. Eccl. Min. lib. 1. cap. 2.
this is reported with an, ut fertur, and yet they have little to say for
themselves who call the truth thereof into question. That merry Cardinal, who
seeing after the death of Clement the fourth, that his Brethren the Cardinals
called still for the assistance of the Holy Ghost, and could not agree upon the
election of a new Pope, cried out Onuph. Annotat in Plat. de vitis Pon. tif. in
vit. Gregorii 10.
Domini disco operiamus tectum camerae hujus, quia Spiritus Sanctus nequit ad
nos per tot tecta ingredi; Sirs, let us untile the roof of this room; for I
fear the Holy Ghost cannot get to us through so many slates: this is merely
Onuphr. ib.
reported upon election of Gegory to have made these Verses.

Papatus munus tulit Archidiaconus unus,
Quem Patrem Patrum fecit discordia fratrum.
Disput. super matter. Conc. genesis quae habetur in Fasciculo Rerum. expetend.
Col. 15 35. fol. 21.
Nicholas Clemangis Arch Deacon of Baion in France writes upon hearsay, that
when Balthazar, commonly known by the name of John the 23. held a Council at
Rome, and caused, according to custom, before the first Session A Mass to be
said for the assistance of the Holy Ghost; immediately upon the Councils
sitting, and Balthasars advancing himself into the Chair of State; an Owl, of a
prodigious bigness (an evil presage) came out of a hole whooping and hollowing
after a dreadful manner, and flew to the middle balk of the Church, staring
just in Balthasar's face, to the great astonishment of him, and the whole
Council, which immediately hereupon broke up. He further writes, that at the
next Session she appeared again, staring in the Popes face as before, and could
not be frighted away with what extraordinary noise was made for that purpose;
at length one throwing a stick knocked her down, and killed her. No man will
question the truth hereof, since he confesses, that he had this story of a
faithful friend, who assured him it was true upon his credit. That the worst
Christians in Italy are the Romans; that of the Romans, the Priests are most
wicked; and of the Priests, the lewdest are made Cardinals, and the baddest
chosen to be Pope; Sir. Edward Sands of the Religion used in the West, page 91.
it is written but with, asseritur: yet to the skilful in History, and such as
are acquainted with the affairs of Rome, this does not seem improbable. In
Bavaria palam ferunt Jesuitas dolium in Collegium subvex^sse, e cujus fundo
effracto, Meretrix in publicas plateas prolapsa sit (says Lib. 2. de verbo dei
cap. 16.
Hassen Muller) They say openly in Bavaria, that the Jesuits caused a Tub to be
carried to their College, which breaking by the way, a Wench dropped out of the
end on it into the open street: And why may not this be true, though it go but
by report. The Papists believe far more incredible reports than this, which
tend to the defamation of us Protestants.

If any should object, that there were many learned men, and great Writers who
lived in her time, sometime after, who though they were the Authors of several
books, yet make no mention of any Woman that was ever Pope of Rome. Besides
Rupertus, an English Bishop, who, because he was excommunicated by the Pope,
invented, and raked together all manner of lies against the Pope, yet
notwithstanding objected not this.

This objection may be easily answered thus in a word: That most of all those
Authors who are quoted by the Romanists to have made no mention of Pope Joane
were no historiographers, but such who employed their Pen, and time in the
study of Philosophy, or Divinity, and therefore it is no more a wonder that
these learned men should be silent, as to this matter, than for a Mathematician
to write of Lines and Tangents only, and not to write of Pharmacy, and Physic.
Again, this Rupertus (commonly called Grosthead) well skilled in Greek and Latin,
a Reader of Divinity in the Schools, an excellent Preacher, and a man so
eminent for a holy life and conversation, that it was the opinion of the whole
Clergy of England and France, that there was not such another among the
Prelates of that time; yet Innocent the fourth called him Quis est ille
delirus* surdus and absurdus says Innocent the fourth. Mat. Paris.
Old Fool, surd, and absurd fellow, and his reproaches were attended with
menaces. The reason is apparent in that he opposed the Pope, and had diverse
cavils with him, in so much that in one Letter he did not stick to tell him
plainly, That by his Writs (with ( non obstante) he brought a deluge of
mischiefs on the world, whereby the purity of the Church was defiled, and the
quietness of the Republic impeded and destroyed: that by his Reservations,
commendoes, and Provisions of Benefices for Parsons, who sought to fleece, and
not to feed the flock of God, he committed such a sin, so contrary to the
Doctrine of the Apostles, and Evangelists, so hateful, and detestable, so
abominable to Christ Jesus, as never Sin was, but the Sin of Lucifer, nor never
shall be but the Sin of Antichrist, whom the Lord shall destroy with the
Breath of his Mouth at his coming. He further signified that no man could with
a good conscience obey any such mandates as he sent abroad, though they came
from the highest order of Angels: for they tended not to edification, but the
utter ruin of the Church. Are these Lies, by reporting whereof he sought to
revenge himself on that present Pope? Sure it cannot be, since the Vt vera
fateamur vera sunt quae dicit said the Cardinals, Mat. Paris. p 1192
College of Cardinals confessed before the Pope, that they could not blame him
for writing thus, having said nothing but what was justifiable. And here give
me leave to recite what another, Matthew Paris, has registered to posterity
concerning Popes and Papists. In his History of England, in the life of William
the Conqueror, in the year 1072, page 10. he reports how Satanas, and omnes
contubernium inferorum; that the Devil and all his hellish crew writ Letters
gratulatory to all the rabble of the Romish Clergy, acknowledging their
kindness, in that following their pleasures, and desisting from instructing the
people, they suffered more Souls to go to Hell than ever went before.

Ibid. An. 1074.
That Gregory the seventh set the whole Church in an uprore by deposing married
priests from their priesthood, and forbidding the Laity to hear them say
service, because he had no president for so doing, and because as some thought
it was unadvisedly done, contrary to the opinion of the ancient Fathers, who
wrote that the Sacraments of the Church, by the invisible working of the Spirit
have like effect, whether they be administered by good or bad men. In Hen. 1. ad
An. 1125. page 93.
He reports how a Cardinal Legate, at a Council held in London inveighing
against the Misses or Wenches of the Clergy, was taken the same night after in
bed with a Whore or Bona Roba.

In Hen. 3. p. 617.
He reports, how Germanus, Archbishop of Constantinople, informed the Cardinals
of Rome, that the Grecians stumbled much at this, that the Cardinals desired to
be accounted his Disciples, who said, Silver and Gold have I none, and yet none
so rich, and covetous as they.

In Hen. 3. page 712. ad (...). 1240.
He reports how the Pope enjoined by one mandate to the Bishops of Canterbury,
Lincoln, and Salisbury, that they should provide for 300. Romans in Benefices
next vacant; and that they should dispose of no Benefice, till so many were
completely provided for.

In Hen. 3. p. 1089.
He reports, how Hugh the Cardinal bragged, when Innocentius departed from Lions,
that whereas there were four Stews, or Bawdy-houses at his coming thither, he
had left them but one, and that reached but from one end of the Town to the
other.

In Hen. 3. p. 1100.
He reports, how the Franciscans and Minorites by Commandment from the Pope
appointed all sorts of people, young and old, men and women, sound and sick,
and of all conditions, to go for recovery of the Holy Land, and yet the same
day, or a little time after, for money dismissed them again.

He reports, how Innocentius the fourth instigated the people of Brabant and
Flanders to commence a War against Conradus the Emperor, promising them for so
doing forgiveness of all their sins; yea, not only a pardon for their own sins,
but the like for their Relations.

These, and the like stories he records against the Pope being manuducted
thereunto by Truth it self; but he meddles not with any thing which was done by
any Pope within 1000. years after Christ; and therefore it is no wonder that he
speaks nothing of Pope Joane.

That I may not omit any material object ion that the Romanists allege to
disprove the verity of the story of Pope Joan, I must here inform the Reader,
that as they say many learned Latin writers say nothing of Her, so Greek
Historiographers, Zonoras, Cedrenus Caropalatas, and others who wrote before
Martinus Polonus concerning the Latin Church, and were enemies to the same, and
would have been glad of such an advantage against it, write nothing thereof at
all; from whence some infer there was no such matter.

To shape an answer to this argument I must beg this question; does not Platina
confess there was a Pope called Mark, who sat two years, eight months, and ten
days; and another Pope called Marcellus, who sat above five years; and yet
Lib. 2. Chronogr.
Pontacus, and Chronol. lib. 3.
Genebrard confess, that all the Greek Writers in a manner omit to speak of the
former; and that all Greek Writers without exception omit to speak of the
latter. Now if we should be persuaded (notwithstanding their passing by these
insilence) that these were Popes, why may we not as well believe that there was
a Pope Joane, though they pass her by in like manner, not speaking one word of
her: we may believe many things of which they write not a syllable. We read in
the Golden Legend, Breviar. Romans in officio exalt. S. Crucis.
Breviary, etc. that Heraclius the Emperor, when he would have entered in by
the gate, by which our Savior, went to his Passion, clad in his Royal robes
with the Cross on his shoulders, was miraculously hindered, and could not get
through, til he had divested his body of it is Princely apparel, and put off his
shoos, and stockings. This is verily believed by many Romanists, and yet
Gretser says, that the Grecians, Zonoras, Cedrenus, and the like, write
nothing of it, yet professes withal he likes it never the worse for their
silence; for they (as he farther observes) omitted many other material truths
whereof no man of reason will ever call them in question; and though Hermannus
Contractus, Conradus, Vrspergensis Abbas, and others speak nothing of this
Joane, we must not therefore conclude that there was never such a Woman once a
Pope. Do arguments taken from authority of few men hold negatively? Is it a
good Argument, St. Paul, St. Luke, and Seneca do not say that St. Peter was at
Rome? Ergo St. Peter was not at Rome. I answer with Lib. de Romans pontif. cap. 8
Bellarmin, negative arguments are nothing worth; for it follows not that St.
Peter was never at Rome, because St. Luke, St. Paul, and Seneca do not report
that he was ever there: for these three were not bound to report all that was
true. Certainly (says one) magis credi debet tribus testibus affirmantibus
quam infinitis nihil dicentibus; a man should rather believe t^^ee witnesses
speaking to a cause, than infinite who speak neither pro nor con. Again, Denis
Bishop of Athens was afterward Bishop of Paris, though Ado Bishop of Triers in
Germany, and Suidas, a Greek Author, make no mention of his removal to another
Bishopric. Lipomannus resolves upon Metaphrastes and one Michael Syngelus in
these words, that Denis was Bishop of Paris, though Ado, and Suidas say nothing
of it. Why then though these and many more say nothing of Pope Joan, might
there not be such a Pope, since as many, and as learned as they, do place her
in the number of Popes. Proligom. 6 in Evangelia.
Salmeron a learned Jesuit says thus, Ea lex apud Historigraphos observatur,
ut quando unus ex duobus historicis aliquid affirmat quod alius supprimit, non
deroget affirmanti qui tacet; That when one Historian reports what another
passes by, the latters silence does not prejudice the truth of the others
relation.

I must confess there is not a word of her in all those six or seven Tables
which are in the Vatican; yet suppose these Tables be of greatest estimation,
yet shall we conclude that he that is as Pope registered therein was a Pope; I
know not how safely we may believe it, since Baronius condemns such for silly
credulous people, who believe reports the rather because they are to be found
in Books belonging to the Popes Library. Besides Leo the 8 is registered in the
Catalogue of Popes, and in some of those seven Tables, if not in them all, yet
Annalium. tom. 10. ad annum. 964.
Baronius, and his followers conclude him an intruder, and Usurper, and did not
in the least deserve that glorious Title of a Pope. Now if this be no good
argument Leo the 8 is numbered among the Popes in seven Tables, in the Popes
Library, or in seven as authentical, Ergo Leo the 8 was a Pope; from hence may
be said, that Joan the Woman Pope is not numbered amongst the Popes in those
seven Tables in the Popes Library: Ergo there was no such Joan, a Woman Pope.
But consider if seven Tables speaking for a Pope do not convince the being of
such a Pope, why should their silence argue the contrary? might there not be as
well, one left out that was a Pope, as commemorize one that never was? Besides,
there are several reasons why it was requisite she should be left out, either
for her Sex sake, being a Woman, and very salacious, or else she would never
have rambled over several Countries with a man, who undoubtedly in their
travels lay together; or else in regard of the foulness of the fact, which as
it brands her Memory with perpetual infamy, so it cannot but prove a great blot
in the Papal Escutcheon.

This omission of her name need not seem strange, if you will but observe, that
other Popes, upon other occasions, have been past over in silence by several
Writers as no Popes; as for example; Faelix the 2. was both Pope and Martyr (as
Lib. 4. de Roman. Pontif. cap 9.
Bellarmin affirms) and he sat as Pope one year, four months, and two days,
as you may read in Invita Faelicis.
Platina: yet by Chronol. lib. 3. ad annum. 368.
Genebrards confession, Marcellinus omits to speak of him, in his Chronicle,
because he was suspected of heresy; and for the same, or such like cause St.
Austin, and Optatus, mention him not among the Popes in their Memorials. That
one Cyriacus was Pope is acknowledged by diverse, yet it is rare to find him in
any Clatalogue of Popes of whom Johannes de Parisiis, a great Papist, in his
Treatise de potestate regia and papali, writes thus; Iste Cyriacus in Catalogo
Paparum non annumeratur, quia credebant ipsum non propter devotionem sed
propter oblectamentum Virginum dimisisse Episcopatum. Cyriacus is not in the
Catalogue of Popes, because it was thought he left the Popedom not for Devotion
but for the sake of Wenching. Damasus the second has his name registered in
many Platina in vita Da^asi 2. Polo^^s in Chronic. circa an. 1040.
Popish Chronicles in the throng of Popes; yet there are Platina l^c^ citato.
many on the otherside who let him go for a Scabby sheep. Thus Platina, censent
nonnulli hunc inter Pontifices nequaquam numerandum esse; some judge this
fellow no ways fit to be registered among the Popes; and in like manner they
deal with many others.

But Florimondus Cap. 22. p. 190.
some may say if Pope Joan was omitted in the registers of some for the
filthiness of her fact, why was that Close-stool reserved, and that Monument of
hers erected where she was publicly delivered; for the Stool, and the Image
were as like to continue the memory of her, as any record in writing. To this I
answer may not some be of one opinion, some of another? May not some think good
to continue the memory of that which others for shame would willingly have
forgoten? Hence not some Papists in France denied that John Chastel was taught
by the Jesuits to murder Henry the fourth of France, because they were loath
the Jesuits should seem odious? and yet did not others contribute their
assistance in the erection of a stony Pillar near the Kings Palace, whereby so
much was notified; If any man should affirm that the same man who omited Pope
Joan for the filthiness of her fact, erected such a Monument for her in one of
the High-streets in Rome, and proscribed such a Stool to be kept for that
purpose I know not how he could free himself from contradiction.

For further Proof whereof I think this worth the consideration, that when Paul
the Third moved with the Spirit of God (as In his Rejoinder to Bishop Jewel
about the Mas^ p. 177.
Harding says) and desirous to reform the Church gave charge to the most
Learned, Wise, Pious, and Zealous men he knew, viz. four Cardinals, three
Bishops, and two others to enquire and search out what abuses and disorders
were in the Church, and especially in the Roman Court; which they did
accordingly, and presented him a Libel containing the sum of all their
proceedings. Some thought their Labors merited Registring; others thought them
fitter to be committed to the fire, which appears by this, that the Libel is
Printed in Crabbs edition of the Council, anno 1551, and yet inserted in the
Index librorum prohibitorum by Paul the fourth, (one of those four Cardinals
that exhibited it to Paul the third) and left out of Dominicus Nicolinus his
Edition of the Councils at Venice auspiciis Sixti Quinti, in the year 1585. and
out of Severinus Binnius his Edition at Colen 1606.

Bell. lib. 3. de Romans Pont. cap. 24.
But say the Papists again, grant that Pope Joan should be omitted for the
filthiness of her fact, yet should there have been mention made of the vacancy
of the Sea for that time she was Pope, else there will be a manifest error in
Chronology.

A foul error indeed to miss two years in reckoning; there may be fouler than
this, and yet the matter salved well enough. For Onuphrius reckons 230. Popes
to Gregory the 13, and Genebrard and Massonus 234. whereas Platina accounts
235; for he reckons to Zistus the fourth, with whom he ends, 221 Popes: afer
whom, to Gregory the 13, every one reckons 14, l Anastas. de Vita Evarist.
which compleats the number of 235: yet Versteganus, in his Table printed at
Antwerp 1590, numbers no more than 231. Moreover do not several Chronologies
written by k Romanists record, that Evaristus sat 13 years, whereas others
say, he sat but Baron, Annal. tom. 2. ad annum. 121. Number. 1.
nine years? do not Baron. Annal. tom. 2. ad Anno 172. Number. 21..
some of the^ say that Denis sat; Annastas. de vita Dionysii*
others that he sat but two years. I think these differences, and such as
these are argue manifest errors in their Chronologies; If no further
inconveniences follow upon Pope Joans omission, than a manifest error in
Chronology, for that space she lived, we may well enough believe that some
omitted her, not because there was no such Person, but because they were
ashamed of her; for two years, and odd months break no square in their
Chronologies, no more than a mistake of two inches in a foot with a bungleing
Carpenter.

I, but says Florimondus, no man ever writ of her till four hundred years after
her death; and is it possible that all writers should so conspire together,
that the truth thereof could never be certainly known, till so long a time
after the expiration of her Popeship?

I have already proved by the books that are yet extant, that this story was
sooner discovered. But suppose we had no Author who lived within 400. years of
Pope Joane to produce for proof, must therefore the story be rejected? Do not
the Papists recommend, as truths, many stories, for which they can bring no
testimony out of any Writer who lived within 400. years after? Bell. lib. 2. de
Image cap. 10.
They tell us of an Image of Christ which was made by Nicodemus, who came to
our Savior by night for fear of the Jews; and of it runs a report of strange
Miracles it effects: yet are not able to name the man who wrote of this 600.
years after Nicodemus. Bell. loco citato and Gretser de Cruce lib. 2. cap. 1.
They tell us that St. Luke drew certain pictures of the Virgin Mary, but Lib.
1. Collectan.
Theodorus Lector is the first man that makes this report, and he lived at
least 500. years after. Not to trouble you with many more instances, Baron
Annal Tom. 1. ad An Christi. 31. Nu. 61.
they write, that our Savior wiping his face with a handkerchief, imprinted
his own Effigies therein, and sent it to Agbarus for a token; but for proof
hereof, there is no Author to be produced, but one Baron. Annal. Tom. 8. ad An.
594. Nu. 30.
Evagrius, who lived 600. years after Christ. That the Virgin Mary made that
coat of our Saviors which was without seam the Annotat. in Joh. 19.23. in
Margin.
Rhemists peremptorily affirm, and Ludolphus de vita Jesu. part. 2. cap. 63. p.
221. Coloss. 2.
others of the like faction add, that as our Savior grew in height, and
breadth, so the Coat on his back grew in like manner. I cannot read any Author
they have produced that writes hereof for above 400 years since.

But how comes it about that Pope Joan should be called John, as she was
supposed a man after her election, since Popes upon their election do now
change their names from a laudible custom (says Florimondus) that Sergius ( a
few years before Pope Joan) introduced, which was that the Pope elect should
not step out of the Conclave till he had changed his proper name.

It is confessed, that Fascic. Temp. ad An. 844. Pol. Virg. de Rerum Invent.
Stella de vitis Pont. in Sergio. 2.
some say that, because Sergius had a filthy beastly name before his election,
viz Swines-snout, he changed it after his election; but they are mistaken who
say Sergius the 2 changed his proper name, for ex paterno nomine a principio
Sergius est appellatus; from his birth he was called Sergius after the name of
his father, so writes Baronius in his Annals Tome the tenth, to the year 844.
The first who changed his name was Sergius the third, and yet not for the
filthiness of his name, but in reverence to St. Peter. Cum enim ille Petrus
vocaretur indignum se putavit vocari eodem nomine, quo Christus primum ej^s
sedis Pontificem Principem Apostolorum ex Simone Petrum nominaverat: for his
name being Peter, he thought it not fit, to be called by that name whereby
Christ called the first Bishop of that See, even the Prince of the Apostles,
whose name be changed from Simon to Peter, as may be further read in that
Learned Cardinal, Caesar Baronius. Notwithstanding this positive assertion, of
Baronius, I see this great Scholar, as well as other Bug-bears of wit, and
controversy may not only grossly mistake, but down right contradict themselves;
for (says he) in another place, Tom. 10. Annal. ad Ann. 955. Nu. 4. speaking
of John the twelfth. Hic revera primus inventus qui mutavit sibi nomen, ut qui
ex Octaviano vocari voluerit Johannes pro mutata non exuta tyrannide: This, in
truth is the first who changed his name, who of Octavian would needs be called
John; not that he meant to leave his tyranny, but to use it in another kind;
for he, who was called by his Father Octavian, in respect of his temporal
authority in the City, would now in respect of his spiritual, be called John:
either because his Uncle John the 11. was called so, or for that he desired to
hear well at least for his namesake, whilst in clawing, and fawning
acclamations the people basely applied unto him that good speech, there was a
man that was sent from God whose name was John. Thus Baronius; and now
Florimondus not knowing almost what to say, asks the question, who was Pope
Joans Father, quinam hujus Pseudopontificis pater; if she had a Father,
certainly he would have been mentioned in History, as well as the Father of
Linus, Clerus, Clemens, and of all the rest of Popes, in answer hereunto, that
the Histories expressly set down the Fathers of all the rest of the Popes is
false. For by History no man knows of what parentage Anastas. de vit. Pont. in
vita Higini.
Higinus was; Higini genealogia non invenitur, neither can we find out the
Ancestors of Pope Denis; as Anastasius, before quoted, does acknowledge;
Dionisii generationem invenire non potuimus; And it is unknown of what Surname
or Country John the 19. was: Stella de vitis Pant. in vita Johan. 19.
Johannis 19, cognomen et patria ignoratur.

In Histories it is expressly written, that Urban the fourth was begotten by a
Cobbler, Onuph. Annot. in Plat. in vita Vrbani. 4.
ex patre Sutore veteramentario; that John the two and twentieth was the Son of
a Botcher, Longius in Chron. ad An. 1316.
Filius Veteramentarii, resarcitoris scilicet sotelarium: That Benedict the
eleventh was the Son of a poor Laundress; ibid.
Filius Lotricis pauperculae: that Benedict the twelfth was the Son of a Milner
Molitoris filius; That Sixtus the fourth was the Son of a Mariner, Papyr. Mass.
de urbis Episcop. lib. 6. in Sixto 4.
patre ortus qui semper nauticam exercuit; that Adrian the sixth was the Son of
a Cloath-worker, or as some say a Brewer: That Cicarellus in Vita Sixti 5.
Sixtus Quintus was the Son of a Swin-heard, but what the names of these men's
Fathers were, that is not expressly written. Papyr. Mas. de Vrbis Epis. lib. 6.
in Alex. 5.
Alexander the fifth confessed; Se nec parents, nec fratres, nec aliquem ex
agnatis, cognatisque suis unquam vidisse: That he never saw either his Father,
or Mother, or Brother, or any of his kindred; who then can tell his Fathers
name?

Beating some of the Romanists from this idle interrogatory, they fly to this;
either this Pope Joan was young, or old when she was chosen. If she was young,
it was contrary to custom to admit of any such election; as may appear by the
great number of Popes that lived in the dignity above the number of Emperors
that succeeded often in their youth. But if she were old when she was chosen,
then how did she bear a Child publicly in procession? the ground work of this
argument, that Pope Joan was either young, or old, may be easily destroyed
thus; if we consider that learned men divide the whole course of man's life not
into youth and old age; but into Pueritiam, pubertatem; adolescentiam,
juventutem constantem mediumve and senectutem. Now middle age is from 35. to
49. whereof she might have been, and so neither old, nor young; for Leo the 10
was chosen Pope at 38 years of age, being not 46 years old when he died, and
yet he sat as Pope 8 years, 8 months, and 20 days; and Gregory the 11. was
about 35 years old when he was chosen, as Niem Vnionis Tract. 5. cap 39.
Theodoricus de Niem, and Massonus testify, besides, she might have been chosen
young for any Popish custom there is to the contrary. For Masson. de Vrbis
Episcop. in Boniface 9.
Boniface the 9 at the age of 34 was chosen Pope; and Innocent the 3 was but
30. I know not but our Joan might have been one of the youths of the Parish;
For not to speak of the Boy Pope Glab. Radul. hist. lib. 5.
Benedict the 9. who was chosen Pope about twelf years old, one, who at that
age better understood a Gig, and Bowlingstones, than the discipline of the
Church, I say not to reflect on him particularly, Paulus Langius in Chron,
Citizense ad An. 1389.
John 13 alias 12 In juvenili and florida aetate creatur Pontifex, He was
constituted Pope when he was in his youth and flourishing condition; that is
about the 18 year of his age, as Annal. Tom. 10. ad anno 955. number. 3.
Baronius gathers by circumstances.

But why might she not have been old, since we read, and have known
experimentally that old women have born children. Henry the Emperor begat
Frederick the 2 on a Wife who was fifty years old, so says Massonus: and
Machutus the Bishop (says Petrus de Natalibus) was born when his Mother was
above threescore: and says Fransciscus Junius in his annotations on Ruth; Hic
in Palatinatu ante annos aliquot vidi meis occulis and vocatus interfui partus
cujusdem foeminae amplius annos 56 natae, quae binos mores enixa est eodem
partu: A few years since I was entreated to see a woman above 59 years old, who
was deliverd of two Boys at a Birth; why may not then Pope Joan (though fifty)
be delivered of a Son.

Again let us consider, that the multitude of Popes above the Emperors was not
by reason of their age, but by other accidents. In the first 300 years while
the Popes were Generally good, they were cut off by Martyrdom, for though it be
not true (as Onuphrius very well observes) that all the Popes from St. Peter's
time to Sylvester were Martyrs (which is confidently avouched by some of the
Romish party) yet I grant it for a truth, that most of them were so. Now in
succeeding times their number grew the greater by their poisoning and murdering
one another. Diligently peruse the History of their Lives, and you shall find
that of forty Popes deceased, there was not one sat a full year: Fascic. Temp.
ad an. 904.
you shall find that in a little more than nine years, there were nine several
Popes: you shall find that one man, in 13 years, poisoned six Popes: Lastly you
shall find, that God in his justice did cut them off for their wicked and
abominable lewd Lives and conversations.

Liberius sat about some six years, says Cardinal Sum. de Eccles. lib. 4.
part. 1. c 9.
Turrecremata, and then died an evil Death, mala morte precibus Sanctorum
extinctus est; he died not for age, but with cursing.

Anastasius the second sat not two years but God struck him suddenly for his
wickedness, and he died miserably: for he died as some say, as Arius the
Arch-heretick, of which opinion is Platina in vita Anastasii 2.
Platina and Stella de Vit. Pont. ad annum 498.
Stella, who say, Sunt qui scribunt eum in Latrinam effudisse intestina dum
necessitati naturae obtemperat; In a house of office he evacuated his guts with
his excrements.

Clement the second continued in the Papacy but nine months, and died not of
old age but poison: so says Genebrard and Aeneas Sylvius.

Damasus the second, who had a hand in poisoning this Clement, kept the Popedom
but 23 days, not that he died of old age, but by the just judgment of God, that
he might be an example to others (as Platina observes) who climb to that
dignity by unjust and indirect means, to which they should ascend by virtue,
and true merit.

Benedict the sixth lived Pope no longer than a year and a half, and then died
in a Goal by strangling, or famine, as Annal. Tom. 10. ad anno 974.
Baronius is of opinion.

Victor the third was no longer Pope but one year, and four months and died by
Poison, so says Platina, Genebrard, Charanza, and Polonus; by the same means
(as is supposed) died Pius the third.

John the thirteenth ( alias twelve) was slain in the very act of adultery,
whether thrust through by one that saw him in that beastly posture (as Platina
believes) or murdered by the Devil (as Luitprandus imagins) Historians agree not
in; but Turrecremata sum. de Eccles. lib. 2. cap. 103.
Turrecremata, a Cardinal, takes that as more likely, that is most dreadful:
for because (says he) the Life of Pope John was detestable, and intolerable
offensive to the Christian People, therefore Christ himself pronounced against
him sentence of condemnation: for, whilst he was abusing, and vitiating a
certain man's Wife, the Devil struck him suddenly into the temple of his head,
and he died as suddenly without repentance.

Boniface the seventh sat but seven months, and a few days, and then the Beast
dyed, says Metrop. lib. 5. cap. 1.
Krantius.

Marcellus the Second lived but 22 days in the Papacy, not that he was very
aged when he died (for he was but 55 years old) but for that he was poisoned,
and which is strange, it is observed, that he was poisoned, because some
thought he would prove an honest Pope. Obiit die 22, non sine veneni
suspitione, quod nimium rectius quibusdam videretur, says Chron. lib. 4. ad
annum 1555.
Genebrard.

That Sixtus Quintus, after the sixth year of his Reign was fetched away by the
Devil, by whose help he came to that place, In his Declarat. made at Vendome
Jan. 28. 1601.
Sr. Francis Breton, a Monk of the order of the Celestines, protested that a
Prior of St Benets order assured him at Rome and the Jesuits at Italy seem to
believe no less by their own reports. To conclude, it is the confession of many
Pontificial Writers, that many Popes were short lived, because God saw they
proved Monsters instead of pious men, and became a shame, and scandal to the
true Religion; wherefore God in his justice snatched them off from the face of
the Earth. Thus this argument of years has its answer.

Another objection they alledg; that it is a most unlikely thing that the whole
Roman Clergy would choose a Pope without a beard, especially, if all the Clergy
in those days, (as some write) were shaven. For men by shaving may make
themselves look like women, and women by often shaving may make them selves
look like men, Pro barbis Sacerdotum, fol. 21. ad Card. Medicen Land. Anno 1533.
Johannes Pierius Valerianus a learned man, imputes the error of the choice of
Pope Joan to this, that the Clergy in those days were generally shaven: for by
the means of shaving (says he) the people were so disguised, that men and
women were in a manner undistinguishable, and by this it happened, that a woman
was chosen Pope of Rome to the perpetual shame, and infamy of that sacred
dignity; of the same opinion is Lib. 5. de Rebus Turcicis.
Chalcocondilas. Thus then since it was an ordinary thing for the Clergy to be
shaven, why should they dislike her the more for want of a beard.

But some may say, that it is very strange, that in all that time, neither
voice, countenance, not actions should not discover her. To this I answer, that
if there be truth in Popish Writers; diverse Women have lived longer among Men
in Men's apparel unknown, than Dame Joan lived in the Popedom. For Marina (as i
Textor reports) lived all her Life among Monks in a Masculine habit, and none
knew any thing to the contrary, but that she was a Monk Pet. de Natal. in
Catalog. sanc. lib. 2. cap. 3.
Euphrosina lived thirty six years among Monks, and was reputed for a Monk; so
did Eugenia, Pelagia, and Margareta, and their Sex the while was unsuspected.
In our late Civil Wars, I knew a woman that was sixteen years a Soldier, at
length, being tired with that starving kind of Life, returned to her relations,
and reassuming her pristin proper habiliments, Text. in Officina Tit. Mul. hab.
viril. meant.
was in a little time Married, and had several Children afterward.

The Romanists, to make this story the more fabulous, and improbable, do say,
that certainly this Woman Pope (had there been any such Person) would not have
been guilty of so much indiscretion (especially having the repute of so much
Wit, and Scholarship) as to go abroad in public, being so near her time, and
venture to go in Procession, where she must consequently have the eyes of many
thousands fixed upon her, whereby, if no other accident should happen, she runs
the hazard of a discovery. To this I answer, that the time of Childbirth is
uncertain, for commonly women go ten months, yet sometimes they come sooner, at
nine, eight, yea, and at seven months, as Levin. Lemnius de occult. Not.
miraculis lib. 4. cap 22. and 23.
Physicians have observed. Honester women than Pope Joan have fallen in Travail
upon the highway; nay in the street, their unexpected pangs have come so fast
upon them that they have been forced to take sanctuary at the next house they
could come at, and make bold with a stranger in a mean habitation, rather than
be delivered in the street; suitable to this is an observation of Theophilact;
novit mulier quod pariet, quando vero non novit: nam non paucae 8 mense
pepererunt, etiam in itinere, nihil praescientes; (says he) a woman knows she
shall be delivered, but the time when, she knows not: for diverse have been
delivered in their eight month, as they have been on a journey, not imagining
they were so near their reckoning. Thus may this poor Gentlewoman, Pope Joan be
mistaken, and the rather, because this was her first that she was delivered of,
as she went to St. John Laterans, for we do not read, that she had a Bastard
before she was Pope, not, but that we may believe it upon good grounds, that
her fellow Traveller, or Gallant was not wanting in his endeavors to give her
that carnal satisfaction she desired; and it may be she proved upon it too, but
had an Art, which the Devil taught her, to carry it off again by medecin, a
practice of late too much used by some insatiate Messalinas of this Kingdom:
whether she used it or not, we know no other proof but bare conjecture, but
certain it is, she was delivered of a Son in the open street, and both expired
immediately thereupon, who were buried together without any solemnity, and
though she had born the greatest offices belonging to the Romish Church, yet
she was interred without the common ceremonies of Burial.

The Sacred Scriptures do inform us, that God in his justice does use to serve
the greatest Princes so, who dishonor him. Do we not read that Jehoiachim King
of Judah was to be buried as an Ass was buried, etc. Jerem. 22.18, 19. and we
read in History, that many Popes have had as small solemnities. Boniface the 7.
(says Annal. Tom. 10. ad An. 985. e vetere Pontif. vaticano codice.
Baronius) who sat after John the 15, in four months dyed a sudden death, and
was so hateful to his own followers, that after his death they showed their
detestation of him, by revenging themselves with Blows on his senseless Carcass,
whilst others with swords ran him through, and through; after this they draged
him by the feet stark naked, till they came to the field which is near the
place where Constantines Horse stands, there they threw him from them, and so
left him. Debora Rebecca's Nurse, was buried under an Oak and Rachel Jacobs
Wife, (a far honester woman than Pope Joan) was buried in the way to Ephrath.
This woman Pope could not have a burial too bad for her; a fact so
extraordinary, deserved an extraordinary usage, wherefore Papyrius Massonus
questions the truth of this story, because she was not shameful enough handled;
for (says he) had there been any such Pope, the Romans could have done no less
in equity, than after Death, to have hanged her up in chains. But how comes it
about, if she was delivered of a Boy, that she dyed instantly? Florimondus
accounts this, as one of the adsurdities which attend this ^able, Masculum
pepererat (says he) quid igitur mortem repentinam attulit? If a Woman be once
delivered of the fruit of her Womb, there is no danger of Death in his opinion.
In the first place, she did not die instantly, though suddenly, for she was
delivered of a Boy before her death, in the next place, I would fain know,
whether it is not common for women to dye in Childbed, as well as in
Childbirth. Rachel was delivered of her Son Benjamin, and yet died shortly
after, Genesis 35, 17.18. Phineas wife was delivered of her Son Ichobod, and yet
dyed presently after. And if they dyed so, why not Pope Joan.

I but can she be said to have gone from the Palace of St. Peter to St. John
Lateran, whereas the Popes laid not then in the Vatican, but at St John Lateran
it self, this Bellar. de Romans Pontif. cap. 24.
Bellarmin, and others do object; and Platina (says some) does justify, that
the Popes lay not in the Vatican till the year 1350, which was in the time of
Boniface the Ninth.

This is a great mistake, for Boniface the Ninth lived in the year 1390, not
1350, the like mistake there is in fathering such a fancy upon In Vita Bonifac.
Platina. For Platina reports only, that the Vatican was repaired by Boniface
the Ninth; he says not it was first inhabited by him, though if he had, the
Pope might have gone to see the Lateran; for he had more than one house to
solace himself, and accommodate his retinue in besides the Lateran. He dwelt
not always in that, De vitis Pontif. in vita Gregorii.
for Gregory the Fourth, built two stately Fabrics for the Popes use, as
Anastasius testifies: and Leo the Third, (as you may read in the same Author)
built another no less glorious, near to St. Peter's Church, which stands in the
Vatican, wherein Leo the Fourth gave entertainment to Ludovike the Emperor.
Besides, History does not mention that she went from St. Peter's Palace to the
Palace of the Lateran, but from St. Peter's Church to the Lateran Church, and
yet dwell in the Palace by the Lateran; for Popes begin not their Procession
from the next Church adjoining to them. Leo the Third appointed to go in
Procession three several days before Ascension day; and he began the first day
at one of St. Mary's Churches, and ended at St. Saviors Church: the second day
he began at St. Sabina the Martyrs Church, and ended at St. Paul's: and the
third day he began at St. Crosses Church in Jerusalem, and ended at St.
Laurences without the Walls; so that this objection I conceive is fully
answered, and I shall endeavor to do the like to several others; and first,
the Romanists do cavil much about her different names before her Papacy; some
say she was called Agnes, h Platina in vita Leonis.
some Gilbert, some Isabel, some Margaret, some Tutta, or Jutta, and others
Dorothie.

This is a mere Forgery, for I cannot Read in any Ancient Writers, that she was
called by any of these Names; in some of later time I find some difference, one
calling her Gilbert, and another Agnes, but of all those whom I have here
inserted, to assert the truth, and give in evidence against her, there is not
above one or two, who either before or after her Papacy, gives her any other
Name than Joan.

Secondly, they say, that some of these Authors I have alleged to vindicate
this truth, do clash and differ in opinion, some calling her John the 7, some
John the 8, and others John the 9. and so says Baronius.

Baronius by his good leave quotes no Author for his Assertion, and therefore I
must beg his pardon if I believe him not; for my belief shall extend in this no
farther than reason shall direct it. Besides, whether she be John the 7, or 8,
the difference is not so great, for the like may be demonstrated in other
Popes, whom the Romish party cannot deny to be Popes. But who styles her John
the 7, or John the 8. assuredly, neither Marianus Scotus, Sigibert, Gotefridus,
Viterbiensis, Polonus, Platina, Palmerius, Trithemius, Fasciculus Temporum,
Krantius, Alfonsus e Carthagena, nor Textor call her neither John the 7, nor
John the 8, but plainly John, or Joan. Onuphrius indeed would persuade the
credulous, that Platina styles her John the 8, in these terms; Johannes hic
omnino 8, non 9, est ut a Platina describitur: Nam etsi Johannes foemina Papa
quam profitetur, fuisset, non tamen numeri natam habere debuisset sacri or
dinis non capax; that is, this John questionless is the Eighth, not the Ninth,
as Platina accounts him; for tho John the Woman, whom he talks of, had been
Pope, yet seeing she was not capable of Priesthood, she should not go for one
in the number of John's.

This is another falsity; for Platina calls her not John the eight, and
therefore Onuphrius, or some person else, has abused him: For proof whereof, I
appeal to Platina, Printed in the year 1481, which was the year wherein Platina
died, and to the next Edition 1481 who speaking of John the Woman in those
ancient Editions, he places no numeral note on her head, but begins his Story
thus, Johannes Anglicus ex Maguntiaco oriundus, etc. John English born at
Mentz, neither styles he the next 9, but 8; for coming to that Popes life, i
Platina moritur Romae, Anno 1481. Trithem. de Script. Ecclesiast, verbo
Bartholomaei.
Johannes 8, Patria Romanus, etc. says he, John the 8, by his Country a Roman,
etc. for further proof of which later point, I appeal to the later Editions,
whereunto Onuphrius his annotations are annexed; for though we read thus in
them, Johannes nonus Patria Romanus, etc. yet that that reading is false, and
the Ancient reading true, appears by that which is written of the next Popes
life, to wit Martin the second, even in those later Editions. For De vitis
Pontif. in vita Martins.
Platina showing how Martin lived in the time of Charles the Third, adds
presently, Quam ab Iohanne 8, Coronam accepisse scripsimus. Now Charles the
third was crowned by John next before Martin, according to Platina, wherefore
the next before Martin was John the 8, according to the opinion of the same
man, and not John the ninth, as Onuphrius would have us believe. Which
oversight k Such as that of Colen, 1574.
or fraud of Onuphrius was not so great, but that by this means he is forced to
alter Platina his numeral note, set to all the John's that follow to call him
John the tenth, whom Platina calls John the ninth; to call him the eleventh,
whom Platina calls the tenth, and so unto the last Baldesar Cossa, who was in
number of John's according to Ancient Editions the 23, and not the 24, as he is
numbered in the Editions which Onuphrius comments upon.

Now, whereas the Romanists do allege that the disagreeing of Authors about
the time wherein she commenced her Papacy, and the time of her continuance
therein, is an argument to prove the nullity of this Story, I say no such
matter: in the first place, let them consider the disagreement that is among
themselves. Some that have written of Pope Lucius, say he was a Platina in vita
Lucii.
Roman, some a Anastasius in vita Lucii.
Tuscan, some say he was the Idem. ibid.
Son of Lucinus, and others of Plat. and Onuph. loco citato.
Porphyrie. Some say he was chosen Pope in the year 253, some 254, some 259,
and others 275. Some say he sat Pope 3 years, 3 months, and 3 days, some 3
years and 5 months, and some three years 7 months, and 6 days, which you may
find in the Authors quoted in the Margent, and yet no man denies that Lucius
was Pope.

Again, do we not read the same difference in the Reign of Sergius the third;
some will have it begin in Mat. West. Flores Hist. ad annum 905.
905, others in Polon. in Chron. ad an. 907.
907, etc. some write that he succeeded Herm. contract as circa an. 907.
Benedict the fourth, others that he followed Luitprandi Chron.
Formosus, others Baron. Annal.
Christopher, etc. yet, whoever denied that there was such a Pope.

We read that the Carcass of Formosus was taken up out of his Grave by one of
his Successors, x Baron. A^. Tom. 10. ad. an. 897.
and brought into Judgment before a Council of Bishops, and that it was
divested of its Papal Robes, and clad with a Lay-mans garment, that it was
Indicted, Arraigned, and Condemned: but among those that report this, there is
a great disagreement. For some say it was taken up by Sergius the third, some
by Steven the sixth, some say it had two fingers cut off, some three; some say
the Head was chopped off, and some deny it; some say the Trunk was thrown into
Tyber, and some say it had Lay-mans Burial: and yet who of the Romanists will
deny the truth of this Story, by reason of these differences. Onuphrius denies
it point blank, saying, quae de Formosi cadavere ex Sepultura a successoribus
eruto dicuntur, proculdubio fabulae magis quam vero similia sunt, quod illorum
qui de ea re scripserunt diversitate and repugnantia facile liquet. The report
which goes concerning the digging up Formosus body out of his Grave by some of
his Successors, are questionless sabulous and not true, which is apparent by
the disagreement, and disconveniencies which are to be found among them who
write of it. Notwithstanding the manifold differences in circumstances,
Baronius durst not cast it off, as Onuphrius. For he ingeniously confesses, it
was such a villainous prank, as was never played before; Intentatum hactenus
scelus, and by reason of its barbarousness incredible; prae sui immanitate
omnibus incredibile; yet he grants it true, and avows that they foully err, who
deny what was done to the carcass of Formosus, looking on the report no better
than a Fable. Lib. 2. de Romans Pont. cap. 5.
Bellarmin says true in this, that saepissime accidit, ut constet de re and
non constet de modo vel alia circumstantia. g Annal Tom. 10. ad an. 897. nu. 3.
It often happens, that men are sure such a thing is done, when yet they are
not sure of the manner how it was done, or of some other such like
circumstance. The difference among Witers about circumstance does not weaken
any man's argument touching the substance: if it do, I would have the Romanists
for shame blot out St. Vrsula and her fellows Holy Day out of their October. 21.
Calendar, and all the Prayers they make to them in their Primers, Portesses,
and Breviaries; for there was never greater disagreement among the Relators of
any Story, than among the Relators of that. Some say, that Vrsula was the King
of Scotlands Daughter, others say the King of Cornwalls Daughter; some say her
Father was called Maurus, others Dionethus, or Dionatus, or Dionicus: the
Husband she was to marry, some say, was King of Little-Brittain, and one calls
him Aetherius, another Holofernes, and a third Conanus. Now in her company they
say there were only 11000 Ladies and Gentlewomen, all Virgins, others say there
were 60000 Country Maidens over and above: besides, there were diverse Bishops,
and Lords temporal, who accompanied them; yea, Cyriacus the Pope of Rome, like
a good fellow, and a Trusty Trojan, left his Papacy, and followed these
Pilgrims, as some say, though others deny it. For some say they went in
pilgrimage to Rome, though others do not hold that probable: some say they were
martyred on the Seacoast; some say before the Gates of Colen. Lastly, some say
that if any be buried in St. Vrsula's Church, though they be Infants newly
baptized, the ground will cast them up again; though others say that that is a
tale of a Tub, and others say it is as damned a lie as e're was hatched.

But to proceed, our Adversaries do say, that Athens was utterly destroyed at
that time, when it was storied John English, afterward Pope Joan traveled
thither, as a Trickery Mate with her learned Companion, to study Arts and
Sciences. I utterly deny it, for Paulus Lib. 8.
Aemilius writes, that Gotefridus was made Duke of Athens, and Prince of Achaia
about the year 1220, and afterward that certain Pirates invading the Country
of Greece, slew the Duke of Athens, who was of the house of Brennas, and took
the City. In like manner we read in In Hen. 3. ad an. 1252. page 1112.
Mat. Paris, that Johannes de Basing-stocks, Archdeacon of Legria, who died in
the year 1252. studied at Athens, and that there he learned many things unknown
to the Western Churches. Besides Aeneas Sylvus, who lived since that, does
justify that in his time Athens was not totally demolished, but carried the
show of a pr^tty Town. For Civitas Atheniensis (quoth he) quondam nobilissima
fuit, etc. eadem nostro tempore parvi oppidi speciem g^rit. So that the
exception aforesaid, does no way prejudice the truth of this Story.

Having driven them from this poor Sconce, this slender shelter, I shall pursue
them to another, which is grounded on what C. Bellarmin writes, That there were
no Schools for learning at that time, neither in Athens, nor any part of
Graecia, (says he) Lib. 3. de Romans Pontif. cap. 24.
Constat eo tempore neque Athenis neque usquam alibi in Graecia fuisse ulla
Gymnasia literarum. This he endeavors to prove, first by Synesius, who lived a
little after St. Basil, and Nazianzens time, who In Epist. ult. ad fratrem suum.
writ to his Brother, that Athens retained only the bare name of an University.
And secondly, he makes use of Zonoras and Cedrenus to back the former, who
record, that in the sole Reign of Michael the Emperor, about the year 856,
Bernardus Caesar restored Learning, Cum usque ad illud tempus per annos
plurimos ita fuissent extincta omnia studia sapientia in Graecia, ut ne
vestigium quidem ullum extaret.

And does this import think you, that in Synesiius his opinion there was no
University at Athens: I am of the opinion that Synesius meant thereby, that
Athens was an University, though nothing near so famous and flourishing as
heretofore, Questionelss when Bernardi Epist. 193.
St. Bernard writ, that Peter Abailard had nothing of a Monk, but the name, and
the Cowl, his meaning was not that Peter was no Monk, but a sorry one. And I am
the rather induced to understand the words of Synesius to be so: because Athens
in St, Basils time (about some 40 years before Synesius) was held the Mother of
Learning, and in regard thereof called Golden Athens by Greg. In Monodia in Bas
Magni vitam.
Nazianzen. For who can think in so few years, Learning should quite be
quenched, and that so famous an University should in so short a time be utterly
decayed; but suppose there was no University in Athens in Synesius his time:
what is that to prove there was no University in Pope Joans time at Athens,
which was 400 years after? That University might revive, and get new Life in so
many years; as it did: for two years after Synesius his time, Boethius went to
study at Athens, test Baronio, adding further that the study of Philosophy was
revived there in those days. p Baron. Annal. Tom. 3. ad an. 354.


As for Cedrenus, and Zonorus, Bellarmin wrongs them both in bringing them in
to witness, that there were no Schools in any part of Graecia in Pope Joans
times. For they say no more, but that Learning was not regarded a long time
before Bardus Caesar: they do not say that it was quite extinct, but almost:
Philosophia neglecta jacebat, ac prope omnino extincta erat, ut ne scintilla
quidem ejus apparet. Bardus Caesar added Life to it by erecting Schools for all
the Liberal Sciences and appointing Public Professors, and giving them
stipends out of the Exchequer, as Cedrenus and Zonoras do writ; but certainly
he raised it not up simply to Life; for had it been stark dead, how could he so
suddenly have gotten Professors to furnish his Schools? We may read in
Zonoras, that at the same time there was a matchless Philosopher called Leo who
studied at Constantinople, and had to his Scholars many skilful Mathematicians.
Moreover it cannot be denied, that about the year 680 there was kept a General
Council at Constantinople, wherein there were many eminent Bishops of Greece,
and among the rest the Conc. Constable. 6. Act. 17.
Bishop of Athens. There was another Council kept at Nice, and 100 years after,
viz. about the 780 at which there were more Bishops of Greece, than at the
former. There was a third Council held at Constantinople which did exceed in
number either of the former two, about the year Bellarm. loco citat.
870: and how is it credible so many Councils consisting of many Bishops should
be kept in Greece, and yet Greece utterly without Learning.

Now as these abusers of truth deny that there was any Learning at that time in
Greece, so they will not allow that there was any s Bellar. lib. 1. de Conc.
cap. 5.
open Profession of Learning in those days in Rome, because they will gainsay
the truth of Pope Joans going thither, and that as she professed publicly all
manner of Learning, whereby the greatest Doctors there became her Scholars, so
she preached, and wonderfully engaged the Ears, and Hearts of her Auditors.

Mat. Westmon. Flores Hist. ad an. 727.
History makes appear, that Ina (one of our Saxon Kings) did build a School in
Rome a little before the days of Pope Joan in the year 727, to this end, that
the Kings of England, and their Children, the Bishops, Priests, and the rest of
the Clergy might repair thither to be instructed in the Catholic faith, and
afterward return home, which School flourished in the reign of King Ibid. ad
an. 794.
Offa which was in the year 795, and continued at least till Alfred's time. For
we Read, that Marinus, who was Pope in the year 883, freed it from all payments
at the request of Alfred. Now is it likely that such a School was built, and
maintained for such a purpose, where no Learning was publicly professed?
Moreover we read of many other Schools kept in the same City, in the time of
Steven the 6, in the year 885. For all the Schools in Rome with alacrity
concurred, and brought Steven the sixth to the Palace of Lateran, and Stephen
was troubled, he had not wherewith to gratify them: thus says Anastasius in
the Life of this Pope; and is it reason to believe these Schools were without
Masters, Readers, and Professors?

But now it is time to introduce that which Cardinal Baronius thinks will knock
'ith' head and bury this story in perpetual oblivion; and that is thus; says
he, if Leo the fourth lived to the year 855, then Marianus Scotus, the first
promoter of this story, told a manifest untruth, in reporting that this Joan
was chosen Pope in the year 853; for by his confession she succeeded Leo the 4,
but Leo the 4 lived to the year 855; Ergo Marianus Scotus lies, etc. Anno
octingentessimo quinquagesimo tertio, Leo Papa, obiit Kalend. Augusti; huic
success it Johanna Mulier annis duobus, mensibus quinque, diebus quatuor. In
the year 853 Leo the Pope died on the Kalends of August, and Joan the woman
succeeded after him for the space of two years, five months, and four days.

You may see the falacy of this Cardinal; for these are not Marianus words, for
he sets not down the year precisely, but in numeral figures in the Margent. And
it is plain by conference of years, that he meant to note out the 855 for her
entrance, and not the 853. For Benedict the 3. who succeeded her, entered not by
his account till the year 857; now if she had entied y Consult Marianus
Chronicle and you will be thoroughly satisfied.
in 853, she had been Pope 4 years, or there abouts: whereas he plainly notes,
that she was Pope but two years, five months, and four days. Secondly, it is
plain by Marianus Scotus, that Sergius the 2 began his Popedom in the year 844
and sat 3 years; and it is as plain, that Leo the 4, next successor to
Sergius, began his in the year 847, and sat 8 years; now add these three odd
sums to 840, and the product will be 855, so that whosoever succeeded Leo the
4, must begin in the year 855, and that was Joan the Woman Pope in Marianus his
opinion.

Flor. in c. 25. nu. 3.
Florimondus would make us believe, that the Moon is made of a Green Cheese;
for, (says he) we read nothing in History of her reforming the Church; of her
determining of causes, and questions usually proposed by Bishops to them that
are Popes; of any intercourse, or affairs that she had with King, or Emperor;
wherefore certainly, had there been any such Joan a Pope, her actions, as well
as her bare name would have been registered by Historians.

He might as well question, whether there ever was an Anastasius the third, who
sat two years, and upward, and yet no Historian tells what he did in that
affair; only Platina writes, he acted nothing worth commemoration. We read of
no great matter done by Leo the seventh, who sat 3 years 6 months, and was as
very a Drone as the other, for any thing we read; he neither reformed the
Church, nor resolved any Bishop his doubts, nor intermedled with the affairs of
Princes; and whereas the Author aforesaid may pretend, that in that age wherein
Pope Joan lived, there was great controversies between the East and Western a
Platina in vita Anastasii 3 nil memoria dignum Cestum est.
Church, that in it many Princes and Emperors reigned, who were as much
signalized for their virtue, as royal dignity: that in it many men of great
learning lived, and therefore if there had been any such monster then, they
could not have past her by in silence. No more they did, as I have already
proved, neither was there more variety of matter fell out in that age, than
ordinary; though some would have us believe, that between the Eastern and
Western Churches, there was a great controversy, and contention about Images,
and that many Councils were held, etc. this is a positive untruth; for all
stories testify, that the difference between those two Churches about Images,
began in the former ages; and that though they continued some few years after
the year 800. yet there was no talk of that matter for diverse years before
Pope Joans days. And as for the Learned men of that age, Baronius gives an
account of them; qui sciret tantum Grammaticam isto seculo rudi, Doc^^ssimus
habebatur. These went for learned men in that age, who were but bare
Grammarians: and therefore were they never so many, Pope Joans acts might pass
unwritten.

If any conjecture that this Pope Joan did never inaugure, and crown Dukes,
Princes, Kings, or Emperors, I may answer, did every Pope inaugure, and crown
them, and though our Antagonists say, that in that age the Emperors themselves
had such a reverend esteem of the Roman Popes, that they would not undertake
the rule, and government of their people, except they gave them their consent,
and crowned them; and for proof of this they alledg, that Adrian the first
baptized two Sons b Baron. Annal. Tom. 9. ad an. 802. nu. 12.
of Charles the great, and after that anointed them Kings.

This is easily answered, for this happened in the year 781, as Baron. Annal.
Tom. 9. ad an. nu. 2.
Baronius observes and not in that age wherein Pope Joan lived. It is not to be
imagined that every Pope in that age inaugured some Dukes, Princes, Kings, or
Emperors; for we do not find that Eugenius the Second in the year 824;
Valentinus in 827; Gregory the 4 who succeeded him; Sergius the 2 in 844, or
Pope Leo the 4, who sat in the year 847 inaugured, or crowned any of them, but
this Pope last mentioned, who anointed Alfred, the youngest Son of Athelwulsus
King of England which assisted him not, nor furthered him to the attaining of
the Kingdom; for till the Death of his three Elder Brethren, notwithstanding
the Popes anointing, he lived like a Subject, not like a King, wherefore though
Pope Joan inaugur'd, or crowned no such Persons, it must not thereupon be
concluded, there was no Pope Joan. But this we read, that contulit sacros
ordines, promovit Episcopos, ministravit Sacramenta, caeteraque Romanorum
Pontificum exercuit munera; she gave Orders, she made Bishops, she administered
the Sacraments, and performed all other offices belonging to the Papacy; this
truth is testified not only by John Bal^, but by De vanitate Scient cap. 62. de
sectis Monasticis.
Cornelius Agrippa, a man highly commended by Lib. 1 Epistol, Epist. 38.
Leo the 10, and in a Book of his solemnly privileged by Charles the 5.

And let me not forget to answer one grand objection more, which the Papists
allege against the truth of this story; Ratio i^^l^^tabilis, says Genebrard
in his Chronology, and this is it. Leo 9 Epist. ad Michael. Episc.
Constantinop. cap. 23.
About 170 years after this invented fabulous election of Pope Joan, in the
year of our Lord 1020, the Church, and the Patriarch, of Constantinople being
in some contention with Rome, Leo the 9 wrote a Letter to Michael the Patriarch
of Constantinople reprehending certain abuses of that Church, and among others
that they were said to have promoted Eunuchs to Priesthood, and thereby also a
greater inconvenience fallen out, that a woman had craftily crept in to be a
Patriarch. Now no doubt (say they) Leo would never have durst to write thus, if
the Patriarch might have returned the matter back upon him again, and said,
this was but a slanderous report, falsely raised against the Church of
Constantinople* but that a woman indeed had been promoted in the Roman Church.

This argument is very weak in my judgment, for any to presume in this, that
Leo would never object that against Constantinople, whereof Rome it self might
be convinced; to prove this no unanswearable argument, it is usual for the
Papists to object that against others, whereof they themselves stand most
guilty; and with the Proverb, cry Whore first. How do they exclaim against the
Clergy of England for want of Continency? and yet is it not well known, how
their Priests, and Monks, like Jerem. 5.8.
fed horses, have neighed after their Neighbors Wives, and their Nuns have
opened their feet (to use the Ezech. 16.25.
Prophets phrase when he speaks of such like Light-skirts) to every one that
passed by, and have multiplied their Whoredoms. Taceo de fornicationibus, et
adulteriis a quibus qui alieni sunt, probro caeteris ac ludibrio esse solent
Spadonesque, aut Sodomitae appellantur, says De Prasulibus Simoniacis in
Bibliotheca Patrum. Paris 1576. p. 655.
Nich. Clemangis, speaking of the Romish Priests. I say nothing of your Priests
fornications, and adulteries, from which crimes, if any man be free, he is made
a laughing stock to the rest, and either called an Eunuch or a Sodomite.

Laici usque adeo persuasum habent nullos caelibes esse, ut in plerisque
parochiis non alitervelint Presbyterum tolerare, nisi Concubinam habeat: quovel
sic suis sit consultum uxoribus, quae ne sic quidem usquequaque sunt extra
periculum, says the same man. The Lay people are so convinced of the
incontinence of all Priests, that, willingly they would not admit of a Parish
Priest, unless he have a Whore of his own, that so they might preserve the
Chastity of their own Wives; and yet fall short of their expectations, by
reason of the leachery of the Priests.

Fornicantur complures Monialium cum suis Praelatis, ac Monachis, et conversis,
et in Monasteriis plures parturiunt filios, et filias quos ab iisdem Praelatis
Monachis et Conversis fornicarie, seu ex incestuoso coitu conceperunt, says
Theodoricus de Niem, Secretary to Pope Urban the 6, thus proceeding, et quod
miserandum est nonnullae ex hujusmodi Monialibus aliquos foetus earum
mortificant, infantes in lucem editos trucidant, etc. Nuns committed fornication
with Bishops, Monks, and Converts, and are delivered of sons and daughters
within their Monasteries, which were got by those Persons Fornicator-like, if
not incestuously; and which is most to be lamented, very many of these Nuns by
internal receptions destroy the fruit of their womb; and many kill them after
they are born.

Clemangis de corrupto Eccles. statu.
Quid obsecro aliud sunt hoc tempore pu^llarum Monasteria, nisi quaedam Veneris
execranda prostibula and Iasoivorum, et impudicorum juvenum ad libidines
explendas receptacula? ut idem sit body puellam velare, quod and public ad
scortandum exponere? what are Nunneries I pray now, but cursed Stews, and
Meeting-places for wanton, and shameless youth to satisfy their lusts in? So
that now it is all one to make a Wench a Nun, and to make her a Whore.

He. Huntingdon, hist. lib. 7. ad ann. 1125. Roger Hoveden Annal. pars prior in
Hen. 1.1126.
Johannes Cremensis, a Romish Cardinal, held a Council at London in the year
1125, wherein he inveighed bitterly against such Priests, as kept Concubines,
saying, summum scelus esse a latere meretricis ad corpus Christi conficiendum
surgere; it was a damnable sin for a Priest to arise from the side of a Whore,
and go and administer the Body of Christ; yet he himself loved a Whore with all
his heart; for we may read in our English Stories, ipse cum eodem die Corpus
Christi confecisset cum meretrice post vesperam interceptus est; he himself was
taken with a Whore the same night after he had said Mass, ipso facto.

Again, they condemn us of ignorance, saying, we dare not dispute with them in
matter of Religion, and if any of us are so confident, we are easily baffled,
being not able to produce so many arguments in our own defense as our Bristo^
M^riu^. 3.
Adversaries do for us, applauding themselves, and debasing us, and yet it is
easy to prove that their Priests, and Monks are generally like the threescore
thousand Jonas. 4.11.
Ninivites, who had not so much wit as to discern between their left hand, and
their right.

Videas admitti in Sacerdotium caeterosque sacros ordines homines idiotas and
illiteratos, etc. says Clemangis, speaking of the ignorance of the Romish
Clergy, thou may see ignorant and illiterate persons advanced to the
Priesthood and other holy orders, which can hardly read; and farther
complains; how many are there now adays preferred to Bishoprics, who so much
as cursorily have neither read, or heard, or learned the holy Scriptures: and
says De Sac. eccles. Minist. Benes. lib. 1. cap. 11.
Duarenus, Hoc saeculo Episcopatus and Sacerdotia indoctissimis hominibus, and
a religione alienis deferri solent -- hodie Episcopi nostri (paucis exceptis)
sacrarum literarum scientia caeteris ex populo long inferiores sunt. In this
age Bishoprics and Personages are bestowed on most unlearned and irreligious
men, etc. and says, Comment. de dictis and fact. Alfons. Regis lib. 2.
Apothegm. 17.
Aeneas Sylvius, pudeat Italiae sacerdotes, quos ne semel quidem legisse
constat novam L^gem. It is a shame to Italy that her Priests never read over
the New Testament: and as another says, Ecclesiarum regimina minus dignis
(Romae videlice^) committuntur qui ad Malos magis quam homines pascendos and
regendos essent idonei, that the government of the Churches even at Rome, is
committed to unworthy Persons, who are fitter to look to the keeping of Mules
than Men.

De corrupto Eccles. statu.
Clemangis speaking of the Roman Worthies, says, Siquis desidiosus est, siquis
a labor abhorrens siquis in otio luxuriari volens ad sacerdotium convolat: quo
adepto, se statim caeteris sacerdotibus adjungit, qui magis secundum Epicurum,
quam secundum Christum viventes and cauponulas seduli frequentantes, potando
commessando, pransitando convivando cum tessaris and pilo ludendo tempora tota
consumunt, etc. If there be any lazy fellow, one that will not work, but
indulge his senses he is restless till he is be-priested, and when he is made
one, and has gotten a Benefice, he consorts with his fellow Priests as sensual
as himself, and then he and they live more like Epicures than Christians;
Drinking, Eating, Reveling, Playing, Damming and being tippled, Swear and
Fight, whilst others as they come reaking hot from filthy carnal satisfactions,
address themselves to the Holy Altar.

Asciscuntur nunc (says In vita Sozimi.
Platina) non modo servi and vulgo concepti ac nati verum etiam flagitioso
quoque geniti. Now adays not only Servants and vulgar Persons are admited to be
of the Clergy, but every vile fellow, and the brats of such like Persons.

And says Panopliae lib. 4. cap. 77. p. 405.
Lindan, ex Aulicis perditissimus and quod omni aetate fuit post Christi
annorum memoriam inauditam ex militibus deploratissimis iisque sanguinariis Dei
loco ad Ecclesiae collocantur; imo repent intruduntur gubernacula quid quod
puerilis and adolescentulis creduntur haec tractanda. The worst of Courtiers
forlorn and bloody Soldiers (a thing never heard of before among Christians)
are all on a sudden thrust in upon the Church to manage it in Gods stead, yea,
Boys and youngsters are made Bishops and Prelates in the Church.

As the Papists tax us with ignorace, so they do with falsehood, of which they
themselves are most guilty. For instance In Epistola (...). ad Impera^^rem.
Agatho a Pope avoucheth, that the Roman Church never swarved from the
tradition of the Apostles, that she never gave Ear to novelties, that the Popes
Predecessors had ever boldly strengthened their Brethren according to Christ's
commandment to Peter; for proof hereof, he appeals to all the world. In like
manner Pope Nicolas boasts, that none of the Popes was ever suspected to have
held an error; and Victor was supposed to have held, that Christ was pure man
and not God, which is attested by Hist. Eccl. lib. 5. cap. 28.
Eusebius: Zepherinus u In Epistola 1. ad Michaelem.
was suspected of Montanism, so says Contra Praxe^m.
Tertullian: Marcellinus sacrificed to Idols according to In Pontificali in
vita Marcelli.
Damasus his report, and acknowledged by Bellarmin, though denied in part by
Baronius: Liberius subscribed to the Arian heresy, so say ^^hanasius, Jerome
and Sozomen, and to be short, that Honorius the first was a Monothelite, and
for that condemned by name in the sixth and seventh general Councils. From
hence I gather, that Pope Agatho was not Infallible in his judgment, neither am
I apt to believe that the Sons of that Church are less fallible. It is not
their bare saying that this is so and that not so, but the proof they produce
must be considered, according to validity.

And now the Papists, not knowing hardly what to say for themselves, suggest
this, Onuph. Ann^^at. in Plat. in vita Johan. 8. Harding in his Answer 10 Ep.
Jewel^ Apology.
that though men at that time had been so far bewitched or mope-eyed, as not to
distinguish a man from a woman, yet God himself, who appointed and ordained the
Seat of Peter to be the rule and direction of the whole Church, should never
have departed so far from his merciful providence, as to suffer the same to be
poluted by a woman incapacitated for holy orders, and a Puttana Errant^ to boot.

I would willingly understand why might not the Almighty suffer that Church to
be polluted by a Woman, as by so many Monsters and Beasts of Me^, as several
Pontificial Writers have discovered, who ingeniously, rather than they would
prejudice, have confessed the wild actions of their brethren to their
everlasting shame and infamy. Why might she not fit there as well as Fascicul.
Temp. ad an. ^14.
Sabinian, whom though a Pope, I must call by reason of his exorbitant wicked
life; I cannot call that miscreant by a name bad enough, and as he lived
sinfully, he died fearfully. Why might she not sit there as well as Stephen
the 6, who dig'd up the Carcass of Pope Formosus his Predecessor, and as if
living, had it arraigned before a Council of Bishops, and condemned, etc. as I
have before recited. Why might She not sit there as well as Plat. in vita Bonif.
Boniface the seventh, who robbed St. Peter's Church, and fled for a time to
Constantinople, who afterward by Simony, and the Murder of two Popes, got
into the Papacy, who in mischief, excelled all the Russins and Bandities of his
time for cruelty, and for the Ruin of his Country Sylla and Cataline come short
of him. Thus much Annal. Tom. 10. ad annum 985. nu. 1.
Baronius confesses, and at length as he lived like a Brute, so he dyed like a
Beast; these are his words, Bonifacius 7 annumerandus inter Famosos latrones
and potentissimos grassatores atque patriae proditores Syllas and Catalinas
horumque similes quosomnes superavit sacrilegus iste turpissima nece duorum
Pontisicum. And why might she not sit there as well as Sylvester the 2 that
famous Conjurer, who gave himself both body and Soul to the Devil, that he
might get the Popedom, and whilst living was hurryed away whither no mortal
ever yet could tell. Platina, in his Lives of the Popes, writes thus of him,
that ambitione and diabolica dominandi cupiditate impulsus, largitione primo
quidem Archiep^scopatum Rhemensem inde Ravennatem adeptus Pontificatum,
postremo majore conatu adjuvante Diabolo consequutus est hac tamen lege ut post
mortem totus illius esset cujus fraudibus tantam dignitate adep us erat:
Sylvester the 2, being damnable ambitious, got first by bribery the Arch
Bishopric of Rhemes, then that of Ravenna, and after that by the Devils help,
the Bishopric of Rome, yet upon this condition, that when he dyed he should be
wholly his, by whose means he had attained such dignity: Sigibert confesses in
a manner the same thing, for he says, non per ostium intrare creditur, he got
the Popedom by indirect course, for a quibusdam Negromantiae arguitur, he was
suspected of Negromancy; the like is affirmed by Cardinal De vita and gestis
Hildebrandi.
Benno, by In Chron. ad an. 1007
Martinus Polonus, by De vitis Pontif. in Sylvest. 2.
Stella a Venetian, by Supplement. Chron. ad annum 997
Philippus Bergomensis, by In Polychron. lib. 6. cap. 14. etc.
Ranulfus Cestrensis, by Matthaeus Westmonasteriensis, by Fasciculus Temporum,
by Charanza, and by Aeneas Sylvius.

William of Malmsbury, having related the same Story in effect with the above
named Writers, supposes that some might reply, this is but a made Tale, Sed
haec vulgata ficta crederet, aliquis eo quod solet Populus literatorum famam
laedere dicens illum, loqui cum Daemone quem in aliquo viderint excellentem
opere; because the common people are wont to say, that Scholars, who are
singular or excellent in any thing, are cunning men, or deal with the Devil;
yet he concludes, that he believes it for true, for mihi vero fidem facit de
istius sacrilegio inaudita mortis excogitatio, Lib. 2. de gestis Rerum Aug.
cap. 10. fol. 36.
says he, I am verily persuaded Sylvester was such a Villain, because of the
strangeness of his death, Nam curse moriens excarnificaret ipse sui corpor is
horrendus Lanista nisi novi sceleris conscius esset? For why should the
Butcherly fellow have torn his own flesh as he did, but that he was guilty of
some strange sin.

To proceed, why might not Pope Joan sit in the Papal Chair as well as Benedict
the ninth tha^ ugly Monster, as Platina calls him, Teterrimum Monstrum, who got
the Popedom when he was 12 years old, Sigonius de Regno Italiae, lib. 7. ad
annum 1048.
who when he was cast out for his unworthiness by strong hand, got it again
within few days after, and for fear he could not keep it long, sold it to
another for money: who after his Death appeared partly like an Ass, partly like
a Bear, confessing that he carried such a shape, because he lived so much like
a Beast in his life.

Why might she not sit in St. Peter's Chair as well as Pet. Crinitus de honesta
discip. lib. 8. cap. 13.
Boniface the eight, who when according to custom, on Ash Wednesday, when he
should have laid ashes upon an Archbishops head, and religiously told him,
that he was but Ashes, and should return to Ashes, he cast them in the
Archbishops face and eyes, maliciously telling him, that he was a Gibelline,
and that he should dye with the Gibellines; of whom Caelestinus his
Predecessor, a man famous as they say for Miracles, Ascendisti ut vulpes,
regnabis ut Leo, morieris ut Canis, and it a sane contigit, Tho. Walsingham in
Edu. 1.
professed that as he entered life a Fox, he should reign like a Lion, and die
like a dog, which fell out accordingly.

Why might she not sit there as well as Gregory the 7, commonly known by the
name of Hildebrand, who set the Abbas Vspergensis in Chron. ad an. 1080.
Church and Commonwealth on fire; who hired a villain to tumble down great
stones from the Battlements of a Church upon the Emperors head, to squeeze him
to pieces, whilst he was at prayers, as Cardinal Benno reports, who cast the
Sacrament into the fire, who usually carried about him a Conjuring-book; who
soundly basted his Predecessor Alexander; who wrested the Scriptures to cover
his lewdness: Florentinus Vigorniersis in Chron. page 641. Mat. Paris in Guil.
Conquest. An. 1086.
who at his death confessed, that the Devil set him on work to provoke God to
wrath against the World.

Why might she not sit there as well as John the 23. ( Onuph. Appendix 24,) who
was fitter for the Camp than for the Church; for Profaneness, than for Piety;
as knowing no Faith, no Religion at all; who openly professed that there was no
life after this, ( -- post mortem nulla voluptas) but that it was with Men as
with Beasts: who, in a word, lived so scandalously, that he was commonly called
the Devil Incarnate.

Why might she not sit there as well as John the 12. Luitprand. Hist. de Europ.
gestarum, lib 6. cap. 7.8. and 10.
who made Deacons in a Stable, who made a Boy of ten years old a Bishop; who
made the Lateran a common Bawdy House; who drank to the Devil; who, when he was
at Prayers, invoked Jupiter and Venus, and other Idolatrous Gods of the
Heathens, who at length was slain even by the Devil himself, whilst he was
committing Adultery, as I said before. If it cannot be denied that God has
suffered these and as many as wicked as any of these (except the last recited)
to seat themselves in St. Peter's Chair, we need not wonder with Part. 2. Tit.
16. cap. 1. Sect. 7.
Antonius at the story of Pope Joan, and say, oh the depth of the Wisdom of
God, how incredible are his judgments! etc.

And now let me ask any Romanist this question: how should this tale of Pope
Joan arise if there had not been such a Pope; Was there ever such a Smoke and
no fire; such a report, and no Probability: To this some Romanists do say, that
great lies do always arise out of some Truth: omnia insignia mendacia ab aliqua
veritate originem habent, says Onuphrius in his notes on Platina in the Life
of Pope Joan, and so did this, confessing that John the twelfth was a
Whore-master, and among other of his Bona Roba's, or Wenches that he kept,
there was one called Joan, who was all in all with him, and ruled the roast.
Now the people perceiving what interest she had in, and power over him,
contemning him, gave her the appellation of Pope. Whereupon the Churches
enemies took occasion to slander the Church, as though the Church had (indeed)
a woman Pope. And this Loco supr* citato.
Onuphrius proves out of Luitprandus Ticinensis a Writer of that Age, who
affirms, that John the 12 had three famous Strapping Whores, of whom the
handsomest, and consequently the best beloved, was called Joan. In answer
hereunto, I read in Lib. 2. cap. 6. and 7.
Luitprandus, in the place cited by Onuphrius, that John the 12 kept one
eminent whore whom he called Raynera, whom he made Governor of many Cities,
and on whom he bestowed many Golden Crosses, and Chalices belonging to St.
Peter, and relates further, that he kept another called Stephana, and that he
debauched and vitiated married wives, widows, and Maidens, who came to visit
the Apostolical Churches, and withal writes, that he kept a third called Anna,
who was a widow, and not so, but kept her Niece to boot; making the Palace
Lateran no better than a Bawdy House, but he nowhere mentions any Joan, on whom
that continent and worthy head of the Romish Church John the 12 doted.
Onuphrius, I suppose, wanting Spectacles mistook Joanna for Anna.

I but say some, John the 9 was made Bishop of Bonony, then of Ravena, and at
last Pope of Rome, by the means of one Theodora a very famous Whore, who in
those days, at Rome overruled all affairs Ecclesiastical or Political. Now it
being generally observed how prevalent this Theodora was with this John, and
howmuch a slave he was to all her Humors and commands, he was concluded to
have deserved rather the name of a woman than a man, and therefore called him
Joan, not John; and upon this account arose the report of a Pope Joan; and to
back this assertion, Annal. l. 4.
Aventinus a Germane is produced; but Genebrard, who is a professed rigid Papist,
differs in opinion; for says he, Aventinus lib. 4. Annal. fabullam esse
asserit a Theodora nobili scorto ortam; ego vero a recentioribus adulatoribus
in Romanae sedis odium; that is Aventinus holds that this tale arose by
reason of a noble Whore called Theodora; but I think some later sycophantising
Parasyts of the Emperors, invented this story, to discredit the Papal seat: I
know not but that Genebrard may be as authentic as Aventinus, since he spent
Prafatio Chronog. ad Pontacum.
10 whole years upon his Chronicle.

Besides, suppose we allow that John who was first Bishop of Bonony, then of
Ravenna, and lastly of Rome, came to those Bishoprics by the means of Theodora
a famous Whore; in respect whereof, Cardinal Baronius questions whether he was
a Pope or not, and terms him sometimes Annal. ad annum. 912. number. 12.
Pseudopontifex, and Anti-papa, a false Pope, and Antipope, Ad annum 928. number.
2.
sometimes intrusor and detentor injustus Apostolicae sedis; an intruder and an
Usuper of the Apostolical chair; yet I deny that this was John the 9, but John
the 10: John the 9 took no indirect courses to gain the Papacy, but lawfully
and honestly, and died naturally, as the said Annal. Tom. 10. ad annum 901.
number. 1.
Cardinal reports: but so did not this; Frodoard Hist. Rhem. lib. 4. cap. 19.
This confirmed a Child under five years of age in the Archbishopric of
Rhemes, at which fact Baronius stands amazed, and could not forbear saying;
than this Annal. number. 11.
turpior nullus cujus sicut ingressus in Cathedram Petri infamissimus, ita and
exitus nefandissimus: there was never a filthier fellow than this. This entered
with infamy and dyed fearfully: this was stifled with a pillow by the
procurement of one as famous for Whoredom as Theodora who preserved him.

Now suppose he was John the ninth; if his loose carriage with Theodora gave
occasion of the report of a Woman Pope, why was it not recorded, as happening in
his time, but above forty years before his time; John the ninth was constituted
Pope in the year 901, yet this story is recorded as happening about the year 854,
to this the Romanists reply, that this came to pass by the subtlety of the
reporters, for say Florimond. cap. 30. nu. 8.
they, about the year 800, the Empress, who in a manner ruled all the world,
was called Theodora. Now these trifling Tale-tellers (to use their own words)
hearing of a Pope Joan in Theodoras time, chopped it into the time of Theodora
the Empress, who lived about thirty years before Theodora the Harlot.

I do think this rather argues simplicity than subtlety in the Reporters; for
Cui bono, whether it happened in the one or the other Theodoras time? But it
carries no color of truth with it; for Theodora the Empress never carried any
sway in Rome at all. At Constantinople for a while, in the time of her Sons
minority, she had great power: Baron. annal. Tem. 10. ad an. 855.
but in Pope Joans time she was turned out of office or divested of that Power
she had assumed in Constantinople, nay, she was deposed of her regency, and
thrust into a Monastery where she was detained till the Expiration of her life.

Now, since this fallacy will stand them in no stead, they imagine this tale, as
they call it, arose from John the 8, for John the 8, say they behaved himself
not like a man to Photius Patriarch of Constantinople, but sheepishly, and like
a woman; for he received Photius into Communion, who was excommunicated by his
Predecessors. John the 8, suffered himself to be overcome by half a man,
whereupon, in reproach, he was called, not Papa sed Papissa, and this they
farther on Baronius, of which he writes in his Annals; but how justly let any
judge, since he is one of those who affirm that the rumor of the Church of
Constantinoples oversight, in suffering a woman to creep in to be Patriarch,
occasioned this tale against Rome, according to his own words, quae ita erant
fama vulgata de Ecclesia Constantinop. conversa in Romana^ Ecclesia^ a
schismatibus ^a^ odio prosequentibas, and calumniis proscindentibus quis non
intelligat, says Baronius in his Annals, who is he so ignorant, that
understands not that what was reported of Constantinople, the same was turned
by Schismatics as spoken against Rome.

With what honesty can he affirm both, since Annal. Tom. 10. ad annum 853, nu.
66.
he acknowledges if there had been but some flying tale of any such accident
at Rome in former days, Pope Leo should first have cleared it before he had
charged the Church of Constantinople with the like. And was there not such a
flying report of a woman Pope before Leo the 9 his time, in Baronius time? How
then did John the 8 occasion such a report who lived 140 years before Leo.

Many more objections I could here insert, and answer, but that I think I have
produced enough already to convince any man unbiassed, of the reality and the
truth of this Story, that there was a Pope Joan. But suppose this Story to be
true, what prejudice is this to the Church of Rome? Yes, very much, for if she
was Pope, then it will necessarily follow, that the Roman Church once hopt
headless; for the Church according to Bellar. lib. 3. de Ecclesia. cap. 2.
Bellarmin, is defined to be a company of Christian-men professing one Faith,
under one head, to wit, the Pope: but she, however she carried the name of
Pope, was no Pope: Rhem. annot. in 1 Cor. 14. v. 34.
for a Woman is not capable of Holy Orders: wherefore a Woman cannot play the
Pope; therefore all the time of Pope Joan, the Church hopt headless.

The Papists do acknowledge this for a great inconvenience, that the Church
should lack a true Head for the time, but that is not so great a matter cry
they: for so she does when any Pope dies, till another be chosen. If this be
granted, what a pitiful case is the Church in then? Since Christ's time above
250 Popes, and by consequence, then the Church has been headless 250 times,
yea and sometimes between the death of one Pope, and the choosing of another,
there have passed many days, many months, and some years, as you may read in
History, and particularly Bodin, that after Faelix, sometimes Duke of Savoy,
St. Peter's Chair stood empty Ten years. Now, if the Church be headless, where
lies her understanding; what shall guide her when she is bereaved of her Head?

But let us weigh another objection, did not (say they) St. Austin hold this
opinion upon supposition of a like case, that the Church of Christ should not
be prejudiced? Did not Austin. Epist. 165. ad literas cujusdam Donatist.
he, having recited the Popes Names from the time of Christ to his days, make
this demand? What if any Judas or Traitor had entered among these, or been
chosen by the Error of Men? and answers presently, Non praejudicaret
Ecclesiae, and innocentibus Christianis. According to the body of the Popish
Doctrine this must be denied: for the Papists hold that the Pope is head of the
Church, and that it is necessary to salvation to acknowledge him the head; but
so did not St. Austin. The Papists hold that in a true Church, one Bishop must
lawfully succeed another, or all is dashed out; but so did not St. Austin: for
he puts the case, that some Traitor suprepsisset, that is, had come in not
orderly into the Bishop of Romes seat: and yet resolves that that was not
prejudical to Gods Church. Let the Papist conform himself in these two points
of the Popes head-ship and succession to St. Austins judgment, and, then he may
the better say in this case of Pope Joan, that which St. Austin said in the
case proposed; that she had not prejudiced the Church of Christ.

Now if it be true that there was a Pope Joan, the Church of Rome must be
discarded as no true Church: for thus I argue, that is no true Church which
cannot give in plain authentical writing, the lawful, orderly, entire, (without
any breach) and sound sincere succession of Bishops: but your Church if Joan
was Pope, cannot give in plain authentical writing the lawful, orderly, entire,
etc. For by reason of her, Benedict the 3 could not orderly succeed Leo the 4;
for she was a bar to his succession; by her a breach was made in the rank of
Popes; and as she was a notorious Whore, so she was no fool; as she shamefully
baffled the Doctors with her learning, so she outwitted them with her policy,
and sat in that seat which properly belonged to men, to the confusion of the
Romish Church and perpetual infamy of her Clergy.

Lastly, if it be granted there was such a Pope, then Popish Priests may well
doubt of the lawfulness of their Mission, and Lay-Papists of the sufficiency of
their absolutions which the Priests give them on auricular confession, and of
the truth of the real presence and transubstantiation. Tolet. summa Casuum
Conscientiae lib. 1. cap. 1.
For unless the Popish Priests be admited by a lawful Bishop, their Priesthood
is insignificant and of no effect: Council. Trident Sess. 14. Can. 10.
unless Lay-Papists be absolved by a Lawful Priest, their absolution is nothing
worth: and Bellar. l. 4. de Eucha. cap. 16.
unless the words of Consecration be uttered by a lawful Priest, intent upon
his business, there follows no substantial change in the Creatures of Bread and
Wine. Now how can the Priests say they were inducted by lawful Bishops, or the
Layman absolved by lawful Priests, or Masses said by them, seeing we read (as
I said before) that Pope Joan gave orders, Pope Joan made Deacons, Priests,
Bishops, and Abbots. For it may be well enough supposed that the Priests of
this present age are descended from those who received orders from her. Her
successors dealt not with her Shavelings, as Pope John the 12 did with Leo the
8 his Shavelings. Sigibert in Chron. ad an. 963. Baronius Turrecremata etc.
John the 12 degraded them all, and compelled every one of them to subscribe a
Paper, wherein was writ Episcopus meus (meaning Leo the 8) nihil sibi habuit,
nihil mihi dedit, he had naught for him self, and gave naught to me: but so did
not Benedict the third with Pope Joans. To what has been said I know not what
any Romanist in any probability can reply, unless he say as Lawyers in the case
of Barbarius Philippus, Communis error facit jus; yet that will not serve the
turn, for though it may be so in matters of the Commonwealth, in matters of the
Church it cannot be so; for an error in the beginning touching the Church,
proves often an heresy in conclusion. In matters of the Church prescription
adds no credit to actions of evil beginning.

FINIS.

