A PRAYER FOR The Perfecting our late Deliverance, by the happy Success of
Their MAJESTY'S Forces by Sea and Land.
O Most mighty Lord, who sit in the Throne judging right, and ministrest
Judgment to the People in uprightness; who have promised to be a refuge for the
oppressed, a refuge in times of trouble; We most humbly fall down before thy
Majesty to beseech thee, to appear at this time in the behalf of these three
Kingdoms; and to maintain our Right and our Cause against those who seek to
destroy us.

Our Sins, we acknowledge, may justly provoke thee to deliver us up into their
cruel hands; because we have been as unthankful for many inestimable Blessings,
particularly the late wonderful Deliverance thou have wrought for us, as we
have been uncorrigible under our former distresses, and all the Punishments
thou have inflicted on us.

But the more unworthy we are, the more will thy Mercy be magnified in our
Salvation. And therefore, Not unto us, O Lord, not unto us, but unto thy name
give glory; for thy mercy, and for thy truths sake. Save us, for the sake of
thy Holy Religion, which, in a mavelous manner, has been both planted and
preserved in these Kingdoms; for the sake of many of thy faithful Servants
among us, who are afraid of thy Judgments, and lay to heart thy Mercies, and
bewail our foul Ingratitude, and earnestly desire to see sincere Piety flourish
every where.

Hear their Prayer, O Lord, and let their Cry come unto thee. Pardon all their
former uncharitableness one toward another. that it may not hinder the
Blessings they desire. And give us grace, for the time to come, to live in love
and peace, and to seek the good of one another.

Thou have been our helper; leave us not, neither forsake us, O God of our
salvation. But, as thou have fulfilled our Petitions, and granted our hearts
desire, in blasting all the Designs of our Enemies in this Kingdom; so we
beseech thee still to confound and turn them backward that labor to regain
their power to do us evil. Make them still as the grass on the house top, which
withers before it be grown up. Whatsoever mischief they project or attempt,
let not their hand be able to perform their Enterprise.

Suffer not that glorious Work (which thy goodness has begun) to miscarry by
our frowardness and folly: But strengthen, O God, and stablish that which thou
have wrought for us; and carry it on to Perfection, by thy own Almighty Arm,
which has been stretched out against those who went about to subvert our Laws,
Liberties and Religion. As thou have beaten down all Arbitrary and
Antichristian Power among us, in a most remarkable manner; so never suffer it
to rise up again: But proceed, O Most Mighty, to crush it every where else,
till it be utterly suppressed.

And for that end, we beseech thee to unite all our hearts in such sincere
affection and right understanding, that we may be in a condition not only to
defend our selves, but to help other Reformed Churches, that are or may be in
danger. Discover to every one among us their Errors; root out their false
Principles; satisfy all their Doubts and Scruples; remove their Prejudices;
open their Eyes to see the things which belong to our peace; that we may be
disposed, with one mind and one mouth, to glorify thy Name, for rescuing us
from Popery and Arbitrary Power; and to join our faithful endeavors for the
support of His Authority, who was the blessed Instrument of that Deliverance.

Establish the Throne of our Sovereign Lord and Lady, KING WILLIAM and QUEEN
MARY; and let them all be put to shame who set themselves to overturn it.
Protect their Royal Persons, prolong their Days, direct their Counsels, make
their Forces by Sea and by Land Victorious. Crown them with all Personal and
Princely Virtues; and then Crown those Virtues with such prosperous Successes
in all their Enterprises; that the World may see in them the love thou bear
to righteous and pious Rulers.

Particularly we beseech thee to succeed their endeavors for the Deliverance
of our Brethren in IRELAND, whom thou have suffered to fall under that power
from which thy merciful Providence has rescued us. Make haste, O Lord, to help
them; by sending timely Succors for their Relief, and accompanying them with
thy Blessing. Make the Winds and the Seas favorable to them: And when Thou
have transported them thither and given them a safe Landing there, strike a
terror into all their Opposers, that they may not be able to stand before them.

Make us all sensible, That whatsoever Preparations are made against the Day of
Battle, Safety is of thee, O Lord: That so we may not trust to our own Strength
or Wisdom, but call continually unto thee, the most High, who shall perform the
cause which we have in hand.

For whenever we call upon thee, faithfully, then shall our enemies be put to
flight: this we know, for God is on our side.

O be thou our help in trouble, for vain is the help of man.

Through thee shall we do great Acts, for it is thou that shall tread down our
enemies.

Be thou exalted in thy own strength: so shall we sing and praise thy power.

And bless, we also beseech thee, the Forces that are now Confederate against
him who has dealt perfidiously with all his Neighbors, and most grievously
afflicted them a long time with injurious Wars. Favor their righteous Cause
with such success, that they may humble him, and lay him so low, that he may
not be able to trouble the World any more. Hear the Complaint of those
oppressed People, who cry unto thee, saying, O God to whom vengeance belongs,
O God to whom vengeance belongs, show thy self. Lift up thy self, thou Judge
of the Earth, and render a reward to the proud.

Arise, O Lord, lift up thy hand; forget not the poor: let not their
expectation perish for ever.

Let not their haughty Oppressions have the upper-hand: but let them be judged
in thy sight.

Put them in fear, O Lord, that they may know themselves to be but men.

So will we praise thee for ever, because thou have done it.

We will sing of thy power, and of thy mercy, because thou have been our
defense and refuge in the day of our trouble.

Unto thee, O our Strength, will we sing; for God is our defense, and the God
of our mercy; through Christ Jesus. To whom, etc.

FINIS.
LICENSED, July 15. 1689.

LONDON, Printed for Richard Chiswell, at the Rose and Crown in St. Paul's
Churchyard, 1689.


