A Preparation for CHRISTMAS, OR The Pious Soul sighing out an Oblation of
Praise and Wonder on that Miracle of Divine Love The Incarnation of Her SAVIOR.

To which is Added A HYMN on the same Occasion.

By R. B.

LONDON, Printed for G. Widows at the Green Dragon in St. Paul's Churchyard,
1674.

A Christian Meditation on CHRITSMASS, etc.
IS the wonderful Nativity of my blessed Savior this day commemorated by a
solemn Festival, and shall my stupid Soul not endeavor by some awakening
Meditations, to blow the sparks of her gratitude into flames of Love and Wonder
for such a Miracle of mercy?

Festivals; it is true, are proper seasons of Mirth and Gladness, nor does
Religion delight in that Sower look and unsociable posture wherein sly
Hypocrites represent her; It Is possible the Conduit on some occasions may
lawfully run wast, and since a good Conscience is a continual Feast, there is
no doubt but we may be Merry with it; yet certainly he who only minds his Good
Ch^er in this days Solem^ity speak; himself more an Epicure than a Christian,
and may be said to celebrate Bacchus his drunken Revels, rather than the Birth
of the Holy Jesus.

This was that glorious Moment which God in infinite mercy had promised our
first Parents immediately after their unhappy Fall from primitive Innocence,
and which the Church had now sighed for, near four thousand years, wherein was
born the expectation of Nations, and the long longed for Redeemer of the World,
did (as his Prophetic Harbingers had foretold) rend the Heavens, and come down
from Mansions of Glory in the vesture of Humanity; Thou, Oh my dearest Lord!
that by the virtue of the highest, were conceived in the womb of an Inviolate
Virgin, of all women the m^st blessed, and yet more blessed by being thy
Daughter and thy Servant, than in being thy Mother.

Thou at whose Birth the whole Quire of Heaven did sing Hallelujahs, and Angels
in kindness to mankind, made have to acquaint ever Shepherds with the blessed
News; But on my God! why would thou be first made known to the meanest
condition of men? Why were they sent to see their Savior, not in some gorgeous
Palace but in the ^ilest Room of a common Inn? And (instead of a Cradle decked
with rich Embroideries) lying in a despicable Manger? Way did thou not choose
for the place of thy blessed Mothers Delivery, either Athens the Learned, or
Rome the Emperial, or Jerusalem the holy City? Or since poor Bethlehem to
verify thy Prophets prediction, must receive that Honor; Why did Thou not
send Millions of Cherubins and Seraphins before thee for thy glorious
Harbingers?

No my God! It was thy Will, it was thy Will (which is the highest of Reasons)
by thy low beginning in the Flesh to confound all Pride, and reach the glories
of the Earth to Blush. Disobedient Adam had destroyed us by Ambition, and thou will Save us by thy Humility: He thinking to become like God, had precipitated
us all into an Abyss of Death and Misery, and thou, the God of Compassions by
becoming like to Man, have restored us to Life Eternal.

Yet thu^ privately born, and thus homely received, denied admittance into the
Inn, and forced by worse than brutish men, to take up a lodging amongst Beasts;
Behold a new Star descending to Illustrate thy Obscurity, and conduct the wise
men of the East (now wise indeed) with their choicest presents to Adore thee:
On strange appearence in the Heavens! and yet one more strange and glorious on
the Earth! Did ever Hippocritus, Ptotomy, the famous* Tresmegist or the greater
Moses, or all the Aegyp^ian Stargaz^rs ever contemplate before such a Planet?
So Irregular! so Ex^entrical, and yet constant to its designed end* as if the
Celestial lights has forsaken their proper ^^^ions and natural positions to
welcome the Lord of all Nature into the World! Thus, oh my Lord! did thou
descend to Earth, that thou may raise us to Heaven, Envelloping thy self in
clouds of Obscurity, to Crown us with Light and Immortality, participating of
humane Nature, that we might partake of that Divine, and clothing thy self
with our Flesh, that we might be invested with thy Spirit.

In the whole course of thy precious Life, what shall I first, what shall I
most admire? All is Wonder, all Amazement, and forces my nonplust Reason in a
holy Ecstasy to that Sanctuary of thy servant Paul; Oh the Height! oh the Depth!
etc. Shall I first celebrate Thy ever blessed Name, for convincing the great
Doctors of the Law at twelve years of thine Age? When thy divine Essence began
to Blaze, which had layn before as it were slumbring in the vail of thy
Humanity? Or shall I pass from this miracle of Knowledge to thy miracles of
Charity, in healing the Blind, the Lame, the Deaf, the Dumb? Or shall I more
contemplate the Acts of thy Power, in checking the unruly Winds unto a calm;
walking on the Waves, raising the Dead, and casting forth unclean Spirits! Or
shall I remain Stupifyed (as all the Learned part of the World was, which lay
grovelling in the contemplation of inferior Causes) that at thy coming, all
their false Oracles; and prophetic Delusions were stricken mute, and no more
answers could be had from Delphos or Hammon? Or shall I run my thoughts from
thy Cradle to thy Cross, and consider how at thy passion all Nature did suffer,
the Earch shaking; Graves opening; and the Heavens by a Preternatural Eclispe
of the Sun all over Invelloped with an affrighting Darkness? Or lastly; after
thou had Triumphed over Death and Hell (whose Keys are in thy Hand alone)
shall I glorify thy Assumption into the highest Heavens?

Yes, blessed Lord! all this and much more there is than the whole World can
contein if it were Written; Yet one thing remains even after thy gloriou^
Departure, for the comfort of our Souls, that thou have dispensed thy saving
Doctrine, not by Eloquent Sophists, or subtle Schoolmen (such as have since
distracted and torn thy Church in pieces) but by the simplest and seemingly
contemptible Instruments, so that it must needs be thy Divine truth since it
was impressed by no humane means: How should we have known, or how should we
have apprehended thy eternal Generation? If thou had not been pleased to
vouchsafe a silly Fitherman to lean on thy Breast, and inspire him to tell us,
That In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was
God.

Therefore to Thee, Thou Incarnate Word! do we with an humble confidence,
Address our selves disowning all other Mediators; Thou only true Messiah! The
wisdom of the Father in whom all Prophecies are accomplished, and the Will of
God, and Desires of Men fulfilled; teach us to contemplate thy Nativity, not
vainly or Superficially as we do a curious Picture or pleasant History, but to
improve the same to the advantage of our Souls; Let the meditation of thy
Birth, inflame us with desires to be born again, and may we read in thy
Incarnation, the true model of our own Regeneration. Look down upon us thy
unworthy Creatures, from thy Throne of Glory: Teach us thy Love, but such a
Love, as does fear to offend thee; teach us thy Fear, but such a Fear as first
does love thee; And endue us with thy Grace, whilst by thy Permission we walk
on this Globe which thy blessed Feet have trodden, to Solemnize this Day of thy
Nativity, not with vain Delights or wanton Jollities, but with Hymns of Joy,
and Meditations of like Comfort.

A Hymn for CHRISTMAS.
HAil sacred Tide.
Wherein a Bride:
A Virgin which is more,
Brought forth a Son
The like was done
Never in the World before.
Let none upbraid
This Blessed maid
Nor yet to her Address,
Worship which She
Must blush to see,
And modestly wish Less,
Her womb most Chaste
Nine Months embraced
Him whom nor Earth nor Air
Nor the vast mould
Of Heaven, can hold;
Cause he is Ubiquitair.
Oh! would he Daign
To come and Reign,
In The center of my heart
And make it still
His Domicil,
And residence in part.
But in s^ foul a Cell
Can he abide to dwell?
Yes, when he please to move,
His Harbingers to sweep the Room,
And with rich Odors it perfume,
Of Faith, of Hope and Love.
FINIS.

