FORTVNES LOTTERY: OR, A Book of News worth the hearing.

Containing many pretty passages concerning the times which will prove to be
delightful to the Readers, pleasant to the Hearer, comfortable to the Buyer,
profitable to the Seller, and hurtful to no man.

Whereunto is added a most excellent Song, showing how a noble Ship of
Bristoll, called the Angel Gabriell* fought against three of Spains great
Ships, and overmastered them all, to the honor and credit of England.

Written by Laurence Paice.

London, Printed for Thomas Vere at the Angel without Newgate. 1657.

To the Readers, Hearers, and Buyers.
All those that do desire to look,
And understand this new made Book;
They shall be sure forthwith to find,
Some rare conceit to please the mind;
The rich, the poor, the young and old,
May herein have his fortune told,
Ripe witted, and the simple sots,
May for their fortunes, here draw lots,
Then come my customers draw and buy,
This Book of Fortunes Lottery.
The first Lot.
IF there be any young Gallant that has spent and wasted his Patrimony on
Gaming, Whoring and drunkenness, and knows not how to live in ye World, If he
desire to be made rich on a sudden, let him take up his Tools and make have
to ye Spanish Mines, where he shall have Gold and Silver for the gathering up
if they speed well, and have made a good voyage* he shall be made welcome to
all his old Friends and acquaintance, but if he come home poor, his Lot will
be to be no more regarded then a Dog.

Lot, 2. If there be any married man yt loves his maidservant better then he
loves his wife let him do as others have done before him, which is to kiss
freely. and fumble til she be with child, and then his Lot will be to pay for a
Nurse and a cradle, and to keep a Child that peradventure another man got.

Lot. 3. If there be any rich Farmers, or Grasters, yt have more store of money
then he well knows well how to use* let him make his case (...) to some of the
Common Lavrs of the Common Garden as some have dote of late, and his lot wi^ be
to have whores-flesh enough for his money, and perchance get a Wincheser Goose
into the bargain.

Lot. 5. Or if there be any yt are loath to venture their lives as to go so
far as ye Spanish Mines, there is a new silver Mine called little Jamaica,
lately found in Lea-Leather-lane near Grays Inn in London where they may have
money ready coin^ for the taking up if they can dig deep enough, but I would
wish them to make have, lest it be al gone before they come for then their lot
will be to loose their labors.

Lot. 5 If there be any one of Vulcan's sons ye desires to come acquainted with
a dainty School Mistress yt can teach him his lesson hansomely, let him march
forward and follow his nose till he come near to Purpoole lane, and there he
shall find a Nymph of Venus train that will fit him to a hair, but it is thought
that there was one blacksmith knocking to get in at her. Alley-gate; every
night in the week for a long time together, but if Mars the God of War light
upon them whilst they are in conjunction, Vulcans lot will be to live a Cripple
and die a Cuckold.

Lot, 6. If there be any that desire to learn ye art of fishing, let them
repair to Moore lane, where they may with much ease find there kind-hearted
honest men, which have lately learned, and dearly paid for their experience
therein, and now are able to teach others to lay the like baits, which must be,
Shoes, Stockings, Boots; and Breeches, and then if they do not curse their
Lot may be caught Fish without nets, and one without a Cloak.

Lot. 7 If there be any new married man that loves to keep the good will of his
Wife, let him be sure to give her her own way in every thing she goes about,
and let her lie a bed long in a morning, and let him make her a good fire
against her uprising, then let him set a good tossed to the fire and send for a
cup of nappy Ale to steel her nose before she goes forth out of doors; and
his lot will be to have much love and content all the day after, if his wife
do not come home drunk at night.

Lot. 8. If any man that has a long time been married, and is troubled with a
scolding wife; let him buy her a new Hat and Gown, Taffety Scarf, silk Aporn,
fine Hose and Shoes, give her money in her pocket to go a gossiping, and be
sure to give her all that she should have, and all yt she would have, and his
lot will be to have quietness so long as he is able to maintain her so bravely,
but when all is gone, she will scold as fast as ever she did before.

Lot. 9. If any man be troubled with a fighting Wife and dares not to stand her
fury, let him follow his work dilligently, lay out his money carefully, look
to his business warily, and please her humors gallantly, besides all this he
must do nothing ^ut what she commands him to do, nor spend one penny more
then she alows him to do, and then his Lot will be to save his bones from
being broken, and his eyes from being scratcht out.

Lot. 10. If any man be troubled with a drunken Wife, let him see to the house
himself, let him make ready his victuals himself, let him look to his
children himself, and let him be sure to keep al things out of her way that
will yield a penny, for fear she sell it or pawn it for Ale, whether it be
Brass or Pewter dishes, or spoons, or any thing else she can come at, for as
the proverb goes, how that he which has a drunken Wife must hire a Porter to
lead her home, and his lot will be to be a very poor man.

Lot. 11. Or if there be any honest woman that has gotten a knave to her Has
hand, and yt she cannot keep him at home with her at night for running into
bawdy Houses* let her make her mind known to James Naylor the Sowgelder, and
for a six penny piece she may have his stones cut out, and after that her lot
will be to have him all to her self.

Lot. 12. If there be any pretly Maid with Child, and cannot tell whether to go
to find a Father for it, let her put her head into a black bag that she may not
be known who she is, and withal let her put some old Taffety Scarce about her
neck which she may buy at the second hand for two groats, and let her be sure
to put good store of poor whores lace upon her headdressings, and take a few
shining Counters in her pocket, and then let her walk down into the Country,
and her lot will be to be taken for a pretty Lady, and she shall quickly get
her a Husband amongst the Tuskins, for you know that hungry dogs will eat dirty
puddings.

13. If there be any rich Usurer that has gotten a great estate of Land, and
money by greedy Extortion, and grinding the faces of the poor. If this said Rich
man have a young prodigal to his Son, let him make his Son master of al his
substance, and he shall make a shift to spend it ten tims faster then his father
got it, For we see by experience that evil gotten goods will wast like butter
against the Sun. And that which is gotten over ye Devils back, will be lost
under his belly; and the Father of such a Son shall have a Lot to work for his
living, or beg for his living, if he lives to be old.

Lot. 14. If there be any spightfull men or women, that loves to go to Law
with their Neighbors, although they know no cause why, nor have no ground for
what they go upon If they have no money, let them sell their Household Stuff,
and their cloths from their backs, rather then want of their wills: And that is
the ready way to make the Lawyers rich, and your selves poor, and your Lot will
be to hear your Children cry for bread, when you have none to give them.

Lot. 15. If there be any Ale-wife that wants customers, let her keep good
drink, make good measure, and trust all yt comes, and her lot will be so, that
her customers will never forsake her, so long as she is worth a groat.

Lot. 16. If there be any troublesome Knave in the Parish, which will never let
his Neighbors live at quiet, for harkning after tales and lies in one place and
carrying them to another, making strife where soever he goes or comes, I wo^ld
have such a fellow to be taken first, and thrown into a house of Office, then
to be taken out again, and washed at a Pump til he be sweet and clean, and so
let him pass for the first fault.

If in case he be taken the second time: then to be put in the Pillory, and
boared through the tongue with a hot Iron, as James Naylor was served: if all
this will not serve turn, but that he is taken playing the knave ye third time
then there is no way but one, for it is very like that Squire Dun the Hangmans
lot will be to have his cloths at the last.

Lot. 17 If there be any man in the City or Country, that has got a civil
modest, laborious, virtuous, chaste, and wise woman to his wife, let him love.
comfort and cherish her both by day and by night, and according to his abillity
let him maintain her: and let her not want for comely habit, wholesome fare*
hansome house-room, decent lodging, or any thing else that is convenient for
her. And then will the lot of that Husband and that wife, be to see many
joyful days together.

And thus my dear beloved Friends,
My book of Fortunes Lottery ends,
Let all the heare^s which are nigh,
Draw forth their mony^ for to buy:
And you shall hear a noble Song.
Which to the Seamen does belong.


The tune is, Our Noble King in his Progress.
ATtend you, and give ear a while,
and you shall understand:
Of a battle fought upon the Sea,
by a ship of brave command.
The fight it was so famous,
that all men's hearts does fill,
And makes them cry to Sea,
with the Angel Gabriel.
The lusty ship of Bristoll,
sailed out adventorusly,
Against the Foes of England,
their strength with them to try.
Well victual'd, Rig'd, and Manned,
and good provision still,
Which makes men cry to Sea,
with the Angel Gabriel.
The Captain famous Netheway
so was he called by name.
The Masters name John Mines
a man of noted Fame:
The Gunner Thomas Watson
a Man of perfect skill,
With other valiant hearts,
in the Angel Gabriel.
They waving up and down the Seeas
upon the Ocean Main,
It is not long ago quoth they,
since England fought with Spain.
Would we with them might meet,
our minds for to fulfuill.
We would play a noble bout,
with our Angel Gabriel
They had no sooner spoken,
but straight apear'd in sight,
Th^^e lusty Spanish Vessels,
of warlike force and might;
With bloody resolution,
they sought our men to spill,
And vowed to make a prize
of our Angel Gabriel.
Then first came up their Admiral
themselves for to advance,
In her she bore full forty eight,
pieces of Ordinance.
The next that then came near us,
was their Vice Admiral.
Which shot most furiously,
at our Angel Gabriel
Our gallant ship had in her,
full forty fighting men,
With twenty pieces of Ordinance,
we played about them then.
And with powder, shot, and bullets,
we did employ them still;
And thus began the fight
with our Angel Gabriel,
Our Captain to our Master said,
take courage Master bold;
The Master to the Seamen said,
stand fast my hearts of gold.
The Gunner unto all the rest,
brave hearts be valiant still,
Let us fight in the defense,
of the Angel Gabriel.
Then we gave them a broad side,
which shot their Mast asunder,
And tore the Bowspret of their ship,
which made the Spaniards wonder,
And caused them for to cry
with voices loud and shrill,
Help, help, or else we sink
By the Angel Gabriel.
Yet desperately they boarded us,
for all our valiant shot,
Threescore of their best fighting men,
upon our Decks were got:
And then at their first entrance,
full thirty we did kill,
And thus we cleared the Decks.
of the Angel Gabriel.
With that their three Ships boarded us,
again with might and main,
But still our noble Englishmen,
cried out a fig for Spain,
Though seven times they boarded us
at last we showed our skill:
And made them feel the force,
of the Angel Gabriel.
even hours this fight continued:
and many brave men lay dead,
With purple gore, and Spanish blood,
the Sea was colored red,
Five hundred of their men,
we the^e outright did kill,
And many more were maimed
by the Angel Gabriel.
They seeing of these bloody spoils,
the rest made have away,
For why? they saw it was no boot,
longer for to stay.
Then they fled unto Cales,
and there they must lie still.
For they never more will serve
to meet our Gabriel.
We had within our English ship,
but only three men slain.
And five men hurt, the which I hope,
will soon be well again,
At Bristoll we were landed,
then let us praise God still
That thus has blessed our men,
and our Angel Gabriel.
Now let me not forget to speak
of the gift given by the owner,
Of the Angel Gabriel.
that many years have known her:
Two hundred pounds in coin and plate
he gave with free good will,
Unto them that bravely fought,
in the Angel Gabriel.
FINIS.

