A PARADOX Against LIFE.

Written By the LORDS in the TOWER.

An Heroic Poem.

-- Beatus
Ante Obitum Nemo --
LONDON, Printed for James Vade at the Cock and Sugar Loaf in Fleet Street,
1681.

A Paradox against LIFE.
WHen GOD the Mighty Mass of Matter Made,
As yet, no Light nor Form, the Chaos had.
Darkness sole Monarch was Below, the Mass
Looked all Confused, and with an Ethiop's Face.
'Till the Almighty Fiat called forth Light,
From the Black Womb of yet Eternal Night.
Light, without which, the World had never been seen,
Nor good, could e're the Six-Days Work, have been.
The living Stream was not to Pipes Conveyed,
But in the pure Eternal Fountain, staid.
'Twas near the End of the Creation grown,
Before Life (Now the Unhappy Thing) was known.
When God, the Gift First to the Fish, was given,
For the Great Whale, was the Firstborn of Heaven.
Man though the First, in Order was the Last,
That from his Maker, did this Bounty Taste.
Too Sweet alas, to be a Long Repast!
His Short-lived Glory, but fore-run his Shame,
And Paradise did seem a Vanished Dream.
How short a time, Poor Wretch! thy Bliss did last,
Thy Brighter Morn, was in its Rise Ore-cast.
O Fatal Ill! Which Mankind may bemoan,
All Edens Fruits were freely Given, save One.
But things Unlawful most Affected be,
And Evab Longed for the Forbidden Tree.
What Restless Passions Rackt the Doubtful Mind*
Who by Free Will to Eat, were quickly pined,
And a Plague, worse than Famine, left their Kind.
The passive Mind, was by Enflamed Desire,
To the New Fabrick's ruin, set on Fire.
Vain and insatiat Appetite and Lust,
Have brought him Back more Low, than to the Dust.
The World's First-Great-Recorder, does Relate,
Of Wretched Man, the Miserable State.
Who following Sense, against Reason did Rebel,
And Traytor-like, from All his Glories Fell.
Whilst in a State of Innocence He stood,
No Fear made Beasts seek Shelter in the Wood.
Nor did the Birds, with hasty Wings take Flight;
All Hovered Round, and Wondered at the Sight.
But when He Fell, How Visible Sin was,
That Birds and Beasts could Read it in His Face?
With various have, the afrighted Croud's Repair,
Some to the Woods, some to remoter Air,
Thus when a Prince turns Traitor to the Laws,
His Loyal Subjects do decline his Cause.
Ah Curiousness! First Cause of all Our Ill,
And yet the Plague, which does Infect us still.
Now look no more for Rest, for Toil thou must,
Till whence First come, thou be brought back to Dust.
The Breath which Blessed his Heaven-Stampt-Dust, is now,
That which the Subject makes him of all Woe,
And rowles the troubled Bubble too and froe.
What does Man's Life, when most Serene afford?
It Is but a Worm that gnaws the fairest Gourd.
Our Days of Gladness are but short Reliefs,
Given to reserve us for enduring Griefs.
Poor Span of wretched Earth! If measured by
The tedious Reign of Life's Calamity,
Though thus Contracted, still thou may Complain,
That yet too much of Patriarch does remain.
If in Long Life, there may a Blessing be,
'Twas only known in the World's Infancy.
Man then, a Stag or Raven, could survive,
But we can scarce with Bats or Swallows Live.
We spend the Summer of Our Days, as They,
To rear a pile of Dirt, and so away.
The Sap of Life now to the Root is sunk,
And the Hydropick Earth the Juice has drunk.
If Life's Meanders to the Spring we trace,
It rises Troubled, and in Storms does pass.
The impetuous Torrent, swelling we shall find,
Like Tides born up, by a strong Western Wind,
Mouldring the Bancks, in which it is Confined.
It dwells in Blood, and is the Tide of Fate,
And does in Cares and Sorrows Circulate.
In secret Channels, through the grosser Mass,
That Small-Red-Sea, pursuing Life does pass.
But no where Rests, no Place affords Ease,
To this poor Man's uncurable Disease;
A breath soon gone, made up of Sighs and Groans,
The unhappy Ligament of Flesh and Bones.
From dull Privation, and lean Emptiness,
A Quintescence derived from Nothingness.
The false and gaudy Colors of the Bow,
May boast as much reallity, as Thou:
Iris may be thy Rival in each part,
Who but the Dream of a faint Shadow art.
Sun, Water, Earth, the Elements in One,
Do Club alike, for your Production.
Both, as the Smoke do vanish, and Our Breath,
Serves only to bear up the Wings of Death.
A busy noisy thing, that do Express,
But hollow joy, and real Emptiness.
Almost each Circumstance of Life declares,
How flat Man's Joys are, and how sharp his Cares.
A Glowe-worms fainter Light, that shines in vain,
Extinguished by the least of Cynthias Train.
Isthmu's of Earth! That do so proudly rise,
And thrust thy self, 'twixt two Eternities.
That do in pain, the shock of time, sustain,
And washed away, art swallowed in the Main.
This vast Triangle, this most Huge small thing
Which all the World within it self can bring,
Life's quaking Center, still first Quick, last Killed,
Like to some vast Abyss can never be filled.
It still is pined, and does complain for Rest,
By its continual beating in our Breast.
Mysterious Riddle, which the Grave does Read,
We cannot be truly said to Live, 'till Dead!
We to a Foreign Country Natives are,
And must by Pain and Travel, enter there,
'Till once Arrived, where we should daily tend,
Cares painful Progress, cannot have an End.
Our being from Above, does let us Know,
We Are in Antipathy to things below.
And all our Ayery Joys do Anguish bring;
They want the Honey, but retain the Sting.
Yet hug Our selves, in hopes that Life will grant,
Some good, of which we still are Ignorant.
This Lesser World, in which we so much Trust,
What is it, but a Wind enclosed in Dust?
A World in which, War never yet did Cease,
For still Intestine Foes disturb its Peace.
Unkinder Nature to a State of War,
Designs us, though we most Defenseless are.
Man's Life's a Warfare, and we are pressed upon
A most unequal Combat, Three to One.
But the brave Victor reaps a Glorious Crown.
The wretched Creature Man's no sooner Born,
But with Good-Morrows, we Salute his Morn.
Though in a rugged and a narrow way,
The Pilgrim's bound to Travel out his Day.
But to his Inn, when he does Safe Arrive,
Although his Night of Rest be come, We Grieve.
With Joy we see him Launch into the Storm,
But when he reaches the Calm Port, we Mourn.
What a Prepostr'ous Kindness do we show,
Paying Our Joy to the Object of all Woe?
By the Reverse, the Spartans do Express
Their Joy and Sorrow in an Apter Dress.
Man at his Birth, instructs us for to Cry,
Complaining strait of Life's great Injury,
And does Himself Weep his own Obsequie.
His Births Portentous, and He falls upon,
An Ominous Precipitation.
The Lump of Earth is Kneaded up of Ill,
Swelling and Fainting, though he goes Down-Hill.
What are those Joys, that He can call his own,
That make the bitter Draught of Life, go down?
Life's the great Hinge, on which uneasy Man,
Does turn in Pain and never quiet Hang.
Life, which from Worldly Care, Contracts each Day,
A Rust, which Eats our Polish't joys away.
Life is a strange and Fatal Energy,
Which does employ Our Sense in Misery.
It winds the Curious Clock-Work up, and strait,
To make it go, hangs on a Heavy Wait.
The Crystal Spheres, the Lanthorns of Our Sight,
(Whether by drawing or dispersing Light)
The general Spies, that every thing do mark,
Of all the Lesser World the brightest Spark;
Which straight, when closed, does make the Great seem Dark:
Did of Chief Pleasures, once the Center prove,
Both from the World Below, and that Above.
Suns of the Senses, Mirrors of the Mind,
Twin-Orbs of Light, which once so Brightly shined,
The Windows of the Man, 'till Sight does fail,
Clear as the Chrystals, and as Chrystals frail;
Being perverted from their Use, at first,
Are turned to Stars of Pride, and Flames of Lust.
By These, as Doors, all Mischiefs enter in,
The Baits, the Panders and the Gates of Sin.
These Living Lab'rynths, entertaining Sounds,
Which bring the Stuff, on which the Judgment Grounds.
As ready Porters at Attendance sit,
And whatsoever strikes, do straight Admit.
These often with Pleasure, smooth Afflicting Care,
Whilst some Harmonious Sound does Charm the Air.
Yet like some Strumpet that is grown Dissolute,
Are to the most Obscene, a Prostitute.
Whilst strong Desires, faint Goodness do Control,
And Circes-like, pour Poison in the Soul.
By the strange Charms of a Seducing Tongue,
Are Tempted, and Corrupted, unto Wrong.
Sin makes Attaques still on the Weaker Parts,
And by our Eyes and Ears, does Storm our Hearts.
These are the Mines, which first blow up the Mind,
To Lust, Ambition, Sins of every kind,
Which all our Strength by Treaty do betray,
Against Sense and Reasons Charge, a Guard-less way.
In The Ear and Eye, Satan in Ambush lay.
These Potent-Entries, can hold nothing out,
But give each Minute grounds for Fear or Doubt.
Impregnable had this Frail-Fort of Dust
Been against all the Batteries of Lust,
Had not his Senses wrought his overthrow,
By holding Correspondence with the Foe.
Besiegers quickly may the Castle Win,
If they Corrupt the Sentinels Within.
Unhappy Man! Whose Life's sublimest Bliss,
In the Enjoyment but his Ruin is!
Yet Spaniel-natur'd, though he is Beaten so,
The Rod he Kisses, and in Love does grow,
With the Enchanting Sirens of his VVo.
Go ask the Tortured Wretch upon the Rack,
When his strong Joints and Nerv's, with Anguish Crack,
How it is he Knows he suffers so much Pain?
He Will Cry, He Feels it, and of Life complain.
Life is by her own Cruelty undone;
For Sense no longer Feels, than Life lays on.
She Chains the Slave to the Gallie, bids him Row,
Which he must do, 'cause Life will have it so.
Let us no more against the Turks Exclaim,
This prouder Sultan must endure the Blame.
She puts us to a Vast Expense, we pay
All that we Have, Each Moment, for her Stay.
And must at Every Turn, be waited on;
For if Neglected, the shye Guest is gone.
BEHOLD the greatest Man of all the East,
Who was (if Riches make Man so) most Blessed!
The Dying Swan in a Melodious Strain,
For all His Patience, does of Life complain.
His Comforters were such, they brought far more
Sorrow, than all his Messengers before.
From Death alone He does expect His Cure;
Death, that is the last of Remedies, and Sure.
Death whose Officious Hand, Binds up the Sore,
Which with a Pot-sherd he had Prob'd before.
(...) The Friendly Porter, who Unlocks the Gate,
And bids the Lazer now, no longer Wait.
Death that does Wing him, for's Eternal Home,
And bids him Fly, quick as his Thoughts have done.
Both by the Separation now will Gain,
One, Bliss; the Other, Freedom from All Pain.
Then the Souls Knowledge, which before alone,
Was at the best but Speculation.
Will be reduced to a Certainty,
What now She Knows by Hearsay, then She Will See.
As Travelers best Know, if Fame speak True,
When they in Foreign Lands the Wonder View.
She recollects Her Faculties, Diffused
Amid'st Frail Flesh, no more to be Abused.
Then parts in Triumph, freed from Earthly Toils,
Yet Stays to'th' last, to gather up Her Spoils.
WHY are We holden in this sad Suspense?
Death's the great'st Blessing, that You can Dispense.
The Cruel Catt thus Dallies with her Prey,
Sporting awhile with what she makes Away.
Make have, lest Nature should Anticipate,
The Glorious Work that is designed for Fate.
We, like to Codrus, would even Death Embrace,
If for Our Country's Good, and Public Peace.
To the Innocent, to Dye's an Easy Thing,
Death does in the dread'st Accost, no Terror bring.
An Ax no more our Spirits can Command,
Than can a Phleghm in the Physicians Hand.
Death in its self, is but a Harmless Thing,
It Is Apprehention Contributes the Sting.
And since a Debt to Nature we do own,
Better on Scaffolds paid, than Beds of Down.
Those Lords of Fortune, sweeten every State,
Who can Command Themselves, though not their Fate.
Thy Rod, Affliction, is to us most Dear,
Who lays it on, will give us Strength to bear.
The storms of Fate, we bravely can defy,
Whilst on the Rock of Ages we rely.
And missing but the false World's Glories, do,
Miss all the Ills which do Attend it, Too.
Here, from Court-Ryots, we secured are;
From Cheats of Marts, and Clamors of the Bar:
And from the Pulpit; A Worse Mischief far!
What great Perfections can those Parsons Reach,
Who far from Practice, only strive to Preach?
Who Learn their Science, as an Art to Gain;
And wanting Salt, would Season Souls in Vain.
Who to Buy Earth, do Sell out shares of Heaven,
And drive a Trade, with what is freely Given.
Vile Avarice, and Pride! From Heaven Accursed,
In all Men Bad, but in a Churchman Worst!
That King, who was for Wisdom most Approved,
Whose Mind and Fortune in like Measure moved.
Reached to those Heights of Bliss, that Earth could Breed,
Whilst Wealth and Honor strived, which should Exceed.
Even He was Crossed Alive, and Scorned when Dead,
By Life's great Happiness, unhappy Made.
Of Senceless Honor, we Renounce the Care,
The First Man he was Made, the rest Born Bare.
These Floating Treasures come and go with Breath,
And nothing have to give so good as Death.
Honor and Wealth, Ambitions Twins, with Pains
Are bred, which Man with Torturing Care, Maintains.
Only the Prickles in Possession stay,
When these Gay Roses Fade and Fall away.
We can without a Paradox, Believe,
Though still Confined, we do in Freedom Live.
And when the Audit of our Days is come,
And all our Items in one Total Sum,
The Cheerfulness with which, to Death we will go,
A Dying Proof shall of this Poem show.
FINIS.

