BLOODY ACTIONS PERFORMED.

OR, A brief and true Relation of three Notorious Murders, committed by three
Bloodthirsty men, 2. upon their own Wives.

The one was done in the County of Kent, in the Isle of Tenet, December. last.

The other was done at Islington, near unto London, this present year, 1653.

The third was done upon a Major in Coven-Garden near London.

Arthur Knight and Thomas Laret was executed, March 2. 1653.

This Copy was drawn up on purpose to give the world satisfaction, whereby to
know in what manner the murders was committed: Being the very truth, and no
more but the truth.

Printed for W. Gilbertson, at the sign of the Bible in Gilt-spur-street,
without Newgate, 1653.

A Note of the Names of those that were hanged.
HEnry Atkinson for picking a pocket of three shillings. Thomas Morral for
several burglaries. Richard Dove, and John Cony for Robbing the Norwich Post.
William Silver for burglary. Thomas Hanscombe for burglary. Rob^rt Woodstock
for burglary, Robert Keys for wives and Linen. Silvester Stanbridge for
Robbing a Majors house near VVatford, and for other burglaries.

To the Readers and Hearers.
THat Conscience is fled, and Promises broken, is a thing that is too well
known in these our froward and distracted times, as it may appear by these
three unhumane Murderers, which made slaughter of their Lawful wedded Wives.

The manner whereof shall directly be here Related, to the end that all
Desperate, Dangerous, and Hasty spirited Men may take a special care by these
Examples, that through the Temptations of the Devil, they fall not into the
like relapse.

So with my Prayers to Almighty God for all Men that will endeavor to serve
the Lord, and keep the Fear of God before their Eyes,

I remain your Friend, Laurence Price. and so go forward with my woeful
Discourse.

Here follows a brief and true Relation of one Master Spralling an Esquire,
who lived in KENT.
THE World is come to such a pass, that many men make it their common practice
and daily pastime to run headlong into the pitfall of mischief: some delights
in swearing, some in whoreing, some in drunkenness. some into o^e si^^e, (...)
some into others: and some there be that are become so bloody minded, that they
make no more conscience to kill a Neighbor, a Brother, or a wife, then they do
to kill a dumb Beast or a Dog: As this sad ^xample makes manifest.

How that in the County of Kent in the Isle of Tenet, in the Parrish which is
called the Town of Saint Lawrance: there lived a welthy Esquire called-Master
Spratling by name, who delighted much in keeping of Dogs for his pleasure.

And as it is supposed, be loved his Dogs better then he loved his wife: and
many times would wrangle and fall out about his Dogs, who in his rage and fury,
there was none that could pacify his wrath so well as his wife could do.

One night amongst the rest, being Saturday at night, December last 11. 1653.
This Master Spratling came home in a madding rage, and finding so much fault
about his dogs, that no one could tell how to qualify his anger, in so much,
that he made them all afraid that came near him: at last his loving wise, with
kind peswastons, came unto him and desired of him that he would be pleased to
pray unto the Lord, and call upon him for mercy, and that he would forbear to
swear and to curse; whereby he offended his Maker, and wronged his own soul.

But the more she sought to persuade him the worse he was, so swearing and
calling his wife many ill names: said that he would be her butcher before the
morrow morning: and there withal charged his man that was then present witch
them, to keep his wife in hold till he went forth to unloose a point and came
to them again: for said he to his man, if thou let her go, I will presenily be
the death of thee

The young man fearing what his Master would do to him if he let his Mistress
go, kept her in the room where she was, til such time that his Master had bin
forth and come in again, and this is the truth of the matter that he brought a
Cord and a Cleaver with him, and so he bound his man hands and feet and cast
him unon the ground.

His Wife seeing that, ran speedily to the Door, and laying her hand on the
Latch, thought to get out of the Room and escape away, but he quickly stopped her
pas^age, and with his Cleaver gave her such a Chop, that he had almost cut off
her hand at the first blow. whereat his wife with much patience spoke to him
and gave him never a bad word, but praid him that he would be so good as to let
her fetch a Surgeon to cure Her Wound and all things should be well: No said
he, (...) can cure you my self; And with that word he gave her such a terrible
stroke with the Cleaver, that be clove her head asunder; when he bad cut her,
and mortifyed her, that the like was never seen, and that her blood ran all
about the Room: he took a Vessel which he had, and laded up the Blood of his
Wife, and put it in the Vessel. After that he went into another Room where
his Dogs were, who when they had smelt the sent of the blood, they fell a
bawling and barking at him in a most wondrous sort, as if they had been
sensible of the Barbarous murder which he had done to his wife.

But to make short dispatch, he killed all his Dogs, and threw the Carkase of his
dead Wife amongst his dead Dogs: then he took his Dogs blould and mingled it
with his Wifes blood, and went to the young man which lay bound, and washed his
face and his own hands in the blood, and sprinkled blood upon the walls, and
upon every thing that was in the Room: when he had so done, he unbound his
Man, and told him that he had given him his life.

Last of all, he took his Cleaver in one hand a Pistol charged, and so stood
on his Guard all day on Sunday, till such time that the Deputy of the Island
came and disarmed him, and brought him to Sandw^tch Prison, where he now
remameth: His Daug^ter and other Servants which were in the House where he
murdered his Wife, had o^kt up themselves in another Room, and by that means
they savd their Lives through Gods Mercy.

Now since Master Spratling has been in the Prison in Sandwitch Goal some
certain people that are of his acquaintance, have been to talk and discourse
with him: where as one asking him whether he was not sorry for that he had so
bloudily murdered his Wife; He answered, that if it were to do again he
would do it: and all that he was sorry for, was because he had killed no more of
them.

The Lord in mercy grant that all Men that goes by the name of Christians, may
behave themselves as Christans often to do, so that they may not take delight in
spilling innocent blood,

AMEN.

Here follows another bloody Example, which is full as bad or worse then that
which was done in KENT.
IN the Parrish of Islington near unto London there dwelt a man whose name was
Thomas^ Laret a Carpenter by Trade, he having married a ^ise which was known to
be a very honest woman, and one that labored and took great pains for her
living, and oftertimes would put the money in his hand that she got about at
good men's Houses by scowring, and washing and such like labors, yet he vild
wretch would beat her, and kick her, and pinch her, and beat her with his fists
about the head, so that many times when he came home in his divellish fits, he
would beat her with Staff, or Club, or any thing the that came next to his
hand, till he had made her all of a gore blood.

His commen course of life was to domineer and vapor in all houses to Swagger,
drink, roar and fight, and would curse and swear, as if be would tear down
the Heavens, and when he had brought himself out of quiet, he would come home
and abuse his poor Wife in such a horrible manner, shat it would make a cender
heart to bleed, to think of the Torments that the poor Creature ^dures: and
although that many times his honest Neighbors would, and did gently and meekly
chide him, and give good Counsel, he would swear and curse at them, and deal
the worse with her: Saying, if he cripled her, he must keep her, if he killed
her, he must be hang^d for her: with these and many such unreasonable
unseasonable answers, he would send them packing.

But now behold what after came to pass? the poor woman which is here spoken
off, having been amongst some of her friends, and received some small parsell
of money for work which she had done, and hoping to please her froward Husband,
she bought a Sheeps head to make him some Pottage against he came home but all
that she did or could do, could not prebaile, for he having been amongst same
of his back Companions, came home in a desperrts rage, idtending to kill his
wife, and taking a Stool in his hand, he struck her on the head till she fell
to the ground: then drawing forth a Tool out of his Case, which was like unto
a Knife, he stabbed and gave her many deadly wouds, whilst she cried out in this
mournful manner, saying, good Husband do not kill me, I pray you spare my
life, even for the Lords sake, consider dear Husband that I am with Child, and
not above six weeks to go of my time, and therefore I pray you if you will
not spare me for my ore sake, yet spare me for your Childs sake which is in my
womb, yet nothing could move the merciless Villain to remorse, he never left
stabing and striking till he had wounded her to death: one of the Neighbors
that dwelt next to the place stood at the window whilst he was beating his
wife, and hearing her make a pitiful moan, durst not go into the house, but
called to him as she stood and bad him not to kill his wise, but he gave her
such a villainous answer which made her run away for fear he should kill her
also.

A his was done on wednesday morning, Ianua^y 12. the next morning he went to
buy her a Coffin, thinking to bury his Wife with speed, and so to color the
matter that his Villainy should not be known: But before he could bring the
business to pass, he was by means of the Wom^n that heard her cry, and
another of the Nesghbors taken and brough before the Justice of the Peace.

And being examined the was by the Cvidence found guilty and was sent by Order
of Law unto Newgate Prison, there to remain till the next Sessions: For its
thought that others that had a hand in the murdering of the Woman shall then
come to try all with him.

And now to conclude, the Woman that was murdered had above thirty grievous
wounds and stobs in her B^y, some in the Head, and Neck some in the ^ides, and
under the Arm pits some throug the Bowe^s, and Secret part. The like Villa^ous
Act, all them that saw it, said that they never saw the like before.

That this is true, there need no further witness, for there went more then a
thousand people out of London to behold the Corpse of the murdered Woman before
she was buried. The Lord send all honest Women better Husbands.

Thus have I laid open to the view of the world, such matters of Murder, that
if it were not too well known to be true, and that it was done so near at hand
it would never be believed.

It is said that since the time was limited, that every one might use their own
conscience, that it is lawful for every one to do as they list: but those
things are contrary carried: for all though there be liberty of Conscience
allowed in some matters, there is no liberty allowed to do Murder.

And although the Devil has taught his Deciples such a Lesson that they care
not who they kill, yet Gods word says plainly, thou shall do no murder.

And now and would have all wilful and desperate men and women to fear God
and take heed what they do. For if a man have the Conscience to kill his wife:
or if a woman have no more conscience but to kill her Husband, the Law will
proceed against them: and whosoever kills his Wife shall be hanged for his
wife: and although these two vile VVr^ches have not as yet had their full
trial. yet certainly they are kept fast in Prison till such time that their
trial is to be acted, and then no doubt but they shall be sure to have their
desert: and it is verily supposed that one-of them, if not both is to be hanged
in Chains, God give them grace to call for Mercy, and to repent them of their
evil Actions.

And now to draw to a concluston, I leave it to the discretion of all
conscientious people to judge of the matter, whether it be fitting for any man
to go abroad and make himself drunk amongst evil and perverse companions,
and afterward come home in an antic humor and call his wife whore and bi^ch,
to swear and to curse, to kick and to spurn, to cut, strike or stab his
harmless wife, as it is known that Thomas Laret did oftentimes do.

It is written in the second Chapter of the Book of Genesis, that a man for
that cause shall forsake both his Father and Mother, and all other Friends and
Kindred and cleave to his wife, and they two shall be one flesh, Genesis 2.23, 24.

I hope there is no man nor woman that is called by the name and title of a
Christian, so wicked as to think the word of God not to be true: moroo^er, if
we believe Gods Word to be true, that a man and his wife when they are married
together are termed to be both one flesh: what man will be so wicked as to
strike, and beat, and ban, and curse his own flesh which is his lawful and
absolute wife: again, what woman, if she beliedes in God will go about to wrong
her Husband, and to be an offense to him whom she often to be a helper, Genesis 3.

But this which is here set down is printed to the end for Men and Women not
only to hear it and look upon, but also to consider of, and to conclude with
the old Proverb, hap are they that can take warning by other folks harms.

Thomas Laret for murther^ of his wife was a judgd to be hanged on a gibbet at
Islington near unto the place wherere he did the murder.

Here follows another bloody murder committed on the body of Mayor Furnifall
a gentleman of good rank and quality
A worthy gentleman of good account called by the name of Mayor Furnifall which
had formerly been a Commander in the wars, in which time he behaved himself so
well, that he gaind the love of all sorts of people, as wellin the City as the
Country, and wheresoever he came be had a diligent care that his soldiers
should do no wrong: yet we may see that the best of us all can no ways prevent
danger: but by heavenly providence, as may appear by this gentleman here
spoken of, for one day he having been merry with some of his friends, his
chance was to light on two of his mortal enemies, being brothers in wickedness
for they met with Mayor Furnifall, saluted him so they betrayed him with saying,
God save you noble sir, and after their false friendship, they desired his
company to drink a cup of Wine or Beer: which Mayor Furnifall consented unto
so they went all three together into a Cooks house to drink, which house is in
Russel Street in Coven-Garden next unto the rose Tavern, the Cook and his Wife
are known to be very honest people, and have the good will and love of all
their neighbors, the name of the Cook is Edward Bowers: the two brothers which
are here spoken of, one of their names was Arthor Knight, and the other his his
name was Thomas Knight, they having gotten the Mayor in a room alone, without
any one to ^d or assist him, Thomas Knight held fast the Chamber door whilst
his brother Arthor Knight in a most bloody manner full upon the Mayor and
wounded him with his knife, stabd him in several places, cu^ h^^ nose in a
most grievous manner, and hauling of him down stamp upon with his feet till he
left him for almost dead, which having done, took the money out of his pocket
and so run forth into the street swe^ring god d^mme, that now they were
thoroughly revenged, the Cook when he saw what was done, followed after them
thinking to have staid them, Arthur Knight began to draw his Sword, and swoore
he would do^ as much to him, whereupon the Cook manfully ran to him and took a
Weapon, and by that means he escaped with life, so the Cooks wife being a good
spiririted woman, ventured her life in her Husbands behalf, and held one of
the Brothers or else her husband might have lost his life. But to conclude the
Gentleman dyed with the wounds and bruses which they had given him, one of the
Brothers is fled and gone, the other by order of Law condemnd to dye, and to be
hang^d upon a Gibbet near unto the place where the Murder was committed: God
in his mercy give all men grace to take heed what company they come into, for
in these times a man can hardly tell who to trust.

FINIS.

