Tandem bona causa Triumphat. OR SCOTLANDS Late misery bewailed; and the Honor
and Loyalty of this Ancient KINGDOM, Asserted in a SERMON, Preached before His
Majesty's High Commissioner, and the Honorable Parliament of the Kingdom of
Scotland. At Edinburgh the 17. day of February. 1661.

By Mr. JOHN PATERSON, Minister of the Gospel at ABERDENE.

Ezekiel 7.23. Make a Chain: for the land is full of bloody crimes, and the
city is full of violence.

Printed at Edinburgh, and Reprinted at London for James Thrale, 1661.

TO THE TRULY NOBLE, Valorous and Famous LORD, The Earl of MIDLETON, Lord
Clairmont and Fettercairn, His Majesty's High Commissioner for SCOTLAND.
May it please your GRACE,
THe simple strain of the following Discourse, being adorned with no Flowers of
Rhetoric, no entisements of humane Eloquence, nor swelled with Citations of
Humane Writers, Ancient, or Modern, speaks it out sufficiently to all men of
Spirit or Candor, that it is not Pride or Vanity, that has put it to the
Press; but the true reason wherefore it appears to the World so publickely,
is to prevent and obstruct the Misrepresentations of other, who having taken it
by swift writing when it was delivered, may perchance wrong the Author, either
from mistake or prejudice. When it comes abroad, I know it will meet with such
entertainment, as Papers of a more Elaborate and Judicious composure have done
before. Who knows not, Envy and Malice, to be a restless Wretch, like a
filthy Fly which seeks all the body over for a Soar, and when she cannot
find one, she makes one? I should wish to be free of such Wasps; but since it
is not probable, that it can be so, in this Conjuncture of Affairs and blessed
Revolution, when men's spirits are not to be seen in their Faces, nor their
Loyalty to be known by their Rhetoric: I have adventured upon those men's
Criticisms, to whom I neither stand nor fall. Let none think that I presume in
such a plain Discourse, to teach the Learned, who are more knowing nor myself;
yet the Ignorant, and such as have fleeted hither till, upon the surface of
Businesses, may be brought to some serious consideration, how deeply the
Stability and Peace of a Nation, which is truly MONARCHICAL is founded: and if
I shall meet with a cloud of Obloquie, Malice, and Prejudice, for speaking the
truth in freedom and soberness, Who shall shelter me, but your GRACE and the
High Court of PARLIAMENT, at whose command I did preach? Therefore let it not
offend your GRACE, that I have presumed to affix your Name to such a worthless
Piece, and offered it to your Judicious View and Censure: I have no excuse, but
my real Respects and Affection to your GRACE (to whom I am so much engaged for
your so many undeserved Civilities,) which have imboldened me to lay it down at
your feet, and to let the World see it under your GRACES Patrociny. If I know
my self well, I account Flattery below me; but I know it is Justice to speak
the truth of all men, and especially of those whom God has made the Shields of
the Earth: Yet your GRACES innate Modesty makes me sparing; and therefore I
shall only say this, that the LORD has made your GRACE a polished shaft in
his own hand under the KING'S MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY, to raise up a poor
sinking Land from the deep waters of Tyranny, Confusion, Trouble and Anarchy:
to vindicate the Honor of this Ancient NATION, over which some Unnatural men
had stretched a black Cloud of Disloyalty and Reproach, to Assart and Restore
His MAJESTY'S just Power and Prerogative: to sweep down mdny Spiders Webs,
which the Iniquity of the late Times had woven, to the great offense of GOD,
Scandal of the Protestant Religion, to the sad Affliction and bearing down of
His MAJESTY'S most Loyal and Faithful Subjects. The LORD has made your GRACE
and this Noble Court of PARLIAMENT, eminently Instrumental to settle this long
tossed NATION, upon a solid Basis of Religion and Righteousness, to break
Yokes, and undo Heavy Burdens, and is shall be your Honor, and the Honor of
this Noble and Loyal PARLIAMENT in all Generations to come, to be called (under
GOD, and the KINGS MOST EXCELLENT MAJESTY) The Reparers of SCOTLANDS woeful
Breach, and Physicians of our sad Distempers. Go on as you have begun to act
valiantly and prudently for GOD, for RELIGION, KING, CHURCH and COUNTRY, and
the Lord shall be with you. This shall be the daily Prayer of

My Lord, Your GRACES most humble and affectionate Servant, Mr. JOHN PATERSON.

TANDEM BONA CAUSA TRIUMPHAT.
Ezekiel. 7.23. Make a chain; for the land is full of Bloody crimes, and the City
is full of violence.


I Mind (Godwilling) to speak on this Text. First, by way of Explication as it
relates to the Jews, and to their condition when the Prophet Ezekiel pend it.
Secondly, By way of Application, to the State and Condition of this Kingdom,
both as it was of late, as it is at present: and as I humbly conceive, it ought
to be for the time coming.

You may be pleased to take up the words into two main Points. First, We have
the Jews condition when Ezekiel delivered this speech to them, and that is
holden forth under the Emblem of a Chain, not a Chain of Gold, nor a Chain of
Honor, but a Chain of Bondage and Captivity. Seconly, We have the cause
wherefore a Chain was their lot, or wherefore they were given over to Bondage
and Captivity, and that is their sins, their overspreading iniquity, the
Epidemical wickedness which had overflowed both Country and City, For the land
is full of bloody crimes, and the City is full of violence.

Point I. We have the State and Condition of the Jews at this time, and that
was, woeful, miserable and slavish, this is holden out under the Emblem of a
Chain. The Septuagints in their Translation of the Old Testament, render the
word Trouble, the Vulgar Latin renders it Conclusion, or an end, make an end:
But the Hebrew Word carries properly a Chain, it is that same word that is
used, 1 King. 6.21. where there is mention made of Chains of Gold before the
Oracle, and so do the Jewish Rabbis read it. Anent this Point of the Text, I
mind (Godwilling) to hint at three particulars.

1. What likeness or resemblance there is betwixt a Chain, and the bondage and
Captivity of a Land. 2. I shall (Godwilling) speak of the makers of this Chain,
Make a chain, etc. 3. Give you some Doctrines and Uses from this first branch
of the Text, and proceed.

First, The Bondage and Captivity of a Nation, is compared to a Chain; because
as a chain of Iron, as an engine, that restrains a man from his natural
Liberty and Freedom: so Bondage and Captivity depriveth a Nation of their
Civil and Ecclesiastic Liberty. A people that are under Bondage, Captivity,
and Slavery, may walk up and down the streets, by a natural and animal motion;
but as to any Civil or Public Concernment, that Land is but in a Chain, they
have no freedom to act, neither as Civil men, nor as Religious men: Such was
the condition of the Jews, when Ezekiel did write this, they were in a Chain,
fettered, deprived of their Freedom and Liberty, and that both in reference to
their Civil, and to their Church State. As for their civil capacity, they were
ruled, overruled and tyrannized over, by Strangers and Conquerours: and for
their Religious Liberty as Church Members, any thing they enjoyed that way, was
but a shadow of Liberty: As may be seen, Dan. 4. by that Idol set up by
Nebuchadnezzar in the plain of Dura.

Secondly, The Bondage and Captivity of a Nation, is fitly compared to a Chain;
because to be bound in Chains of Iron, is a sad and comfortless condition: Such
is the condition and state of a Nation that is under Bondage and Slavery, their
condition is most sad and lamentable, it is a very comfortless state; such was
the Jews condition at this time, they were in Chains, in a very sad and
comfortless condition, Psalm. 137. When we sat by the rivers of Babylon, there
we wept, we hanged our harps upon the willow trees. And Lament. 1. She weepeth
sore in the night, and her tears are on her cheeks, amongst all her lovers she
has none to comfort her, all her friends have dealt treacherously with her,
Juda is gone into captivity.

Thirdly, Bondage and Captivity of a Nation is fitly compared to a Chain;
because as a Chain of Iron laid upon a Malefactor is a heavy burden to him, so
that the poor creature cannot walk nor stir, even so a Land that is under
captivity and bondage, has a great weight on it, a weight that presses it
sore down: This was the Jews condition at this time, their Chain was heavy
enough. Lord, thou has made our chain heavy, Lam. 3.7.

Fourthly, The bondage and captivity of a Nation is fitly compared to a chain,
because of reproach and disgrace; for as it is a discredible and disgraceful
thing to be bound in chains and fetters of Iron; so a Land that is brought
under Bondage and Slavery, is in a disgraceful and discredible condition.

Fifthly, The bondage and captivity of a Nation is called a chain; because, as
poor malefactors that are bound in chains and fetters, ordinarily are the
object of scorn and derision, at least to the rascality, although any that has
true humanity in their breasts, can pity the worst of Malefactors, Even so a
Nation in bondage and captivity, is but an object of scorn and derision to
their enemies: So Psalm. 137. Let us have some of your Hebrew songs. We are a
reproach to our neighbors, says the Royal Psalmist.

Sixthly, The bondage and captivity of a Nation is compared to a chain;
because, to be bound in chains of Iron; implies a purpose to keep the poor
creature sure, that he escape not: Even so these that makes a people captive,
they study to lay such strong Chains and Bonds on them, that they may never be
able to escape out of their bondage, and recover their former liberty: there is
no human policy that they leave unessayed to keep that people fast in their
bondage and slavery.

Lastly, The Captivity and Bondage of a Nation, is compared to a Chain; because
as these who keep Malefactors in Fetters, have a further purpose against them,
to bring them to Trial and Execution: Even so these who Conquers a Land, and
brings it under Bondage, they have still some further purpose to bring that
people more and more under Slavery; for it is not ordinary for those who
leads a Nation captive, and minds to fix their Tyranny, to do their worst
at first, except it be in the heat and fury of Battle, but to wreath on the
yoke piece and piece, till they render them absolutely incapable of a revolt.

2. The second particular proposed on the first Branch of the Text, was, Who
were the makers of this chain, Make a chain, etc. As to this I say, There were
several Makers of this Chain, every one in their own Line and Consideration.
First, God made this Chain, as the Sovereign and Great Judge of the World.
Secondly, the Jews themselves had a very eminent hand in making this Chain, by
their sins and abominations. Thirdly, The Prophet Ezekiel had some hand in
making of it, in a Ministerial sense. Fourthly, The Chaldeans and Babilonians
had an Immediate hand in making it.

First, I say that God made this Chain: It was the Lord that brought this sad
captivity and bondage upon the Jews, it was the Lord that sent them captive to
Babylon, it was he that brought up that Northern Army against them, he raised
up the spirit of that hasty and furious Nation against his own people, and this
he did out of his Sovereignty and Justice.

Secondly, The Jows themselves had an eminent hand in making this chain, by
their sins and abominations, by provoking the Holy one of Israel to anger: and
I am apt enough to believe, that even several unnatural and treacherous men
amongst the Jews, had a hand in making this chain, by their treacherous
compliance with the Babylonians; for you shall read in few Stories, that ever a
Nation or Kingdom was invaded and conquered by an Enemy, and brought under a
Chain of Bondage; but always some unnatural Monsters, some Hypocritical,
Temporizing, Self-seeking Traitors, have complied with the Enemy, I mean,
complied actively and vigorously.

Thirdly, The Prophet Ezekiel and other Prophets, had some kind of hand in
making this Chain; for you see the command here is given to Ezekiel, Make a
chain. It is on this account, that the Lord says, I have hewed them by my
Prophets: And, Jer. 1.10, See, I have set thee this day over the Nations, and
over the Kingdoms, to root out, and to pull down, and to destroy. Now Ezekiel
and other Prophets, had a hand in making this Chain. First, Praedicendo, by
foretelling the Jews captivity, before it came, Jer. 18. Thus says the Lord;
behold I frame evil against you. Secondly, It may be said in some sense, that
Ezekiel and other Prophets, had a hand in making this Chain, Comminando, by
threatening it as a sad imminent Judgment. And, Thirdly, by making the hearts of
the people Fat, through their own corruption, and obstinacy. Go, make the heart
of this people Fat.

Fourthly, the Chaldeans and Babylonians, had an immediate hand in making this
Chain, as the Instruments of GOD, and the Executioners of his wrath upon the
Jews, and that in these Considerations. 1 They projected this Chain, they did
in their secret Counsels and Designs, plot and contrive, to bring the Jews
under Bondage. 2. The Babylonians had an immediate hand in making this Chain, by
an actual Invasion: they not only plotted, and designed to invade the Jews, but
they did actually invade them. 3. The Babylonians had an immediate hand in
making this Chain for the Jews, by Overcoming and Conquering them. 4. The
Babylonians had an immediate hand in making this Chain, by leading many of the
Jews captive to Babylon: in making them Exyles from their native Country. 5.
The Babylonians had an immediate hand in making this Chain for the Jews, by
Garrisoning many parts of their Country. 6. By appointing of Rulers and
Governors over them that were for the most part Strangers. 7. By laying on them
sad Impositions and Taxations. And thus you may see who made this Chain to the
Jews: GOD made it as a most just Judge, to punish the Jews, for the abuse of
their Liberty, and for their other Sins: The Jews made it as Malefactors: the
Prophet made it as the LORDS Messenger: the Babylonians made it, as the LORDS
Executioners. Now before I pass this first branch of the Text, Make a chain,
etc.

Obs. 1. That the LORDS own people may meet with a Chain: they may be brought
under sad bondage and captivity for their sins and iniquities. This was the
lote of the Jews many times: they were in Chains and Bondage in Egypt: in
Chains by Tigloth-Pileser: made captives by Salmanezer: by Senacherib: by the
Captains of the Host of the King of Assyria, who carried Mannasseh captive to
Babylon. I say, a people in whom God has a special interest, may meet with a
Chain: they may be brought under sad Bondage and captivity, like poor
Malefactors, that are fettered in Chains of Iron; so that Turkish Argument,
from success or not success to justify or condemn a Procedor, is ill Divinity:
This sandy argument was too much plied in our late Troubles.

Obs. 2. That who so ever be the immediate Instruments of the Chain of GODS
people, God is the chief and principal Author thereof himself: It is the LORD
who commands to make this Chain, Make a chain, etc. I say, it is GOD in his
Sovereignty, Justice, and Righteousness, that makes Chains for a Land: who
ever be the immediate Instruments of their bondage and captivity; And therefore
it is their duty to look beyond Instruments, to a far higher hand, than
creatures are: so did Job, and so did David to Shimei.

Obs. 3. That before GOD bring a judgment upon a Land or Family; he gives them
some warning before hand: some time to repent and escape the wrath threatened:
So dealt GOD with the old World: so with the Jews and Jerusalem, Matthew. 22. But
I come to the second branch of the Text.

Point II. Wherein we have set down the cause wherefore this chain of captivity
and bondage was made for the Jews, and wreathed about their Necks, and that was
for their sins and iniquity (For the land is full of bloody crimes, and the
city is full of violence.) Here let us consider these things. 1. The particular
sins challenged upon the Jews, Blood and Violence. 2. The hainousness of these
sins, they are not ordinary sins, but crimes and bloody crimes. 3. The
universality or the overspreading of these sins, it was both Country and City
that was infected with them. 4. The height of these sins, the Land and City was
filled with them, their sins were come to a great height.

First, The particular sins wherewith the LORD by his Prophet challenges the
Jews, are wrapped up in two words, which are very large and comprehensive, Bloody
crimes and violence. I shall first (God willing) open these two words, Bloody
crimes and violence. Secondly, Show you how many ways a Land may be defiled
with blood, or with bloody crimes. Thirdly, How many ways a Land may be
defiled with violence. Then I shall come (God willing) to apply the whole Text
to this Kingdom and Nation.

1. The two words which the Prophet makes use of here, to express the sins of
the Jews, are Bloody crimes and violence, Some Writers take this expression,
bloody crimes, in a general sense, for all heinous and grievous sins
whatsoever; especially for capital and criminal sins, deserving death by the
judicial Law: Such as Idolatry, Deuteronomy. 13. Blasphemy, Lev. 24. Witchcraft and
Sorcery, Beastiality, Sodomy, Lev. 20 Rapes, Deuteronomy, 22. I deny not but the word
may bear this large sense; but I take it more strintly for shedding of Innocent
blood, and that by them that had the Power in their hand, and pretended to do
Justice: some render it the Judgments of Blood: did not Manasseh make the
streets of Jerusalem to swim with Blood, with Innocent Blood; as may be cleared
from Isaiah 1. and 59. Your hands are full of Blood. And for the word Violence,
by it we are to understand every thing that is contrary to Justice, to Equity,
and Righteousness, Especially Robery and Oppression, false, unrighteous, and
unjust Dealing. Zeph. 3. Woe to her that is Filthy and Polluted, Woe to the
oppressing City: Her Princes within Her, are roaring Lions, Her Judges are
evening Wolves: they suck the Blood of the Poor, they eat their Flesh, and they
gnaw their Bones. So is it Jer. 6. Cast a mount against Jerusalem, this is the
City to be visited; for she is wholly Oppression in the midst of her, Violence
and Spoil is heard in her Streets. Thus the two great National sins, which
brought this Chain of Captivity on Juda and Jerusalem, was Innocent Blood,
Injustice, Oppression, and Violence.

2. The second particular on this branch of the Text, was, How many ways a
Land may be defiled, or filled with blood. I shall only name some of many. 1.
By private manslaughter, I mean occasional slaughter. 2. By murder, or by
lying in wait to kill. 3. By these damnable Duels, which are condemned by all
sound Divines, and sound Politicians, and ought to be most severely punished,
especially in the Challengers. 4. A Land may be defiled with blood, by an
unjust and unlawful War. 5. By cruel and bloody Plots, Conspiracies, and
Massacres: such as that of Paris, where the blood of 30000. Protestants was
shed at one time: So was Ireland defiled with blood, with the innocent blood of
many thousand Protestants. Which horrible cruelty, some, yea, too many were not
ashamed to lay to our late murdered KING'S door, most falsely and unjustly;
but that was not the first lie, which his implacable and treacherous Enemies
invented, and which evil men's Tongues sounded out against him. Oh! to have
branded such a Religious, Innocent KING, with such damnable, bloody cruelty,
how horrid a guiltiness was it before GOD. But, 6. A Land may be polluted with
blood, by false and unjust Sentences pronounced on the Bench, even that which
should be the Seat of Justice. Lastly, A Land may be defiled with blood, with
innocent blood upon Scaffolds, when innocent and just Persons, are most
unjustly and cruelly Murdered and Butchered like Beasts.

3. The third Particular on this Branch of the Text, was, How many ways a Land
may be defiled with Violence, or with Injustice, Oppression, and
Unrighteousness. I shall only name some few.

First, A Land or City may be defiled, with Violence and Oppression, even in
bargaining, in buying and selling, Lev. 25. When thou sellest any thing to thy
neighbor (and consequently when thou buyest any thing from him) you shall not
oppress one another.

Secondly, A Land or City may be defiled with Violence, when that which is
justly due to any Person, is unjustly, violently, or falsely detained from
them, Jam. 5. Behold the hire of the laborers, who have reaped your harvest,
which is detained by you by fraud, cries. It is Violence and Oppression, and
so is all Unrighteousness, Mal. 3. I will be a swift witness against these
who oppress the hireling in his wages.

Thirdly, A Land or City may be defiled with Violence and Oppression, when too
heavy and insupportable Bnrthens, Taxes and Impositions, are laid on it, which
it cannot bear without sighs and groans: and this may be not only the fault of
the Supreme Powers, but even of inferior Powers and Rulers of a Land, by an
unjust and unequal dividing, and laying on of public Taxes and Burdens, when
the poorer sort of people are taxed and rated beyond, not only their power, but
beyond their due proportion, and the richer sort spared: to take the burden of
the Rich, and to lay it on the Poor, is a horrible Violence in the sight of
JEHOVAH.

Fourthly, A Land or City may be defiled with Violence and Oppression, by
perverting or delaying of Justice, when the Poor, the Widow and the
Fatherless, are born down in Judgment, in their just and righteous Cause, by
the Richer sort, whether it be by Money, Friendship, or Money, Isa. 1. Every
one loves gifts, and follows rewards: they judge not the fatherless, nor
does the cause of the widow come before them. To delay or pervert Justice, is
horrible Iniquity and Violence.

Fifthly, A Land may be defiled with Violence and Oppression, by Ingrossers and
Monopolizers.

Sixthly, A Land may be defiled with Violence by Sacrilege, when people makes
a prey of holy things, of those things which are devoted and consecrated to
GOD, to his Church, to the Poor, to Pious uses: these are they who devour holy
things, Psalm. 83. Let us take to our selves the houses of God in possession.
These are Sacrilegious Oppressors, and their sin is Sacrilegious Violence: They
deal with the Church as Dyonisius dealt with Jupiter Olympus, he took from that
Idol a Garment of massy Gold, which Hero had dedicated of the Spoils of
Carthage, saying, It was too heavy for Summer, and too cold for Winter, and put
a Garment of Wool about the Statue, saying, This is fit for both seasons of
the year.

Lastly, A Land may be defiled with Violence, by imposing and tyrannizing over
men's Consciences, and that is the saddest oppression of all, when force and
violence is done to the Conscience (I mean) in point of men's judgment, when
they are content to submit and conform in their practice, especially in things
which are in themselves, but merely problematick and disputable, and which may
be holden pro or contra, without any hazard or loss of Salvation, or of a good
Conscience: matters where^nent Pious and Learned Orthodox Divines, are not
agreed among themselves. When such things are imposed upon men's Consciences,
as necessary and Fundamental Truths, this is horrible Violence. As to the
Universality, or Overspreading of these sins amongst the Jews, both Country and
City were defiled with Blood and Violence: And as to the height of these Sins,
The land is full of bloody crimes, and the city is full of violence: Time
forces me to pass these two Particulars.

Now I come to apply the Text, and what I have said on it in reference to the
Jews, to this Land wherein we live. And I shall apply it (God willing) in these
Considerations. First, What our condition was of late, we were in a chain under
a base Bondage and Slavery. Secondly, Who were the makers of that chain.
Thirdly, The causes wherefore GOD suffered us to come under such a sad chain of
bondage. Fourthly, I shall in a word exhort all Ranks to Repentance, for our
accession to the making of this chain. Fifthly, I shall tell you, that we have
great cause to bless GOD, for breaking this chain. And, lastly, With all
submission and reverence to the KING, his Commissioner's GRACE, and this High
Court of PARLIAMENT. I shall make bold to say, that GOD is calling at your
hands to make a fourfold chain.

1. As to our condition of late these many years by gone, we were in a chain,
we were brought and kept for many years, under a most base Slavery and Bondage,
we were Slaves to Slaves, we were in a chain in all these respects, whereof I
spoke in the Explication of the Text.

First, In a chain, because we were restrained and deprived of our National
Liberty, a yoke of Tyranny and Usurpation was fast wreathed about our Necks: we
had not power to act in any of our Public Interests or Concernments, all our
Civil Power and Authority taken away; yea, the Fountain of Power under GOD,
taken away, the KING himself: our Parliaments razed to the foundation, our
Civil and Criminal Courts made to run out of the right Channel, into a strange
and new fancied Commonwealth: Strangers ruled over us, and some temporizing
Complyers of our own Land, were larg worse than Sir angers, such as our
Sequestrators. We were in a chain also, in reference to our Church State, our
Church Judicatories interrupted, hindered to proceed in their just and lawful
Businesses, the General Affembly raised by Swordmen, a just judgment on the
Church for our too much meddling in Sword matters; so we were in a chain for
want of our native Liberty and Freedom.

Secondly, We were in a chain, because our condition was sad and comfortless,
we might have weep'd as the Jews did in their captivity, when they sat by the
Rivers of Babylon. And I am sure, there was not any, that had a true Scots
heart in their Breast, or the spirit of a man within them, or the true fear of
GOD in their Hearts: none in Scotland, except sorne unnatural Monsters, and
Treacherous active Compliers, but it pierced their hearts through, to be
chained in such a base Bondage as we were in for many years. Tell me, what
Honest, Godly, or Loyal heart in Scotland could cease from bleeding, when they
heard of that Woeful, Cruel, Bloody, Treacherous, Vnparalelled, and eternally to
be Anathematized blow, in striking off that most Pious, Glorious, Innocent,
Sweet KINGS Head, the best KING amongst the sons of men. O Bloody Traitors!
Traitors that plotted it, acted it, or allowed it. So we were in a chain, for
our condition was sad and comfortless.

Thirdly, We were in a chain; because our condition, was Reproachful, and
Disgraceful: We were but a laughing stock to our Conquerours, the object of
their contempt and scorn, they did in effect but Jeer us, even the civilest of
them, and they had no other cause; for they might have easily perceived the one
half of us, cutting the others Throat. I know not, if any Story of Scotland
holds out, that ever this Land, was brought under a more disgraceful and
contemptible condition.

Fourthly, We were in a chain these many years, before this blessed Revolution;
because we were under many sad and insupportable Burdens. Who can tell since
the righteous Government of this Land began to be shaken, and the KING'S just
Power and Authority was most unjustly and rebelliously wreasted out of his
Royal Hands, and since that Ancient and Equal Government was razed by Traitors,
Usurpers, and Tyrants, what a vast, incredible Treasure of Money, has been
drained from this poor Nation? Have we not found, that our late Rulers, and
that fancied Commonwealth, our late pretended Parliaments, and these
Traitorous, Bloody Usurpers, their little finger heavier, than many of our
KINGS Loins were, for many Ages and Generations? And any Burden which the Land
lies yet under, was occasioned and brought in by Rebels, Usurpers, and
Tyrants, and let them be blamed for it so long as it shall continue.

Fifthly, We were in a chain; because these that kept us in Bondage, had a
purpose that we should never escape, and therefore they made our chain heavy
and strong: What were our Citadels, but as so many chains of Iron, to have kept
this Land in a perpetual Slavery? But I proceed.

2. The second thing in the Application is, Who was it that made this chain? I
cannot in this condescend on Particulars, although something might be said to
this Purpose, which, it may be, a little piece of time will discover. I shall
hold out some Generals: and as I said of the Jews chain and captivity, so do I
say of Scotlands late chain and Bondage.

First, GOD made this chain for us. as a Just Judge, to punish us for playing
Jeshurun's part, in kicking off our Just Master, and most Gracious KING of
eternal memory.

Secondly, It is not improbable that several Unnatural, Treacherous and
Perfidious Monsters amongst our selves, of each Rank, have had a hand in making
the chain of our Bondage, and in helping to wreath it about our Necks, about
the Necks of all Estates of the Land: about the Necks of our Nobles, Barons,
Burrows, Ministry, Commons, that so they might rule all, and carry all at their
pleasure, like petty Princes, and petty Popes.

Thirdly, That strong chain of bondage, was made and wreathed fast about our
Necks, by a rebellious Faction of Sectaries; for it is far from our thoughts to
impute that Invasion to the Kingdom of England; but to a Bloody and Traitorous
Faction of Fanatics and Sectaries, which kept these own Nation and Ours both
in a chain of bondage. In a word, the spirit that moved most strongly and
powerfully in making our chain, and putting it about our Necks, was a spirit of
Error, Rebellion, Sectarism, a spirit of Madness, of Delusion, Treachery and
Hypocrisic.

3. The third thing in the Application, was the Causes wherefore the LORD
suffered this sad chain of our bondage, to be wreathed about our Necks. In a
word, beside these common Sins which reigns through all Christendom, such as
Atheism, Swearing, Profanity, Drunkenness, Uncleanness, Barrenesse under the
Gospel, etc. This Land was defiled with these particular Sins, contained in the
Text, that is, with Bloody Crimes and Violence, and that in all these Respects,
whereof I did speak in the Explication of the Text.

First, This Land was defiled with much Innocent Blood, by an unjust War, by
rising up against the KING, a practice inconsistant with sound Divinity,
against all Orthodox Doctrine: a practice contrary to Scripture, contrary to
the Doctrine of the Ancient Church, and their practice contrary to the
Confession of Faith: No King upon the account of his Intellectuals, Morals, or
Religion, being to be suspended from the exercise of his Government, or denied
submission too, by his Subjects. How many mournful Widows and Fatherless
Orphans, have our late civil, or rather incivil Wars made in Scotland? How
many poor creatures have been snatched away perforce, from their weeping
Wives, and poor Babies, and sent out to be Soldiers, that knew not how to
handle a Sword nor Arms? what could these do but be cut down like Beasts? And
does not the Blood of these poor creatures cry to GOD for Vengeance, against
Rebels, Usurpers and Tyrants? Is not the Land defiled with much lunocent Blood
by most unjust and cruel Sentences on Benches? Is not the Land defiled with
much Innocent Blood upon Scaffolds? How many in Britain have been forced to lay
down their Heads to the Block, within these few years of Usurpation and
Tyranny, and that for their Loyalty and Fidelity to their Just and Native
KING? Has not as Noble, yea, the most Noble Blood in England and Scotland been
shed on Scaffolds? And which no Story can parallel, and which none that fears
GOD indeed, or any faithful Subject, can speak of, but with Horror, sad hearts,
and Tears in their Eyes, was not the Royal Blood of that Blessed Martyr KING
CHARLES the 1, of Eternal Memory, Spilt on a Scaffold, in the Famous City of
London, in the view of many Thousands of his Dear, Loyal, Weeping Subjects, who
had no Power for the time, to deliver that Innocent Lamb, from the teeth of
these Bloody Cannibals, Dogs, yea, Devils Incarnat? Thus was the Land defiled
with bloody crimes. And was it not full of Violence also, full of
Unrighteousness, Falsehood, Deceit, Cheating, Injustice, Oppression and Robery,
defiled with Violence of all sorts? What Oppression, Injustice and Violence was
there by Blind bands, Loan Money, or rather taking men's Means, and Imprisoning
their Persons, Forcing of Consciences, and several things of that nature?

4. The fourth thing in the Application was, To Exhort all Estates in the Land,
both Church and State, to repent and mourn before GOD, for our Accession to the
making of that Chain of Bondage, and Slavery, wherewith this poor Land has
been fettered these many years by gone: It will never be well with Scotland,
neither will GOD be fully pacified with us, and turn away his Anger wholly from
us, till all Ranks of people in Scotland, Nobles, Gentry, Burrows,: And in
particular, til we of the Ministry, come to an ingenious confession, of our
Accession to the making of the Chain. Shall we charge this on others, and wipe
our own mouth like the Whore? No, we are us Guilty as any, and GOD will extort
a Confession from us, whether we will or no.

5. Let us bless GOD who has broken that Chain of Tyranny, Usurpation and
Bondage, wherewith this poor Land, was so long and fast tied: by reducing and
restoring, our Native KING, to his just Rights and Prerogatives, and by
restoring to us, the Liberty, Freedom and Authority of Parliaments. Let us
admire and adore the Wisdom of GOD, who upon a sudden, befooled the Princes of
Zoan, the great Wits, the cunning Achitophels and Matchavels of Britain. Let
us admire the LORDS Out-witting, Over-topping, and Over-turning all the Cabinet
Councels of that Perfidious and Treacherous Cabal. I say again, it is a duty
well be-coming, this High and Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT, to bless GOD from
your hearts, for breaking the chain of our bondage, by reducing and restoring
Our Native KING, to his just Rights, Royal Dignity and Power, after such a sad
and long Exile, by a pack of false, greedy, ambitious, hypocritical, cruel,
Bloody Murderers and Traitors, who called themselves Saints, and that in
despite of all the Enemies of the Royal Family and Interest, who were not few.
And if any have yet a Bone in their Stomach, against the KING, His Family and
Authority, time will try; for it is not all Gold that Glisters: Mal-contents
will discover themselves one way or another: For fairded Loyalty will soon be
rubbed off, when occasion offers. But let Honor and Happiness attend all that
are cordially Loyal.

6. To close, Let it not seem Presumption nor Vanity, in such a poor weak man
as I am, to say, that in my humble opinion, GOD is calling upon KING and
PARLIAMENT to do two things. First, To break off all unjust, illegal and
Tyrannical chains, which wicked and evil men have made, and fastened about the
Neck of this poor Kingdom: and in this his MAJESTY'S Commissioner, and this
Honorable Court of PARLIAMENT have made a very considerable and noble Progress,
to their eternal memory. Secondly, I humbly conceive that GOD calls to KING
and PARLIAMENT to make a Chain.

First, A Chain of Justice, for all such, who upon clear evidences shall be
found guilty, of the Plotting, Contriving, or Acting in that Vnparalelled
Murder of the late KING, the betraying, or selling his MAJESTY, and the
Ancient Honor and Liberty of this Nation.

Secondly, A Chain of new Laws, or the reviving of Ancient Laws, if they can be
by more severe and terrible Sanctions, for preventing the like Treachery,
Disloyalty and Usurpation in time coming: Ex malis moribus oriuntur bonae leges.

Thirdly, A chain of Regulation in reference to Church Government: Remember my
words, it is the regulation of Church Government by Civil Authority I speak of.
I mean, that Church Government be not suffered by the Civil Power, the KING and
PARLIAMENT, to run without its own Channel, nor to be excentrick to Church
Matters, but that it may be kepet within its own Banks. I shall not use that
Argument which some calls a Fallacy, that is, to reason from the faults of
Governors, against the Government from the outstretching of a Government, to
the overturning of a Government, and yet that Argument was made use of in Anno
1638. But I may very lawfully and justly without Fallacy, in all equity, Argue
from the outstretching of a Government, or from the abuse of it, to the
Regulation of it, and putting of it within its own Channel. I think, that all
Church Government should be so Regulated by the KING and PARLIAMENT, that it be
not suffered to cope with the Supreme Authority of a Nation, much less to
counteract thereto, least of all to overtop the Supreme Authority, that is
Popish. I think, that Church Government should be so regulated, that there be
not in one Kingdom, two Supreme Coordinat Powers to clash one upon another, and
to distract and rent the Spirits of the Subjects, so that they know not whom to
obey: Whether the KING and the Supreme Civil Power, or the Supreme Church
Power? Did not the Business of 1648. speak out this too clearly, when the
PARLIAMENT ordered one thing, and the Church the contrary? This should be
remeaded by the KING and PARLIAMENT. I am no Stats-man, yet I take it to be
beyond an Ordinary Wit, to make two Coordinat Supreme Powers in one Land,
consisting with the Safety and Peace thereof, especially a Nation that is
Monarchical. I conceive, that too many lay a wrong Foundation, in reference to
this matter; whereupon they build wrong Superstructures; for they look upon the
State, Civil and Ecclesiastic, as upon two several, distinct, independent
Bodies, while as they are not two Bodies, but two parts of one and the same
Politic Body, under one Chief and Supreme Civil Governor: And although the
Supreme Civil Authority ought not to meddle immediately with Things merely
Spiritual, Such as the Preaching of the Word, Administration of the Sacraments,
the exercise of the Keys, these things being committed by CHRIST to the
Minister of the Gospel; yet it is proper for the Supreme Civil Magistrate, to
meddle with Things that are Ecclesiastic, to see the Church in His Dominions
rightly Constituted, and rightly Governed: For in reference to the external
Regiment of the Church, the Supreme Gubernative Power is in the Supreme
Magistrate: And therefore the Reformation of Religion, without the consent,
much less contrary to the Will of a Supreme Christian Magistrate, has no
warrantable Precedent in GODS Word; but the very contrary is holden out there.
See Deuter. chap. 29. verse. 10, 11, 12. Josh. chap. 24. verse. 25. 2 King. chap.
23. 2 Chronicles. chap. 15. verse. 8.12. 2 Chronicles. chap. 29. verse. 3.10. 2 Chronicles.
chap. 34. verse. 31.32. Ezra chap. 10. verse. 3.5. compared with chap. 2. verse.
7. And several other places of Scripture wherein the Chief Magistrate
conourreth; or rather according to his Place and Power goes before the people:
But we find no where in Scripture, the people reforming, without the
conourrence of the Supreme Magistrate, even in the times of their worst Kings.
And any who will deny that it so, in the beginning of Christian Magistracy,
will show themselves ignorants in Antiquity. And is it not more suitable and
agreeable to Reason, more for the Honor, Safety, and Stability of a Church, and
the Government thereof, and for the advancement of Religion and piety in a
Land, that the Church depend rather upon the KING and Supreme Magistrate, than
upon popularity, the natural product whereof is coufusion and tumult, as the
breathing and wind of factions and schismatic Spirits blows upon these
waters? It is my humble opinion, that there ought to be such a chain of
Regulation, put about Church Government, as it shall not be lawful for the
Church to prescribe restrictions and limitations to the KING, before his
admission to the Exercise of his Royal Power; such a chain of Regulation, as it
may not be lawful to the Church to declare against the KING, to state Quarrels
in matters of War, to purge Armies, and least of all, to exclude the KINGS
Interest out of the state of the Quarrel, to force the KING to subscribe Papers
and Declarations, contrary to his will; such a chain of Regulation, that it
shall not be lawful for Ministers to protest against the Magistrates Lawful
Power, in raising all fensible Parsons in the Kingdom, for the just and
necessary Defense thereof, and calling that necessary Duty a Sin, and a
conjunction with the Malignant Party: a Principle and Practice inconsistant
with the Safety of any Nation: a Protestation and Practice to be abhorred by
all Modest and Loyal-men: Clearly contrary to the Law of GOD, of Nature, of
Nations: A Principle and Practice never heard of since the beginning of the
World, in any Story, Sacred or Profane^: A Principle which ought to be well
adverted, that the like may be preveened in time coming: A Principle and
Practice to be Stigmatized, as well as the Remonstrauce; Such a chain of
Regulation, as may lay a Restraint upon Ministers, from starting or venting
Questions, Principles or Tenets, destructive to the Supreme Civil Authority, or
which may have any tendency to unsettle Authority, and to shake the Peace of a
Nation; such as the Doctrine of opposing and resisting of KINGS by their own
Subjects, through Force of Arms: the crying down the Authority and Actings of a
Free PARLIAMENT: Popular Reformation: the laying too much Stresse upon any
Humane Draught whatsoever, as if it were the Basis and Foundation of Religion,
or making any thing the rule of Faith, Worship, and Religious Practice, but
the Word of GOD. All which may, and ought to be done with due respect and
tenderness too, and preservation of the Just Power, Liberty and Authority of
the Church, according to the Holy Scripture, taken in its Native and Genuine
Sense, and according to the Ancient Primitive, and Apostolic Practice, and for
the advancement of Godliness and Peace, both in Church and State.

Lastly, I humbly conceive, GOD calls KING and PARLIAMENT, to make a chain of
Power, which may gird the Laws about, and make them effectual by a vigorous
Execution; for a Law without Execution, is but a Be without a Sting: And there
can be no Law really executed, without Power. And therefore these who did wrest
the Militia out of the Late Martyred KING'S hands, did in effect destroy all
Law and Justice, by robbing the KING of the Sword, the choicest Flower and
Strength of the Crown. Necessity, Duty, Safety, the Peace and Quiet of the
Land, the putting Law and Justice to a lively Execution, calls for Power,
that so Popery and Profanity, Violence, Robbery, and Oppression in the Land,
Schism in the Church, Ruptures in the State, Mutinies, Insurrections,
Plottings, and Contrivances to involve the Nation in new Troubles by
Mal-contents, may be timely preveened and kept under; for though the face of
the Waters appear smooth for the present, there is some stirrngs at the
Bottom, by these who have put on a present Mask of Loyalty, but are ready to
pull off, when they can see their Opportunity. I crave Pardon for my boldness,
in offering my rash Thoughts to His MAJESTY'S Commissioners GRACE, and to his
High and Honorable Court, in matters of so great Concernment; but I may say, I
do it in all humility, and from a principle of Loyalty, and Love to my
SOVEREIGN the KING, to the Country, and to my Mother Church, let Men construct
it as they list, and so. I end, Giving Glory to the FATHER, SON, and HOLY
GHOST. Amen.

GOD SAVE THE KING.
FINIS.

