THE MYSTICAL MATCH BETWEEN Christ and his Church.

BY The late learned and reverend Divine.

JOHN PRESTON, Docter in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master
of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

The leading Sermon to that Treatise of his called The Churches Marriage.

CANT. 63. I am my beloveds, and my beloved is mine.

LONDON, Printed for Francis Eaglesfield, and are to be sold at the Marigold in
S. Paul's Churchyard. 1648.

To the Christian Reader.
WHen the Sermons of this reverend Divine entitled the Churches Marriage, were
first published, this Sermon was not come to the hands of those who were
isntrumental in setting forth the work: who yet were willing rather to send it
so abroad, then that so many excellent truths should be lost. This Sermon
since, coming to my hands, taken by a skillful scribe from the Authors mouth, I
thought fit to add it to the rest, lest the work should seem a body without a
head. My pains is saved for speaking any thing concerning the worthy Author, or
his Works, it is sufficiently done by those reverend Divines that have been the
publishers of them, therefore commending this to thee, and thy self to Gods
blessing, I rest

Thine in any Christian office T S.

THE CHVRCHES MARRIAGE.
EPHESIANS. 5. 32. This is a great mystery, but I speak concerning Christ and
concerning the Church.
THE point out of these words is this, that, There is a match between Doct.
There is a match between Christ and the Church
Christ and the Church: and consequently, between Christ and every particular
man that is a member of the true body of Christ; this is the great Mystery the
Apostle tells us of in this place. To open which, let us consider wherein this
match It consists in five things.
consists, what similitude it has with the ordinary marriage which is
between a man and his wife here upon earth, it consists in these five things.

First, as in marriage there must be consent of 1 Consent of Parents.
the parents, so here, the Father has given his Son to us, and likewise he
has given us to the Son; wherein we are to consider the great mercy of God,
that he would bestow his own Son upon us, which is the reason why the
Apostle says in Ephesians. 1. Blessed be God, even the Father Ephesians. 1.
of our Lord Jesus Christ, that has blessed us with all spiritual blessings
in heavenly things in Christ, that is, that has given us his own Son, and
with him all things else, and Him likewise for us, when we were cast away men.
That thus he should give us to his Son, and match us with him, that is the
first thing.

The second thing in marriage, is the mutual consent of the parties themselves
that are to match 2 Consent of parties.
together, wherein we are in the first place to consider, the consent of the
Son, the Husband, because we know that the man is the suitor, he begins,
and if he had not, who could have known the mind of the LORD JESUS, that he
would match so low, that he would match with sinful dust and ashes, except
himself had declared it, his Church seeks not first to him, not because
modesty forbids it, but because she knew no such thing, that there was such an
Husband for her; she indeed had most need to seek, because she stood in
need of such an Husband, Christ matches with her, not for any need he had of
a wife, but only for the need his wife had of him. Now his Father from
eternity had ordained this Wife for his Son, and therefore he must have her,
and he could have no other. Therefore, first see if 1 Christ's consent.
the Son be willing, for this he has declared it plainly in his Word. We
are Ambassadors, says the Apostle, 2 Cor. 5. beseeching you in Christ's stead,
2 Cor. 5. Matthew. 22.
to be reconciled to God, and in Matthew. 22. you see all were invited to the
Marriage, and all those speeches; Go preach the Gospel to every creature
under heaven, and Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden: and that
in Revel. 22. Let whosoever will Revel. 22.
come; this I say, declares the consent of the Son that he is willing.

Now, secondly for our consent, we have that 2 Our consent wrought. 1 By
discovering our danger.
wrought by the holy Ghost, by a double work.

One is a work of the holy Ghost, discovering to us the thraldom, and
bondage, the death and danger wherein we are, and also discovering to us our
own sinfulness, which is necessary, because a man is ready to be conceited
of himself, and so is somewhat coy, and unwilling to yield to the suit of
Christ, but when the holy Ghost has showed a man what he is, that he is such
a one as he never thought himself to be, he then begins to think, that he is
unworthy that the Lord should vouchsafe him so much favor; he is ready to say
as Abigail said to David, when she was spoken to, to be his wife, Lord what am
I, that thou should so far respect me? Let thy handmaid wash the feet of
my Lords servants, I am worthy of no better office; I say, this is one work of
the holy Ghost, thus to prepare us to this match.

The other is to present Christ unto us, and to 2 Presenting Christ.
fit him above all the world for us in our apprehensions, which is done by the
work of the holy Ghost manifesting Christ, and his beauty; when Christ comes to
join our love, he is feign to use his skill to join us: and all that we can
do to set him at, is nothing, except the holy Ghost show you Jesus Christ, and
except withal, he make a secret impression upon the heart, except there be a
secret instinct wrought in us, causing us to long after Christ, we shall never
bring our hearts to consent to this Marriage. Now therefore, as there goes a
secret virtue from the Lodestone, that makes a secret impression upon the
iron, and when that is done, the iron rests not, but draws near to the
Loade-stone, so the holy Ghost that is sent from the Father, makes an
impression upon our spirits, that we have no rest till we obtain Christ.
This is called in Scripture, a Drawing to Christ; None comes to me except the
Father draw him, that is, except the Father work powerfully upon him, and make
him willing to come: for that is the meaning of drawing, when the Lord turns
as it were the will of a Lion, makes him a Lamb, when he gives another will.

This consent must not be mental only, kept 3 What consent it must be,
within the breast, but there must be an expression of this consent, and it is
in a mutual covenant; so then the third thing is the Covenant between Christ
and us, which is an everlasting covenant on both sides, an everlasting covenant
on Christ's part to be ours, to bestow himself on us and all that is his,
whether salvation, remission of sins, sanctification, glory, his death,
obedience, all he did or is, all is ours: and again, a covenant on our part,
to give up our selves to him, and this for ever, and all that is ours: as our
sins are made his, so all the good we receive from him, we promise to
employ to his service. Now, this is but as the Espousals.

The fourth is that union that follows upon this, 4 Union.
and the solemn celebration of the Marriage which is done in Baptism, when
you were asked this question, even as it is in ordinary marriage, Will you have
this man to your wedded husband, will you take him for better and for worse,
will you be content to renounce all others and to be alone to him, to serve
and obey him? so in Baptism it was ask't: Will you be content to deny
ungodliness, and worldly lusts, to renounce the world, the flesh and the
Devil? etc. When men were of riper years and converted, this was answered to
by word of mouth from the party himself, and now when you are baptized young,
it is even as it is in marriages which are made when the parties are under-age,
which when they come to age they use not to disavow, but are obliged to
confirm it: of that force is Baptism unto us. This I say, is the solemnizing
as it were of the nuptials between Christ and us, when we are baptized into
his Name, when we leave the former name that we had before; as a wife does,
we forsake father and mother and cleave to him, so that a man is no more sui
juris, but is given up to this Husband, to live after his will, to be subject
to him in all things, and take him even as he takes us; he takes us to keep
us in sickness and in health, not to cast us off, notwithstanding our
insirmities, but to keep to us and communicate himself alone to us, and not
to reprobate men cast off; so we take him with all crosses and afflictions,
that attend the profession of him, to follow him through thick and thin, as
well in adversity as in prosperity, to keep the soul chaste to him, and not
to prostitute it to any lust or any creature.

The last, is the consequents of this Marriage and union, we have part in his
goods, whatsoever 5 Consequents of it.
is his, is ours, and ours is made his, our debts are made his, and again, all
his honors and riches, and privileges are made ours, there is an union
between the parties, My beloved is mine, and I am his, and then we have
interest in all that is his.

We come now to apply this, and make some use of it.

First, if there be such a match, between Christ and every believer, so that
no man is partaker of Use 1. To see that we have Christ himself ere we apply
his benefits.
any thing that is Christ's, except he has him first; then take heed of
applying the benefits of Christ preposterously to thy self, for except thou
have him first, it is but a vain conceit to think any thing of his belongs to
thee, to think of remission of sins and adoption, and all the privileges,
and to apply them to thy self, and to think when thou art but once persuaded
of it, to think so, that they are presently thine, I say, this is but a meare
dream and conceit, except thou be married to Christ, that thou have the Lord
himself, thou have nothing to do with any thing that is his, He that has
the Son has life, and all things pertaining to life and Godliness, but he
that has not the Son, has nothing, neither life, nor any thing else.
Therefore that you be not deceived, you must look on this as the ground of
all your comfort: am I married to Christ? Is the match made between me and
him? if it be not, know that whatsoever thou think of forgiveness of
sins, of any blessing, spiritual or temporal that it is thine, thou do
but deceive thy self therein with vain words, it is not thy persuasion, that
makes the match, this is a point of great weight, therefore examine thy self
strictly herein.

You will say, how shall I know it? Quest. Answ. How to know we are matched to
Christ.


I answer, you shall know it by this.

First, consider whether thou have the consent of the Son: for that is the
first thing, as was said, thou must consider, whether the Son have given his
consent our no: Now it is true that in the word he has declared his consent,
but do thou believe 1 By Christ's consent which is accompanied.
that? have thou applied this word to thy self? there are two things which
bear record with the Son that he is willing to match with us, and that is
the Word and the Spirit: and consider if both have come home to thy heart yea
or no, to testify this.

First, I say, Christ he has declared his will to match with us in his Word:
for though there be 1 With the Word.
no particular promise to John or Thomas, or to any particular man, to say
Christ is willing to marry thee, yet there is the general that includes the
particular, as we find the substance of this general, All that receive him
shall be saved; then says the Soul, but I am one that am contained under
this general, this general speaks to me as well, and that as surely and as
certainly, as if a Messenger were sent from heaven to assure me that the Son
is willing to match with me, for thou must look what ground thy faith has
had, whether thou did find such a word as this, and whether thou can apply
it to thy self, and have laid hold upon it, and by resting on it, have put thy
seal to it, that God is true in such a speech as this: For you must know my
beloved, that Faith must have a word, that is the proper object of Faith, for
if Faith had nothing else for its object but a persuasion, or fancy of our
own, faith were but a weak thing, for it would alter according to the object
and ground upon which it is pitched: now a man's own opinion it is changeable,
and mutable, but therefore we are said to be rooted and grounded in faith
because it has a sure foundation, there is a rock for faith to be built on,
which the gates of Hell cannot prevail against: now the rock upon which faith
is built, it is the Word of God, so that that faith, whereby thou beleevest
thou art justified, that thou art grafted into Christ, that thou art matched
with him, that he is become thy Husband, I say even that faith of thine must
have a Word of God to be grounded upon, thou must find something in the Word
that must testify to thee that Christ is willing to match with thee, for you
know there is no match without mutual consent, and therefore the first thing
when thou come to be married to him, is to know that there is such a match,
and that the Son is willing to match with thee.

Now how should any man in the world know that, except he declare himself? and
how can thou know he has declared it, but from some word, from somewhat
that he has revealed in the Scripture, to which all those places that I named
before do serve, Go preach the Gospel to every creature under heaven, and
Come unto me all ye that are weary and heavy laden, etc. and we are
Ambassadors Mat. 11. 2 Cor. 5. 19.
beseeching you to be reconciled. These and the like are the sure Word of God
upon which thy faith must be grounded, so that thou come to say thus to thy
self, well, whatsoever come of it, I am sure there is a corner stone, on which
whosoever is built, shall not be ashamed nor deceived, I am sure of it from a
word that the Lord has confirmed with a seal, and with an oath, and therefore
I rest upon it. And it is not a bare word, that Christ has given to assure us
of this, which is a sign it is a hard thing for us to believe it, it is no
easy thing, for there is added to the word a seal, and it is confirmed with
an oath, so then that is the first thing thou art to consider, whether thy
faith has been pitched upon some such word, and whether thou have applied that
word to thy self or no.

In the next place beside this word, there is a witness from the spirit, there
is a wondrous work 2 The spirit
of the Holy Ghost, which says to a man's heart, be of good comfort, fear
not, I am thy salvation. If you say to me what needs the witness of the
spirit? is not the Word enough? if Christ declare himself so far that in
plain terms he is willing to match with us, what need the special witness
of the Holy Ghost?

I answer, there is very great need of it, because Answ. Necessity of the
witness of the spirit.
the Word of it self is not able to comfort, and quicken and releeve us, it is
not able to beget in us peace, and joy, and righteousness, but it is even like
a dead letter, it is a cold dead thing, able to do nothing with the heart of
man without the Spirit, this we find by experience, the clearest arguments,
and the most comfortable that the Scripture uses to comfort a man in distress
that has his Conscience troubled with the apprehension of his sin, and of Gods
wrath, they are all nothing till it please God to send his own Spirit to bear
witness to a man's spirit.

You will say, what is this witness of the Spirit? Quest.


I answer, it is a certain divine expression of Christ to the soul, whereby a
man is secretly assured Answ. Witnesses of the spirit what.
without any argument or reason, that he is his salvation: for you must know,
that there are indeed two things besides that confirm this truth to us, that
is, the ground we have in the Word, and the effects and fruits of
sanctification, but both these do it by way of argument; for when a man
argues thus, I see this general proposition, All that believe shall be
saved, but I am one that believe, therefore I am one that am contained under
the general pardon; this I say, is by way of argument. So again, I find in
my self the fruits and effects of sanctification, and I am sure none are
sanctified, but they are also justified, and they have received the Spirit of
Christ, therefore I know I am one that belongs to him, all this is but the
witness of our own spirits, for these are but collections, that our own
spirits gather as a conclusion from the premises; but now the witness of the
Spirit, the witness of the holy Ghost, it is a distinct thing from this,
therefore Romans 8. 16. it is said, to witness Romans 8. 16.
together with our spirits, and therefore is a distinct witness from our
spirits, that indeed witnesses the same things, but the witness is distinct
from that of our own spirit, and that is without any argument or reason at
all, being a secret manifestation made to the soul, whereby we are comforted
and assured, that our sins are forgiven, and that Christ is willing to match
with us. Now consider if thou would know whether thou be one that is
matched with Jesus Christ, whether thou have this double witness or no, of the
Word and of the Spirit.

You will say, has every one this secret testimony? Quest.


I answer, that every one has it in some degree, Answ. Every one has it in
some degree Romans 8. 16.
more or less, for that same in Romans 8. 16. The Spirit witnesses with our
spirits, is a general proposition, it concerns all believers, even with every
man's spirit, the Holy Ghost bears witness, but then we must take the words
in the right sense; It is true, in some the Spirit speaks more evidently and
audibly, with joy unspeakeable and glorious, the flashes of comfort are much
more bright and glorious to some then to others, and such special witnesses of
the HOLY GHOST are very rare, and dispensed to us for some special purposes,
commonly after some great humilitation or prayer, or to prepare us for some
great enterprise, or some special conflict, they are even as the apparitions
to Abraham, and Jacob, and Paul, were, Acts 23. 11. Be of good courage Paul,
thou must bear witness of me at Rome, etc. so when he was at Corinth, Acts
23. 11
Paul be of good comfort; I am with thee. Acts 18. 9. All these were on
special occasions: so I say there are some special witnesses of the HOLY Acts
18. 9.
GHOST, when the HOLY GHOST speaks evidently, and these are dispensed to us
according to the good pleasure of God, and commonly it is added for some
special purpose: now I say, not that every one has this kind of testimony,
but every one has so much witness from the HOLY GHOST as does uphold his
spirit, that Christ is willing to match with him, that he has or may have
interest in him, and in all the privileges of his death; this I say, every one
has more or less, although those special degrees of the evident speaking of
the Holy Ghost, are dispensed but to some, and to those that have it, but for a
special time: this is the first thing.

The second thing thou art to enquire into (if thou wovldest know if there be
any such match, 2 By our own consent.
between Christ Jesus and thee,) what thy own consent has been and is,
which herein is not in words only, but is given then, when they heart and
affections do, or can make this answer, that thou art willing to match with
the Lord Jesus, and this I give as a sign to examine thy heart by; for it is
not in the power of any man living to bring his heart to this consent, nor is
any creature able to do it, you may as well bring fire and water to agree
together, as to bring the heart of a natural man to be willing to match with
the Lord, but it is a special work of the holy Ghost that must mould the
spirit a new, and break all in pieces, and cast thee into a new frame, that
must make thee willing to come into so near a Communion with the LORD JESUS,
for our spirits are quite contrary to it.

Only concerning this, take this caution, that it is not so much what thou art
willing to say in Caution.
any case or condition, for it may be a man may be willing sometimes to match
out of fear, or hope, or out of some by respect, I say, he may be willing to
do any thing; and to be married to Jesus Christ, but it is another thing when
a man can say, that it is the inward bent of his will, to have it done, it is
the bent of his inward affection, the stream of them runs that way; this
must be wrought by the Holy Ghost. And take Our consent must not be.
heed thou be not deceived in it, for there are many unsound and false
conceits, some there are that are willing to match with Jesus Christ, when they
are in extremity, when they are on their 1 Only in extremity.
deathbed, when they know not how to shift for themselves, but alas, such a
consent is far off from being a right consent, there is no freedom in this
consent, that contract that is made through threatening, it is but a compelled
and constrained consent, this is not that which thou can ground on, and yet
this is a frequent thing, when men are in straits, that they know not what to
do, then they are willing to match with Christ. Besides it may be a man is
willing to match with Jesus Christ for a time, to serve him for a fit, for 2
Not for a fit.
a month or a year, but art thou willing to make an everlasting covenant with
him? you know that such a covenant is required in Marriage, that women give up
themselves to their husbands so long as they live together. Now ordinarily when
a man considers this seriously, What, must I forsake my pleasure for ever? must
I live to Jesus Christ, and no more to my self? must I bestow all my time upon
him, and have no more liberty? here a man makes a stand, he is not willing to
make such a covenant with him, such an everlasting Covenant; therefore consider
whether thy consent be for perpetuity. Moreover, it may be thou art willing to
match with him in some good mood, when thou art in a good fit, but that 3 In
good moodes.
may be but a flash. There are many that for a fit in some good mood, when
their hearts are wrought on, by some powerful preaching of the Word, or some
transient action of the holy Ghost, they are willing to match with Jesus
Christ, but this holds not.

Besides again, many are willing to match with Christ hereafter, but they are
not content to do 4 hereafter.
it for the present, but you know it is essential to the Marriage Covenant,
that it be in verbis de praesenti, for the present, that is, I do take this
man for my wedded husband, etc. not that I promise I will, but that I am
willing at this time, to give up my self to him, this present resigning of
ones self; this is the consent that makes the Marriage. But Errors in men's
consent.
that we may show all these false consents, I will run through them briefly.

First, there is in some an error concerning the person, when men are ready to
take Jesus Christ, 1 In the person.
and yet do not conceive aright of him. Whereas the Lord has dealt plainly
with us, as if he meant not to circumvent us, and tells every man aforehand,
that if he will match with him, he must make account to take up his Cross, and
deny himself, he must make account to be wholly to him. Now, when a man
looks on Christ, and conceives him under another notion, and thinks he shall
live another kind of life more free and loose, and thinks this strictness is
not required at his hands by Christ, now there is an error in the person, and
that makes the Marriage frustrate; therefore take heed you be not deceived in
this, for thou must know this, that when thou art once married to the Lord,
then thy will must be subject to his will, thou must be content to obey him
in all things, thou must be content to forgo all, and resisine up thy self
to him, and live no longer to thy self, but to him.

Yet, there is another error, that commonly 2 When we take not the Lord alone.
runs along with men's consent when it is not right, which is, when a man is
not willing to take the Lord alone, but joins others with him, when a man will
so match with Jesus Christ, that he seeks other things too, when he will
seek honors with him, and seek wealth, and seek the pleasures of this
world. Now, if thou match with Christ, know this, that thou must be content
with him alone, thou must not join pleasures, and Christ together, thou must
not join covetousness, and him together, thou must not seek praise with men,
and think to match with Jesus Christ, thou must be content to be divorced
from all other things and be to him alone, and take heed, that this deceive
thee not.

And lastly consider, whether this consent that 3 Imperfect consent.
thou give, be a perfect consent; for there is a certain imperfect consent
that deceives many, when a man has (as I may so speak) a kind of wambling
that way, but it does not boil up to that full height of resolution, when a
man makes some kind of offer, he makes well toward it, but he does not fully
resolve to match with the Lord Jesus, and this is that, that excludes many from
this match, that, though they have a kind of willingness and velleity, yet it
does not come to a fixed, solid, peremptory resolution. Now, you must know
this, that whosoever matcheth with Jesus Christ, must be so fully resolved,
that he must be shook off again with nothing: this resolution when it is
imperfect and by halves, when thou doubtest whether thou should do it or
no, this is a consent that is not accepted, all this while there is an error
on thy part, this is the second thing to be considered, as thou must consider
whether thou beleevest the consent of Jesus Christ, so I say in the second
place, if thou would know whether there be a match between Jesus Christ
and thee, consider what thy own consent is, and take heed thou be not
deceived in it.

Thirdly, to know whether there be a match 3 Way to know we are matched to
Christ by our union.
between the Lord and thee, consider whether there be an union made between
you and him: now, this union with Christ, it is not merely a relative union,
such as is between husbands and wives, but besides this, there is a real
union, when CHRIST sends his Spirit into the heart; therefore thou must
consider, whether thou have the Spirit of thy Husband dwelling in thee or no,
for except thou have the holy Ghost to dwell in thy heart, it is impossible
that there should be any match, for there will be always jarres and
dissentions between you, when thou have the same Spirit, then there is the
same will, the same desires, you love and hate the same things; therefore in
considering, whether there be a match or no, this is a great thing, it will not
deceive you, By the Spirit.
consider whether thou have the Spirit of thy husband. I find that the Apostle
in all his Epistles, he takes this as the sure argument to persuade himself
and others, that they were grafted into Christ, that they had received the
earnest of the Spirit, I need not name to you particular places, they are so
exceeding frequent. If any man have not the Spirit of Christ, he is not his.
Romans 8. but if you have the Spirit, you are sure you have the Son. Consider
therefore, whether Romans 8.
you have this Spirit in you or no, whether thou walk according to the Spirit
or the flesh, guided and led by the Spirit of Christ in all, for that is the
way to know if thou have the Spirit. A man may walk after the vanity of his
own heart, A man may walk after the vanity of his own mind, when yet he has
some good motions and good desires; so that if thou would try thy self,
whether thou have the Holy Ghost, the spirit of thy Husband, thou shall find it
by thy constant course, as you have it, Gal. 5. If you have the spirit, live in
the Spirit, that is, consider what thine ordinary course is, whether thou be
guided by the Gal, 5.
Holy Ghost or no.

To know whether this spirit dwell in us or no, we must not take it upon
conceit and fancy, but The work of the Spirit in us.
you shall find it by real and sure effects. If you have the Spirit, he will
be as fire in you, I will Baptize you with the Holy Ghost, and with fire, that
is, the Holy Ghost shall be as fire; now the nature of fire is, to discover it
self where it is. If the Spirit be in thee, he will be as the Pilot in the
ship, he will direct thy course, and build up the Kingdom of Christ in thy
heart, that is the third thing, consider whether thou have the Spirit of the
Son.

Fourthly, if thou would know whether Christ have matched with thee, then be
sure of this, that 4 Way by sanctification.
he has washed thee from thy filthiness, look to that as another mark
whereby thou may discern it: For though JESUS CHRIST marry thee when thou
art in thy blood, yet when thou art married once, he suffers thee not to
continue so, but he will cleanse and wash thee from it, as we see in this
Chapter, the Apostle exhorts Husbands to love their Wives, as Christ loved the
Church, and gave himself for it, that he might sanctify, and cleanse it with
the washing of water, by the word, that he might presentit to himself a
glorious Church not having Spot or Wrinckle, or any such thing, but that it
should be holy without blemish; mark it, when Christ has married thee, his
end is, to present thee pure, to wash thee. Now consider whether thou find thy
self cleansed from thy filthiness, and from all filthiness, for when he
washes any, he washes them from top to toe, though not fully in respect of
degrees, yet he suffers not any spot or wrinckle, to remain constantly upon
them. For the meaning is, not that this wishing is perfected suddenly, when
we come to heaven, there shall not be the least wrinckle at all: but
notwithstanding he so washes them here, that there is no spot remains, How
far the Saints are washed.
that is, they allow not themselves in any sin, that they wallow not in any
puddle, he so cleanses them from every sin, that it does not abide there, a
believer is still purifying himself, though he be still defiled; therefore
consider with thy self, whether Christ have thus cleansed thee from all
pollution of flesh and spirit. Beside in this washing, he does not only
cleanse thee from all outward defilements, but he will wash thee from thy filthy
nature, not only from the outward staynes, but from that swynish nature: for
though a swine be washed clean, if she retuaine her nature, she will be ready
to fall into the next puddle she meets with; but now when Christ washes his
Church, he washes them from the filthiness of their nature, even every man
whom he washes: Therefore consider if thou find this purifying of the Holy
Ghost or no; for whosoever is washed by Christ, there is a certain simplicity
and plainness of heart, that though he fall into sin, yet his heart is
upright with Christ, as we see in 2. Cor. 11. 3. 4. I am jealous over you with
a godly jealousy, for I have prepared you for one husband, to present 2 Cor.
11. 3, 4.
you a pure Virgin to Christ, I fear least as the Serpent beguiled Eve, so
your minds should be corrupted from the simplicity that is in Christ. Mark,
the Apostle speaks of the Church, as it is in this life, my endeavor is to
present you as a Virgin, what is that? that you be not corrupted from the
simplicity that is in Christ, but that you may have a plain heart, that has
no deceit, that there be not a double mind. Christ so far cleanses, that
the heart is upright in every thing, therefore by that thou shall know whether
thou be washed or no, for though Jesus Christ marry us when we are Ethiopians,
yet when he has married us, he puts a beauty upon us. Consider whether this
beauty be put on thee or no, whether thou be so washed from thy filthiness,
that there does a new beauty appear, that that natural blackness of thine
be removed throughout: indeed it is removed but in part for degrees, but yet
there is a general, throughout removing of it all over.

Lastly, if thou would know whether thou be matched or no with him, consider
whether thou 5 The wedding garment. Matthew. 22.
have the wedding garment. In Mat. 22. and Luke 14. you shall find the parable
of the King inviting men to the marriage of his son, and there are many that
come, but one of them wanted a wedding garment: What is the meaning of that?
many men come to the wedding for cheer, many for the benefit they might
receive, or such by respects, because they would do as others do, because
they might escape censure; many motives there might be to bring men to this
marriage feast: but now to have the wedding garment, that is the trial.

Now what is the wedding garment?

It is a wedding affection, it is to love the Bridegroom Wedding garment what*
himself, his person, for we are not only guests, we are not so to
understand it, but such guests as withal are married to the Son. Now he that
comes to this wedding without a conjugall wedding affection, he comes without
the wedding garment; therefore consider with thy self whether thou have that
affection or no.

You will say, what is this marriage affection? Quest. Ans. 1. Marriage
affection what? 1 To prefer Christ.


I answer, it is such an affection whereby a man pitches on Christ, he chooses
him before all others, as his Husband: the wedding affection, is such an
affection, as when one prefers her husband before all others: Consider whether
there be such an affection, that thou can prefer Jesus Christ, before all
things in the world besides.

Again consider, whether thy affection be fixed 2 To look to his person.
on his person: for the affection of an harlot may be toward her husbands
goods, and toward the commodities and benefits by him; but art thou able to
love the person of Jesus Christ, so as to delight in him, and desire his
presence, and seek him, so that thou carest not for any thing so thou may
have him? this is to have a wedding conjugall affection: but this is not all
that makes the marriage garment.

Consider besides what boldness thou have in his presence, for perfect love
casts out fear: now by 3 Boldness.
perfect love, is not meant only love in the perfection, that is grown to a
height, (such we shall not have, till we come to heaven) but by perfect love
is to be understood sincere love: therefore if thou would know if thou have
the wedding garment, whether this conjugal affection be wrought, thou shall
know it by the boldness thou have with thy husband: will thou say, thou art
married to him, and yet dare not speak to him, but look on him, as on a
Judge, as a hard Master, or a stranger? that thou dare not ask any thing of,
or if thou do, thou know not whether thou shall obtain it? there is a
certain boldness and familiarity goes along with this, is there such a
disposition put into thy heart?

Besides this is not all, there do withal accompany this all spiritual
graces, that cloathe thy 4 Spiritual graces.
soul, that do alter the habit of it, for there is something understood in
the similitude of a garment, as importing the very clothing that the soul
wears, when it has another habit than it had before. Now this clothing is a
party-colored garment made of all the graces of the Spirit; therefore if thou
would know whether thou have this wedding garment or no, thou must look to
every grace, for the Image of God is nothing else, but the bundle and heap of
all graces: as the old man, the image of Satan, and the first Adam is the heap
of all corruptions; so this wedding garment, this Image of the new Adam, it is
that which consists of all the graces, these must cloth thy soul.

And now beloved, when this is done, the second thing that we are to do after
this examination, is,

To persuade every man to be content to take Use 2. To persuade, men to take
Christ.
Jesus Christ for his Husband. If already you be in Christ, we have no more to
do, but to exhort you, but to continue and intend that desire, and affection,
and love to your Husband; but if upon this examination you find you are yet
strangers, I say the next use we are to make of it, is to bring your hearts to
a willingness to match with him. Now to persuade you to this, I will pitch
briefly on these three particulars. Motives. I Our necessity of him.


First, consider whether thou be able to live without a husband or alone? The
truth is, thou must marry of necessity, or thou art undone; for it is the case
of every man which is said of the Captive woman in Deuteronomy. 21. when they had
overcame a City, if there were a woman among them Deuteronomy. 21.
to whom they had a favor, they might marry her if they would, if she
consented, she saved her life by it. I say, that is the case of every man
living, that when we were all exposed to death, Jesus Christ had a favor to
us, and we must marry him or we dye for it. Now therefore when he shall be a
suitor to thee, consider what thou have to say, art thou able to live without
him? art thou able to pay thy ransom? certainly thou art not able, and is it
not then a madness in thee to refuse? Consider what is thy debt, and consider
thou 1 Our debt
art bound to pay the utmost farthing which the Lord requires at thy hands:
when a man considers seriously of this, that every idle word, every sin of
omission, or that is committed, is a debt, and stands upon his own score, and
that himself is not able to pay, this will make a man begin to look about
him. My beloved, all the afflictions, that we have in this life, they are but
a paying the use money required for the debt, the maine debt remains entire,
that must be Simile.
paid at that day, the day of wrath, at the day of declaration of the just
Judgment of God; therefore consider first thy debt, and withal consider thy
poverty. It Is true, though thou were in debt, if a Poverty.
thou had somewhat to pay it, it were another matter. And indeed, many men
are puffed up with a conceit, and think they have something to pay, and this
is the case of all hypocrites, that think they have some good works, they
have done many good things, they come to Church duly, etc. But you must know
that all this will not pay your debt, as it is Revel. 3. I counsel thee to buy
of me gold, that thou may be rich. Revel. 3.
Till a man has a husband, till he have Jesus Christ, all the works he does
are little worth.

I, but though a man be in debt, and have not Object.
a penny to pay his debt, yet there is usually a time given, a man is not cast
presently into prison.

I answer, though thou be not, yet thou art in Answ. Though a man in debt be
not imprisoned, he is in fear.
danger all the time; and it is a miserable thing to live in another man's
danger, to be in danger of an enemy, when a man shall have many writs out
against him, and knows not when the Sergeant will seize upon him; I say, put
the case he be not arrested, yet he is in continual fear; this is thy case
before thou be under this covert, before thou be matched to this thy husband
Christ: when thou have him, thou art safe, but in the mean time thou art in
continual fear. As Heb. 2. 14. Heb. 2. 14:
it is given as a reason, Why Christ took part with the children, that he
might deliver them, that for fear of death, were all their life long subject
to bondage; So that though a man be not cast into prison, he is all his life
time subject to bondage. Now if it were but to be delivered from this fear,
and bondage that every other man is in, it were a great motive to move us to
this. I, but is there not Quest.
some bail, may not a man flee from this arrest?

I answer no, every man without Christ is like Answ. No bail or escape from
this danger.
a woman that is friendlesse, that has none to stand for her, that is
destitute of wisdom, that has no counsel to direct her. We are destitute
of righteonsnesse, we have none to speak for us, we are destitute of
sanctification, we have none to cleanse us, from our leprosy; we are
destitute of redemption; therefore you know it is said, Jesus Christ is made
Wisdom, Righteousness, Sanctification, and Redemption: which implies thus
much, that 1 Cor. 1. 30.
till we be married to him, we have neither wisdom, we have no
righteousness to speak for us, we have none to cleanse us, we have none to
redeem us; this is the first thing to move thee to it.

Secondly, when thou have well pondered this 2 Motive. The excelency of Christ.
first motive, that thou art not able to live alone without a husband, I say,
consider secondly the excellency of thy husband, who it is that is a suitor to
thee. And here first look on Christ himself, with all his Attributes, and how
that the Lord himself will become thine; consider 1 Himself and his
attributes.
the infinite wisdom of Christ, his Almighty power, consider his eternity;
consider whatsoever is in him, and think with thy self, that all this is in
Him, who offers himself to be my husband, and all this shall be mine, all
this is for my use, and advantage; this is a great motive to win us to match
with him, as you know in earthly marriages, the excellency of a husband, the
parts that are in him, those that are inherent in his very person, is the
greatest motive of all other: think therefore of all Christ's excellencies, draw
to your selves some Idea of him, and think all these are mine, for my use, as
his wisdom to give me direction, his power and strength for my protection
upon all occasions, whatsoever is in him is mine, he himself is become my
portion; this is a great motive to us.

Besides this, consider that thou have not only 2 What we have by him.
the person of Christ alone, with all his Attributes, but how much comes with
him, which add to this; as the immunity thou have by matching with Christ,
that when thou art once matched with him, thou art under covert, thy 1 Our
immunity.
debts are paid, thou art out of all danger. My beloved, if it were but to be
freed from those injuries, and wrongs that a woman is subject unto, from potent
enemies that are able to hurt her upon all occasions, you know it is a great
motive to move her to match. Now Jesus Christ frees us from all those great
enemies of our salvation, as it is Luke 1. 74. That being delivered from the
hands of all our enemies, we might serve him in holiness Luke 1. 74.
and righteousness all the days of our lives. This we have by him, that when
Satan shall come to us, and arrest us, we may say to him, I am now under
covert, thou must go to my husband, he is bound to pay my debts. My beloved,
we consider not what a benefit this is, what it is to have Jesus Christ at such
a time, when you come to dye, when you shall be arrested by death; now to have
the Lord Jesus to undertake all your debts, now to be under covert it is a
great matter; as you know (to express it to you a little what it is,) Judas
when he had committed that great sin, he was indicted and arrested, he had
none to flee to; Peter when he had committed a sin, he had a covert to go
to, and you all know the difference that was between their conditions in the
events upon both; Saul and David if you look on them in their distress, David
had a covert to go to when he was in distress, (for I speak not now of the
debt of sin, but of all calamities in which you shall have a husband to be a
refuge for you,) I say, David when he was in distress upon any occasion, when
his City was burned and his Wives taken, he had a covert to fly to; but when
Saul was in distress, he had none, he went to the Lord, but he had no
answer. I say, it is a great matter to consider this, that we have a covert,
that when the Lord shall rain down fire and brimstone upon us, when there is
no rock to shelter us, now for Jesus Christ to be a covert to us. We know the
Egyptians when they were in that deadly storm of hail, the Israelites were
in their houses under covert, and looked out, and saw the danger they were in,
and they then knew the benefit what it was to be under shelter: such is the
condition of all those that are in Christ.

Besides this immunity, consider all those great privileges that do come by
him, for this 2 Privileges and riches.
is not all; but when you have matched with him, he will make you rich, he
will make you heirs of all things, all the precious promises belong to 1 In
promise.
you, which it may be you reckon a small matter; but the promises of God are
most precious, and will make one rich, as you know a man that has nothing but
bills and bonds, and evidences, may be very rich, though he have not a penny
by him; so to have all the promises belong to us: now as soon as we were in
Christ, there is not a promise in all the book of God, but it belongs to us;
that is the misery of another man that is not in Christ, there is not one
promise his. Therefore till thou have him, thou have nothing.

And besides the hope of the promises, consider 2 In possession.
what you have for the present, what dowry he brings with him, in 1 Cor. 3.
Wherefore let no 1 Cor. 3. ult.
man rejoice in men; for all things are yours, whether it be Paul, or Apollos,
or Cephas, or the world, etc. all is yours, and you are Christ's. Mark, here is
the expression of that dowry, that Christ brings with him an Inventory of the
wealth of a Christian, says he, when once you are matched to Christ, all that
is his belongs to you; Paul, or Apollos, or Cephas, all his servants, all are
bestowed on you, to wait upon the Spouse, as it were; he has given all to
you, all those gifts are bestowed on them for your sakes: besides, the world is
yours, that is, as far as it is good for you, the world and all things in the
world are so a Christians; though he have but little of it, yet indeed the
world is his; other men are the worlds: if we speak properly, the world is
not said to be any man's, but only a Christians; for his use, he is the master
of it. Indeed, whilst a man is in his minority, (you know the heir does not
possess his goods, because it is the time of his education, so) it may be
thou have not full possession: It is dispensed to thee as the Lord sees meet,
because it is the time of thy nurture and education, thou art in thy minority,
but yet the world is thine. Then he goes on, life or death, that is, all this
life is bestowed on a Christian for his advantage: to another man it is not so;
the longer he lives, it is the worse for him, he has the further reckoning;
it does but make his sin ripe, and but lay up a treasure of wrath for him; so
that all a man's life long, he does but gather sticks to make a fire to
consume him at the last day. But now in the portion of a Christian, this is one
thing, that Jesus Christ bestows upon him, that all his life is for his
advantage; all the good works he does, all those shall be remembered, all
those shall go along with him and bring a sure reward; and then not only life
is his, but death is also. My beloved, it is a strange thing, that this should
be reckoned among the dowries, and commodities, and privileges that Christ
bestows on his Spouse, to bring death with him; yet this is a great
privilege, that he bestows death on us; for what were the condition of a
Christian if death were not? were it not the most miserable of all other? for
if there were no death, there should be no Resurrection: therefore death must
needs be a very great advantage: it is that, that makes way for us, to deliver
us out of all the miseries of this life, and to give us possession of that
everlasting Kingdom that is provided for us. Whether they be things present,
or things to come, that is, all that belong to this present life, and not only
those, but those that belong to the life to come, all those are yours: this is
that we have by Christ. 3 The life we shall lead with him.


And lastly consider, how fair a life you shall live with him, in what plenty;
that there is nothing that your heart can desire, but you shall have it; In
that security, that you need fear no enemy; whereas other men have a thousand
fears, a Christian has this benefit, he makes the Lord his dread, that he
need fear nothing; but he is delivered from the hands of all his enemies.
Consider with what contentment thou shall live, that thou have such a husband
that is an adequate object (that I may so say) that shall fill thy soul, that
when thou have him, thou need not thirst after any thing besides. That is
the great benefit that is promised, that thou shall Thirst no more, that is,
when a man is married to the Lord Jesus, he is so filled and satisfied with
contenment, that he lets all other things go: if he have them so it is; if
he want them, it is no great matter: he has one that is contentment enough to
him, he has one that is instead of all.

But you will say, if I have this husband, I Object.
must live in subjection to him; our wills must be subject to his will; our
liberty must be taken from us.

My beloved, what if it be? you must consider Answ. What kind of subjection
we are in to Christ.
what kind of subjection it is, it is such a subjection as whereby the members
are subject to the head: now do you think it any burden, for the members to
be subject, and to be ruled by the head? it is a natural subjection, that
is, such a subjection as is convenient for you; therefore if you complain, you
have lost your liberty, know it is quite contrary when you have matched with
Christ, now you are delivered from bondage and set at liberty.

I, but you will say, it is a pleasant thing for a Object.
man to do what he will; liberty is a sweet thing, and to part with this, and
now to live under a husband, it is a hard case.

For this my beloved I beseech you consider, that it is true, for a man to live
as he will, if his Answ. Liberty in evil hurtful.
will be right, it is a great benefit; but for a Frantic man to do what he
will, for a man whose will is set upon things hurtful to himself, for such a
man to have his will, it were better he were restrained: and this is the case
of every man till he be matched with the Lord Jesus: therefore that you may
know what this liberty is, we will put you but this case; you must know that
every man is married to one of these two husbands, either he is subject to the
law of righteousness, or to the law of sin; either he is in bondage to the
flesh or to the spirit, either he is subject to Christ, or else he is subject
to Satan. Now consider which of these two thou would choose, whether to be
subject to the law of sin, or to Christ: and that you may know which to choose,
I will express it to you by this; It is as when a sick man lies between the
Physician and the disease, he must needs be subject to one of Simile.
them: the disease counsels him to do one thing, the Physician another: now
consider which of these two thou would obey.

You will say, I would do what I list, I would do as my disease suggests to
me, and would have me do: that seems easy for the present, but will not
this increase thy bondage, and pay thee with death in the end? on the other
side, if thou be content to be subject to the Physician, and have thy will
subject to his, does not this draw to liberty and restore health, and bring
thee to life? therefore consider what a small objection that is, and consider
withal, what you will choose; for I say, every man must be subject to one
husband; and that you may see the difference of these husbands, consider that
in Romans, 7. you Romans 7.
shall find there, that whosoever is not married to Christ, is subject to
another husband, that is, the Law. Know you not brethren, that the Law has
dominion over a man as long as he lives? for the woman that is subject to a
man is bound by the Law to the man while he lives, and if she take another
man, she shall be called an adulteress: but if the man be dead, she is freed
from the Law, so that she is not an adulteress, though she take another man.
This is but the similitude: but the meaning is, before ever a man be married
to Christ, he is married to the Law, and he cannot be married to Christ Jesus,
till he be dead to the Law; and when he is dead once to that, then he may be
married to him. Now you shall see the reddition of this similitude: so you
brethren are dead to the Law by the body of Christ, that you might be married
to another, to him that was raised from the dead, that you might bring forth
fruit unto God. For when you were in the flesh, the motions of sin that are
by the Law had force in your members to bring forth fruit unto death, etc. The
meaning is this, that till a man be matched to Jesus Christ, the Law of God,
the moral Law that is written in every man's conscience, it rules there like an
hard husband, a severe cruel husband, that sets an hard task to do, and
gives no strength at all to do it, and therefore it brings forth death: for
when the Law commands a man to do a thing, he has no ability to perform it:
and withal it does signify unto him, that if he do not perform it, he shall
be cursed; this is to be subject to the Law: and so a man lives in bondage
all his time; so that whosoever is not married to Christ, he is all the while
subject to an evil conscience, to the Law that suggests what he should do,
with threatening him if not; and when conscience tells him, that he has not
performed it, it is a continual vexation, a burden and a grief to him: but
now when he is married to Christ, then he serves in newness of spirit, not in
the oldnesse of the letter, as it follows there, that is, he does every thing
freely, he does it out of choice, he does that which his own spirit caries
him to; look what commandment he has, he has some ability to perform it.

Again, he serves a kind husband, that takes every thing in good part, that
will not pay him with death, as his first husband does. I say consider this,
and let it be the second motive.

The third thing I will conclude with, is, the danger of refusing him, wherein
I thought to have bin 3 Motive, the danger of refusing.
large, but I can but touch it. I say consider this, that if thou refuse, it is
the greatest sin that thou can commit: for thou must know this, that when the
Lord Jesus Christ shall become a suter to Refusing Christ, the greatest sin.
thee, for thee then to refuse, thou provokest him to anger. I dare say, it
goes beyond all the sins thou have committed; for know this, he is not a bare
suter, but a suter that has paid dear for his wife; he has purchased thee
at a dear price, with the shedding of his own blood: so that if thou will not
hear his suit, he loses not only his labor in suing, but the price that he
paid for thee, for the very blood of Jesus Christ shall be put upon thy score.
To have the Lord as suing to thee thus despised, you know, Romans 2. 4. 6.
Despising Romans 2. 4. 6.
the patience of God, treasures up wrath against the day of wrath. Now
despising kindness is greater, and the contempt of it, does more incense the
Lord to anger. Now therefore when the Lord shall be a suter to us, one would
think we should rather be suitors to him: but when he shall condescend to be a
suter to us, and be refused, think what a provocation it is; I will give you
but one instance, that you may know what it is to refuse this suit. The Jews
when Christ came in the flesh, it is said, He came to his own, he made offer
of himself, but his own received him not, but refused him, they would none of
him. John, 1. He came to his own, but Ioh. 1.
his own received him not, you see how Christ took this at their hand, you
see, For this the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost. Compare now all
the The greatest sin of the Jews, and had the greatest punishment.
sins of the Jews, and all the punishments that were upon them before this
time, they were nothing to this.

For first you see, that for sixteen hundred years 1 The wrath of God has
been on them longest for it.
welnigh, the wrath of God has layne on them; take the times of the Lords
wrath formerly upon that nation, it may be for seventy years, or for forty
years, as in the time of the Judges, and in the captivity of Babylon, what was
that to this wrath?

Secondly, in those times, though they were in captivity, and were hardly used,
yet the nation 2 Their Nation is dispersed.
was still kept together, and restored again; now they are scattered to all
nations of the earth, so that this very sin of the Jews in refusing Jesus
Christ, you see how the Lord was offended with it, as the Apostle expresses
it, the wrath of God is come upon them to the utmost: mark it, for it is your
own case, that when we preach the Gospel, and offer Christ, we are the
friends of the Bridegroom: our business is, to present you as a pure Virgin to
Christ, and when you will not hear, but refuse when we beseech you to be
reconciled, you commit the same sin that the Jews did, when they would not
receive Christ: this is the case of every man that refuses, you know those
that were bid to the wedding; the text says, The King was exceeding angry, and
pronounced this, that not one that was bid should taste of the Supper: thus for
a man to refuse, we know not what God will do to that man: we cannot
distinguish of the time: secret times belong to him: but for a man to refuse at
any time, when he is invited to come to Christ Jesus, either by the preaching
of the Word, or by the secret motions of the Spirit, it is a dangerous thing.
Who knows whether ever thou shall be invited more? as you see when they
refused, the Lord did not send the second time, but pronounced this peremptory
conclusion, and sentence upon them, Not a man that was invited should come.

An objection may be made, which I will an Object. The consideration of the
benefits by Christ, serve.
swer, and so proceed: which is concerning these motives I have given, and
that is, whether we may use such to our hearts, to move us to take Christ, as
to consider the privileges and liberty we shall have with him; for will some
say, we are bound to match with Christ merely out of love to his person: how
shall these be used as motives then?

These motives serve notwithstanding to two Ans.
ends.

First they are a good introduction to lead us to 1 To lead us to match with
him.
the match: for when we make a tender of Christ, men will not hearken to us; as
many a woman will not hear of such a suter; but when she is told, that he
has such an estate, that he will bring her to such an house, thus and thus
furnished, that she shall have these and these commodities by him, it may be
that will win her thus far as now to see him, she is content now that he
should come, and be a suter, she is content to confer with him; so I say,
this is that that brings every man first to look after Christ Jesus, to admit
him as it were, to be content to see his person, to give him leave to confer
with them; therefore that is one use to be made of them. 2 To make us more
willing.


The second use of such motives is, when a man has resolved on the match, it
is a great help to make him the more willing. When a man or a woman has
resolved on this match, and withal considered these and these additions, I say
they add, they help well to his resolution: so that when respect to his
person, has once set the compass, these considerations of punishment and
reward, they are good to fill the sails, and to carry the ship along, and to
drive it to the Haven; although still the principal motive be a mere respect
unto his person. I say that use these have, to bring us to look to Christ.
But when once they have brought us to the knowledge of Christ, to be acquainted
inwardly with him, now the heart of every man is to be content with him alone,
though there be nothing beside, and indeed it is that which makes the match,
only these helps are good additions, these draw us on to make our consent and
choice, and willingness the more full, and perfect: but this but by the way,
only to answer that objection.

Now to come to the maine impediments that 3 impediments that hinder from
Christ.
hinder men from Christ, it is worth all our considerations, to see what it is
that keeps men off, which is not only profitable to bring them in, that are
yet strangers, but also to confirm those that are already entered into covenant
with the Lord Jesus, and you shall find one of these three things keep men
off.

Some there are that never heard of the Lord Jesus, some there are that hear
of such an offer, but 3 Sorts of men. 1
cannot believe it, some again that do believe it, yet are not willing to
live under him, but would live according to their liberty, they are not willing
to change their condition, even as sometimes there is a Proclamation out for
pardoning of Pirates, it may be there are many Pirates that never heard of this
Proclamation, these cannot come in, they know it not, and this is the case of
those to whom the Lord Jesus is not preached or remain ignorant of him.

Secondly, there are some other Pirates, that 2.
hear of it, but they believe it not, they think it is but a trap to get them
in, they cannot believe that those great rebellions that they have committed
can be forgiven. There is a third sort that believe 3.
it, that make no question but they shall be pardoned if they come, but they
think it a better course to live by piracy still, rather than to come in under
the law to live in subjection, they think they shall live a poorer life and be
more restrained, they are not willing to change their condition. Now for the
first of these, we have nothing to do with 1
them, for we speak to none but those that have heard of the Proclamation,
that know well enough there is such an offer made, therefore our business is
with the two second.

First I will begin with those that will not believe, that there is such a
pardon; that cannot 2 Those that will not believe pardon.
think that the Lord Jesus is willing to match with them, this is a common
case, many a man when he looks on his rebellions, is ready to say, why; is it
possible that I may be admitted to match with the Lord Jesus? I that have an
heart so hard, such lusts? I that have committed such rebellions against him.
Yes, whosoever thou art, I am bold to say to thee, (and thou must think it as
true, as if Christ himself should speak from heaven) that if thou do come in,
thou shall be received.

Oh! but is it possible that such a wretch as I am Quest.
may be advanced and raised to such a degree of honor

Yes, it is most possible, the Lord Jesus may Answ. Christ willing to receive
great sinners. Deuteronomy. 21.
have a favor to thee, it is our message to come and tell thee so much, only
thou must do as the captive woman in Deuteronomy. 21. when any had a favor to a
woman that was taken captive, she must put off her old clothes, she must put on
new apparel, she must be washed and purified, and pare her nails, and so she
must become his wife; so I say to thee, the Lord is willing to match with thee,
only thou must change thy raiment, thou must wash thee and pare thy nails,
etc. Therefore beloved, let none in this case be discouraged, as indeed we are
exceeding apt to be, and ready to do in this case, as Gideon, when the Angel
appeared to him, and told him he should do great matters, that he should
judge Israel, that he should deliver them out of the hands of the Midianites,
what says Gideon? Lord (says he) What am I and my father? he is one of the
poorest in Manasses Tribe, and I am the least in my fathers family, and is it
possible that I should be raised to such honor? yes says the Lord, it shall
be done, I will confirm it, thou have my word, and I will confirm it by
miracle, as you know he did by the burning of the Sacrifice, and by the dew on
the Fleece, when all the earth was dry. I say, the same is our case, when we
hear such a thing as this, that we shall be made Queens, that we shall match
with Christ, when a man is little in his own eyes, he wonders at it; I say,
the Lord will make it good to thee, thou shall have a word and a miracle to
confirm it, for indeed beloved, it is a thing that needs a miracle, that the
Son of God, the Lord Jesus, should come, and match with such wretches as we
are. 1


You will say, where is this word?

You shall find it in Romans 4. 5. He justifies the ungodly, He has given his
word for it. Romans 4. 5.
I will take but that place only, Abraham believed in him that justifies the
ungodly, and his faith was accounted to him for righteousness, that is though
thou be an ungodly man, though thou be a Pirate, a Rebel, it is no matter, the
Lord will match with thee notwithstanding, and pay all thy debts and justify
thee; indeed after that, he will sanctify thee, and change thy heart; but yet
this is thy comfort, that though at present thou be ungodly, yet
notwithstanding he will match with thee. Beloved, this is a sure word, and this
is our great consolation, that though we be in our blood, yet then the Lord
makes the match: indeed afterward he washes and cleanses us: therefore say
not, I am black, and therefore the Lord can have no delight in me, and what
can he see in me, to marry with me? for he will marry with thee even then.
Only when he has married thee, then he will change thy nature, he will change
the skin of the Blacke-more, then he will put a new beauty on thee, this is thy
comfort, that there is this difference, between the marriage of Christ, and
the marriage among men, when we come to match, we must find beauty, first
some amiable thing in the party; but the Lord looks on us, when we are the
most loathsome creatures in the world, and then he makes the match, and after
he puts that beauty on us, that may cause him to delight in us.

You will say, here is the Word, but where is the 2 Confirmed it by miracle.
miracle to confirm this?

I answer, this very word has a miracle going along with it, and you shall see
them put together in Matthew. 4. 23. where you shall see the Lord Jesus Mat. 4.
23.
when He came to His own, to make a tender of Himself, in what manner He
comes, says the Text, He went about preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom,
that is, to tell men this good news, that if they would match with Him, they
should have a Kingdom: Here is the Word, and see the Miracle follows, He
went about preaching the Gospel of the Kingdom, and healing sicknesses, and
diseases, there is the miracle, that seeing it would be a wondrous thing that
the Lord should match with dust and ashes, that He should bestow Himself
thus freely on us, says the Lord, if you will not believe me for the words
sake, yet for the Miracles sake, you see what I do, I that preach this.

But you will say, these Miracles were wrought long ago, if they were done
now, it were another thing.

Beloved, it is all one, for know that this word and miracle went then
together, the word is as ancient as the miracle, therefore you must make the
same use of them now, as you would have done then; indeed if the word were now
delivered, and the miracle wrought long ago, it were another case, but when he
that said the word, at the same time confirmed it with these miracles, this may
work belief.

You will say, this miracle confirms it in general, if the Lord should speak
personally to me, and say, I will be thy Husband, this were to purpose.

Beloved, consider, it is all one, because you have this general, He bids the
Gospel be preached to every Creature; therefore, thou art sure thou art in
that number: consider that the word of promise also, which word you all know,
that Whosoever beleives shall be saved, that is, whosoever will take his pardon
Pardon offered to all.
shall be saved, and nothing keeps men from salvation, but the refusing it;
therefore say not, he that commits such and such sins, shall be damned, but
he that takes not the pardon shall be damned: Beloved, this is a matter of
great consolation, this is that that is our Freehold, we have a sure word, and
this is the Gospel that we have to preach, that whatsoever the rebels be,
and whatsoever the sins are, yet they may come in, and be received.

I, but my sins are great, as red as skarlet? Object. Answ.


What if they be? they shall be as snow.

But I have often committed them. No sin excepted.


What if thou have? He that said to thee, thou shall forgive thy brother to
seaventy times seven times, sure He is able to forgive to seaventy thousand
times seven times.

But my sins are exceeding great as the mighty mountains. They shall be
drowned in the bottom Ob. Answ.
of the Sea, that is as able to drown mountains, as the least hill.

Oh! but they are exceeding many; I am guilty of all variety of sins, there
is scarce any gross sin, but I have committed it.

There is as great variety and multitudes of mercy, to cover and swallow them.

You will say, This is possible if my heart were soft, able to repent; but I
have a hard obdurate heart.

If thy heart be hard, he can take away that stony heart, God can soften the
heart.
and give thee a fleshy heart; this he has promised: Why now what have thou
to do? even to lay fast hold on this word, as they did on the horns of the
Altar, and even go and say to the Lord, Lord I will hold me here. Lord, it is
thy word, thou can not deny it, Lord, if thou will kill me, here I will dye,
I will not let my hold go: I say, if thou do but take hold of this word, That
He justifies the ungodly, and whosoever will believe shall be saved: if thou
take this hold, I assure thee, my life for thine, it is impossible, but the
Lord should in the end give thee this answer, Be of good comfort, thy faith
has saved thee I deny not, but that the Lord may hold off for a while, for a
time he may keep off, and give thee hard words, and say as he did to the woman
of Canaan, that he is not sent to such a dog as thou art; but if thou persist
as she did, and keep close to this word of promise, then after thou shall
receive the same answer that she did, Thy faith has saved thee, be of good
comfort.

But you will say, if it be thus, this seems to be a very easy thing. Is
there no more to do?

I answer, yes: and thou must mark diligently, that thou run not away with a
false conceit He that comes in to Christ must
now.

First, thou must take out this pardon. You 1 Take out his pardon.
know a pardon in Law though the Prince give it, if it be not taken and sued
out, it will do a man no good.

Again, this pardon has certain conditions, thou must remember the
conditions; if thou will have the pardon, thou must observe the covenants and
conditions.

Lastly, know that this pardon may be for a certain time, after which the
pardon may be out of date.

For the first of these, you will say, what is it to take out the pardon?

Beloved, it is this, when a man has seen his To take out the pardon what.
sins and knows his need, and his rebellions (for that is first required) as
you know whosoever pleads a pardon, must know himself guilty, and then seeks
a pardon, prays earnestly day and night and gives not over, beseeches the
Lord to forgive his sins, and also if he stay long (as sometimes he does, as
we see in that Parable of the man that was in bed with his children, and loath
to rise) yet thou must continue knocking, and not give over till he give thee.

What is it, he will give me (you will say?)

That is, till he give thee a secret assurance, till he send His Spirit from
Heaven, to say to thy soul in thee, I am thy salvation, till he give thee
some secret comfort, when thou have that once, then thou have taken out thy
pardon. But till there be some calming of thy conscience, some secret answer
of the Spirit, though there be a pardon contained in the Word, thou have not
taken it out; for thou take it not out, till the Lord gives it out: and when
thou once gettest this secret hint, thou have thy pardon sued out. Now let
Satan and thine enemies come, thou may be bold to plead thou have thy pardon,
and it shall never be taken from thee; that is the first thing, To take out
thy pardon.

The second is, there is a condition required after taking it: there is this
condition in it, you 2 He must be no longer a rebel.
must be no longer rebels, you must come in, and be subjects, and serve and
obey your King. I say, you must remember this, therefore thou must go to the
Lord, and say, I know well there is such a condition in the pardon, I am
content to enter into covenant with thee; so that that which is past may be
cleared, I resolve for the time to come to serve thee, and fear thee, and obey
thee; I say, if thou can bring thy heart to this purpose and resolution, thou
have kept the condition.

But you will say, How shall we do to keep Quest.
it? it is one thing to purpose, but to keep it is hard.

I will be bold to say, take no care for that, Answ. If the purpose be sincere
God will give ability.
if thy purpose be sincere; I say this to any, let his purpose be sincere, and
his resolution without deceit and pretenses to serve the Lord, to cleave to Him
as an Husband; then, I say, the Lord has undertaken to give thee a new heart
still, and he will enable thee to keep it: bring thou a well bottomed new
resolution, so as to say, I will give up my self in obedience; and the LORD
has promised, it is one part of the Covenant, wherein he has promised not
only to forgive, but in Ezech. 36. He will give a new heart, and a new spirit:
Ezech. 36.
be thou but willing to take him, and thou shall be able to do that which
thou have undertaken.

Well, the last thing is the time of the pardon, 3 The time of the pardon.
there may be a time when the pardon is out of date.

You will say, what is that time? Quest. Ans. 1 The time of life.


Know that there is a double time, one is the time that is revealed to us, that
are the Ministers of the Gospel, that is, the time of this life, for we can
say nothing else to any man but this, At what time soever, while thou live,
thou repentest, thou shall be saved.

But then you must know, there is another time 2 The time of the offer.
besides this, a time that is not revealed to us, but known only to the Lord
Himself, which may be thy time, and is that distance of time, which is
between the first and the last offer.

It is indeed the very offer it self, the very opportunity that God gives to
thee, the very time of the tender of Christ to thy soul. Now this is only
known of the Lord himself, what that distance of time is between the first
offer and the last that ever he will make to thee, and after this time this
pardon is out of date to thee, though not to another, it is too late for thee
to come in.

You will say, what ground is there for this, Quest. A time only known to the
Lord. Answ.
that there is such another time, that is only known to the Lord?

My beloved, it is a point worth the considering, therefore you shall see a
ground for it, 2 Cor. 6. 2. when the Apostle had exhorted them 2 Cor 6. 2.
there, Not to take the Grace of God in vain, says he, This is the accepted
time, this is the day of salvation, implying, that all time is not the accepted
time, for then there needed no distinction; but when he says, This is the
accepted time, there is a secret intimation, that when salvation is offering
for ought thou know, this is so the accepted time, as that when that is
past, there is no more opportunity. So in Hebr. 3. When it is called to day,
that is, when the offer is making, that is the Heb. 3.
time.

Now to give you some instances of this, as well as we give you grounds from
the Word, in Instances of some that lost this time Genesis 4. Caine.
Genesis 4. God says to Cain, If thou do well, shall thou not be accepted? but
now after that time Cain was accursed and a brand set on him, the Lord gives
him over, he was excluded from the presence of the Lord for ever; there was a
secret time after, which the Lord made the offer no more. That was the case of
Saul, there was a Saul.
time, I say, Gods time, with Saul, was the time between the first offer and
the last, when he bid Samuel pray no more for him, and he told Samuel
resolutely and peremptorily, I have rejected him, and now there was no more
hope. And this was the case of the Jews, when he bade Jeremiah not to pray for
them, says he, I have resolved to destroy The Jews
them, the time now is past. And this was the case of Jerusalem, If thou hadest
known the things that belong to thy peace, in that thy day! if you ask what
that day was? I say you shall find the very period of it, Acts 13. 40. you Act.
13. 40
shall see there, when the offer was made fully (that was the Lords great mercy
to them, he does not give over a man, till he have made the clearly and
fully) in Ver. It was necessary we should speak the word first to you; but
since you put it from you, and judge your selves unworthy of eternal life, we
turn to the Gentiles; you may see their refusing before. The Jews they were
full of envy, and spoke against the things that He spoke; after this time the
Lord made no more offer: this I say, was there case, and it is resembled in the
Parable of them that were invited and refused; the inviters were sent forth no
more unto them. It was the case of Capernaum, and those Cities to whom the
seaventy were sent; if they would not receive Capernaum
them, they were to shake the dust of their feet against them.

Beloved, I beseech you consider this, for it is a matter of very much moment
to think with To take heed of neglecting this time.
your selves, what know I whether this be the very time when the Lord makes the
last offer, and that how ever, it will not last ever. So you see S. Paul to the
Hebr ends Chap. 3. when he had Heb. 3.
said, there is a certain day, he brings his proof, says he, did not the
Lord do so with your fathers in the Wilderness? Now you shall see with those
in the Wilderness, the Lord took ten refusals at their hands, These ten
times you have rebelled against me, and then he would endure no longer. So the
Lord deals at other times: it may be he will take but five refusals at
another, it may be twenty at another, it may be but one or two at a third man's
hand. I say, you must be exceeding careful and wary, for the end of this
Doctrine is to teach you to take heed of refusing Christ Jesus, of letting the
opportunity slip, (...) heed of refusing the time of the offer of Christ, the
accetped time, when the Lord offers Christ in the Word, and by his Spirit
accompanying it, it is dangerous to refuse. To conclude this point, consider,
when the Lord himself shall be a suter; beloved, we should be suitors to him,
but he is pleased to be a suter to us. And consider, that whereas other women
use to bring portions to their husbands, he is pleased to buy us, and to give
us portions, and can you find in your heart to refuse?

You will say; if I were sure the Lord would Object.
take me.

Beloved, you shall see how far he goes, Answ.
that we may put you out of all doubt.

First, he has made a very clear declaration That God is ready to receive
sinners.
of his good will: he says, Whosoever will come, shall be saved, he shall be
taken in, whosoever will come. This is not all, but he goes further then that,
he 1. He has declared it.
has not only set up such a Quicunque vult, but he sends home to us, he
calls and invites us, go, call and invite them to the marriage. This is not 2.
He entreats it.
all, but he goes yet further, he beseeches us, he becomes a downeright
suter, 2 Cor. 5. We are 2 Cor. 5. 19.
Ambassadors in Christ's stead, to beseech you to be reconciled. Nay beloved,
more then this, he is not a cold, but an importunate earnest suter, Go,
compel them to come in, says he, that is, with the strongest arguments you
can use: he does not rest here, here is as much as he can do by fair means:
but then he tryes the other, to see what he can do by foul means, then he
lays a command upon men, 1 John 1. 3. This is the Commandment, 3. Commands it.
that we believe in his Son; he commands all men living to come in, and
take Christ, and receive the pardon. And it is not a bare command, but he adds
a threatening; if they will not 1 Ioh. 1. 3. 4. Threatens if we come not in
take him, they shall be damned: which is the greatest threanings that can be.
Consider, will thou refuse now? I will say but this in a word, if thou will for
all this, it shall be the greatest matter against thee at the day of Judgment:
take all sins, the grossest Idolatry, and adultery, and whatsoever else: they
shall not be so much laid to thy charge when thou come to lie on thy
death-bead, as this; that Christ was preached, that there was so many offers
made, and yet thou would none of him. Therefore consider this, and say not
nay, alas, such conditions are required on my part, as I cannot perform them;
for beloved, there is nothing required on thy part but sincerity. Indeed that
is required: thou must Nothing required but sincerity.
not think when thou art matched to thy husband, to live as if thou were a
maid still; thou must not think to match with thy husband, and to live as thou
list, thou must not think to swear still, and follow the lust of
uncleanenesse still, and to follow thy drunkenness and good fellowship still,
thou must not think to match with the Lord Jesus, and break the Sabbath and
neglect holy duties, and violate thy conscience, thou must know, that all thy
old clothing, as I said before, must be put off, and not only so, but thy
nails must be pared, that is, those thoughts that thou reckonest less sins,
vain thoughts, idle thoughts, negligent performance of holy duties, or
whatsoever is of that nature, these nails must be pared, there must be a
sincere heart, to resolve to do all this. But so much for those second sort of
men, that will not believe there is such a pardon, that yet cannot think the
Lord Jesus is willing to match with them; and to pass by the great sins that
they have committed.

But now for the third sort, which is indeed of 3 Those that believe but will
not come in.
the greatest company of men; for we find not so many men doubt, whether they
shall be forgiven or no, but though they know there is a pardon, and that the
Lord will match with them, yet they are willing to live as they did, they are
not willing to come under his subjection to live by his Laws. Now besides
consider, what is the cause of this, what keeps men off from this.

First, you shall find one great general cause is Inconfideration: this is the
fault of young men, I Hinderance inconsideration.
that have a thousand vanities in their heads, and never think of matching
with Christ, and of their spiritual estate: And not of them only, but of
others too, who as they are held off by pleasures, so others by business, as
appears in those invited to the marriage: one went about his merchandise,
another to his Oxen, and never considered, they never took to heart this their
inviting to the marriage: consider that in Deuteronomy. 32. 27. When Deuteronomy. 32. 27
Moses had made an exhortation, that they should not receive the strange Gods
of the people, but come into covenant and be married to him (for that is the
scope of the Chapter) threatening withal, that when they should provoke him to
jealousy, he would provoke them; says he, Oh that you were wise to consider
your latter end, as if he should say; this is the cause that you come not in,
and keep not close to the Lord, Oh that you were wise to consider; for it is a
man's wisdom to consider this, for a wise man stands as one upon the top of an
high hill or a rock, and so he looks round about him, and sees all events
before they come, whereas a fool is taken unawares by death, he is arrested,
and judgment comes upon him on the sudden as a snare: therefore I say, thou
must consider. And yet this is the usual case of men, they go on in a secure
sleep in sinning whilst death and judgment breaks in upon them, which by
consideration might be prevented. Therefore if you ask me what you must
consider, I say, consider if this be not thy case, as it is of many men, many
owe more then they are worth, more then they know how to pay: now if they would
but consider their case, and but cast up their accounts, it may be they might
seek out for a match to discharge all, but they neglect it, and are secure,
and an arrest comes on them and they are cast into prison, and now it is too
late. Therefore I say to every man of you, consider thy debts, thy sins, yea,
consider those sins thou think are past so many years since, that ly
still, and thou hear no more of them, I say, consider them, and bring them
to mind, and consider what a sleping sin is. You may see it in the case of
Ioab, when he had committed those foul murders of Abner and Amasa, the Lord
let it sleep for a time, and Ioab was secure; but you see in due season, he
having not sued out his pardon, the arrest came upon him, and Solomon slew him.
And such was the case of the sin of Shemei that he committed against David, it
lay a sleep for a time. Such was the case of Joseph's brethren, in that they
did against Joseph, many years together it lay quiet, when it awakened, they
saw what it was with anguish. Therefore consider what a sleeping sin is, the
forgetfulness of which makes men secure. Men commit sins, and they are in
health, and forget them, and so not considering their debts, they regard not
this match, and go not about it.

There is another part of security, wherewith men are involved, and that is,
they think they 2 Me think their estate good enough.
have matched already with Jesus Christ, they think they are in an estate good
enough, and to come now to make a change of it, they think strict preciseness,
and more then needs.

And this one thing keeps many thousands off from matching, that they think
their debts are paid, that they are in good estate, and they think that they
are under covert. But to answer it in a word, I wish thee to consider those
plain places of Scripture, Gal. 5. 24. Whosoever is in Christ, has crucified
the flesh with the affections and lusts: and that in 2 Cor. 5. 17. Whosoever is
in Christ Gal. 5. 24
is a new creature, old things are passed away, all things 2. Cor. 5. 17.
are become new: and that Iam. 2. 10. If a man fail Iam. 2. 10
but in one point, (willingly and constantly) he is guilty of the breach of
the whole law: in Ezech. 18. Ezekiel. 18. 10
10, etc. The new translation does not so well express it as the old; If he
beget a Son, if he do any of these things, though not all, if he beget a
Son that is atheife, or a shedder of blood, if he do one of these things,
if not all, but either he eat upon the mountains, or have defiled his
neighbors wife, or have oppressed the poor, etc. if he have done but one of
these, he shall dye the death, his blood shall be upon his head. Not to name
more; I say, out of this I gather, He that allows himself in the least sin,
is not matched to Christ
that he that allows himself in the least sin, he that respects not all the
Commandments, and the least small particle in them, that man is not yet
matched with the Lord Jesus, and therefore do not deceive your selves with
vain words, to think that these excluding signs, and marks, and rules that
we give, are inventions of our own, that we are too strict beyond our
Commission. Beloved, this plain Word by which you shall be judged at the last
day, makes it plain to you, that except there be such a general reformation,
except you be new in all points, except all your lusts be crucified, except you
respect all the Commandments, and every particle thereof, unless that there
be a general sincerity, certainly you are excluded. Therefore I say, take all
these together, that though thou be quiet for a while, and free from the
arrest, that yet thou art not out of danger, thy sin is but laid asleep, etc.
I say, if a man do but seriously consider with himself, if he sit down, but
one half hour, and consider what the shortness of his life is, what his
danger is, and think there is another place that he must live in, for eternity,
and then consider this, I may be surprised on the sudden, as the foolish
Virgins; the Bridegroom came when they did not look for him; and if he do,
what is thy case? know this, that it is too late to be matched at that time; as
when the destroying Angel came, it was too late to sprinkle the doore-postes
with the blood of the Lamb; but the time of it, is the time of the Passe-over;
he will come at midnight, when thou look not for him; and if it were to be
done at that instant, no man should be damned; know this, that it must be done
before; therefore consider seriously, and loose not your souls by
inconsideration. But to proceed a little further to another impediment: for
when a man has considered the match, he begins to make objections against it,
as,

First, he looks upon his husband, and he sees Object.
he must live in a poor and mean condition, he 3 Impediment, the crosses that
follow.
must take up his Cross, and be despised, and contemned, and trampled upon,
and when he begins to think of this, he is unwilling to match: for says he, I
am not willing to live after this fashion.

To this I may answer in a word; for the Lord Answ.
himself gives a very direct and quick answer to this; says he, I will
deceive none of you, I will Those that have Christ must be content to suffer.
deal plainly with you, if you match with me, I say, your condition will be
very base, and mean, and Blessed is he that is not offended with that mean
condition. I confess, if you match with me, you must take up your cross, you
must be persecuted, and despised, and hated of all men; therefore says he,
choose you, I leave it to you to make your own choice; if you will not match,
you may choose. But says he, he that is not willing to loose his life, and
part with father and mother, and let lands, and credit, and liberty, and all
go, he is not worthy of me. Wherein he implies, that the Lord is worthy to be
matched with, notwithstanding all this base condition, and that thou art
unworthy of him, that stickest at it. And if thou did know who he was, thou
would notwithstanding match with him to choose. If the Bridegroom, the Lord
Jesus, should come in glory with his Bridegroomes apparel, if he should come
decked with ornaments, with thousands of his Angels about him, every man would
be willing to match with him; but here is the trial what thou will do at this
time, it appears not yet what he is, and what he will do, while he is now
covered with a base outside, now he is hid. But yet he deals plainly you see
with us. I remember a Story of Crates, the Philosopher, when a virgin desired
to match with him, he takes this course, he goes to her, and tells her, and
shows her his crooked-back, his staff, and his satchell, and says this to
her, this is thy husband, and thy portion, will thou be content to take such an
one as I? she persisted: but when she had him, she knew she had another manner
of husband then she looked for. I use it but for a resemblance; for after this
manner does the Lord Jesus deal with us. You must suffer the cross, and go
out of the Camp; this is your husband, this is your portion, the cross is your
jointure. Now thou may choose, if thou will match with him, so it is. I say
now to every man that is willing, that persists for all this; thou shall have
the King of heaven for thy husband, thou matchest with such an one, as shall
make thee happy for ever, this is thy happiness, thou shall have thy worst
first, the best is reserved for afterward: with the world it is quite
otherwise; there you have the best first, and the worst follows after:
Therefore here is the trial; all the matter is to love Christ, in a base and
mean estate, and I say this to thee, thou shall have the same answer from
Christ one day, that if thou be not content to match with him in a mean
condition, if thou will not take him for worse, thou shall never have him for
better; if thou will not have him in a low condition, thou shall not have him
in a glorious. Romans 8. Romans 8. 17
17. he says, those that suffer with him, shall also be glorified with him:
and so on the contrary, he that does not suffer with him, that is, he that is
not content to take him with sufferings, and with the Cross, he shall never
reign, and be glorified in heaven with him.

But yet men will still say, are not these hard Object.
conditions that goes with this match? if otherwise, I should much desire it.
And every man is content to have the kernel, but he would not trouble his
teeth with the hardness of the shell.

And indeed, there are in appearance hard conditions. For he must be taken for
a Lord, and an husband; and for this cause many will not take him, this keeps
many off.

And who would not be religious, if he thought it an easy thing to be
religious? Men think they shall be tired and strait-laced, and never be able
to endure the yoke.

But yet I say to every man that thinks so, he Ans. These seaming hard
conditions are easy.
shall not find it so, these conditions thathou think so hard, are easy.

First, the Lord has said in plain terms; if thou will believe his Word,
that His yoke is easy, and his burden light: I will make it plain to thee,
thou shall not deny it. There are but two things that make the burden of
Christ, that is his Law, to be hard, and that is either. 2 Things make the law
of Christ hard.


The contrariety, or, The disproportion.

For, there is nothing makes a thing hard, but one of these two.

One is the contrariety between our wills; the reluctance between our wills
and Gods. Christ 1 Contrariety
will have one thing, and we another: hence comes the difficulty. If our wills
were the same, then there were no difficulty, then a man lives as he would, as
he list. But beloved, if thou match with him, he will give thee another will;
he will take away that reluctance and renitency, he will take away thy old
nature, thou shall have a new nature, and a new will, and so then they are
easy.

The other is from disproportion: if a man have a great burden, and a little
strength, the burden 2 Disproportion.
proves heavy, why? not because the burden is in it self heavy, but because
there is but little strength. Now know, that Christ is such a husband, as that
what he gives in charge, he will give strength to do it; this I touched the
last time, in comparing the two husbands, Romans 7. see there our first husband,
the Law, to which Romans 7.
every man is married, till he be matched to Christ; that is an hard yoke, he
commands much and gives no strength to perform it, it commands all things
exactly. But the other husband requires but Evangelicall obedience, he
commands, but that is possible, and gives strength to do it. When again thou
servest him in newness of spirit; he will raise up thy strength, and make a
fitness, and sutablenesse, and proportion between thy strength and it;
therefore thou shall find no such difficulty in the thing, if thou resolve on
the match once, so as thou should never fear the hardness of the burden,
that thou should not be able to obey thy husband.

In setting out the other impediments that keep men off from being willing to
match with Christ, we will keep still the same order, and to the similitude
here, as we have done hitherto. Ob.


The next impediment is, that we shall not 4 Impediment, we have little for
the present.
have any great dowry for the present: there is much promised, but we shall
enjoy but little of it yet; though we shall have much hereafter, yet we have it
not now; this is a great impediment, and keeps off many men. It is the case of
many; they think with themselves: if I match now with Christ, I have much
promised, that I shall have heaven, and many things to come hereafter; but for
the present, I must forsake my pleasure, my profit, my delights. Now answer
this, and all is done. But beloved, it must be Christ himself, that Ans.
must answer it: though we be the instruments, and the means, yet except he
speak with us, it will do no good; the Lord himself must be his own
spokesman; yet I answer, it is true indeed, the great dowry is to come, ye must
wait for it; this time is a time of serving, as Jacob, he served fourteen
years for Rachel before he had her, and because he loved her, he thought the
time short, he was willing to serve so long. Now if thou love Christ, if thou
prize him above all; then thou will be willing to stay for him; and those that
will not stay, it is a sign they do not love Christ, and therefore thou art
not worthy of Why Christ makes us stay.
him. You must know, that Christ makes us thus to stay a time, to know and try
his Spouse before he match with her, (indeed the match is now, but I speak of
that glorious match with the Lamb at his second coming, when we shall
receive the full dowry) which the Apostle speaks of, Iam. 1. 12. verse,
Blessed is he that endures James 1. 12
temptation; for when he is tried, he shall receive a Crown of life, which
he has promised to those that love him, and wait for his appearing. Beloved,
ye must be content to believe for a time, enjoying is not yet come. Christ will
try our patience, our faith, he will try whether his Spouse will take his
word or no, whether she will rest upon him, whether she will believe him: this
is that, I say, that holds off many men, because they shall have nothing here,
But therein they do not look upon the whole life of man; we look but upon
part; we only care to provide for a short time here, and not for the whole
life of man, which is eternal: and this is that which makes us to err; as the
cause of all error in all the actions of men, is because they look upon some
part of a business, Cause of all error.
and not upon all. When a man looks upon some part of a case, and not upon
every part, this makes them judge amiss: so in this spiritual case we err,
because we do not look upon the whole life of man, to provide for our good
hereafter, as well as the present. The reason is, because as the Apostle says,
2 Pet. 1. and 9. Ver. 2 Pet. 1. 5.
We are pur-blind, and cannot see a far off. Indeed, this is the case of all
that match with Christ, they have the worst for the present, the best is
reserved. Indeed worldlings they have the best for the present, and the worst
is reserved. Consider of it which is best, an heir that is in his minority is
content to serve and do as a servant does, because he knows, notwithstanding
there is a difference between him and a servant, he shall, he knows, when he
comes to age, enjoy his lands, and therefore he is contented, though as yet
he is used as a servant. Indeed, if he knew he should not live to enjoy his
lands; but dye before he comes to age, then it were somewhat, if he were
discontented to live so: but we shall be sure to live unto them, we shall
enjoy them; as in that 2. Epistle to the Corinth. 4. 17. 18. For the momentany
lightness of 2. Cor. 4. 17. 18.
our tribulation prepares for us an eternal weight of Glory: while we look
not upon things that are seen, but upon things that are not seen; for the
things that are seen are temporal, but the things that are not seen are
eternal. The time that we are to be here is short, if we consider it with
eternity; and beloved, if we did but seriously think of the time we are to be
here, and eternity hereafter, we should not so much stick upon these earthly
things as we do.

But to come nearer, and answer it to purpose; if thou accept of this match,
thou shall have Christians enjoy more then Worldlings for the present. Mar. 10.
29. 30.
more, even for the present, then the full vintage of the men of this world, as
in that 10. Chapter of Mark, 29. 30. There is no man that has forsaken
houses, or brethren, or sister, or father, or mother, or wife, or children, for
my sake and the Gospels, but he shall receive now in this time an hundred
fold; houses, brethren, sisters, fathers, mothers, and children and lands, with
persecutions, and in the world to come life everlasting: even with persecutions
a man shall receive an hundred fold. If you ask how can that be, that a man
with persecution shall receive an hundred fold in this life? for answer, we
must compare this place with the 2 Cor. 6. 10. As sorrowful, yet always
rejoicing; as poor, and 2 Cor. 6. 10.
yet making many rich; as having nothing, and yet possessing all things: though
they have a sorrowful time outwardly, yet they have abundance of inward joy,
which they have in the grace and favor of God. This is your usual Proverb,
He is rich whom God loves. Though a man loose credit with the world, and
praise with men, and estimation, which keeps many men off; yet thou shall have
joy in God, peace of conscience, which is an hundred times better. But you will
say, what if they be put into prison? shall they then have Object. Answ.
an hundred fold in this life? yes, for their imprisonment is better then
worldly men's liberty. It is said, that when Joseph was put into prison, that
the Lord went in with him, and was with him, and therefore it was no prison:
for what is it that makes it a prison? The Lords absence, a man has more joy
in a prison wherein God is, then in a Palace without God; as you may see in
Saul; when the Lord was departed from him, his Palace was but a prison to him.
Brethren, if you believe this, that you shall have more for the present, if ye
will accept of this match, you will not any longer stand out. But if you will
not believe, for all that I have said, we have no more to say to you in brief,
but this: thou shall have thy portion in this life, as the Prodigal son, he
would have his portion presently: well, if you will have your portion, ye shall
have it, as in that 17. Psalm. 14. The men of this world, who have their Psa.
17. 14.
portions in this life. You shall have your portions in this life, thou shall
have thy belly filled with treasures: but remember that terrible sentence, Thou
have thy reward. Therefore it is no marvel, that worldlings live so
contentedly, with so much outward ease; it is no marvel, I say, for their
Father has given them their portion.

Another impediment is; when parents have provided a fit match for their
children, and come and 5. Imped. The heart is set to match with others.
propound it to their children, then they are promised to another, their hearts
are set upon others: and this is a great impediment in this, and it is common.
Now the Lord comes to propound this match to thee; but thou can not forsake
those things that thy affections are set upon, thou have made another choice,
thy heart is set upon these outward things, thou have promised thy love and
delight to them, and thou must now refuse the suit of the Kings Son. This one
day will lie heavy upon thy conscience, when as this Christ that thou have now
rejected, shall come to Judgment, and shall sit upon his glorious Throne, and
shall pronounce that heavy sentence, Depart from me ye cursed; and then thy
conscience shall tell thee, oh he was once a suter to me, but I had made
another choice, a worse choice; which then thou find, though it seemed
pleasant for the time, yet indeed his service would have been more pleasant
and profitable, for he would have thee live but according to the rule, in
temperance, sobriety, in diligence, in thy calling, and such like, which would
have kept thy body in health, and preserved thy estate; and now thou have
wasted thy body in fornication, and uncleanenesse, and have wasted thy goods in
drunkenness and good-fellowship, and all riotous living: and so if we should
stand to compare every particular service of each husband, we should find that
our obedience to our right husband, is more pleasant then that we have now
chosen; nay, we Comfort in Christ's service.
should find that the worst actions that Christ commands, are far more
pleasant then the best of the other; as take sorrow for sin, that we count
the worst and the hardest duty, yet even in that there goes along with it a
secret sweetness, and comfort; those that have any experience in it, know it
to be true: but when as thou yeeldest obedience to thy other husband, even in
the midst of thy carnal delights, thy heart is sad, there is a kind of
perplexity goes along with it: this we shall find in all the actions we do
to this wrong husband, a secret griping and stinging of conscience; and besides
this, we shall at length be paid with death.

But in our obedience to our right husband, Reward of it.
more-over and above our comfort in his service, he will give us wages and
rewards, eternal life, and all the comforts appertaining thereunto. But in
brief, if you will not yield, if you will not be ruled, God will do with you
as parents do with rebellious children, if they are stubborn, and match
against their will; when as neither promises, nor persuasions will do any
good, what will they do? Why, they will disinherit them. So if ye will be
stubborn, and neither persuasions nor promises will do no good with you, but
notwithstanding all this, you will not remove your affections from off your
choice; your Father shall disinherit you, you shall loose your Kingdom, you
shall be damned; if you will not cut off your right hands, and cut out your
right eyes that offend you, ye shall keep them, but ye shall go to hell with
them. If you will not believe us, we have no more to say to you, ye shall loose
your birthright.

Another impediment, if so be we find we stand in 6 Imped. We will not match
yet.
need of an husband to pay our debts, yet we are not disposed to marry yet. But
know, if thou will not take the time before the time be past, thou shall sit
long enough without suitors. Christ he is a suter by his Spirit, and we are his
friends to persuade you to match with him. Now consider how that He only must
persuade: we may persuade long enough; if no other do persuade you, you will
never be won: but there is another, the Lord himself, he is his own
spokseman, and must be, or else you will never be won. And therefore, take
heed of deferring when thou find the Holy Ghost a suter to thee, and that
Christ speaks to thy heart, take heed of refusing, his Spirit shall not
always strive with man: if he knock but once, open to him, perhaps he will
knock no more. Take heed of delays and puttings off, bidding Christ come
another time; for we commonly say, delays are dangerous. If thou do, thou
may loose thy suter, and Christ may let thee sit all thy life time, and never
be a suter to thee again. There is indeed a time, when all would match with
Christ in their extremity at their deaths, as the foolish Virgins, they came
when it proved too late, the doors were shut. When the arrest comes upon us,
then we would match with Christ, but then it is too late, then Christ will not
match with thee; then we may fly to the horns of the Altar, as Ioab did, but
then Christ will say, as Solomon did of Ioab, Go fall upon him, and kill him,
even there. There is a refuge in the City, but thou must be a Citizen there,
before the avenger of blood comes. Then is not a time to marry with Christ,
then is a time to call to mountains to fall upon you and cover you, and
furthermore whereas thou say, thou will hereafter match with Christ, but not
yet, what know thou but that thy soul may presently be taken from thee? and
therefore you see what a deal of folly men show in their puttings off.

Another impediment is. When the parties are 7 Impediment. men do nor like
Christ.
brought together, to see one another; many times they do not like one
another: and this is a common case: and so it is in this spiritual match; when
men come to look upon the Lord, they do not like the Lord: well, if this be
thy case, if it be thus with thee, the Lord will not be so much as a suter to
thee, he counts thee an enemy. There is an antipathy between the Lord
Enmity. double.
and many, there is an enmity; but you must know, in this there is a twofold
enmity; one out of ignorance, as Paul, says he, I was a Blasphemer, and a
persecutor, but now I am received to mercy, because I did it ignorantly through
unbeleife. If he had known the Lord, he would not have persecuted him. But
secondly, there is also a wilful enmity against the Lord: they know the Lord,
and yet they do not like him. But these men will deny this, and say, this is
not the cause they come not in, whatsoever is the cause. Well, do not deceive
thy self; if thou love the Lord, thou will love his Image, thou will love his
children which are his Image. If thou hate those that bear his Image, thou
hate the Lord himself. And therefore do not deceive thy self: if thou
bear a secret hatred and dislike of that strictness and holiness, that is
in the Saints; if thou have an inward grudge to that which is Gods Image, thou
hate God himself.

But perhaps thou will say, I hate him because he is an hypocrite; if he were
the child of God I would love him, but I hate his hypocrisy.

But take heed, that when thou strikest an hypocrite, a Saint lies not a
bleeding; so also when a man lies under a sharp and powerful Ministry, and
thou bear hatred and dislike of it, thou hate the Lord himself, whose
ordinance it is. This was the case of the Jews, when the Apostles had showed
them the Lord Jesus, and they saw all was rejected, what followed? we have no
more to say to you, Christ would no longer be a suter to them. Seeing ye reject
us, and will not receive this word of salvation, lo now we turn to the
Gentiles, and those that will receive us. And therefore brethren, take heed of
disliking the Lord, when he comes a suter to you, do not lay false aspersions
upon him, and his ways, and children, do not believe false aspersions laid
upon him by others; as those that were sent to spy Canaan, they brought up
evil reports of that Land; what followed? not only they were excluded out of
the Land, but also all those that believed them.

Now thus we have showed you the match, and given you some trials to know,
whether you are matched with Christ or no, as also what may stir you up to
accept this match, if ye find upon examination, that ye are not matched with
him, also the impediments that keep men off from the match: that if any of
them be your case, ye may remove it. But brethren, all this can do nothing to
procure this match; this will not work upon you, except the Lord be his own
spokse-man to win your love, he it is that must win you. Men are like dead
men when we speak to them; but if Christ speak not by his Spirit, they are
dead still; it is he that must show you your debt and your danger, and the
beauty and excellency of your husband, and must remove the impediments.

And seeing that now you are to receive Christ digression to the Sacrament.
offered in the Sacrament, this point may be a great help to strengthen your
faith. When a man promises to match with one, this helps well forward to the
match: but when the man is in the Church, and offers himself to match with
thee, then we cannot choose but believe it: He that eats and drinks this
unworthily, he is guilty of the body and blood of the Lord: therefore do not
take it hand over head, but examine whether thou stand in need of Christ,
can thou set a price upon him, as the chiefest thing thou want? The great
match is made in Baptism: this is but the renewing of the Nuptials, and new
Acts of taking and receiving Christ. Consider then, if thou have matched with
Christ before, else if thou come hither, this is a great provocation to the
Lord: for that which is required of thee now, is, that thou take Christ with
more willingness, still that thou come with more desires and longing after the
Lord Jesus, or else thou do receive unworthily. Consider every time thou
come, of what need thou stand in of Christ, and in this thing thou must
take some pains with thy heart, every time thou come, to see more need thou
stand in of Christ, and also examine strictly what thou have done amiss,
and work thy heart to unfeigned sorrow, and make up all breaches before thou
come, as thou do with men, which is a very commendable thing, and if thou
have any request to put up to him, this is a special day of hearing.
Whatsoever jewel thou would have to beautify thy self, that is, whatsoever
graces thou want to beautify thy soul, what change of raiment thou would
wear to adorn thy conversation, what temptation has long haunted thee, thou
can not be rid of, ask of thy husband now upon this day; this is the
marriage day; this is a fair opportunity to ask any thing of thy husband:
ask thy husband now, he will not deny thee, nay whatsoever thou want for
this life, for thy body, ask it now, for all is thine; whatsoever thou
desire, any gift for soul or body, whatsoever it be that thou would have
him to take from thee, that hurts thee, or whatsoever thou would have him
give thee, to do thee good, ask it: I dare be bold to say, he will not deny
thee; for if Herod because of his oath, would not deny the daugh ter of
Herodias, even to the half of the Kingdom, do thou think that thy husband
will deny thee any thing, that has given himself to thee? has he given thee
the great? and do thou think that he will deny thee the less, if it be good
for thee? if he do deny thee, it is because it is not convenient; or else,
thou do not ask it in due time, or else he will give thee a better thing.

THE CHURCHES CARRIAGE, OR DVTY.

DELIVERED IN SUNDRY Sermons at Lincolnes Inn.

By the late learned and Reverend Divine, JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity,
Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Immanuel College in Cambridge,
and sometimes Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

Published by (...), Thomas Ball, B^ in Divinity.

EPHESIANS. 5. 33. Let the wife see that she reverence her husband. 2 COR. 11. 2.
For I have espoused you to one husband, that I may present you a chaste virgin
to Christ. LONDON, Printed by R. Badger for N. Bourne, at the Royal Exchange,
and R. Harford at the gilt Bible in Queenes-head-Alley, in Pater noster-Row.

THE CHVRCHES CARRIAGE.
EPHESIANS. 5. 22. 23. 24. Wives, submit your selves unto your own husbands, as
unto the Lord.

For the husband is the head of the wife, even as Christ is the head of the
Church: and he is the Savior of the body.

Therefore as the Church is subject unto Christ, so let the wives be to their
own husbands in every thing.


THE Scope of the Apostle is, to show that wives ought to be subject to their
husbands, which he inforceth Scope,
upon them with this argu meant; for so is the Church to Christ. My scope is
only to speak of the latter: for whereas formerly I pressed men to receive
Jesus Christ; now because the chiefest thing they stick at is, being subject
to him (which yet is a thing necessary, if they receive him aright) for men
having lived all their lives at liberty, would do still, although it be the
condition of those that are married to Christ, to be subject to him, as it is
of the woman to be to the man, as appears by that law first given. 3 Genesis 16.
Thy desire shall be to thy husband, and he shall rule over thee, that is, Genesis
3. 16.
thy will shall be subject to his. Now this Text shows both, that the Church
is subject to Christ* and the reasons why it should be so: there are three
things in it.

That every man that takes Christ is subject to 1
him: that is laid down positively in the Text* the Church is subject to
Christ.

That every man that takes him ought to be so. 2


That it is best for them so to be: and to that end the Apostle gives two
reasons, for he is their 3
head and Savior.

I will bind up all into one point, that,

Every one that does, or will take Christ, he is, and ought to be subject to
him, and it is best for him so Doct. Every one that takes Christ ought to be
subject and it is best for him.
to be.

He that takes Christ, is subject to him; for so soon as there is an union
made between the soul and Christ, so soon there is a power goes out from him,
which bows and fashions the heart, and makes it willing to keep his Laws, it
causes such a motion in the heart, as is in the members from the head: so
soon as the will is willing to do a thing, there is a readiness also in the
members, and the reason is, because there is the same spirit that is in the
head transfused into the members, and so here the same spirit is communicated
from Christ by virtue of this union to the members, and as soon as that union
shall be perfect, and the Spirit shall dwell in all fullness in us, then we
shall have a full readiness to obey him.

Now because it is but in part; therefore in regard of the degrees of it, there
is much wanting in this readiness to obedience, yet so, as there is in some
measure some such inclination, though the members are weak and paralyticall,
and contrary humors are in them, which much hinder their readiness; yet so as
there is an inclination in the mind, an intrinsecall aptness to be subject to
Christ in all things. 2


That he that takes Christ ought to be subject. Now thou art matched with him,
thou art engaged, thou have covenanted with him, Cor. 7. 23. 1 Cor. 7. 23.
He is thy Lord, and has bought thee, and thou have sold thy self to him, yet
he has bought thee of thy self, so as thou art not tui juris. It is an
usual thing for men to bethink with themselves, how shall I bestow this day?
and men forger that they are servants; for they are not to spend it in what is
pleasant and profitable for themselves, for God has bought them of themselves,
and as a servant is to ask his master every morning what work he would have
him to do that day, so are ye; not a jot of strength is thine own.

The last is, that is is best for men to be subject to him, and if men were
persuaded that it were best for them now at this time to be subject to him,
they would come in: but it is one thing to think it generally best, and best
for me at this time in my particular case. Now this is it, I will show you, and
take the reasons in the Text.

Because he is an head, and that in four respects.

In regard of Sovereignty. 1 Best for men to take Christ. Reas.


In regard of preeminency and excellency.

Because he gives life to the Church, as the head does to the body. 1 He is a
head


Because he is a guide to the Church, as the 1 He is their Sovereign
head is to the members.

Because he is their Sovereign Lord and Prince, for this subjection is in
nature to be subject to him that is our Lord, and whom we find set over us,
and we think it no disparagement to be so. To subject our selves to an equal
indeed, we may and do think much at it: therefore now think, that he is a
Prince, and thou art a base creature; and do thou think much to be subject
to him? all disobedience comes from this; that we think our selves too good
to obey him: as he said, so men say secretly in their hearts, who is the Lord,
that I should obey? and this they do in every sin.

And whereas it may be said, there are many great men set over men, which they
will say, they see no great reason why they obey them; I am of more excellent
parts then he: this may be objected against many Kings; and indeed, unless
they do excel, obedience does not come off willingly, nor naturally.

Therefore in the second place consider, he is a 2 A head of preeminence. Col.
1 18. 19
head for preeminence, Col. 1. 18. 19. He is the head of the body, the Church,
that in all things he might have the preeminence; for it pleased the Father,
that in him all fullness should dweld, that as in the head there are all the
excellencies of the body in all fullness, the senses and the understanding,
etc. so in him: now if a man had all excellencies in all fullness above all
other men, all the world would obey that man. See it in beasts; an Eagle being
the excellentest of fowls, nature has made it the King of all: and were there
such a man among men, there would be no resistance in nature to such an
obedience to him. Now Christ is such an one, full of wisdom, full of love and
meekness, etc. such an one as thy heart can wish.

In the third place, all this is for thy profit, if 3. For their profit.
thou be obedient to him, for thou might say, why should I obey him? what is
all this his excellency to me? when we see the government we live in to be for
our good, then we are willing to submit: if we had such a Governor as is
mentioned in Judges, that would spend his fatness and his sweetness for us,
him we would obey. Now Jesus Christ has spent his fatness for your good, and
all this fullness that is in him, is for the good of the body, Ephesians. 1. ult.
speaking of Christ and the body, he calls the body the fullness of Ephesians. 1.
ult.
him who fills all in all.

The body is the fullness of him; for as the head makes not a complete man
without the body, so nor Christ without his Church, and yet least this might be
thought too much to be spoken of the body, that it should be the fullness of
Christ, therefore withal he shows that it is Christ which fills the Church, It
is the fullness of him who fills all in all, emptying out his fullness into
them, filling all with all the excellencies that are in himself. No excellency
is in him, but he stamps it upon the body; for he received it for their sakes.
As the common Conduit receives not water for it self, but for others; so is he
the common Conduit of Grace, a head which communicates the same life to his
members he has in himself, which was the third thing.

But ah! you will say I have no need of all this, nor of being subject to him;
yes but thou have, 4 Their guide
for thou can not live without him: for as the Husband is said to be the
guide of the Wife, He is the guide of thy Youth, as the Scripture speaks; so
is he to thee, and without him we are in this world like men in the wide sea
without a guide; if left alone, we shall fall upon some rocks, or sands or
other, and so perish: He is thy guide, and there is reason to be subject to a
guide, a folly to leave thy guide in a wood, and step out of the way from him.
Nay he is a guide that does guide thy feet in the ways of peace; the ways he
will lead thee in, lead into prosperity and peace.

The second reason in the text is, He is the Savior of his Church, he has
saved them already from 2 Reas. He is the Savior of his Church.
the guilt and power of their sins, and he is so continually, and thy safety
consists in being obedient to him: look how many acts of disobedience, so many
steps from under thy shelter into the storm, from out of the shade into the
scorching Sunshine. All the commandments we His commandments for our good.
have from him, are things, by which our lives are maintained: as fishes live
in the water, so we in the commandments, for they are our elements: so as
withdrawing thy self from the commandments and going out of them, tends to
destruction; and it is as if a man should see a fish going out of the water:
every such motion tends to death. If therefore a man would consider when he is
about to commit a sin, that this act tends to death, and that to be subject to
the commandment is my safety, he would certainly keep within compass: if
the commandments tended to destruction, we ought to do them; for what are we
but Gods vassals? he has bought us. As they in the old Law might do what they
would with their servants they had bought with their money, so might God: but
when every commandment shall tend to thy good, so as thou can not devise a
better way for thy self than to obey them, wilt not thou much rather be
subject? 10. Deuteronomy. 13. In Deuteronomy. 10. 13
the former verses he had shown that God had done great things for them, and
therefore might do as other masters, that command their servants that which is
for their own advantage, and not for their servants; and so God might do, and
thou ought to be subject to him: but says he in the thirteenth verse, what
does the Lord require of thee, but to keep the commandments of the Lord which
he commands thee for thy good? Thou may think that to sanctify the Sabbath
is not for thy good, but now thou may think happily by thy travel on that
day, and plotting thy business to further thy wealth: or suppose that God bid
thee be bold for him, and stand out for the profession of the truth, thou
think it may be thereby thou shall loose much; and that by stepping out of
his way, thou may take in some convenience, or balke some cross, which for
doing his will would befall thee; but thou art deceived, thou shall find that
this shall be for thy ruin, and though thou can not see how this should be
for thy good; yet shut thine eyes, believe it, for it will be so.

The use is, to exhort you to be willing to come Use. To exhort to come in to
Christ.
to Christ: You see this great objection taken away, that men are loath to be
subject to him. I will further show what it is to be subject, and so add
motives.

If you would know what subjection is.

Subjection is, when an inferior willingly submits to a superior, there are
two things in 1 Subjection what.
it.

It must be between an inferior and a superior; 1 To a superior willingly.
for if a superior does it, it is not subjection, but yielding; if an equal
does it, it is an agreement, compact, not a subjection.

It must be willingly, or else it is not said to be subjection: to be carried
captive is not to be made subject, but when a man sub mits out of an inward
inclination of his Will, then it is said to be obedience and subjection.

The second thing is, what we must be subject 2 We must be subject unto.
to, and they are three things, first the counsel of Christ. Secondly, the
Commandments of Christ. Thirdly, his providence, to be willing to be disposed
of by him. And these three do answer to all that is in a man. For 1. there is
his mind or understanding; now to that answers counsel. Secondly, there is his
will; to that answers commandment. Thirdly, affections; they answer to his
providence.

First, we must be subject to the Counsel of 1 The counsel of Christ.
Christ, that is, to think his ways, and what he commands, to be the wisest
and the best way. And this is one thing a Wife owes to her Hasband, to be
subject to his opinion: and Paul, when he would express his obedience, says,
I consulted not with flesh and blood, that is, with my own reason; but I
brought my mind into subjection to Christ's mind: I was willing to think his
way the best, in 2 Cor. 10. 5. This is called Subjection, namely, 2 Cor. 10. 5.
the bringing of every thought into subjection. The original of disobedience
is refractorinesse of thoughts, whereby a man thinks his way better then God's
way, and therefore chooses it, for every man does what he thinks best, and
therefore in Pro. 23. 4. Solomon counselling men not to Pro. 23. 4.
labor to be rich, because a man would say in his own thoughts, why, it is
good to be rich, therefore says he, Cease from thine own Wisdom, that is,
submit thy wisdom to Gods, he knows what is better for thee: walk in thy
calling without seeking inordinately to be rich; and if God cast riches upon
thee, so it is. And so likewise a man that thinks credit in regard of gifts,
learning, parts, a goodly thing, cease from thine own wisdom, it being but
as the Apostle says (...) an empty thing, a thig blown up by men's breathes:
seek not after it, follow his counsel. And thirdly, so for pleasure, thou
think this or that thing to be most pleasant, cease from thy own wisdom,
abstain from it, and thou shall have it some other way.

The second thing are his commands: if thou see he has commanded a thing,
which thou see 2. His commands.
no reason for, nay, thou see a reason against it, yet do not question it.
The will of man is still objecting. See this now in Adam and Saul. In the
commandment given to Adam, there is nothing but a mere command, it is likely
he saw no reason for it, yet see how God charge him, have thou eaten of that
I commanded thee thou should not eat? Saul thought he had good reason on his
side, to spare the kine for sacrifice, but did not I command thee the contrary?
The servant is not to examine his masters ground, but to do his will.

Lastly, we must be subject to, his providence, and all the passages of it.
Look what variety of 3. His providence.
conditions, of sickness and health, good report and ill report thou go
through. God requires that all thy affections should be subject without
murmuring; if he will have thee lie under an ill report without cause a long
time, it is his providence, submit; and wereas men will say, if I were thus or
thus in such a condition first, then I would be content; what is this, but to
make his will Regulam regulatam?

The third thing are motives to be subject.

From the nature of subjection; which is as it Motives to this subjection.
was defined, that the inferior ought to be subject to the superior; so as
there is reason for this, 1 From the nature of subjection.
if thou be an inferior to him, and when a man sees reason, he will not be
stubborn. Now, that there is reason for this, look through the whole
universe. That which is most base is lowest, and if there should not be such a
subordination, what confusion would there be, as if the waters should overflow
the earth, or the fire possess the place of the air? As in the body of
nature; so political; if servants should not be subject to their masters,
inferiors to superiors, what confusion would it breed? Eccles. 10. 5. 6. for
the servant to be on horseback, and the master on foot, this Eccles. 10. 5. 6.
is an evil, and a folly. So in the body of man, for the humors to be
predominant, it brings sickness and death; so in the soul, for reason to be
below, and the affections above, what disorder is it? So that there is reason,
that in all things the inferior should be subject to the superior.

Consider who it is you are to be subject to.

It is to him that is able to do you much good, 2 Who we are subject unto.
and one that is willing to recompense thee to the utmost. Why are men so
willing to be subject 1 One that is able to do us good.
to Kings, and do them service? because they are able to advance them; and
therefore men will do any base offices for them, even violate their
consciences: but in being subject to God, thou shall not be subject to base,
but honorable services, and thou shall get much by it also. As Balak said to
Balaam, Am I not able to prefer thee? so may I say of God, and of others,
even of Kings, as Saul said of David, Can David give you Vineyards, etc? Can
Kings give you what God can give you? why is there such seeking to the Court,
but that men are persuaded of getting profit and honor? And is it not God that
sets up whom he will, pulls down whom he will? does whatsoever he will in the
earth, and in the sea? which if considered, men would be ambitious of serving
him.

Secondly, he is able to do you much hurt: 2 He is able to do us much hurt 1
Pet. 5. 6
and that is another reason of our subjection to Princes, and therefore, 1.
Pet. 5. 6. he bids us humble our selves under his mighty hand; that is, God
has a mighty hand, able to bring you into subjection, and therefore do it
willingly, Humble your selves. Do you provoke him to anger? are you stronger
then he? is he not able to bring you down? In Ezechiel there be four
Emblemes of his power; God compares their great men to Eagles, the masters of
all birds; to Cedars, that over-shadow all the trees of Eden; to Dragons, that
do live in the water, and do drink it up as a river; and to an excellent
Cherub; now God to show his power, says, that he will deplume that Eagle,
loppe the boughs of that Cedar, uncover that Cherub, put a hook into the
nosthrils of that Dragon: so that God is able to do the greatest men in the
world hurt.

Thirdly, God is exceeding munificent, his goodness is great. If one has a
father that is 3 His munificence.
full of goodness, an ingenuous son would not disobey him, because he would
not grieve him; now God will spare thee, as a father spares his son that
serves him: he will keep thee still in the house, notwithstanding all thy
rebellions.

Last motive is taken from our selves. It is for thy good to be subject to him:
which if men 3 Motive from our selves.
thoroughly apprehend, they would not stick, though it were a thing
burdensome to them. If a Physician prescribes thee an hard diet, to which thou
have no good will in it self; yet if thou be told it is for thy good, then
thou art willing; and thus it is with the Commandments. But say, is not
liberty an excellent thing? is it not better to live as a man lists? Indeed if
the mind of a man were framed as it ought to be, it were so; but seeing thy
heart is possessed with errors, etc. it is not best for thee to be at liberty,
for one that is well in his wits, it is good to be at liberty, but not for one
in a frenzy; again, for thee to follow thine own will, is to subject thy
self more to the disease, but when thou do what God commands thee, thou do
follow the prescript of the Physician. For every man lies as it were Inter
morbum and medicum; if thou subject thy self to God, thou growest out of
bondage to the disease to further life and liberty, but when thou obeyest thy
self, thou art brought in bondage to sin, which is the disease of thy soul.
Now bondage properly is this; when one is subject to one that is not our proper
Commander, or when it is to our hurts; and therefore now to be subject to a
Father is not bondage, so not to God, he being our natural and proper
Commander. Now one of these two you must be subject to, either the law of
sin, or of righteousness. Consider now which of these is bondage, which
liberty.

Every creature has a certain rule given it, and so long as it keeps close
to that rule, so long it is well with it: and so it is with men, whilst they
are subject to the Law, which is their proper rule; to be subject to the
contrary rule, that is bondage. But thou will say, I find it a pleasant life,
to be subject to my lusts. But what is the reason of that? because it is
agreeable to the present disposition of thy soul: but yet know this, that thou
have another radical disposition in thee, in which thou were created, to It is
pleasant.
which the Commandments are more pleasant then the satisfying of thy lusts. As
now take the constant disposition of thy body; meat, and drink is pleasant to
it, but indeed in a time of sickness, 1 It is agreeable to the soul.
not meat, but something else is more pleasant; yet so as the pleasantness of
meat to one in health; is the greater of the two. Now this is a rule in
Philosophy, that those things that are agreeable to nature are jucunda per se,
and all times, the other not so, and but for a fit, and so now sin is
pleasing to thee, but whilst thou art in such an humor. Now the things that
God commands agree to the first constitution of thy soul, and therefore they
are the better choice, and in themselves more pleasant, and the obedience to
them, is like the obedience of the members to the head, but the obedience of
them to sin is the wringing them the wrong way.

Again* peace is pleasant. Psalm. 133. 1. It is a 2 It brings peace. Psalm. 133.
1.
pleasant thing for Brethren to dwelt in unity. Discords in a family are
unpleasant. Now whilst thou obeyest sin, it breaks thy peace with God thy
Head, and thou live an unquiet life, but as it is, Gal. 6. 16. As many as
walk according to the rule of Gal. 6. 16.
Gods Commandments, peace is upon them, and that is pleasant. Again, it
brings Jesus Christ into 3 It brings Christ into the soul.
the soul; and he brings joy with him, for when he comes into the heart, he
comes as the Sun into a room with light, and joy, and peace. I find one
similitude more in the words, to express our union with Christ: and indeed the
Scripture is much in expressing of this union, now it is a sure rule, that what
the Scriptures bestow much words on, we should have much thoughts on, and what
the Holy Ghost urges most, we should prize most, as in this union with Christ,
which is the foundation of our Salvation and of all graces.

Now different similitudes in Scripture do express some new thing, as is
this, that he is the Head and Savior of the body. It will bring to our minds
some other differing notion concerning this union then the former did, it will
bring new light that we shall see further into the riches of this glorious
mystery.

The point is, that Christ is the Head, and Savior Doct. Christ is the head
and Savior of his Church and every member. 1 Cor. 11. 3.
of his Church, and of every member. I add this last, for so you shall find
it. 1 Corinthians. 11. 3. That the Head of every man is Christ: and this similitude
shows that the union betwixt Christ and us, is more than the union of a
politic head and body, so as we are flesh of his flesh, and bone of his
bone, as it is in the thirtieth verse of this Chapter.

In that Christ loves and cherishes every one 1
united to him, as every man does his own flesh. Put case a member be more
deformed than another, there be an Vicer in it; yet a man loves it, because it
is his flesh.

He is sensible of all the pain, and ease they 2
feel, as the Head is, of what the Members do.

He communicates Sense and Motion to every man; without him, every man being
dead, 3
and not able to moove a step, in the ways of God.

He guides, directs, counsels every member up on all occasions, suggests
wisdom what to do. 4


But there are three other special respects, in regard of which he is called
an Head.

In regard of authority. Ephesians. 1. 22. God has appointed him over all things
to be Head, He has 1 Ephesians. 1. 22.
committed the Kingdom of the Mediatourship to his Son.

In regard of preeminence. Col. 1. 18. 2 Col. 1. 18.


In regard of influence of life, Ephesians. 1. 23. his headship is made to consist
in this, in filling his 3 Ephesians. 1. 23.
body, which in it self is a dry empty thing, and he fills them all, that is,
every corner, and secondly with all, that is, all variety of graces; so as they
have nothing, but what they have from him.

The use of these three in particular, secondly, in that he is a head in
general.

If Christ be so a head, as he is a Governor and Use 1. To be obedient to
Christ as a head.
commander; it is easy to know what follows then; let us be obedient and live
according to his laws, in those doxologies which are given to Christ, this is
one, To him be all dominion: all the dominion that is in parents over their
children, Kings over their people, are but rivelets out of that Sea. In the 9.
of Isay, 6. the Government is said to be upon Isay, 9. 6.
his shoulder, so as he rules all the world, only with this difference, that he
rules his Church with an inclinative disposition, as the head rules the
members, but others with a rod of Iron, so as he brings all under his feet,
and makes them stoop, and it is profitable for us to consider what division
we are of; for First, there are some of the kingdom of his son, translated
into his kingdom. 1 Col. Col. 1.
others are as Cain, vagabonds, lawless persons, that are not the Lords
portion, and though these do what they list; yet thou must do as by a rule,
from morning: till night, in all thy business, undertake no action but by
rule: there is not the least action but there is rule for it in the general
find out that rule, so use recreations, eat and drink by rule.

If you object, that there are some things which All things to be done by rule.
a man may do animi causa; so the Apostle says, he would not for his mind
sake. I answer, you must even do these things by rule. It Is true that a man may
have in his choice to do a thing, or not to do a thing; for then a thing is
indifferent: yet there is a rule to be looked to in these things, viz. That
Christ has given a man this liberty: so men should order their speeches by
rule; not to be vain at any time, not in the least word. But you will say,
this is a bondage. Answer: no, but it is for thy benefit; for the more thou
walkst Object. Ans. It brings peace. Isay, 9. 7.
by rule, the more peace shall be upon thee. It is observable, 9. Esaias, 7. that
these two things are put together; Of the increase of his government, and of
his peace there shall be no end: to this end, to show that as his government
increases in men's hearts and is enlarged, so as a man is made more subject to
him, so also peace increases. In those that are most subject, there is most
peace: and therefore he is called the Prince of peace; for where he rules as a
Prince, there is that peace which he, as a mighty Prince, is able to procure to
you. And to this purpose is that copulation of being a Head and a Savior in
the Text, as I have observed before: if any man goes from out of his
government, he shall find thorns, unquietness, and restlesnesse of spirit:
if they walk by the rule, they shall have perfect peace, perfect mercies: if
you walk unevenly with him, he will walk unevenly with you.

Is he a Head in regard of excellency; not only Use 2. To choose. Christ for a
head.
because God has put him into the highest place, but because he has a
fitness in him, all fulness? choose him then, take him before any thing
else; for he is the best, and will preponderate whatsoever comes in competition
with him. There are no excellencies, that are in the creatures, which are out
of him, but all in him. And therefore thou must choose him altogether, and make
him the adequate object of thy soul, in whom thou art fully satisfied* bring
thy heart to this frame, to be content to be stripped of every thing, thinking it
enough to have the Lord; 2 Col. 10. And ye are complete in him, who is the Col
2. 10
head of all Principality and power: his scope is this; in the 6. verse
before, he had exhorted them: that as they had taken Christ, (it being the same
word that is in John, 1. 12.) so they would walk in him, Ioh 1. 12.
being fully contented with him; and let no man deceive you in Philosophy,
that is, whereas men teach you excellent rules of moral Philosophy; yet reckon
not these as excellencies added to Christ, but abound you in faith in him, for
we are complete in him; if any thing were wanting in him, then indeed we might
seek out to other things. Learn to apply this to your particular occasions;
say, I care for no man's friendship, nor wealth; it is enough, I have the Lord
alone; I am complete in him, look for all from him; and then you will do all
for him. He that looks for any thing; from the creature, will do so much for
it. Every benefit has an office joined, and so much men serve sin, as they
look for pleasure from it, and so much service as is done to the creature, so
much is taken off from God; and therefore say, I will not apply my self to
you, but to Christ. And so if a man be to preach the Gospel, he that thinks
himself complete in Christ, will not care for man's day: so if a man come to
some action of trial, wherein he shall loose some special friends, and get
great enemies, if he think himself complete in Christ, he cares not. So in
walking in the exercise of a man's calling, if a man thinks himself complete
in Christ, he will think it enough to do his duty; so as men may receive
profit by it, and as for wealth, he leaves that to the Lord, in whom he is
complete.

But you will say, how shall I live in this world Quest:
then? I have credit to look to, and wife and children.

Ans. God is able to do abundantly for you, if Answ. God supplies what. we
loose for him.
you have him. When Moses was content to let Pharaoh go, and his great place
in Egypt go, and so suffer affliction with the people of God, God made him a
greater Prince then ever he was; so Christ, because he endured the shame, and
the speaking against, and the meanest condition that ever man had, therefore 2
Phil. God gave him a great Name above all names. Abraham let his Phil. 2.
Country go, but God gave him a greater Country, and in his seed made him heir
of the world; so if a man be a Minister of the Word; let him not think with
himself, how to provide best for himself, but how he may do most good; and
therefore not to take care for preferrement or maintenance, in the 10. of
Matthew. 10. Luke, when Christ Mat. 10. Luke 10.
sent his Disciples out to preach the Gospel, He bids them take no money, nor
no scrippe, to maintain them, nor no staff to defend them from injuries, nor
salute any man by the way, that is, do not stand upon officious complements to
get friends. You go about the Lords work, and I will provide for you, and
therefore he repeates this 22. Luke 35. when he was going out of the world,
asking them if when he did send them out thus, they did lack any thing, to
which they answered, no. Then learn by this, not to look after maintenance;
and this may be said to every Minister of the Gospel; prefer Christ, and he
will prefer you. Every one desires a preeminence, a place above his brethren;
the way to get it, is to be for Christ: Of his own will be begot us, that we
might be the first fruits of all the creatures. When a man has chosen Christ,
then he is made the chief of the creatures, he excels all others, as Roses
and Lillies excel thorns; so that if you choose and make him your Head, he
will make you the Head and chief of all things else. Use 3. To draw influence
from him. Ephesians. 4. 15, 16.


From this, that he is a Head in regard of influence, a Head that fills all in
all; that then we would be careful to draw from him, that which may fill us,
and this is the use is made of this, 4. Ephesians. 15, 16. Let us follow the truth
in love, that we may grow up in him in all things, who is the Head, from whom
the whole body fitly joined together, etc. The scope of the Apostle is to show
us, we should grow, and how to grow; adding this motive to it, to stir them
to it, that Christ is their head, able to fill every empty crevis, and that
should stir them up to bring their hearts to him, that so you may grow up
into him, that is, when you hear he is a Head that fills you, stand not at a
stay, but grow up to him, there being as great a necessity for you to grow, as
for others to come in: and therefore (says he) continue not children: if they
ask how they should grow up into him; he bids them follow the truth in love,
that is, as you get more light into divine truths, and have your hearts
affected with them, which is meant by love, so much is added to you; grow then,
for otherwise how is it said, that the Word does build us up? as S. Paul, when
he told those that He was to leave them, and they knew not what to do when he
were gone, to grow, he tells them this, I leave you to God, and the Word of his
grace, to build you up. Now how does the Word do it, but by revealing truth,
new truths? which if they affect the heart, men grow up into Christ.

In that it is said, grow up into Him, it is added, to difference that growth
which is out of Him 2 To grow up in Christ.
in moral Virtues; men may grow in them, and yet not grow up into CHRIST: but
to grow up into Him, is to grow more emotied of our selves and selfe-conceits,
and fuller of him, so as he may be greater in us; for we define Grace
otherwise then the moral Philosophers define Virtue; they define it to be that
which frames the soul to right reason, that is, to do that which is best
Definition of moral virtue.
for himself and his converse with men; but we grow in another manner, to be
that which frames and exercises every faculty of the soul to the Lord, and
therefore there is no growth in grace, unless it be into Christ, doing all for
him, unless we be taken off of our own bottom, and set upon him. Now there
are things further mentioned in that place, as means of this growth.

To receive all from him, from whom as the 1 To keep the heart nigh Christ.
words are, etc. and therefore to keep the heart nigh to him; that therefore
which hinders growth is that which causes distance betwixt God and us. Now the
cementing qualities that do join us to him, are faith and love, and that
which looseneth us from him is self dependence, and self seeking, and all
things else which thrust in betwixt God and you, as vain hopes and vain
fears.

Keep in the fellowship of the Saints, for they receive from Christ only, as
they are knit and 2 Fellowship with the Saints.
compacted together: if the branch be divided from the tree and the root,
there is no growth. Let them look to it that take no heed of their company.
There are many mutual duties to be performed together, by which the Saints
grow* be one of their fellowship in conference, prayer, etc. if thou would
grow.

By that which every joint furnishes to us. There 3 Sinews by which grace is
conveyed.
are certain Commissurae, bands and sinews, by which grace is conveyed, by
which is meant all those vehicula of grace, all the ordinances of God: he
therefore that prays most, hears most conscionably, and is in company of
those most which excel in grace, whence something will drop that may increase
grace and truth, such men grow most; though Christ be the fountain, yet grace
is conveyed by these as the means: therefore using these means, look up to
him to open the fountain.

There is an effectual power, a nutritive faculty in every one that has life
in him, which is a 4 A Nutritive faculty in Christ's members.
means of growth, according to the effectual working in the measure of every
part, by which a man makes use of every thing suggested to him, still receives
profit from the word read or preached, or from Gods providence, some nutriment
from them all: as you say of good wits, that they make use of every thing, so
of good hearts, and that is according to the measure in every part; yet so as
the least bud has this effectual power in it is measure to draw from the root,
as well as the greatest branches; some have a greater measure, because they
take in not for themselves, but digest and deliver it to others; for in the
body there are some members, that receive for themselves, and for distribution,
as the liver, heart, etc. And therefore think with thy self, I have a greater
degree in the Church of God, therefore I must look to receive more then
others, or else there will be an (...). I must pray more and read more, that so
growing more in thy self, thou may be able to distribute unto others. Let me
add this, take heed you do not dead this effectual power, for then you will
not be able to draw much, or else not to concoct it. You will say, how may it
be deaded? by worldly mindedness, or by Sin not repented of.

This weakens the nutritive faculty, the more How this faculty is weakened.
spiritual every man is, the better conscience that he keeps, and that will
quicken the nutritive faculty, for what makes a member to draw nourishment, but
emptiness and hunger? so that the more we thirst after other things, the less
we shall draw from Christ.

The use is of Trial whether you be in Christ or 4 Use. To know if we be in
Christ by our subjection.
no, by your obedience and subjection to him. The Church, that is, every member
of it, is subject unto Christ and obedient unto him in all things. That which
God makes a rule of his own judgment, as that by which he judges of every
man, that is a sure rule for every man to judge himself by that which we shall
be judged by; at the last day, is a sure rule to apply to our selves for the
present. Now by our obedience and works, he judges us, He will give to
every man according to Romans 2.
his works, Rom, 2. that is, he will not look to their good meanings and
profession, but to their actions and works, because our real taking of Christ
appears in them. Isay. 1. 19. If ye consent and Isay. 1. 19^
obey, ye shall eat the good things of the Land, that is, if ye will consent
to take Jehovah for your Lord and King, if you give consent, there is the first
thing. But that is not enough; but if you also obey, the consent that stands
in the inward act of the mind, the truth of it will be seen in your
obedience, in the acts of your lives, if you consent and obey You shall eat the
good things of the land, that is, you shall take of all that he has, that is
good and convenient for you, for then you are married to him in truth, and have
an interest in all his goods. The Lord would have sacrifice exactly performed,
but the Prophets make light of that, in comparison of obedience, and the
complaint of the Lord is of your disobedience, you are a disobedient and
rebellious people, Your neck is like an iron sinew, you pluck away the
shoulder, and will not obey. It is not a sacrifice which was a typical taking
of Christ, but obedience must go with it: so in the new Testament, the two
maine things the Apostles beat upon, were Faith and Faith and obedience go
together. Act. 20. 21*
new obedience, fruits worthy of amendment of life, Acts, 20. 21. The Apostle
sums all his preaching in these two things, repentance toward God, and Faith
toward Jesus Christ, and he joins them together, because they are never
severed. That was his business, if you should have heard him confer or
preach, you should have heard him beat upon these two, Faith and obedience, or
subjection to the commandments. So it was the scope of John Baptist, he
preached the baptism of repentance, and the washing away of sins, now they
would be ready to take the sweet, therefore he tells them they must be
obedient, and he urges it on particulars, as they that are soldiers must
offer no wrong to any, and so of the rest, the Lord will not take any thing of
an enemy, a stranger, 2 Cor. 8. 12. He that gives alms, 2 Cor. 8. 12.
and gives not his person first to the Lord, the Lord accepts it not, but
yet on the other side, works must justify our faith: it is but an empty
faith, except it has an actual real obedience accompanying it. It is a
dangerous rock to think our sins are forgiven, and we have accepted Christ,
and have good meanings, and yet we have no obedience accompanying this: he
that is in Christ has crucified the flesh, and walks after the spirit, and
he that is in Christ, is subject unto him in all things. Aristotle says, not
he that had a strong body, but he that run well, had the crown in the
Olympian games, it was not an athleticall ability, but he that wrestled best:
and it is the similitude the Apostle himself alludes to, and takes 1 Cor. 9.
up, 1 Cor. 9. toward the end. Exhorting to strictness of obedience unto
Christ, as without which a man will loose his labor. It is well expressed in
the parable of the sons, one said he would go into the vineyard, there were
good intentions; the other said he would not: he that said he would, and went
not, went besides the reward; and he that said he would not, but went, it was
he that received the reward. It is not good desires, but actual performing of
obedience that shall provide a Crown for you. And good reason why trial
Trial is from obedience.
should be taken by this, for trial is in difficult things. To profess and
know much, are easy, but to bring your affections into subjection, to wrestle
with lusts, to cross your wills, and your selves, upon every occasion, this is
hard. The Lord looks that in our lives we should be serviceable to him, and
useful to men; that which is within, the Lord and our brethren are never the
better for it; but the outward obedience flowing thence, glorifies God, and
does good to man. The Lord will have this done. What else is the end of our
preaching, our planting, It is the end of preaching.
and watering, but that the trees may be filled with sap? And what is the end
of that sap, but that the tree may bring forth fruit? what cares the
husbandman for leaves or barren trees? not only the thorns, are cast into
fire, but barren trees. Therefore look to your fruits, and deceive not your
selves. It is a common error for men to think their estates good, when in the
mean time they walk after the stubbornenesse of their hearts: they that do
the will of the Lord The end of every grace.
shall be saved. What is the end of every grace, but to mollify the heart, and
make it pliable to some commandment or other? Look how many commandments, so
many graces there are in virtue and efficacy, although not so many several
names are given them. The end of every such grace is to make us obedient, as
the end of temperance is chastity; to bow the heart to those commands, be ye
sober, etc. not in chambering and wantonness, etc. When the Lord commands us
not to be angry with our brother, the end of meekness, and why the Lord
infuseth it: is to keep us from unadvised, rash anger, so faith the end of it,
is to take Christ Jesus, to make us obedient to the command of the Gospel,
which commands us to believe in him; so as all graces do join together, but
to frame and fashion the soul to obedience. Then so much obedience as is in
your lives, so much grace in your hearts, and So much obedience so much grace.
no more: therefore ask your hearts, how subject you are to the Lord in your
lives; it was the counsel that Francis Spira gave to them about him, Spira.
says he, Learn all of me, to take heed of severing faith and obedience; I
taught justification by faith, but neglected obedience, and therefore is this
befallen me. I have known some godly men whose comfort on their death beds,
has been not from the inward acts of their mind, which Comfort from obedience.
apart considered, might be subject to misapprehensions, but from the course of
obedience in their lives issuing thence. Let Christians look to it, that in
all their conversation, as they stand in every relation, as Scholars,
tradesmen, husbands, wives, look to this, that when they come to dye, they
have been subject in all things: this will afford solid comfort. What will you
say, when Satan charge you with this? it is true you have large promises, and
he that believes shall be saved, but then you must have been obedient and
bring forth fruits; and when you look upon your lives, and find not these
fruits, where are you? But you will say then, there is none but Quest.
may doubt himself, for who can say his obedience is perfect? I answer, it is
not so much the perfection, as the sincerity that is required. But how shall we
know that, you will say?

First consider, whether thou be obedient in every Trial of sincerity.
thing. This is in the words of the Text, therefore 1 Looking to every command.
I mention it first, he that has taken Christ, there is never a commandment,
but he is subject to it: though he fail in the performance of the
commandments, yet never an one but he is subject to; as for example, the Lord
has commanded to sanctify the Sabbath, not to forsake the fellowship of the
Saints; to pray continually; to take heed how we hear; to wash our hearts
from evil thoughts and lusts. When an obedient heart, one that has taken
Christ truly, hears these commands, he is obedient to every one of them, he
goes about the business, as an obedient servant about his masters service;
though he may be overtaken with negligence and some contrary passion, yet he
goes about it. I mean, he does it as well as he is able. Another will not
set himself to do the business, but is ready to expostulate the matter with
God, and say, The commandment is too strict, or else he refuses by plain
stubbornness. As for example, that commandment, Take heed how you hear,
that is, let not one instruction fall to the ground, see that you work it upon
your hearts; a disobedient heart goes not about this, he lends his ears
for an hour; but when the Sermon is done, there is an end: so that other, to
pray continually; it may be he prays not alone, nor with his Family, or if
both, yet in a slight and negligent manner, as good never a whit, as never the
better: so also, let your communication be always gracious; such an one
thinks it a needless thing to be so strict and indiscreet, he is not, nor
will not be subject: this is disobedience. Mark the generality, and think it
no more then needs, when the Scripture there says, We must be subject to him
in every thing; that is, not only to the maine commandment, but to every part
of it: he that has said, Thou shall not commit adultery, has said, Thou shall
not have an adulterous heart, or eye, or thought, or dalliance. Now if thou be
subject to the maine, if thou neglect the smallest as thou countest them; thou
art disobedient, and thou art one to whom God will render vengeance, 2 The. 1.
7. 2 These. 1. 7.
For it is to them that know not the Lord, or that will not obey him, though
they know that he will do this unto them, ver. 8. and I ask you if you know
not, that there is such a commandment as this, Redeem the time, etc. where is
thy obedience to it, thou that triflest away thy precious time, and make no
conscience of it? If the Lord has said, He that does his work negligently,
shall be cursed, what shall thou be, that do it not at all? Students that
loose their time, and will not be obedient to that command, has not the Lord
commanded you here to be subject in all things? so he has said, Forsake not
the fellowship of the Saints, that is, the element you should live in; and it
is not enough only to abstain from evil company, but to frequent good: so
for your speeches being gracious always: are not these commandments of the
Lord? where is thy obedience therein, when thy company is idle, thy speeches
vain? Likewise, pray continually, that is, at least twice a a day; it must be
frequent and fervent too: when no pains is taken herein, it is a sign you
are disobedient. Thus you may examine your selves by other commandments, and
pitch upon that which you are most ready to fail in. Now when I urge this as a
necessary concomitant of grace, the meaning is not, that it is a perfect
subjection in What subjection is meant.
every thing, but such, that a man does go about it with all his soul, and
make it his work. A Man's heart may be a Temple for the Holy Ghost, yet evil
thoughts and lusts may pass through, but there is not a table set up there for
them; sin has not quiet possession in them, they set up no idol of riches,
or pleasure, though they may be overtaken and fail in giving due respect to
these commands, yet they draw not out, they spinne not the thread of any sin
thorowout the course of their lives. Whatever it be, if a man lie in it from
day to day, it is disobedience. And your purposes must be resolute, the
divorce must be full without any secret lingrings after the lust forsaken,
though by an accident you may be overtaken by it, yet this is your resolution,
there is sincerity seen, another gives them over but for necessity, with a
months mind to return to them again: as Phaltiel, that when the King sent
for his wife, sent her, because there was a necessity of it, but yet went
weeping after her, 2 Samuel 3, 16. so it is with us, we 2 Samuel 3. 16
let go our sins, but go weeping after them: the heart is not clear of
them. And consider well the ground of it, why it must be in every thing, in
thoughts and words, and why disobedience in Why universal obedience is
required.
the smallest commandment, as in idle words, not endeavoring to keep your
hearts clean, your affections pure, does thus put a man out of the stare of
grace, and that such have not taken Christ, is because all the commandments
are equally commanded, and though they fall upon differing objects and so are
different, in respect of the Commanders will, and therefore by the same reason,
a disobedience to the smallest, is a disobedience, as well as to the greatest.
Now the threatenings are against disobedient persons, because every disobedient
person casts away the Lord, as Saul did, that is, he refuses to have him his
governor. Now he that does so, cannot be saved: for he has not taken Christ
for his Head and Husband; Whosoever shall keep the whole Law, and yet fails
in one point, Iam. 2. 10.
he is guilty of all, that is, it is a disobedience to the Commander, in what
commandment soever it be, though but in one thing, thou have refused the
Lawgiver, and art a rebel against him: standing out against any one thing,
makes a rebel against a Prince, if he stubbornly refuse to obey in one thing,
as well as in a thousand.

A second rule to try our sincerity of subjection 2 Trial in the manner of
our subjection.
is to consider the manner of it. Consider whether you be subject, as the wife
is to her husband, which is the maine thing intimated in this subjection here:
there is a great difference between being subject in the outward man out of
necessity, and: to obey from the heart the form of doctrine, etc. It is one
thing to be subject as a servant, another thing to be subject as a wife, who is
subject, not of coaction or necessity, but freely and willingly out of love,
because she would not grieve her husband, the Saints delight lies in communion
with God, so as their hearts are not at rest, when they stand not in good
terms with him; they cannot let any uneven reckonings to lie between him and
them; they love him, and therefore dare not disobey him. And this arises from
a persuasion, what ever he commands or inflicteth it is good, and just, and
equal: then he willingly obeyes and suffers. Thus the obedience of Christ, you
shall see what kind of one it was, Shall I not drink the cup which my Father
has given me? that is, I would not drink this bitter cup, not only because of
necessity I must, but seeing my Fathers will is I should drink it, and he
has prepared it for me, I will drink it. Hence many a woman will say, shall I
not do that which my husband would have me to do? he is wise and loves me,
and he has reason for what he commands: others of the Sts. have yielded
obedience thus unto the Lord, as Eli, when news was brought to him that all
his house should be cut off; says he, It is the Lord, let him do as seems
good in his eyes, it is the Lord that loves me, takes care of me, let him
do what pleases him, I am content, and willing to subject my self. Another
may be subject to his commandments, but it is of necessity; on the contrary,
the Saints who love and prize communion with him, and would not loose it, would
have no interruption. So also Job 2. 10. We have received good of the Lord,
Job. 2. 10,
and shall we not receive evil? As if he should have said; Surely the Lord
would not have done me so much good as already I have received from Him, if His
purpose had not been good toward me: and therefore if some evil by his
providence do befall me, should I not bear it quietly? If it had been from
an enemy, he would have been discontent, but coming from the hand of a
friend, he was willing with it. Indeed, holy men may be sometimes in a mist,
and not consider the reason of the Lords Counsels, as Paul, when he was
buffeted by the messenger of Satan, he was somewhat discontent, till the Lord
made known to him, that he was mistaken in it, that though he took it for
poison, yet it was a medicine, he thought it came from Satan; but when he saw
it came from one that loved him, and it was for his good; that the grace of God
and his power might appear, he willingly submitted, yea, he rejoiced in it. A
good Conscience is not only to do that which is commanded; it is possible for
him that has no grace, not to dare to do somthings which are evil in secret;
but a good conscience is, when a man is not willing to displease the Lord, he
dares not do it, because he loves the Lord. He stands upon such terms
with him, as a chaste wife with her Husband: Therefore he will look to make
his course even, and to please the LORD in all things.

The third rule to try it by Consider whether 3 As to the Lord.
thy subjection be as to the Lord, or no, for his sake: as here it is said, As
the Church is subject to Christ. Many think their obedience to the
commandments is to the Lord, when they are deceived. It was Saul's case, it was
a fair pretense to spare the cattle, for Sacrifice for the Lord: but it was
but a pretense; for it was for himself indeed, that he spared them. So Balaam
spoke fair, when he said, he would speak nothing but what the Lord should
say to him, and that he would not curse the people of Israel, except God bad
him curse them; but it was not for any love to God, but he had an eye to
himself and his own honor, he knew it was in vain to curse where God did
bless, and so he thought thus with himself, if he should curse them without
the command of the Lord, he should but discredit himself, and loose his
labor, wages and all, for his curse would take no effect: therefore he would
not go till God commanded him to go: likewise it may be, he desired to dye
the death of the righteous, so as all was out of self-love. Likewise Amaziah
was subject to the Lord, walking in all the ways of David, but all was done to
other ends then David did. But you will say, it is hard to discern, when a man
does obey the commandment, Quest.
whether it be to the Lord or no: how therefore shall we know it?

Consider after any failing in thy obedience, Answ. When our obedience is to
the Lord.
or commission of any sin, what it is that troubles thee, the offense
against God, or the harm, discredit, etc. redounding unto thy self? You shall
see the falsenesse of Saul his heart in this, the disobedience of the Lord
never troubled him, though he seemed a while affected with offending the Lord,
but he after showed that it was only the loss of his credit which he was
tender of; for when Samuel would have left him, and he thought some dishonor
would redound to him, that was it that troubled him; he desires not so much
that God would pardon, as that Samuel would honor him; come says he with me,
and let us go and offer Sacrifice, honor me before the people. It was not his
sin and disobedience, but the loss of his credit that he stood upon. The
contrary you may see in David, see his carriage under the guilt of his murder
and adultery, for which he was so greatly afflicted: but how much did he slight
all other things? his affliction he did bear well enough, when his own son
had abuse his wives; this did not perplex him, it was his sin troubled him, as
appears by that Psalm he made upon that occasion, in which you have not a
word of his affliction, but his sin; it was that he was tender of. Find out
therefore where thy tenderness for sin is; as a Smith, when he would try the
hoof of an horse, look where it shrinketh, that is the tender part, so see what
shrinketh and galleth thy heart most; if it be sin and offending the Lord, it
is a sign thy eye was upon the Lord: but when thou art tender of losses, and
crosses, and discredit to thy self, it is an ill sign, showing thou
respectest thy self. David taxes himself in those things which were counted
no sin by men, but an honor; as the cutting off Saul's lap of his garment; it
was an honor to him to come so near his adversary, and but cut off the lap of
his garment. So in numbering the people, it was no outward shame or evil, but
the sin that troubled him, Lord, says he, strike me, for these sheep, what
have they done?

A fourth rule whereby thou may try thy subjection 4 Rule.
to the Lord, is by thy disobedience to all others; it is a rule may seem
somewhat remote at the first hearing, but it is such a rule of trying
subjection, that I find in the Scripture, St. Paul when he would express his
subjection, he does it by way of opposition. If I should yet please men, I were
not the servant of Christ; it is a good argument of our being subject to the
Lord, when we care not for displeasing others, Romans 2. 8. as not obeying the
truth, is joined with obeying unrighteousness, so as the contrary, obeying the
truth is always joined with disobeying, all unrighteousness, I am. 4. 7. they
are put together Submit your selves to the Lord, and resist the Devil. He that
is most subject to the Lord, is a most untractable man to man, and to all
creatures else, upon every occasion, because the common course of the world is
contrary to holiness, Ephesians. 2. 1. which causes others to quarrel so much
with them as they do; and this arises from their obedience to the Lord. It is
common amongst us, when we see a man easy, pliable, tractable, ready to give
satisfaction and content to men, to commend him for it, as a good disposition
in them; but to be so in all things, even in sinning against God, this though
it is pleasing to men, it is abominable to God; it is an evident case, that
they which would not do a thing, if left to themselves, because unlawful, yet
to give satisfaction to friends, to their company, as Herod did, they will,
that is a sign of disobedience; the more waxy the heart is to men, the more
hard to the Lord. It is a sign of pusillanimity in Christians that yield so
much to men, they forget themselves; there is a certain magnanimity which
Christians should maintain: we are Kings, the Sons of God, therefore what
is the countenance or discountenance of man? we should carry our selves as
greater men than they, we should learn regnum gerere in pectore, to carry a
kingdom in our breasts. It is a common saying among men, such a man understands
himself well, that is, he understands his place, his dignity, and caryeth
himself according to it. In this we are ready to go too far, but we should
learn to do thus in our obedience to God. The truth of a wives chastity is
seen in the peremptory denial of all that solicit her; the more peremptory
we are in such denyals of the creatures, the more subject we are to the Lord.

Lastly, you shall try it by this, consider what 5 Rule.
you do in those things that above all others you would not be subject in,
single out that sin that is dearest to thee; though a man would be obedient
in all else, yet in some things to be restrained it goes to his heart,
something is more peculiar, and is that he fancies, and it goes more near
unto him to obey in that, then in any other thing* When the Lord would try
Abraham, he tries him in that which he was most unwilling to part with. Now,
says he, I know that thou fear me, for I have tried thee in that which I
know thou lovedst dearly, and yet thou art content to part with it for my
sake. Make the same question to you: look what it is, that above all others you
would not be subject in, whether it be a matter of credit, of estate, or a lust
that sits close, if thou will try whether thou be subject, so if for his
sake thou can obey the commandment, which is against it that crosses it,
for such a command the Lord gave to Abraham, and he did obey it: he that
takes Christ, takes him for a Lord and a Savior.

But you will say, these rules are good, but I Quest.
find my self wanting, I would be subject, but I cannot bring my heart unto
them, what means should I use for the doing of this?

For this I will give some helps: for the end of these rules of trial, is not
so much to shut men Answ. Helps to this duty.
out, or discourage them, but the end is, that finding themselves wanting, they
may be stirred up the more to be diligent in the prosecution of the means, and
so grow up to perfection.

The means to beused are these.

First, be diligent in observing where thy heart is not subject. Diligent
observance of the flesh in us that is ready to rebel, when we take least
notice 1 To observe therebellion of the flesh.
of it; this is the first means. There is no work we go about, but the flesh
has an hand in it. There is some commotion and rebellion goes along with the
best work we do, now to see this is a great help to obedience. We are not
so much overcome by it, as by our own inobservancy. The flesh is an enemy, and
nihil in host despiciendum, slight nothing of an enemies that may hurt thee,
take heed the flesh deceive thee not, it is an enemy: suspect thine own heart
upon every occasion; for it is ready to deceive thee; especially in things that
are lawful, there thou must have a diligent eye, that there be no rebellion,
that thou go not beyond thy bounds.

Secondly, labor to have thy heart and reason 2. To be convinced of the
convenience of it.
convinced and persuaded that it is best for thee to be subject to the Lord:
the Lord rules no where as a King, but where he rules first as a Prophet, that
is, except he first persuade the heart by an inward enlightening, that it is
best for the heart to be subject, the will and the affections will never yield.
Therefore if there be any commandment wherein thou find a difficulty, arm
thy self with reasons out of Scripture, get those weapons the Apostle speaks
of; 2 Cor. 10. The weapons of our warfare are not carnal, but mighty through
God, 2 Cor. 10.
bringing into captivity every thought to the obedience of Christ, that is,
seek out the reasons the Scripture gives against such a sin, and for to
persuade the heart to obedience, for spiritual reasons only will work, and are
mighty, moral reasons and arguments from respects to thy self, for fear of
Hell, and for desire of Heaven, and the like, they may restrain the outward
man, but they cannot bring the inward man into a full subjection: but
spiritual reasons will make thee subject, and to obey from the heart: and yet
this is not enough, they must be mighty through God: the Lord must have the
setting them on, they must be brought home and applied by him. One may have
many good reasons to move him to be subject to such a commandment, but except
they be brought home to the conscience, by the Lord, they do no good:
therefore says the Apostle, they are mighty through God to bring down the
strongs holds, and false reasonings in the understanding, for they are these
strong holds: where ever disobedience is, it arises from some lust, and whereon
is this lust grounded, but upon some false conceit, and reasoning in the
understanding? Now these spiritual reasons do dissolve them: and when you see
the vanity of the conceit, the lust vanishes, when thou see thy error, the
lust will be gone, and then the mind obeys easily. It then runs in the
ways of Gods commandments, as a wheel that is well oyled. First then you
must observe narrowly, and strive to discern between the flesh and spirit,
which are as close as the bones and marrow, as the inwardest parts, they are so
mixed together, there is such a conjunction between the flesh and spirit in
every action, as is between the marrow and bones, but you must labor to
discern between them, and that is the use you must make of all the knowledge
you get by the Word of God. And then secondly, thou must have a special care,
and still labor with thy mind, reason, and understanding, to be persuaded that
it is best to be obedient.

And then the third and last thing is, to do somewhat 3. Labor to bring the
affections to obey.
with the affections, that is, to exercise and accustom thy stubborn
affections to obey: the continuance in doing good, does subject the affections;
for as the Apostle speaks, Hebr. 5. Heb. 5. 14.
14. of some, That by reason of use have their wits exercised to discern good
from evil, that is, men being occupied in spiritual reasons, and truths, holy
conferences, etc. they are able to discern truths. So it is in the affections;
for, as exercise in these things makes the understanding ready to discern, so
exercise makes the will and affections as ready to be subject, for it has the
same force in one part of the soul, that it has in another: therefore the
Lord leads us into variety of conditions, to exercise such and such graces,
that we may be subject to him in all things, for the image of God serves but
to bring the soul into obedience to God, as it did in Adam in Paradise. Now
therefore, God leads us into another place, and state, and condition of life,
that such a grace may be exercised in us. As the Apostle says, James, 1. 2.
Iam. 1. 2.
Be glad when you fall into many temptations. Sometimes he brings sickness,
sometimes disgrace, sometimes poverty, sometimes affliction in children, wives,
or onething or other upon us, and all this to exercise our graces. And what is
the end of this exercise, but to bow the heart to subjection, that we may be
ready to obey him in all things? Now if thou would exercise thy self in
this manner, consider wherein thou art ready to disobey, and say: I see I want
such a grace, and am ready to disobey in such a particular, I will resolve to
practice the contrary. As if a man be subject to anger, and want meekness,
say, well, I see I am too much subject to anger. Therefore I will set upon the
exercising of this grace of gentleness, and meekness, I will not be angry
with the meanest of my servants. Thus if we would do, it would save us much
affliction, which otherwise the Lord is forced to bring on us for this, to make
us subject to him.

But you will say, it is grace that does it: how Object.
can this custom that is but the act of a man do it then?

It is true, it is grace that does it, but yet it is Ans.
the exercise of that grace that does it too. Heb. 5. 11, 12, 13. And that, as
it increases and enlarges He. 5. 11, 12, 13.
grace, and intends those habits which we have, and makes them stronger: it
is indeed those infused qualities of grace planted in the faculties of the
soul that bring it in subjection: and this custom does but stir up and
increase, and intends them; but yet this exercise where graces are first
wrought, will increase them and make them strong, through the assistance of
Christ accompanying it. Thou shall find this exercise will make thee strong in
grace: the joints of the body bent to such a course, and often employed in it,
do get an habit. So it is with the Soul. Other yokes the more they are borne,
the more they weaken, but the more you bear the Yoke of Christ, either in
doing or suffering, the more able you are to do it.

Another use that we may make of this is, that Use. 2. To show our privilege
by Christ as a head.
we should be from hence stirred up to consider that great privilege we have
from Christ, for if he be a head to us, he is our guide, he is so an head to
us, as an husband is to the wife* Now the husband is the guide of her youth,
and so Christ is our guide. When a woman is young and not able to guide her
self, she had need have a guide: such is the case of every man naturally: but
Christ, when a man is in him, becomes a guide unto him, or as the Head guides
the rest of the members, so does the Lord all that belong to him. This is a
privilege not thought of among us. When we think of the other privileges,
this of the guidance of Christ is forgotten of us. Therefore I will stand upon
this great benefit, which all How Christ guides us.
have that are ingrafted into Christ: now he guides them in all their ways.

First, by enlightening them, so as when others 1
are in darkness, they have their eyes in their head, and see the way before
them, when as all others are blind, and want either light, or else eyes to see
withal.

Again, he sends his spirit to be a remembrancer 2
to them in ambiguous and difficult cases, to show them the way they are to
take, and he brings some prevalent arguments and reasons to mind, to move us
to do this or that, which would other wise have bin forgotten; and to show us
the inconveniences that will follow of doing this or that which would
otherwise have been hid from us.

He stirs by our consciences which are appointed to be the immediate guide
of us, and the 3
Lords deputy, whereas otherwise they would either be still, or guide amiss.

By taking from us wrong guides, false opinions, strong, unruly, and inordinate
affections, and 4
instead of them he puts a right guide into our hearts, rectifies our
judgments, puts in holy affections, which are the rudder of the soul, that
turn it this way and that way. Thus there is a secret guidance, though we know
it not, that the Saints have from the Lord in all their ways. This is a great
privilege: for when a man is inops consilit, in a strait and exigent, and
knows not which way to go, when if he should take the wrong way, it might be
his undoing, then to have a guide, what a great privilege is it? When David
was in Keilah, and heard that Saul would come down thither, 1 Samuel 23. he
knew not what to do, whether to go or stay; then the Lord guided 1 Samuel 23.
him. So Abraham his servant, when he went for a wife, for his Masters son, he
knew not which way to go for a wife for him, nor whom to take, then did God
send his Angel to guide him, as Abraham had fore told him before he went; he
told him The Angel of the Lord should go before him. The want of this you may
see in Rehoboam, who was in a great strait, when he asked counsel of the
young men, but the Lord would not guide him, and therefore he did that which
was his ruin. So Absolon when he was in b^^^^, not knowing which of the
counsels given him to take, the Lord would not guide him, having a purpose to
destroy him. So it is with us, there are often cases fall out wherein guidance
is requisite, as in the changing our estate by marriage, place of living, the
choice of our callings, wherein to be guided or misguided, is our making or
undoing. There is no day, wherein we have not need of his guidance, in regard
of one occasion or other: now to have this privilege to go to the Lord
freely; and ask counsel of him, and to be sure to have a ready answer from
him, it is a great privilege. David in all his straites went to the Lord to
ask counsel, and the Lord gave him counsel: Saul went, and the Lord would
not answer him by Vrim or Thummin, nor dreams, nor any way. The case of all
that are in Christ, is like the case of David, if they go to him, the Lord
has bound himself to answer them; for they have some interest in the wisdom
of Christ. But the case of the other, is like the case of Saul, he sends them
away without, because they are strangers to him, and therefore he is not bound
to answer them. And that you have such an interest, consider, 1 Corinthians. 1.
30. But you are of him in 1 Cor. 1. 30.
Christ Jesus, who is made unto us wisdom, that is, God the Father has given
him to us to teach us; to make us wise, to guide and direct us in difficult
cases, when we cannot instruct our selves. The like to this is that, Isay. 9.
6. Unto us a child is borne Isay. 9. 6.
etc. But what are the benefits we shall have by that child? First he shall
do miracles, wonderful things among you, for his name is wonderful.
Secondly, he undoubtedly shall be your Counselor, that is, I have given him
to you, that when you want counsel and direction, you may go to him, for I
have given him to you, for that end. This we may as truly expect of him, as the
Jews did it of the Messiah, as appears by that speech, Ioh. 4. 25. I know
well that when the Messiah is come, he will tell us all things. This was the
common opinion Ioh. 4. 25.
of the people: the Jews did expect this from him, so may we: and therefore
upon any exigent go thou and say, Lord, thou have given me thy Son, and him
to be wisdom to me, and appointed him to be my counselor, and I have need
of counsel and direction, and therefore Lord give me an answer, and direction.
If we would press him thus, he could not deny us. Besides, in that Christ
has made himself our head, it is his office, he has undertaken it, it
belongs to him, to guide his Church and every member of it, and can he fail
in that belongs to him?

That which sets the price on this privilege; is the need which we have of it,
none being able to guide himself. The principle of guidance is resident in the
head, and is communicated to the members but upon occasion. As it is thus in
the natural body, so that faculty of directing us is in Christ, and is
communicated to us but upon occasion, as we need it: hence every man walks
so vvisely upon every occasion as God will guide and direct him to do, in
such a time, and in such circumstances; therefore wise men, we see are
sometimes infatuated, take a foolish course, that a stander by, who is far
inferior to them, sees plainly this to be an unwise course, this the Lord
does, that they may know, the Lord is only wise, as 1 Timothy 1. Which consider,
and it will be 1 Timothy 1. God only wise.
a great help to make us prize this privilege. Where is any man but is too
well conceited of his own wisdom? but to think God is only wise, and that
himself has not a beam, nor a spark of wisdom, it is hard to persuade a
man of this, but it is evident the Lord is only wise.

For first, none can give counsel, except he knows the whole compass of a
business, he that knows but part is not sit to give counsel: they that
look but upon few things, but upon a corner of a business, and not round
about it, are apt to mistake: now who knows a business thus, but the Lord
above? our knowledge even in practical matters, in our own business, is but
in part, as well as in things heavenly.

Besides, Secondly our consolations depend commonly on these two things, first,
the knowledge of the secrets of men's hearts, with whom we have to do.
Secondly, of the future contingent events, which are to come, and to know
neither is in our power, but it is the Lord only that knows the secrets of
these men's hearts, with whom we have to do, as also the contingent things that
are to come.

When the Lord would have David go out of Keilah, says David, will the Lords
of Ketlah deliver me up? David knew not their hearts, nor no man knew, but the
Lord only knew they would deliver him up into the hands of Saul, 1 Samuel 23.
11. 12. and he told him, they would do it. And again, 1 Samuel 23. 11. 13.
he asked whether Saul would come down to Keilah, it was futurum contingens, a
contingent thing, and no man could tell whether he would or not; but the Lord
told, that he would come down to destroy Keilah; if any other had known
these two things, he might have counseled David. Now our guidance then in such
things depends upon the knowledge of those two things, which yet are not in
our power to know, but only in the power of God, and therefore we are not
able to guide our selves. It is said, Col. 2. 3. That in him are hid all the
treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; And they are so in Him, that they are not
out of Him.

But men have natural wisdom you will say. It is true, but they have it from
Christ, All the Object. Answ. Natural wisdom from Christ.
light that ever was in the world, even in those which knew not Christ, it came
all from him. As Ioh. 1. 5. The light shined in darkness, that is, in the
dark places of the world, and not only in Goshen, even since the beginning of
the world, and the darkness comprehended it not, and in that sense it is he
who enlighteneth every man that: comes into the World. But put the case you
could find out right counsels, or you had a man like Achitopel, whose counsel
was as the Oracles of God, and who were able to direct you, yet to take this
counsel is not in your own power, it must be given you. That which Solomon
says of the fool, He has a price in his hand, but he has no heart, may be
said of good counsel, there is oftentimes a price put into our hands, as was
into Absolon's, and Rehoboam's hands, but we are not able of our selves to take
it: therefore says the Apostle to Timothy, 2 Timothy 2. 7. having 2 Timothy 2. 7.
counseled him what to do, Consider what I say, and the Lord give thee
understanding in all things. As if he should say, I have given thee good
counsel: but there must be another counselor, therefore I beseech the Lord to
give thee understanding, to open thine eyes, to see the rectitude of this
counsel, and enable thee to apply it, and take it. Nemo per se sapit, no man
by himself is able to counsel himself, there must be both a secret light,
and eyes within to direct us. Many times we refuse the best, and pitch upon
the worst, Ier. 10. 23. The way of man is not in himself, it is not in man to
direct his ways, as if he had said, it is true, for the most part, men pitch
well enough upon the journies end, and aim at happiness; but how to direct
their steps, and to attain that end, it is not in them, therefore Lord I
beseech thee (says he) to guide us and direct us for the best. It is every
man's case, his ways are not in his own power, he is not able to see what is
best and worst, and to choose the right way, and if he could in the general,
yet we had need of continual guidance in the several particular passages of
our lives. We are at a stand at every turning we come at, and like a man in a
wilderness know not which way to go, except we have a guide at every step,
Dan. 5. 23. He is the God in whose hand thy breath is, and all thy ways Dan.
5. 23.
etc, this is a thing we do not consider. We think indeed our lives are in
Gods hand, and that matters of greater moment, are of his disposing; but that
every step we take should depend on him, this is that we consider not of, a man
takes not a step either into good or evil, into prosperity or adversity, but
the Lord guides that step. Therefore consider your great privileges, who have
the Lord for your head, your guide, and your counselor, and as you must know
this privilege, so you must make use of it, for all those our privileges we
have in Christ, were not declared that you should gaze upon them only, know
them, and no more: therefore go to the Lord for counsel, wisdom and
direction upon all occasions.

You will say, but how shall we do to obtain it? For this I will give you
these rules. Quest.


First, thou must acknowledge thine own inability, that thou art not able to
guide thy self. Ans. How to get wisdom from God. Iam. 1. 5.
James, 1. 5. If any lack wisdom, let him ask, etc. his meaning there, is not
so much to show that some men want wisdom, others not, but the meaning 1 See
the want of it.
is, till a man sees he wants it, he is not fit to ask it, neither will the
Lord be ready to give it. 1 Corin. 3. 18. He that is wise, must become a fool
to be wise. It is true also here, thou must cease from 1 Cor. 3. 18.
thine own wisdom, thou must confess thou art not able to guide thy self,
and that therefore because thou want wisdom, thou ask it of him. Psalm.
25. 9. He will teach the humble his way, and Psalm. 25. 9.
guide the meek in judgment, that is, those that see their own emptiness,
how unable they are to guide themselves, such He is ready to teach in the way
they should choose.

Secondly, thou must also ask it of the Lord. 2 Beg it of God.
You may read how God used David to this course from time to time, and put him
often to a stand when he fled from Saul, purposely that he might be accustomed
to ask counsel of the Lord upon all occasions. Therefore let us learn so to
do, in any hard case, when we know not which way to turn us, to go to the
Lord, and say, Thou art my Husband, my Head, my Father: and whither should the
Children go for counsel, but unto their Fathers? and the Wife, but unto her
Husband? Now Lord counsel me and direct me what to do in this case. If you
do thus, will the Lord deny you? no, why says he, you, if your Children ask
you bread, will you give them a stone? If they ask fish, will you give them a
serpent? So I say to you, if you ask him counsel, will he give you poison?
will he turn you into a vvrong way and misguide you when you ask the right?
No.

Thirdly, you must ask in faith, that is added 3 Ask in faith. Iam. 1. 6.
in S. James, 1. 6. So as to rest and rely upon him. Thus he commanded his
Disciples, that when they should be brought before Counsels and rulers of the
Synagogues, they should take no thought what to say, what was the reason but
this, I will have you rest upon me, for guidance and assistance? at that time I
will suggest to you whatsoever is needful upon such an occasion. Now though
that was extraordinary, yet it holds thus far in ordinary times and cases,
that though you may use the best means you can, and take the best
consultations, yet so as still to trust more to your prayers, and on God for
wisdom and direction, then to your own consultations, and the means which
you have used, say as Iehosaphat did, although we use means, yet our eyes are
toward thee; it is a prevalent argument which Asa used to the Lord, 2 Chronicles.
14. 11. Lord (says he) it is nothing with thee to help with many, or with no
power, 2 Chronicles. 14. 11.
help us O Lord our God, for we rest on thee, and in thy name are we come
against this great multitude. As if he should say, I have provided an army,
made all things ready, but I rest upon thee for help; therefore the Lord was
present with him, gave him the victory: so we should go to the Lord and say,
we have used the counsel of our best friends, and the best means we can, but
yet our eyes are toward thee, and we rest on thee for direction in this case.
If a man thus rests upon God, he may say, if I be deceived, the Lord
deceives me. If thou trustest not to the Lord, he may fail thee, for he is
not bound to direct and to guide thee: it fares with us, as with those that
came to ask questions of our Savior, curious ones; the Lord sent them away
without an answer, kept himself reserved: so if we come to ask, not with
resolution to rest upon the Lord, and in confidence he will direct us, we
shall go without: Isay, 7. The Lord has promised deliverance Isay, 7.
to Ahaz, yet tells him, if you will not believe, you shall not be established.

Fourthly, there must be a care to please him, 4 Labor to please God.
a constant course of obedience, else we do not trust in him: he that says
he trusts to the Lord, and does not obey him, does but dissemble with him,
and so the Lord accounts it no better than dissembling with him, as Ier. 42.
20. Ier. 42. 20.
Carry thy self so, that the Lord may rejoice over thee, to do thee good, and
to guide thee in all exigents. And if thou will take his counsel in heavenly
things, thou shall not want it in earthly things, Prove. 4. 6. Forsake her not
(that is, Wisdom) Pro. 4. 6.
and she shall keep thee; love her, and she shall preserve thee; that is, if
a man will preserve the uprightness of his heart in his ways, if he will
walk by the rule that God has appointed him; then wisdom shall preserve
him, that is, Christ shall guide him in all his ways.

Now there is a double guidance, one in a matter of sinning, or not sinning
against God; when we are preserved from doing a thing that is unlawful, which
David calls, leading in the paths of Psalm. 23. 3.
righteousness, Psalm. 23. 3. Secondly, there is a guidance, which is a matter
of blessing and comfort to us, which is called, feeding in fair pastures. In
the same Psalm. 23. 2. and the second does depend upon the first. If thou be
contented to be guided by the rules the Lord gives thee, he will direct thee
in the things that belong to thy own comfort and advantage. Psalm. 25. so the
promise runs there, verse 12. what man is he that fears Psalm. 25. 5.
the Lord? him will he teach the way that he shall choose. (Him) that fears
him, and keeps a good conscience in all things, our former care herein is that
which stirs up the Lord to guide us and direct us, in all our straites.
There is a time when the Lord has need of thy service, if thou will not fail
him at his need; (as I may so speak) he will not fail thee, when thou have
need of him in thy straites. And thus to have counsel given a man in such
cases as do nearely concern him, and are of great weight, it is a great
privilege. And this thou shall have, if thou will follow his counsel in other
things. Therefore be exhorted upon this ground and motive to keep thy heart
more perfect with God.

The cause why Absolon and Rehoboam erred, was because they provoked the Lord
formerly: and if thou be also disobedient, this shall be your punishment,
that because you would not hearken to his counsel, therefore when thou need
counsel, even in those things that shall be as much as thy life, thou shall
be infatuated. The Lord has made no promise to such a man, to show him the
way he should choose.

One thing must be added, and that is this, that in any particular case, thou
must be ready to resign 5 Get a teachable heart.
thy self up to the Lord, to take his counsel. He will not loose his labor,
thou must have a heart that is pliable to him, and yield thy self up wholly to
his disposing, and not set thy self to any way so, but that the Lord may take
thee off it. Those among men that are governors of others, are willing to
bestow their labor on them that are pliable, but those that are of stubborn
dispositions are a discouragement to them; they that walk frowardly with the
Lord, the Lord will walk frowardly with them; therefore see thou resist him
not in the passages of his providence, and take not the bit in thy mouth, and
hold it in thy teeth, as one unwilling to be guided. So it is, men are often
set on a thing upon an humor, and they will go this way, or that way, as they
like, what ever come of it: but sometime the Lord in mercy barreth up the way,
as we do pits that are by the way side to keep travelers from falling in, as
they pass in the night. We find sometimes the door shut upon us in a course
which we would enter into; sometimes he sets our conscience upon us to
expostulate with us, even as the Angel did with Hagar, when she fled from her
mistress. Genesis 16. 18, Hagar Sarahs maid, says he, whence come thou, and
whither wilt Genesis 16. 18.
thou goe^ return to thy dame, and humble thy self under her hands. As if he
should have said, Hagar, think with thy self who thou art, Sarahs maid, it
was her pride caused her to run away, she thought to have been mistress,
and because she could not bear the rough usage of her mistress she had
forgotten her place, therefore the Angel calls her Sarahs maid; and bids her,
Go and humble thy self under her hands, and likewise says he, consider
whence thou come, from the godliest family in all the world, and consider
whither thou go, to them that know not God, that are strangers and aliens
from the common wealth of Israel, and therefore return unto thy Dame. So the
Lord sometimes sets our consciences to expostulate with us, why do you refuse
such a course, and why do you take such a course? and it shows us the cause
of our errings, as here the Angel did Hagar, for pride of heart was the cause
of her flying from her mistress, therefore the Angel says, Hagar, Sarahs
maid, go and return unto thy mistress, and humble thy self under her hands;
do not as Iohanan did when he sent to ask counsel of the Lord, whether he
should go into Egypt or no, resolve aforehand what thou will do, he set down
with himself, that whatsoever the Lord had said, he would go down into
Egypt. So it is with many, though they ask counsel of the Lord, by prayer,
their hearts are set upon a course, and will not be taken off. Take heed of
this stiffenesse of disposition and frowardness of spirit, which is a frequent
cause, and a cause of much misguidance immens actions, and resign thy self to
the Lord, and seek counsel in the uprightness and plainness of thy heart:
this resignation of our selves to the Lord, is the way to be directed upon all
occasions.

Now to work your heart to this, consider that the way God leads thee to, how
improbable soever it seems, it will be the best and safest way for thee. Many
would go the contrary way: As Lot, when the Lord would have him flee to the
mountain, he would go to Zoar, against Gods counsel, and you see what came
of it. So David for the numbering of the people, though better counsel was
given him by Ioab. But he was set upon it, he would do it, and see what came
of it. So Josiah would fight with Pharoah-Necho, though better counsel was
sent him from the Lord, to pass by him, and let him alone: see what came of
it. Therefore take heed of this stiffenesse of affection, and wilfulness, and
stubbornenesse of Spirit. The Lord may sometime give way to thy mind, but it is
in judgment, not in mercy: the thing which thou have a mind to, it may be
brought to pass, but it had been better for thee to want it; as it had been
for Balaam, but he would needs go up to Balaac, and therefore the Lord bad
him go in his anger, seeing he would not be staid. He deals with us as
Elisha did with those, 2. King. 2. 15. That would go to seek the body of
Eliah, they had many denyals, but yet they were instant with him, so that in
the end, he bad them go, and they went, and lost their labor, for they found
him not. In all cases of difficulty learn to seek counsel of the Lord.

These conditions observed, you shall have the use of this privilege.

Another use is this, let every man learn from hence to be the glory of
Christ. How is this drawn Use. 3. To give glory to Christ. 1* Cor. 11. 7.
from thence, you will say* If you look into that place in the 1 Corin. 11. 7.
See how it follows upon it: Christ is the head of every man, and the man is
the woman's head, as is before in the Chapter, what follows upon that? in the
seventh verse, he says, the man is the image and glory of God, and the woman
is the glory of the man. The meaning is this, when thou do consider that the
Lord is thy husband, and thy head, thou must think of this with thy self, and
every time thou findst that passage in Scripture, it should put thee in mind to
carry thy self so as thou may be the glory of the Lord, that is, thou must
take heed of standing on thine own bottom, and seeking glory to thy self,
and of shining with thine own beams, seeking any selfe-excellency; but as it
is in the civil law, Mulier coruscat radiis mariti, the woman must shine with
the beams of the man, that is, she must challenge nothing as her own, but
every thing she seeks or stands for, it is in the name of her husband,
therefore whatever thou have been, or ever thou have sought honor to thy
self, and applause, and to be thought some body in the world, yet now think
thus with thy self, I am the Lords now, I must give him all the praise, and
carry my self so, that all my excellency may reflect upon him. And this also,
that we are members, is also argument enough for it. What can the members do?
there is agility in them to do many actions, but where have they all their
vigor? is it not from the head? So all the wit, and learning thou have, those
excellencies thou have, whence have thou them? are they not from Christ? the
members do that they do, but in an isntrumental manner, so do thou, what
ever thou do. Therefore consider this, and say heartily, it is not I that do
this or that, but the grace of God in me, I do but actus agere, it is the
influence of my head; Christ has wrought it by me, as Paul said, that phrase
is to be marked which is used in Galat. 2. He that was mighty by Peter in the
Apostleship over the circumcision, was also mighty by me toward the Gentiles.
The Apostle does not say, that he, or Peter was able to do any thing, but
ascribes all to the Lord. So thou should think with thy self, never say,
I have done such a thing, or brought such a thing to pass, or such an
excellent performance has come from me, but say, the Lord has done such a
thing by me. In other things you do it, when you see an instrument well played
on, you commend not that, but him that uses it: that is the case of every man;
we are but the Lords instruments, he is mighty by us, we are but acted by the
Lord. If Christ be the Head, thou must seek his glory: this the Lord is
jealous of Sacrilege God, will not take at the hand of any man, he will not be
robbed of his time, the Sabbath or any thing else, but of all other he can least
away with this theft, robbing him of his glory, and yet as that is most tender
to him, so our fingers are more itching after that. A man is greedy of
applause, and if he look not narrowly to himself, is ready to take the glory
to himself that belongs to the Lord. Thou must be the Lords glory, but if thou
take any to thy self, and if thou stand on thy own bottom, thou art thy own
glory, and not his: therefore above all things take heed of being deceived and
found guilty herein. But you will say, how may I come to know it? First,
consider what thy end is in thy actions, whether the demonstration of some gift
God has given thee, or for his glory, and if thou find not out thy end, yet
consider whether in matter or manner of doing, thou do not step out of the
way: if not by this, yet consider after the action is done, when any thing is
well performed by thee, whether thy heart begin not to swell in thee, that
is, to think better of thy self than before, that is a sign thou take
something to thy self, that belongs to the Lord. And when a man takes that to
himself which is the Lords, he is not the glory of the Lord. If not by this,
then,

Lastly, consider whether thou art more troubled for that discredit that comes
to thy self, or the dishonor that redounds to the Lord upon thy miscariage at
any time, consider how thou art affected with any thing. One step further you
must go, and that is, not only to take nothing to your selves, but likewise
so behave your selves that you may be an honor to God by showing forth the
graces of Christ, that the Lord may boast of you, as he did of Job Job. 1. 8. I
say thou must carry thy self so, as the Lord may glory in thee, say to Satan
of thee, as he did to him of Job: seeest not such a man in such a town, in
such a place, how zealous he is, how holy? be not a shame and reproach to him,
but a praise: he looks for this from his Saints, and therefore wears them as
signets on his right hand. As great men wear diamonds, and precious stones,
and jewels in their ears, about their necks, and in their rings, to adorn and
beautify them: so the servants of the Lord, are his jewels that he wears to
make him glorious in the eyes of men: great men are known by their Jewels, and
so is the Lord by his Saints. Therefore it is a great motive to keep thy self
unspotted of the world, to carry thy self so, that his name may be honored,
and his Gospel well spoken of: the glory of Christ is engaged in thy carriage,
let it be such as becomes the Gospel.

Again, if Christ be the head of every man, then Use. 4. To try if we be
members of Christ.
try and consider from hence what thy condition is. If he be the head of the
Church, no man within the compass of the true Church, but is a member of
Christ. Consider whether thou be a member of his body, one that is guided by
his Spirit or no: but how shall we know that?

First by this, thou shall find the same Spirit 1
that is in Christ living and breathing in thee; thou shall find the same
disposition, and antipathy, and affections to be in thee, that are in him;
abhorring that evil, and cleaving to that good he does; for the body of the
tree and the branches are not of different natures: therefore consider what
similitude is between the Lord and thee. So soon as thou art a living member,
the same spirit is sent into thy heart, and insinuates it self into thy soul,
and makes it conformable to Christ in all things. As the fire insinuates it
self into the iron, and makes it like it self. He that is in Christ, is made a
new creature, and partakes of the divine nature, and is like him in all things.
But if this be the rule, I fear my condition, for I find many contrary
dispositions Quest.
in me to his Word, and contrary to Christ. Answ. Thou may find many
rebellions Ans.
in thee, and yet the same disposition remain in thee, that is, in Christ.
There may be swellings in the members, but yet there is a disposition of
health, and strength, and vivacity that wears them out. 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16. Know
you not that your bodies 1 Cor. 6. 15, 16.
are members of Christ? Shall I then take the members of Christ, and make them
the members of an harlot? God forbid, etc. that is, it is impossible it should
be so, it is like that speech in Romans 6. 1, 2. Shall we continue in sin,
etc. how Romans 6. 1, (...),
shall we that are dead etc. live any longer therein? That is, as it is
impossible for him that is dead to sin, to live therein: so it is impossible
for him that is a member of Christ, to be made the member of an harlot. Why
what say you to David's case, that fell into adultery? Answ. Though he did, he
was not made the member of an harlot. For therefore you shall find in the 16.
verse, be that is glued, for so the word in the original signifies, that is,
adhereth to an harlot, out of the inward sway of his heart, gives his mind to
any sin, he cannot be a member of Christ: though he that is a member may
fall into many sins, yet he is not (...) glued, nor knit to any sin, for
then he could not be a member of Christ: for if he be so, he is of the same
spirit or body. Now it is impossible to be of the body of Christ; and of a
contrary body too. If a man have his heart glued to any sin, he is not a
member of Christ, be it a matter of credit, learning, pleasure, or delight, any
lust, if thy heart be glued to it, and thou can not get them asunder, thou
art not a member of Christ. For they are not wedded to any sin, but there is a
divorce between every member of Christ and sin, though they may fall one upon
another, and touch each, yet they are of a mouldering nature, they will not
cleave together. For he that is of God is in Christ, and has the nature of
Christ in him, that will not suffer him to sin. As take water and oil, they
may violently be shaken together, and they will seem to be mixed together, and
to be one, but they will not continue so long, there is no coalition, because
they are of diverse natures; and the one remains water still, and the other
oil: so he that is in Christ cannot cleave to any sin, though sin and he may
touch sometime, yet they are strangers, they cannot stand together, they cannot
cleave one to another.

Besides, consider the manner of thy obedience, all that are Christ's, obey him,
after that manner that the members do the head. The headship of Christ is not
an imaginary thing; he is not like the politic head of a body, but he is like
a natural head, that is, there comes a natural true living influence from
Christ to his members, that works upon their hearts and wills, as the head does
on the members. There is a force that infinuates it self from Christ unto
them, that moves them to obedience. Members, they are not moved by
argumentation, by reasons and arguments, but by a certain force that comes
from the head, and from a propensnesse that is in them: so those that are
Christ's, are not moved by reasons simply to obedience. My meaning is, not that
reasons are excluded, for they have motives and arguments to move them as well
as others, but that is not all, there is a proclivitive planted in them, that
makes them obedient to their Head CHRIST JESUS. Consider those words, Romans 6.
13. Wherefore give up your members as weapons of Righteousness unto God, that
is, so soon as a man is dead to sin and made alive to Christ, consider now
you are made members of another body, have another head, and therefore as the
members are obedient to the Head, and ready to do what ever that will have
them do: so be you ready to do what ever Christ commands. As when the Head
would have a thing done, the members do it willingly without any reluctance,
consider whether thy obedience be of that nature: other men are drawn to it by
outward motives from the force of Arguments and Reasons, but they want this
inward propensnesse to be guided by Christ, as the members are guided by the
Head.

Lastly, consider whether thou seek thy self, or the good and advantage of
others. For look what being a man has, what state or condition in the Church,
what frame of spirit within, such are his desires. So long as a man is not a
member, but alone, so long he seeks the perfection of himself, as alone; but
being a member, he seeks his good as he is a fellow member with the rest; his
condition is altered, there comes another spirit into him that gives him the
disposition of a member: and the well-being of a member, is not to be alone,
but to be knit to the other members, and to be knit together with them to the
Head.

The Characters of a member are, first to be sociable, Characters of a member.
it is not the property of a member to be alone, if thou be knit unto Christ,
thou can not 1
want fellowship with Christians, with the members of Christ. As a member of
the body, if there be any disjoynture made, it seeks to be knit again: so
every one that is a member, cannot endure to want the fellowship of Christ; if
a cloud come betwixt Christ and him, he cannot rest till he be made one with
him again, or of the rest of the Saints, which are his fellow members.

Secondly, another disposition of a member is to 2
be useful and serviceable to the body and the rest of the members, as the
hand, the eye, and the ear, in its place. So it is with every one that is a
member of this body, whereas before he sought himself, and considered what did
redound to himself, what profit, or credit, now the case is altered, and his
thoughts are, How shall I do any thing which may glorify my Head, and
advantage my fellow members? How shall I be useful to God and man?

Lastly, a member is compassionate, has a fellow-feeling of what befales any
of the rest of the 3.
members, it weeps with them that weep etc that is, it uses to be affected
with the good or with the evil, that concerns the body of the Church, or any
member of it, and this is a natular disposition that follows the nature of all
members, and the spirit that is in them. As Saint Paul says, who is offended,
and I burn not with grief and sorrow for it? I feel twinges when others are
hurt. Consider how thou art affected with the case of the Church, whether thou
find bowels of compassion in thee, and art able to take their cause to heart,
and is thy heart stirred in thee, accordingly as thou see it go well or ill
with the Church? If so, thou have the dispositions of a member, and then Christ
is thy head, and all the promises made to the body of Christ, the Church,
belong to thee, otherwise thou have no interest in him.

FINIS.
THE TABLE.
A
Acquaintance. ACquaintance with God, how it is gotten, part 1, page, 179.
Affections. Affections moderated by humiliation, 1, 91 Affections what, 1, 120
Affections show what is our utmost end, 1. 165 Affections of Gods children
resist sin, 1, 216 Affections subject to Christ, 2, 117
Afflict, Afflictions. God Afflicts his own people, 1, 3 Afflictions do not
always follow sin, 1, 6 Examples of Gods Afflicting his people, 1, 8 Not to
think strange th t God afflicts his children, 1. 19 God slow to afflict, 1, 21
God sustaines his people in affliction, Ibid, God brings his people through
affliction, 1, 25 Afflictions needful, 1, 29 Difference of men in Affliction,
1, 31 Afflictions why sent of God, Ibid. Afflictions removed in due time, 1, 34
Humiliation wrought by afflictions, 1, 80 To be humble in afflictions, 1, 123
To judge of our state by the issue of afflictions, 1, 288 In what case God
afflicts his people, 1, 290
Apostasy. Apostacy, the ground of it, 1, 90
Ashamed. Men ashamed of the power of religion, 1, 60
Assurance. Assurance not to be weakened by daily failings, 1, 122, 269
Avoid. Afflictions sent not to be avoided, 1, 33

B.
Benefits. COnsideration of the benefits by Christ, what they serve for, 2, 37
Best. Subjection to Christ, best for us, 2, 115
Blaspheme. God afflicts his people, that his name be not blasphemed, 1, 4
Boldness. Boldness to got to Christ, 2, 22

C.
Calling. DIligence in our calling, a means to humble us, 1, 130
Christ. Humiliation makes us cleave to Christ, 1, 88, 99 The Church married to
Christ, 2, 1 Motives to take Christ, 2, 23 Benefits by Christ. 2, 27
Impediments that keep from Christ, 2, 38
Church. Comfort concerning the afflictions of the Church, 1, 63
Choose, Choosing. Choosing God the way to happiness, 1, 42 Motives to choose
God, 1, 43 God chooses his people, 1, 48 See God,
Compassion. God has Compassion of his people in affliction 1, 20
Confession. Confession of sin required in fasting, 1, 38
Conscience. Conscience of good men fight against sin, 1, 215
Consent. Difference in men's consent, 1, 210 Consent in our marriage to Christ,
2, 2, 12 Consent, how it is wrought, 2, 3 Consent, what it is, 2, 4 Caution
concerning our consent, 2, 13 Error in men's consent, 2, 15
Constancy. Constancy caused by humiliation, 1, 73 Constancy in good duties, 1,
129 Constancy in fighting against sin, 1, 218
Contempt. Want of fear a sign of contempt, 1, 14
Content. Contentment wrought by humiliation, 1, 92
Covenant. Covenant renewed in fasting. 1. 39 Freeness of Gods covenant, 1,
263

D
Death. Sin at the last brings forth death. 1, 285
Defer. Dangerous to defer coming to Christ, 2, 67
Discourage. Ground not to be discouraged in afflictions, 1, 32
Difficulty. Difficulty of leaving sin, what it should teach us. 1, 229
Difficulty of a Christian course, 1, 230
Disobedience. Disobedience to all others to obey Christ, 1, 112

E.
End. AFfliction of Gods people turned to good in the end, 1, 26 End of actions
double, 1, 158 To make God our chief end, Ibid. How to know we make God our
end. 1, 62
Enmity. Enmity double. 2, 69
Error. Error, the cause of it, 2, 63
Excellency. Excellency of Christ, a motive to take him. 1, 26

F.
Fase. HVmiliation makes us seek Gods face, 1, 87 To seek Gods face, what, 1,
132 How to know we seek Gods face. 1, 155 Benefit of seeking Gods face, 1,
183
Faith. Faith grows from humiliation, 1, 101 Faith what, 1, 102 Impediments to
faith, 1, 268
Fast. Double performance of a fast, 1, 38
Fear. Fear, the nature of it, 1, 7 Fear, the want of it provokes God, 1, 13
Fear of the creature a snare, 1, 15 Fear of God, how to bring our hearts to
it, 1, 16 Fear, the object of it. 1, 138 Fear in those that are out of
Christ, 2, 25
Fellowship. Fellowship of the Saints. 2, 97
Forgiveness. Means of conveighing forgiveness 1, 260. Who excluded from the
promise of forgiveness, 1, 263. Promise of forgiveness brings men to God, 1
273. How to be persuaded of God's readiness to forgive sins, 1, 274 Danger of
refusing the promises of forgiveness, 1, 277

G
Garment. Wedding garment, what, 2, 21
Glory. The wife the glory of the husband, how, 2, 53 Humble men give God
glory, 1, 113 Christians, how they are the glory of Christ, 1, 33
God To choose the Lord for our God, 1, 41
Grace. Grace to be stirred up, 1, 248 To stir up grace what, Ibid.
Guide. Christ a guide, 2, 80 How Christ guides those that are his, 2, 119
Necessity of Christ to be our guide, 2, 122 We are unable to guide our selves,
2, 126 Guiding double, 2, 129

H.
Hard. TWo things make the law of Christ hard, 2, 60
Hatred. Hatred of sin, 1, 195 Hatred of sin what, 1, 196
Head. Christ the Head of his Church, 2, 78 To choose Christ for our Head, 2,
93
Heart God fashions the heart of his people in afflictions, 1, 23 Heart to be
kept in good temper, 1, 40 Hardness of heart, the cause of it, 1, 56 Searching
the heart, a means to humble us, 1, 128 Turning to God with the whole heart,
1, 191 A Christian fights against sin with his whole heart, 1, 215 God
softeneth the heart, 2, 44
Help. Promises of Gods help, 1, 57
Holiness. Holiness what, 1, 150 Nature of holiness, 1, 151 Double holiness
required, 1, 152
Humble, Humiliation. To humble our selves after we have sinned. 1. 53
Humiliation double. Ibid. 134 Way to humiliation. 1, 55 Humiliation wrought by
the Spirit. 1, 58 Without humiliation no mercy. 1. 66 Necessity of humiliation.
1, 67 69. 75 Humiliation what. 1. 77, 78 116. 121 Ingredients in humiliation.
1. 82 Difference of humiliation. 1, 84 Two things accompanying humiliation. 1,
89 Ends of humiliation. 1, 99 Means of humiliation. 1, 103 The Lord is
merciful to the humble. 1, 112 Means to humble the heart. 1, 128 How to know
we are humbled. 1, 131 God reveals his secrets to the humble. 1. 136 God
leaves sin in men to humble them. 1. 240 All sins forgiven to the humble. 1,
254

I
Jealousy. Jealousy what. 1, 4
Idleness. Idleness, a sin. 1. 198
Illumination. Illumination, in turning to God 1, 192
Endeavor. Endeavor accepted of God. 1, 56
Inconsideration. Inconsideration hinders men from coming to Christ. 2, 53
Influence. To draw influence from Christ. 2, 95
Joy. Joy, what. 1, 43
Judgment. Judgments caused by the sins of the Saints. 1. 11 Judgments of
God of three sorts. 1, 279 Calamities removed in Judgment. 1, 287
Justice. Justice of God in forgiving sin. 1, 259

L
Law. Humiliation wrought by the Law. 1, 79 Law what. ibid. Use of preaching
the Law. 1. 254
Liberty. Liberty in sin hurtful. 2, 32
Loose. We loose nothing by subjection to Christ. 2, 94
Lord. When our obedience is to the Lord. 2, 110
Love. God afflicts his people because he loves them. 1 4 Love makes a man
humble, 1, 54 Humiliation makes us love God. 1, 91 Love increased by
humiliation. 1, 102
Lusting. Lusting against sin in the regenerate. 1, 211

M.
Marriage. Consequents of our marriage with Christ. 2. 6 How to know we are
married to Christ. 2, 7
Measure. To be afflicted in measure, what. 1, 22
Means. Means limited by the end. 1, 163
Members How to know we are Christ's members. 2, 137 Law of the members what.
1, 226 Characters of Members of Christ. 2, 140
Mercy. Humiliation makes men seek Mercy. 1, 70 Humiliation makes men give God
the praise of his mercy. 1, 74 Not to forget God in the midst of his mercies.
1, 172
Might. To do Gods work with all our might. 1, 166
Mind. Law of the mind, what. 1, 209
Miracle. The offers of mercy confirmed by miracle. 2, 42
Moderate. God Moderates, the afflictions of his people. 1, 22
Mourning. Mourning for sin when it is effectual. 1, 118

N.
Name. The Lords Name called upon his people. 1, 47 Not to pollute Gods Name,
1, 59
Nature. Sin agreeable to our nature. 1, 225
Nearenesse Our nearenesse to God. 1, 51
Necessity. Necessity we have of Christ. 2, 23
Need. God afflicts us no more then Needs. 2, 29
Negligently. To do Gods work negligently, what. 1, 167

O
Obedience. Exhortation to obedience. 1, 49 Obedience from humiliation. 1, 76
114 Faith and obedience go together. 2, 100 Trial of our estate from our
obedience. 2, 103 Obedience universal required. 2, 107 Obedience constant. 2,
129 Obedience to Christ, the manner of it. 2, 139
Observation. Observation of the manner of sins fighting. 1, 250
Offend. We must come to God though we have offended him. 1, 35
Omission. Sins of Omission. 1, 202
Ordinances. The end of Gods Ordinances. 1, 221
Opinion. What opinion to have of our selves 1, 155. 156

P.
Pardon. Who believe not the offer of pardon. 2, 39 Pardon offered to all. 2,
43 Pardon taken out, what. 2, 45 The time of offering pardon. 2, 47
Peace. Subjection to Christ brings peace. 2, 89, 92
Persecution. God a refuge in persecution. 1, 184
Person. Person of Christ must first be looked to. 2, 21
Pleasant. Sin hard to be left because it is pleasant. 1, 224 Subjection to
Christ pleasant. 2, 88
Prayer. Prayer a means to get the fear of God. 1, 16 God fits his people to
prayer. 1, 23 Humiliation makes a man pray. 1, 87 Want of prayer causes want
of assurance. 1, 270
Priests. Humiliation makes us Priests to God. 1, 76
Present. Presenting sins past, a means to humble men. 1, 104, 130 God present
with them that seek his face. 1, 183 Men think their present condition
unalterable. 1, 292 Want of present comforts keep men from Christ. 2, 61 What
Christians enjoy by Christ for the present. 2, 64
Pride. Pride cause of disobedience. 1, 72
Profession. Outward profession required. 1, 62
Promise. Promise of mercy to whom made. 1, 119 Promises not to be applied
without humiliation. 1, 131 Interest in the promises by turning from evil
ways. 1, 186 Promises part of our riches by Christ. 2, 28
Profit. Obedience to Christ for our profit. 2, 79, 87
Power. Power against sin in the regenerate. 1, 213 Power of Christ, in
mortifying our sins. 1, 235
Purpose. Good purposes alone insufficient. 1. 222 Ground of good purposes in
carnal men, 1, 223 Where purposes are sincere, God gives ability. 2, 47

R.
Reasons, Reasonings. Reasons to turn from sin. 1, 249 False reasonings to be
avoided. 1, 107
Rebellion. Rebellion must be left of them that come in to Christ. 2, 46
Reconciliation. To be sought in fasting. 1, 39
Refusing. Danger in refusing Christ. 2, 34 The greatest sin to refuse Christ.
2, 35
Repentance. Repentance cures afflictions. 1, 23 Repentance, what should lead
us to it. 1, 37 Actual repentance for the sins of Gods children. 1, 272
Relapse. Difference in the relapses of the godly, and the wicked. 1, 196 202,
205
Resisting. Difference in the resisting sin. 1, 214 Resisting of sin in the
wicked. 1, 236
Reward. What use we may make of promise of reward. 1, 139
Righteousness. Righteousness of Christ not valued by unhumbled men. 1, 71

S.
Sacrifice. No Sacrifice accepted without humiliation, 1, 75
Sanctified, Sanctification. God will be sanctified in those that draw near
him. 1, 4 Humiliation for sanctification. 1, 100 Means of sanctification, 1,
246
Savior. Christ is the Savior of his Church, 1, 90
Self, selves. Not to serve our selves, 1, 50 How a man may seek and serve
himself, 1, 143, 149, 160. Why we should seek God, and not our selves, 1, 168
Scripture. Studying the Scripture a means to humble us, 1, 106
Sense. Sense of sin necessary, 1, 98
Service. Comfort in Christ's service, 1, 66
Severity. Gods severity to wicked men, 1, 18
Sin. Sin great, how, 1, 194 Sin forsaken differently, 1, 206 Sin, ground of
forsaking it, 1. 208 Sin how taken away, 1, 271 All calamities from sin, 1, 279
To see sin in afflictions, 1, 28, Sin, to see it in it is colors, 11 283 Sin,
none to be allowed, 2, 55
Self-love. Motives in Scripture from self-love, 1, 143 Difference of
self-love, 1, 147
Sinners. The greatest sinners may come to Christ, 2, 40, 51.
Small. Small sins resisted by the godly, 1, 217
Sorrow. Sorrow double, 1, 93 Violent sorrow not always necessary, 1, 94
Greatness of sorrow, the ground of it, 1 96 Sorrow must abide in the heart, 1,
106
Spirit. Spirit of God dwells in the humble, 1, 76 Humiliation wrought by the
Spirit, 1, 80, 109 Witness of the Spirit, 2, 9, 10 Degrees of the witness of
the Spirit, 2, 11 The work of the Spirit in us, 2, 18
Spring. Spring of sin in our nature, 1, 237
Striving. Striving against sin, 1, 241
Syncerity. Syneerity required in the covenant of grace, 1, 52 Trial of
sincerity, 1, 104
Subjection. What kind of subjection we give to Christ, 2, 31 Subjection to
Christ required, 2. 76 Subjection what, 2, 82 Motives to subjection, 2, 85
Trial of our subjection, 2, 99, 107 Exercise of grace brings subjection, 2,
118
Suffer. Those that take Christ must be content to suffer, 2, 57
Stubbornness Stubbornness against God dangerous. 2, 131

T
Time. DAnger to neglect the time of pardon, 2, 48, 50
Truth. Truth of God engaged to forgive sin, 1, 256
Turn. Turning to God how known, 1, 187 Motives to turn to God. 1. 188
Manner of turning to God, 1, 191 Effects of turning to God, 1, 194 No duty
accepted without turning to God, 1, 219 Turning from evil ways difficult, 1,
224 Rules of turning from our evil ways, 1, 232 Means of turning, 1, 242
Double way of turning the heart from sin, 1, 245

V
Uaine. THe Lord does nothing in vain. 1, 288
Uertues. Definition of moral virtues, 2, 97
Uictory. Uictory over sin in the godly, 1, 238 Uncleanness, 1, 201
Union. Union with Christ by marriage, 2, 5, 17
Uow. Uow, the nature of it, 2, 131

W.
Walk. GOd walks among his people. 1. 5
Washed. How far the Saints are washed. 2. 19
Way. Evil ways not left without humiliation. 1. 71
Wicked. Men ashamed of religion before the wicked. 1. 61 Description of wicked
men. 1. 264
Wise, Wisdom. God only wise. 2. 123 Wisdom of God helps to believe the
promises. 1. 258 All wisdom from Christ. 1. 124
Word. Christ has given his word to receive sinners, 2, 41

Z
Zeal. Zeal not only wanting, but disgraced. 1, 12

FINIS.
Perlegi has Conciones, dignasque judico quae typis mandentur.

Tho. Weeks, R. P. Episc. Land. Cap. domest.


