IOHANNIS PRESTONI VIRI CLARISSIMI S. S. THEOLOGIAE DOCTORIS. EFFIGIES.


RICHES OF MERCY TO MEN IN MISERY. OR Certain Excellent Treatises concerning
the Dignity and Duty of Gods Children.

By the late Reverend and Faithful Minister of JESUS CHRIST, JOHN PRESTON.
Doctor of Divinity and Chaplin in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuel
College in Cambridge and sometime Preacher of Lincolns Inn.

Psalm. 34. 8. Taste and see how good the Lord is; blessed is the man that
trusts in him.

LONDON, Printed by I. T. and are to be sold by John Alen at the Rising Sun in
Paul's Church Yard. 1658.

THE PREFACE.
KNow Christian Reader, that this Remainder of Doctor Prestons works was never
(heretofore) extant, being the last of His, that are likely to see the light
(taken by the same pen that his other works were and no way inferior to those
already published. Dr. Sibbs of eminent memory (contemporary with Dr. Preston,
and one of those to whom he committed the publishing of what should be thought
fit for public view) did in his life time own these Treatises by affixing his
approbation to them. And the Attestation of such Reverend authority forbids any
doubt concerning the Author, or worth of the work, though this Treatise may
inherit Orphans usage, being not so exactly polished, as it would have been,
had the Author lived.

But the filings of Gold, and the dust of Diamonds must not be made waste of:
such advantages have accrucd to the souls of men by his other labors, that we
could not think it any less then a wrong to the Church of Christ to conceal
any thing that might make for it is spiritual benefit.

Perhaps thou will ask why this Piece was so long suppressed? To which I
answer; the age has doted so much about new lights, that we perceived Old
Truths to be neglected and laid aside; but after men had filld themselves with
their own devices, and found their souls thriven no more then if they had fed
upon ashes, the vicious humor came to be abated, and their appetite was reduced
to a better state, by the great Physician, who testified his dearest respect to
men's souls, by the price he paid for restoring of them.

The intent of these Sermons is to promote the work of grace in the heart and
life of a true Believer. Not only to enlarge the knowing faculty, but chiefly
to improve the practical part, and distribute god liness through the whole man.
The Rickets are not so epidemical in the bodies of Children, as in the souls
of men and women whose heads are swollen with notions, while their feet are
feeble in heavenly motion. The benefit of this work will better appear by thy
serious perusal thereof, from which I shall no longer detain thee.

Farewell.
Doctor Sibbs his testimony of this Treatise.

This Treatise has nothing offensive in it, but contains arguments tending to
edification, and may be of singular use and comfort to all true Believers.

R. Sibbs.

THE CONTENTS Of the Sermons in this Book.
Ephesians. 3. 16.
Doct. 1. That God is exceeding merciful. p. 1. 1. To move men to come unto
him. 2. 2. It affords a ground of confidence to all distressed sinners. ibid.
3. All men are exhorted to look after a portion in his abundant mercy. ibid.
Quest. What to take his mercies in vain answered. 4. Means to partake of Gods
mercy. 6. Two sorts of mercies to be hungered after. 7. Gods mercy a motive to
duty. 8. Motives to this from the several properties in a good Master which
are all found in God. 20. Comfort to the Church from the consideration of Gods
mercy. 24. Why God afflicts his children. 26. Doct. 2. Gods mercy is his Glory,
or God accounts it his glory to be merciful. 28.
USE.
1. Doubt not but your petitions shall be heard, for it is his glory to show
mercy 30. 2. Glorify God in his mercy which is his glory. ibid.
Sermon 2.
D. 1. Inward strengthening should be the earnest desire of a Christian. 38.
Wherein this spiritual strength is seen 40.
USE.
1. Blaming them that seek not after this strength. 44. Advantages of this
spiritual strength. 49. 2. Exhorting all men to labor after spiritual
strength. 60. Several motives to labor after it. 61,. 62. 3. Directions for
the attainment of spiritual strength. 67. Several means 69. Rules propounded.
72, etc. Hindrances. 77. etc. D. 2. Sanctifying grace proceeds from the
sanctifying spirit. 82. How the spirit strengthens grace in the soul. 83.
USE.
1. Without the holy Ghost, we are without strengthening and sanctifying
grace. 85. Signs of having the spirit. 88. 2. Above all things to labor for the
spirit. 106. Benefits of having the spirit. 107. D. 3. The spirit is freely
given. 113.
USE.
Terror to them which have not the spirit. 114. Means to obtain the holy
spirit. 115.
Ephesians. 3. 17.
D. A great prerogative the saints have that Christ dwells in their hearts.
121. What it is to have Christ dwell in our hearts. 122. The benefits of
Christ's dwelling in our hearts. 125.
USE,
1. To judge aright of Gods working in your hearts. 135. 2. To saints, that
they would rejoice in this privilege that Christ dwells in them. 139.
Romans 8. 34.
D. Nothing can hinder the salvation of a believer. 145. Reasons if it. 147.
USE.
1. To see a necessity of all those blessed means whereby Christ is pleased to
communicate himself. 150. 2. Confutation of the Church of Rome as to their
doctrine of doubting. 152. Objections answered. 153. 3 Of examination about the
certainty of our spiritual state. 160.
2 Timothy 2. 1.
D. 1. Grace has a strengthening property. 183. Reasons. 186, 187.
USE.
1 To examine whether we have grace. 189. Strength of grace in three things.
192. Grace enables to actions of new obedience. 200. And to constancy in it.
201. D. 2. All Grace received from Christ. 207. Christ's willingness to match
with us. 208. D. 3. We must not only get strength, but use it. 212.
USE.
To quicken us to our duties in the putting forth of our strength. 217. Helps
to exercise spiritual strength. 219. Necessity of it. 223.
2 Timothy 3. 5.
D. 1. Godliness only accepted and required of God. 233. Godliness, what.
235. To exalt God. 237. Reasons of the point. 238.
USE.
1. Not to content our selves with any thing that nature has wrought in us.
242. Application to the Sacrament. 246. Godliness how wrought. 251. 2. Exalt
God in your hearts. 253. 3 Labor to excel in Godliness. 256. D. 2. Most men
have but a form of godliness. 257 Reasons of it. ibid.
USE.
To examine whether we have only a form. 261. Five differences between the
power and form of godliness. 263.
2 Timothy 1. 13.
Doct. The words of a Minister must be wholesome. 271. Reasons of it. 273.
USE.
1. Two sorts of words are reproved 276. 2. The people must receive nothing but
what is wholesome. 283. 3 We ought to esteem wholesome words as our food. 288.
4. What the behavior of Ministers ought to be. 296. Rules for the use of
humane authority. 305.
John 14. 1.
D. Our hearts should be established in the day of fear. 327. Means to manage
this duty. ibid.
Romans 7. 23.
D. There is a Law of sin in every man's nature inclining him to that which is
evil. 352. What this inclination is. ibid. How a Law. 353. How it warreth as a
Law. 354. D. 2. In every regerate man there is a contrary Law, etc. 360. Why
called the law of the mind. 361.
USE.
To bewail our condition under this law in our members. 368. How to know the
law of natural conscence from the law of the mind in the regenerate. 370.
Philip. 2. 21.
D. Every man ought to seek the things of Jesus Christ. 371. Reasons. 375. How
to know when we do the things of Christ faithful. 388. What it is to give our
selves to Christ. 390.
2 Chronicles. 32. 24, 25.
D. Prayer is the chief means to obtain any thing at Gods hand. 397.
USE.
To esteem that precious ordinance of prayer. 398 Mercies without prayer nor
blessings. 399. What kind of prayer obtains blessings. 400. D. 2. Gods answer
to our prayers is to be observed. 402. 3. God ready to hear our prayers. 405.
4. The Lord tenders a weak faith. 406. 5. God expects thank fullness answerable
to his mercies. 407. Conditions of thank fullness. 408. In what cases God
expects extraordinary thanks. 411.
Rev. 22. 17.
D. God invites sinners to come unto him. 419 Reasons of it. 420. Many
Objections answered. 421, 422.
USES.
1. To take heed how we refuse Christ offered. 426 2. Faith a grace very
pleasing and acceptable to God. 432.
DIVINE MERCY MAGNIFIED.
Ephesians. 3. 16. That he would grant you according to the riches of his glory, to
be strengthened with might by his spirit in the inward man, etc.
THese words are a part of the heavenly prayer which the Apostle makes for the
Saints at Ephesus; we may gather three observations out of them.

First. That God is exceeding rich in mercy.

Secondly. That his showing mercy is his glory.

Thirdly. That when we are to beg any thing at Gods hands, we may use the
motive that Saint Paul does here unto God, do it for the riches of thy glory,
or for the riches of thy mercy. The first point, That God is rich in mercy, I
have handled formerly, and in what respect he is rich in mercy, Therefore I
shall now draw some consectaries from it.

One is to move men to come in to God, Because he is so infinitely rich in
mercy. When the Hue and Cry is made Use of the first point, Similie.
after the thief, you know it makes him run away the faster, but the
proclamation of pardon brings him in. The Law and the judgments of God, bring
not men in of themselves, but the promises of mercy win them to come in: and
this use we should make of the mercies of God, to be moved and invited by them
to come in, and partake of them.

Secondly it offers a ground of humble confidence to all Use 2.
distressed and heavy laden sinners! God i ready to forgive and succor them,
because he is rich in mercy; and not only so, but his mercy is exceeding
precious; for except these two go together, a man cannot be said to be rich,
the thing must be precious and he must have much of it; for to have much of
that which is base and mean, is not to be rich: Now for as much as Gods mercy
is precious, and he is rich in it, despise not therefore the precious mercies
of God.

If God be rich in mercy, if there be abundance of Use 3.
mercy in Jehovah, then let us lay hold of this abundance, and look after our
portion in it. This is another excellent use we are to make of it: for to what
end is it made known that God is rich in mercy, or to what purpose is it
manifested? not that we should barely know it, but that we should use it; not
that we should contemplate it in God, but that we should enjoy it for our
selves, For this riches and mercy of God is not only plenty but bounty; not
only a treasure laid up in him, but it is like a Common dose bestowed upon all
the poor in the country, all that will may come and take what they need, this
is the use you should make, of the abundance of Gods mercy, otherwise if you
make no profitable nor Saving use of it, what is it to you? The apostle says
All Scripture is, written for this end that we might have comfort; now if it be
true of all places of Scripture, then it is true of these especially that
declare the mercies of God, it is that we may have comfort; now what comfort is
there to dwell by full barnes, when a man may not partake of that fullness? I
Similie:
say it is no comfort except you have your part in them. So when you hear of
the riches, of the patience and long suffering of God, what comfort is this to
you except you take your part of them; Therefore now I am to exhort you, come
and make your selves rich out of these riches, let not the mercies of God be in
vain to you, but when you hear that God is rich in mercy, let that move you to
get an interest in it. When we hear of riches and treasures it inflameth every
man's desire to have a part of them: the riches of the land of Canaan drew the
Israelites out of Egypt, and the riches of the garners of Egypt made them go
down thither in Jacobs time, when there was a famine in Canaan. What makes
Merchants to take such dangerous voyages to the East and west Indies, and to
the furthest parts of the world, but rich Commodities? now when you hear that
God is rich in mercy, what use should we make of it, but to take of these
mercies, There is enough to be had, for the mercies that concern the outward
man, as riches, honor, long life, gold and silver, he has abundance, you may
take freely of them; for the riches of the inward man he is rich in mercy,
full of grace and truth, and you may take your fill of them; he is rich in
Comfort, he has fatlings and wine prepared: in a word, seeing there is so much
mercy in God, let it not be in vain to you, let them not lie before you as if
they did not concern you; affectionately embracethem that you may have your
part in them, this is the use the scripture makes of the mercies of God; St.
Paul prays for the Ephesians that they might know what the riches of the
glory of his inheritance in the Saints is etc His meaning is, not only that
they should see them Ephesians. 1. 18.
and look upon them, for what were that to them? but that they might take part
of them, and not only have a mental but an experimental knowledge of them. Why
did Saint Paul preach the unsearchable riches of Christ, but that men should
have their desires stirred up to take part of them? And this is the use we
should also make of this doctrine: In so doing, we do an acceptable thing unto
God; its the great design he has in the manifesting of his mercies. You cannot
do him a better turn, then to take the riches of his mercy; in not doing it
you cannot displease him more, for to what end has he declared this to you? Is
it not that you may come in and partake of them? Must it not displease him
therefore if you refuse them?

Suppose a great man that has provided a feast, a costly Similie.
and sumptuous feast, he has made all ready, when all is done his guests that
were invited come not, will it not trouble him exceedingly? Certainly the Lord
is angry when you are all invited to a rich feast, and yet you will not come.
You know the parable in the Gospel, how he was angry with those that were
invited and came not, because his mercy was in vain: now when you shall hear
that there are riches of mercy in God, if you make no use of it, it is in vain
to you, and to take the riches of Gods mercy in vain, is to take his name in
vain, and you know what he says, that he will not bold him guiltless that
takes his name in vain, Exodus 22. To this purpose consider that place in Exodus
34 5. 6. where God descended in a cloud, and proclaimed the name to Moses, and
what was that? A strong God, merciful and gracious, abundant in mercy and
truth. This was his name, now to take these mercies in vain that is, not to
make use of them, is to take the name of God in vain. When you swear by the
name of God idly in your common speech that is a verbal taking of his n^m in
vain, and it is a great sin; but when you make no use of Gods mercies but take
them in vain, that is a real taking his name in vain.

Quest. Now what is it to take his mercies in vain?

Answ. It is not to make use of them, therefore when you Quest. Answ.
hear of this abundance of mercy that is in God, if you do not make use of it,
and earnestly lay hold upon it, so as to improve it for your own advantage, you
take the grace of God in vain; Consider therefore what you have, and what you
do, when you make no use of these mercies, how you have his riches laid before
you, without any particular advantage by them; Consider what there is in God,
that he is abundant, in mercy, not to know it is to take his name in vain, in
frustrating the end of their manifestation, it is a treasure, it may be, that
you think not of, you know not, it may be, what it is to have a merciful God,
therefore consider what God is, consider the largeness of his power, and the
greatness of his wisdom, and the riches of his mercy, Consider that he is your
portion, that he is your husband, and this is required of you to make use of
him to the uttermost. What a comfortable life might Christans live, if they
would do thy? What do you vexing and perplexing your selves a bout triffl^s? Is
it for you to take care for matters belonging to your credit and preferment,
and for other things of this life with that perplexity and solicitude? The
better way is to know God in the greatness of his mercy, and to make use of
him. Shall one have a rich father and make no use of him? Shall one be a
favorite to a prince and not make some use of it for his one advantage? In
these things not to do it you reckon it a point of carnal folly, I am sure it
is a great want of spiritual wisdom not to make use of God, specially when not
only you may do it, but when it is a sin if you do it not; for indeed it is
for your masters credit as well as for your own comfort, and therefore the Lord
will be angry when you do it not. When he looks into the world, and sees such
a servant standing ragged poor and hungry, he speak^s angerly to him, why
stand you here ragged and poor? Am not I rich in mercy? May you not go in and
take changes of raiment and cloth your selyes from top to toe? Therefore (my
br^^^^^) be exhorted to make this use of the riches of Gods mercies, take an
exceeding great portion of them, let them not be in vain to you, fill your
souls, and your bodies too, take enough for the present, and lay it up for the
future.

Quest. But now I have spent so much time in exhortation, the question will be,
how you shall do it? Perhaps Quest.
you will say, it is true we would do it, who would not have mercy? but show us
the way to attain to this mercy.

Ans. I will add therefore to this exhortation the Answ.
means whereby you shall partake, of these riches of his mercy, and I will name
but these four; the first way is this.

First, To be hungring after the mercies of God, to prize them and esteem them
much, to desire them much, as 4 Means to partake of Gods mercy.
you thirst more, so you shall have more of them; and this you will never do
without the sense of misery, that very much endears the mercy of God, and the
love of Christ, therefore labor to be sensible of your misery, that you may
hunger after the mercies of God, and then according to your desires, you shall
partake of those mercies; This I observe out of the place of Luke. 1. 53. He
fills the hungry with good things, etc, If you ask the way to have a full
portion of the mercies of God, that place shows you, he fills the hungry
with good things: look what kind of mercies men are hungry after, I speak of
spiritual mercies, other mercies we are forward enough to hunger after, If we
hunger after spiritual mercies, it is the way to be filled with them, and
indeed God will not bestow them without this, for they will not be Sweet to
you, you would not acknowledge Gods hand to you in them, you would do nothing
for them, when you have got them, therefore he will have them much prized, this
you cannot do without the sense of your misery without them. If you did but see
the depth of your misery it would make you see the height of his mercy, he that
knows the mercies of God out of a feeling of his misery, he knows them
experimentally, and sensibly. An intellectual contemplation of the mercies of
God is one thing, and an experimental knowledge of them is another thing, this
latter you cannot have without the sense of misery.

Now the mercies you should hunger after are of two 2 Sorts of mercies to be
hungered after.
sorts.

First. The one that belong to the outward man, and here you need no motives,
but yet even in these things God will have men to smart many times, that they
may know what health is, and what the comforts of our present conditions are,
and what abundance of peace and wealth is, for even these things we most
esteem, but this is not the thing, for here we need no exhortation.

Secondly, Spiritual mercies, those are they we do not hunger after, we are
backward enough to desire them, and therefore we have so few of them: Therefore
that which I must press upon you is to desire earnestly these spiritual
mercies, if you desire them much you shall have much of them, for you must know
before you have them God will teach you to know how precious they are, for if
he has commanded us not to cast pearls before swine, he himself will not cast
the riches of his mercy before those that prize, and regard them not.

As for instance, forgiveness of sins, and reconciliation with God, this is a
spiritual mercy, this if you would hunger much after, you should have it, yea,
and according to the measure of your desires, but when you prize it not, that
is it which keeps it back; you may say the like of all other mercies,
therefore prize them much, that is, be sensible of your misery without them,
call your sins to remembrance, go over them, sum them up, and let your hearts
stay and dwell upon the meditation of them, give not over till you be touched
with them, and do this often, we might be more humbled if we would take pains
with our hearts, but we slight it, and do it overly as being an exercize
needless and tedious; but do it not so, l^bour to get a sense of your sins,
that will make you prize the mercies of justification, and reconciliation: for
this cause many thousands miss of the forgiveness of their sins, it is not a
thing they esteem much, they do not strive and contend with God for it, as a
matter of such great moment, whereas it is the preciousest mercy of all other,
it is the immediate door that opens into the favor of God, which is the
cause of all other mercies, and then no good thing can be withholden from you,
for it is your sins that keep good things from you, now if your sins were taken
away, what need you fear either diseases, or death, or revilings and disgraces
for your profession, or imprisonment, or poverty: if you had the forgiveness of
your sins you might enjoy the prosperity you have freely, and as for crosses,
either you shall be freed from them, or else they shall be as serpents without
a sting, or as great bulks without burden and weight, this you should have, if
you had the forgiveness of your sins; consider all this, labor to s^t a price
upon it, and so for ^ll other mercies, work your hearts to this, to esteem the
Mercies of God.

Again, labor to see an excellency in them. The same as I said of forgiveness,
the same may you say of love, or of patience, see the preciousness and
excell^ncy of them, the more you prize them, the more you sh^l have of them. If
you could beg for forgiveness as for life, if you could reckon other things but
as dross and dung in comparison of that, as Saint Paul did, which was nothing
but the forgiveness of his sins, you would be sure to have these m^r^i^s: but
men do it not, men live in prosperity, in health, and wealth, and abundance of
all things, and such mercies as these they regard not: forgiveness of sins,
reconciliation, the gospel of Christ, this they despise, but we should prize
these, even then when they are nakedly propounded to us. The reason we do it
not is, because we have not the sense of our misery. What cares the innocent
man for a pardon? What cares a whole man for a medicine? Mercy is the medicine
of misery, labor therefore to be sensible of your misery, that you may partake
of this mercy. All the promises run upon this condition; all that are weary
and heavy laden shall find rest, Math. 11. The more Math. 11.
weary any man is the more rest he shall have, and so again the poor (says
Christ) receive the Gospel, the more poor he is the more he shall receive, and
so he that hungreth and thirsts after righteousness shall be filled, the more
you hunger and thirst, the more you shall be filled. In a word the more you
desire the more you shall have. The reason you have not these mercies, is
because you desire them not, or else your desires are not strong, for strong
desires would bring forth strong endeavors, and these would take spiritual
mercies by force, as it is said of the kingdom of heaven that it suffers
violence, even so these violent desires would extort it from God by an holy
earnestness.

A 2d. way to be made partakers of the riches of Gods The second means to
partake of Gods mercy.
mercy, is to believe them. Add to your desires a belief, for believing is
that which opens the hand of God to give, and opens your hearts and your
hands to receive, put but these two together, to desire the mercies of God, and
to believe that God will give them, and then open your mouths wide, and God
will fill them; This I shall manifestly show, from these following places of
scripture, as we find them often; Go thy way thy faith has made thee whole,
when Christ bestowed any mercy upon men, that is added in the Gospel, thy faith
has done it, thy faith has made thee whole, if they were forgive^, they might
thank their faith for it, as it is the instrumental means to obtain the mercies
of God, the more faith the more mercies, for we shall alwais find that by faith
men obtained mercies, and the want of faith missed them. It is certain God is a
merciful God, you should find him so if you could believe him to be so, for
the believing that he is merciful makes you partakers of the riches of his
mercy, because it is his pleasure to put it upon that condition, he might have
put it upon other conditions, but this is his pleasure to say if you believe
you shall have these and these mercies, for faith knitteth us to him, faith
makes us to know him, and makes us give him the glory of the mercies we have,
faith ascribes it wholly unto him, it makes it every way to be his work, faith
makes us righteous, now the righteous obtain mercy, this faith is imputed for
righteousness, God reckons every man the more righteous, as he abounds in
faith, therefore the way to fill your selves with the riches of Gods mercy is
to believe much, and as you grow in faith, so you shall grow from mercy to
mercy, if Christ could say to us as he did to the woman, O woman great is thy
faith, we should be sure to have great mercies, my meaning is this, that
beleiving is nothing else but this,

To be persuaded that God will be kind and favorable What faith is,
to you, that hispromises belong to you, that he will pardon your sins, and
receive you into grace and favor with him, that he loves you and is your
friend, that he is ready to bestow upon you the riches of his mercy; now the
more you can promise yourselves this from God, the more you can expect it at
his hands, certainly the more you shall have of his mercy; the less you do it,
the less you shall have, if you do it not ^t all, you, shall have no mercy at
all from God, the more you can persuade your selves that God is m^rciful, that
he is loving and gracious, and will be ready to do for you as you shall need,
the more of his mercy you s^all have, according to the largeness of your faith
so shall the largeness of the mercy ^^e.

For evidence of this, look into Heb. 11. the whole chapter sh^weth what
mercies faith bad, what mercies Heb. 11.
Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the Israelites had when they went through the red
sea, what mercies Samuel and David had, the means they had to obtain al these
mercies was their faith, they believed, and therefore they had them, you may
there see how it is attributed to their faith: The reason why they exceeded
others in mercy, was because they exceeded others in faith: the reason why
David was filled with mercy and goodness above others, was because he attained
to an higher pitch of faith then others.

Again the want of faith still hindered men from mercy, and it is a good
argument that is drawn from contraries, now unbelief hindered Christ's
countrymen from having any part in his miracles, he could do nothing there
because they believed not, it hindered the Israelites from that good land of
promise, they all died in the wilderness because they believed not; so Mary she
had like to have lost the raising of her brother Lazarus because she began to
doubt, for when Christ was upon the very point of doing the miracle, and Mary
she told him he had been dead four days, Christ stayed his hand, and said to
her, Said I not to thee, if thou believe etc. as if he should say, if thou
believe not I will not do it. The Apostles in the ship being ready to be
overwhelmed with waves, what was the cause? because they doubted, Why did ye
doubt O ye of little faith? Still mercies are kept from us for want of faith,
therefore it is true on the other side, have faith, and have mercy, have faith
in abundance, and have mercy in abundance, If you would have outward mercies,
do you believe that God is ready to give riches, honor, and life, that is all
a man can desire, these God gives to those that fear him, believe this, trust
to it, rest upon it, Let Go I know you rely upon him for it, the more yo^
believe this the more you shall have, even of these mercies.

And so for spiritual mercies, has he not promised to give his spirit to those
that ask it? and that great promise which he made when he ascended up on high,
that he would send down the holy Ghost, the more you believe this the more of
the spirit you shall have.

So for the forgiveness of sins, the more you believe this the more assurance
you shall have, he has promised to hear your prayers, The more you can believe
this, the more you shall prevail in prayer; In a word you know every one best
what mercies you would have, the more you believe that God is your father,
expecting it from his hands, the more you shall have of any kind of mercy. As
it was said of the faith of miracles, if you have but faith, you may say to
this mountain be removed into the bottom of the sea and it shall obey you, the
same may be said of justifying faith, do but believe, and this you shall enjoy;
for faith is not a bare opinion, a bare persuasion, for that is not operative
to bring such mercies to you, but faith sees things that are not present, as
if present, the things were before we believed them, now God has promised
mercies in abundance, they lie open to us, the very believing of them is the
taking and receiving of them, God has put them upon that Condition, and not
only so, but if you would have abundance of mercies, add still to your faith,
therefore you have those words, be it to thee according to thy faith, that is,
if thy faith be great the mercies thou shall have shall be great, therefore you
see now what use may be made of all that has been said touching the riches of
mercies, that you might be convinced of this, that according to your faith such
shall your tastings be of the precious mercies of God: the more you are
persuaded of the greatness of his precious mercies, accordingly shall you
partake of them, and accordingly will you look upon your selves as bound to
obey, and love him under the apprehension of his mercies.

The third means to obtain these riches of his mercy The third means to
obtain mercy.
is humbly to rely upon the author of them, as to desire much, and to believe
much, so to depend upon him, to wait upon him, the more you do that, the more
readiness will you find in him to show you mercy. I follow but the scriptures
in this, and set forth such mercies as is there set forth, and this I take out
of those places of scripture, In thee the Fatherless and widow find mercy. God
is still apt to help such as are in Prison and in a low degree.

Quest. what is the reason of that? Quest.


Ans. Answ.
Because such depend upon God, such as have no other fathers to depend upon,
such are apt to depend upon God, and he shows mercy to such, not because they
are fatherless, but because they depend upon him.

So you have it expressed by the Apostle, Widows (says, he) that are left alone
trust in God, those (says he) are widows indeed, they might have trusted in
God while they had husbands, but that is our weakness while we have other props
we are apt to trust upon them, but when they are taken from us we are apt to
trust in God. So the woman when she had spent all in Physic, then she came to
Christ, so if we depend upon him, we shall be as the fatherl esse and widow
that know not where else to have help. This wins God to you, for dependence
presupposes trust, for upon whom you depend, upon him, you trust, now God will
not fail those that trust in him, for he has put so much nobleness and
ingenuity into the hearts of men that they will not fail those that put their
trust in them; now dependence is a trust in God, therefore the more you depend
upon God the more mercy you shall have, he has put that instinct into every
Creature, the hen you see covers her chickens under her wings because they
depend upon her. He is worse then an Infidel (says the holy Apostle) that does
not provide for his household, because they depend upon him, this is an instinct
put into the very Infidels. If God have put this instinct into the Creature
will he not do it himself? He that gave them this disposition certainly he
himself will be abundant in mercy to those that depend upon him, for
dependence wins love from God, therefore he so nurtereth his Children, that
commonly before he bestow mercy upon them, he will teach them what it is, and
therefore he helps them not till he bring them to extremities, that so they
may depend upon him, and then he shows mercy, therefore if you would have
abundance of mercy, learn to depend upon God, that is to do these two things.

1. To see a vanity in your selves, and an inability in every What it is to
depend upon God.
creature to help you and withal to see an^ sufficiency in God to help, the
more you fail in this the less you depend upon God, the safer any man thinks
himself to be for his own strength, for his friends, or for his will etc. the
less he depends upon God.

And again the more you see the vanity of these outward helps, and withal look
upon God, and see an allsufficiency in him, the more you will depend upon God,
and the more you do this the more mercy you shall have, and when you do not
this, that undoes you. Adam and Eve when they depended upon God, all was well
with them, but when they wouldstand of themselves, that overthrew them, because
indeed the creature has no bottom to stand upon, for a creature has not his
subsistence in it self but it depends upon God, And therefore as it is with
glasses that have no bottoms, if you set them down they will presently break, so
the Similie.
creature has not a bottom of his own to stand upon, but he has his dependant
being upon God, therefore when he will have a bottom of his own to stand upon,
that overthrows him, as we say of some plants, take them from the earth where
once they were planted, and they are destroyed, Similie.
so we say of accidents that have their being in another, set them upon their
own bottoms and they vanish, and come to nothing, so it is with the creature,
every creature has his dependence upon God, when it comes to stand upon a
bottom of it is own it perishes, therefore the more you depend upon God the
more mercy you shall have, the less you depend upon him the less mercy. If we
run through particulars we shall find it so, if any man stand upon his wisdom
and trust to it, God will make him foolish, let him but make a bottom of his
strength in 2. Sam. 12. in his own strength shall no man be established, that
is, when he rests upon his strength, but let a man depend upon God then he is
like the water and fire in their own places, they are where they should be,
like a stone in his own center, so are those that wait upon God, like a tree in
his proper soil: while he depends upon the creature it is not so, you shall
find it so in all examples. When the Israelites depended upon God he carried
them upon Eagles wings (says the text) when they left him and sought to the
creature that overthrew them: So Iehosaphat when he depended upon God, (Lord
(says he) we know not what to do, but our eyes are toward thee) then it went
well with him. Asa when he depended upon God you know how he prospered, so when
men do not depend upon God, see how it fared with them, Asa when he did not
depend upon God but sent for the king of Ara^ to help him, that overthrew him,
the Prophet comes and tells him, did not (says he) a great army of
Ethiopians, and Lubims come against thee, and thou dependest upon God; and he
delivered thee? but now it is not so. So for the diseases in his feet when he
depended upon the Physicians that cost him his life. So Saint Peter in matter
of Grace and sanctification when he would depend upon himself, see how
fearfully he sell: Look to all men, go through all stories, and you shall find
that while men depended upon God it went well with them. Rehoboam while he
depended upon God see how he prospered: the more dependence therefore the more
mercy, the less dependence the less mercy. Quest.


Quest. what was the reason why Christ would not have his disciples to
premeditate before hand what they should say?

Ans. Because they might still depend upon him. And Answ.
so the reason why God fed the Israelites with Manna, he might have fed them
with Bread in an ordinary Deuteronomy. 8. 2.
fashion, but the reason is set down in Deuteronomy. 8. 2. for this end that thou
might know that man lives not by bread but by every word that proceeds
out of the mouth of God, that is for this end, that thou might learn to
depend upon him. The truth is, we are all of the disposition of the prodigal
son, we would have our portion in our own hands: we have the same fault that
Adam had, every creature would have a bottom of his own to stand upon, and that
sinks under it and the ruin is very great.

Finally, the last means of obtaining these riches of Gods The fourth means to
partake of Gods mercy.
mercies is to walk worthy of them, let all these now be put together. To
desire the mercies of God, To believe that he will be merciful, to depend and
wait uponhim for his mercy, and last of all to walk worthy of them and you
shall not fail of having your part in these riches of his mercy.

This last means I take out of Math, 10. 11. When the disciples were sent forth
by Christ to preach the Gospel, Mat^. 10 11.
even the glad tidings of peace, to preach the unsearchable riches of Christ,
they were commanded to make inquiry who is worthy in the City or in the town
into which they entered, and if any man (says Christ) be worthy, your peace
shall come upon him, that is, he shall have his part in these riches of mercy
that you preach. Therefore we put this as the last way of obtaining the mercies
of God, to be worthy, now to be worthy is nothing but this, To be in a fit
disposition to receive mercy; by What it is to be worthy of Gods mercy in
general.
worthiness is not meant any fitness of holiness or of sanctification, any
Godly sorrow, or any measure of repentance, that is not the meaning, that such
as have these they only shall obtain these mercies, for these things follow;
but by worthiness is meant a fit disposition to receive the mercies of God, and
so you have the words used in other places of Scripture; that which St. Matthew
here calls worthiness St. Luke calls receiving, so that to be worthy is
nothing else but to be fit to receive, so in another place Luke 10. 8.
when Paul and Barnabas had preached the Gospel at Antioch, and when the Jews
spoke against those things Acts 13, 45. 46.
which were spoken by Paul, contradicting and blaspheming, then, says the
text, Paul and Barnabas waxed bold and said we turn from you, because you judge
your selves unworthy, that is, because you reject the Gospel preached to you,
and despise these glad tidings of salvation, you are not of a disposition fit
to receive these mercies of God that we declare to you. So those that were
invited to the marriage of the kings son in the gospel, the text says, they
were not worthy: what was that? They had no hunger after the feast, they prized
it not, and therefore they were unwilling to come. If you would therefore have
the mercies of God, be worthy of them, labor to be in a disposition fit to
receive them. Now (as we said before) by worthiness we do not me an any measure
of grace whatsoever, or any preparations, as if they came under any merit or
desert, it seems good to the God of all grace by deeply affecting and humbling
of us under our sins to beget in us vehement desires after Christ our Savior.

Again you must take a resolution to serve him with a perfect heart for the
time to come, though you have no worthiness for the present, if you be in such
a disposition, as you have this the more, so you shall have the more mercies.

But this is not all, it is true this is required in the beginnings of mercy,
viz. an exceeding great desire after forgiveness; But a resolution to serve God
for the time to come, this is to receive or to be worthy, viz. to be willing to
part with father and mother and all for Christ, such a disposition must be
wrought in you before you can lay hold upon any part in these riches, yet I say
this is not all, but if you would have these mercies continued, you must walk
worthy of them; those gracious qualifications are ordered in tendency to your
introduction and admittance into the Covenant of grace and the mercies here
spoken of, but after you are brought into covenant with God, you cannot secure
the comfortable contents of it unless you labor to walk worthy of them,
pleasing the Lord in all things, as St Paul says, and as it is in Psalm. 18.
25. with the upright man thou will show thy self upright, and with the froward
thou will show thy self froward, that is, you shall find as much mercy in me
as I find Enemies of behavior in you, but if you walk stubbornly and
frowardlie with me, I will walk stubbornly with you. Therefore it is, that
when the Saints stepp out of the way and walk unevenlie with God that he
chafteneth and afflicts them, herecompenseth says Solomon the righteous in
this life, that is, he afflicts Prove. 11. ult.
the righteous when they go astray from his ways. Put this together with that
place in 1 Pet. 1. 17. we call him Pet. 1. 17.
father that judges every man according to his works, that is he does this to
his own children, chasteneth, and afflicts them when their carriage to him is
not upright. Therefore, says the Apostle, making this as a motive to that
exhortation which follows; pass the time in fear, take heed now of
offending: for we call him father that judges every man according to his
works, for though it be true that God is rich in mercy, yet there must be a
worthy walking, for he holds not the wicked innocent, though he deal wisely
and lovingly wi^h his children, yet he will be sanctified in them, he will have
such a carriage from them as befitteth those that are his children, therefore
as you would have him deal mercifully with you so you must walk worthy of his
mercies.

The next Consectarie is this. If God be rich in mercy, then be willing to
serve him, you know a merciful man, Use. 5.
a liberal man never wants workmen, every man is willing to betake himself
to a rich and merciful master, That is the use I find made of it in Deuteronomy. 28.
47. Because thou servest not the Lord with cheerfulness of heart for the
abandance Deuteronomy. 28 47.
of all things, as if he should have said, seeing he has given thee abundance
of all things he looks that thou should serve him with cheerfulness,
therefore when you hear of the riches of Gods mercy you must make this use of
it, to be willing to serve him with cheerfulness of heart. So it is in Romans 12.
I beseech you by the mercies of God that you present your bodies as a living
sacrifice holy, etc. that is if God have been so merciful to you, then Romans 12.
give up your selves to serve him altogether, consecrate your selves wholly to
him, let your bodies and minds serve for no other use but for his service; for
so it is, when a thing is consecrated to the Lord, nothing else has to do with
it, but only the Lord, if he be therefore an exceeding merciful God, give up
your selves wholly to his service.

Object. This is that we had need to exhort you to, it Object.
may be every man will be apt to say, we serve the Lord and who is there that
serves him not?

Answ. But my brethren the truth is we do not serve the Answ.
Lord, and whatsoever we say yet we serve other masters and not him, we serve
men, we serve the world, we serve our riches, we serve our credits, we serve
our lusts, and very few there are that serve the Lord, that is look what men
have an eye to in their actions, that they serve. Consider therefore what you
do in your actions; look what you do with respect to your wealth and profit,
therein you serve but your profit and not God, look what you do with respect to
honor amongst men, therein you serve men and not the Lord, the like I may say
or other things, so that if you examine your actions you shall find that God
has but a little part in all your performances, but still some by-respect
comes in between. But you must know that all the talents that you have are
given you for this end that you may serve your master with them, all the
riches, the honor, the strength, the wit, the learning etc. that you have you
should serve the Lord with them, but we do not serve him altogether, we serve
respects of our own, by respects we serve men with them, when there is a man
upon whom our rising depends, it is wonder to see with what solicitude and
vigilance we serve him, the like we may say of other respects that we have in
things that concern our selves, in these, or the like we use the talents that
God has given for his service to our own advantage, and not for our masters
benefit.

When we do things in sin^rity unto God as in the sight of God, this is to
serve the Lord, this we should do in all our callings, and therefore though ^u
must follow your callings, yet as it is said of servants, Ephesians 5 that though
Ephesians. 5.
they serve men yet they are the servants of the Lord, and therefore they were
to do their service as unto the Lord, even so should every man in his calling,
men should have their eyes upon the Lord, do it because he commands them to
do it, because it tends to his glory, because some honor will redound unto
him thereby.

Now consider what is the reason that every man (for The reason why men serve
other things and not God.
the most part) serves other things and not the Lord, it is because they think
they give better wages, then God does, you think you shall fare the better if
you serve such a man, you think your riches will do you a better turn, then if
you should fix your eyes only upon God, you think your credit will do you more
good then if you served the Lord, you think your lusts will give you more
content then if you applied your self wholly to Gods service: Therefore if you
would amend this fault, draw your How to amend it.
hearts from the creature to the creator, and consider that he is exceeding
merciful, that he is rich in mercy, you shall not lose your labor, for he is a
good master, he has a good eye, that is, he considers what his servants are,
and looks upon them with a pitiful eye, and is ready to help them at every
need, and therefore as it is said of the kings service, no service to his, so
it may be said of the Lords, no service to his, all his servants have found it
so, otherwise, (as it is said of the believers in Heb. 11.) Heb. 11.
they had opportunity to return again, but they found the Lords service to be
the best, the present wages he gives are better then the wages that the world
gives, or that our lust gives u, besides what is laid up for us for eternity.
In a word if we could persuade you to this that God is rich in mercy to his
servants, you would do all you did with respect to him. To the end therefore
that we might persuade you, we will draw you to particulars, you shall see that
there are in God all the properties of a good master, which may persuade you to
give up your selves to his service.

First, He is ready to take any thing at a servants hand that he can do, he
looks not altogether for exactness, if 8 Properties of a good master, which are
found in God.
they do but little, so long as it proceeds from a pure heart, he accepts of
it, and therefore as it was said of Daniel, though he was sick yet he was about
the kings business, even so the saints and servants of God have sick souls
oftentimes, yet notwithstanding if they go about the Lords business, if they
put their hands but to the work, and do but show their desire to it, the Lord
considers it, and takes it in good part, for God is a loving and a wise
master, one that is loving, he sees what his servants can perform, as it is in
Psalm. 103. he knows wherefore we are Psalm. 103.
made, and therefore will exact no more at our hands then we are able to do.

Again he is a wise master; he knows with whom he has to deal, and therefore
though we are not so exact in holiness, yet if we serve him in sincerity,
though with much weakness, he accepts it, see how he did in this case with
Job: Job you know in his afflictions, mingled with his patience much
impatience, as the cursing the day of his birth, and wishing for death etc. yet
notwithstanding see how God makes mention of him in the Epistle of St. James,
James. 5. 11 Have you not heard of the patience of Job? So Jam. 5. 11.
David a man subject to many and great failings, yet God passes by all, and
accepts of him, and gives him this report, that he was a man after his own
heart, and did fulfill his pleasure. This is one property that is in God.

Secondly he is a kind master, ready to grant what his servants 2. Property.
shall ask at his hands, he has made them such a promise, Ask what you will
and it shall be given to you.

Thirdly. If they do offend in any thing (as what servants 3. Property.
are there properly but they do offend?) if they be lesser and ordinary
infirmities, he passes them by as if he saw them not, if they be greater sins
that they commit, he is ready to pardon them, if they confess and forsake them.

Fourthly if they fall into any misery, if into sickness of 4. Property, Psalm.
41. (...) Psalm. 31 7.
body, he tendreth them in their sickness, he makes their bed soft in their
sickness, that is, he sweeteneth their afflictions, if they fall into any
trouble of any kind, he knows their soul in adversity. Men are ready to
forget us in adversity, but the Lord knows us: so in poverty, I know thy
poverty (says God) to the angel of the church of Smyrna, In a word in all
outward afflictions, he looks upon them, tendereth them and regards them:
many others masters care not for their servants much when they are weak and
sick, but God tendereth his servants in all their afflictions.

Fifthly, He casts not off an old servant though he do 5. Property.
ran into diverse transgressions, and often provoke him to anger, with men one
fault or infirmity in a servant causes a breach, yea ten years service is
often lost with one failing, with one contrary action; but God does not so, he
casts not off an old servant, but makes a sure covenant with him, even the
sure mercies of David, that is, even as he showed mercy to David, though he was
unconstant, and failed grievously, yet he had sure mercies, the like has every
one of his servants. 6. Property. Rev. 2. 19.


Sixthly, he observes all that they do, there is not an action or work that
they do in which they lose their labor, I know thy work (says God) to the
angel of the Church in Thyatira, and thy charity, and thy faith, and thy
patience etc. not any thing that we do for God but he observes and rewards
it, not the least thing we suffer for him, but he considers it, and gives an
hundred fold even in this life, not a good action that we perform but shall do
us good one time or other, not a prayer we make, or any thing we do in
sincerity of heart but the Lord remembers it though we forget it, and that is
a great comfort to a servant, all that ever he has done evil in, shall be
forgotten, but not a good action but shall be remembered, and recompensed, and
not only to him shall be a recompense but to is p^steriti^ also, many a
servant is well rewarded by his master or his time, but it may be his children
are never the better for it, but I have been young and now am old (says David)
yet never saw I the righteous for saken or their seed begging bread.

Seventhly, if he do ch^stise his servants, it is with much gentleness and
lenity, he lays no more on then needs 7. Property.
must, no more then is for their profit, no more then they can well ^ear. You
shall find this excellently expressed in Psalm. 78. Many a time turned he his
anger away, and did Psalm. 78.
no^ ^^ir up all his wrath, for he remembered that they were but flesh etc. They
offended many times, and prov^ked him to wrath, even so that he was ready to
strike, yet he turned a way his anger many a time, that is oftentimes they
deserved affliction, ^ut he would not afflict them.

Again when he did afflict them yet he laid it not on heavy, he stirred not up
all his wrath, for he remembered they were but flesh. 8. Property. Luke, 18.


Lastly, his servants are defended by him, he avengeth their quarrel, he
Keeps them in safety. Luk 18. Will he not avenge his elect that pray day and
night unto him? I tell you (says Christ) that he will avenge them quickly, he
reproves kings for their sakes, as it is in the Psalm, Touch not mine
anointed etc. It may be said of the Saints, that they are all anointed, he
hedgeth them about, he keeps them as the apple of his own eye. A man you know
will not suffer the apple of his eye to be touched in any wise, such a master
is God, and such a master shall you find him to be. If then he be a master
thus rich in mercy, then serve no other master, serve not your l^sts and those
by-respects that you do in your actions, but give up your selves unto God,
Consecrate your bodies and souls unto him, remember what wages he gives, and
make that use of it, to serve him with a Cheerful heart.

Last of all to conclude this point, If God be so rich in Use. 6.
mercy then this will follow from it, certainly he will deal well with his
church, he will deal well, with every particular Saint in his a fflictions,
for he is rich in mercy, that is, he is of a merciful nature, and can do
nothing contrary to his nature, but all his ways are mercy and truth; we had
need to draw this use from this doctrine, because the ways of God seem
somewhat strange to flesh and blood, he seems to deal hardly with his church
and children. But (my brethren) it is not so, for he is of a merciful nature,
therefore all his ways, not a way he goes, not an action he does about his
own but it is full of mercy and truth.

First, for the Church, because he seems to deal hardly Comfort for the
church in general in affliction.
with the church, yet let us learn to be assured that he is still of a merciful
nature, though he may afflict them for a time, yet he will in the end deal well
with them, he cannot otherwise choose, that is, the church in the end shall rise
again, though it seem for the present to be fallen. Excellent is that place to
this purpose in Zach. 12. 3, 4, 5, 6. verses, where the Lord puts together
three similitudes Zach. 12. 3. 4. 5. 6.
to show the success of the churches affliction. The Church (says he) seems
to be swallowed up for a time as if the enemies had devoured it, as if there
were an end of it, but it is compared to the devouring of a cup of poison, now
you know a cup of poison though it do not as soon as it is received bring the
body to dissol^tion, yet notwithstanding in the end when it has had its full
time of working, it destroys the whole body, Even so will the church be to
those that devour it, though for a time it seems not to work, yet in the end
it shall bring destruction to all the people.

Again men seem to overthrow the church, as one that sets his shoulder
against a great stone to overthrow it, but in the end the stone falls back
again, and crusheth him to pieces. So does God deal with the church, men seem
sometimes almost to overthrow it, it seems sometime to be at the point of
utter undoing, but yet nevertheless it falls back again upon them like a
mighty stone too heavy and weighty for them that meddle with it, Even so shall
the enemies of the church be ruinated, and crushed with it.

Last of all the church seems to be covered with the enemies, and to be pressed
down with them as a few coals are pressed down with an heap of wood; such a
pressure seems the Church to be under sometimes, yet you know though the coals
be few, yet a little fire will devour all that wood, this you shall find to be
the issue of the church in thus it was with Jerusalem, and thus you shall find
it to be with the Churches that seem now to be overprest, and overthrown, and
swallowed up with the enemies, it shall be as a cup of poison to destroy the
enemy, as a mighty stone to crush them in pieces, as a fire in the midst of a
bundle of wood to devour them.

This you may the rather take notice of, because our adversaries Bellarmine his
argument for their Church, with the answer to it.
use it as an argument. And Bellarmine amongst the rest uses it as a special
argument against our churches, and a confirmation of the truth of theirs. viz.
the many victories they have had against us, but this is but a weak argument.
The people of the Jews were more afflicted then all their Neighbors, and there
is good reason for Gods dealings so with his own Church. Men you know plow the
field that belongs to themselves and let others alone, men take their own
Children and correct them oftentimes, the children of strangers they meddle not
with, and if this be true of particular Christians, that if they be sons they
must be chastned; must it not be true also of the whole Church, which is
nothing but a company of those that are his children; let not this therefore
trouble you, God will be merciful to them in the end, for he is of a merciful
nature, he cannot (as we said before) otherwise choose.

This a man in particular may apply to himself, men Comfort for every Christian
in particular in affliction.
when they are in trouble, or under some affliction are apt presently to say, O
I shall be always thus, I shall never see better days; my brethren this is a
great fault in us; But to keep to the matter in hand, the way to comfort-you is
to remember that God is of a merciful nature, he will not take his children at
advantage, but he considers what they are able to bear, and so deals
tenderly with them, for he knows what they are, that they are but flesh,
therefore will deal with them according to their strength, for he is a merciful
God, So likewise for things you want, and complain of, still remember this that
God is merciful.

But it will be objected, we see God is not so rich in mercy to all the saints
as you speak of, many of his own children are poor, they are beneath, and not
above, mean in gifts, and mean every way, where is then the riches of his
mercy? Again many of his children are sorely afflicted, who have worse
entertainment in the world then they? upon whom are afflictions more heaped
then upon those that serve God with an upright heart? 1. Answ.


We will answer this briefly, to begin with the first, you must know that
though God be exceeding rich in mercy, yet there is a difference amongst his
children, that is, he has made diverse degrees amongst men, men are put into
different degrees of mercy, notwithstanding all do taste of the riches of his
mercy. you know in the body there is the foot as well as the eye, so in the
body of Christ there are members of all sorts. In a great house there is use of
vessels of diverse degrees, so in the church of Christ there is use of mean
christians, of those of lower parts, there is need I say of them, as well as of
those of more excellent gifts, therefore you must remember this, that though
God be rich in mercy, yet he takes not away those differences and degrees that
are amongst men, and if you ask how then he is rich in mercy? I say every man
has the mercies that belongs to him in his kind, a man of a lower degree
has so much mercy as he is able to receive, he has the mercies that belong
unto him, and it is enough for him, for we say if a man have his appetite
filled it is enough, take a man that is lower, his appetite is lower, and the
mercies that he has are sufficient to give him satisfaction, for the appetite
follows the form, and when that's satisfied every creature is in its
perfection.

Secondly, For the other part of the objection concerning 2. Answ.
those afflictions wherewith God seems to afflict those that are his
children, we answer, That his love is to them constant as unto sons, but his
carriage to them Reason why God afflicts his children.
is different. The reasons are many, he knows their constitutions best, he
knows their conditions best, as a stander by a sick patient is not able to
tell what the physician does, although the physician knows, so God lays
sharp afflictions upon his children, he himself knows the reason, although
men are not able to discern it.

Again there are different causes, it may be upon some men he means to bestow
more grace then upon others, therefore he afflicts them more, he will have
them purer then others, therefore they are oftener in the fire, some he
intends for more special use, therefore he thresheth them cleaner then
others, the seed corn you know is commonly more clean threshed and winnowed
then that which is for ordinary use, so God deals with his children.

In general this you may be sure of, that God will deal mercifully with you, he
is not ready to afflict you, you shall not taste of any sharp dealing from him,
except it be in these cases.

1. If there be any sin that lies unrepented of, then look to be scourged by
affliction. When Joseph's brethren 5. Special cases of affliction.
had forgot their sin, God calls them back again by affliction.

Or Secondly, in case they go about any evil thing, or any indifferent thing in
an evil manner, then oftentimes God meets them with affliction; so he dealt
with Iehosophat, 2. Chron. 20. 35, 36, 37.
because he went about an evil enterprise to join himself with Ahazia king of
Israel (a man who did very wickedly) to make ships to fetch gold from Tarshish,
the ships were broken that they were not able to go.

Or Thirdly, in case they need deeper humiliation, then they must look for
affliction, David was humbled when Nathan came to him, but yet you may see
Psalm. 51. (which was made a great while afterward) that he had need to be
more humbled, for there he complains that his bones were broken.

Or Fourthly, in case of scandal they may be afflicted lest the enemies of God
should blaspheme, for this cause (says Nathan to David) because thou have
given occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme, the sword shall not depart
from thy house, so when the Saints fall into scandalous sins, in this case they
must look for afflictions.

Or Lastly, to prevent an inward disease, and thus Saint Paul was afflicted,
for when he was taken up into the third heaven, he had pride growing upon him,
and began 2 Cor. 12. 2.
to be exalted above measure, therefore the Lord sent a messenger of Satan to
buffet him, and though he took it at the first somewhat amiss, yet when God had
informed him that it was to heal a greater disease, he was well contented; in
this case therefore God often afflicts to prevent sin beginning, when his
children begin to be stubborn, he teaches them by affliction to be obedient.
Christ himself learned obedience by affliction, so if his children begin to
overvalue earthly things, to delight over much in them, to wean them now from
the world, and to teach them to know the vanity of the creature, he afflicts
them, still I say, either to bring them back to repentance, or to meet with
them when they go about an evil enterprise, or to bring them to deeper
humiliation, or when they fall into scandalous sins, or lastly to prevent a
further sinning, except in these cases you are sure always to have mercy, for
God is exceeding rich in mercy; And so much for this point.

According to his glorious riches, or the riches of his glory.

The next point to be observed is this, that God Doct.
reckons it his Glory to be merciful, his mercy is his glory, therefore it is
called the riches of his glory, that is, those riches of mercy are glorious,
which will appear by these reasons.

First, When God promised to show Moses his glory, for that was Moses his
request, that God would 1. Reason. Exodus 33. 18. and 34. 6.
show him his glory, you see there what God did, he made known his mercy, for
that was all he did, when he proclaimed his name to Moses, he made known his
mercy to him, therefore his glory consisted in that, for when he would make
known his glory, he manifested his mercy.

Secondly, That which is the object of praise must needs 2. Reason.
be glorious, ^ow the mercies of God you shall find are still the object of the
praises of the saints. Look into the book of Psalms, and you shall see how
abundant David is in praising God for his mercies, look into all the songs made
by Moses, or Deborah, or Esaiah, or by any other in the scripture, all the
object of their praise was his mercy; now whatsoever the object of praise is,
that is glorious.

Thirdly, God made the world you know for his glories sake, 3. Reason.
to make manifest that now that which he did in making the world was to
communicate his mercy and his goodness to the creature, for this was the
primary and first intent of God, and that indeed was all that he did, he
explicated his goodness to the creature, and then made angels and men to behold
it, now I say if he made the world for his glory, and in the world he
communicated his mercy and goodness to the creature, his mercy then must needs
be his glory.

Lastly, He has put into men a natural self-love, every Last Reason.
creature desires the preservation of it self, now the mercies of God tend to
the preservation and advantage of the creature, therefore the creature is apt
to give him praise for it. It is his mercy that the creature is ready to
magnify with all propenseness of heart, with all readiness of disposition, now
when God had man in his hands as the potter the clay, seeing he has so
fashioned him that he is apt to praise him for his mercy, it is a sign that he
would have his mercy to be his glory and excellency; but I will stay no longer
upon the proving of this point, let us now make some use of it.

First, If the mercies of God be his glory doubt not Use. 1.
then, but that when you come to ask at his hand any request that is meet for
you, he will be ready to grant it, for it is his glory, to show mercy, and God
loves his glory, now if so be to show mercy be his glory, doubt not then I say
of obtaining what you desire at his hands, for glory is nothing else but the
manifestation of some excellency to the view and knowledge of man. When a thing
is excellent and beautiful, and is shut up, we say What glory is.
it is beautiful, but not glorious, except it be explicated and spread abroad
to the view of others, as a peacock is then said to be glorious, when he
spreads abroad his feathers, and the Sun is said then to be in his glory when
he shines in his brightness, when Ahasuerus made that great feast, he did it
for the glory of his kingdom, because in the feast, his riches and potency was
manifest, therefore it made him glorious. So does the Lord, if all his
perfections were shut up in himself they were excellent, but not properly
glorious, for glory is when any excellency is made manifest to the view of
others, therefore God i^ said to be glorious when he manifests his mercy. If
therefore this be his glory, then doubt not but that he will be ready to show
mercy to men, that is, not only to be merciful in himself, but to show mercy
to you, learn hence now to strengthen your faith, and to come with more
boldness to the throne of grace, and beseech God to grant you what you ask,
that he might glorify himself, when you have therefore occasion to ask any
grace, any help, or any succor in temptation, this will help to prevail with
him. Lord if thou shuttest thy hand, and keep thy mercy within thy self,
what glory will thou bring to thy self? but if thou openest thy hand, and
manifestest thy mercy, thence will glory redound to thee. Use. 2.


Secondly if Gods mercy be his glory or his excellency, then let us praise him
for his mercy, let us give him the glory of it, for that he looks for at our
hands; on Gods part there is but this to make him glorious, viz. an explication
or showing of his mercy, on our part it is required that we see it, and take
notice of it, be inwardly persuaded that he is merciful. Seeing now God has
done his part in making manifest his mercy, let us also do our duty, and give
him what is required on our part, even to praise him for his mercy, that is it
which he looks for from his Children, whatsoever others do. Wisdom is justified
of her children, whatsoever others do, let the Saints and children of God
justify him for his mercy, let them say that he is merciful. Others will not
say it, or at least they do not think it, but as those wicked men that were
devoured with fire that came from God, brake cut into this speech, who shall
dwell with everlasting burnings? even so every evil man thinks God a cruel
master, thinks him a severe judge, this secret thought has every evil man in
him, but yet let his children justify him for his mercy, let him say as David
did, yet God is good to Israel etc. that is, though he afflict them often, yet
he is good to Israel, Isay 6.
and to them that are of a pure heart. Let us be ready to say as the Seraphims
in Isay 6. holy and holy is the Lord of hosts, it is spoken upon this
occasion, The prophet Isaiah was sent forth upon this errand, to make the
hearts of the people heavy, this seemed a strange judgment, God seemed to be
very cruel, to make their hearts heavy, that seeing they might not see, and
hearing they might not understand, yet they justified God notwithstanding, that
he was holy: so let us do, though we see not the reason of all his ways, yet
let us justify him, and say he is glorious, and give him the praise of his
mercy, that is, let us be persuaded of it our selves, that he is merciful, that
he is not hard to the wicked, that he is an indulgent father to his children,
and when we have don, let us be ready to speak of it to others, and indeed when
we our selves have the sense of his mercies, then we will be ready to speak of
them to others, then speeches will come from us easily, naturally and
plentifully, but contrariwise when we are not inwardly persuaded of the mercies
of God our selves, our speeches, of them come forcibly, and sparingly, and
truly (my brethren) this is the reason we are so little in praising the Lord,
because our selves are not touched with a sense of his mercies, we are not
persuaded he is so exceeding merciful as he is, we think better of men then we
do of him, therefore if any thing greive us, we are readier to complain unto
men, then unto God: and for matter of mercy, we are exceeding in praising of
those men that are merciful to us, but we are not persuaded of the exceeding
mercifulness of God, for if we were, we would be speaking of his praise, we
would be exhorting others to serve the same master; but we are short in this,
and the reason is because we are not persuaded of the riches of his mercy our
selves.

I will now add but one word more, fully to convince you Object.
of the glorious riches of mercy that is in God, because you may object, Is God
so merciful? what is the reason then that he does so sharply afflict, even his
dearest children? why does he afflict evil men with such a great affliction as
hell i^ self? why are so many damned, and why do so many perish while it is in
his power to save them? Lastly is he not an hard master to condemn many that
could not be saved, as the Gentiles, that came not to the knowledge of the
Gospel before Christ's time? and since also does not God exact that at their
hands which they could not perform, and does he not look to reap there where he
did not sow? how can we therefore be persuaded of his exceeding mercifulness.
Answ. 1.


I will answer all these breiflly. For the first I answer that though God
indeed be exceeding rich in mercy, yet that does not contradict his other
Attributes, though he be rich in mercy yet it contradicts not his wisdom,
therefore he afflicts his children, otherwise he were not wise, as you have
heard heretofore at large. Answ. 2.


Secondly, though he be rich in mercy yet that contradicts not his ju^ice,
therefore he must deal with the wicked according to their sins, for he holds
not the wicked innocent, their punishments therefore are great because their
Answ. 3.
sins are great.

Thirdly, for the multitude of those that perish, though he be rich in mercy,
yet his mercy contradicts not his liberty, he has a liberty to do what he
pleases, having a soveraigntie over all creatures, he is free to choose more or
fewer to his kingdom, as he pleases, and to exercise his severitie as he will.

Lastly, in that it is said he reapeth where he does not sow, Last Answ,
I answer, he does not reap where he does not sow, and therefore in that he
shows not himself a hard master, for there are none condemned for more then
is revealed to them; the Gentiles that had no more then the law of nature
revealed to them, they are condemned for no more but for the breach of the law
of nature. If the Gospel never came amongst them it shall never be required at
their hands, And so the Jews, those amongst them that had no more but the old
testament made known to them shall never be condemned for rejecting the Gospel,
but for the breach of that law which they had. So Christians as their means
have been more, as their light is more, as more truth has been revealed to
them so God will require more at their hands, as he sows more seed, so he
will look for a greater Crop at the harvest amongst Christians those that are
ignorant (if there be no fault in themselves) he will not punish for that they
know not his will.

A Second answer to this is, that there is a great difference 2. Answ.
if we consider the manner of Gods showing mercy, for,

First, the primarie intent of God, was to show mercy to all the creatures, to
men and angels both, now the execution of his wrath came in by the way (as it
were) and by occasion, that when his mercy took no place then there was a place
found for his justice. First he began with mercy, he set the angels in a hapy
condition. Justice now came in when his mercy took no place, so to mankind
Similie.
he first began with mercy, and set him in a happy estate, if mercy might have
taken place, there had been no room or his wrath, for as we say of bees that
naturally they give honey, they sting not but when they are provoked, so God
naturally propensely and readily shows mercy to the Creatures, he never
exercises his wrath but when we offend him by our words or works.

Thirdly, You must consider that God is exceeding rich 3. Answ.
in mercy, in that he offers mercy to mankind, it lies manifested to all;
if they will not take it, it detracts not from his mercy, now all mankind has
had mercy manifested to them, it lies open to them, if they take it not, it is
not because he is not rich in mercy, but because they will not accept it.

Fourthly, He is merciful, even to evil men, to them he 4. Answ.
declares the riches of his patience and long suffering, to bear with them
from day to day, to feed them, to cloth them, to preserve them, and yet they
make conscience of nothing, their lives are a continual rebellion against him,
is not here therefore a great deal of mercy manifested? Does he not as the
Apostle says, bear with much patience the vessels of wrath fitted for
destruction.

Last of all, put together the manner of the execution 5. Answ.
of his wrath, and of his mercy, and you shall see this difference, look what
wrath there is executed in the world, and you may thank your selves for it. The
congregation of Corah, the text says, Numb. 16. destroyed Numb. 16.
themselves. Mercy is not so, that comes from God, the day spring from on high
has visited us, Luke 1. Thy Destruction is of thy self oh Israel says the
Prophet, but we may thank him for his mercy, the wages of sin is death, that
comes as our due debt, but the gift of God is eternal life, that comes
freely.

Again, the justice of God is but even measure, the just wages of an hireling,
just no more then our sins deserve, but the mercy of God runs over the brink
as a mighty sea over his bounds, so does not the other, therefore his mercy is
exceeding great, conclude it therefore, and set it down in your own hearts, be
persuaded of it your selves, and be ready to glorify him before the sons of men.

Last of all, the use of this point shall be this, that if it Last use.
be the glory of God to be merciful, then labor to imitate his mercy, for
every excellent thing that is glorious is worthy to be imitated, therefore
imitate God in this, so the scripture would have us, be you merciful as your
heavenly father is merciful; and so again Col. 3. as the elect of God put on
tender mercy, that is, if God be merciful, be you merciful likewise, and so
Ephesians, 1. forgive one another, And why? as dear children, be you followers of
God, etc. he is so, therefore be you so, make this use therefore of Gods being
merciful, be you merciful as he is merciful, that is consider the miseries of
others, and wherein you may be helpful to them, and be ready to show them mercy
upon any occasion. As it is the glory of God to show mercy, so, (as Solomon
says) it is the glory of a man to pass by an infirmity, that, is to pass by
the faults of others, to show mercy to them, to forgive them, and not to take
things in the worst sense, this is acceptable to God, for mercy pleases him
far better then Sacrifice, all the duties that you perform to God, though you
serve him in all the parts of his worship, yet put these and showing of mercy
unto men together, and he esteems mercy to man before all, for Isay 58. 6.
when the people had fasted and performed those duties to the full, yet
notwithstanding God makes this exception, Is this the fast that I have chosen?
is it not to break every yoke, to relieve the oppressed, to show mercy, etc.
therefore (my brethren) be ready to show mercy, for in so doing you shall
imitate God, that is it which indeed makes you good men, every man would be a
good man, now goodness stands in this, to be merciful, for goodness is but a
relative term, and it stands in conformity with the chiefest good. So carry
your selves therefore that you may be counted good men, that you may have a
good eye, which is nothing but this, to be ready to do good to those whom you
see in misery, herein your goodness consists, all that you do without it is
not accepted, whatsoever goodness you do unto men if it be without mercy, if it
proceed not from that, as it is said of love, if you give your body to be
burned, and yet have not love, it is nothing. So it may be said of mercy, God
acaccepteth of no action that you perform unless it come from mercy, labor
therefore to have a merciful heart, that so all your works may come from a
good principle, for actions are not good except they come from some grace
within, (I speak of those actions which are actions of mercy) be you merciful
therefore as your heavenly father is, for that is a sign that you have the same
spirit that he has, when God comes into the heart of any man he receives the
spirit of the father. And therefore as you would have a witness, and testimony
to your selves that you are the sons of God, be you merciful. There is a
natural mercy, I confess, found in those that have not mercy indeed, but this
God accepts, not, because such mercies are but counterfeit to the true mercy.
Labor to be merciful as God is, to abound in mercy that every one may fare the
better for you wherever you dwell and whatsoever you do, let all your actions
be works of mercy, so will God accept them, and be ready to render mercy to you
again.

INWARD STRENGTH The desire of a Christian.
Text, EPHESIANS. 3. 16.
That you may be strengthened by the spirit in the inward man. THese words are
a part, and indeed the sum of that excellent and divine prayer that Paul made
for the Ephesians the principal thing that the Apostle prays for is this, that
they may be strengthened by the spirit in the inward man, and this the Apostle
sets down in such a manner that he answers all doubts that might hinder the
Ephesians from obtaining this gracious privilege.

For first they might demand this of Paul, you pray that we may be strong in
the inward man, but how, or 1.
what means shall we use to get this strength? the Apostle answers to this
and tells them, the means to be strong in the inward man is to get the spirit,
that you may be strengthened by the spirit in the inward man. Secondly but they
might demand, But how shall we do to get the spirit?

The Apostle answers to this, you must pray for him, for your selves, as I do
for you, for I pray that he would grant you the spirit that you may be
strengthened in the inward man, and thus you must do for your selves, be
earnest in prayer to get the spirit, which he has promised to those that ask
it.

Thirdly, They might demand, but what should move God to give us his spirit,
and to hear our prayers? 3.


To this he answers, that the moving cause is the riches of his glory, that you
may be strengthened in the Inward man.

Fourthly, they might demand, yea, but what shall we be the better for this
strength if we get it? 4.


To this the Apostle answers in the verses following, then (says he) you
shall be able to comprehend, with all saints, what is the length and the
height, the depth and the breadth of the riches of the love of God toward you
in Christ. Now in that the Apostle above all other good that he wishes unto
them, prays for this, that they may be strengthened by the spirit in the
inward man, I gather this point.

That which is to be desired of every Christian, and to be Doctrine.
earnestly sought for, is this, that they may be strengthened in the Inward
man.

I gather it thus; Saint Paul was now to pray for some special good to the
Ephesians, and considering what might be most profitable, and advantageous, he
makes choice of this above all other good things, making it the sum and
substance of his prayer, that you may be strengthened by the spirit in the
inward man.

I shall not need to prove this by any other places of scripture, because the
place in hand sufficiently proves the point, as being the main scope and intent
of the spirit of God in this place to show the necessity of this doctrine of
strengthening the inward man. But for the fuller explaning of this point we
will first show you what this strength is, and then we will come to the uses.

There is therefore a twofold strengthening.

1 There is first a natural 2. There is a supernatural
Strength.
First I say there is a Natural strength, and this is when a man is naturally
strong or able, either in the parts of his body, or in the gifts of his mind;
as for example, a man that has a strong memory this is a natural strength, or
in other qualities of the mind, or else when a man is strong in the parts of
his body, these are natural strengths, but this is not the strength that is
here meant.

Secondly there is a Supernatural strength, and this is two fold.

The first is a Supernatural strength which is received from the evil spirit,
which is when Satan shall join with the spirit of a man, and adds a
Supernatural strength, and so makes him to do more or suffer more, then
otherwise by Nature he were able to do. With this spirit are all the enemies
of the Church strengthened. Paul himself, before he was committed, was
strengthened by this spirit. Some men have more then a natural strength to
undergo torments, and yet not to shrink at them, but this is not the strength
here meant.

But there is a Second supernatural strength which comes from the sanctifying
spirit, whereby a Christian is able to do more then naturally he could do, and
this is the strength which is here meant in this place, and with this strength
all the Saints are strengthened [that is] this was the strength that Eliah,
Stephen, John Baptist, the Apostles and the rest had; this made them speak
boldly in the name of Christ.

But you shall the better understand what this strength is if you do but
consider the particulars, which are these.

The first particular wherein this spiritual strength is seen is this: if a man
cheerfully thrive under many afflictions, that is when they can rejoice under
great troubles and trials, they have this strength, as Acts 5. 41. it is said
of the Apostles that they departed from the Council rejoicing that Acts. 5. 41.
they were thought worthy to suffer rebuke for the name of Christ: he that
bears some troubles has some strength, but to bear great troubles is required
great strength, that is to stand fast to Christ, to profess his name, as the
holy Ghost says in Rev. 2. 13. there where Satan has his throne must needs be
a great Supernatural work of the spirit. Rev. 2. 13.


The Second particular is this, in the hour of temptation, when the storms
arise and the floods lift up their voice, the heart is stablished, being
founded upon the rock*so that the gates of hell cannot prevail against it, all
Satan's darts fall upon such a state as an arrow upon a rock; the heart is fixed
like mount Zion.

The third particular wherein this spiritual strength is seen, is this when a
man does believe, though he have all reason and strength against him, this is
to be strong in the inward man, but to go further that you may the better know
what this strength is, I will give you a definition of it.

It is a general good disposition, or right habit, a temperature or a due frame
of the mind, whereby it is enabled to please God in all things. 1. I say it is a
general good disposition or right habit, because a disposition to some one
particular good is 1.
not strength, as for example, to have present passion to good and not to
continue, argues not strength in the inward man, or to have the understanding
strong, and yet to have the will and affections weak is not to be strong in the
inward man, but they must be all fortified as for example, a man or a woman is
not said to be perfectly beautiful, except they be beau tiful in all parts, for
beauty is a fit composure of all parts: so likewise a man is not thoroughly
strong but imperfect except he be strong in all parts, that is strong in the
understanding, strong in the will, strong in the affections. 2.


Secondly I call it a temperature or due frame of the mind, because it sets the
soul in order, that is, it sets new bits on the faculties, and fit objects for
those habits; the soul was before like a disordered instrument or clock that
went at random, every thing was out of its place, but when this strength of
the inward man is communicated to the soul, it frames it a new, that is, it
puts it into a right temper again. 3.


Thirdly it is a frame whereby a man is enabled to please God in all things,
because it sets a good hew upon all our actions, for as varnish makes all
colors fresh, so does the strength of the inward man, it sets a deep die upon
all our actions, puts a grace upon them, and makes them beautiful, nothing
without it will hold trial, every thing that has the tincture and virtue of
the strength of the Inward man will hold good, it sets the stamp of holiness
upon them as implanted by the spirit, and therefore they are acceptable unto
God.

Now that you may know the better what this strength is, you must first inquire
what weakness is, now by weakness we do not mean weakness before a man be
converted, for that cannot so properly be called weakness as wickedness, and
therefore know that this weakness which the Apostle speaks of here, which is
proper unto Christians is of two sorts.

The First is weakness or a small measure of grace, as in 1 Cor. 3. 1. That is
those that are weak in knowledge and habes in Christ.

The Second kind of weakness is this, when one that 1 Cor. 3. 1.
has been strong is now fallen sick and weak, that is, he is fallen into a
consumption of grace, so that he cannot use his strength and his grace as
formerly he could. Now those that are weak in the first kind they grow
stronger and stronger, but they that are weak in the second way they grow
weaker and weaker, therefore if there be any here that are such that have made
profession of Christ, but now are fallen unto the love of the world, that were
once lively and quickly to good duties, but are now backward and cool, my
counsel to them shall be the same which Christ gives to the Church of Ephesus
in the Rev. 2. 5. Remember from whence thou art fallen, and Rev. 2. 5.
repent, and to do their first. works, lest their Candlestick be taken from
them; that is, let them remember what they were in times past and what they are
now, and let them humble themselves, and turn again into the right way, and be
ashamed of themselves that they have run away so far from Christ, and that in
time too, lest their Candlestick be taken away from them, that is, lest those
opportunities to good, and the offers of grace be taken away from them.

Again as there are kinds of weaknesses, so there are degrees of weaknesses.

The first degree of weakness is that which follows a relapse, and this is of
two sorts. 1.


1 Sensible. 2 Insensible.
First Sensible, and that is when the understanding is good in regard of the
grace it knows, yet not in regard of the good it feels.

2. There is a weakness Insensible, and is such as cannot be felt, and this is
when men change their opinions of sins, that is when they have thought
otherwise of it, then they now do. As for example, before they thought every
sin a great sin, but now they think some to be little or none at all.

The Second degree of weakness, is that which follows 2.
the new birth, and that is of two sorts.

1 General. 2 Particular.
First General weakness, and this is when the judgment, will and affections
are all weak, that is when a man is weak in all the parts of the soul, and
overrun with an universal feebleness.

The Second degree is a particular weakness, and that is when a man is
Generally strong, and yet weak in some parts, as for example, a ship may be
strong built, or generally strong, and yet having a leak in it, cannot be said
to be strong in all parts, because it has that in it which will at last
destroy it: so it is with a Christian, if there be but a leak, that is a
weakness, in one part of the soul, he is not strong in the inward man,
therefore a man must take heed of all weakness, though a man may be generally
strong, that he be not weak in some things.

Now I come to the Reasons, wherefore we should be strong in the inward man,
and they are these.

The first Reason wherefore we should be strong in the Reason. 1.
inner man is this, because it will fit us for many employments, that is, it
will make us go through much work with great ease, to perform the weightiest
duties in Religion in such manner, as otherwise we could never be able to
perform; and this should persuade men the rather to pray earnestly for this,
because God rewards men according to their works, that is, it is not for
beauty, riches or dignity, that moves God to give grace and glory unto any, but
according to their works: a good reason it is therefore to persuade men to be
strong in the Inner man, that they may be able to go through great matters for
God, and that with great strength, and this should make men to beg the spirit,
because he works in us effectually to the strengthening of us in the Inward man.

The Second reason why you should desire to be strong Reason. 2.
in the Inward man is this, because it brings most comfort and chearfulnes into
the soul.

First, because it makes us do all that we do with facility and easiness, that
which we do is easy unto us. As for example, a man that is weak in judgment
and understanding, any high point of Religion is weariness unto him, because he
wants a capacity to conceive, now that which is not rightly conceived or
understood, he has no comfort nor delight in it, but it is with irksomness and
much weariness unto nature, where as the same things unto a man of larger
capacity; they are easy unto him and he delights in them.

Secondly, the more strength a man has in the Inward 2.
man, the more health in the soul, for as it is in the body so it is in the
soul, the more Natural strength the more health. So it is in the soul, the more
strength in the Inward man the more healthful in grace.

Thirdly, because it brings sufficient and plenty of all good unto the soul,
and we say that if a man have a good 3.
outward estate he is like to hold out if a famine or other calamities should
come; so it is with a christian if he be strong in the Inward man though a
spiritual famine should come he is likely to hold out and to keep that which he
has, on the contrary when a man is poor in the Inward man, as it is with a
body that is weak, every thing that it has is ready to be taken away, as a
bowl that has a bias, the strength of the arm takes away the force of the
bias: so strength in the Inward man makes us to bear afflictions strongly and
joyfully, that is, it takes away the bias of shame and reproach which otherwise
would draw us to be offended at the cross.

4. Because it strengthens a man against temptations, and therefore the
Apostle says, be steadfast and unmovable, that 4.
is, it makes us to stand fast in Christ that nothing will break us off,
neither temptation, affliction, reproach, shame, or disgrace, because God and
Christ are united together in us; and on the contrary what is the cause that
temptations press men so far as they do, but because they are not careful to
grow strong in the Inward man.

This shows how they are to blame that seek this strength least, or not at all
for let us look upon men and we shall Use. 1.
see, how busy they are to get riches and honor, or pleasure, but few, or none
regard strength in the inward man, which is the health, beauty, strength and
dignity of the soul: but for the health, beauty and strength and welfare of
the outward man, they take great care and spend much time about them, and much
labor to add any thing unto that, but for the beauty of the inward man they
care not, they respect it not; all their care is for their backs and bellies,
still regarding the things that may advance their outward estates, but never
mind the strengthening of the Inward man. If you ask them why they do not pray
oftener, or hear or receive the Sacraments oftener, all which have strengthening
virtue in them; to this they can answer, they cannot for business, they have
great employments in the world which they cannot neglect, as if the Inward man
were neither worth the looking after, nor the cherishing, and yet these men
will be accounted as good men as the best, As for example: This day is
appointed for the strengthening o^ the inward man, but how do you neglect it?
how often were you in prayer and holy meditation before? or how often since
have you seriously considered on the things that you have heard? or how have
you ca^t aside your occasions, of businesses in your callings? or are they not
now fresh in your memories? nay do not your hearts run after them, even now
when I am persuading you to the contrary? If they be, whatsoever you say of
your selves, you have no care to grow strong in the inward man, your outward
man carries away what should be laid out upon the inner.

And that you may see you have good reason to strengthen the inward man: 1.
consider you that are old men and think with your selves, how soon the inward
man may be thrown out of doors, and how soon this earthly house may be unpin'd,
and dissolved. Therefore you have great cause to strengthen that, and to grow
strong in the inward man, as your outward man decays day by day!

Secondly, you young men you have need to strengthen the inward man, for as
there is a time of springing and growing strong for you in the inward man, so
there is a time of not springing, that is when you will have much to do to keep
that which you have without increasing of it: therefore while the opportunity
is, take heed of neglecting the time, that is no rule to be relied upon that
God calls at all times: thou know not whether he will call thee hereafter,
and therefore do you labor to grow strong in the inward man, and to persuade
you the more Consider these particulars.

First, Consider the excellency of the inward man, that it 1.
will fit you for great employments; as for example it will make you see God in
his holiness, and to converse with God, and to have such a holy familiarity and
communion with him as will joy the soul, this will bring you so acquainted with
God, as that you will be esteemed of him as one of his familiars, therefore
this should persuade you to strengthen the Inward man.

Secondly, Consider that you are to be made like unto the 2.
Image of God, and you are predestined to be conformed unto Christ, but this
cannot be except the Inward man be strengthened to actions of holiness, and
therefore the Apostle 1 Pet 1. as he that has called you is holy, so be you
holy 1 Pet. 1.
in all manner of conversation, that is, seeing you are called unto such a high
place, as to be the sons of God by grace, what an unworthy thing is it to stoop
unto base things. As for example, what a base thing were it that an eagle
should stoop at flies? although it be unseemely in this creature, yet men do
the like and are not ashamed, when men stoop to the world and will be vassals
to their lusts, and be any thing they would have him to be, if it may enlarge
his outward estate: beloved there is a great loss and baseness in that, for
what is gold or honor, or pleasure to Christ, grace and holiness, and inward
worth and excellency? In every thing that there is loss it grievs and pains us,
as for example we grieve when we see wheat given to swine which would be man's
meat. Again we grieve when we have set up a fair building, on which we have
bestowed much cost and labor, and now to have Zim and Ohim to dwell there, and
not our selves, and if these things return upon us with vexation then how much
more have we cause to grieve, when we see men give themselves unto their lusts,
that is, they give their souls to be a harbor for their noisome corruptions
which ought to be Temples for the holy Ghost.

Thirdly, Consider that it is the Inward man, that inables a man to do those
things that are honorable to God, and 3.
profitable to men. No man can truly honor God, that does it not by the
strength of the Inward man, neither can any man be truly said to profit
another, except it be the Profit that flows from the Inward man, therefore the
Apostle Col. 3. 2.
says in the Col. 3. 2. Set your affections on things above and not on things
below: but Satan comes and robs us of all the good that otherwise we might do,
and first he robs us of our selves, by stealing from us the strength of our
affections:

And secondly he robs our parents of us, making us the object of their grief;
And thirdly he robs the Church and Commonwealth of us, by making us
unprofitable Instruments. And beloved if you look into the world you shall find
it true: as for example look unto young men, they are busied in eating and
drinking and rising up to play, but never regard the strengthening of the
Inward man, and so having poured out their souls to vanity, become unprofitable
to others and dishonorable in their generations. And beloved, the soul is unto
some as the salt is unto meat; only to keep it from putrefaction, for the body
is advanced into the souls place, but what is the reason that we put it thus?
does not this prove that true which Solomon says, I have seen servants ride
and masters go on foot, that is when you employ your selves and spend your time
and pains in getting of outward dignity, and decking the outward man, and
little regarding the beautifying of the Inward man. You prefer dross before
gold, copper before silver, you set the body in the souls place, you set the
servant on horseback, but the master must go on foot: in a word you do not
things like or beseeming Christians: and on the contrary, you do things like
your selves when you prefer the Inward man first.

Fourthly Consider that it is an immortal soul; thy Inward 4.
man is of a different original from thy outward, why do you eat meat that
perishes in the use of it? that is, why do you dote upon the outward man that
perishes in the using, that will stand you in no stead if you keep it, and why
do you not rather labor for the meat which perishes not? that is, why do you
not labor to get this strength of the Inward man which is of an immortal
substance, that will never fail nor perish in the use; as for example; you
have built a temple here, which is in it self a good work, but I say except you
build also in your selves the Temple of the Inward man, all your labor, all
you pains, all your cost, is but lost labor, that is will perish, and stand
you in no stead when you should need it, and the whole scope of the scripture
is to this end, to show you the vanity of earthly things, that you should not
set your affections upon them because they perish in the use.

And again wherefore do you lay out money for that which profits not?
consider therefore that it is a spirit, and again it is infused into the body
to bear rule, and the body to be but a servant to the inward man.

But that you be not deceived, there is a Natural strength, whereby some men
will go very far, and there is a moral strength, take heed you rest not in
that.

I speak not against Natural and moral strength, because it comes from God and
is good, for I say we do not take away those, but we exalt the other above
them, therefore I beseech you look that you do not content your selves
therewith, but labor to strengthen the Inward man.

And here a question arises, seeing there is a Natural and a spiritual
strength; how shall a man come to know, whether that the strength he has be a
moral or a spiritual strength? yet as I say we do not destroy Natural strength,
but we use it as men do wild horses and beasts, they tame them to make them
sit for service, so we should use these as means to carry us to their right
end, we will then come to show the difference between Natural and spiritual
strength.

The First difference is this, the spiritual strength goes Diff. 1.
further then the natural strength, that is, look what the natural man can do
with the natural strength, the spiritural man can do more, he can go further
both in degree and measure: and the reason is because grace elevates nature,
that is, it brings it unto a higher pitch: grace is unto the soul as a
prospective glass unto the eye, it brings things a far off nigh hand: Again it
causes a man to see things in a more excellent manner: or as matter that is
elevated by fire, so is he that has this strength: that is he is able to do
more then a natural strength can do: This was that which made a difference
between Sampson and other men; he had a natural strength, and he had a strength
to do more then other men could do: and that this strength does go further then
natural strength we will prove by these particulars.

First, the spiritual strength enables you to see more, 1.
and to prize grace more; the natural strength shows you something in your
journey, but it shows you not the end of your journey, whereas the sight that
the inward man brings unto the soul, adds unto it, as in 1 Iere. 31. 1. Then
Jere. 31. 1.
shall ye know me: that is, they knew me before, but now they know me in
another manner then before, grace presents things unto the soul in another hue
then nature does.

Secondly, In performances: all natural strength leads a man unto a form of
godliness: but this strength gives a 2.
man power and ability to do good; labor therefore for this strength, that
your heart may be in such a frame in holiness, that you may do Gods will on
earth, as the angels do in heaven, which the carnal man cannot do, that is, he
that has not this strength, he will never labor to please God after that
manner: because he cares no further for grace, but that he may escape hell, but
the spiritual man will not be contented to have the pardon of sin, except he
may have Grace and Holiness too.

Thirdly, It enables him to go further in judgment of 3.
things; that is the natural man cares not if he can get but just so much
holiness as will bring him to Heaven, but the spiritual man will not be content
with any measure: but it is with a spiritual man, as it is with the sun; the
clearest sun shine shows the most moates: the clearest glass the least spots,
and the best water is next the Fountain: even so when the spiritual man is
strong in the Inward man: it sees the more moates and bracks in the spiritual
strength, and labors for more strength against weakness, which a natural man
cannot conceive of: as in the 1 Pet. 4. 4. They think it strange that you run
not with them into the same excess of Riot: that is, they know not the reason,
1 Pet. 4. 4.
or they cannot conceive what should keep men from loving such and such vices,
which they love, like blind men they hear the Pipe but see not the persons that
dance, so they hear the word, but they see not the rule by which the spiritual
man goes. As a Country man that comes and sees a man draw a Geometrical line,
he marvels what he means to spend his time about such an idle thing, when that
he which draws it knows it is of great use.

Fourthly in degree, that is in the generality of the growth, when you grow in
every part proportionable. A 4*
natural man may grow in some parts, but not in all parts, As for example he
may have a large capacity of knowledge in Divine truth, yet he has but weak
affections to God, or it may be his affections are strong, but his judgment is
weak: or it may be he is strong in both: that is, he knows the good, and after
his manner of loving he loves the good; but yet there is weakness in the will,
he will not yield any true unreserved obedience to God: but it is not thus in
the spiritual strength, that is in the growth of the inward man, for that leads
him unto an universal growth in all parts. Now in the natural growth we say it
is not proper Augmentation except there be a growth in all parts, as if a man
should grow in one member and not in another, as in the arm or leg, we would
not say that were a growth, but a disease, and that many humors in the body
were met together, that it were rather a sign it should be cut off from the
body then a help unto the rest of the body: even so the growth in the natural
strength in any one part of the soul, rather hurts then helps, that is, it
rather shows the disease of the soul, then the health of the soul: but the
spiritual strength grows in all parts; so much for the first difference.

The second difference is in the beginning and ending of 2. Differ.
that strength, that is it has another Alpha and Omega: for the strength of
the spiritual man is wrought by the spirit and word of God, as thus, the
principles of Religion being taught him out of Gods word, hence there is
spiritual strength secretly conveyed into the soul: for I say no man can
receive the spirit, or this spiritual strength but by the Gospel, therefore
consider what the goodness is that you have, and how you came by it, whether it
came by the Gospel or no; if it did you shall know it by these particulars.

First, Examine whether ever thou were humbled: that is 1.
examine whether by the Preaching of the Law you have had such a fight of sin,
that has broken your hearts. If thus in the first place you came by it, it is
a sign that it is the true growth, for this is the first work of the spirit
when it comes to change the heart of a Christian, and to make him a new
creature it deeply humbles him.

Secondly, Examine whether there has followed a comfortable conviction and
manifestation of Gods love in Christ, which has not only wrought joy and
comfort against the former fear, but also a burning and affectionate desire
after Christ and Holiness. Therefore if the Holiness that is in you be thus
wrought it does proceed from the spirit, for this orderly proceeding of the
spirit does make it manifest. But as for the natural strength, it has no such
beginning: it is not wholly wrought by the word: it may be he has been a
little humbled and comforted by the word, but it is not thoroughly and soundly,
but it is a overly habitual strength of nature picked out of observations and
example.

Again as the spiritual strength has a different beginning, so it has a
different end: that is the ends of them are as far, if not further different
then the beginning, for as the spiritual strength has a different beginning,
so it has a different end; that is the end of them are so far, if not further
different then the beginning: for as the Holiness that is in a gracious man
arises from a higher well head, so it leads a man to a more noble and
excellent end then the natural strength; for the end of a spiritual man's
strength is Gods glory, that he may yield better obedience unto God, that he
may keep touch with him, and keep in with him that he may have more familiarity
with him, and more confidence and boldness with him in prayer, In a word that
he may be fit for every good work. But the end of the natural man's strength is
his himself, his own profit and pleasure, and his own good: for as the rise of
any thing is higher, so the end is higher. As for example, water is lifted upon
the top of some Mountain or high place because it may go further, then if it
were upon even ground, so when a man is strong in the Inward man, he is set up
higher, he has another end, and that is to please God and not himself, and
thus much for the second difference.

The third difference is this, he that is spiritually strong, is strong in
faith, that is, the strength of the Inward man 3. Differ.
is Faith, but the strength of the outward man is but moral strength, gained by
the diligent improvements of nature. Now it is faith that gives strength, a man
is not a strong man in Christ, or in the Inward man, that has not a strong
faith, for faith it the only thing that makes a man strong, that is which makes
a difference between a spiritual man, and a natural man, for as Reason makes a
difference betwixt men and beasts, so faith make a difference between a holy
man and a wicked man. As for example, take a Philosopher, that does excel in
other things, as in humane knowledge, he goes before other men, yet in matters
of faith and believing he is as blind as a beetle, and the Reason is this; A
Christian sees and does all things by faith; but the other only but by the
light of nature, and this is the same that the Apostle speaks of Heb. 11 Of
weak they became strong, that is because they had Heb. 11.
faith, and were strong in the faith, and trusted, and believed and hoped in
God therefore they became strong; that is they did that which other men could
not do that wanted faith; Sisera might do as great things as Gideon, but here
is the difference; Gideon does them all out of Faith, the other does them but
from Nature: and so Socrates may in worldly things be as wise as, Paul that is,
as wise in understanding and in policy, by reason of excellent natural parts:
but here is the difference Paul, does all things out of faith, and Socrates
does not, therefore the Apostle says, in the 1 Timothy 4. 10. We are strong
because we 1 Timothy 4. 1^.
trust in the living God, that is we have a strong faith in God, and that makes
us stand out all the assaults of men and Devils: I say this is that which make
a difference betwixt us and the men of this world; Diogenes may trample under
his feet the things of this world as well as Moses, but Moses by faith chose
rather the things of another life then these. Heb. 11. That is faith in Christ
made him to choose grace Heb. 11.
before the things of this world; but it was not thus with the other, he chose
it not out of faith as Moses did, that is he saw not Gods Commandments; carnal
men they do many things but they do them not to this end: for then and not till
then is a spiritual man strong, when he will let life, riches, honor, and
pleasure, liberty and all go for Christ, which he cannot do without faith: The
natural man will never do this; this is the only property of faith, which is a
supernatural work in the soul, and therefore the Holy Ghost says, they
suffered with joy the spoiling of their goods, that is they let them willingly
go, life and liberty, and all shall go, before Christ shall go. A noble Roman
may do some thing for his country, and for himself, but there is a by end in
it, that is he does it not in a right manner, to a right end; but the spiritual
strong man does all things in a spiritual manner, to a saving end, the one does
it for vain glory but the other in uprightness of heart. For in faith there is
a double work.

First it empties a man, that is, as a man that has his 1.
hands full cannot take another thing, till he has let his handful fall, so
when faith enters into the heart of a man it empties the heart of self-love,
self-will, that is it purges out the rubbish that is naturally in every man's
heart, and lets all go to get hold on Christ: all shall go then, life, and
honor, profit, and pleasure, and he is the truly spiritual man, that can thus
lose the world to cleave to Christ, and miserable are they that cannot, and by
emptying himself of himself, he is filled with the power of Christ.

Secondly, As it empties the heart of that which may keep Christ out of the
soul, so in the second place he seeks all things in God and from God, that is
he first seeks Gods Love and Gods blessing upon what he does enjoy, and then
he goes unto secondary means, and uses them as helps; but a man that wants
faith he will not let all go for Christ, he will not seek first unto God in any
thing, but unto secondary means, and then if he fails, that is if he want power
to supply, then it may be he will seek unto God, and hence it is that he will
not lose his life, or liberty, or honor for Christ, because he sees more power
and good in the creature then in God.

Again this makes the difference between the Christian and Christian, namely
Faith, and hence it is that some are weak, and others are strong, hence it is
that some are more able then others, for the greatest duties of Religion, as
for example Caleb and Joshua can do more then the rest of the people, and what
is the reason but because they were stronger in the faith then others? And so
Paul said of himself that he could do more then they all, because Paul had a
stronger faith: for the truth of a man's strength is known by his strength of
faith that he has, it discovers whether he be naturally strong or spiritually
strong; for this is the first work of the spirit after Humiliation in the
conversion of a sinner, namely to work faith in him, and no sooner faith but
as soon strength, and the promise follows faith. He that believes, and is
baptixed shall be saved; but he that believes not shall be damned, Mar. 15.
15. And this Mark 15. 15.
is the course that we take, first we preach the Law unto you, and we do it to
this end to humble you, and to break the hard disposition of your hearts, that
so they may be fit to receive Christ, And when we have thereby humbled you,
then we Preach unto you the Gospel, beseeching and exhorting you to believe in
Christ, for the pardon of sins, past, present, and to come, and to lay down the
arms of Rebellion, which you have taken up against Christ, and you shall be
saved, And yet notwithstanding how few are either humbled by the one or
persuaded and provoked by the other, but are (as the Prophet says) having eyes
and see not, ears, but they hear not, that is, seeing they do not see, and
hearing they do not hear, as for example, when a man is showed a thing but yet
he minds it not, that is the eye of the mind is upon another object, that man
may be said to see and not to see, because he does not regard it, or a man that
has a matter pleaded before him, hears it, but his mind being otherwise
employed he regards it not: in that respect he may be said to hear, and not to
hear, because he minds it not, And what is the Reason that we Preach the Law,
and the judgments of God so much unto you, and what is the Reason that we
beseech and entreat you so often to come in and receive Christ, and you shall
be saved, time after time, and day by day, and yet we see how little efficacy
the word has? what is the reason that the word wants this effect in you, as
not to humble you? what is the reason, that you are not more affrighted with
the judgments of God then you are? what is the reason that you remain as
ignorant and careless as ever you were, but because you do not believe, that
is, you want a true saving and applying faith; for if you had, the word would
work other effects in you then it does, as for example: if one should tell a
man, that such a benefit or Legacy is befa^n him, that would raise him to
great honor, though before he lived but in a mean condition; if this man did
but believe it, surely he would be affected with it and rejoice: So truly if
you did but believe that Christ's Grace and Salvation were so excellent, and
that Holiness, and the strengthening of the Inward man, would bring you to so
happy a condition and estate, as to be the heirs of Heaven, you would rejoice
in Christ and grace only. Again if you did but believe that the word of God is
true, and that God is a just God, I say if the drunkard did but believe that
the drunkard shall be damned: or if the Adulterer did believe that no Adulterer
should inherit the Kingdom of God and of Christ, or if the profane person and
the Gamester did but know that they must give an account for all their misspent
time and idle words, and vain communication, they would not sport themselves in
their sins, as they do;

Again if we did but believe that God calls whom and when he pleases, and
that many are called but few are chosen, that is, if a man consider, that
though here be a Church full of people, yet it may be but a few of them shall
be saved: I say if a man did but believe this, surely they would not defer
their repentance, That is, They would not put off the motions of the spirit,
but they would strike while the Iron is hot, and grind while the wind blows.
But men will not believe and therefore it is that they go on in sin as they do.

It is not so for earthly things, men are easily to be brought to believe any
promise of them, As for example: If a man shall come and tell a man of a
commodity, which if he would buy, and lay by him, it would in a short time
yield an hundred for one, oh how ready would men be to buy such a commodity
with the wise Merchant, Matthew. 8. 44. they would sell all that ever they had,
to buy this; oh Matthew. 8. 44.
that men would be thus wise for their souls.

Beloved I tell you this day of a commodity, the best, the richest, the
profitablest commodity that ever was bought, even Christ, grace and salvation
for which if you will but lay out your stock to buy them you shall have them,
that is if you have but a desire to rest your wearied souls on Christ and to
lay him up in your hearts, I tell you it will yield you an hundred for one:
Christ who is the commodity himself says, Mark 10. He that for saketh Father,
Mark 10.
and Mother, wife and children and life for my sake shall receive an hundred
fold in this life, and everlasting life in the world to come: but men will not
believe that, but time will come when you shall see it to be true, and befool
your selves that you lost so precious a bargain as Christ and salvation is, for
the disbursing of a little profit and pleasure, but as I said before the
difference lies here, men want faith, and hence it is that they neglect the
strengthening of the inward man, And are so over-burthened with losses, and
crosses because they want faith. And so much for the third difference.

The fourth difference is this, natural strength leads a (...) Differ.
man unto a form of godliness, but the spiritual strength leads a man unto the
power of godliness. I call that the form of godliness, when a man does perform
or do any thing with carnal affections not to a right end, and it is known by
this, when men fall away from that stedfastness, or form, or show of holiness
which they seemed to have; this form of godliness is the same with that Heb 6.
which have tasted of the word of life, and yet notwithstanding Heb. 6.
fall away, that is, they seemed to have tasted of saving grace, and to have
the power with the form, but it was not so because they continued not, that is,
they lost the form which made them seem to be that, which now it appears they
were not.

Again I call that the power of godliness which is performed by the Divine
power, force and efficacy of the spirit: in the Romans 2. it is said that The
Gentiles that were not under the Law did by nature the things contained in the
Law: Romans 2.
That is, they did not by the power and efficacy of the spirit, but by Nature.
This Paul speaks of in the 2 Timothy 2. 2 Timothy 2. 3.
3. In the later time men shall come in form of godliness, that is with a form
or show without substance or power of the spirit, But the inward strength which
is in the Inward man does not only teach you to do, but also it teaches you
how to do them; from an inward principle of sanctiing grace.

But know also men that have but a common strength, have some bubbles and
motions to good, and they seem to have this strength, because they have the law
of nature written in their hearts, and they may promise much, and yet not be
spiritually strong, having only a form, because he cannot do spiritual actions
in a spiritual manner, for he goes about them with a natural strength, which
should be performed with a spiritual strength in 1 Pet. 1. 3. Who are kept by
the power of God through faith unto salvation. That is, when aman is truly
regenerated, when he has 1 Pet. 1. 3.
not power of his own to do the will of God, then he has the spirit to help
him, that is, they are not only kept by his power, but also they are enabled to
all the acts of grace betwixt this and salvation.

The fifth difference between the natural and the spiritual 5. Differ.
strength is this. That which proceeds from the spirit is always joined with
Reluctance of the will, but in the natural strength there is no Reluctance,
because there is no contraries, but in the spiritual man, there are two
contraries, the flesh and the spirit; in every new man there are two men, and
you know these can never agree, but are still opposing one another. As for
example, a man that is going up a hill he is in labor and pain, but he that is
going down a hill goes with much ease; so there is much labor and pains which
a spiritual man takes to subdue the flesh, but the natural man has no
reluctance at all, that is he has no fighting and struggling with corruption,
but he goes without pain, because he is but one, he is one man, and one cannot
be divided against it self, but in every spiritual man, there are two men, the
old man, and the new man, the flesh, and the spirit. And hence grows that
spiritual combat, Gal. 5. 13. The flesh lusts against Galat. 5 13.
the spirit, and the spirit against the flesh that they cannot do the things
that they would. These two men in a regenerate man strive for masteries. And
you must know also, That in a natural man there may be a kind of reluctance in
the will against some particular sin, as covetousness strives against pride,
and pride against niggardness; yet not fighting against it as it is a sin but
as it crosses and twarteth his covetousness and pride.

Again know that a natural man may have reluctance in some part of the soul, as
in the conscience, the conscience being sensible of sin, hence it may convince
the man, and yet the rest of the faculties be at peace, but where this
spiritual strength is, it is in all parts, not one faculty against another,
but all are fighting against sin in the whole man. Now the reason that there is
not this reluctance in every faculty in a natural man is, because he wants
saving grace to oppose the workings of sin. That is, grace is not in the
faculty opposite unto the corruption that is in it, but in the holy man there
is. And therefore he is like Rebekah, there are twins in him, Jacob and Esau,
the flesh and the spirit, hence it is that Paul complains so in Romans 7. I
find another Law in my members Romans 7.
rebelling against the Law of my mind: A Law, That is I find something in me
that is contrary unto me, and in my members, That is in my body and soul:
notwithstanding I see the evil of sin as most contrary to grace, yet I cannot
avoid it, I cannot do the things that I would. But the natural man does not
hate the evil of sin, otherwise then as it brings punishment.

Secondly, I do delight in the Law of God in the inward man, That is, howsoever
I am captivated and violently carried unto the committing of sin, yet it is
against the desire of my soul: he has no pleasure, he can take no delight in
it, for his delight is in the Inward man. But the natural man looks upon the
Laws of God as burdens, and therefore he will not submit himself unto them,
because he is not strong in the Inward man, he promises, but he performs not,
he yields, and yields not: That is, to some thing but no to every thing, and
thus much for this last difference, betwixt natural strength, and the spiritual
strength.

Secondly, is it so that the strength of the inward man is to be desired above
all things, then in the second place 2. Use.
it may serve for exhortation to all men, that they would labor to grow strong
in the Inward man, And that they would now at the last gather the fragments of
their thoughts and desires, which have been formerly set to get other things,
and wholly to employ them for the getting of this strength. And so much the
rather, because other things are as the husk without the kernel, or as the
scabberd without the sword, which will do a man no good, when he stands in need
of them. As for example, to be strong in riches, honor, credit (and this is
all the strength that most men desire) what good will these do, when you come
to wrestle with sin and death? yet men are violent after these, but to be
strong in the Inward man who seeks or inquires after it? I know every man
desires to be strong in all earthly strength, but I beseech you above all
things labor to be strong in the Inward man, It is the folly, weakness, and
sickness of men, they look all without doors, and upon outward things, That is
to the strength of the outward man, but they seldom or never look within at
all, that is to strengthen the Inward man: Oh that I could persuade you as I
said before, to gather up your thoughts and desires together, and set the soul
in assurance of grace, that you may mortify these inordinate affections, which
keep back the strengthening of the Inward man, as covetousness, pride,
pleasure, self-love, vain glory and the like: Then it would be an easy work,
and no burden unto you to strengthen the Inward man: but here men stick, the
way is too narrow, it is a hard matter to persuade men to it, That is, To make
them believe there is such excellency in the one and not in the other, that
grace is the better part, Therefore that I may the better prevail with you to
attend to the strengthening of the Inward man. I will lay down some motives to
incite you to it.

The first motive to move you to strengthen the inward man is this, Because
your comfort lies most in the Inward man. There is all your comfort, and
therefore to strengthen that is to add unto your comfort: As for example the
sun brings comfort with it, because that brings light, so the more of the
Inward man you have, the more light and joy. Now the reason wherefore the
strengthening of the Inward man brings the more comfort, is because it is the
greater faculty, and the greater the faculty is the greater is the joy or
sorrow. As for example, take a man that is troubled in mind, none so humble,
none so Penitent, none so sorrowful as he, and therefore it is said that a
sound heart will bear his infirmities, but a wounded spirit who can bear? That
is a man may be able to speak of any grief, but the grief of a troubled mind
who can express? On the contrary take a man that is at peace with God, who so
joyful and comfortable as he? Now the outward man is the lesser faculty, and
therefore it is capable of the less comfort; That is, It does not in any
measure know what true comfort and joy there is in the Inward man.

Again what joy the outward man has in these outward things it is but
according to the opinion of the inward man, That is; the comforts is no more
then they are esteemd of the Inward man; If the inward man do not esteem them
as worthy the rejoicing in, they will not bring comfort. Again all the pains
and labor, and all things else you do bestow upon the outward man is but lost
labor, that will do no good, brings no sound peace to the spirit, and who will
bestow labor on a vain thing? but if you strengthen the Inward man, the labor
that you take about that will bring you great advantage, it will arm you
against all losses and Crosses, and reproach and poverty that you shall meet
withal in the world whiles you are in the way to Heaven.

Again consider that though you be strong in the outward man, yet you are
moveable, subject to shaking and fleeting, but it is otherwise with the Inward
man, it makes a Christian steadfast and immovable, That is it will so establish
the heart in grace that he will stand firm unto Christ in all estates; It is
with the outward man as it is with the seas: Though he strength of the stream
run one way, yet the wind blows contrary, it moves, and stirrs, and strives,
and disquiets it: when losses and crosses come, they break the frame and
strength of the outward man, but the Inward man is like the firm ground, let
the wind blow never so violent, yet it moves not, it stands fast.

Again in the abundance of outward things there is no true contentment, neither
in the want of them; But where the strength of the Inward man is, there is no
cause of dejectedness, this difference we shall see in Adam and Paul: Adam
though he was Lord of all things, and had the rule of all the creatures; Yet
when he was weak in the inward man, what joy had he? nay what fear had he when
he hid himself in the garden? Again look upon Paul, who in the want of these
outward things is not dejected at all, as in Acts 16. It is said that when Paul
and Acts 16.
Silas were in prison in the stocks, the prisoners sung for joy; Now what was
the reason of it, but this, because they were strong in the Inward man, and
therefore you see that all true peace is that which comes from within, and
when you rejoice in that, your rejoicing is good, that is you stand upon a good
bottom. Alas you think to have contentment in your riches but you will be
befooled, they will deceive you. If you build upon them, you will build without
a foundation and go upon another man's legs. Now were it not far better for you
to get legs of your own, and to build upon a sure foundation; And this you
shall do if you strengthen the inward man.

Again consider, if you do not strengthen the Inward man, wicked thoughts will
get strength in your hearts, and evil actions in your hand swear it not better
to be strong in the Inward man, and to have Holiness and grace in the heart;
let this therefore move you to strengthen the Inward man. Thus much for the
first motive.

The second motive to move you to strengthen the inward 2. Motive.
man is this, if you labor to strengthen the Inward man, you shall thereby
please God, that is if a man had never so much strength, yet if it be not the
strength of the Inward man he cannot please God. That is he cannot perform any
holy duty in such a holy manner as God will approve of. And therefore the
Prophet says that God does not delight in any man's legs, that is, he cares
not for any man's strength, be it never so great or excellent, except it be the
strength of the Inward man, and on the contrary he regards the holy man with
his strength, though outwardly weak, as in Isai. 57. I will dwell with Isai. 57.
him that is of an humble and a contrite heart. That is, he that is of a
contrite spirit, he is spiritually strong, therefore I will dwell with him.

What is the reason that men seek so much the favor of Princes and great men
but because they may be exalted unto honor? Wherefore then should we not much
more labor to have favor, and to be in familiarity with God who is the Kings
of Kings and Lord of Lords, who has power to exalt one and to pull down
another. Now if we would but bring our hearts to believe this, that
instrengthning the inward man we should get and grow in favor with God, then
men would be stirred up to set upon this work.

But withal you must know that by the strength of this Inward man you do not
please God by the way of merit: for so Christ only, and none but Christ
pleased God. But when you strengthen the Inward man you please God by way of
object: you choose grace and favor and holiness above all things; Merit was the
Argument that Christ uses unto his Father to glorify him, John 17. Father I
John 17.
have glorified thee on earth, I have finished the work, therefore glorify me:
That is I have merited this at thy hand that thou should glorify me because
I have perfectly pleased thee in doing thy will. Again it is the Argument that
Christ uses to his Disciples in John 14. Herein is my Father glorified, in
that you bring forth much fruit: That John 14.
is when you grow strong in the Inward man, and can bring forth fruit according
to his will, you please God, and therefore it is that the Scripture sets forth
the members of Christ by the Olive tree, and to sweet oil, the one full of
fatness, the other full of sweetness, so the Inward man makes a man fat, that
is rich in grace, and like oil, as the nature of it is to cheer, and beautify
the countenance: so does grace, it sweetneth the soul, and makes it beautiful
unto God, therefore let this move you to strengthen the Inward man, that
thereby you may please God.

The third Motive to persuade you to strengthen the Inward man is this, because
this inward strength draws on the outward strength more prosperous: Now who
would 3. Motive.
not thrive in the things of the world? but if you turn it, the contrary will
not hold so: for the outward strength will not draw on the inward strength,
therefore our Savior says, Seek ye first the Kingdom of Heaven, and the
Righteousness thereof and all other things shall be added unto you, That is the
way for you to thrive in the outward man is to get strength in the Inward man
first, seek you first Christ, and grace, and Holiness, and then the effect will
follow: all things. That is, whatsoever you shall stand in need of shall be
given you. And in the 48 of Isaiah 18. as the Lord says, Oh that my people had
but a Isai. 48. 18.
heart to consider; That is, oh that my people would but be wi^e, first to
strengthen the Inward man and then, as it follows, your Prosperity should be
as the floods, That is then your outward strength should abound like floods.
Again in Prove. 22. the wise man says that the reward of Holiness Prove. 22.
is riches, and honor, and life, That is be that is strong in the Inward man
shall have whatsoever may be necessary o^ good for the outward man, and
therefore we should strive to grow strong in the Inward man, That is to be full
of grace and spiritual wisdom, especially against evil days, that when they
come we may have strength to bear them.

Now the inward man will bear a mountain of affections, and reproaches, which
will press and squeise the outward man to powder. A sound heart will bear his
infirmities, but a wounded conscience who can bear? That is if the inward man
be weak, who can bear the burden of afflictions, and the like; but if the
Inward man be strong then the will will bear a part, and the affections will
bear a part with the Conscience, and so the burden will be the lighter; but if
you be not strong in the Inward man, it is impossible that you should bear
them, therefore let us not busy our selves about Fantasies and vain things
that will stand us in no stead, but let us labor to strengthen the inward man.

The fourth Motive to persuade you to strengthen the inward 4. Motive.
man is, because a man is that which he is in the Inward man. A man without the
Inward man is but a scabberd without the sword, that is worth nothing, and
therefore the wise man says, that The righteous man is more excellent then his
neighbor, That is the excellency wherein he does exceed him is the Inward
man, and therefore Christ in the Canticles when he would set forth the
excellency of his spouse, he says that She was fairer then the daughters of
men, That is she is fairer because she is more excellent to the inward man,
she is All glorious within: Psa. 45. Psalm. 45.
That is the holy man does as far exceed the natural man in beauties, as pearls
do exceed pebble stones, as gold excels brass, or silver copper: I know that
every one does desire to be in some excellency, I say it is a property in
nature to seek for some excellency. Then is it not the best wisdom to seek it
in the best things, that is in the inward man? Now as there is means to be rich
in the outward man, so there is means to be rich in the inward man. Therefore I
beseech you use the means that you may be rich in grace and Holiness. In the
Prove. 30. 4. The wise Prove 30. 4.
man sets forth the excellency of that man that is strong in the Inward man.
There are four things says he that are excellent: a Lion a he goat, a gray
Hound and a King, before whom there is no standing; first he is a Lion, That is
Prove. 30. 4.
he is strong in grace; secondly be is a gray hound, That is he is swift in the
performance of all holy duties: Thirdly a he goat, serviceable to God and
profitable to the Church; fourthly a King to rule, and overruled his Iusts.
Every spiritual man is a King because he bears rule in the inward man; but it
is not so with a wicked man, his lusts rule him that he is a slave, and not a
King, and therefore the Apostle says: let not sin reign in your bodies to obey
it in the lusts thereof: That is; if it once reign, it will rule, and if it
rule, you must obey whatsoever drudgery or slavery is enjoined you. Therefore
labor to get strength in the Inward Man, And know also that you shall not only
be free from the slavery of sin but you shall also keep your excellency. And
therefore it may be said of every one that is weak in the inward man as Jacob
said of Reuben in the 42. of Genesis, Thou art become as weak as water: That
is, thou wast that Genesis 42.
which thou art not now, thou wast excellent, but now thou have lost it.

So I say unto you, if you lose the strength of the inward man you will lose
your excellency. Now no man would willingly lose his excellency; if you would
not lose, you must keep strength in the inward man: In the 1. Psalm. the
Psalmist sets forth the excellency of that man that is strong in the Inward
man. He shall be like a tree that is Psalm 1.
planted by the rivers of water. First he sets forth the property of the
spiritual man, he shall be green, secondly he shall be as a tree planted, that
is that shall not easily be plucked up. Thirdly his perpetuity: his branches
shall shall never wither, That is he shall never grow unseemly. Fourthly his
fruitfulness; he shall bring forth fruit in season that is he shall be fruitful
in grace. But on the contrary, when a man grows weak in the inward man it will
be far otherwise with him, he will be like a tree that has lost both sap and
root, leaf and fruit, set in an barren soil with withered branches and
fruitless, fit for nothing but the fire: but if a man can keep the strength in
the Inward man, neither reproach, disdain nor shame or the Devil shall be able
to make a man miserable, Therefore keep the vigor of the inward man safe,
whatsoever becomes of the outward man. And there is good reason why you should
keep the inward man safe, because it keeps the soul and directs it to that
right end. In the 1. Eccles. The Eccles. 1.
wise man says all things are vanity and vexation of spirit, That is when a
man loses his happiness in the Inward man, Though he keep the outward man
secure, yet it is but vanity and vexation of spirit. That is he goes besides
the rule he should go by: For there is a rule unto every creature that he is to
go by, And the nearer the creature comes unto the rule, the more excellent is
the creature, but if it go besides the rule it loses its excellency. As for
example the fire and water they are excellent creatures if they keep to their
rule, But if they exceed their rule, they become hurtful; so the rule of the
soul is the law put into the Inward man, And the closer you keep to this, the
more excellent you are. Therefore that you may keep your excellency, which you
cannot do except you strengthen the Inward man, let this move you to a diligent
attendance to it.

In the third place this may serve for direction, for you 3. Use.
may say unto me, you have showed us what this inward man is, And the
differences betwixt the inward strength and the outward strength, And you have
also laid down Motives to move us to strengthen the inward man: But alas how
shall we strengthen the Inward man.

To help you in this work I will lay down some means, by the use of which you
may be strengthened. But before I come unto the particulars it will not be
amiss to stand upon the general, That is to persuade you a little, to desire
to be strong: for if you could but bring your hearts unto this, but desire to
be strengthened, it will be a great means to move us to prevail against
whatsoever may seem to hinder us from it. I say if you did but desire it, that
is if you did but know the excellency of the Inward man, it would work a holy
desire in you, and a true desire will let no means escape that will further a
man. This is the same means that Christ uses to his Disciples when he would
have them in love with faith, If you have faith says he, but as much as a grain
of Mustard seed, you shall be able to remove mountains. That is if you did but
know the excellency of this grace of says you would desire it, and if you did
but desire it you would never rest till you had got it; so if you did but prize
grace and the worth of the Inward man at a high rate, you should be sure to
gain it. Therefore you know the promise in the 5. of Matthew, Blessed are they
that hunger and thirst after vighteousness Matt. 5.
for they shall be satisfied. Therefore if you would but bring your hearts unto
this frame as to hunger after the strength of the Inward man, you shall have
it, or if you can but bring your hearts to this temper as to desire and seek
after the strength of the Inward man, you shall find it; as in Prove. 2. 7. If
thou searchest for her as for silver, and diggest for her as for hidden
treasure then thou shall find her. Prove 2. 7.
That is, if thou did but esteem the Inward man as men do silver, and prize
it, as a rich treasure at a high rate, Then the effect would follow you, shall
find it. So then if you will desire salvation, and happiness, and the strength
of the Inward man, you shall have it, for you will never thrive in grace until
you have a desire to thrive: grace will not grow till there be a desire wrought
in the soul, for when men do not delight in the inward man, they never grow in
grace and holiness. That is they are not as trees planted, that bring forth
seasonable fruit, but are barren; do what you will to it, the soul is naught,
for the spirit has not yet tilled the heart, and sown in it the first
beginning of the seed of grace which is an earnest desire after it. Now as it
is good in the bodily ^^ckness to know the means of recovery, so in the
sickness and weakness of the Inward man it is good to know the means by which
it may be strengthened: Therefore we will come to the particular means for the
strengthening of the Inward man. 1. Means.


The first means to strengthen the Inward man, is to abound in spiritual
knowledge, because the more knowledge the more strength; for the spirit of
Divine truth is the strength of the soul* for as the soul is unto the body, so
is the word unto the Inward man: the body is dead without the soul, not able to
do any thing, so the Inward man without the spiritual strength, which is
wrought in the soul by the saving knowledge of the word is nothing 1 Pet. 2. 2.
but weakness. Therefore the Apostle says 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes
desire the sincere milk of the word that ye may grow by it, That is knowledge
in the word will make you grow strong in Christ; The contrary to this we see
the 1 Cor. 3. 1 Heb 5. 13.
Apostle upbraids the Corinthians with: 1 Cor. 3. 1. And in the Heb. 5. 13.
because they were weak in knowledge he calls them babes; for says he, He that
is not expert in the Word of Righteousness, he is a Babe. Therefore labor to
abound in spiritual knowledge that you may be strong in the Inward man: I
press this the more, because I fear many of you are weak, because you are
ignorant, That is you want this spiritual knowledge; you know in our ordinary
talk we count ignorance folly, That is, when a man does any thing that he
should not do, or would not do, if he did but understand himself; we say that
man is weak in judgment, or it is folly: surely this weakness in the Inward
man is folly indeed, and a man cannot show his weakness more then to be weak in
spiritual knowledge. And yet you must know that a man may have much knowledge,
that is worldly knowledge, and the notional or speculative knowledge of Divine
truths, and yet be but weak in the inward man, for there is an artificial
knowledge which fills the brain, but the spirit goes no further and descends no
lower, That is, it does not sanctify that knowledge in the heart, and the
inward man.

Again there is a knowledge of the spirit or experimental, which is an
operative knowledge and goes along with this other knowledge, and bends it to
Sanctification, and is practical: but yet you must know, I say before you can
be strong, there must be some proportion between the spiritual knowledge and
the spiritual strength, as for example, one man eats and is fat and lusty,
another man eats and is still lean: so some have as much as others have, and
yet are not so strong as others. And yet we say not but as the lean man is
strengthened by the meat he eats: so he that has weaker knowledge is
strengthened by it: but where the Lord works by his spirit the greatest
knowledge, accordingly strength is increased. Therefore I beseech you labor
for a full measure of saving knowledge, that is, for a working, purging,
operative and powerful knowledge, And this I do not only speak unto you that
are weak, but also unto you that are strong, that you be careful to add unto
your knowledge, for what is the reason that you do not grow in grace, but
because you are not careful to add more knowledge unto that which you have?

It may be you pick some good thing from some Sermons, or from some good book,
but presently you forget them, you do not make it your own by Meditation, it
slips out of your memory again, and so does you no good: but if you would be
careful to add unto it, you would grow stronger in the inward man then you do.
And here is the misery of us that are spiritual Builders* other Builders when
they have built a house, the owner looks to it himself, and keeps it in
reparations: but when we have done what we can to build up in the inward man,
and think that you will put to your hands your selves; when we are to further
the work of grace, you begin to pull down your buildings again your selves by
your ignorant and loose lives, That is by following your pleasure, your
sporting and gaming, and profaning the Lords day. Therefore you must labor to
grow in knowledge if you will grow strong in the inward man.

The second means to be used, if you would grow strong in the inward man is
this: you must be diligent in the use of all means, as the wise man says, The
hand of the diligent makes rich: so where there is much diligence in the use
of the means of grace, there is much strength in the inward man: no men get
spiritual strength, but they that are diligent, And therefore this is the
reason that men are not strong in the spiritual strength, because like the
sluggard you are not diligent in the use of the means. That is, you take no
pains for grace, and therefore it is that you get no increase. for according to
the proportion of your pains, so is the inward man strengthened, And as you use
them more diligently, so you find the strength of them more operative and
powerful: for it is in the soul as it is with the body: If you be not diligent
and careful to feed the body, it will wither and consume away, and grow weak,
so if you feed not the soul diligently, and use the means constantly, you will
breed weakness in the soul, and the more remiss and secure you are in the
performance of holy duties, the weaker you are.

It may be you think it will not weaken you to omit private prayer: but omit it
once, and it will make you careless, and the more you neglect it, the more
unfit and undisposed will you find your selves when you would, and your
strength will abate. Or you think you may profane one Sabbath, or you may take
your pleasure immoderatly sometimes: but beloved it will make you secure, That
is the more a man does in this kind the more he may do, For this is true in
every act; every act inclines a habit, and a habit brings custom: so it is as
true in good things, the beginning of good things brings many particular good
things, And therefore if you can but get your hearts in a frame of grace, you
shall find a supply of grace: because Christ says, unto whom soever has unto
him shall be given; That is, he that has grace, and is careful in the use of
the means, by Gods appointment he shall thrive in holiness, for if you once get
but the beginnings of saving grace, and be industrious, and careful to employ
them, then you will in time grow strong: you know what Christ said unto the
servant that had used his Talent well: he had more given him.

So if you be diligent in the use of the means, the inward man will grow
strong: but for the using of the means observe these Rules.

The first Rule that I would have you observe, if you would have the means
effectual, is this: you must use all 1. Rule.
the means. If you use but part of the means you will not grow strong: for as
it is with the body so it is with the inward man; for the health and growth of
the body a man will use all means, labor and recreation. In health, for the
whetting of the faculty; Physic in sickness. In a word he will use every
thing that he may strengthen the body. Thus you must do for the strengthening
of the inward man, you must use all means, As hearing of the word, receiving
the Sacrament, prayer, Meditation, conference, Communion of Saints, particular
resolutions to good, or else the inward man will not grow strong; These are the
food that the inward man feeds on: It is with the inward man as it is with a
plant: If you would have a plant to grow, then you must set it in a good soil,
you must dig about it and dung it and water it; but if you be careless where
you set it, it will not prosper and thrive: even so if you do not add fatness
of soil to the beginning of grace, That is if you do not use all the means, As
the Communion of Saints, and prayer, and hearing of the word; the inward man
will not grow strong, but wither and die that is you will be dwar^es in grace
and holiness.

The second Ruls, if you would have the means effectual, is this, you must look
that you perform holy duties strongly: 2. Rule.
for then the means do strengthen the inward man when they are don with strong
affections, That is when a man uses them not remiss^ly and coldly: for remiss
actions weaken the habit: As for example take, water that is exceeding hot, and
put cold water to it, and you will weaken it; so perform Holy duties and use
the means of grace remissely; and they will weaken the habit to good, that is
it will work an indisposition in the soul. Therefore do them strongly, with
much zeal and fervency of affections that the inward man may grow strong by the
performance of them.

The third Rule if you would have means effectual, 3. Rule.
Then you must be constant in the use of the means; for what is the reason
there is so little thriving in grace, that men remain cripples in grace, but
because they use the means of grace but by fits and halfes; That is they are
not constant in a good course of life, they are still off and on: they shoot
sometimes short, and at other times they hit the mark, That is they come seldom
unto the means: Now and then they pray, and now and then they use the Communion
of Saints; Now this inconstancy disableth the faculty, and weakens it, And
therefore it is impossible you should thrive in grace except you be constant.
The Apostle James calls them unstable men; That is let these never think to
receive strength in the inner man till they come to more constancy in good.
Therefore labor to be constant in Prayer, in hearing, in Meditation, in the
Sacrament, and in conference, which if you be not: you will not grow strong in
the Inward man.

The fourth Rule, if you would have the means effectual 4. Rule.
is this, you must take heed of depending on the means without an eye to God in
them; For know that the means without God is but as a pen without ink, a pipe
without water, or a scabberd without a sword, That is they will not strengthen
the inward man without God: for it is the spirit that puts life in the means:
And yet you must not cut off the pipe from the well head, that is you must not
depend upon God without the use of the means; but you must use both: First seek
unto God, and depend upon him for the strengthening of the inward man, and
withal use the means constantly, because, as water is carried from the well
head through the pipe; And so from the pipe to many places: so the means are as
pipes to conveigh graces unto the soul, therefore use them, and ^ut them not
off by carelessness: if you do you will cut off the strength of the inward man.

The third means if you would strengthen the inward man is. You must get
rectified judgments? That is, 3. Means.
you must see that your judgments be right, for men do deceive themselves in
their judgments; they think that they have strong judgments, and that they
are able to judge of things, when indeed, they are mavelous weak; And that
you may not deceive your selves I will lay you down some signs of a rectified
judgment.

The first sign of a rectified judgment is this, you shall know it by your
constancy. That is, so much constancy in 1. Sign.
good, and so much is your judgment rectified: And on the contrary so much
inconstancy, and so much weakness. As for example, when a man has propounded a
rule to himself and is not constant in it, it argues that he is weak in his
judgment, because he keeps not close to the Rule; That is, there are stronger
or more arguments to the contrary, which makes him to fall away, and not sit
down by the Rule; That is he is posed, because he is but weak in judgment: As
for example suppose a man should come and proffer a man an 100. pounds not to
leave such a practice, And another man should come, and offer him two hundred
pounds to leave it. If the man be weak in judgment he will be drawn by the
greater reward though it be to his hurt. Therefore if you would not be beaten
off, and made to sit down by stronger Arguments, then you have in your selves,
then you must get your judgments rectified, which you shall know by your
constancy in Holy duties, or whether a little profit or pleasure will draw you
away: if you do, whatsoever you think of your selves: your judgments are weak.

The second sign whereby you shall know whether your judgments be rectified,
is this, examine whether your 2. Sign.
Passions be strong. Strong sinful passions argue a weak judgment; when the
passions of a man are strong, it weakeneth the understanding, and therefore
Paul in the Acts 14. when they would have made him a God he cries out. We are
men subject to like Passions as you are, That is full of weakness. As if he
should say; your vehement passions in this thing proves your weakness of
judgment. Therefore labor to have strong affections to good: for the strength
of affections come from the inward man: Again the strength of the affections
show the abiding of the spirit in the soul. As in the 1 Samuel 11. 6. it is said
that 1 Samuel 11. 6.
The spirit of the Lord came upon Saul and he was angry. That is his affections
were strong for Gods glory. And in the Acts 4. 32. After they were filled with
the Holy Ghost they spoke Act. 4. 32.
boldly; That is they had strong affections for Gods glory; And therefore the
spirit is compared to fire and oil: for fire that burns and consumes, and oil
that mollifies and softeneth: so does the spirit, therefore examine whether you
burn in the inward man, That is see whether you have strong affections to good,
if not your judgments are weak, And again see what cheerfulness you have,
examine whether your hearts are soft, tender and pliable, then it is a sign the
spirit is there; It is true a strong man may have passion, but it is but now
and then, that is, it continues not, it is not always, yet so much passion as
he has, it is so much weakness in him, therefore labor to overcome your
passions. 3. Sign.


The third sign whereby you shall know whether your judgments are rectified or
no is this, Examine what contentment you have to bear losses and crosses, I
gather this out of the Phil 4. I can (says the Apostle) want and Phil. 4.
abound, I can do all things through Christ that strengthens me; examine then
whether when you are abused and reproached for Christ whether you can bear it
patiently; that is, can you be content to suffer reproach and disgrace for
Christ? if you can; then it is a sign that you are strong in judgment: if not
you are weak whatsoever you think of your selves. In the Prove. 17. says
Solomon: A Prove. 17.
wise man is known by his dignity: so I may say a man that is strong in the
inward man is known by his bearing of reproach, without seeking for revenge
again; this man is spiritually strong in judgment. Therefore try your
judgments by your contentedness, and ability to bear the reproaches of Christ.

The fourth sign whereby you shall know whether you have rectified judgments
is this, examine whether you 4. Sign.
find your selves easy to be deceived: if so it is a sign that you are weak in
judgment. And therefore this is the Argument that Paul uses to women, that
they should not usurp authority over the man, 1 Timothy 2 12. I permit not a woman
to bear rule, because she was first deceived, That is she is easilier deceived
then the man in the judgment between 1 Timothy 2. 12.
good and evil. As for example, a man that is weak in judgment is like a
child, and you know children will be won with Counters and feared with
bugbears so if you love the world and the things of the world, and are won by
them, and feared with the loss of them: you are weak in judgment, That is you
are weak in the inward man. Again in things that are good in themselves: if you
use them immoderately, and then seek to excuse them by putting a false gloss
upon them you are weak in judgment. As for example; In studying the Law, the
thing in it self is good; but if you by studying it seek to excuse your selves
from strengthening the inward man, that you have no time nor leisure; you are
weak in judgment because you are easy to be deceived. Therefore as you are
affected with these things, and as they prevail with you, so you may judge of
your selves.

The fifth sign whereby you shall know whether your judgments are rectified is
this: examine whether you are 5. Sign.
in the times of trial, as you are in these times; so you are either strong or
weak, and so God esteems of you; for God esteems a man strong, as he is in the
times of trial; Thus he approved of Abraham, for Abraham in the time of trial
was strong, and Paul in the time of trial was strong, and therefore God set a
price upon them: that is he prized them at a high rate. Abraham is his friend,
and Paul is his chosen vessel; and not only when the temptation is past, but
when the temptation is present. Then see your strength whether you have
strength to Master particular corruptions: if in this time you start aside, you
have flawes and much weakness in you: That is you are like a broken bow, that
will serve for show as well as the best, but when a man comes to draw it, then
it breaks; so some men seem to be strong in Christ till they are tried; but
when they are drawn up, then they break; That is, they have no strength to
withstand sin: And therefore it is that God many times sends temptations and
afflictions to try men; That is to see what is in them; whether they be such as
they seem or not: not that he knows not before; but because by his trial
others may know what they are, And here God makes a difference in trials, some
are tried by small, others by great trials, partly because Hypocrites may be
known, and partly because he may stir up the godly to get more strength, As
also warn them not to depend on their own strength: therefore in the Isai 40
last: Isai. 40.
of strong they became weak. That is he that thought himself to be strong in
his own apprehension is weak, and thus much for the third means.

The fourth means, if you would grow strong in the inward 4. Means.
man is this: you must remove the excuses and those impediments which hinder
the growth of the inward man.

The first hinderance is this, when you spend your 1. Hind.
strength upon other things and not in the strengthening of the inward man:
therefore you must be wise to take away those things that you spend most of
your time about, and set them for the strengthening of the inward man; This is
the reason you grow not: all your time and affections are so after the things
of the world, and how you may grow strong in that; that you cannot mind
heavenly things.

Again you hinder the growth of the inward man, when you set your mind and
affections upon base and vile things, this hinders the growth of the inward
man: such a man is a weak man in grace. As for example, A man that has money to
bestow at market, if when he shall come there, he shall bestow it upon bawbles
and not upon the things he was sent to buy, this man were a foolish man,
especially he knowing that he shall be called to an account for it how he has
laid it out: even thus and much more foolish are men, when they spend their
time on their pleasure and lusts which are base things, and not in strengthening
the inward man, they forsake a great prize that would enrich them, but because
they want knowledge, that is, they are weak in the inward man, They are not
able to judge of spiritual things. Therefore never bragg of your strength
except it be the strength of the inward man, and take heed of neglecting the
time. Paul would have the gathering for the poor before he came, that that
might not hinder him from strengthening of the inward man, though that was a
holy work. It was a good speech of one after he had spent much time in writing
about controversies, at last concludes, I have (says he) spent a great deal of
time, but not in strengthening the inward man; the Devil has beguiled me, but
he shall never go beyond me any more, that time that I have I will spend to
another end. It were wisdom in you to do the like. You that have spent and do
spend your time upon trifles, and bawbles, that is, about your lusts, conclude
that now for your time to come you gather your strength, and bend all your
labors and pains to this end for the strengthening of the inward man, and say
with your selves, we had a prize in our hands, that is, we had much time,
whereby we might have strengthened the inward man, but we had no heart, that is
we were befooled, because we did not know the excellency of the inward man, But
we will do so no more; The time now that we have shall be how we may be
strengthened in the inward man, and grow in favor with God.

The second hinderance which must be removed, that is contrary to the growth of
the inward man is strong lusts, that is, unmortified affections. There are
inward hindrances, which must be removed before the soul can grow strong in
grace, these venom the soul, and keep off the stroke of the sword; That is, It
keeps the plaster from the sore, As for example if a man be wounded with an
arrow, so long as the arrows head is in the wound no plaster will heal it. Now
as it is thus in the outward man, so it is with the inward man: if you retain
any lust, that is any beloved sin, and so come unto the ordinances of God: you
will come without profit, because the arrow head is yet in the wound, that is
your lusts are unmortified, and so long you cannot be healed: this keeps the
plaster off the sore. You know what pains the humors of the body will breed in
a man when they gather into any part of the body, and how they will hinder the
augmentation in other parts: so when these evil humors of the soul, gather
together, and begin to r^i^n, and bear rule in the soul, it is impossible that
the soul should grow in holiness till they be purged away. Therefore be earnest
with God to purge out those humors: whether they be profit or pleasure, or
honor, or any thing, and in this doing you strengthen the inward man: and the
stronger the inward man is the healthfuller the soul is. I say it is impossible
you should thrive in the inward man so long as you retain any sin, and
therefore our Savior says: how can you believe seeing you seek honor one of
another? That is if you prefer, the love of profit and reputation, and credit
in the world before grace, how can you believe? that is how can you be strong
in the inward man?

The fifth means to strengthen the inward man is this: 5. Means.
you must get spiritual courage and joy; That is you must get joy in the new
birth. The contrary to this is Discouragement, And again nothing so available
to make a man strong as courage and joy; This was the means that Nehemiah used
in the 8 of Nehe. when he would build up the walls of Jerusalem he says, Be
not discouraged nor sorrowful, for the joy of the Lord is your strength:
Nehemiah had a great work to do, and what argument uses he to make them to
hold out, but this to be full of comfort and joy? That is: if you hold your
courage you will hold your strength, and then the work will be easy unto you.
And this we see by experience, That great courage where there is but little
strength will do more then great means with little courage. Joshua can do more
with, a small army full of courage then with a great army with little courage.

Again I say to those that are traveling toward Heaven, take heed of giving
discouragements unto any; for this is the property of the Devil to discourage
men, And therefore this is one way whereby he makes men to doubt of their
salvation by affrighting them, making them to question Gods love toward them
in Christ, that he may persuade them the way to Heaven is narrow and hard, and
that God is pure and just withal. And thou art full of strong lusts and shall
never subdue them. it will be in vain for thee to set upon them* hereupon a man
is so discouraged, that he neglects the mortifying of sin. But be not
discouraged, for know that strength to resist the least temptations is not of
your selves. That is, it is not your own, it comes not from any power of your
own, but it is by the strength of another, Then for your comfort know that he
that gave you power over a small temptation is also able and willing and will
certainly help you against a raging lust.

And so likewise for the performance of Holy Duties: though you find your
selves indisposed to pray, to hear, or the like, you know that it is God that
^s the heart: that is he can of unfit make it fit, of unwilling make it Luke
11. 14.
willing, and remember the promise in the Luke 11 14. He will give the holy
ghost to them that ask him. That is he will give such a supply of grace, that
he shall be enabled to withstand any temptation; Therefore if you would grow
strong take heed of discouragement, and let one Christian take heed of
discouraging another by any speech, action or behavior, And let Ministers take
heed of discouraging their flocks: for it is the property of false prophets to
discourage the people from God; And this is the sin of this Land, especially of
profane people that never think themselves well, but when they are casting
reproachful speeches against those that labor to strengthen the inward man;
But this discovers a great deal of corruption in them, and it is a means to
pull down the judgments of God upon them: But take heed of discouragements.
That is be not cast down when you meet with such as will revile you and speak
evil by you, this will weaken the Inward man.

The sixth means to strengthen the inward man is this, 6. Means.
you must get faith, That is, you must labor to be strong in the Lord, you
must go about all things with Gods strength, and not your own, and therefore
the Apostle says, when I am weak then I am strong: in the 2 Cor. 12. I 2 Cor.
12.
rejoice in my infirmities, that the Power of God may be seen in my weakness:
That is, I rejoice in those infirmities that discover my own weakness to God,
that I may not put any confidence thereby in my self. Again I rejoice in my
infirmities and weakness: That is because hereby I feel my weakness, that I may
go out of my self, and depend wholly upon God. Therefore when you go about any
business, or perform any holy action unto God, As you must do it in faith, so
you must renounce all strength in your selves, and then God cannot but prosper
your business, or whatsoever good you go about, when you go about it with Gods
strength as Gideon did. And on the contrary the Lord has pronounced a curse
against him that shall go about any thing with his own strength: in Ier. 17.
Cursed Jere 17.
is that man that makes flesh his arm. That is, that goes about any thing in
confidence of his own strength without faith in God; Thus you see that if you
would be strong in the inward man, you must get saving faith in Christ. 7.
Means.


The 7. means: If you would grow strong in the inward man, is this: you must
get the spirit: all other means will nothing avail you except you get this: for
this is that that makes them effectual, and makes a difference betwixt men:
Sampson was strong and so were other men, but Sampson was stronger then
othermen, because he had the spirit, and it is said o^ John the Baptist that he
came in the spirit of Eliah. That is he had the same spirit that Eliah had, and
therefore he had the greater efficacy. If John had not had this spirit, he had
been but as other men, therefore whatsoever you do, labor above all things to
get the spirit, nothing will strengthen the inward man, except you have the
spirit: It is the spirit that makes the inward man to grow strong. And thus
much for the means for the strengthening of the inward man; And for this point.
Now we proceed:

The next thing to be considered is the means which the Apostle lays down,
whereby they may be strengthened in the inward man; Is, to have the spirit;
That he would grant you, etc. That you may be strengthened by the spirit in the
inward man: That is, if you would knowwhat would strengthen you, it is the
spirit: hence note this point. That

Whatsover saving or sanctifying grace, or strength of grace any man has, It
all proceeds from the sanctifying spirit: I Doctr.
say all saving grace, all strength of grace comes from the Spirit; Yet do not
mistake me, as if I did exclude the Father and the Son, for they work together
in every act; The Father works not without the Son, The Son works not without
the Father: The Father and the Son work not without the Spirit, neither does
the Spirit work without the Father and the Son: for what one does, all do: But
I ascribe the work of sanctification unto the Spirit: because it is the proper
work of the spirit, to sanctify, and he is the strengthener of all grace; That
is all grace comes from the Father: as the first cause of all things, And then
through Christ by the Spirit Grace is wrought in the soul; Therefore those 3.
distinctions of the Trinity are good. The Father is of himself alone: the Son
is of the Father, and the holy Ghost is of the Father and the Son: That is the
Holy Ghost proceeds from the Father and the Son, and is sent into the hearts of
his children to work grace and holiness in them, and it must needs be so that
the holy Ghost is the only worker and strengthener of Grace, because
proceeding from such an holy Fountain, as the Father, and the Son are, the
fruit must needs be holy, and the way to get sanctification and holiness is to
get the holy Spirit.

Now in that, that is sent to sanctify, Two things are to be required;

First he that is sent to sanctify must proceed from a 1.
holy Fountain; But the Spirit does proceed from a most holy Fountain and pure,
which is God; therefore it cannot choose but be a holy work that he works.

The second thing that is required in him that is sent to 2.
sanctify, is this, that he subsist in sanctification. That is, that he depend
not upon another for sanctification; but that he be able to sanctify of
himself: Now this is the excellency of the holy Ghost; He is sanctification
and holiness it self, that is subsisting in sanctification, and abounding in
holiness, And therefore able to strengthen the inward man. But that you may
more fully understand this point I will show you how the Spirit strengthens
the inward man working holiness and sanctification: And this will appear in four
things especially.

The first way how the Spirit strengthens grace in the 1. Worcester:
the soul, Is this, By giving unto the soul an effectual, operative, and
digestive faculty, that is, by rearing the inward man in the soul, and setting
up the building of grace: And this he does by shedding abroad in the heart the
blessed effects of grace into every faculty, even as the blood is in used into
every vain, or as the soul goes through every part of the body, and so gives
life unto it: so does the Spirit go through all the parts of the soul by
infusing spiritual life and power into them; therefore the Apostle calls it in
the Ephesians 4. his effectual power: that is Ephesians. 4.
he has such efficacy in working that he infuseth spiritual life into the
soul.

The second way how the spirit strengthens grace is this, 2. Worcester.
when he has set up the building, and swept every corner of the soul; Then he
enables the soul to do more, then it could do by nature: That is by putting new
habits and qualities into the soul; As first when a man can do no more then a
natural man can do by nature, then the spirit fortifies and enables the soul to
act holily and spiritually. As for example, any hand can cut with a cheesil or
the like instrument: But if he can by it make a picture; this is a work above
nature, No man can do it unless he have Art and Time about it; so when the
spirit comes into the heart then it makes a man to do more then he can
naturally do.

Water you know of it self is cold, but if you would have it of another
quality, then you must put a quality of fire in it: so the soul is dead and
cold by nature: but if a quality of the fire of the spirit be added unto it,
then it will be able to do more then it naturally can do: Therefore examine
what new habits and qualities be in you: that is, whether you have new habits
of patience, love, hope, experience, That is, as patience begets experience,
and experience, hope: so where the spirit is it does beget new habits and
qualities in the soul: by which it is able to do more then naturally it can do:
as I said, it first builds the house, and sweepes the rooms, and then it fills
and furnishes the Rooms with new habits and qualities of grace.

The third way how the Spirit strengthens grace is this, when it has given us
new habits, then it enables 3. Worcester.
and helps us to use those habits to good when we have them, for herein
appears the power and the excellency of the spirit, not only to give
spiritual life and strength, but also to enable us to the use of that strength
for the strengthening of the inward man. There may be qualities and habits in
the soul and yet want of power to use them. As for example a man that is
asleep, he has habits and qualities, but he wants power to use them, so it is
with those that are not strengthened in the inward man. But he that has the
spirit, has power withal to use those habits to good, therefore it is said
that They spoke as the spirit gave them utterance, that is they had power from
the spirit to speak, to do and use those habits that were in them. Thus Sampson
by the power of the spirit had power to use his strength, And in the Acts 4 32
it is said Acts 4. 32.
that the Apostles spoke boldly; That is they had power. for you must know that
there may be habits of grace in the heart and yet want of power, but when the
spirit comes then it puts strength in the inward man to do; Thus it is said
that the spirit came upon Saul, and he prophesied. That is, he was able to do
more then before he could do, and yet know that you may have true grace, and
yet now and then for the present want action, that is power to do yet is but
then when the spirit seems to absent it self from the soul, and this was that
which the Apostle speaks of Heb. 12. 12. Brethren you have forgotten the
Consolation, Heb. 12. 12.
That is, your spiritual strength may lie hidden, dead, and forgotten, but the
spirit will return, and then you shall find good again.

The fourth way whereby the spirit strengthens grace in 4. Worcester.
the soul; is by giving efficacy and power unto the means of growth, which is
a special advantage for strengthening of the inward man: for as he sets up the
building, and furnishes the Rooms, and gives power unto the soul to use them:
so that which makes all these effectual is this, when he gives power and
efficacy unto the means that are for the strengthening of the inward man: Now
you know that the word is the only ordinary means to work new habits and
qualities in us, that is to c^l^s, and beget us into Christ, but if the spirit
should not add this unto them, namely efficacy, they will never beget us into
Christ, Therefore this is the means to make all effectual, that is it gives a
blessing to the means of grace.

The word alone without the spirit is, as I told you, as a scabberd without a
sword, or b^t as a sword without a hand, that will do no good though you should
stand in never so great need; therefore the A^ostle joins them together in the
Acts 20. he calls it the word of his grace, that is the spirit must work grace
or else the word will nothing Acts 20.
avail you.

Again prayer is a means to strengthen the inward man: but it the spirit be not
joined with it, it is nothing worth, and therefore the scripture says, Pray in
the Holy Gho^t: That is, if you pray not by the power of the Holy Ghost, you
will never obtain grace or sanctification. The spirit is unto the means of
grace, as rain is unto the plants, that is as rain makes the plants to thrive
and and grow, so it is the spirit that makes the inward man to grow in
holiness. Therefore it is the promise which God makes unto his Church in Isai.
44. 3. He will pour water upon the dry ground. That is, the heart Isai. 44. 3.
which was before barren in grace and holiness, shall now spring up in
holiness, and grow strong in the inward man, and this shall be when I pour out
my spirit upon them, Therefore you see how the spirit does strengthen grace in
the soul, by setting up the building of grace in the soul, and then by
furnishing the Rooms with new habits, and qualities of grace, And then by
giving power unto the soul to use those habits, And then by giving a blessing
unto all the means of grace.

The use of this stands thus: If the spirit be the only means to strengthen
the inward man, then it will follow Use.
that whosoever has not the Holy Ghost, has not this strength, And whatsoever
strength a man may seem to have to himself: if it proceed not from the spirit,
it is no true strength, but a half and counterfeit seeming strength; For a man
may thus argue from the cause to the effect: That that is the true cause of
strength must needs bring forth strong effects, And on the contrary, That which
is not the true cause of strength, cannot bring forth the effects of strength;
so that no natural thing can bring forth the strength of the inward man,
because it wants the ground of all strength which is the spirit: And therefore
you may have a flash, or a seeming power of strength, such as the foolish
virgins had in Matthew. 25. which Mat. 25.
seemed to be strong in the inward man, but it was but a feigned strength,
because they had not the spirit: It is the spirit, that must give you assurance
of salvati^n, and happiness, And I have chosen this point in regard of the
present occasion, the receiving of the Sacrament, before which you are
especially to examine your selves whether you have this or no, which if you
have not then you have neither strength in the inward man, nor any right or
interest unto Christ. for I may well follow the Apostles rule. It is the sign
of those that are Christ's, they have the spirit: In the 1 Cor. 2. 10. The
spirit searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 2. 1^.
which he has revealed unto us by his spirit. And in the Ephesians 1. You were
sealed with the spirit of Promise; and Ephesians. 1. Romans 8.
in the Romans 8. That they should be raised by the spirit which dwells in
them, and again, As many as are led by the spirit of God, they are the sons of
God. Thus you see that it stands you upon to examine your s^lves whether you
have the spirit, but above all places there are 2. places which prove the
necessity of having the spirit. The one is this place which is my Text: That
you may be strengthened by the spirit in the inward man; and the other place is
that which Saint John has in the 1 Job. 3. 14. By this we 1 John 3. (...).
know that we are translated from death unto life, because we love the
Brethren. That is, if we be united in the bond of love, that is a sign that we
have the spirit, and having the spirit it is the cause that we are translated,
that is, changed, we must be changlings from sin to grace, before we can be
saved. Therefore examine, what effectual spiritual strength you have: what
spiritual love there is amongst you; And so accordingly you may judge of your
estates whether you have any right or interest unto Christ, And that I may help
you in this thing I will lay down some signs by which you may know whether you
have the spirit or no.

The first sign whereby you shall know whether you have the sanctifying spirit
or no is this: if you have the 1. Sign.
sanctifying spirit you will be full of fire; That is, it will fill you with
spiritual heat and zeal, now if you find this in you, then it is the
sanctifying spirit and therefore John says of Christ in Matthew. 3. That he will
baptize them with the spirit and with fire; That is, he will baptize them Matt.
3.
with that spirit, whose nature is as fire, that will fill you full of
spiritual heat and zeal, and therefore it is said in Acts 2. that they had
tongues as of fire, And again it is Acts 2.
said, That the Apostles were stirred up with boldness to speak; That is, when
they saw God dishonored, this spirit kindled a high zeal in them, that is, set
their hearts on fire: it set their tongues on fire. when the spirit enters into
the heart of a Christian, it will fill it full of zeal: the heart, the tongue,
the hands, the feet and all the rest of the parts will be full of the heat of
the spirit: for it is imposssible that any man should have true zeal except he
have the spirit. Therefore it is said that they spoke with New tongues us the
spirit gave them utterance, that is they spoke with a great deal of zeal of
another nature and quality then they did before.

Well then examine what heat and zeal you have in your actions: so much heat,
so much spirit; He shall Baptize you with the spirit and with fire; That is. if
you have the sanctifying spirit you shall know it by the zeal that is in you in
the performance of holy duties.

Therefore I say it is an excellent sign, whereby a man may know, whether he
has the spirit or no: Now that a man may know by this, I will make it clear by
this example. Take a bottle that is full of water, and another that is full of
Aqua vitae, look upon them outwardly and they are all of one color: but if you
taste them, the one is hot and lively: the other is cold and raw: So look unto
the formal outward actions of wicked men, they have the same color which* the
actions of holy men: but if you taste them, that is examine their lives, and
search into their hearts you shall find a great difference; It may be they may
seem to have light and heat in them, but they want this Spirit; for they have
neither a loathing of sin nor power to resist sin. They may put a false color
upon their actions but it will not hold, And by this they may restrain lusts
for some end; they cannot Master and subdue them: and it may heat a part of his
heart, but it cannot heat all his heart: But where the sanctifying Spirit
comes, it heats all the soul: That is, it kindles a holy fire in all the
faculties to burn up sin that is there. Therefore this was the difference
between John the Baptists Baptism and Christ's; John could baptize them with
water, but Christ with the Spirit and with fire. Therefore examine what heat
there is in you against evil, and what zeal there is in you to good: Are you
cold in prayer, in conference, in the Communion of Saints? it is a sign that
you have not the Spirit: It may be you read, hear, pray and confer^; but see
with what heat you do them; is it with you in these things as the Apostle would
have you to be in earthly things in the 2 Cor. 7. 30. 31. To sorrow as if you
sorrowed not, to use the 2 Cor. 7. 30. 31.
world as if you used it not; That is, do you perform holy duties with that
coldness, as if you cared not whether you did them or did them not? Do you
hear, as if you heard not, and do you receive the Sacrament as if you received
it not, do you pray, as if you prayed not? do you love, as if you loved not?
then surely you have not the Spirit; And on the contrary if you find spiritual
heat and zeal in you, a nimbleness and quickness to good^* it is a sign that
you have the Spirit: ^or it is the property of the Spirit to heat the so^l,
therefore the Prophet says, The zeal of thy house has even eaten me up; That
is I have such a measure of zeal wrought in me by thy Spirit that I cannot see
thee in the least measure dishonored but I must burn with zeal: Therefore
examine your selves what zeal you have for God and godliness. Are you hot for
the things of this world, and cold for grace and holiness? Then whatsoever you
think of your selves yet, you have not the sanctifying Spirit. There is not a
holy man or woman, that belongs unto Christ, but they have this holy fire in
them: And yet I would not have you to mistake me, as if every Christian did
attain unto the like heat and zeal as others do, for you must know, that some
have more, and some have less, according to the measure of the sanctifying
Spirit that they have: but this you must know, that you must be full of heat,
full in some measure, answerable to the measure of the sanctifying Spirit: but
if you find no heat at all in you: then you have not a grain of the Spirit in
you; Not to be hot is to be luke warm: and luke warmness is that which God
hates: it is a temper mixed of both heat and cold: loathsome to nature, and
odious to God, and therefore in Revel. 3. Because the Laodiceans were neither
hot nor cold, but luke warm, that is, they had neither Revel. 3.
heat to God: nor were so cold as to forsake the Truth; That is, sin and
holiness stood in arbitration together and they had as good a mind unto the
one as unto the other; Now because it was thus with them, therefore says God I
will spew them out: and in the next verse he exhorts them To be zealous and
amend: That is except they labor to be hot in the Spirit, they cannot be
saved. Again in Titus 2. it is said by the Apostle, That Christ Titus (...).
died that he might purchase to himself a people zealous of good works, that
is, this zeal must not be a constrained zeal but a willing zeal; And if there
were no other motive to move men to be zealous but this, because Christ came to
redeem them for this end that they might be zealous of good works for his
glory: if there be any spark of the fire of grace in us, it will burn at
Christ's dishonor: And if Christ came to this end to make men zealous: then
surely Christ will not lose his end: but they that Christ will save shall be
zealous. Therefore I beseech you labor to be strong in the inward man, and
labor to get the Spirit that you may be zealous. But alas men think that they
have drunk too much of this cup of giddiness; That is they think they need not
be so zealous as they are; but I say if you be not, it is a sign that you have
not the Spirit; especially it stands men now upon, if they have an holy zeal in
them to show it. I say it is time you should, when you see such halting between
two opinions: show your zeal by hating and abhorring Popery, and laboring to
draw men from it, especially now when we see men so desirous to go into Egypt
again: which is to be lamented in these days: for which the Lord has
stretched out his hand against us; But where is our zeal? That is what
spiritual heat is there in us? where are those men that at such a time would
have been hot and zealous? where are the generation of these men? surely they
are all gone, for there is no heat nor zeal left: It is true we abound in
knowledge: that is we have the same knowledge that they had, but we want their
zeal and Spirit: and we have the same gifts, but we want their spirit;
Therefore let us now show our selves to be in the Spirit: that is to have the
Spirit in us by our zeal against evil.

But you will say that many holy men that have the Object.
Spirit yet they are not so hot and zealous against evil but are mavelous
mild and patient.

First, to this I answer; that holy men may have pits Answ.
wherein they may be fallen, I say they may have dross as well as gold, and hence
they may be driven through a strong passion and lust, not justly to scale sins
aright, whence arises remissness, and neglect, both in doing good and
resisting evil; But this in a regenerate man I call but a passion, because it
continues not; for prayer and the Preaching of the pure word will recover this
again: that is it will recover his strength, and make him zealous against sins.
But if you see a man (what profession soever he makes of Christ) that can wink
at sin and not be moved at it, and the word nor prayer do not kindle this holy
fire in him, Then plainly that man is a dead man, there is no spark of holiness
in him; Therefore I may say to every such holy man, as they were wont to say to
Hannibal, that he has fire in him, but he wants blowing; so I say unto you: if
you have the spirit you have heat in you: but if this heat do not appear at all
times or at sometime, it is because it wants blowing: for when they have just
occasion to exercise the strength of the inward man for Gods glory, they will
show that they have zeal in them, and are hot, and lively to good and not dead
in sin, As for example: this is the difference between a man that is dead and a
man that is in a swoon: the man that is in a swoon; if strong waters and
rubbing of his joints do not recover him, it is a sign that he is dead: so if
the word will not work in you, but you remain senseless and dead without
spiritual heat in you, it is a sign that you are more then in a swoon, that is
you are already dead in the Inward man. It is said of the Adamant, that it will
not be heated with fire: so I say of you if the word will not heat you when you
are rubbed with it, it is a sign that you are like the Adamant dead unto grace.

Secondly, to this I answer, that howsoever some men 2. Answ.
that are faithful, are not so zealous, it is true, yet I say it is no good
argument to say, that because counterfeit drugs and wares have the same sent
and smell that good wares have, therefore they are as good: or that the good
wares have not the like; It were better to say that they have the fame: but the
difference is in this that they have a false die, and gloss upon them (...)
so^l, say there is false and counterfeit zeal, and there is a true zeal; That
is, there may be a zeal without heat, as a Painter may Paint the similitude and
proportion of fire, but he cannot give heat unto it; or as there may be pieces
of coin counterfeit as well as pieces of true Metal: so there may be a
counterseit fire as well as true fire; So I say men may be sanctified, and yet
be mild and not of a hot and fiery disposition; That is, they do not so burn
in the Spirit as others do: It is not therefore good to conclude, that it
matters not whether you be zealous or no: for howsoever it be true in him, it
may be false in thee: And know also that this weakness is joined with much holy
zeal, though it be not outwardly expressed; for certainly as where true fire is
there is heat, so where there is the Spirit, there is zeal. Therefore examine
whether you have heat in you: if you have not you have not the Spirit.

The second sign whereby you shall know whether you 2. Sign.
have the sanctifying Spirit or no is this: if you find that you are not only
able to do more then you would naturally do; But you have also holiness joined
with it; this sign I make of two parts: because a man may do many things that
carry a show above nature; and yet want holiness: but if they be above nature,
and then have holiness joined with them it is a sign that you have the
sanctifying Spirit.

First, I say it will make you to do more then you could 1.
do by nature, that is it puts another manner of strength in you by which you
are able to do those things which before you were not able to do: As for
example, it will work in you a Patience above a natural Patience; This we see
in Christ himself when he was crucified, he opened not his mouth: he was like a
Lamb; That is he had more then natural patience: also this is true in Paul,
Peter, and the rest of the Saints; also it works in us love above a natural
love, therefore it was said that Christ was full of love, and had compassion on
the multitude. Again it works joy in a man beyond natural joy; this we see in
Paul and Silas, when they were in prison, they sang for joy. And the Disciples
in Acts 4. Rejoiced that Acts 4.
they were thought worthy to suffer for Christ. Again it works in a man
boldness, above a natural boldness, and therefore it is said in Acts 4. That
they preached the word with Acts 4.
great boldness; That is with a boldness above a natural boldness. And so
Luther he was endued with a Spirit of boldness: else he would never have been
so bold in the defense of the Truth, if he had not had another spirit in him.
Again it works in a man wisdom above a natural wisdom, and therefore 1 Samuel 18.
it is said of David that 1 Samuel 18.
the Spirit of the Lord was with him, therefore Saul was afraid of him; And so
Abimelech feared Abraham because he saw a great measure of wisdom and
discretion in him: Again it works in a man strength above a natural strength,
because to the strength of nature they have another added; Again it will make
you see above a natural sight; Therefore it is said they shall not need to
teach one another, but they shall be all taught of God: That is, they shall see
into the excellency that is in God. Therefore examine your selves whether you
have the Spirit or no, by this, for if you have the sanctifying Spirit then you
shall be able to keep down lusts, to have power and ability to sanctisie the
Sabbath, power to pray, power to hear, power to confer, power to meditate,
power to love, power to obey all above nature; and a power to forsake life and
liberty, riches and honor, pleasure and all things, which no man will do,
except he have the Spirit.

Secondly, as it gives a strength and an excellent quality above nature, so it
adds unto it holiness, that is, it puts a tincture of goodness upon all your
actions, it warmeth the gifts of the mind, and puts the heart in a frame of
grace: many men have a kind of strength but they want holiness and
sanctification with it; Now a man is said to be a holy man, when the soul is
separated and divided from things that are contrary to its salvation and
happiness, and joined, And then joined and united unto Christ wholly and
totally. Then, and not until then is a man a true holy man, it is with a holy
man in this case, as it is with a spouse, she is separated from others and
united to her husband, are joined to the Spirit, have holiness with it, and
separated from sin. The vessels in the time of the Law they were holy vessels,
because they were appointed to Gods worship, in like manner when the Spirit
comes into the heart, it sanctifies it and makes him a holy man by making him
in all his aims and ends to pitch upon Gods glory; And this can no man do till
the spirit of Christ be his. In Cant. 6. 3. The Church Cantic. 6. 3.
says I am my Beloveds and my Beloved is mine. That is because he is my
husband, and I am his spouse, therefore I will labor to be like him in
holiness. And our Savior prays for this holiness for his Disciples, In Ioh.
17. 17. John 17. 17:
Sanctify them through thy truth, thy word is Truth. That is, the word is the
means to work holiness in them: when they want holiness they want all things,
for when profit and pleasure comes, then the Spirit of holiness is as it were
plucked from them: but when they have the Spirit, then they see the vanity of
these earthly things, and therefore it is that men are deceived with false and
counterfeit wares, because they want the Spirit of discerning: but when the
Spirit of God comes into the heart of a Christian, then it shows him the
vanity of these things, and this he does by enlightening the mind; and
therefore it is that they are kept from playing the Adulteresses with these
things, because they have the Spirit of discerning.

Now examine what strength above nature, what conjunction of holiness have you
with it: what Spirit of discerning have you? are not these things in you? then
you have not the Spirit.

The third sign, whereby you shall know whether you 3. Sign.
have the Spirit or no, is this. examine when and by what means it came into
thy heart. This is the sign that the Apostle makes in Galat. 3. Did you (says
he) receive the Galat. 3^.
Spirit by the work of the Law or else by Faith preached? That is, if you have
the Spirit then tell me how you came by it? how and by what means came he first
into the heart.

But here all the Question is how a man may know, Quest.
whether the Spirit be come into the heart in the right manner or no.

To this I answer, That this you must know, that the Answ.
only means to receive the Spirit into the heart: that is the right conveyance
of the Spirit into the heart, is, by the word purely preached. That is, when it
comes in the evidence of the Spirit, purely without the mixture of any thing of
man's with it, and further you shall know whether you have received the Spirit
by the Preaching of the word by these two things.

1. By the Antecedent. 2 By the Consequent.
First I say you shall know it by that which went before: I say if the spirit
has been brought into the heart by the word, then there will be a deep
humiliation wrought in the soul for sins, And then Christ and the Spirit comes
into the heart and begins to cheer up the dejected sou, and hereupon there will
be a through change wrought in the whole man: and it must needs be so, because
the nature of the spirit is first to pull down what man's corruptions have
built, And then to lay the foundation of the spiritual building, Humility. And
then afterward to rear the buildings of grace in the soul. As for example, if
you would know whether the plants receive virtue from the Olive, or no, Then
you must know that first they must be cut off from their own stock, and then
they must be ingrasted into that, and then see whether they have the fatness of
the Olive, and then whether they bear the Olive leaves. So a Man that has not
received the the spirit by the word, he shall see it by the ripeness of sin,
the corrupt branches, the bitter fruit, that comes, and is brought forth by
him. But on the contrary if the word by the spirit has cut you down and
humbled you thoroughly by the light of your sin, and then ingrafted you into
Christ, by working in you a saving a justifying faith, and if it has made you
fat and well liking in grace that you have brought forth better fruit then you
could do before, then surely the spirit came into the heart the right way and
works, in the right manner: but as I said it will first humble you by the word:
as in John 1. 8. The Spirit shall reprove the world of sin of Righteousness;
and of judgment. First he will reprove John 1. 8.
them of sin to humble them. Secondly of righteousness, because they have not
believed the all-sufficiencie of Christ. Thirdly of judgments, that they might
change their opinions, that they might do those things, and bring forth that as
fruit is agreeable to Gods will.

Secondly consider the consequence, that is look to the thing that follows
the spirit where it comes in. Where the spirit comes it works a through change
in the soul: I call it not a bare change but a through change: for as there may
be a glistering show of something like gold that is not gold: so there may be a
cessation and a change from sin but not thoroughly or heartily, and so not at
all, for what will it avail Herod to forsake some, and like of John Baptist in
some things well, if he will not forsake all, and like of John Baptist in
reproof of all: In like manner, what if you change your opinions of some sins,
That is, what if ye esteem some sins to be sins indeed, if you have no the like
opinion of all, whatsover you think of your selves, as yet you never had the
spirit. Therefore if you would know whether you have the sanctifying spirit or
no in you, then examine whether there be a through change wrought in you, That
is, whether you do not esteem every sin to be sin, but also what spiritual life
you find in you; I say you shall know whether the holy spirit, be in you by
this, if you find your own spirit dead in you, and Christ's spirit quick and
lively in you, And this you shall know also by your affections, That is, if you
have other affections both to God and Christ, to holiness, and to the Saints
then you had before, it is certain you have the spirit, for this is that which
follows the spirit: for when the sanctifying spirit comes into the heart of a
Christian it works another kind of love in a man then a man naturally has,
and again it makes a man live another kind of life then he did before. Thus it
was with Paul in 2 Gal. 20. I live, but not I, but Christ in me. That Galat. 2.
20.
is, there is a proportion and likeness between the life of a Christian and
Christ. That is, when the spirit enters into the heart, Then it will begin, to
put off the old man, and to put on the new man, it will put off their own
power, and strength to good, and put on Christ only.

Yet mistake me not: I say not the substance of the soul is changed, for the
soul in substance is the same as it was before. But here is the difference,
when the spirit comes, it puts new qualities and habits unto it, it alters and
changes the disposition of it, it gives it that sense which before it felt not,
and the sight which before it saw not: hence it is thoroughly changed in regard
of the quality, and disposition of what it was, and yet in substance remains
the same; as for example, put iron into the fire, the iron is the same it was
in substance before it came into the fire: but now it has another quality; it
was cold, and stiff, and hard, and unpliable; but now it is hot, soft, and
pliable: and this change is throughout in every part of it, and yet it is iron
still; So it is with the spirit, when it comes into the heart of a Christian;
he mingleth, and infuseth spiritual life into all the parts of the soul, and
therefore it is said, if the Spirit of Christ be in you, the body is dead as
touching sin, but the Spirit is alive: That is, he is like a tree that wants
both sap and root: or as a man that is dead that wants a soul: he is now dead
whatsoever he was before; Therefore examine if this through and great change be
you: see then what death there is in you to sin, and what life unto holiness: I
call it a through and great change, because a little one will never bring you
into such a frame as to be fit for Heaven: And again the Apostle calls it a
great change in Romans 12. 2. Romans 12. 2.
Be you met amorphosed; That is thoroughly changed, new molded again: In the 1
Cor. 3. You are (says the Apostle) 1 Cor. 2.
changed from glory to glory: and therefore consider that every change will not
serve the turn: but it must be a great change, the changing of Christ's spirit
for your own spirit: which if you have, then shall you come out of every
affliction, and every difficulty like gold out of the furnace, like cloth out
of the die: of Lions you shall be made Lambs, of Serpents Doves: Therefore see
if this change be in you or no. If this change be in you, Then when your old
guest, that is your old lusts shall come and find that their old companions be
cast out of doors, and that the soul is swept and changed, they will not stay,
but seek abiding elsewhere. And on the contrary if your opinions of sin be the
same: if you have the same lusts reigning in you, if you use the same evil
company, and have the same haunts that ever you had, you have not the spirit;
And so long as you remain thus, do you think that Christ will come and sup and
dine with you; And yet you will not erect a building for him in your hearts?
Therefore, if you would have Christ and the spirit, labor to get holiness.

The fourth sign whereby you may know whether you 4. Sign.
have the spirit, is this: If it be but a common spirit. you shall find, that
it will do by you, as the Angels do by assumed bodies. They take them up for a
time, and do many things with them to serve their own turns, but they do not
put life into them: So in like manner examine whether the spirit makes you
loving men, or no. That is when the sanctifying spirit shall join with the soul
of a man, it will make him do suitable things, and brings forth suitable actions.
The body is dead without the soul, so the soul has of it self no spiritual
life to good without the spirit: Therefore that which Paul speaks of unchaste
widows that they are dead while they live: so I may say of every man that has
not the Spirit: they are dead men, dead to good, to grace, to holiness. I say
there is no life without the Spirit, Men are not living men, because they walk,
and talk, and the like, but they are living men that live in the Spirit and by
the Spirit: And on the contrary there is no true life, neither are men to be
esteemed living men that want the spirit: Now the difference between the
assumed bodies, and the bodies which have the souls joined with them, are
these; By the examinnation of which it will appear that the most men which
think they have the spirit, are deceived with the common spirit, That is beause
they do the actions of assumed bodies. 1. Proper*


The first property of an assumed body is this, we have but an assumed body of
grace and holiness, when in the practice of life we take unto our selves the
things that are evil: and leave the things that are truly holy and good. I do
not say when I hate good, but when I prefer evil before good, setting it at the
higher end of the Table, and serving it first, and attending on it most. That
is when holy duties become troublesome, and wearisom unto you, when it goes
against the hair, as we say, that they cross our nature: and yet you will not
cross it for the love of Christ: when it is thus with you, whatsoever you
think of your selves, you have not the sanctifying spirit, but a common spirit
without life*

The second property of an assumed body of grace, is if you have it not in a
feeling manner. The sanctifying 2. Proper.
spirit works a spiritual sense and taste in the soul. That is, if you have the
sanctifying spirit, then holy things will have a good taste, it will be sweet
unto you: it will purge out that which is contrary to the growth of the inward
man. On the contrary the common spirit will never make you to taste grace, as
it is grace, or because it is grace. That is grace will not be a dainty thing,
and it will be without a good savor: therefore examine, what taste of good you
have: whether you can relish grace or no: if not you have not the sanctifying
Spirit but an assumed body and show of grace, That is, a common spirit without
the life of grace.

The third property of assumed bodies, they are unconstant: That is, assumed
bodies walk for a time but they 3. Proper.
walk not always: even so if you have but a common spirit you will not be
constant in good, but off and on from the Rule: A man that is living in Christ,
you shall find him living and moving, and doing the Actions of the new man. A
man that has a common spirit may do some things that are good: he may keep,
and press down sin, for a while, but not always, nor then neither as it is
sin, but because it crosses his profit or pleasure, or some such thing: Again
he may have some taste or relish o spiritual things, But he is not cleansed or
purged by them. Again they may walk as a living man walks, That is perform holy
duties, but they are not constant in holy duties; neither do they perform them
in obedience, but out of self love. That is they are still ebbing, and seldom
flowing. They omit ostner then they perform. Therefore let me exhort you all.
You that are alive, and have been dead, be you careful to prize your life: And
you that have been alive, and now are dead; That is, you that have fallen from
your holiness and zeal, and have lost your first love, and strength, labor now
to renew it again: But you that are alive and yet are falling, let me exhort
you to strengthen the things that are ready to die. If there be any here such,
let them now humble themselves, and seek the spirit with earnestness, That they
may be renewed, That they may be strengthened, and quickened to good, and
received to favor again; But if you will not but continue in this condition
still, you have but a name that you are alive, but indeed you are dead: In Romans
6. it Romans (...)
is said: That they that die in Christ shall live in him. That is, if you once
live the life of grace, and have received the sanctifying spirit, you shall
never die, but live for ever in Christ. This was the promise that Christ made
unto his Disciples, and in them unto every Christian. That he would send the
spirit and he should abide with them for ever; Therefore examine if the Spirit
do remain in you, and make you constant in good: if not it is not the sanfying
spirit.

The fifth sign whereby you shall know whether you 5. Sign.
have the sanctifying Spirit is this, examine whether it be the Spirit of
adoption, That is, if it make you to call God Father, Then it is the
sanctifying Spirit: in Galat. 4. 6. We have received the spirit of adoption
whereby Gal. 4. 6.
we cry Abba Father; That is, this is the property of the holy man: no wicked
man can call God Father, because he has not any such relation unto God, he
neither loves God, nor God loves him. The Apostle says unto the Church, I do
this to prove or know the naturalness of your ^^ve. That is, they that have the
spirit, they have as it were a natural inclination wrought in them to love God
again, to delight in God, and in the Communion of Saints. And therefore our
Savior says in John 4. It is my meat and drink to do the will of my Father.
That is, he that has God for his John 4.
Father, will serve him willingly without constraint: as willingly as a man
will eat and drink, without wages; that is he needs not to have wages to do
that: so he that has the spirit, he will delight in doing Gods will, he will
serve God though he should give him nothing. And in this that God is our
Father, it will raise some like affections in us to love God again; so likewise
in prayer to have God to be our Father, it likewise raises Son-like affections
in us, whereby we do not only believe that the things we pray for, we shall
have, but we have also boldness to come unto him as unto a Father, which no man
can do till he have this spirit of adoption. Therefore examine with what
confidence, and boldness you pray, with what reverence you hear, with what
affection you love. That is examine, whether you have the spirit, that does
make you to call God Father.

The sixth sign whereby you shall know, whether you 6. Sign.
have the spirit or no, is this; you shall know it by the manner of working.
That is, if it change you, and lie combating in you: as in Galat. 5. The flesh
lusts against Galat. 5.
the spirit and the spirit against the flesh; That is if you have the Spirit,
you will have continual fighting, and striving in the soul, and this will not
be only against some or more particular lusts, but against all that it knows
to be a sin. I say not only that there is a striving or a suppressing, but it
is by way of lusting: Because a natural man that has not the sanctifying
spirit, may keep down a lust for ^^me by-respects, but it is not from a (...),
That is, it is not because his heart hates it, o^ ^sses it by another power
then a natu^ (...), (...) (...) love of sin still* But the opposing and
resisting of sin in the godly, is by way of lusting, because they hate the sin,
and they fight against it with courage.

Therefore examine what lusting there is in you, that is what hating of sin,
and then see with what courage and power you go about the subduing of it; It is
said that John Baptist came in the spirit of Elias: that is he came with that
spirit, that is full of power; I say you will fight faintly against sin except
you have the Spirit: when the Disciples had received the Spirit, in Acts 4.
Acts 4.
They spoke with great boldness: That is, they had greater power to speak then
before. Therefore the Lord exhorts all men in Isai. 30. 3. Trust not in them
they are men and not Isai. 3 (...).
Gods; As if the very name of men were weakness, That is they are men that have
no power, it is God that has power, and therefore trust not in them, but in
every thing labor to see the power of God in it, and seek for all spiritual
power to good by God, and examine your selves what power you have; when you
pray, what power have you to go through to the end? when you hear, what power
have you to edification? when you see evil, what power have you to avoid it?
when you are offered the pleasures and profits of the world, what power have
you to forsake them, if they may prove hurtful unto the inward man? if you have
strong lusts in you what power have you to suppress, and lust against them?
Therefore you shall know by this whether you have the sanctifying spirit or no,
by the working of it. 7. Sign.


The seventh sign, whereby you shall know whether you have the sanctifying
spirit or no, is this; you shall know it by your carriage in your words and
actions, and by your Christian like walking, and holy conversation. And this is
the same the Apostle speaks of when he would assure Romans 6.
them of their resurrection to life in Romans 6. If you die with Christ, you
shall also rise with him again: That is, if your actions be the actions of the
spirit, proceeding from the inward man, and have some resemblance of Christ,
then you Romans 8.
shall rise again, and live with him. And in Romans 8. he Romans 8.
comes to the works of the spirit. So many (says he) as are led by the Spirit,
they are Sons of God; That is they are led unto all holy actions and the duties
of sons, and then he comes in Galat. 5. unto the fruits of the spirit; The
Galat 5.
fruits of the spirit, are love, joy and peace, etc. well then, examine whether
you have the spirit by the actions of the spirit, and by the working and fruits
of the spirit, and by the teaching of the spirit: For it is the Spirit which is
the doctor of the soul, that teaches it all spiritual and saving knowledge;
and therefore the Lord says you shall not need to be taught of any other, for
you shall be all taught of God, that is, men's teaching will never be effectual
to work grace and holiness in you, except God teach by his spirit.

Now you must know that there is a two fold teaching;

First there is a teaching of beast by man, that they may be serviceable unto
men: by this to put men in mind of the spiritual teaching; God has put such a
power in the creatures that they cannot choose but they must do it, there is a
necessity laid upon them by God in the very instinct of nature. So when the
spirit comes into the heart of a Christian, it opens another light in the
mind, and therefore the Apostle says that you need not teach you to love: for
you are taught of God to love one another. That is, there is a necessity laid
upon you, and therefore you must needs love.

I grant that sometimes a thief may be in the high way, but it is for a booty,
and a holy man may be out of the way, That is, slipped aside; but here is the
difference, the one sets himself of purpose to do evil: and the other is
enforced unto evil unwillingly. And you shall know the difference between these
two; in these 2. things. If a holy man have gone besides the way, as soon as
the passion or temptation is overpast, he will return again into the right way;
he will not go forward, nor stand still, but he will return: But the other
though in some sense he knows it, and is told he is besides the rule, yet he
cares not, he will go on forward.

Therefore examine, what fruits of the spirit you bring forth, and what ways
you delight in. Are you in the way of holiness? do you delight to pray, to
hear, to receive? do you love God, and Christ, and the Communion of Saints?
Then it is a sign that you have the Spirit. But on the contrary if you follow
drunkenness, and uncleanness, and profaning of the Sabbath, in gaming, and in
sporting, and idleness, you never had the Spirit.

Again, consider what are your walks, that is do you follow your old evil
haunts now as fast as ever you did? it is a sign that you have not the Spirit.

Again, think not that it will excuse you to say, that whatsoever your actions
be, yet you have good hearts: for you must know that your hearts are far worse
then your actions, as I said before: for if you had the Spirit: it would not be
idle in you. but as it makes the heart holy, so it sends forth holy speeches
and actions in the life.

The working power of the spirit is excellently set forth in that passage
between Eliah, and Elizeus: in the Kings: It is said that Eliah cast his mantle
about Elizeus: Kings.
presently he cries out, let me go first (says he) and take leave of my
Father, and then I will go with thee. Eliah might well have reasoned thus with
him: what have I done unto thee, or what have I spoken unto thee, that thou
should thus reply unto me, as if I tied thee unto the contrary? Said I any
such word unto thee that thou might not go? But there was a necessity laid
upon Elizeus by the spirit to go with him, and therefore he could not choose but
break out into these words: That is, the spirit now entered into his heart, that
he was not now his own man, he must now go where the spirit would have him, and
do that which the spirit bid him: and so we see in Act. 4. 20. Acts 4. 20.
when the Jews came to Peter, and commanded that he should not preach Christ
unto them, he answers that he cannot choose, but he must preach Christ; And in
the beginning of the chapter you shall see the reason of it. They had received
the holy Ghost, and they spoke boldly: Therefore you see, the spirit is not
idle, but mavelous working, and operative. Therefore examine what power you
have, what actions you have, and what fruit you bring forth:

But you may say that sometimes the spirit seems to be dead in the heart,
therefore it is not always working. Object.


To this I answer that the property of the spirit is always to work, and it
does always work: but he may sometimes withdraw his actions of growing, as
when a Answ.
Temptation comes, which before you have resisted; but now you are taken with
it, then the spirit seems to absent himself by withdrawing his power, but
notwithstanding he works still: for in the instant there is lusting, and
laboring in you against it: and afterward he gives you power to return again.
Again it is not always thus with you: but sometimes only. Thus much for the
first use.

The next use stands thus: if the holy ghost does 2. Use.
strengthen us in the inward man, then let me above all things exhort you to
seek the spirit: because it will strengthen you in the inward man. For what
would a man desire either for the outward or inward man, but if he have the
spirit, he shall obtain it? Would a man be enabled to pray, would a man be
enabled to bear losses and crosses, would a man master particular lusts, is a
man in bondage, and would be set at liberty from sin, is a man spiritually dead
and benumbed, is a man spiritually affrighted with sin, would a man walk as a
Christian man ought to walk, would a man be enabled to every good work, would a
man love, in a word, would a man do any thing that is holy and good? Let him
get the Spirit, and he shall do these, and much more. Thus much for the general
what the spirit can do for a Christian. Now I come unto the particulars what
the spirit will do unto them where he comes, and those I will reduce in these
four particular things.

The first benefit is this which a Christian gets by enjoying 1. Benefit.
the spirit. That it puts the heart in a good frame of grace, I say that the
spirit, and the spirit only does this: And I speak of them only that have the
spirit: That it sets the heart in a frame of holiness and new obedience which
nature cannot do, because it keeps it in suspense; That is, the flesh
suffers it not to do what it would, as to break the stubbornness of nature;
the flesh will make you very industrious and painful in evil. But the spirit
will restrain your liberty in evil: That is, it will not suffer you to do what
you would; though the lust and the temptation be violent to carry you away
after it, the spirit will not suffer you to be carried after that manner so
long as the Spirit lives in the heart; but if once the Spirit depart out of the
heart; then he becomes as weak as water. Thus it was with Reuben in Genesis 44.
Reuben is become as weak as water: and he became Genesis 44.
thus after he had defiled his fathers bed: that is when lust and opportunity
met together, they took away strength: and it weakens us, because it draws
away the affections from good. But when the spirit comes then it casts us into
another frame, as appears if we do but compare these two places together that
in James 4. 5. with that in Act. 20. James 4. 5. Acts 20. 22.
22. Saint James says; That the Spirit lusts after envy. That is, it
labors to carry us headlong unto the committing of sin and to the doing of
that which is evil; but then comes the sanctifying Spirit and it stays us, and
makes us to lust after God, that is, it binds up your spirits, suffers us not
to do that which other ways we would do.

Therefore examine whether you are bound with another Spirit that you cannot do
the evil that you would do: then it is certain that you have the holy Spirit.
Therefore Paul in the place forenamed said that he was bound in the Spirit for
Jerusalem: as if he had said, the spirit of God bound up my spirit to go, that
I cannot otherwise choose: Therefore, what do you mean to break mine heart? what
do you mean to hinder me? I tell you there is a necessity laid upon me by the
Spirit that I must go, whatsoever death befalls me. For it is the office of the
Spirit to bind up our spirits: and therefore in Rev. 1. it is said that John
was in the Spirit: that is, he was Revel 1.
compast about with the Spirit, he was in the Spirit as a man is in armor. It
keeps I say our spirits in a spiritual disposition, that we cannot do the evil
we would.

The second benefit that a Christian has by the Spirit 2. Benefit.
is this, that it enableth him to see, and believe the things that otherwise he
would not believe. And I gather it from that place of the Prophet, Isai. 6. 9.
where it said. seeing Isai. 6. 9.
they should see, and not perceive, and hearing they should hear and not
understand: That is, they see, but want another sight, which is the sight of
the Spirit, and therefore he cannot see. A man may have a great fight of humane
things by learning and Philosophy, and the knowledge of Arts and sciences, by
these he may see both into natural, and spiritual things, in some measure. But
I say he cannot see as he should: except he have added unto this another sight,
which is the sight that the spirit brings: and therefore it is called the
opening of the eyes, and the boring of the ears: and it is that which Saint
John speaks of in John 1. that light shined in darkness, and the darkness
comprehended it not. That is, before a man have this sight of the Spirit,
whatsoever he sees it is with a great deal of darkness; but when the spirit
comes, it drives away darkness, by giving us another eye to see withal: and
the darkness comprehended it not. That is the light is so great which the
Spirit brings, that nothing can eclipse the light of it. Now until a man have
the spirit, he does neither see, or believe truly: you will not believe till
you have the spirit, but when you have got the Spirit then you will believe in
Christ. We Preach Christ unto all, and exhort you to believe: but what is the
reason, that some believe, and others believe not, but because they do not see?
that is, they want the spirit to show their sin to humble them, and to show
them Christ to comfort them: and therefore Peter calls them purblind. As men
that are purblind cannot see things afar off, so men without the spirit are
purblind men, that cannot see Christ, grace, and salvation a far off, as near
at hand, but if they had the Spirit, then they would see them near hand, That
is, you would see a mavelous beauty in Christ, and holiness.

It is that which the Apostle speaks of in the 1 Cor. 2. 9. The 1 Cor. 2. 9.
eye has not seen, nor the ear heard, nor has it entered into the heart of
man to conceive the things that God has laid up for them that love him. That
is, he saw them before, but he saw them not in that manner that he sees them
now: They are represented unto him in another fashion. Again he sees them in
another hue, that is, he sees another beauty in them. Thus you see the
sanctifying Spirit opens the eye of the understanding to see more: a blind
man might see, if if he had but the faculty of seeing: so spiritually blind
persons may see when they have the Spirit.

The third benefit that a Christian has by the Spirit is 3. Benefit. John 14.
this: it breeds heavenly and spiritual effects in the soul, as joy and
comfort, and the like: and therefore in Ioh. 14. he is called the Comforter.

First I say, the spirit will bring joy into the soul, and (...)
therefore in Saint John, says Christ, he will lead you (speaking of the
spirit) unto all truth. And says the Apostle, The God of peace fill you with
all Peace, and joy in believing. Now I make a difference between joy and
comfort thus; joy is unto the soul as a wall is unto a City, that is, as the
wall does compass the City, and so is a defense unto it, and keeps out many
enemies that other ways would destroy it: so does joy, it walls and fences the
soul: so as it keeps many dangers out that would ruin it. The second effect
is comfort, and this I call a bulwark, because a bulwark is of greater strength
to beat off, and keep out any that shall besiege it, and make the Citizens more
secure. So comfort is a Bulwark of the soul. That is; it strengthens the soul
against the greatest temptations and trials, it makes the soul secure resting
upon Christ.

The third effect that the spirit begets is boldness: there is no true boldness
without the spirit, let Adam witness 3.
it: ask him what boldness he had when he hid himself from God; and what was
the reason of it, but because he wanted the spirit? and on the contrary, when
the Disciples had received the Spirit; They spoke with boldness.

The fourth effect that the spirit begets, i holy and heavenly desires in the
soul, therefore the Church in 4.
Cant. 2 is mavelous inquisitive to find Christ: and what is the reason there
is in men such a want of holy desires, Cant. 2.
but because they have not the spirit?

The fifth effect is, That the spirit begets holy indignation: holy anger is an
effect of the spirit, and therefore 5.
the Apostle says in 1 Cor. 7. What indignation and 1 Cor. 7.
wrath. This he speaks in the commendation of the Corinthians: men will not be
angry with sin as an evil, until they get the Spirit.

The sixth effect of the spirit is holy affections: It will make you have
heavenly affections toward God, to grace, 6.
to the Saints. Therefore the Lord says, Eze. 26. 21. I will give you a new
heart. Carnal men they may do some things to make their children to reverence
them, as to Ezekiel. 26. 21.
love them in regard of some donation: that is they may proffer an object, but
they cannot beget holy affections. That is the only work of the Spirit thus to
change the heart.

The seventh effect of the spirit is this. It will purge the soul, i. e. it
will cast out all rubbish out of the 7.
soul: There fore the Lord says that he will purge the sons of Levi, as
silver. That is that they may be fit for the service of the Priesthood: he will
purge out of them by the spirit, that which other ways would make them unfit.
And David in Psalm 51. often prays, That the Lord would Psalm 51.
purge him, and then after he prays for the restoring of the spirit making the
absence of the spirit the cause of his uncleanness.

The eighth effect of the spirit is, It kindles holy affections 8.
to good in us; and this is that that gives us great advantage against sin. I
say we have no small advantage against the devil when the heart is full of
heavenly affections and that for these reasons.

First because the more holy affections, the better man. 1. Reason.
That is God accounts more of him. A man is esteemed of God as he has or has
not holy affections; a man is that which he is in his affections, that is, a
man is not a good man, because he knows much: but he is a holy man because he
has holy affections; when he is full of love to God, to Christ and to the
Saints.

The second reason is, because holy affections are a means 2. Reason.
or a second cause of good. That is, they are the cause of good actions: as for
example, for a man to suffer for Christ, and yet not to do it with holy
affections, out of love unto Christ, That is nothing worth. Therefore when the
affections are ripe they are drawn upwards by the spirit both to do, and to
suffer.

The third reason is, because holy affections they widen 3. Reason.
the soul, that is they make the soul large, for when holy affections are dead
in you, the soul will begin to shrink in, even as cloth that is not thoroughly
made, when water falls upon it, it will run in, but if you stretch it, it will
come to its own length again; so when the spirit comes and ^rks holy
affections, they widen the soul and make it large and firm. Therefore that you
may have large hearts in prayer and in meditation, labor to get the spirit:
that you may have holy affections kindled in you.

The fourth benefit that a Christian has by the Spirit is this, it will make
the heart good: because it is the proper 4. Benefit.
work of the holy ghost to sanctify the heart, that is to cleanse, and change
it, and so make it good. It is the work of the Spirit, to work repentance, a
through change, because men for the most part mistake repentance. That is men do
think, that if they be turned this way and that way, from this sin, and from
that sin: though it be not from every sin and evil way, that they have true
repentance, but they are deceived. For repentance is a true change of the whole
man consisting both of soul and body, whereby the parts and faculties of both,
are turned a quite contrary way: That is, the heart is turned out of the way of
sin into the way of holiness. Now that a partial turning is not repentance I
will make it clear by this comparison.

Take any natural thing that is of an earthly substance, whose nature is to go
downwards. Yet you may force it upwards by means that you may use.

As for example. Water you know is of an earthly substance, and the nature of
it is to descend, yet you see by the force and strength of the sun, it is drawn
upwards; first into vapors, and then congealed into ice, and snow, and rain,
and then it will not rest, till it descend again. But there is another motion
of things; light and spiritual clouds ascend upwards, and are not forced, but
naturally do it. Even so a carnal man may do the same things that a spiritual
man does, he may keep down some lust, and he may forsake some evil: That is, he
may forsake his drunkenness, and his uncleanness, and his old evil haunts, but
yet he does not forsake all, neither does he keep out sin by the spirit, but by
a natural strength: if he do a good action, it^ by constraint, he is forced by
something to do it, but it changes not his heart a whit: he may take a
resolution to be good, and to be better; yet to change his own nature is not in
his own power, for this is the work of the holy Ghost. Thus much for this use
and for this point. We now come to a third point: the Apostle says he would
have them To be strengthened by the spirit in the inward man: noting thus much,
that God must give them the spirit, before they could have him. The point is
this,

That The Spirit is a free gift:

I say that the sanctifying Spirit is a free gift, I gather it thus. The
Apostle here prays That God would give them the Spirit. Not that they had
deserved it: and so should have it by merit: as the Papists teach: but he must
give it them freely without defert of their own: I need not stand in the
proving of it long, That the Spirit is a free gift: only I will show you
briefly, how the Spirit is a free gift, and this shall be in these five
particular things.

First, the Spirit is a free gift, and it must be free, because 1.
the Spirit is a gift: and what more freer (as we use to say) then a gift is:
Now it is a free gift, because it is not merited by us at Gods hands, it is not
extorted and drawn from God by force, nor merited by desert, because all the
good that is in us, is wrought by God: it is God that puts the very first stamp
of holiness upon us.

Secondly, The Spirit is a free gift, because the Spirit 2.
is a free Agent, that is, it works freely of himself: Now reason is the free
Agent of the outward man: but it is the Spirit that gives reason. Therefore the
Spirit must be most free:

Thirdly, The Spirit is a free gift by his carriage toward 3.
them that he will save, he might have chosen the elder, and not the younger,
That is he might have chosen Esau and not Jacob: or if he would have chosen the
younger, Then he might have brought him first out of the womb; but he will not,
because he is most free in his choice; he will have Jacob, and cast off Esau:
and so he might have chosen honorable and Noble men to have both preached the
Gospel, and to be saved by the Gospel: he might have chosen them only for
salvation, but he will not; The poor, they shall receive the Gospel. That is he
will make choice of them for salvation: he might as well have chosen Simon
Magus, as Simon Peter: but he will not, therefore he is free.

Fourthly the Spirit is free: which appears by the paucitie and fewness that he
chooses: he is at liberty, he might 4.
have saved more: but this shows his freedom, he is not tied to one more then
to another. The wind blows, where it lists. That is, he calls when, and
whom he will! Let them come in that my house may be full. That is, none shall
come, no more, no less then I have chosen.

Fifthly that the Spirit is a free gift appears by the prosecution of his
decree, both of Election and reprobation: 5.
nothing more free then the Spirit is; he might, as I said, have chosen Esau
and not Jacob: for there cannot a reason be given, wherefore he should choose
the one and not the other; he will choose the wife and not the husband, and he
will choose the husband and not the wise; he will choose the child, and not the
father, and he will choose the father, and not the child. Again he will choose
this man, and that woman, and not another man or the other woman: and what is
the reason of it? surely there can be no reason given of it* because the Spirit
is free to choose, and choose not; Thus briefly I have showed you that the Spirit
is a free gift.

Is the Spirit then a free gift, and does it work freely? Use.
Then let them consider this, and tremble, that are not sanctified by the
Spirit. For if the Spirit work freely, and yet thou have not sanctification
wrought in thee, it is a sign that thou do not belong unto God.

Again if the wind blows where it lists, then it stands you upon to do as
Millers and Mariners do* to watch the opportunity, and grind when the Spirit
blows upon you. That is, if at any time the Spirit does kindle any spark of
grace in you, Take heed of neglecting the opportunity: That is, do not say in
this case unto Note.
the Spirit, as Festus said unto Paul, That you will hear him another time: but
be sure if the Spirit command, do you run: or if he calls, be sure to answer
him, left he call you no more: I have often told you, there is a time when he
will call you no more: Therefore think with your selves, what time of darkness
and sorrow it will be to you, then, when with the five foolish virgins you
shall be shut out of heaven and happiness, There is a time when he will swear,
That ye shall not enter into his rest: and do not I say only labor and watch
for the opportunity, that is, take the Spirit when it is offered: but labor to
get the opportunity, That is, use the means whereby you may get him: And for
your help herein, I will lay down some means whereby you may get the Spirit.

The first means to get the spirit is this, you must labor 1. Means.
to know the spirit: for what is the reason that men do not receive the spirit,
but because they know him not: that is they do not know him in his purity in
his free working, in his incomprehensible greatness, in his increase in
holiness, and therefore they put off the working of the spirit: when men think
now that their sin in this kind is not so great as Simon Magus was; It is true,
say they, Simon Magus his sin was a great sin, and worthy of punishment,
because he thought to have bought the spirit with money: But if we will consider
men's dealing now with the spirit, we shall find that the same sin is committed
still. I say men think that they do not commit the sin of Simon Magus, when
indeed you do; you know how great the sin was in him, and what a judgment was
inflicted against him, and your sins are as great, and the same, but you know
them not. Therefore let us compare them together, and you shall see that they
are all one, and that in these three particulars.

First Simon Magus thought that the spirit might have been had at any time* for
he neglected the means, and despised it, presupposing that at any time with a
small reward he might get it of the Apostle: what shall I give thee etc? And so
when you put off the Spirit, is not your sin the same, thinking that you may
have him when you will: that you can have him at your pleasure to mortify a
strong lust, a sin that you would be rid of, and for a sin that is pleasing to
your nature, you can subdue it, when you will; And is not this a great sin, as
great as Simon Magus his was; but can you do this, can you mortify your lusts?
have you power over them? can you love God and the Saints? well if you had
never so much time: you can never get the Spirit except that God give him.

Secondly, Simon Magus thought, that it was in the power of man to give the
Spirit: Therefore he asked Peter, what he should give for the Spirit: and is
not your sin the 2.
same? do not many men think that it is in the power of men to give the spirit,
when all the time of their life they will neglect the calling of the Spirit,
but in some great affliction, that is when they lie upon their death bed, then
they will send for the Minister, but not till then, as if it were in his power
to give the spirit; Oh sir what shall I do to be saved? can you tell me of any
hope of salvation, and the like?

Thirdly, Simon Magus desired the spirit to a wrong end, namely for his own
advantage, that upon whom soever he should lay his hands, They might receive
the holy Ghost. 3.
And do not men do the like now, They desire to have the spirit, and they could
wish with all their hearts that they had him, but yet not to a right end. That
is for Gods glory: but for some carnal end of their own. That you may be
reputed thus and thus, but not to any other end: for know that a man may desire
grace, but if the aim of his desire be for his own end, the desire is sin, the
same that Simon Magus his was. Therefore I beseech you not to defer, put not
off the opportunity, and remember what the Lord says in Hebr. 3. To day if
you will hear my voice harden not your hearts. That is, this is Hebr. 3.
the day, now have you the opportunity, the candle is in your hands, and you
may light your souls by it, the word is near you, well then light your candles
by it: you may now light them whilst the fire is here, but if you will not now,
how will you do when the fire is out? That is when you shall be either taken
from the means, or the means from you: therefore labor to know the spirit, and
Judge aright of him if you would get him.

The second means to get the spirit is faith; and the best means to get faith
is to be conscionable and constant 2. Means.
in hearing the word Preached. That is, the Preaching of the word is a means to
get the spirit. And therefore the Apostle said Received you the Spirit by the
work of the Law? or else by Faith Preached? Gal. 3. That is, you may know
whether you have the Spirit or no, by this; Galar. 3.
examine whether you have gotten ^aith by the Preaching of the word: Our
Savior says, that The Tree is known by his fruit; That is, the branch cannot
bear fruit, except it receive virtue and strength from the root: so if we get
not faith in Christ, and be joined with him, we shall never get the spirit.
Therefore if you would get the spirit you must get faith: for faith is the
knitting and the drawing grace, it will draw the spirit into the soul, and it
will knit him fast unto the soul, that it can never depart from it: Faith will
recover the spirit if it seem to want his power of working in the soul, it will
return him if he seem to depart away: it will enlarge the heart, if the spirit
seem to be scanted in it, that is, it will widen the narrow bottle of our
hearts: And you know what our Savior said to men and women in the Gospel: be
it unto you according to your Faith. Therefore if you would get the Spirit you
must get faith in your hearts: That is, if you would get a large measure of the
Spirit, then get a large measure of faith: for what is the reason that men
thrive not in the Spirit, but because they thrive not in faith?

The third means to get the Spirit is an earnest desire joined with prayer,
that is to desire, and 3. Means.
pray earnestly for the Spirit is a means to get the spirit: An instance of
this we find in Elishaes servant: he earnestly desires and prays that the
spirit (...) Eliah his Master might be doubled upon him: Not that he meant that
he might have as much more again; but that he might have a greater measure of
the spirit then other of the Prophets, and he did obtain his desire, for he was
endued with a greater measure of the spirit then other of the Prophets were.
Even so, if you would but desire and pray earnestly for the spirit you might
get him; Solomon desired wisdom, and prayed for it, and he had it, and that in
a larger measure then those that went before him: so if you would pray for the
spirit, you have his promise, in Luke 11. 14. That he would give the holy Ghost
unto them Luke 11. 14.
that ask him: and this he does speak by way of opposition. If you that are
evil can give good things unto your children, then much more will God give you
his Spirit. That is, if a man or woman will be importunate for grace and the
spirit, as a child will be unto the father for bread, then he cannot deny you.

But you will say, if he were my father, and I were his child, then it is
true, he would give me his spirit: But Object.
alas, he is not for any thing I know, neither my father, nor I his child.

To this I answer, suppose thou be not his child in thy Answ.
own apprehension, yet look back unto the 14. verse, and see what importunity
does: Though a man would not open his door, and give his neighbor that which
he would have: yet in regard of the importunity of him that asks, he will
open, and give him what he would have; this do you: though you may have a
denial sometimes, That is no answer at all, or an angry answer, yet take no
denial, and your importunity will at last prevail with him. And to encourage
you against former runnings out from God; the Apostle says that he gives and
upbraideth no man; That is, as no man meriteth James 1.
at Gods hand; so no man shall be upbraided with any railing to shame him, he
gives unto all men that come unto him, that is without exception of persons,
without any by-respects, freely; and reproacheth no man, That is, he will not
lay before him either that which might hinder him from coming to him, or him
from receiving him; he might do, but he will do neither. And you know the
promise made to the Disciples, They must go to Jerusalem, And he will after a
certain time send the spirit, but they must wait for him; And this they did by
constant prayer, and they had the promise made good unto them: for they had the
Holy Ghost which came upon every one of them, Acts 2. So if ye be constant in
Acts 2.
prayer, what though for the present you get him not, yet at last you shall
have him; thus much for this means, If you would have the spirit, you must pray
and desire him earnestly.

The fourth means to get the spirit is to obey him: and 4. Means.
this you may do when you give him good entertainment: that is when you indulge
him with heavenly thoughts, and do what he would have you to do: out if you
slight him, That is, set light by him, and will not obey and be ruled by him,
you will never get him: And this you do, when you resist, grieve, and quench
the spirit: you resist that power, when you resist the light which the spirit
has wrought in you; That is, when you fight against it: against illuminated
reasons and arguments. This is a great sin, You grieve the spirit, when you
mingle two contraries together. That is, when with the profession of Religion,
you join corrupt speeches and actions, And you quench the spirit when you
neglect the motions of the spirit, and the means by which the spirit is got, or
increased, or kept; N^w if you do thus, you shall never get and retain the
spirit. But if on the contrary, you love, cherish, and obey the spirit, you
shall have him and keep him.

The fifth means to get the spirit is this, If you would 5. Means.
get the spirit then you must wait upon those means, which are means for the
getting of the spirit. Neglect none of the means, because you know not in which
nor when the spirit will come: it may be he will come now and not another time:
it may be he will breath upon you at such a ordinance and not at another. In
Acts 9. whilst Acts 9.
Peter was Preaching unto them, The holy Ghost came upon them that heard him.
So be diligent in waiting upon the means, and the holy Ghost at one time or
other will come. Again he could have sent the spirit to Cornelius without the
sending for Peter: in Acts 10: But Peter must be sent for, and he must Preach
unto him, and then he Acts 10.
shall receive the holy Ghost.

Thus much for the means, and for this time.

CHRIST the best INHABITANT.
Text, EPHESIANS. 3. 17. That Christ may dwell in your hearts by Faith.
I Have chosen this Text, by reason of this Sacramental occasion, which does
represent Christ's dwelling in us: and it is the second head of Paul's Prayer.
The first was, That they might be strengthened in the inward man. This; That
Christ may dwell in their hearts by faith. Having in the former discourse
opened the words, I shall not need to add any thing here.

The point hence arising is: That it is a great prerogative, of Doct.
which all the Saints are partakers, that they have Christ to dwell in their
hearts.

The Apostle prays for it, being directed by the spirit of God in his prayer,
and therefore we should esteem of it, as of a great privilege: And as of that,
of which all the Saints are partakers, because it is necessary to salvation:
none are saved without it. Now for the better understanding of it I will first
of all show you these two things.

1. What it is to have Christ dwell in our hearts. 2. What benefits we receive
by his dwelling in them.
For the first, what it is to have Christ to dwell in our What it is to have
Christ dwell in the Heart.
hearts; To this I answer. That then Christ dwells in our hearts, when as he
works in them in another manner then he did before, he has other works, and we
see other effects then formerly:

First he shows himself kind and favorable to us, inlightning, giving
comfort, refreshing, framing and ruling ou^ spirits that before he did not: and
he does not in others he is said to dwell in the Temple, because his eyes are
upon it, his ears are there open to hear the prayers of men, his mercy seat is
there. It Is true, God fills heaven and earth: yet he is said to dwell in the
Temple, because there he manifests his peculiar presence; so the phrases of
the Scripture are to be understood. Go not up for God is not with you. That is,
he will not assist you. God dwells where he assists: he dwells not where he
helps not. That you may understand this; consider these four particulars.

First where a man dwells, he must come to the house and abide in it: so Christ
comes into the hearts of believers (...).
in whom he dwells, and unites himself to them, and their hearts to him. And
that is done by a double act of the Spirit: First he humbles and convinces
men ^t consists in 4, things.
of sin, he makes some alive, and us to be dead, the way to life is death, as
the corn dies that it may live. And this the spirit of bondage does by putting
an edge to the Law, by making men desirous of Christ. Secondly the Spirit of
adoption that unites us, that persuades us The cause of perseverance in Grace.
that Christ is ours: Love makes the union; Faith is the agent in this union:
but it does it by love: as fire is said to heat, though the quality does it
immediately: when after sound humiliation we believe reconciliation with
Christ; there is a love to Christ, then there is a union. That is the first
word, he unites himself to the heart, and it to him.

Secondly, It is not enough for a man to come to the z.
place, to be conjoined to it for a time: but he must continue there, else he
dwells not there but is a stranger: a dwell ^r must continue. Christ abides
with us for ever, according to that everlasting Covenant which he has made
with (...), Is 55. 3 He has made an everlasting Covenant Isai. 55. 3.
with us: even the sure mercies of David. He never seperates himself from us:
after he comes he continues for ever.

But it may be objected: though Christ will not depart Object.
from us; yet we may depart from him.

To this I answer, that he will not suffer us to depart Answ. Jere. 32, 4.
from him, Ier. 32. 4. I will make an everlasting Covenant with them. That is,
I will not turn away from them to do them good, but I will put my fear in their
hearts, that they shall not depart from me, we are knit together without
separation, he never departs from us nor we from him; The reason why we
continue in the state of grace, is not because grace is of an unsatiable
nature: for it is a creature, and may vanish as all other creatures do: But it
never fails because it is in Christ, and supported by his arm of omnipotency.
The light in the air may quickly perish, but if the sun be ever with it, it
never perishes, ^o the water of a stream may fail, but if there be a spring to
supply it, it never fails: grace may perish as it did in Adam, but men
ingrafted into the second Adam can never fall, because Christ is never severed
from them; we have his word for it, he keeps us by his power: There is an
everlasting Covenant on both sides. The Sacrament se ls this unto us; That God
has made a Covenant, that he will never depart from it, and we set our seal by
it, that we will never depart from him, Gal 5. 3. He that is circumcised Gal.
5. 3.
is bound to keep the whole Law. So he that receives the Sacrament, is bound,
he engages himself to keep the Law of faith: and he receives that oath when he
was baptized.

Thirdly where a man dwells, there he must delight: else he is not said
properly to dwell there: a man that is 3.
imprisoned, is not said to dwell in the spirit, because he delights not in it.
Now Christ is said to dwell in us, because he delights in us, Esai. 62. 4. Thou
shall no more be Isai. 62. 4.
called forsaken, but Hephsebah: because the Lord delights in thee; presence
argues delight. God delights in the Saints therefore he dwells in them, he
works in them that which is pleasing to them. Artifex amat opus proprium. He
loves his own workmanship. Thus,

First God delights in them as in those that are beautiful, Cant. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Thou art beautiful my Love thou art fair: 1. Cant. 4. 1, 2, 3.
Thou have Doves eyes, thy teeth are like a flock of sheep, which are shorn,
which came up from washing: thy lips are a thread of Scarlet: thy Temples like
a piece of Pomegranate.

Secondly as one delights in a garden, so God delights in them, Cant. 4. 12.
because he has planted them, with such graces, as flourish and grow up in
them. (...) Cant. 4. 12.


Thirdly as one delights in a Feast: so God delights in them, Cant. 5. 1. I
have eaten my honey comb with my honey, 3. Cant. 5. 1. Revel 3. 20.
I have drunk my wine with my milk, Revel. 3. 20. I will come and sup with
them. I delight in them as in a Feast.

Fourthly where a man dwells, there he is active, one that does nothing is not
said to dwell in the place, but rather to be imprisoned: as one said of an idle
man 4.
pointing to his body: hic situs est, his soul was buried in his body. So
Christ is said to dwell in us, in regard of his activity, and influence, in
regard of the works that he does in us: he works efficaciously in the soul,
making it fit for himself; Christ has an influence into the Saints, he is
still active, in them, furnishes them with qualities, that they had not, and
with actions that they did not before: as one having an house makes his garden:
he dwells in us as the fire in the iron. That is as the fire gives to the iron
all the qualities, and properties of fire; as hot, burning, and giving light:
it makes it like the fire; so the spirit of a man when Christ dwells in him,
is made as the Spirit of Christ in all thin^s according to that degree of grace
that he has received.

We now come to the second thing we propounded, and that is to show you the
benefits that we have by Christ his dwelling in our hearts: and those are six.

First Where ever Christ dwells, he makes that person 1. 6. Benefits of
Christ dwelling in us. Psalm. 24. 7.
glorious: he fills his heart with glory. This I take out of the Psalm. 24. v.
7. Be ye lift up ye everlasting doors. That the King of glory may come in, The
meaning is this, when ever Christ comes into any man's heart, he comes as the
King of glory. That is, not as one that is glorious in himself, and keeps his
glory to himself: but as one that communicates his glory to that place where
he comes. For there is that difference between Christ his coming in to an
house, and the coming of a Prince: when a Prince comes, though he bring never
so much glory with him, yet he puts it not upon the house, the house
remains the same. But when Christ comes into the heart, he changes he
alters the house, he beautifieth, and decks the soul with such excellencies,
as in themselves are glorious, and appear glorious unto the view of others. So
Moses when he was with God, his face did shine, when he came down from the
Mount, because there God communicated his glory to him. Indeed it is true, that
was an outward visible glory: but yet the resemblance of that inward glory,
which God communicates to the soul of him in whom he dwells. That is he
makes an impression of his own glory, of his own Image upon that heart into
which he comes: he stampeth it, I say, upon the heart, and it is glorious in
the Inward man; it shines forth also in the life and conversation, even as the
light shines through the window: so is it when Christ dwells in the heart:
he puts a glory there which shines forth: makes him glorious in the eyes of
others, gives a gracious and heavenly tincture to all his actions. And the
reason is, because where he dwells he brings the spirit with him, the
Spirit of glory rests upon them: as you have it in 1 Pet 4. The Spirit of
glory rests upon 1 Pet. 4.
you when you are railed upon for his names sake. That is, that spirit dwells
in you, covers you; and let them say what they can, they shall not be able to
hurt you, for you are compast about with light, even with the glorious Spirit
of God. As if one should cast dirt upon the Sun, he cannot obscure the glory of
it, because light dwells in it, so when men speak evil of the Saints, disgrace
and revile them, they cannot hurt them, for there is glory in them that shines
about them.

Now glory is nothing else but the manifestation of some excellency to the
view of others: so we attribute still the word, glory, to such in whom we see
some excellency: to see a man in gorgeous apparel, An Army under banners, to
see a ship under sail, we say they are glorious. So Michal said of David, How
glorious was the King of Israel to day? because then he manifested himself: Now
when God sheddeth abroad his Spirit into the heart^ of any, whom he infuseth
the graces of his Spirit into them, he is said to put glory into them, This
Christ does wheresover he comes, because he furnishes them with grace, and
every grace is glorious, As it is said of wisdom in the Proverbs. He that is in
estimation for wisdom and glory: That is for wisdom which is glorious: so when
Christ comes into the heart of any, he makes them wise, and therefore
glorious. The like may be said of an^ other v^rtue; therefore in the Epistle of
Peter, virtue, and glory, are joined together. In a word, the Image of God is
in them: which is compounded of many graces, Now that image is a glorious
Image, 2 Cor. 3. You are changed to the Image of God from glory to glory. That
is from one 2 Cor 3.
glo^i us degree of grace to another; And this is the first b^n si^ we have by
Christ, he makes them glorious in whom he dwells, because he puts his
graces in them, and stamps his similitudes upon them.

Secondly, A second benefit that we have by Christ's dwelling in us, i^ this,
where ever he dwells, he rules and governs, he guides the spirit wherein
he dwells, he keeps the heart in order, from mutinies and tumults: he
keeps all the affections in obedience, And this is a great benefit, and this
he does where he dwells; Therefore in Psalm. 24. it is said Be you lift up ye
everlasting Psalm. 24.
doors, (speaking there of the soul which only is everlasting*) and the King
of glory shall come in, That is he rules as a King, dwells as a King, that
rules in the place where he comes. That as Satan rules in the hearts of the
children of disobedience: so Christ rules in the children of obedience: he
guides them, and governs them, he orders their steps the right way, That
is, when there are in them lusts fighting in their mind, a law in their
members, rebelling against the Law of the spirit: he keeps down these Rebels,
he mortifieth these lusts: and therefore in Romans 8. The affections are said to
be servants Romans 8.
to righteousness, That is because righteousness rules in the hearts of those
in whom Christ dwells.

But you will say, what benefit is this: what privilege Objection.
is it to have Christ rule us? it seems rather to be contrary* it seems
rather that this is to be restrained, and to be overruled; is it not better to
have our liberty?

I answer, that it is not: but it is a great privilege to Answer.
have Christ govern in us: for he is not as those governors that govern for
themselves; but he has the property of a good governor, that spends his
sweetness for the good of those, over whom he is a governor. And this you will
see if you consider what a government it is. For it freeth you from the
government of other Lords: from the government that your lusts have over you,
Again he governs not as a Tyrant, by force, but as the soul governs the
members without difficulty. Now as it is said of the Members, that while they
serve and obey the soul, That very labor is a rest, and that obedience is a
liberty: even so the soul when it obeys Christ, that is indeed a liberty,
and that service is rest, the reason is, because Christ guides them sweetly in
whom he dwells: all the members are guided by the soul with a willing
resigation, so that from an inward propensness, not from constraint, they do
what they will: it is therefore an easy government. Again when any thing is
made obedient to what is the proper rule of it, it is the better for it: for
therein the perfection of every creature lies, when the Creature has a Law
given it, according to which if it work, it is in the best condition. Now God
himself and the law is the rule to which every man should conform, therefore
the creature is best, when it is in obedience to him; even as is the body of
man, when it is best governed, and kept closest to the rule, it is best in
health: Simile.
so it is in the soul of a man, the better it is governed, the more obedient it
is to Christ, the better it is in health: for every rebellion is a sickness and
disturbance to the foul: Therefore you have a great benefit, when Christ
dwells in your hearts as a King; If it were not for that my Brethren, whether
would your unruly affections carry you? how would those rebels wound you? how
would they rob you of all that that is good? those foolish and hurtfullusts
that are in you, how would they drown you in perdition? Now when Christ
dwells in the heart, he keeps down these lusts, keeps the soul in good
temper, guides our feet into the way of peace: our feet of themselves would be
running into miseries and dangers, his government keeps us out of these: This
is his government, and this is the second benefit that we have by Christ his
dwelling in us.

The third benefit is this, where Christ dwells there 3. Benefit.
he comfort, and refreshes the heart; This I take out of Esai. 57. 15. Thus
says the Lord, the high and loftic one Isai. 57. 15.
that inhabiteth eternity. I dwell in the high and holy place, with him also
that is of a contrite, and humble spirit, to revive the spirit of the humble,
and to revive the heart of the contrite ones; In that place you have Two
benefits expressed: one is, that Christ refreshes the heart of the humble in
whom he dwells. And secondly he gives life to them: we will speak of both:
and begin with the first which is the third in order. When a man is drooping,
when his spirit is dejected in him, when he meditateth of nothing but of fear
and danger. Now when Christ comes into the heart, he sets all at rest: he
brings a tranquillity to the soul. In a word he fills the heart with joy
wheresoever he comes; For as the Sun brings light into the world, so Christ
brings joy into the heart; and you can no more have him in your heart without
some joy, then the Sun can be in the world without light; And it must needs be
so, because where Christ comes, he brings matter of joy with him, for where
ever he comes he brings salvation, as he said to Zaccheus, this day is
salvation come unto thine house. Now when Christ shall say unto a man, That
salvation is come unto him, he brings matter of joy, so he is said to come as
a Bridegroom. Now a Bridegroom is always bringing of joy, so it is compared to
the joy in harvest, and to the joy of those that divide the spoil.

Again Christ brings his spirit, and his spirit is a spirit of joy, therefore
he is called the comforter, this made God break forth into this speech: seems
the consolations of God a small thing to you?

Again he brings a Kindom, and that Kingdom consists of joy, in Romans 14.
17. The Kingdom of God is not Romans 14. 17.
meat, and drink, but Righteousness and Peace, and joy in the holy Ghost, Again
where Christ dwells, you cannot have him but you must have much joy with him,
because joy follows him naturally; at his right hand are pleasures for
evermore. Therefore in whomsoever he dwells that party must needs have joy.
Look through the world, and what joy some ever a man has, it is accordding to
the measure of his participation with God. Therefore those that have him fully,
as in heaven, they have a fullness of joy: Those that have him not at all, as in
hell, there is a fullness of grief: Indeed in heaven it is midday, and in hell,
it is midnight, The one has the sun always with them; the other darkness it
self. Now those that are in the way to both, as the Saints which are in the
spring of the day, They have some measure of joy, even as much as they
participate of God, and the reprobate that shall be damned, and here dwell in
the twilight, they have some flashes of joy, according as God communicates
himself in common gifts and graces unto them. But in a word, so much of God so
much of joy a man has: Now when God himself dwells in a man's heart, and if
joy thus naturally follow him, it must needs refresh the hearts of those in
whom he dwells: so much for the third Benefit.

A Fourth Benefit is this, That he gives life to those in whom he dwells,
that is he makes them living men; 4 Benefit.
he lives in every man in whom he dwells as the vine in the branches. That
is all the actions and properties of life we draw from him, all the sense we
have is from him, in him we live, move, and have our being, and this is a great
Benefit. For the worst living thing, is better then the best dead thing, and
amongst life's, the life of grace which Christ gives is the best life; because
it comes nearest to the life of God, and Angels: And they have only this
life, in whom Christ dwellerh, for the most living men are but ghosts whilst
they are alive: now when Christ comes into their hearts; he puts life into
them, he makes them living men. Again those that are in Christ: though they
have some root of life continually in them, yet they are often, dead, and dull,
and indisposed to do any holy duty: It is Christ now that quickneth them, and
makes them ready to every good work. All the motions, all the fruits of life
in your selves, are but the budding and putting forth of the spirit; therefore
all such blossoms are precious, and they should be nourished in you: you
should not let them wither for want of sap, and that you may have from Christ,
for it is he that quickens every man, by his Spirit; That look as the old
Adam makes sin active in every one that is born of him, so the second Adam
communicates grace and life to those that are ingrafted into him by faith.
Therefore he is called a quickening spirit: even as a man lives when the soul
is conjoined to the body, so the soul lives, when Christ is conjoined to it:
Look upon all the living Saints, the reason why they live among such a
multitude of dead men, is because Christ is in them; if you see one more holy
then another, more active, more nimble in the ways of Gods commandments then
another, it is because Christ dwells more in him then in another: if you find
your selves more ready, and more strong to perform any duty, it is because
Christ helps and quickens you, for he is your life. In a word, all the life
you have is derived from his inhabitation, and dwelling in you, And this is the
fourth Benefit that we receive from Christ, he makes us living men.

The fifth benefit we have and receive from Christ his 5 Benefit.
dwelling in us, is that he consecrateth us, and makes us holy. Know ye not
says the Apostle 1 Cor. 3. 17. That ye are the Temple of God, and that the
spirit dwells in you. That is Christ's act, no man is holy, but he whom Christ
consecrateth, and he consecrateth the soul, That is, he sanctifies it, sets it
apart, makes a temple peculiar to himself: for holiness is nothing but an
appropriating something to Gods use, and sequestring it from common uses: Now
when Christ works such a work in the spirit of a man, he is said to consecrate
a man, to sanctify him.

And that he does when he reveals to us the vanity How Christ sanctifies us.
of earthly things on one side, And the excellency of heavenly things on the
other side. By this means the heart is weaned from those, and is knit and
married to these in a conjugal love, so that it loves him, and nothing
besides; and this I say Christ does, by revealing the truth, making earthly
things to appear vain as they are, and God to appear beautiful and excellent as
he is: For when he appears as he is, we cannot but love him: and that is the
reason it is said, Sanctify them with thy truth; that is, when any man has
the truth revealed unto him, he sees things as they are, then his spirit
cleaves unto God, loves God, marries it self unto God, keeps it self
proper unto him, weaneth itself, and estrangeth it self from all other things.
That which is called sanctifying in that place, you shall find in two places of
Scripture expressed in such terms, as express this double act of Christ which I
named unto you, as in the 2 Tit. verse penult. He has purified to himself a
peculiar people; that is, he has emptied 2 Tit.
them of whatsoever may draw them from God, and has sanctified them by his
spirit. And so again in the 30. Deuteronomy. 6. And the Lord God will circumcise the
heart, that thou may love the Lord thy God with all thy Deuteronomy. 30. 6.
heart, etc. That is, I will draw you to me, your hearts shall cleave to me.
Now then when these two acts are done, the heart circumcised, and love put into
it, that it cleaves to God without separation. This is the sanctifying of the
heart, this Christ works wheresoever he comes. And (my Brethren) this is not
an easy thing to do, and indeed no man can do it but Christ: for this holiness
of spirit is not only an abstaining from the things common and unclean, from
pollution of flesh and spirit; it is not an abstaining from them out of
judgment How we may get Christ in our hearts.
only, but then a man's spirit it is holy, when he has an inward propence
inclination to that which is good, and an aversness to that which is evil. When
the spirit has a new quality put into it, Abhor that which is evil, and cleave
to that which is good, this is holiness, not to abstain from the evil only,
but to abhor it, not only to do the good, but his spirit cleaves to the good,
loves the good. So it is said, Lot had his righteous soul vexed with the
unclean conversation of the Sodomites, that is, he had a holy soul, and in this
his holiness was seen, that he vexed, etc. So Moses, his holiness appeared when
he wept, when he Heb. 17. 16.
saw the people commit idolatry; so Paul, his spirit was stirred within him,
when he saw the idolatry of the people of Athens. So when a man's spirit
sti^reth it self after this manner, when from that new quality that is put into
it, it works out the uncleanness that is in it: this is the holiness of the
spirit, and no man has it but from Christ. As the needle, unless it have it
from the Loadstone, Simile.
could not have that property of looking to the North; so it is with the spirit
of a man, before Christ dwells in him, before he has put a new quality of
holiness, he never looks toward God, but when it is done once, it cannot do
otherwise; therefore those in whom Christ dwells cannot sin, that is, cannot
delight in sin: this is a great benefit therefore, and this holiness of spirit
they have in whom Christ dwells, To be holy in all manner of conversation, to
be holy at all times in all places, in all that he does to have a holiness of
spirit acting and appearing therein. It is a hard thing, and therefore the
benefit is the greater: so now how much unholiness we may find in the spirits
of men, when the spirit of a man steppeth out and does what it does to its own
ends, and looks not to Christ, but to other ends, this is unholiness and
adultery of the spirit; therefore those, the trade of whose life is not to look
at God in their actions, but to themselves, to pass from pleasure to pleasure,
and from sport to sport, and all for themselves; those also that are so much
occupied in worldly businesses that God is forgotten, this is exactly contrary
to holiness, for here the spirit turns it self from God, whereas we should be
holy in all manner of conversation, holy in every thing, holy in eating, holy
in drinking, holy in recreation, holy in all our business, holy in mirth, etc.

But you will ask how shall that be? Quest. Answ.


When you do all these as to God, as fit^ing you for his service; when you put
God as the end unto all that you do, then is your spirit holy, you know that
place, Whether you eat or drink, or whatsoever you do, do all to the glory of
God. That is, respect God in it, make not your selves the utmost end of it, for
then your heart is unholy, for holiness is to keep the heart close to God,
peculiar to him alone, eying God in all things. When he turns from him, that
is the unholiness of the spirit. This benefit we have by Christ dwelling in our
hearts, our spirits are consecrated unto him, all that is in us is turned, and
looks that way; and so much for this fifth Benefit.

The sixth and last benefit we have by Christ dwelling, is defense, he
defends those in whom he dwells, he 6. Benefit.
covers them, he is a buckler and protector to them, he preserves them from
all evil, from all crosses, or the evil of crosses. This is a great benefit.
For there is this difference between Christ and other Inhabitants, other
Inhabitants are defended by the house wherein they dwell, but here the
Inhabitant defends the house. And the reason is good, because, though he
dwell in our hearts, yet he is our habitation, as it is in the Psalm, that is,
we dwell in him, he covers us, as a house covers a man, and defends him
from the violence of the weather. This you have excellently expressed in the 4.
Isaiah, the two last verses, Upon all their glory shall be a Isaiah 4. 6.
defense; that is, upon all the people of God which are glorious, he calls
them glory in the abstract. I will defend them from all evil. If you ask what
defense it is? you shall see a distribution of it, in the verses following, I
will be as a covering in the heat of the day: That is, one kind, and a place of
refuge and covert from storm and from rain. That is, if there be heat I will
keep you from that, if there be storms and rain I will preserve you from that;
you shall be as a man within doors. Thus Christ defends those that belong
unto him, he is a covering to them, he keeps them safe; in the 1 Cor. 3. Him
that destroys 1 Cor. 3.
the Temple of God, him will the Lord destroy. It is his Temple, it is the
place where he dwells, and be assured, Christ will not have his house pulled
down over his head; no man will promise his Inheritance to be spoiled. Now Gods
children are his portion, they are his sheep, he will not suffer them to be
plucked out of his hands. Therefore the Prophet Esaias compares his Church to a
Tent, that though it be made of two or three materials, only cords and stakes,
yet says he, there shall not a cord be broken, nor a stake plucked up. My
Brethren, if you look upon the Church, you will wonder that they should not
have been swallowed up ere this time, but know that God dwells in this Tent,
he keeps and defends them. Christ dwells thus in every believer, in
particular he will be a buckler, and defense unto him. And this benefit you
have by Christ dwelling in you.

And so much for the Benefits you receive by Christ's Inhabitation in you.

We must add something now for the application of Use 1.
this point; and first, you may make this use of it. Learn to judge aright of
the works of God in your hearts, and remember that it is wrought by Christ
himself. It is Christ himself that is in you, that consulteth with you, that
acts in you, that enliveneth you to every duty, he himself is given us of God,
to be our wisdom, righteousness, sanctification, and redemption; it is he
himself that Rev. 3.
will come in and sup with us, Rev. 3. And therefore if you would have a great
measure of grace, a great measure of comfort and refreshing, if you would feel
the life of grace flowing abundantly in your hearts, fasten your eyes upon
Christ the fountain. This is our fault (my Brethren) that we look upon grace,
and remission of sins, and sanctification, separated from Christ, we labor not
for Christ in the first place, we look upon pardon for sin, we go unto God for
it, but we think not upon Christ; learn first to get Christ to dwell in your
hearts, fasten your eyes upon him, entreat him to come thither and sup with
you, and then take from him justification and sanctification, the spirit and
every grace. For so it is, as when a wife marries a husband, she must not
think of the titles, honors and commodities that he brings separately from
Simile.
himself, for then it is an adulterous thought, she must first take her
husband, and then those other things come along with him: so must we do with
Christ, fasten our eyes upon Christ himself, love him, cleave to him, labor to
have our heart^ married to him by faith, then we have remission of sins, then
we have adoption, then we have reconciliawith God, and every particular grace
coming along with him. Even as if a man would have a treasure that lies hid in
a field, he must first have the field it self, and then he Simile.
may take the treasure; he must not think of the treasure as of a thing
abstracted from the field, even so, thou must get Christ, for in him are hid
all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, and of his fullness, we receive grace
for grace. But this is our hinderance, that we look upon these things
separately and apart from Christ. But let us remember that it is Christ that
dwells in our hearts, and although indeed it is by his spirit, yet it is he
himself that is the fountain of all; get Christ therefore more and more into
your hearts; for you must know that there are degrees of dwelling, as the Sun
dwells more in the house at several times, so Christ dwells more and more
plentifully in the hearts of men, even as there is a nearer union between us
and him, and so he dwells in us accordingly; as there are degrees of
familiarity between friends, so are there degrees of union and habitation,
between Christ and us. And accordingly are there degrees in all the effects of
his habitation; labor therefore to get Christ in your hearts.

But you will say, how shall this be done? Quest. Answ. what holiness of Spirit
is. Isay 57.


Labor to get a contrite and humble heart, there God delights to dwell;
there are but two places in which he delights, Isa. 57. In the highest heavens,
and with him also that is of an humble and contrite spirit; look what delight
he has to dwell in the heavens the same delight he takes to dwell in him that
is of an humble spirit. This is the reason why so many living in the Church
have not Christ in them; they are not yet humbled, they are not yet sensible of
their sins, they know not as yet that they are children of wrath; whereas a man
that is humbled, and broken with the sense of his sins, that has his heart
wounded with them, this is one that is a fit habitation for Christ to dwell
there. Therefore it is, that even the Saints themselves, when they begin to
have their hearts lifted up in them, that Christ removes them far from him,
and therefore also is it that he humbles them, before he returns to them
again: So it was with David and Hezekiah, when they were li^ted up in their
hearts, you see how God for sook them, and how angry he was with them: get
humbled hearts therefore. When you can say to Christ in good earnest, as the
Centurion said, Lord I am not worthy that thou should enter under my roof:
that is the best way to draw his favor to you. You know how readily Christ
healed his servant, how he admired him.

Again, the nearer you draw unto him, the more he will dwell in you; it is the
Apostle James his counsel, Ia
or rather the Spirit of God ^y St. James, I^. 5. Draw near to God, and he will
draw near unto you. And Christ I^
himself, in John 15. 4. Abide in me, and I will abide in you. That is, if we
would come n^^r him, we must not suffer our selves to go a whoring after the
things of the world, but mind him, draw near unto him, then would he dwell in
you.

Again, the wider you open the door, w^^n he knocks, the further he ^ntr^th,
Rev. 3. I stand at the door and knock, if any man will open the door, I will
come in and sup with (...). 3.
him; that is I will come in and dwell with him, enter commons with him. Now
^re said to open the door, when you yield to his knocking, that is, when you
are stirred up to any good duty by hearing the Word: all all provocations are
knocking at the door, the more you yield to these, and the more willing you are
to perform holy duties, the more you open, and so the more Christ dwells in
you.

Again, the less you live to your selves, and the more you are emptied of your
selves, the more Christ dwells in you, the less you live to pleasures, and
the more you are emptied of whatsoever is in you, the more will Christ dwell in
you.

Again, the cleaner you keep your heart, the more will he delight to dwell in
you, a man that is of a neat disposition, loves not to be in a soul place; so
Christ abhors to dwell in a heart that is ^oul and unclean, the more clean
therefore you keep your heart from Rebellions and unruly lusts, and the more
you are free from any kind of vanity, and the more you grow up in holiness, the
more will Christ delight to dwell in your heart.

Again, the larger spirit a man gets, and the stronger he is in the inward
man, These are the means whereby you may get Christ to dwell in your hearts;
and the more humble and contrite spirit you are of, the nearer you draw unto
him; the wider ye open the doors when he knocks, the less you live to your
selves; the cleaner you keep you heart, the stronger you are in the inward man:
why then the more you shall have Christ governing you, the more you shall have
him putting his glory upon you; the more you shall find him comforting and
refreshing your hearts, the more you shall find him quickening you to every good
work; the more he will defend you, the more he will consecrate you: But still
remember that it is Christ that does all, when you do any holy duty, when you
have any strength to perform any thing that is of any special moment, it is
Christ that dwells in you, that acts in you; as the Apostle says, it is
Christ that lives in me; that is, if you see any holiness in me, if you see me
excelling others in grace, if you see me doing great and strong actions of
Religion, it is not I that do it but Christ that lives in me, it is he that
strengthens me; therefore for a man to think to live the life of grace
without Christ, is as if a man should think to live a natural life without a
soul, no wonder therefore that you cannot abstain from such and such a lust,
that you cannot pray, that you cannot sanctify the Sabbath; no wonder, seeing
you want Christ, no man else can do it. Sampson, when God was departed from
him, became as another man; the reason why he did such mavelous things, above
the reach of other men, was because God was with him; the reason why the Saints
do so much, is because God is in them, he lives in them, he enableth them to
do all that they do; therefore if you find your selves as common men as other
men, not able to do peculiar things, not able to reach that pitch of holiness
which God requires, and is expressed in the lives of the Saints; know that the
reason is, because you have not Christ: remember that it is Christ that does
all, and therefore in all the things that you do, if you find your selves at a
dead lift, if you be unable to do a holy duty, labor to sigh for Jesus Christ;
say, Lord I can do nothing without thee, it is thou that must enable me to
every good work, I cannot so much as think a good thought without thee: labor
thus to have recourse to Christ, it is he that must quicken and enliven us, or
else we are but dead men.

Secondly, If Christ live in the Saints, then let them Use. 2.
know what priviled ^e they have, and triumph, and rejoice in it. It is good
for us (my Brethren) often to reflect upon these spiritual privileges:
remember now that you have Christ in you, that must be a great advantage to
you. When Moses was to go up with the people into the promised Land, he would
not be content with ^n Exodus 33.
Angel, but he would have Gods own presence, God yields to his opportunity.
You see by that how much Moses esteemed of Gods presence: know therefore that
it is a great benefit to have the presence of Christ in the soul, learn to
esteem it so; it brings much comfort, and another kind of comfort then any
other creature can bring. Again, consider if Christ dwell in you, you are made
living Temples, in the 1 Pet. 2. 4, 5. Ye as living stones are built up a
spiritual house, a holy Priesthood, to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable
to God by Jesus Christ. They were dead stones, and dead Temples before; and
this is a great privilege, for we have all the benefits that the Temple had:
no sacrifice you know was accepted but from the Temple, no prayer was accepted
but what came from the Temple, or directed toward the Temple. So it is with
the Saints, all their prayers are accepted, because Christ dwells in them,
and they are his spiritual Temples to offer up spiritual sacrifice acceptable
to God through Christ, it is peculiar to them alone; others may pray and hear
the Word, and do some other outward duties of Religion, but they are not
acceptable, because they are not Temples of Christ. Consider this (my Brethren)
and rest not in your outward performances, nor privileges: labor to have the
assurance of being the Temples of God, it is that which makes your sacrifice
accepted. This confuseth the common error, men think they may satisfy their
lusts, etc. and yet if they pray morning and evening, receive the Sacrament at
least once in the year, and do some other outward performances, they think they
make God some amends. But alas it is not so, the Lord abhors all those
sacrifices, because they come not from his Temple. They are not sacrifices
offered upon that altar they should be, they are not yet of that holy
Priesthood spoken of before, and yet there is that hypocrisy in the spirits of
men, that they are neither willing to omit holy duties altogether, nor willing
to perform them in that holy and zealous manner as they ought: Labor therefore
to have Chirst dwelling in your hearts, otherwise nothing will be accepted.

I thought to have added something to have made known to you, when Christ
dwells in your hearts. As one way to know it, where Christ dwells, there
none dwells but him as the glory of God filled the Temple, so Christ fills
the heart.

Again, where he dwells, he dwells powerfully, he is strong, able to make
men go through with their good purposes and resolutions.

Again, 3. He continues and abides there for over, he makes them constant in
performing holy duties.

And lastly, He is active as the Sun, when that dwells in the world, we see
how it enlight^eth the world, so Christ enlightneth the soul where he dw^lleth,
makes us able to judge all things. Again, where the Sun comes, it thaweth the
frozen earth, and causes a Spring, it causes every thing to flourish; so
Christ dwells in the heart as the Sun in the world, or as the soul in the
body, see what a beauty the soul puts upon the ^ody, what motion, what
sense; such an al eration there is when Christ comes into a man's heart. If
you find therefore a power in you to do good duties, not weak offers, and
breeding of good conceptions, and yet have no strength to bring them forth,
Christ is not yet in you. But if Christ be in you, where he dwells, he
dwells powerfully: shall the Devil think you, powerfully rule those in whom
he dwells? And shall not Christ strengthen and enable those in whom he
dwells?

Again, if you find your Religion to be but for a fit, if upon sickness or
upon the apprehension of death, or upon the touch of some sermon, or upon some
fearful accident befalling others or your selves, you can pray, and hear, and
perform the outward parts of Gods Worship, and yet fall off again afterward.
Know for certain that you have not Christ in your hearts; for if once he were
there, he would remove no more, ^ut ^n^^le you to? constart course of holiness.
There may be some cl^uding now and then: but the Sun will never set upon your
hearts.

Lastly, If you find not an alteration in your soul, a spring in the inward
man, as when the Sun comes into the world life, and beauty, as when the soul
comes into the body, be assured that Christ is not yet come into your heart:
on the contrary, if you do find all these, then know that Christ dwells in
your hearts. And this you are to rejoice in, as the greatest privilege vouch
safed to you under the Covenant of Grace.

THE BUCKLER Of a BELIEVER.
ROMANS 8. Verse 34. Who shall Condemn? It is Christ that is dead, yea rather
which is risen again, who is also at the right hand of God, and makes request
also for us.
IN this most sweet and comfortable Scripture, I mean the eighth Chapter, our
blessed Apostle Saint Paul shows at large, the happy and safe estate of every
true believer that has his part in Christ; where he proves at large that there
is nothing can hinder and dis-anul that estate, but that he must enjoy it
according to his faith, showing withal that if any thing could hinder it, it
must come either from sin, or from the cross, the punishment of sin. Now
he shows this and proves it strongly against all the enemies of Salvation, that
neither sin nor the cross can do it, and therefore not any thing.

Sin cannot do it, verse 1. Because there is no condemnation, that is for
sin, to them. The cross cannot do it, because as verse. 28. All afflictions
they shall work to good for them. Therefore once in Christ nothing can hinder
them from eternal Salvation: And one would think this were sufficient proof,
yet as if all this were nothing, Therefore that he may raise the true believer
to the highest pitch of sound and lasting comfort; he goes further, and would
have him to insult and victorio ^sly triumph, verse 33, 34. and rise to the
highest pitch of holy confidence, speaking here in a kind of defiance, and
saying, If any man dare be so bold as to accuse one that believes, yet where is
he that can condemn him? as if he had said, There is none at all that can; So
that briefly in these words contained in the Text, is laid down every holy
believers challenge, which he may take up against the face of all enemies
whatsoever.

Wherein observe two parts.

First, A true believers challenge in these words, Who shall condemn? Secondly
the person in whose name the challenge is made, which is Christ's, It is Christ
that is dead, etc. For though the believer is weak in himself: yet in the rock
Christ, strong and invincible.

For the first, vi^. The true believers challenge, it is the more to be noted,
because it is laid down by way of interogation: For that has with it a strong
confidence and a kind of victorious triumph, as if he said, there is none at
all that can condemn though they may go about it. It is not intorrogatio
rogantis or dubitantis, but instantis ^t triumph^is, It is not a question of
one asking by way of doubt, but of one earnest in affirming, and Triumphing. So
that the point then is this.

There is not any one in heaven, earth, nor any where else, that can bring in
any thing to condemn a true believer in the sight of God. Or

There is not any thing in this world, nor in the world to come, to hinder the
salvation of a true believer.

Where we are to consider,

First, What it is to condemn.

Secondly, That all and every one of us before we believe are in the estate of
condemnation, and therefore easily to be condemned, because under the curse of
the law and the guilt of sin.

Thirdly, That when we come truly to believe in Christ, even then we are not to
think to be free from all that will assay and seek to condemn us and bring us
to perdition and destruction.

Fourthly, That though there be many, as the Devil and all his instruments,
that aim and endeavor by many means to spoil us of our faith, and hinder our
salvation, and so bring us to destruction, yet shall none ever be able to do it.

Lastly, We will make application of all to our selves,

For the first, namely what it is to condemn. It is taken 1.
diversely, either in foro publico (as in our courts) when one is guilty of some
offense against the Law, and so is bound over by sentence of condemnation to
suffer for it. Or else in foro conscientiae, in the court of Conscience, as
here before God, and it is nothing else but to have a Conscience guilty of sin,
and for that to be judged of God to Eternal punishment: even to be separated
from the Love of God in Christ for ever and ever; And all this presupposes a
guiltiness for sin that justifies the Judgment of God in regard of the just
sentence of condemnation. Now who shall make the true believer guilty before
God, being once in Christ? The answer is made by the Apostle, There is not one
that can.

Now for the second thing observed, namely that those 2.
which come to believe, while they were in a state of Nature and under the
curse of the Law, were in an estate of condemnation, This is proved Ephesians. 2. 3.
Among whom we also (faith the Apostle) had our conversation, etc. And were by
nature the children of wrath as well as others. As he also tells those
believing Romans, Romans 6. 17. Of this their own conscience is witness against
them. The Law of God is the bill of indictment, God the Judge, the Devil the
executioner, and hell the prison from whence it is impossible to escape until
they come soundly to believe in the Lord Jesus.

For the third, When a man has this blessed grace of 3.
faith, and begins to lay hold on Christ: he is not to think himself safe, and
that he is secured from all that will seek his condemnation. For the Devil will
do what he can still to winnow all goodness and grace received out of him. That
nothing may remain but chafe, And therefore it is we are taught in the Lords
Prayer after forgiveness of sins, to pray against temptations. Though thy Sins
be pardoned by the blood of Christ upon thy believing, yet there is one that
seeks to break the force of thy faith, and so to bring thee to destruction; And
therefore it is, he is called the accuser and destroyer, Rev. 12. 10. so that
thou must look, that though thou have got out of his paws, yet he has many
ways whereby he will labor what he can to bring thee back, to condemn and
destroy thee.

As first, he will lay unto thee the wrath of God, to drive thee to despair, as
he would have done Job, who was brought to sore trials, discovered in
passionate speeches.

2. The curse of the Law is enforced against thee, to make thee think thy
obedience to be so poor, as God will not accept thee.

3. Want of faith is another of his suggestions, and for this he will allege
the condition of the Gospel, and tell thee that thou do not believe, and so
art not only under the curse of the Law, but the Gospel also.

4. The sins of thy conscience, that he will buffet thee with, persuading thee
that such a sin is not pardoned, or pardonable.

5. He will muster up the world where he has many Troops following him to
choke the Word, and quench the grace of God that is in thee.

Lastly, He will fear thee with the grim and dismal look of that last enemy,
death, and put thee under fears of never being able to undergo it.

Now for the fourth circumstance, That though with 4^
all his power, cruelty and subtilty as before he does assail, yet a true
believer, he shall never be able to prevail against; and that first, because a
true believer, his debt is paid by the death of Christ: Who shall condemn?
faith the Apostle, Christ is mighty and strong. None; for faith has a hand
that lays hold on Christ, so that if Christ perish, he may, else not; And that,

First, Even because Christ has died for him; and the 1 Reason.
strength of the Apostles reason stands thus. A man in debt, if his debt be
paid, he is not in danger of the Law to be condemned for it; so there is not
one farthing that God can in his Justice demand at a Believers hands, for it is
paid by Christ. There is a double debt indeed he has, but if both be paid for
him, the Law shall not condemn him.

The First is the debt of obedience to the Law; God has required of every
child of Adam to obey and keep the whole Law, and he has not done it;
therefore there is a debt unpaid by him.

The Second debt is of punishment, for not doing it, and that is the curse of
the Law.

Now a B^liever may produce a surety that has paid both, namely Christ; for
first, he died not before he had fufilled the Law. His righteousness,
obedience, and all was for us; He took our nature, only that we might have our
part in him; he did all in our stead and names, even for our sake; upon our
believing in him, all is ours.

Secondly, by his death he removed the curse which is the punishment of sin.
For the first, Romans 10. 4. (Christ is the end of the Law for righteousness, to
every one that believes) think of this, and labor for a spirit of faith, ever
groan in thy soul, till thou piercest the Heavens and obtainest says. For the
second, Gal. 3. 13. Christ has redeemed us from the curse of the Law, being
made a curse for us. Pitch on these places, and lay fast hold on Christ by
faith, and they will uphold thee in the evil hour, even when the devil labors
against thee with all his forces.

I, but the Devil is crafty, may some poor soul say, it may be he has some
bill or bond yet undischarged that I know not of, which he may demand at my
hands.

No says the Gospel, he has blotted out the handwriting that was against us,
Col. 2. 14. All is crossed and cancelled, and this God has spoken and sworn to,
therefore let him do what he can, only believe thou. Every writing is
cancelled, there is not a whit to show in the fight of God. A poor man is
indebted a great sum of money to a mighty King, and knows not what to do,
having nothing to pay it withal, whereupon he is convicted, condemned, cast
into prison. Now it pleases the Kings only Son to undertake the debt, his
Father is content, and in process of time he pays it, and satisfies his
Father, who then I pray you can condemn that man? Even so is it with the poor
believer, he ought both body and soul, and was to be put into the prison of
Hell for ever, for breaking Gods Law, and incurring his displeasure; But the
Lord Jesus out of his love and free favor, undertakes for the poor believer,
and pays his debt; who then can condemn this poor Believer?

Now further, by way of gradation and assent, to make us raise up our thoughts
in assurance of this, the 2. Reason.
Apostle uses a second reason, that is, Because Christ our surety is not only
dead for us, and so has paid our debt, but also is risen again to make the
poor believer more sure, he has paid the debt. And the strength of the
argument is thus. If Christ had not risen again, but been still in the power of
the grave, and kept under by the enemy of our salvation, the poor believer
might have been justly afraid his debt had not been paid, but Christ being
risen and out of hold, he is out of doubt. As when the debtor sees the Kings
Son that was his surety at liberty, and in the Kings Court, he fears not but
his debt is paid; so when the poor believer sees Christ set free from the power
of the grave, etc. he knows God has accepted the payment he has made as
sufficient for him. Let us therefore look upon our selves as having a part in
Christ, and know whatsoever he did, it was for us, even for every true
believer; so that he rising again, we rise again, which being so, it manifests
that God has accepted Christ his payment, if any thing could hinder, it must
be death and the grave; but Christ being risen, they have lost their power, and
so none able to condemn, Romans 6. 9. Christ rose for us never to dye again, and
therefore that we should never dye eternally.

A third reason is taken from the sitting of Christ at 3 Reason.
the right hand of God, which puts all out of question that he paid our debt
when he laid down his life, in that he is risen and ascended up to his Father.
Now God would never have admitted him to sit at his right hand had the work
been unfinished, but now being ascended to the right hand of his Father, where
he is advanced to the highest pitch of honor, glory and Majesty; and that in
our Nature, sitting in full authority King of heaven and earth, there for ever
by his spirit, to gather and guide all his children, and quell the power of
their enemies; it is apparent that our Sureties payment is accepted, so that
now nothing can condemn a Believer, not his conscience, nor any thing else can
condemn him, and therefore he may triumph over all accusations.

In the fourth place, add unto all this, that Christ does 4 Reason.
not only sit at Gods right hand, but so as that he also makes intercession
for every true believer, having not only power, but even the same good will
and mind that ever he had to do them good, consider this well, whether thou
believing, need to fear the face of any enemy whatsoever. The poor man that
was indebted to the great King, For whom the Kings son was pleased to undertake
and satisfy, when he sees him come out of prison, set at liberty in his
fathers Court, in greater honor, and not only so, but highly favored of the
King his father and continually requesting him for that poor man. What needs he
now care for all his enemies? He need not be afraid to look all officers in
the face, etc.

Is this the secure and happy estate of every true believer, Use 1.
out of himself, in Christ. Then see the necessity of using all those means
(and that constantly) whereby Christ our Blessed Redeemer is pleased to
communicate himself and this his grace unto us. Faith is a special gift and
grace, and comes from God in Christ, and Christ he comes only in the means
which are channels and conduit-pipes. Therefore if thou would have this
grace, and be strengthened and increased therein, even as thou would have
thy soul thus dignified, use carefully all the means. As

The word which is the Scepter of Christ's Kingdom, submit thy soul to it: If
thou will have an excellent spirit, such a one as Joshua had, pray to God for
it, and take heed of grieving the spirit of God, by continuing in the practice
of any known sin, which is as water that quenches the fire, but rather cherish
thy faith and put fuel unto it, by constant and consionable hearing, reading,
prayer, meditation, receiving the Sacrament, holy conference, and watching over
thy heart. For if thou put fuel to thy faith, and keep away that which may
quench it, thou shall clearly see this blessed truth, and find the power of
faith in this that has been said. Therefore as thou would have this
confidence and comfort in thy heart and soul, use the means for it. The
dilligent hand becomes rich in Gods ordinary providence, and so may thou in
this grace, if thou use diligence, there is no way else: Therefore whilst thou
have time use the means, give attendance to the word, and all those heavenly
means before mentioned.

Its true indeed Christ has freed himself by dying, rising Quest.
again and bring at the right hand of God, and this I believe, says the poor
soul, in the midst of his fears, temptations and troubles of mind, but how
should I be comforted in knowing that I am freed from all that danger and
condemnation which my sins do deserve?

Yes, upon this ground every believing soul, and so thou Answ.
if thou do believe, may be sure to be freed as Christ himself is freed,
and that even because Christ undertook and did all this for the poor believing
soul, and he had not done it but for him. Esai 9. 6. To^us a child is born, to
us a Son is given, All he did was for us and for our Salvation, so that if
Christ has any happiness, thou believing in him may be assured of it as
Christ himself? All Gods intentions toward thee are founded in love, else how
should that be true, John 3. 16. God so Loved the world, etc. Christ also took
all upon him for our sake, even to redeem and save us, he needed not have done
it for himself, for he was God in glory, etc. lift up therefore thy heart by
faith, and believe this and thou shall find it true, though we miserable
wretches are unworthy of any such mercies, yet is God worthy to be believed;
Look on Christ and consider who he is, and reflect it upon thy self, and if
thou can believe the Lord Jesus has done all this for thy sake; To help and
strengthen thee to this.

First, Consider Christ did it for us; that believe as a surety, we were all
bannk-rupts in the law of God, for want of obedience thereunto, now Christ the
surety of mankind comes and undertakes for us and has done i^* Hebrews 7. 22.
He was made surety of ^a better testament.

Therefore think on him always as thy Surety in glory; Christ there is said to
be a Surety of better things then the legal Rites were, even of the New
Testament, wherein whatsoever is contained, it is for us, and there it is
treasured up; ask and thou shall have, seek and thou shall find. All he did, he
did as my Surety, all the evil he took away, and all the good he purchased, it
was for me.

A second means or help to strengthen thee, (if thou art one that art humbled
for sin, and desire more and more to believe) is to know that God has bound
himself, and sworn to it (and he is true, though every man is a liar): now that
he should swear to that Testament of Christ's blood, it is even because we
should have hearts strengthened to believe, and therefore now it is a shame if
we have not more faith obedience and holiness then heretofore. Certainly if we
had faith instead of our presumption, what abundance of peace of conscience and
sweet and comfortable joy might we have, because Christ has done so much for
us as we have heard, and all, that nothing might hinder the salvation of a poor
believing soul.

Now to handle this point as it is contrary to the erroneous Use 2.
doctrine of the Church of Rome.

Who can condemn? none, This is the speech of the Apostle in the person of
every true believer, as well as those to whom he then wrote at Rome. Only
those that have but a weak faith, the weaker assurance, yet all shall find the
truth her* o^ if they believe, both weak and strong; this then may serve in the
next place against that tormenting and racking Doctrine of doubting so much
maintained by Bellarmine; it is true indeed, says he, we doubt not of Gods mercy
and the merit of Christ, nor of the efficacy of the Sacrament, etc. but in
regard of our own indisposition, infirmities, unworthiness and sins, in respect
of these we ought to doubt and fear. And so by a counsel has the Romish Church
accursed all such as say they are assured of their Salvation, though here every
believer is enjoined to believe it assuredly. But, as the Psalmist says, he
that loves cursing, it shall enter into his own bowels.

But what are Bellarmines reasons against assurance?

First, Says he because of our unworthiness. Object. Answs


But to this I answer, to what purpose should the Apostle speak that which he
does here if our own unworthiness or sins could condemn? But if they stand upon
unworthiness we will say as much of our selves as they can possible. But seeing
Christ has undertook, as our surety, in our stead, and God through his grace
gives power to believe, he takes away our unworthiness and gives us Christ's
righteousness to go out and in as he has done, and so we make all our
challenge in Christ's name, not in our selves, and so our unworthiness obliges
us more strongly to rest our selves upon Christ. In which case we resemble the
vine that goes up and lays hold on that which is stronger then it self, so we
in our selves weak, close with Christ, in whom God looks on us, not as we are
in our selves, but in him in whom he is well pleased. So we stand not upon, nor
look unto our righteousness but to God in Christ, by whom our sins are washed
away in his blood, and our persons covered with his righteousness.

I but says he the promises of Salvation are made conditionally, if we repent
and believe, now in regard of Object.
our selves we cannot believe, and therefore we are to doubt.

To this the Apostle shall answer, Though the promise Answ.
of Salvation be conditional, yet every on that truly beliveth, his faith has
from God a light in it that makes him believe and repent, 1 Cor. 2. 12. We
have received, says the Apostle not the spirit of the world, but the spirit
which is of God, that we might know the things that are freely given us of God;
So that the true believer has received such a light, from the word, which
lets him see and know in some measure, that he has faith and repentance.
Then what can hinder him from believing in Christ, that has done all this for
him, he may know he is chosen in that he is effectually called, he may know he
is effectually called in that he has true repentance and faith in the Lord
Jesus, and therefore he may be assured of his Salvation.

I, but who can tell, says he, that he has sufficient faith and sufficient
repentance? Object.


Our assurance depends not upon the sufficiency, that is upon the measure, but
the truth of our faith and repentance. Answ.
As our faith is true and strong, so is our assurance; though it be but as
smoking flux, yet if it be true, Christ will not quench it. It stands not upon
this, how much or how little we believe, but how truly, Acts 16. 31. Believe in
the Lord Jesus and thou shall be saved. They said not believe thus much. I, but
says he, a true believer has many secret sins, how can he then be assured?
Object.


The true believer though he do fall into sin, yet if he Answ.
be in Christ, and Christ reign over him, then sin raigns not over him, and so
long there is no condemnation to him, as it is Romans 8. 1. Seeing that sin does
but dwell, though it trouble, so it reign not, it hinders not but he may have
assurance. Assurance may stand with secret sins that a man confesses and
humbles himself for, but if a man be given up to any sin, he cannot be assured,
else he may; howsoever sin may trouble him much.

Lastly, He says we must doubt in regard of our selves, because all we have is
but natural assurance. A man may Object.
hope well, that he grants, but he cannot be certainly assured.

Romans 5. verse 5. He that has sound hope is assured. That I soundly hope I
know, for I truly believe, Answ.
which shows what the Doctros of the Romish Church are, Though greatly learned,
yet fearfully given over to delusion; for all true hope is grounded upon
present faith. So that if a man's hope be sound his faith is sound, and
therefore the true believer may have assurance. A true Christian he looks not
on himself but upon Christ what he has done for him, utterly disclaiming his
own merits.

Now we have heard this great Doctors reasons and confuted him by scripture,
let us hear the instances he brings out of Scripture to maintain doubting.
There are three examples Bellarmine brings of holy and righteous Object.
men in Scripture, that says he, durst not stand upon assurance; where is then
that man, says he, that dare presume of his assurance?

The first is Job. 27. 6. where he says my heart shall not reprove me all my
days. I have lived so as in the main, I have had a care to please God,
therefore ^t my friends say what they will, I will never forsake my
righteousness.

Now says Bellarmine, If a man can say thus and yet fear as he does, Job 9.
20. saying, If I would justify my self my own mouth shall condemn me, If I
would be perfect he shall judge me wicked, Though I were perfect, yet I know
not my soul. Who then dares stand upon assurance? For answer hereunto we must
understand and know that Answ.
justification is double: First from Faith, Secondly, from the fruits of faith,
namely that righteousness we receive by his grace, the Imputative righteousness
that is by faith in Christ that Job there speaks not of, so that we go not
about to free our selves by our own righteousness, or any thing that we can do,
but by Christ. So that though he durst not justify himself in his own
righteousness and integrity of life, yet did not this hinder from the assurance
of his salvation before God in Christ; for Job 19. 25. 26. I am sure says he
my redeemer lives etc. whom I my self shall see and mine eyes shall behold and
no other for me: So that though he stood not upon the righteousness of works
for himself, yet he was assured in Christ of Eternal Salvation.

The second example he brings is of David, Psalm 26. 1. Object.
who says, Judge me O Lord for I have walked in mine Innocence, to show what a
holy and righteous man he was, and yet says Bellarmine for all that he doubts
of his Salvation, as appears Psalm. 19. 12. where he says, Lord who can
understand his errors? cleanse me from secret faults. Now if he had secret
sins that he feared might hinder him, how then could he have assurance?

We deny that, because he that truly believes and repents, Answ.
all his sins both secret and open are pardoned, known and unknown he confesses
and repents of all, and therefore they are forgiven, Romans 8. 1. Laboring to
know his sins and forsake them, though he cannot know them all yet is he
accepted. So the not knowing of our sins particularly hinders not our assurance
of salvation, though David knew them not, yet had he assurance of the pardon of
his secret sins and faults as well as other, in Christ.

I, but he was afraid he might be blinded in them, and so he might doubt, says
he. Object.


We deny not but he might fear, for we say none can be assured of Salvation,
but he that fears to offend. As Answ.
a good child fears to offend his father, Now his fear hinders not his fathers
love, fear of Gods favor indeed may hinder assurance, but not fear to offend
him; Fear of sinning against God keeps him that his assurance is the stronger,
the child of God that falls into sin when he casts off his fear and trembling,
least he should offend against God, dashes and weakens the strength of his
assurance, and the more a man fears to sin the more it keeps him in the favor
of God, 2 Samuel 12. 12. David had assurance from God by the very prophet, etc.
Ps. 32: when he confessed his sins he prophesied that God forgave them;
besides Psalm 73. 25. he testifies to all the world that he had none in heaven
but his reconciled God alone, all which shows how strong assurance David had
notwithstanding all his fear.

Again in the third place he brings that of Paul 1 Cor. 4. 4. where he says,
though I know nothing by my self, yet Object.
am I not thereby Justified. Whereby Bellarmine would prove that Paul could not
be assured.

For Answer hereunto, we must know that the Apostle Answ.
there speaks not of the justification of his person, but his office, and that
not before God but men, who though he knew he had used all faithfulness in his
doctrine, yet I stand not upon that, says he, for he acknowledged that God
might find and see faults enough that way, but because Christ had done such
things for him, etc. God had accepted of his sincere obedience in Christ,
nothing could hinder his assurance of Gods approbation and love to him, which
he testifies Romans 8. 34. showing his assurance that nothing could separate him
from the love of God in Christ, so that none of these holy men, Job, David, nor
Paul, howsoever they durst not stand upon their works, yet in regard of Gods
love in Christ, they were all assured of their salvation and so may every true
believing soul.

What comfort else could we have at the day of death?

First, Satan who at first was an angel of light, yet fell away, Object.
says he.

But to that we answer, Satan he had never a covenant Answ.
made with him in Christ, we speak only of believers.

Secondly Adam. Object. Answ.


But that is nothing to the purpose likewise, because before his fall he was
never in this covenant of grace. He had ability to stand if he would, but he
never had that promise before his fall, which we have in Christ, As namely
that we shall continue and never depart away, God putting his spirit in us.

Thirdly Saul. Object. Answ.


To which we answer that he was never a truly righteous man, though he was
called to be a king, and had a new heart fitted with endowments for his kingly
office, yet were his graces but common graces, nor peculiar and special saving
graces.

Fourthly, Salamon, Bellarmine holds that he perished, Object.
yet he says that he was a man beloved of God, 2 Samuel 12 25.

Therefore say we he fell not totally and finally, he Answ.
lost not all grace because he had still so much grace as kept him from falling
finally, as we may see by his book or repentance.

Fifthly, David. Bellarmine says, he fell totally.

But that is not so, he lost not all when he fell into sin, Object. Answ.
as appears Psalm 51. 12.

Though the operation of his faith ceased, yet lost he not the substance and
habit thereof, for there was a spirit of prayer and repentance still left, he
had a conflict within that made him so earnestly pray, restore me to the joy of
thy salvation, etc. where note he prays not simply for salvation, for that he
was assured of, but for the comfort of it, and his prayers we know were the
prayers of faith, for they brought him joy and comfort. So that then he had not
lost all his faith.

Sixthly, Peter.

But he also lost not all, which to hold were directly Object. Answ.
contrary to that of our Savior, Luke 22. 32. where he tells Peter, that he had
prayed to the Father that his faith might not fail him, and it is a priveledge
Christ has purchased for every believing soul, that howsoever he may be
grievously and continually tempted on every side, yet shall his faith never
utterly fail, because Christ has prayed for it.

Seventhly, He brings Simon Magus. Object. Answ.


But we deny him to be a true believer, he was at the best but in the gall of
bitterness, his heart was stark naught, and therefore for him to fall away it
is no wonder.

Lastly, Judas, whom we deny to be given to Christ's Object. and Answ.
keeping to eternal salvation, though he was given him as an Apostle, for
Christ to prevent all, declared plainly that he was the son of perdition from
the beginning; so that there is indeed no strength in all these to weaken and
hinder the assurance of him that truly believes, only the Devil stirs up all
his instruments by all means to discourage him if it were possible, but he
shall never prevail.

The use of this in the third place is for trial, namely Use. 3.
that we should examine our selves, to find if we have this insulting and
triumphing faith, whereby we may be able to look up to God in the day of trial
and hold out. If a man have base and counterfeit coin in his purse, he cannot
abide to let it be tried, but if it be sound and good, he is not afraid to
bring it to the touchstone. God in this case will take nothing for current, but
what has his own stamp upon it. The word of God has that in it that will try
us; let us therefore every one deal sincerely with our own hearts, as in the
sight and presence of Almighty God, that so we may know whether we have this
blessed Grace of Faith or no. But before we come to this, let us consider these
grounds.

First, That all that live under the Gospel have if not, though it be called
the word of Faith, and be the very means to beget Faith. For this, look 2 Thessalonians. 3. 2. where it is given as a reason why those that truly receive the
Gospel, are so reproached and hardly dealt withal, by the world, even because
all men have not Faith, for if all had Faith, then could all be of the same
mind, and Holiness, Righteousness and Love would be their delight.

Secondly, That this triumphing Faith which upholds 2.
a man, and opens his mouth to speak upon grounds of Faith, is so far from
being a common gi^t to all, that but few indeed have it.

It is a special and peculiar grace that makes a man triumph over condemnation.
That this was hard to be found, the Prophet complains in his days, Isa. 53. 1.
Lord, Who has believed our report? And that not among the heathen only, but
even among the people of God.

The like complaint Christ takes up in the very words of the Prophet, John 12.
38. Romans 10. 16. He admires at the paucity of true believers. So now the sound
of the Gospel has come to all of us, but who shows this faith of Gods elect
in them. This also we may see in the parrable of the sower, wherein is set
forth the estate of the visible Church. Where there is but one sort of the four
kinds of hearers that bring forth this fruit. Three sorts come to hear, some
but for fashion sake, or compelled thereunto, some to get knowledge only, some
to carpe, scoff, or catch somewhat to run to rulers with, or to judge that
which shall judge them one day. This triumphing faith it arises from an
Immortal seed of Gods word alone.

Thirdly, That though there be but few that have this faith, yet not the
poorest and meanest of Gods children 3.
if they have any true hope of Gods mercy, but in his time shall come to it.
Act. 13. 48. As many as were ordained to eternal life believed, whosoever is
Gods child shall have this faith, and therefore Titus. 1. 1. it is set out to
be a pecular grace and gift of God, that only belongs to the elect, Gal. 3.
6. all are said by faith in Christ to be Gods sons. John 10. our Savior shows
as none will, so none can believe but such as are Gods sheep, that is his
elect, even those that are chosen in Christ to eternal life.

The fourth thing we are to consider as a matter to be believed is, That those
that have this faith that will 4.
save their souls, they may know they have it. Which is against Bellarmines
reasons of diffidence and doubting.

First, They may know it to themselves for their comfort, and next they may
make it known to others by the fruits thereof, 1 Cor 2. 12. That we may know,
says the Apostle, the things which are given us of God in Christ: which is
spoken in common to all that truly believe, and not only to any special
person: the true believer has such a light going along with his faith that he
comes to know though not perfectly, yet truly and infallibly that God has
chosen, Adopted, and sanctified him, etc. He takes hold of the promise of
Salvation, upon Gods commandment: Faith is that which receives the word and
promise, and cherishes himself in a special manner in the Word and Sacrament.
The Devils works are in darkness, God gives his in light, and therefore his
children are called Saints in light, Col. 1. 12. and John 15. 10. He that
believes in the Son of God has the witness in himself, So that thou need
not have others tell thee that thou do believe, for if thou have faith
indeed, it is not so hid and buried in thy heart but that thou may know it.

Secondly, Others also may know it, as it manifests it 2.
self in the fruits, Romans 1. 8. Their faith was spoken of far and near which
was known by their wonderful change, they were become new creatures such as
were now of a holy life and conversation, for which Paul thanks God, and
desires to be with them to be comforted with their faith and his own.

N^xt to this consid^r that this triumphing faith wheresoever it is kindled, it
will endure the trial, even the fire of Gods spirit, it will endure also the
fiery trial of affliction, 1 Cor 3. 13. It is not a chaffie or counterfeit
faith, that all the troubles or temptations can blow away. But being begotten
by the word it pacifies the conscience and stablishes the heart in the blood of
Christ, And purges the heart to make it fit for the Holy Ghost to dwell in,
also it works by love and makes a man not churlish and froward but loving, and
that even to his very enemies, for Christ sake, thy heart will tell thee thus
much, and make thee say, I thank God I have this faith in me.

Lastly, seeing it is thus, namely that it is the duty of all and every one
that lives under the Gospel to prove his heart, and search it to the bottom, 2
Cor. 13. 5. Examine your selves whether you be in the faith, this shows that
it is not a thing to be taken as granted that we have this faith except we find
that we have it indeed, but to search and try our selves for it, Because else
we are in a great danger even in the state of reprobates. Therefore examine thy
self, and if thou have it, bless God that ever thou were born to be brought to
such a blessed state wherein thou may thus triumph.

Now for the notes whereby thou may try thy self, they may be these.

The first is taken out of Romans 8. 15. yea have not received the spirit of
bondage to fear again, but the spirit of adoption whereby we cry Abb^ Father.
Thou have found thy self before to have bin in an estate of bondage, as those
believing Romans there, who were accepted in an estate of fear and bondage
under the curse of the Law and condemnation, even in despair of themselves, the
spirit of Bondage for that time shows us the law that condemns us and makes it
to triumph over a man so long as it lasts, try therefore if thou have felt thy
conscience set on thee, and found thy self to be condemned for thy sins. Thus
all Gods children truly converted indeed have felt, though some more, some
less, and lain under it some a longer, some a shorter time; if thy soul have
drooped, been afraid to be utterly cast away, if thou have found thy self in a
lost estate then is thy case good, for this goes always before that insulting
faith, that triumphs against all condemnation. If thou have not found this, but
have gotten faith without it, then do thou speak peace to thy self, before
God speaks it, and it is all one as if the Israelites should have looked up to
the brazen serpent, before they had been bitten with the fiery serpent in the
wilderness: who had been never the better, not finding indeed the need thereof,
as those that are stung and troubled with fin do. Many are driven to believe
because they are convinced thereof in their judgment, and the example of
others they think would shame them else. But that is not enough, thou must find
thy self thoroughly awakened for thy sins, and feel thy self lying under the
wrath of God, and lost as it were in thy self before thou can truly see the
need of a Savior, and look up to him effectually.

Secondly, If thou have obtained this absolving, quitting 2.
and triumphing Faith, then after this spirit of bondage thou have found the
spirit of Adoption spoken of in the same place, Romans 8. 15. for before thou
have been bitten with thy sins, the Devil and thine own conscience, thou can
not receive any true comfort. But when thou once find in thee nothing but
matter of condemnation, and art driven quite out of thy self, then the spirit,
with the Gospel, opens thy heart and inlargeth it to rejoice, and draw stronger
consolation from the Gospel then the law could bring condemnation. So that if
thou have found the spirit of grace and comfort calming thy mind and purging
thy conscience, and so sealing thy heart, and giving thee some assurance that
thy sins are forgiven thee, then is thy estate good: assure thy self nothing in
the world could do this but the spirit of God; Ask therefore thine own soul if
thou have in any small measure in truth found: thus then has God begun this
triumphing Faith, and set it up in thee.

Thirdly, If thou have this Faith, then art thou united 3
unto Christ and have fellowship with him, thou art then knit to Christ as a
man to his wife in a marriage bond, for thou must know that Christ is the
believer in a spiritual and mystical manner, Romans 8. 1. We first are in Christ,
that is, when we once come to believe; and then Christ is in us (as it is verse.
10.) when his death kills the body of sin in us, and John 17 21, 23. I in them,
says Christ, and they in me, which show as in diverse other places in like
manner, that there is then an union, which is an in^allible note that flows
imediately from the grace of faith once begotten and wrought in any poor soul,
1 Ioh. 1. 3. They have fellowship with Christ, and with the father through
Christ, if thou have this faith, then is there a bond, that knits thee to God
above all other in the world, and without this thou can challenge no
Salvation from Christ. let every one therefore examine if he have such a Faith
in him, by which he may know whether he find Christ in him, or himself in
Christ, and so a blessed fellowship between them, and this thou may know, if
thou find not the world and sin working and reigning in thee, but the spirit
of Christ having the rule and dominion in thee, Christ he is the ruler and
governor of his Church and children; O blessed man that have this, O blessed
habitation to dwell in Christ, to be ingrasted and have an happy being and
fellowship with Christ.

This discovers abundance of false faith in most men in the world, that dream
and think to be saved by Christ's death on the Cross, now ascended and being in
heaven, etc. But if this be all, the wickedest heart in the world that knows of
this may say as much, but here is the disfence that cuts the thread, the sound
believer has further the spirit of Christ to kill sin in him, he has also
Christ's blood in him, that is the worth and merit thereof, taking away the
guilt of sin, and purifying his conscience, which he finds by the peace of it
He has also the virtue of Christ's Resurrection in him to raise up his dead
heart. Paul desired to know nothing but Christ crucified by an inward
experimental knowledge and feeling of the power thereof. Also as Christ is now
in heaven making intercession for him, so he has his spirit in him to teach
and assist him to pray for pardon of sin and strength against the world, and
the Devil, and that remnant thereof, inbred corruption that still remains in
him. Try thy self for this, and if thou find it in thee, go on, thy marriage
bond here shall be broken, and soul and body separated by death, yet shall thy
blessed union with Christ never be broken, but though thy body happen to lie in
the dust for a time, yet shall it one day be raised up again and united to thy
soul, and both conjoined to God to live with him in glory forever.

Fourthly, If thou have this insulting and triumphing 4.
faith, then thou art a devoted and consecrated man to God and Christ, to serve
God in righteousness and true holiness all thy days; hence all believers are
said to be Saints, that is, sanctified and set apart to God, dealing with
worldly things, not with hearts set upon them, but using them as if they used
them not, even with holy affections, and hearts consecrated to God and Christ;
hence also is it, that they are called temples to God, set apart to their
Redeemer by Baptism and Profession. But do those that think they have this
faith thus carry themselves? this belongs to every man and woman; we must not
be devoted to the pleasures of this world, but keep our hearts as men devoted
to God and Christ, even in our recreations. We must have a special care we
destroy not this Temple, by prostrating our selves to base lusts; try thy self
for this, and though none can do this as they should, yet are all to labor and
endeavor it.

He that has this assurance to be able to challenge and triumph over his
enemies in Christ, must be the most fearful 5.
man in the world, not as doubting of Gods favor, but in being afraid to sin
against God, and to offend any of his Brethren; which if thou do, thou shall
be the stronger in this triumphing faith. Examples hereof we have throughout
the whole Scriptures in all Gods children, when they were once effectually
called, whose carriage I pray mark what it was, Luke 19. 8. Zacheus made
restitution abundantly when his faith had embraced Jesus Christ again, Act. 17.
Those that had used unlawful A ^s when faith once entered, they burnt their
books lest they should draw away their hearts, and infect and hurt others, they
so hated their sin; and Romans 6. 1. the Apostle abhors even so much as to think
of his former conversation, to live in the corruption of it. They that have
this faith indeed, there is an uproar as it were in their hearts against sin;
and when they are overtaken and stumble, 2 Cor. 7. oh how careful are they to
repent, and pray to God to be washed from their sins. And all this may serve to
show what kind of persons they be, even the most fearful to sin, and careful to
please God of all others. Paul after he was converted, would rather never eat,
then he would justly offend his Brother, and all because God had given him this
triumphing faith. This care and fear should be in all of us, for he that is
bold in sin, say what he will, he finds not this faith, nor can triumph in it.

Sixthly, It a man have this, then is he the most forward unto, and
fruitfulness and abounding in good 6.
works above all others in the world; for this faith, it transplants and sets
us (being by nature wild olives) into Christ the true Vine, who is no barren
root, but fruitful, 2 Cor. 9. this we may see in the believing Corinthians
charity, he speaks of there, and in the woman that cast all that she had into
the Treasury, and in Zacheus, that gave half his goods to the poor; faith
opened his heart, that before was nigardly; and so John 12. how did Mary pour
out the ointment, and that good woman, Act. 9. 36. so full of chastity; so also
Acts 2. 4. they were now content all should be for Christ. Now these examples
with many more, are all set down for our learning and imitation, if we will
find indeed such a faith as will save our souls another day.

Seventhly, he that has this insulting faith, he does already conquer his
enemies, he finds the power of it daily 7.
in giving him victory in some kind over his in-dwelling sin; and strengthening
him against the world and temptations, leading him to sin, though he find them
not fully conquered, yet is not his heart so fully and altogether taken up, but
that he has some freedom in the midst of all the affairs and businesses of
this world, to set some time apart for Divine exercises to honor God, he is
not a slave to the world, 1 John 1. 5. this faith lifts him so up, as he is
above the dominion of the world, though he may be often foiled, yet gets he up
again, and gets ground of lusts daily, and is not as many that are led away,
and made slaves to their pleasures, profits, etc. This faith gets victory over
the immoderateness of recreations and delights in some sort.

Lastly, This faith, it is no fantasy of a man's brain, 8.
but that which Gods Word is the ground of, and therefore he that has it, it
makes him receive the Ministers testimony to Gods Word which is true. Now this
faith, it carries life in it, whereby a man may know he has it; the Scripture
is manifest for this, Gal. 2. 20. The life that I live is by faith in the Son
of God; Hab. 2. 4. The just shall live by his faith; and that righteousness
which brings into Gods presence and favor, it has a light within which
consists,

1. In that if thou have this triumphing faith, then 1.
thou have a sweet apprehension of Gods favor by an inward feeling of a
reconciliation with an angry God whom thou have so offended.

2. In some peace of Conscience. 2. 3.


3. Unspeakable joy in the Holy Ghost, even when the world sets against thee,
and sorrows oppress thee.

4 In a change, a new creature, the D^vils image 4
defaced, and the Image of God that was lost, restored.

5. It shows it self also in warranting thy actions, and 5.
letting thee see that the thing thou do, in regard of the substance, is
good; also it covers the defects of thy actions in Christ, and tells thee that
God accepts of thy po^r endeavors in him; and hereupon it is that Gods
children, when they find God reconciled to them, and themselves once brought
into his favor, are so stirred up to good works and prayer; also in
afflictions, that it is which keeps the heart close to God in his promises;
neither tying God to time, means, nor manner, but waiting patiently for
deliverance.

This faith also, it has his sense, an eye, an ear, a Psalm 119. Luke 10. 23.
Mat. 3. Luke 9. 1.
hand, etc. likewise its voice, both inward and outward; when God says
believe, it makes a man find a spirit within, say^ng, Lord I believe; indeed it
makes him also outwardly, with the Publican, confess his sin and wretchedness;
as also, how does a true believer pray: he not only speaks, but even speaks
because he does believe. Now of the lets to this faith, there are a world of
hindrances; the Devil blows into the brains of men by ordinary conceits,
arising in their imaginations, to hinder and keep them from such a faith as may
assure their hearts that there is no condemnation belonging to them, and so go
on cheerfully about their business, having all their wants supplied. And there
is indeed no Christian that is in Christ that can possibly be clean without
them, only the difference is, some have more, some less; but let us all well
weigh them, and they will appear all but conceits, and to have no reality and
truth in them.

1. Now the first of these is, That it is presumption, which is a conceit the
Papists take up, and is in us all, 1.
so far as we are naturally Popish; we think this faith is but a presumption,
yet this is but a mere conceit, for if we have faith, it assures us through
Christ, that nothing can destroy us. All presumption, is either upon a man's own
merit, or Gods mercies (as Divines acknowledge.) Now that faith does neither of
these it is plain; for he first that knows Christ according to his Word, lays
hold on Christ's merits, and Gods mercy in him, and so applies and rests
thereupon before God, laboring to bring forth fruit, and so is assured of Gods
love. And this is no presum tion, for he relies not upon his own merits, but
Christ's.

2. This faith builds not on Gods mercy at large, but 2.
on his mercy in Christ; he believes on him that has satisfied Gods justice,
and therefore knows that God cannot but must needs show mercy: If this were
presumption, who would seek after it to lose his labor? but this the Lord
commands, and therefore it is no presumption, but obedience and duty to do it.
Nay, if thou should Vide Joh. 14.
not seek after this faith and assurance, it were a neglect Joh. 1. 3, 23.
and contempt of the Commandment of God.

A second impediment that keeps men from seeking this faith is a conceit that
it is impossible ever to get it, and this sticks too much in our unbelieving
hearts, and is strongly rooted in our ignorant Protestants, that give
themselves to other Books, but not to the careful and conscionable reading of
Gods Book, where there is nothing so beaten upon, both in Old and New
Testament, as that we should trust in God, and not upon our selves; and that
this which belongs to every child of God that shall be saved is no conceit of
impossibility; but this faith belongs to every child of God, therefore not
impossible to be attained; and this is plainly proved, Gal. 3. 26. where it is
said, Ye are all the Sons of God by faith; there is none the Son of God but by
believing in the Son of God; and Act. 13. 40. So many as were ordained to
eternal life believed: which shows, that all such shall have this faith, that
is, a true and a saving faith, not the counterfeit faith of the world; for it
is a gift common to all Gods children, without which a man cannot be a Son of
God.

A third hindrance, is a conceit that it is very hard and 3.
difficult, though not impossible; a man may labor will some say, seven years
and never attain thereunto.

But admit it be hard, as it is indeed so to flesh and blood, to which every
good course is irksom; yet consider, that the first point in Christianity is to
deny our selves, and to go to Christ, always knowing that whatsover the first
Adam lost, the second Adam Christ Jesus has it for thee. N^w Christ, he has
bidden thee to take upon thee his yo^k, and that is part of it, even this
conquering and triumphing faith, and whatsoever belongs to Christ's yoke it is
easy. John 14 1. Ye believe in God, believe also in me, says Christ, where he
commands thee to believe; and Mat. 11. 28. Christ calls thee to come to him if
thou be heavy laden, and weary of thy sins. Why should thou then fear any
thing, when he can make all things easy to thee? Go therefore to God in
Christ's Name, he has promised to give thee above all thou can ask or think:
This conceit of difficulty in obtaining such a faith, it belongs only to
sluggish and slothsul Christians, who yet notwithstanding for the things of
this world will sit up all night, and ride and run through thick and thin. Be
not thou less careful and diligent for thy soul, this faith, this excellent
thing, will quit all thy pains if thou dealest not in thine own wisdom and
strength, but go out of thy self and seek it of Christ, which if thou
do, then shall thou find it no hard thing, but easy, because God will give
it thee in the use of the means, if thou be constant therein. Let not therefore
this misconceit by any means hinder thee.

A fourth let or hindrance, is a conceit that it is either needless, or at
least not of such absolute necessity, but (...).
that a man may do well enough, though he come not to such assurance and
confidence in his faith, as to insult and triumph therein; And this is a
conceit that hinders those that are more forward in profession then others, and
in the performing of some duties more careful, yet go not home to God so
thoroughly as they should, but keep their souls aloof as it were from God; but
without this faith it is impossible for them to know whether they be elect or
reprobates, hypocrites, or the true children of God indeed, and therefore let
such know it is of absolute necessity, 2 Cor. 13. 5. Know ye not that they are
in the faith, says the Apostle, except ye be as reprobates? Let not therefore
any such conceit still possess thee; but seeing this says is of absolute
necessity, as the truth of Gods Word shows; pluck up thy heart and go to God
for it.

A fifth impediment, is a conceit that this is the only way to open a gap to
all licentiousness; but 5.
who are they that say thus? surely none but Athiests, that fear neither God
nor man, or else Papists, that are blinded themselves, and would blind others.
Oh that such learned men as many of them be, should be so grossly ignorant of
Gods truth; Indeed they that have not this faith, may open a gap to all
licentiousness, but no true believer that has found this conquering and
insulting faith, for he is the most fearful man of all other to commit sin, and
before this a man never makes conscience of sin, Act. 15. 9. and Act. 26. 15.
when this once comes, it opens his eyes and makes him pry into his own heart,
to see what a dunghill it is, and so makes him labor to cast out all his filthy
affections and sinful lusts, and to endeavor after holiness and righteousness;
so far is this from making a man licentious: for it is the very ro^t from
whence all holiness of heart and life flows, and therefore let no man suffer
this conceit to hinder him from seeking this faith.

We shall be kept to the possession of that salvation we once believed and
hoped for; if we could quite lose it again, then must there be something
stronger then the power of God, but we know that cannot be; for God only has
power to consume all things from the earth in a moment, with the breath of his
nostrils; and therefore there is nothing above his power: O then in how blessed
an estate are they above all the world, whom the Lord has pleased to set in
such an estate, as once to be assured of this faith, and walk in it? Beware
therefore of conceits; a conceit had almost made the Iaylor to kill himself,
Acts 16. 27. 2 Kings 7. 19, 20. a conceit hindered the Prince: go thou
therefore by sound judgment from the Word of God; false suppositions and
conceits make men so differ as they do. All conceits at last will fall on thy
head, and thou with thy false conceits as cha^t, be blown away; labor thou
therefore for truth and right in all things, that will be a Buckler which will
defend thy head; but make account the Devil will hinder thee herein what he
can: for he knows well enough, if thou once get this, thou will soon be gone
out of his Kingdom.

Now come we to consider the means which God has appointed to work this faith,
and increase it in our selves, which be indeed abundant; but the main means of
all is the lifting up the standard, The preaching of the Gospel of Jesus
Christ; And therefore we are diligently to attend at wisdoms posts to hear Gods
word, Romans 10. 14. It is that which opens the heart and so lets in Christ, who
by his spirit does enable us from an inward light and power to say, Lord I
believe, and therefore am assured of my salvation. This faith leaves not a man
with his sins about him to go on in the course of this world, still doubting,
for he can tell how he came by his faith, and it is not a common but a true
substantial faith, that will never fail when he comes to stand most in need of
it; and is no conceit or bare imagination gotten by contemplation, but a
settled persuasion arising from Gods word, even the root of all good works,
that can possibly be accepted in Gods sight.

And the first means whereby to come to such a faith (...).
is to see, consider and take to heart what estate we are in without believing
in Christ, this is the first step thereunto, and before this a man can never
come truly to believe and so to be knit to Christ in the marriage bond of Grace.

Now what estate we are in before may easily appear by these particulars, as

That we all in Adam are fallen away, and so have lost the image of God. 1.


Are wholly under the guilt of sin.

The children of Gods wrath. 2. 3. 4. 5.


In the power and snares of the Devil,

Under the curse of the Law, howsoever we may bless our selves and the world
think us blessed, etc.

And lastly guilty of eternal condemnation, and so endangered to be swallowed
up of the gulf of Hell when 6.
we are dead, without we get this faith. Now by all this we may see what need
we have to get into the rock Christ, it being the estate of every child of
Adam, Kings, Emperors, etc. even all and every one by nature. Which when the
poor soul stricken with the word, comes to understand aright and feel it as in
the presence of God, then he comes

To think how he shall be brought to God again. 1. 2. 3. 4.


How he may be born again being of such a sinful case.

How he may get the heavy curse removed.

How he shall come to get out of the power and snares of the Devil.

How to come to be a child of Gods love. 5. 6.


To think how he shall be freed from the gulf of Hell when he dies.

Now when a man sees this and is convinced thoroughly thereof in his judgment,
he cannot be quiet until he has sought some remedy, then has he set the
first step to this blessed estate of true saving faith. Examples hereof we have
Act. 2. In those three thousand that were converted at one Sermon: who having
their case laid open, cried out, what shall we do to be saved? and that was
the first step to their believing, for after that they came to believe: so
likewise Act. 16. 30. The Iaylor when he came in trembling and desired to know
by what means to come to salvation, then the Doctrine of faith took place; even
so we, before we can attain to this faith that triumphs against condemnation,
we must go out of our selves, and run to God only in Christ, without whom we
perish: And the reason many find not this faith, is, because they have a
general and conceited faith wherewith they content themselves, which makes them
to slubber over all things, and so live and die in the same; even because they
come not soundly to understand by the word of God their woeful and lamentable
estate by nature, the true and effectual knowledge whereof is the first step to
true saving faith.

A second means is, when a man not only sees it soundly 2.
and so does effectually go out of himself, but also resolves to cast away
that sin he sees in himself, a man may come to consider his estate deeply and
yet go on in wicked courses. But when he can desire with all his heart to be
rid of all his sin, and cast it off, it is a special means and a further
step to this faith, at least to the manifestation of it to us. Repent and
believe is the voice of the gospel. No man can believe except he repent, and
cast off sin, so no man can repent except he believe, and have some hope that
his sins may be pardoned. Many see their sins yet cast them not away, and
therefore the conscience beats them off and will not let them believe. It tells
them that Christ and such a soul cannot stand together. The door is shut, if
thou make not account in thy affection and conversation to leave all sin, 1
Io. 3. 6. whosoever, says the Apostle, sins has not seen God. So that the
soul has a second step to believe when a man truly repents of all his sins, 2
Cor. 6. 17, 18. Then God offers himself as a father to a man, when he casts off
such as are lin be as it were of Satan, and of the fellowship of darkness, that
is when a man casts off his evil company and all sin that may defile his soul,
and make him unworthy to be Gods child; and therefore when a man casts off sin
and the instruments of sin, then is he fit to believe, and God will be ready to
show himself unto him, not a judge but a father, Rev 3. 19. When a man begins
to be zealous for God and amend his sinful ways and courses, and leaves
cherishing those abominable sins that before he has lived in, and for want of
this resolution to take Christ's part against sin, it comes to pass a man's heart
and conscience will not let him come to lay hold of Christ, even because he
harbors Christ's enemies that will not suffer him to come in.

A third means is when a man renounces as well his 3.
own righteousness as his sins. It is Christ's righteousness that must make us
righteous before God, that is our justification to eternal life. There is (to
say the truth) no righteousness before a man comes to be in Christ, only it is
called an outward righteousness, and is so taken before men; and therefore if
thou will come to this faith, thou must cast off all, not conceit of
righteousness, but thine own righteousness indeed; For that cannot further thee
in this point, as thine own sins cannot hinder thee. What hindered the Jews and
Papist, and thousands of Protestants at this day from faith that should uphold
their souls, but a conceit of their own righteousness? The Jews they would
perform obedience to the law, and venture their salvation upon that
righteousness, Romans 10 2^. And therefore they could not believe. So the Papists
now, they do still in part stick upon their own righteousness, whereas there is
none in himself righteous but God alone Jehovah, who is righteousness, as he
proclaims himself. We lost all in Adam, and recover all again in Christ. Many
ignorant Protestants, and some that have knowledge also, will not stick to say,
that if a man have a good meaning, dealing righteously, and serving God, he
shall be accepted; all which is nothing without Christ: for the more a man goes
on in good intentions, before he be in Christ by faith, all his performances
are but cursed abominations, and so further off from faith, and that which God
has most severely punished, as he did Saul, his good intention without
obedience unto him.

But may some say, if it be so, then it is better to sin, Object.
and not do good works ^t all.

Not so, for then thou encreasest thy punishment: thy Answ.
sin is the less if thou have a good meaning, because thou think that thou
do that which is good; if thou knew and thoughest otherwise, thy
condemnation should be the deeper; yet know this, till thou art in Christ all
is abominable before God, and but l^st labor, Phil. 3. 5, 6. Paul, he had a
zeal enough in him, before he came to believe in Christ, and not only a good
meaning, but thought he did more, and better then others, and for his
righteousness toward man, he was unrebukeable, none could come near him, but
after he came to see it was a hindrance (for that it was without Christ) and so
made him to run so far out of the way; and therefore we must cast off all our
own righteousness before we can be in Christ. This Paul saw, and that made him
come to Christ, and say that he counted all loss, yea but dung that he might
win Christ, and be found clothed in that righteousness which is by faith in
him, which before he could not attain unto, notwithstanding he might have stood
upon his privileges, and have boasted of the excellent things he had done, yet
was he fain to cast away all his confidence in the flesh, that is, his
prerogatives, righteousness and zeal, etc. and so must we cast away all our own
righteousness and goodness, and fetch all from God, and serve God according to
his will, and not after ourown fantasies, or the prescripts of man, dealing
also truly with every one we have to do withal. It Is not our own
righteousness, but the relying on it, that hinders and keeps a man from faith,
without which all is but abominable, even our eating, drinking, and whatsoever
we do is odious before God, until we come to get this true faith, to triumph
over condemnation. A man when he is naked in in himself is then the fitter to
be clothed with Christ's robe; every thing is then sweet to him, and so he
comes to desire and say, Come Lord Jesus.

A fourth means is, a poor spirit and beggarly, that is, such a one as has
neither comfort within nor without; 4.
when nothing will now so comfort him, as the thinking of his present estate
will humble him. And this will make a man poor indeed though he be never so
rich, and bring him with David to say, I am poor and needy, Lord help me, Psalm.
70. 5. This will let him see that he is a poor Lazer, begging at the gates of
God, who is rich in mercy. And it is a further degree to bring him to Christ,
and make Christ to enrich him; That which hinders many from coming to Christ
is, that they are full enough; these whatsoever they say in words, they indeed
cast off Christ's righteousness, because their spirits are not cast down to beg
at Gods hand; if they have children, honor, wealth and professions, tell them
of condemnation, they are proud, and think themselves well enough; they will
tell you that they hope to be saved as well as the best. But let such know, all
fullness dwells in Christ, none at all in us, in the matter of salvation. Get
Christ first to reign in thee, that thou may after come to reign with him in
glory.

A fifth means is, the fair, free, large, and great offer of 5.
Grace made in the Gospel, where are they now that say they would, and so would
indeed believe? John 3. 16. God so loved the world, etc. Here is a means to
bring thee to believe indeed; A strange thing that the Judge and party
offended should thus offer to every soul to whom the Gospel comes, his Son,
that God himself should offer a pardon, who would not strive with himself and
sigh and groan, yea even burst his heart in pieces to believe? This is one of
the specialest means of all to bring a man to believe that God himself the
party offended should come and say, here is my Son, take him unto thee; Labor
therefore to get him, lay fast hold on him, and he will bless and comfort thee
for ever. If thou do open thy heart and let him in, he offers his son to
thee to believe in. And why? Is it because thou art such a beautiful and great
person? etc. No, it comes from the love of his own heart, and therefore it is
free. As thy righteousness cannot further it, so thy sins cannot hinder it, if
thou lay but hold on it. The offer is not only to noble, rich, young, etc. But
to all whosoever believes though never so mean, poor, old may take him, go away
with him, and live with him for ever. Many think they should have something of
their own. No, God looks at his own love, and so do thou, that his love mercy
and grace, may be magnified in thee. Let us therefore stir up our sev^s and
look and seek to God, He will give his spirit to all his at one time or another.

A sixth means is, to know that there is not only a free 6.
offer, but also a commandment to enjoin us, not to refuse and neglect Gods
offer: that is the greatest blessing that can be to have him come unto thee, to
reign over thee, and subdue thy sin. It is the spirit of God that would draw
thy heart to believe; open therefore and receive it. Consider for this 1 Ioh.
3. 23. This is his commandment that we should believe on the Name of his Son
Jesus Christ, And search thy heart to try if thou have gotten such a faith. God
commands thee to believe, and therefore it is not indifferent whether thou have
it or no, or to think only that thou have it: And this is a further means and
that which leaves us without all excuse if we obey not. A man often times will do
a thing upon command, that else he would not do.

A Seventh means is to remember the fearful threatenings, Ioh, 3. 18. He that
believes not is condemned, 7.
because he has not believed in the Name of the only begotten Son of God, God
sees all is little enough we have such carnal hearts, consider that well and it
will awaken thee out of thy security and make thee see thou can not tell what
to do if thou do not get this faith, which except thou do seek to God for
and get, even this that here has been said shall stand up in Judgment against
thee another day. Now to encourage thee hereunto know this, that God has
promised that though thou can not do it, yet if thou seek to him he will help
thee. Go to God therefore upon his promise, if thou would not have thy
portion with the condemned Devils. He that will not believe has nothing to
uphold him against the guilt of conscience, then the which there needs no more.
He that has the wrath of an infinite God to wrestle withal cannot but be
condemned; The care of this therefore ought to be above all other care for
wife, children or any thing else in the world whatsoever.

But you are very strict and hard may some possibly say. Object.


If thou think strange of this, think strange of God, for here is nothing
spoken but from God. Answ. 8.


A eighth and a chief means is the word preached, Romans 10. 17. Faith comes by
hearing, and hearing by the word of God. Therefore be careful to come as thou
ought to the word, and bring others under the sound of the Gospel which is
the word of faith; submit thy self to it and God will not fail thee, this do
and it shall com, it will come, yea it must needs come, because God is
faithful and unchangeable; stumble not therefore at any thing that is said by
the faithful Ministers of Gods word, if any weakness pass, bear with it, and
take all in the best part. If thou get this ^aith thou shall eat and drink, and
sl^ep and trade, and live in the world with more comfort then ever thou did,
and after live with the Lord Jesus for ever.

The last means is prayer which serves as bellows to 9.
blow up all, pray that thou may see, consider, and take to heart thy woeful
and lamentable estate by nature, then will thy sighs and groans bestrong and
powerful with God Pray with all, that God will be pleased to humble thee and
enable thee to do all as aforesaid. To stir thee up to this lay thine ear and
hear how the damned souls in Hell, that neglected and refused grace do roar,
yell and howl, that now would give worlds if they had them, to enjoy the time
that the Lord affords thee to repent in; consider these things wisely, and the
Lord give thee understanding in all things.

CHRIST THE FOUNTAIN OF STRENGTH to all his SAINTS.
2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Thou therefore my son, be strong in the grace which is in Christ
Jesus.
NOw that we are met together to receive the Lords supper and to be partakers
of that holy Sacrament, we are seriously to consider what we are to do, When we
draw near to the Lord in such a holy business: you shall find that there are
two things to be done.

One is, that every man is to examine himself, that is, to try whether there be
any grace in his heart or no, any beginnings of grace: because if there be no
grace, a man eats, and drinks his own damnation, or judgment to himself.

Another thing is, if there be any grace, then the end of the sacrament is for
the confirmation, and the strengthening of this grace, and to build him up
further: therefore we must consider how we should grow in that grace. This text
will help us in both these. For in this inquisition whether there be anygrace
in our hearts or no, we must examine it by some characters of grace. Now the
principal character is that it makes a man strong, grace give^ a man power and
strength, which is intimated in this. Thou therefore my son be strong in the
grace which is in Christ Jesus.

And then for the growth of grace, the question is where we shall have it?
Surely it is to be drawn out of the fountain, that is in Jesus Christ, be
strong in grace, that is, the grace that we receive from Jesus Christ. Now we
do not take it immediately from him, we do not come so near to the wellhead:
but we draw it by certain conconduit-pipes: there are certain veins, and
arteries, that convey this grace from Christ to the heart of a Christian,
certain duggs by which we suck it from him, and those are the Lords Ordinances,
the word, and sacraments. This text will give us opportuuity of both these.

The scope briefly is this: when the Apostle had told Timothy what his own
sufferings were, how many difficult cases he had passed through, says he thou
art my son; thou must go in the same steps thy father has gone before thee,
thou must also suffer persecution; thou have also the ministry of grace
committed to thee, therefore be strong in the Lords work.

But how shall he be strong?

Says the Apostle, nothing strengthens but grace, be strong, through the
grace, or in the grace, etc. that is, it is only grace that strengthens in
the inner man, that makes a man able to do spiritual and holy duties.

But whence shall we have this grace?

Says he, be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus; that is, the grace
which is received from Christ Jesus: not only that which is received at our
first conversion, but which we receive continually. As the Air receives light
from the Sun, by a continual influxion; so there is a continual influence of
grace from Christ.

Adam had grace originally inherent in him, but it is not so with us; there is
not that inherency, (though there be that also, yet it differs from the other)
because the grace that we have now, is wholly received from our conjunction
with Christ Jesus. We should therefore presently lose all if there were a
disjunction between Christ and us. And that is the ground why we cannot fall
from grace, because we cannot be divided from Christ.

Now I say, in these words you shall see a character, or property of grace;
Thou my son be strong in the grace which is in Christ Jesus. This point then
you see does first offer it self to us evidently; That

It is the property, or nature of grace to make us strong; Doct. 1. It is the
property of grace to make us strong.
to make us able to perform the duties of new obedience.

So that now, when you are to come to the Sacrament, and to consider whether
you have grace; that is a business in which you may occupy your minds, to
consider whether you have this character of grace, that it make you strong, and
able to do the work of the Lord.

For the opening of this point, I will do two things.

First, I will show you what grace is, what is signified by this word Grace,
that we may understand what is meant by it.

Secondly, I will show you the reason why it makes us strong.

First of all, grace, it is a supernatural peculiar quality, Grace What?
wrought in our hearts by the Holy Ghost, whereby we are enabled to please God
in all things.

First, I say grace is a quality, for you must know, there is a double grace
mentioned in the Scripture: There is A quality.
the grace of justification, which is a thing in God alone, it is his favor to
us, whereby he accepts us in his Son, Romans 6. 14. Sin shall have no dominion
over you, for you are not under the Law but under grace; that is, you are in
the state of grace, or favor with God: so in Romans 3. Ye Romans 6. 14.
are justified freely by his grace, that is, of his mere favor, not of debt,
or due, not by works. Romans 3.


But now there is mention made likewise of grace in other places, where you
shall see it is taken for an inherent quality, as in Heb. 12. the last verse
but one; Seeing we have such a kingdom, let us have grace in our hearts to Heb.
12.
serve him with godly fear and reverence. Mark it, Let us have grace to serve
him; that is, let us labor to have this holy quality of grace wrought in our
hearts, that it may strengthen and enable us to serve him, that so we may
please him in all things with fear and reverence; so likewise, 2 Pet. 3. ult.
But grow in grace, and in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ; growth is
properly of that which is a permanent thing, of that which is an inherent
thing, as when a thing is said to grow whiter and whiter, etc. so I say, grace
is an inherent quality, which is stamped upon the heart, which is begotten in
the heart.

But then I add, that it is a supernatural quality, that is, it is such a
quality as elevates and raises a man, that ^2 Supernatural
enableth a man to do more then he is able to do by the strength of nature. As
for example, to illustrate it; If you take water of it self, you know it is
able to make your hands cold, or any thing that is put into it; but if you will
have water do any thing above the nature of it, you must put in a higher
quality; if you will have it heat, you must put it to the fire. So it is here,
we are able to do the things agreeable to nature, without any special help; but
when we are to do the duties of new obedience, to please God, to do things that
nature cannot reach unto, we must have a higher quality infused into our
hearts: therefore I say, grace is a supernatural quality that raises nature,
that elevates it, that helps it to do more then otherwise it is able to do.

Again, I add, that it is a supernatural peculiar quality, 3. Peculiar.
because there are some common supernatural gifts, as those gifts of
temperance, knowledge, patience, meekness, and the like; these are the gifts of
the Holy Ghost, and these are many times wrought in the hearts of those that
are not truly sanctified; and these are supernatural gifts too: but yet they
are but common gifts; they are such gifts as the Holy Ghost bestows upon those
that are not elected to life. But now saving grace is a gift peculiar to the
Elect, peculiar to those that are within the Covenant; therefore to make a
distinction, we put them together in the description, and say it is a
supernatural peculiar quality.

Again, further I add, that it is wrought in us by the 4. Wrought by the holy
ghost.
Holy Ghost, because no creature in heaven or earth is able to work grace in
any man's heart: for to put grace into the heart, is to put life into the heart;
now to put life into the heart, is the property of the Spirit, it is he that
makes a man to live another life, that as it is only fire that can beget heat,
so it is only the Holy Ghost that can beget life. It is true, other
instruments are used; the Word is an instrument, and holy men are instruments,
but yet it is the Holy Ghost that works it principally, and all instruments can
do nothing without the influence of the Holy Ghost.

I add again, to make it yet more full, that it is wrought 5. Whereby we are
enabled to please God.
by the Holy Ghost, whereby we are enabled to please God; All those other
common graces, and all the effects and fruits of them, though the things be
good in themselves, and supernatural, because they come from the holy Spirit,
yet they do not please God, that is, the Lord is not so well pleased, as to
accept the man, that is the Subject and the Agent of them to eternal life.
Only by faith a man is able to please God, and faith you know is the principle
and root of all other graces, it is only grace that makes a man able to please
him, because the Lord delights in that which is like to himself. This grace is
the stamp and Image of God; till a man then have such a quality in him, and
that all the works that he does proceeds from this Image, he pleases not God.

Lastly, I add, it enableth him to please God in all things; for it is the
property of grace, that as it has a 6. In all things.
general being spread through the whole soul, so it has general effects, that
is, it has an influence into all a man's life, into all his actions, so that
whatsoever he does, there is some tincture of grace seen in it, some leaven (as
I may say) of grace, some taste of grace. Such a grace as is bestowed upon a
man as a common gift, it helps a man to do such a particular business; it makes
him m^ek, it makes him temperate, it makes him to understand his profession, it
makes him able to rule, etc. but yet this property it has not, to have a
general influence into all that a man does, into all his actions; for that is
only the property of saving grace, it enableth us to please God in all things.
So we see briefly what grace is.

Now I say, this grace strengthens us wheresoever it is, it makes a man
strong in the inner man, it makes him Grace makes strong.
able to do the duties of new obedience, he is not only willing and desirous,
and purposing to do them, but it gives him power, and strength, and vigor to go
through with the work; and the reasons are two.

First, because grace changes the nature of a man, when a man's nature is
changed, that he does naturally, Reas. 1. Grace changes man's nature.
he does it strongly. There is nothing so strong as the course of nature; you
see it is hard to turn that: other things that are not natural, their course is
easily altered; but to make a man another man, of a Lion to make him a Lamb;
this grace can do, and nothing else. Now take all feigned and counterfeit
things, they are feigned, and return quickly to their own nature again. You
know gilded things last not long, the guilt wears off; colors that are not
wadded, they will not last, because they are but counterfeit, and counterfeit
things abide not, they have no strength in them. Now grace, changing a man's
nature, it runs strongly, it makes a man able to do the things he is set on
work to do, that is the first Reason.

Secondly, Grace is the vigor, or strength, or efficacy Reas. 2. Grace is the
efficacy of the spirit.
of the spirit, the very force, and power of the holy Ghost. As it is said of
the Gospel, It is the power of God to salvation: so you may say grace, it is
the power of the spirit. All other things in a man do but proceed from the
flesh, that is they have a root in the flesh: common graces have a rise in our
selves; though there is a help of the holy Ghost in them, yet there is
something of the flesh in them. Now whatsoever comes of the flesh, though it
be beautiful, yet it is as a flower that will fade away. There is a weakness in
all flesh, as there is a strength in spirit, Isa. 21. 3.
which is intimated Isa. 21. 3. Fear not the Egyptians for they are flesh, and
not spirit. As if he had said, if there be nothing with them but an arm of
flesh, they are but weak: for weakness is that that follows the flesh as
naturally as the shadow does the body. Now I say grace is the immediate work
of the spirit, the very power of the holy Ghost which is able to out-wrestle
all difficulties, and to help us against all spiritual wickednesses, and assist
us in all holy obedience.

But it may be objected, I but grace though it do Object.
strengthen thus, yet it is but a creature: for though it be a quality that is
wrought by the holy Ghost in the heart, if it be so, yet it is but a creature;
therefore seeing every creature is subject to weakness, how does grace
strengthen a man thus?

To this I answer, First that grace is a quality of that nature, Answ. Grace an
emptying quality.
that it empties a man of himself, it is an emptying quality. It is not as
other indowments, other qualities, and other habits put into the soul, but it
is an emptying quality that takes a man off from his own bottom, it cuts him
off from his own root, and ingrafts him into another, it teaches him to depend
upon God. For if you look upon faith which is the main grace, and gift, (as it
were) the root and foundation to all other graces, is it not an emptying Grace?
what is faith but to teach a man to trust in God? Now no man trusts in another
fully but he distrusts himself fully; it makes a man nothing in himself, and
wholly dependant upon the Lord. Even such is grace, it takes a man quite off
from any root of his own, and makes him as ivy that hangs upon and clasps
about the tree, receives its being, and sustenance from it. So grace it
annihilates the creature as it were, it takes a man off from that sufficiency
that every man seeks to have in his own sphere, in his own nature, it teaches
a man to know that he is not able to think a good thought, nor to do a good
work of himself.

Again I answer, though it be a quality, and that our strength is from God
immediately, yet God will have We must use means of strength.
us to use means, and instruments, wherein he himself helps us to do. For it is
true, if any man will trust to this habitual grace, which I say is an inherent
quality wrought in the heart by the holy Ghost, if any man will grow careless
in the strength of this grace, and say, well, I am now a man grown strong, I
have now gotten some good measure of grace, therefore now I will venture upon
occasions of sin, etc. Here a man makes flesh his arm, though he do trust to
grace: for he ought not so to do, he ought to look up to God, for another
transient exciting and assisting grace: besides this inherent quality which I
speak of to have a dependence upon him; and yet not altogether to rest in that,
for then a man should not be bound to increase in grace, and to grow in it,
which every man is bound to do, grow in grace and in the knowledge of Jesus
Christ. Therefore there is a use of that, you must make account you are so much
the stronger by it: for no man will labor for a thing but he will know some
end of it. As we see in other things, a man may use the strength of horses, and
of men, he may use means and friends; but still it is required that he remember
how he uses them, that his eye be still upon the Lord as him that gives the
strength. It is he that keeps that grace in being, it is he that must act it,
and stir it up to do the works we are to do from time to time.

The chief use we are now to make of it is, to examine Use. To examine if we
have grace.
and try our selves whether we have grace in our hearts or no, by this
property, and character of grace here set down, that it makes a man strong,
thou my son be strong in the grace, etc. We must I say examine our selves: for
there are two special times wherein the Lord himself makes a privy search (as
it were) the one is at the time of the Sacrament, the other at the day of
death. Therefore when men come to the Lords Table, the Lord (as it were) goes
down himself, and takes a view of the guests, and sees whether they be so
qualified as men ought to be that come to his Table: therefore look to your
selves now you are bidden, examine your selves.

In the Law a man might not come to the passover but he must be circumcised:
those you know were but legal types, and resembled somewhat else. You must not
come to the Lords Supper, but there must be this circumcision made without
hands, there must be such a fitness in you as you may be accepted: therefore
you must examine your selves when you come hither.

Again another time wherein the Lord makes this privy search is at our entrance
into the wedding chamber, at the day of death, When the Bridegroom goes in,
then the Lord searches whether we have oil in our Lam^s or no: whether those
that offer to enter in have any effects, any tincture of his Sons blood upon
them. The effect of Heb. 9. 14.
his Sons blood you shall see Heb. 9. 14. It is to purge the conscience from
dead works. If there be no strikes (as it were) of his blood, if there be no
dye of it, he gives the destroying Angel power to devour them: because there is
not that grace that is the effect of the blood of Christ: they have no oil in
their Lamps, therefore they are shut out.

Therefore I say, when we come to the Lords Table, let us consider what we do:
for you must know that the Lord admits none to his Table but friends, such as
are of his acquainance; those that are strangers to him may not presume. If
thou come to the Lords Table, and be a stranger to him: that is, if thou want
grace in thy heart, this quality that we now speak of, thou have nothing to do
here: for you must know that no man must sit at his Table here in earth, that
is not to sit at his Table in Heaven, to sit with Abraham, Isaak and Jacob in
his Kingdom. The Lord will take it for a great presumption; therefore take heed
of intruding upon this duty.

When the Ark was brought among the Philistines, and the Bethshemites would be
so bold as to look into it, the Lord smote fifty thousand of them for it. What
was the reason of this? say they who shall stand before this holy Lord God. If
the Lord were thus ready to revenge himself on them for profaning of that
which was but a type, what will he do for profaning the body and blood of his
Son? You know that is the comparison, Heb. 12. If any man transgressed against
the Law of Moses, Heb. 12.
he received a recompense and reward: What will he do then to those that
contemn the salvation that is brought by his Son? So if the Lord would do this
for the profaning of the Ark that was but a type of Christ Jesus, but a legal
rite, that had but a show of holiness; what will he do, when we shall neglect,
and abuse and profane those things that are holy indeed?

We do not know what danger we incur when we come negligently to the Lords
Supper. You see in 1 Cor. 11. That their negligent coming to the Lords Supper,
because 1 Cor. 11.
they did not discern the Lords Body, that is, because they did not discern the
holiness, the preciousnesse and excellency of his body, because they did not
consider the holiness of that duty; therefore says the Text, the Lord struck
many of them with sickness, and some with death. It was certainly some
contagion, some sickness at that time more then ordinary. And if you compare
it with that before mentioned of the Bethshemites, you may see plainly that it
is the Lords ordinary course to inflict a more then ordinary judgment upon
those that are prophaners of holy things: therefore we may well say among other
causes, that the unholy coming to the Lords Table is the cause of that great
plague that of late has been in this place.

But you will say, I have received it and it may be Object.
negligently, but I have felt no such thing as this you speak of.

Perhaps thou have not; but there is the spiritual plague Answ.
and judgment which the Lord has put upon thee, as a revenge for thy unworthy
receiving of the Sacrament. When John Baptist came to preach, the Scripture
says he brought the ax with him, not that men were to be cut off from their
natural life; but the meaning is, when men abuse these holy Ordinances, and
will not receive the offer of the Gospel, and will not profit by the Gospel.
When we do but preach the Gospel only to your ears, and no more, the Lord
commonly smites such souls with spiritual judgments; he gives up such souls to
hardness of heart: therefore when you come hither, ask your selves this
question, what grace have I in my heart? have I any life, any stomach, any
taste to feed upon the Lord in the Sacrament? have I white raiment to cover my
nakedness? if not, what do I here? You shall see in 1 Cor. 10. when men offer
to come to this Sacrament without grace, what says the Apostle? Do you provoke
the Lord to anger? are ye stronger then he? that is, the Lord takes it as a
provokation to his face, as if ye did despite the very spirit of grace: and so
afterward says he, ^e cannot drink the cup of the Lord and the cup of devils,
ye cannot partake of the Table of the Lord and the Table of devils; and
therefore for a man to come to this holy Sacrament, and not cleanse himself
from all pollution and filthiness of flesh and spirit, but will be partaker of
the Lords Table, and join with it filthiness which should be abhorred, in so
doing he provokes the Lord to anger; and what follows that? The Lord will put
his strength against him to destroy him, Are ye stronger then he? Therefore if
I might but obtain so much, let me entreat you to enter into consideration of
this.

To help you to this, we will apply the point, That the property of grace is to
make a man strong; Now this power of grace is seen in three things.

First, the power and strength of grace is seen in this, That it heals corrupt
nature, and it elevates and helps us Strength of grace in three things.
to do more then common nature can reach to; for there are two things in every
natural man; corrupt nature, which is contrary to grace, and common nature,
which is beneath 1. It cures corrupt nature.
grace. Now when saving and sanctifying grace is come into the heart, it heals
corrupt nature, and enableth to do more then common nature can do. Consider
therefore whether this grace cure those hereditary diseases which we have
received from Adam, those diseases which breed in the heart: Take any thing
besides grace, if the Sire, and the Dam trot, it is a hard thing to work the
contrary in the offspring; but grace is able to heal those diseases that are
hereditary. If you bring a man to a Physician, and say such a man has a
hereditary disease which he has received from his parents, he will presently
give him over as a desperate Patient; but grace can cure those natural and
hereditary diseases. Therefore in James 4. 5. says he, The spirit that is in
us lusts after envy, that is, there is this natural disease in every man,
that his spirit is lusting; the word there used i (...) it is still boiling, or
bubbling forth, it is still lusting after envy; But how shall we do to help it?
says he, the Scripture offers more grace, that is, the Scripture gives grace
that can do more then nature can do; it is able to heal that very l^^ing
whatsoever it be. That is, you must not think when a man has a strong natural
infirmity hanging upon him, that all the vows and resolulutions and purposes in
the world can help him, it is beyond natural help, but it is not past the help
of grace. When Naaman the Assyrian could not be healed, he inquired what he
should do, and when he came to the Prophet, there he was healed: so when the
Disciples could not cast the Devil out of the man, they went to Christ, and he
was able to do it. When thou go about to cast out any natural infirmity, or
to heal any of thy hereditary diseases, think with thy self, though by nature I
cannot do it, yet let me go to Christ, let me go to grace, that is able to do
it, though it be past the cure of nature, it is not past Christ's cure, it is
not past the help of grace.

When Christ was upon the earth, they brought to him those that had old festred
diseases, those that were born blind, and deaf, and dumb, and he healed them.
The same Christ does now to the souls of men in the world, and that by the
virtue and power of grace here spoken of; Therefore consider with your selves
what natural infirmities you have, what hereditary diseases you have; if you
find that they are not healed in you, that those bloody issues run as fresh as
ever they did, you have not this grace: for it is able to heal nature, and to
cure it wheresoever it comes.

But you will say, Is there any man that has these natural Quest.
infirmities so wholly healed and cured?

I answer, No, I say not that they are altogether healed, Answ.
but they are cured by grace, that is, grace so far heals them, that it gets
the Mastery over them, there is the power of grace seen, therefore it is called
a Kingdom, The Kingdom of God is in power, that is, it is such a Kingdom that
gets the Mastery wheresoever it is, it has the dominion over the disease, and
as we say, the power of any object it stands in this, that it subdues the
faculty: so herein the power of grace is manifested, in that it overcomes those
corruptions that are most hereditary.

As for example, take the grace of faith, I do not say that it heals all
infidelity and doubting, but it overcomes it, so that it has the mastery and
prevalency over it; faith is predominant above infidelity. For it is a rule
that the Schoolmen have, and a true one; faith does not exclude all doubting,
but faith overcomes doubting: that is the nature of it, though it be assaulted
with doubttings, yet it overcomes them; and as it is the nature of faith, so of
every saving grace, it is prevalent and powerful. So is the grace of knowledge,
it comes with a full evidence and demonstration of the Spirit, and brings every
thought into subjection to it: though it suffers ignorance, and some other
errors it may be to remain, yet it overcomes ignorance.

And so spiritual love, it brings under, and eats up, and swallows all other
loves: and spiritual fear brings under all other fears. True desire subjugates
all other inordinate desires; whereas on the contrary, when grace is not true,
you shall have a kind of faith, and a kind of knowledge, and some good purposes
and desires, and some fear of God: but these, though they be in the heart, they
are not commanding and prevailing objects that bring the heart into subjection,
they lie there glowing as a coal in the dark, but they do not overcome the
darkness, but still their foolish heart is full of darkness, as the Scripture
says, Romans 1. So that you must remember, that it Romans 1.
so heals these diseases, that yet still it gets the victory over the disease,
though it does not altogether take away the disease: not that it dries up the
fountain of these issues, so that they are no more, but the meaning is, that it
gets the dominion over them, it masters them, and brings them down, that they
have not the prevailing force as formerly; for it is the nature of sincerity
that it gets the mastery. Sincerity is of that quality, that though it be the
least of all graces in the beginning, yet it grows the strongest of all other.
So I say grace heals after that manner; as for example, when a man is recovered
out of his sickness, take the least degree of health, this least Simile.
degree has the victory over the whole disease, it has overcome it. We say it
has not overcome it fully and totally, yet that little degree of health runs
through the whole man, and it over comes the disease, and at length grows
stronger and stronger. So wheresoever these healing qualities of grace come,
they have so much power as to get the mastery over corruption. Though the
natural corruptions bias us, and draw us aside, yet I say they are healed. For
mark that by the way, there is a great deal of difference between that
unevenness and inconstancy that comes from the natural corruption of a man
unsanctified, and that that proceeds from the remainder of those corruptions
that are left in the soul after saving grace; In the one there is an unevenness
of the kind, in the other, the unevennes^ of degrees. As for example, a man
that has not his heart sanctified, he has his corruptions expressed by fits,
this we say is an unevenness of kind, when a man sets himself in holy courses,
and presently gives over himself to all his lusts. This is that unevenness
spoken of, Iam. 1. such a man is unstable Jam. 1.
in all his ways; the meaning is, such a man hangs between two objects, that
he knows not whether he shall choose this or that: like a man that has two
ways before him, and knows not whether of them he shall go, either this way,
or that, but sometimes he is for God, another time he is for his lusts, his
mind hangs in such an aequi librio, that he has nothing to sway him, such an
unevenness there is in a natural man. Now this doublemindedness is opposed to
singleness of heart, when a man is resolved to choose one in such a manner, that
he subjugates and leaves his choice and leaning to the other. So it is when
grace is come into the heart, when it heals corruption, it brings a man to such
a pass, that he chooses the ways of God, he chooses to serve God with all his
heart, with uprightness, and he chooses it in a fixed, resolved manner. And
though he may be biased, and drawn aside, through the weakness and sickness
that is left yet behind, yet I say he is pitched upon one object, therefore he
is not said to have the inconstancy of kind, he is not instable in his ways:
so that though he may be sometimes carried out of his way, yet because he has
set himself wholly to serve the Lord, we may say that he has a single heart:
for grace does not take away all unevennes. The holiest men that have the most
grace, yet that grace is subject to ebbing and flowing, it is sometimes in a
greater degree, and sometimes in a less. You see a bowl that is cast out of a
man's hand; so far as the strength of the man lasts it carries the bowl along to
the place which he aims at notwithstanding the bias be (at it were) contrary;
so it is here, the bias of corruption that is left within us, is not quite cut
off or taken away; but yet the strength of grace with which the soul is first
acted, it keeps us along, and carries us in the ways of righteousness
notwithstanding that biass that is within us that inclines to the contrary.

Hence it is, that sometimes the Saints are carried aside in their ways with
some unevenness, but it is the unevenness of degrees I say, not the unevenness
of kind.

This I add that as we should exclude those that have no grace, notwithstanding
they have some good intentions toward God; so we must be careful that we
discourage not those that have some failing, and some expressions of their
corruptions, yet the bent of their soul is set aright. This then is one thing
wherein you shall see the evident power of grace when it is in the heart, it
heales the hereditary diseases of the heart. Therefore let every man examine
himself by that, whether that grace which is in him has so much power in it as
to cure those natural diseases Grace raises common nature.
whereunto he is subject.

Now I say, it does not only cure the diseases of the soul, but it elevates,
and raises common nature to do more then that which otherwise it could do.
That is, herein the power of grace is seen, that it makes you able to do that
which no man else can do, and that which thou thy self could never do
before. As for example, for a man to delight in the commandments of God, it is
more then any natural man in the world can do: because delight (as we say,)
arises from a suitableness in the subject to the object. Now unless there be a
suitableness between the ways of God and the heart of a man, there cannot
possibly be any delight in the ways of God. It is one thing to approve the
ways of God, and another thing to delight in them. Other men that are but
civil men may approve the ways of God, but they cannot delight in them; this
is more then a natural man can reach unto. If therefore thou find this in thee,
be assured the strength of grace is there. So, to love God, we find that
peculiar to the Saints, that is more then any hypocrite in the world can do, if
any man therefore find that grace so strong in him that it makes his heart
cleave to the Lord wholly, and long after him that he loves him, and seeks his
face: that he loves him not for other respects, but beholding him in his
person, in his attributes, and in all his excellencies he can love him above
all things, this no man by nature can attain to. And so to hate sin; no man by
nature can hate sin, but by the power of grace, for all hatred arises from
contrary, and only grace is contrary to sin; it is grace that makes a man a
sin hater.

It is possible for another man sometimes to fall out with sin, and to abstain
from some particular acts of sin: but to hate sin, no man can do it naturally.
For there is no man that hates any thing, but he hates the whole kind thereof;
as the sheep hates the wolf, therefore it hates every wolf. And again hatred we
know is implacable, when a man is angry, he is reconciled again sometimes, but
when a man hates a thing, he would have it quite taken away. Now no man is able
to do this but by the power of grace, to hate all sin, every where, in himself
as well as in others, to hate it so, as to desire to have it utterly destroyed,
and to be implacably out with it so as never again to be reconciled to it. This
is the property of grace. This thou have that thou hate the works of the
Nicholaitans. We are deceived in that, when we think we hate sin, because we
abstain from some acts of sin: if thou did hate it, thou would hate it
every where and every kind of sin: Thou would not only fall out with it
when it does thee a shrewd turn, but thou would be out with it for ever.
When a man finds that he can hate sin, that he can love God, and delight in his
Commandments, and love the Saints, etc. these are things that no man can do by
nature; therefore if thou find these things, there is more in thee then nature,
herein is the strength of grace seen.

Now it is true, there are other things which a man may do, which has not this
saving grace; but grace has this efficacy, that it makes thee do more then any
man will or can do by common nature. As for example, wheresoever the power of
grace is, it makes a man deny himself, whereas another man would not, it will
make a man refuse gain, and profit, and advantage to himself, when another man
would not; it makes a man able to forgive his enemies, which before he could
not do.

But you will say, other men may do this that have no grace.

But they never do it in sincerity, here is the difference; grace makes a man
do it ordinarily in his common course, another man may have some fits in these
things, but to do it when a man is himself, to do it upon deliberation, this is
the strength of grace, therefore you may try your selves by that. Am I able to
do more then common nature can do? if thou can not, be sure that grace is not
there; for is there not an efficacy and power in grace? and why should we say
there is a power in it, if we see not the effects of that power? if thou do no
more then another man can do, thou give just cause to those that are
Atheists, to think that this power of grace is but a mere notion, but a fancy.
Is it think thou for the honor of God, that thou should be reckoned a
man within the Covenant; and to be such a one as has grace wrought in thy
heart, and have no power of grace in thy life? Therefore examine thy self by
that, can thou do more then a man can do by the strength of natural
abilities? or by the accession of moral virtues, or good education, or humane
wisdom, etc? This is the first thing wherein the power of grace is seen; I
named three to you. We told you one is, that it heals corrupt nature, and
raises common nature above its own sphere.

Now secondly, that whereby you may examine whether 2. Grace enables to (...)
of n^w obedience
you have this property of grace, whether you have this strength of grace in
you or no, it is this: Consider what you are able to do in the acts of new
obedience; the power of grace is seen, that it enableth you to do them, when
another man cannot do them. In the first we had to do with the nature; and then
I told you that grace heals corrupt nature, and puts more into you then common
nature: This second thing is distinct from that, and is seen in the actions.
And the third is seen in the intententions: In these three the strength of
grace is seen. There is scarce any man but has some good intentions, some good
purposes; but when they come to the birth, there is no strength to bring forth,
men are not able to perform them. Now grace wheresoever it is, has so much
strength, as not only to beget good motions, but it is powerful and effectual
to bring them forth into act. Grace is an effectual Midwife to bring purposes
and conceptions to performances, enabling us to do them. Therefore by that you
may try it, whether grace strengthen you to performance, and practice that
which you purpose and desire to do. It is observed, that your fennish and
rotten ground suddenly shootes out a broad blade of grass, but we know it is
unprofitable to any man, whereas good ground that brings forth good grass,
brings it not forth so suddenly, nor so broad; so those that have unsoundness
of heart, they may go so far as to have some sudden good purposes, and desires,
and motions, and conceptions, but yet they come to nothing, they are but foggy
purposes as it were, they do not last, they vanish away; and what is the reason
of that? they want true rooting, they want this grace that should strengthen
them, and make the soil good. There wants that depth of earth, that is, there
wants that depth of sincerity, and there wants that sound and convincing
knowledge to carry them through all objections, and that is the reason that men
have good desires, and yet so little performance. Let his desires be never so
good, when he meets with stronger reasons and arguments from the flesh, or the
world, or the devil, he gives over, because he has no strength to answer them.
So that when we come to perform our desires, it is grace that must give us
strength, when we have not that we give over. The power of grace therefore is
always seen, in that it enableth us to go through the work, to perform it.
Therefore the world is exceedingly deceived in the misapplication of that
distinction, the Lord accepts the will for the deed. I say the misapplication
of that is the cause why there is so much laziness and dullness in men, that
they do not set themselves to go through with holy duties, for say they, we
have a desire, and a purpose, and the Lord accepts the will for the deed.

You are exceedingly deceived, the Lord indeed will accept the will for the
deed, when there is such an impediment as that you cannot proceed: for what is
the occasion of that speech of the Apostle to the Corinthians, when they had
liberal minds to supply the necessities of the Churches, and yet they wanted
money, in this case says the Apostle, the Lord accepts the will for the deed.
Will thou say now therefore, because thou have a good desire to serve God, to
pray, to keep to Gods truth, to keep thy heart close to him, and thou hopest
the Lord will take the desire for the deed, and yet thou will be negligent in
them? what impediment have thou? If thou would bestow time in prayer, if
thou would bestow time in working on thy heart to warm it, and to quicken it
to duty, thou should have the deed as well as the will, what hinders thee
then? where therefore there is no impediment, the Lord will not accept the will
for the deed. Look how much will there is, so much deed there will be: when the
will is wrought by the spirit of God, the deed will follow. I am able says
Saint Paul (not only to purpose, and intend, but) to do all things. If thou
have the power of grace in thee, as he here exhorts Timothy to be strong, thou will go through with the work, I say if thou have the power and strength of
grace in thee, thou have strength and ability to do all these things.

Again, as the power of grace is seen in enabling thee and to be constant in
them.
to do; so further it is seen in this that when thou have begun to do, it keeps
thee from fainting in well-doing. Another man will have some fits in
well-doing, but he is uneven, he is unlike himself. Now herein the power of
grace is seen that though a man be sometimes transported through the violence
of corruption, and passion, and the like, yet grace brings him back again: that
is, he is not quite carried away with temptations, as the chaff with the wind,
but he is held with a strong anchor, that though he float up and down, and be
off and on in degrees, yet he is not carried clean away; Therefore you shall
see, 2 Pet. 3. ult. take heed says he, that you be not drawn away from your
stedfastness, but grow in grace, etc. 2 Pet. 3. ult.
As if he should say, this is the power of grace, that it will keep a man, that
though he do sin, and forget God, and have some such falls as David had, yet
herein is the power of it, that it never lets a man go quite, but still it
brings him back again.

This is much for the comfort of those that are upright hearted: for some man
might say alas though I do purpose, and have performed, and kept on in a good
course yet I am apt to fail back again to my old sins, and am ready to return
to my old courses.

It is true, thou may do so; but yet herein be assured that the strength of
grace will be manifested in thy heart to k^^p the from falling from thy
steadfastness, it will keep thee along, it will not suffer thee to go quite
away, thou will not depart from the Lord, Ier. 32 40, I will plant Jer. 32. 40.
my fear in their hearts that they shall not depart from me. As for example,
take Saul, and David, Saul was in a good course a great while, and he made many
turnings aside, yet the Lord kept him by the common assistance of his spirit,
yet at length he went quite away from the Lord. But now David, how many
turnings aside had he? how many great infirmities had he? yet he had the sure
mercies of David, the strength of grace kept him along that he never departed
from the living God, he never went aside, so as he returned no more. Therefore
if thou find this, that though thou fall, yet thou art returning again, that
thy heart is never at rest till thou have gotten the Lord again, it is a sign
that thou have the true touch of the spirit. As the needle we know that is
touched with the lodestone, it never is at quiet till it find the north point
again.

Lastly, As the strength of grace is seen in enabling us to do, and in keeping
us from fainting: so it is seen in the particular things we do, in those good
duties that we perform, the hearing of the word, communicating, the partaking
of all the holy ordinances, in all the duties belonging to Gods Worship, herein
I say the power of grace is seen. For as everything is in its being, so it is
in its working: look what being and essence it has, such is the work of it.
Now take those that are common, and counterfeit graces, which are not sound and
right, they are able to reach the form of good duties, but not the substance:
but where there is true lively grace, there a man is able to do the thing
indeed, that is, he can do holy duties as he ought to do them. This is the
property of grace that it enableth you to do the things you do with a pure
heart: for my brethren it is grace that purifieth the heart, it is that which
makes the inside clean; other things may cleanse the hands, and the head;
Philosophy, education, and parts of morality; but the power of grace is such,
as that when you come to do duties, it purifies the heart: because grace makes
a man wise. Now a wise man will be sure to look to the foundation, that is, to
look to the heart wherewith he performs every duty; the foundation is all
in-all; a wise man will see with what heart he performs every duty: the outward
performance is but as the top of the building, the foundation is the principal.

Besides grace puts a treasure into a man's heart, and makes him prize that
treasure; and where a man's treasure is there his eye will be: he will look
therefore to his heart in the performance of duties.

Besides, it teaches a man to exalt God as God in his heart, and when he is so
exalted, he is more to him then a thousand witnesses. It enableth him to seek
praise with God, and not with men.

Again, it gives a man light, whereby he can discern of the secret failings of
his heart. Another man that has not light he cannot see them; he can see
gross enormities, but it is grace only that makes us to see small moats,
inward failings; it is grace therefore that makes the inside clean.

And not only so, but it makes us perform duties in a holy and lively manner,
it enableth us to do them to purpose. To perform them in a holy manner: for
this is to perform duties in a holy manner, when the heart is apprehensive of
the presence of God in the business only; for holiness is to sequester a
thing, and to appropriate it for the use of God only: so when thou come to
perform a good duty, if thy heart be altogether looking upon the Lord,, so that
nothing without have to do with it, if nothing else come in, and take up thy
heart; not the sight of men, or the opinion of the creature, or the by-respects
of any thing, none of these come and take a part of thy heart, and use it (^s
it were) that is to perform a duty in a holy manner; Otherwise, whatsoever
takes away the heart, or sets it on work, abates this holiness; for then the
heart is not made peculiar to God in the performance of a duty, for it meddles
with common things. Grace I say enableth to do this, because grace sanctifies,
that is, it makes a man really and in good earnest appropriate, and sequester
his heart and mind to the Lord; so that he only looks to him to serve him
holily in all duties: so is it when we pray, or preach, or do any public or
private duty, this is the holiness of the heart, when it is done only to the
Lord.

Again I say, it makes us perform duties, not only in a holy, but in a lively
manner; for grace is the life of the soul. Where this life is not, we may do
duties, but they are but dead works. Vital actions are only proper to grace,
because only grace works life: a man never comes to perform a work that is a
living work, but so far as it comes from grace; grace is the fire of the holy
Ghost. Grace is to the soul as the lively and natural heat is in the body,
which only acts it, and makes it to do the works thereof. So grace in the soul
is that only which begets liveliness in duties wherewith they are to be
performed.

Lastly, I add, it makes us perform them in a holy, lively and substantial
manner, that is, to do them to some purpose. Take another man, he does these
duties, but to what purpose are they? when we come to pray, and to do these
duties, they are then done as they should be, when the end is obtained, then
every business is done, when the end of it is effected, otherwise it is not
done; we do not say a thing is done, because a man has been about it, but
because he has obtained that end for which he took the business in hand.
Consider now what is the end of the duties you do, what is the end of your
praying, what is the end of your hearing? is the end of your hearing
edification? is the end of your praying to be strengthened in grace? prayer is
a lost prayer except the heart be strengthened by prayer, except the heart be
made better, and more composed into communion with God, you pray not in the
holy Ghost. Now then examine your selves by this; grace only enableth a man so
to pray that he shall grow more heavenly in every prayer: whenever any other
prayer is made without this power of grace, it is lip-labor, it does the heart
no good. And so for keeping of the Sabbath, The Sabbath is made for man, that
is, it is made for man's use, for man's benefit, for man's advantage. What is the
advantage we get by a Sabbath? That we may be built up and grow in grace and
in knowledge and the like. Now a man without saving grace may abstain from all
bodily labor, and servile work on the Sabbath day, and be occupied in holy
duties: but to keep it so as to get advantage by it, so as to get growth in
knowledge and in grace, so that he shall have a greater stock of grace laid up
in his soul by the use of the ordinances upon that day; this grace enableth a
man to do. So, when a man comes to hear to purpose, to hear so as to please God
in his hearing; to hear so as to get something into his heart by hearing, this
only grace enableth to. You know what our Savior says, Luke 18. Take heed
how you hear, for to him that has shall be given. intimating that when you
hear aright, you have more given in then you had before. Grace now enableth a
man so to do the duty, that there is not only the task, the business, the
work done and passed over, but it is done to purpose.

So when you come to receive the Sacrament, what is the end of your receiving?
only to come, or to come with some outward reverence, or shows of devotion,
etc? No; the utmost end of receiving the Sacrament is to get more strength of
grace, to get more assurance of Faith, to get more persuasion of the love of
God toward you, that your sinful corruptions may be more healed; that the
grace that is in you may be more enlivened. I say grace enableth to do this,
and herein the power of it is seen: for without the power of grace you may do
all these things, but not to purpose. I cannot enlarge these thing; but to
finish this point, I beseech you in a word consider, whether you have the
strength of grace in you or no, otherwise you receive the Sacrament in vain.

And let no man think, I will make up this with my absence, and fit my self
against another time; that is not the way: Not to sacrifice, as well as to
sacrifice amiss, was a sin: he that came not up to the passover as well as he
that came uncircumcised was to be cut off: he that would not come to the feast,
as well as he that came not with the wedding garment, they were both liable to
judgment; therefore I say take heed. And if there were no other argument to
move men not to defer their conversion, this were enough, that if a man come
without grace to the Sacrament, he eats and drinks his own damnation; if he
defer to come, he provokes the Lord to anger, and if he come unworthily without
grace, he provokes him to anger likewise.

2 TIMOTHY 2. 1. Thou therefore my son, be strong in the grace which is in Christ
Jesus.
THe next point that we are to handle out of these words is this; That All
grace is recived from Jesus Christ. Doct. All grace is received from Christ.
We can receive no grace but from him, and in him there is enough to be had.
There is none but from him, we know nothing but what we are taught by him as a
Prophet: whatsoever we do is lost labor, except it be made acceptable through
him as a Priest: we are able to overcome no lust, to do no duty but through the
power we have from him as a King. Besides, I add further, that as all grace is
from him, so in him there is enough grace to be had; We all of his fullness
receive grace for grace; that is, Joh. 1.
we receive the variety of graces that he had, grace for grace. As the child
receives limb for limb, or as the wax receives of the seal character for
character, print for print, so we receive the quantity of grace that we have,
from that fullness that is in him.

But how is this grace received from Christ? Quest.


We take it not immediately out of the fountain, but it is derived to us by
certain conduit-pipes, therefore Answ.
take heed of that, of expecting to receive grace from Christ without these
means.

Again, we must not think that these means will do it without him; we must not
break off the conduit-pipes from the Wellhead, as we must not go to the
Wellhead without them. Now the means whereby we receive grace, is by the Word
and Sacraments: we are not born of him by carnal generation as Adam, but
instead of that generation, when we have taken him, there is a spiritual
relation instead of it in Gods sight, and by virtue of that we receive grace
and strength from him.

Therefore if ye would receive more grace, increase of How to draw near to
Christ.
grace, labor to draw near him, and then you drawn near him when your will is
brought to a greater degree of willingness to have him for your husband.

But yet in general we must know, that grace is received from Christ, as we
receive corruption from Adam; the old man he does not more powerfully
communicate corruption and sin to us, then the new man is powerful to
communicate grace and life. So that when we are once in Christ as we are in
Adam, we are sure to have grace from him; and then we are in Christ when we
have taken him, and are matched with him, and united to him. As a man may be
matched to his wife, after the match is past in a greater degree of will; when
there is a greater degree to have such a woman for his wife, or a women to have
such a man for her husband. The will may be wound to a higher degree and peg of
willingness. Therefore our business is, when we come to receive the Sacrament,
to labor to increase that willingness, to labor to add to that resolu^ion of
taking Christ. Now 1. To see Christ's willingn^ to match w^ u^.
that is done by a distinct and clear apprehension of Christ's willingness to
match with us: we must know that the gift of righteousness is freely offered;
there is nothing required, but that we be willing to take it; there is nothing
required but sincerity on our part. Now this false opinion, that there is more
then that required, is that which keeps us asunder.

Now to bring our hearts nearer to Christ (for when we are near him, then we
receive most grace from him:) first, I say the apprehension of that must be
clear.

Then secondly, we must labor to be divorced from 2. To be divorced from all
other Husbands.
all other husbands: when the mind is weaned from all earthly things, to which
they are too much wedded, to have those lingrings cut off, when we affect
riches or pleasures too much, or whatsoever the heart is taken up abo^t; in
what measure a man is earthly minded, in that measure his heart is disjoined
from Christ. Now the way to bring our hearts nearer, is to be divorced from
these.

But when is this love inordinate? Quest. Answ. When love to outward things is
inordinate.


Then you may know it is inordinate and adulterous love, when it is a let of
your love to your Husband: God gives you leave to take and to use outward
comforts; you may rejoice in them, he commands you so to do: only this you
must take care of, that your love to your Husband be not lessened. If a man be
so busy in his calling and business, that he find himself more indisposed to
draw near to his Husband the Lord, that he is more unfit to pray, and to holy
conference, it is an adulterous occupying of himself about the works of his
calling. So when he loves his children, or friends, his sports and recreations,
whatsoever his mind is occupied about, look how far it lessens his love to God,
and daunts, and hinders, and interrupts that, in the same measure it is
adulterous. Therefore if you would draw near to Christ, consider how your
affections run out: for he looks on you with a jealous eye.

And you must take pains with your hearts to labor to have those lusts
mortified: you must reason out the matt^r with your selves; for there is no man
that loves any thing inordinately, but it arises from deceit; and there is
nothing so good, but we must let it go, and cleave to Christ: and if we cannot
do it with ordinary pains, we must do more then ordinary. There are some lusts,
as some Devils that will not be cast out without fasting and prayer: Now when
we loose our hearts from these things, that is a means to draw near the Lord.

Lastly, to add to this, consider the need we stand in* of Christ, and to that
add the virtues of our Husband, 3. See our need of Christ, and his excellency
what need we have of him, and what benefit we have by him.

Consider thy need of him; thou art in such a case, that when thou art out of
him, thou art subject to an extent, and to be laid in prison: but when thou
have him for thy Husband, thou art under cover.

But you will say, I hope I am past this. Object. Answ.


Thou must know that thou have continual need of it; thou have need of him
every day, thou have need of him to redeem thee from every evil that thou
escapest from day to day: thou have need of him to help thee to every comfort,
thou have need of him to assist thee to every duty thou performest.

And withal consider, when thou feast thy need (for therefore we do not prize
Christ, because we know him not, and we know him not, because we know not our
selves; how impotent and weak we are without him, we are able to do nothing
without him. I say when we have considered what our need is of him, then let us
consider the virtues of our Husband, and the portion we have with him.

Consider the virtues of our Husband; we are all too short in this: consider
the excellency that is in Christ, the beauty that is in him, to draw us near to
him. Thou must look on him as one full of beauty, the fairest of ten thousand,
as we do with men that we converse with: if it be a man that has worth in him,
that you daily converse with, now you see one excellency, and then another, now
one spark appears, and then another; so learn to know Christ by experience
continually.

And then as we must know him by the description of himself in his Word: so to
know him by his actions, by all his carriage, to see what a one he is. There is
no Husband so kind as he, there is no master so bountiful as he, there is no
friend so loving as he. Consider how patient, and ^ow wise he is: how he
disposes things for thy advantage, better then thou could do of thy self.

Withal consider the portion thou have with him, 1 Cor. 3. 18. see it there,
All things are yours, whether Paul, or Apollo, 2 Cor. 3. ult.
or Cephas, or the World, or life, or death, or things present, or things to
come, are all yours; that is, as if he had said, if here be not enough, think
all that thou can, all is thine, that portion thou have with thy Husband; all
the gifts in the world, a^l the excellent men in the world, they are made for
thy service. And if thou think not that enough, the things of the world, he
tells thee all the World is thine, every thing in the world, of what condition
soever it is, thou shall have no want of it if thou have need of it, all the
world is thine, and then Life is thine; that is, when a man may be afraid that
if he live long, such and such things may befall him: no, faith he, life is for
thy advantage. I, but may not death come too soon, and do me a shrewd turn by
coming on me as a snare? No, faith he, let it come when it will, death shall be
advantage. That benefit a goodly man has, that whenever death comes, it
shall be the fittest season of all other times. Therefore when a man stands in
fear that he knows not what shall become of him, this is his security, that
whenever death comes, it shall be for his advantage.

And then if that content thee not, that thou shall have present things, for we
are apt to fear future things; and who knows what may fall out for the time to
come? Those things are yours for your advantage. If this be not enough, all
things are yours, whatsoever thy heart can wish or desire, this portion thou
have with thy husband. I say we are to exercise our selves in the meditation of
these things, that it may incline our hearts the more to him, and make us come
more willingly to match with him; and to confirm us in the choice we have made.
When this is done, that we are willing to match with him, and to take him in a
greater degree then before, this is to eat his flesh, and drink his blood. For,
taking him, and coming to him and eating his flesh, are promiscuously used,
Ioh. 6. He that eats more gets John 6.
more strength, he that drinks deeper gets more refreshing: he that takes him
more gets more grace from him. Now taking him thus; this resolution to take him
for a Lord for a King, for a Master, for a Husband: as there are more degrees
added to it, so you shall find more abundance of grace and life flowing from
him to your hearts. So much shall serve for this point.

There is but one point more, and so we will have done with this text. We have
handled, First his, that It is the property of grace to make a man strong: In
that it differs from counterfeit grace. Secondly, That all grace is from
Christ. Now there is another lies in this; in the manner of the exhortation,
and the occasion of it. Now my Son be strong, that is, Timothy, know that thou
have grace, and strength in thee; but now thou art to preach the Gospel, to
fight the good fight of faith, now thou have many things to suffer: now thou
have great employments in hand, stir up or use the strength that thou have.
This is the point hence; that

We must not only get strengthening grace, but use it, and Doct. We must not
only get strength but use it.
improve it.

That is, the strength that we have, it must not be as a sleeping habit, lie
still there, but we must draw it forth to action, bring it out to practice, and
that upon all occasions. So I say we must not only get habitual strength, but
use it, stir it up, bring it forth to action upon all occasions. You see how it
is gathered from the words, Thou my Son be strong.

But you will say to me, What are those occasions, wherein Quest.
we must in such a special manner stir up this strength?

I say, upon all occasions: but yet to pitch your thoughts Answ. Upon what ^ons
especially to stir up our strength.
on some, I will name these three.

First, in employments which are done with any special hazard, in such stir up
thy strength, for you see that is spoken to Timothy here, that is i^ there be
any action to be done that will cost the loss of thy credit or estate, or
friends: if there be any action to be done that will cost In times of special
employment.
thee imprisonment, loss of liberty and disgrace, now be strong. If the action
have any such difficulty, such losses and crosses depend upon it, now be strong
to go through with it; do not say now there is a Lion in the way, and bauke it,
but be strong, stand fast, break through all such impediments, be undaunted,
quit thy self as a man: for this i^ a time to be strong. As it was said to
Sampson, the Philistines are upon thee, now it is a time to use thy strength.
So I may say to every man, when there is a special business lies on him which
must be done with hazard, having a fountain of strength in Christ, use it.

This is that which the Scripture calls boldness: when the Apostles were to
preach the Gospel, and had the priests, and the whole Counsel against them, now
was the time for them to speak boldly: therefore you see it is so expressed,
when Joshua was to fight with the Canaanites, with the Anakims, and cities
walled up to heaven, Now be of a good courage, be strong, (that word is used,
Jos. 1. 6. Jer. 26.
Ios. 1. 6) that is, now is the time. So Jeremy, Ier. 26. when he had a special
business to be done with much hazard, that he must go and speak in the name of
the Lord to the King, and Princes, and people, which were ready to put him to
death, Now be strong, and keep not a word back. So John Baptist, he was to tell
Herod of his fault, of that sin; you know what hazard that action was
accompanied with: now it was a time for John to stir up his strength and to use
it. So in all such exigences as these when God puts us to the trial whether we
will do any thing for him; whether we will part with any thing for his sake;
whether we will deny our selves, and take up our cross and follow him, I say
these are the times. And therefore i^ a man have any treasure in heaven, and be
persuaded of the vanity, and worthlesness of outward things: herein stands his
boldness to neglect them, to let them go, so he may do service to God, and
bring glory to his name, and do good to the Church: for indeed in that stands
the stirring up of our strength. As Luther said, when he was so bold, he gives
the reason of his boldness: says he, What Luther.
can they take from me? my credit? what care I for that, it is but small; they
may take away my estate, that is but little: they may take away my life, but I
make no account of it says he; if other men made as little account of these
things as I do, they would be as bold as I.

Therefore I say now it is a time for a man to stir up his strength, to be
willing to part with these things, when actions come that have hazard
accompanying them, and opposition, and persecution, and resistance from this
temptation, and from that, Now be strong in the Lord, Ephesians. 6. When there
comes temptations, if any thing be to be suffered, be strong to endure it; If
Ephesians. 6.
any thing be to be done, be strong to go through with it; if be any special
duty, be strong, wrestle with the Lord as Jacob did in distress, there was his
course, stir up thy strength at that time, and wrestle with all thy strength.
So, if ^he business be to contend for the common truth and faith, a man must
be strong: what though it be accompanied with hazard? this is a time for a man
to stir up his strength; that is one case.

A second is, in all great changes of estate, for that is a time when a man
should stir up his strength, because then 2. In change of a man's estate,
a man is most apt to be weak. That is, if a man ^al^ into great crosses and
afflictions and adversities: and again if he be raised to prosperity more then
ordinary, now (...) him be strong: that is, let him look to himself and take
heed now that his heart be not broken by the one, nor puffed up with the other:
now is the time for a man to be strong upon these great changes. As the body of
a man when he comes into a strange Country, to change of diet and air, he is
affected with it, it works upon him: so the soul of a man in all great changes
of estate that it falls into, cannot but be affected with them: Therefore the
Scripture calls it drunkenness: A man may be drunk with prosperity, and
adversity, and a man is apt to be so: that is when a man is drunk his brain is
weak, and the beer or wine is strong: so when the heart of a man is weak and
the operation is strong, the estate that falls on him is strong, it makes him
drunk both ways. A man is drunk with prosperity one while, another while with
adversities; this is a time to be strong. As the Apostle expresses it, Phil.
4. I am able to want, and to abound, Phil. 4.
to pass through good report, and evil report, That is, now in this great
change, if you talk of strength, I am able to do all things through strength
from Christ.

A man in an even condition, it is nothing for him to keep his mind in an even
temper; but in the unevenness of a man's condition, now to keep his mind
equally disposed, that is the difficulty. And it is not only difficult in that
which rises from the unevenness of a man's estate; but the suddenness of the
change. When a sudden change comes, look to thy self, be strong. As we say of
the body (it is a rule of Physicians) it indures not sudden changes; no more
can the mind, but it is apt to be disquieted and put out of temper. As when a
man has had a great heat, and sudden cold comes: when a man is in one
condition, and suddenly comes into another, now is the time to stir up
strength. That is the second.

Thirdly and lastly, there are certain seasons and opportunities, 3. In the
seasons of using several graces.
wherein a man is called to exercise such and such a grace; now is the time,
when we must be strong to put that grace in practice. Sometimes there is a
season of using the grace of patience, sometimes of love sometimes of
temperance, sometimes one grace, sometimes another: whenever these seasons
and opportunities come; now put forth these graces, and let them have their
perfect work, every grace in his season. That is the time now when a man is to
stir up his strength in those opportunities and turnings of a man's life. Such
things fall out every day; now one grace is to be used, and then another: now
be careful to stir them up, as we see, 2 Pet. 1. 5. when a man has one grace,
says the Apostle, let 2 Pet. 1. 5.
him add one to another: Therefore give all diligence thereto, join virtue with
faith, and with faith knowledge, and with knowledge, temperance, with
temperance, patience, with patience godliness, with godliness, brotherly
kindness, with brotherly kindness, love. That is, suppose, says the Apostle,
thou have faith, perhaps there i^ need of more then that, there comes seasons
when thou art to do good works, to add works to thy faith, therefore remember
in such a case to join virtue to it: for virtue is taken here for action, a
readiness in a man to perform, to bring that faith into use. But when you are
set on work, perhaps it may be a difficult case to know what a man in
discretion should do in this ambiguous case: therefore add knowledge and
prudence, to guide and direct you in that you do; but when you have gotten
prudence, and know what is to be done, then add to knowledge, temperance. It
may be a man may know well enough what to do, but he is drawn aside with some
pleasure and lust; for it is usual for a man to know, but because he is biased
the wrong way with some inordinate affection, he performs not that (...) knows,
therefore says the Apostle, now is the season to add temperance to knowledge,
to abstain from those things. And besides, as pleasures are a means on the one
side to keep him from the practice of what he knows, so there are likewise some
dangers and difficulties, somewhat that a man is to suffer. When a good action
is to be done, a men shall find many crosses and oppositions, somewhat he must
part with: therefore add not temperance only, but patience, that is, a time
for patience, or else he cannot do any thing to purpose. When both these are
done, join with patience godliness. A man may do much, and join temperance and
patience, but these are moral virtues, a man may do them for other ends; he may
be a good servant, but he may serve a wrong Master: therefore says he, eye God
in all you do, join to these godliness, do it out of sincerity, advance him and
his glory, and do it not for your own ends: and with godliness, brotherly
kindness, that is, that the work and business you do, though it must be done to
the Lord, for his sake, and so you must do it in a godly manner: yet your
business is with men for the most part, therefore you must join with godliness,
brotherly kindness, that you do it out of love to men, as well as out of
sincere respect to God. I, but there are other men in the world besides godly
men, and we have to do with them, and there are many businesses to do for their
sake and advantage; therefore says the Apostle, add to brotherly kindness,
love, that is, love to all mankind, that when you do any action, he means
actions of mercy and compassion, you must do it out of love to them, though
they be strangers from the Covenant of grace.

Now mark, these are the times and seasons, wherein a man is to stir up the
strength of all these graces; you see they come in season one after another.
Put case, a man exercise one, and leave another unexercised in its season,
there is a deformity and want: when a man uses other graces, and not
temperance; suppose a man will do any thing, but when he is to suffer, he will
baulk the way because of the Cross, he is loath to suffer, he wants patience:
here is a thing wherein his weakness is seen; therefore be strong, that is, in
every thing, in the practice of all the graces we receive, that they may have
their perfect work.

Well, the use of this in a word is, To put us in mind Use. To put forth the
strength we have.
of our duty, and to quicken us, that we may all remember what person we
sustain, what we have to do, for what end we come into the world, and to do it:
for that which the Apostle says here to Timothy, we have all need to have it
repeated to us, and to be put in mind of it upon every occasion. Now be strong
to do this, and this; for all the actions of a man's life are divided into these
two main heads: Either they are such actions as are bestowed in Actions of men
of two sorts.
gathering strength; as when we pray, and keep the Sabbath, and read and are
occupied in holy duties, now our business is to gather strength. But now there
are other actions that stand in converse, in doing the business and works of
our calling; when we are to grapple with troubles and temptations, when we fall
upon change of our estate, etc. these are times of spending and not of
gathering, these are times to use strength: now we must be as careful to use
our strength as to gather it, we must be as careful to stir up our strength, as
the Apostle says to Timothy, Thou my Son be strong in the Lord, we must stir
up our strength. I say, we have need to be called upon, for you must not think
that the Lord does all. It is true, he puts life in us, but when we have life
once, then we may move and stir our selves: he kindles the sacrifice from
heaven at first, but when the sacrifice is kindled, when you have got fire, you
must keep it alive, and blow it up, and put fuel to it. Therefore Jude 20.
build up, Edify your Jude 20.
selves. It is true, the Lord first lays the foundation: he first lays us
upon the corner stone, he begins the building, but when it is begun, we must
not think that it belongs only to the Minister to build us up, or to the Lord
to build us up, but we must edify our selves: that is, we must still be adding
to the building, now one stone, and then another: so we have the building of
grace going up in our hearts, this should stir us up to use our strength.

And this is a matter of special moment, the rather because all the graces we
have otherwise are flitting habits in the soul. Some things we have that are
altogether for use; as money, it is all for use; if a man use it not, he were
as good not to have it. And physic, if a man have the best receipts and
cordials, if he use them not, he were as good not to have them: and so skill in
a Trade, if a man do not use it, he were as good not to have it. Of this nature
is grace, all the end of grace is for use: the end of every habit is for
action, as we know not the Tree but by the fruit. Now consider, if the end of
all the strength and grace we have be but for action, that it may be stirred
up, Then you should not only busy your selves in gathering strength, but let
half your thoughts at least be occupied in considering, how shall I spend this
strength, and use these graces? To be on the thriving hand is good, or else
thou will have no strength to spend; yet that is the special thing. The rather
because it is a general fault among us, it is an old complaint; we learn more
for knowledge and dispute, then for living. That is, when you come to hear, you
are glad of notions, and there is delight in them, and perhaps we add to our
knowledge, and perhaps some habitual strength too we add to that we had before:
but you must learn to live; he that has knowledge must learn to bring it into
practice, especially you that are able to do it. Some cannot pray, but you that
can pray, converse profitably, stir up your own hearts to it when you are in
company.

You neglect this, and live as if you had not such grace wrought in you, as if
you were not regenerate, as if you had not tasted of the powers of the world to
come. I say it is a shame for you, therefore your business is now Helps to
exercise spiritual strength.
to stir up your selves to this. And to help you in that, I will briefly name
to you some helps.

You must know that there is an essential power, whereby a man is strong and
able, if he will put his strength to it, to do of himself. And besides this,
there is a certain energy, an ability present, as of body or mind, ready 1.
Exercise.
at every turn to do holy actions. Therefore if you ask how you shall do this;
how you shall bring this habitual power to this readiness and nimbleness? I say
exercise your selves to godliness. Use makes perfect in other things: so in
this, the more a man accustoms himself, the more his soul is ready to do every
good action. As the hand gets a habit to play on the Lute, or in writing, or
other things that are done with the hand, by often applying it self to the
work: so the soul when it often applies it self to such actions, it turns it
self into it, it gets readiness and nimbleness. Therefore be ready to do it
upon all occasions with facility and delight, upon all sudden opportunities; It
fashions a man, as it is said 2 Timothy 2. 21. as a vessel prepared to every good
work. The 2 Timothy 2, 21.
meaning is this, that even as you see a vessel is fitted for such a turn, as a
spoon, or a salt, or a cup, etc. as there are variety of vessels, so they are
fitted for such a turn or use: so a Christian should be a vessel fitted for
good works. Now this vessel is not fitted on the sudden, but is molded every
day more and more, and is brought to a better, and better fashion, and as it is
fashioned more, so it is readier to its proper work.

Now it is this suiting and applying your selves to good works, that makes you
ready. If a vessel be not fit for the turn, it will not do the business so
readily; there is an impediment in it: so it is with the mind, when it is not
accustomed. Every action you do, helps to mould the soul more, and makes it a
vessel fit for the Lord, and for every good work.

Besides this, as there must be a moulding of the heart, and fitting it for
exercise, so there must be a removing of 2. Removing of impediments.
impediments that hinder. Therefore we see in that place, 2 Timothy 2. 21. If any
man purge himself from these, he shall be a vessel unto honor, sanctified, and
meet for the Masters use, and prepared to every good work. There is a certain
rustiness that cleaves to the wheels of the soul, that it moves not nimbly and
readily in the doing the works we are called to do, this rust must be rubbed
off. There be impediments of diverse sorts: worldly-mindedness is a great
impediment and hindrance. And so cares, and pleasures, and lusts, those that
are called thorns, that hinder growth: all these impediments, this
uncircumcision of heart, these hinder from working, and these must be removed
before we can be ready to do it.

We see in Psalm. 51. says David there, Lord deliver me Psalm. 51.
from blood guiltiness; this sin that I have committed, and my tongue shall
sing joyfully of thy righteousness: open my lips, and my mouth shall show forth
thy praise. The meaning is this, David found that that was the sin wherewith
his soul was hindered, that it made him unfit, so that though there were a
fountain of grace in his heart, yet it was not able to flow forth, but was
stopped up (as it were;) therefore he prays to God to open his mouth. How
should it be opened? by removing that sin, by taken away that indisposition
which that sin had brought on his mind.

As we see a fountain may be stopped up with mud, or dirt, or stones, or any
thing, remove these, and the fountain is open, and when it is open, it is ready
to flow out. So then there must be a removing the impediments: let every man
see what it is that hinders him, when there is a fountain of grace, when it
flows not out readily. If a man be not ready to good works, there is some
impediment that must be removed.

But that is not enough to use our selves, and fashion our hearts to them, and
to remove the impediments; But 3. To beg the Holy Ghost to help us.
thirdly, there is a work of the Holy Ghost he must act, and stir us up: there
is a certain work of the Spirit that must help us upon all occasions. For even
as you see in Trees; there may be sap enough in a Tree, yet till the Simile.
Springtime come, till the heat of the Sun come, till moisture come, that sap
is not drawn up to the branches, and so long it brings not forth fruit nor
leaves. So a man may have much grace in his heart, much habitual grace; but
unless this be brought forth more immediately to act, there is no fruit brought
forth. Now what is it that brings it near the branches? Why, that which makes
the springtime of good actions, and fills a man with the fruits of
righteousness, it is the holy Ghost that is the moisture, and the Sun, and the
rain that moystens and quickens us. There must be a certain action of the
spirit I say, to help us to do every good work; we must seek to the Lord for
this: Lord I have such a business to do, I confess I am unapt and indisposed to
it, I beseech thee help to quicken me by thy spirit.

But further there are certain duties that more immediately fit and prepare us,
that is, the communion of Saints, 4. Prayer and communion of Saints.
that whets, and warms us, and stirs up the grace of God in us. So likewise
prayer: be much in prayer, and in the communion of Saints, and that will make a
man strong, it will make him ready to use his strength, and the grace he has.
But I hasten.

The main thing that I have to commend to you to stir you up to use your
strength to do the Lords work, and 5. To seek the things that are Jesus Christ's.
to use the grace you have upon all occasions for his advantage, it is this
consideration, to deny your selves, and to seek the things of Jesus Christ;
that is the last thing I will pitch on: for that is all in all. What is the
reason that a man uses not the strength he has? because he seeks his own
things, and not the things of Jesus Christ. If the heart were brought to this
to deny it self, and to neglect its own things, and to seek the things that are
Jesus Christ's, he would be ready then to stir up his stength; he would be ready
then to run, and to go to do any service to the Lord. You have that in Phillip.
2. I Phillip. 2.
have no man like minded that will faithfully care for your things, for every
man seeks his own, and not the things that are Jesus Christ's. Now to heal that
disease in your selves, to bring your hearts to a quite contrary temper, not to
seek your own things but the things that are Christ's, labor to have this
wrought on your hearts, and that is it that will most immediately prepare you,
and enable you to use your strength for the Lord upon all occasions.

You will say, how shall we do this? Quest.


Consider that there is a necessity lies upon you to do Answ.
it.

And if there did not a necessity lie on you, yet it were best for you to do it.

And if it were not best for thee, yet Christ has deserved it at thy hands, he
is worthy of it that thou should not seek thy own things, but the things of
Jesus Christ. These things we will a little enlarge, and so end.

First, I say there is a necessity lies on thee to do it. It 1. There is a
necessity so to do.
is true, if thou were thy own master, if a man were sui juris, he might do
with himself what he would; he might seek his own things: but if thou be none
of thine own, if thou have hired thy self to Christ, if thou have sold thy self
to him, thou art his; and if thou be his, there is a necessity lies on thee now
to seek his things, and not thine own. A woman, while she is a maid or a
widow, she may dispose of her self as she will, she may seek her own things,
and stand upon her own bottom: but when she is married once she must please her
husband, and be obedient to him. I say when thou art Christ's once (for I speak
to those that profess themselves to be his; those that have strength, and need
nothing but to stir it up) other men may do what they will, as it is said, when
there was no King in Israel every man did what was good in his own eyes. But
when thou have put thy self under his yoke, and accepted him for thy King, thou
must live by the laws of his Kingdom, and be subject to thy Prince. When thou
have taken Christ for thy King, (as every man has that is once entered into
Covenant with him) I say there is a necessity lies upon thee. Christ says
plainly to thee; he says to every man if thou will be mine, I will tell thee
before what thou shall do, thou must deny thy self, and take up thy cross and
follow me. Choose whether thou will enter into my service, and make the match
or no, but if thou will be my disciple, this thou must do: so when thou art
once his disciple thou art bound to it, thou art not now left to thy Liberty.

And besides if there were not this necessity put upon thee, yet secondly it is
best for thee, and indeed that is that which moves every one of us. It is best
for the not to seek thine own, The reason why men seek their own is because
they think it best. I say it is best for thee not to seek thine own. For you
know there are two ways for a man to provide for himself; one is by looking
immediately to himself, and seeking the things that belong to his profit, and
credit, and pleasure. The other is by neglecting himself, and by serving the
Lord, and committing it to him. Now consider which is the most compendious way
to a man's happiness. I say it is the next way, the best policy for a man to
provide for himself, even out of self-love, it is for him not to seek his own
things but the things that are Christ's. For there are but two ways for a man
to do good to himself. The one is direct, when his end is to do good to
himself, that is his object, he goes about without any more ado; The other is
when he does it by way of reflection, that is when he serves God and men
faithfully, and leaves it to him to serve him. This is the best way for a man
to look to himself to serve God, not to seek his own things but the things that
are Christ's, why? because he cannot do as much for himself as Christ can.

Think in all the needs thou have, how little thou can do for thy self. When
thou art sick, thou can not heal thy self: when thou art at the point of
death, thou can not deliver thy self. When thou have business to do, thou
can not bring thine enterprises to pass. When thou art in a doubtful case,
thou know not how to advise thy self. God is only wise. Go through all the
business thou have need of; God only is able to do it.

Besides, if thou go to seek happiness in thy self, if thou seek thy own
things, know that thou seek that which is not to be had there; that is the
way to undo thy self: because it is not in the nature of the creature; the
happiness of the creature stands not in its own compass, but in another without
it self: therefore if thou seek happiness in thy self thou art undone by it. As
if a glass be left to it self, and be not held up, it falls, and breaks in
pieces. That is the nature of every creature, if it go about to stand on its
own bottom, it is the way to break it assunder, to undo it.

Besides, consider what an unreasonable thing it is, thou may not seek thy
self. It is true God may seek himself, and his own end; he is the utmost cause,
there is none before him; there is no end beyond him, he may therefore do all
for his own end, for his own glory, he may seek his own things. But thou art a
creature, and every creature stands in subordination to somewhat above it:
therefore thy happiness is in seeking another end; if thou seek thy own end,
thou turnest the course of nature; therefore thou art bound to do it.

Again, when thou seek thy self and thine own things, what do thou please?
Thy flesh, thy disease, thou give it that it calls for, that will destroy
thee. He that hearkeneth to and gratifies his disease, strengthens his disease
and kills himself. So, when a man hearkens to himself, to his own lusts and
desires that the flesh requires of him, (for whatsoever is contrary to this
grace here, is but the flesh, that the more thou hearkenest to, thou
strengthenest that wihch will be thy destruction; because thou do not
withdraw from it that fuel that it desires: Therefore it is best for thee in
all respects, not to seek thy own things but the things of Christ.

But besides this necessity that lies upon thee if thou be 3. Christ has
deserved it.
his; and that it is best for thee. Then consider if he do n^^ deserve it at
thy hands, if it were not best for thee, is not he worthy? Consider that in 1
Cor. 1. The Apostle tells them of divisions among them, some were of Paul 1
Cor. 1.
and some of Apollo, etc. says the Apostle, Was Paul crucified for you? As if
he had said, you must consider that Christ is he that has deserved all at your
hands, and will you tie your selves to Paul, or Apollo, and not consider what
the Lord has done? has not he been crucified for you? And what is it to be
crucified for you? Is it a small thing to suffer death? to have his body
broken? I, but that was the least thing in it, to have his soul poured out for
your transgressions; that is with grief and anguish of heart, as he expresses
it himself, My soul is heavy to the death. And he made it good, it fell cut
so, it was effected: in the cold night when Peter crept to the fire, he sweat
water and blood. I say consider that Christ was crucified; and what it is to be
crucified: But this was but little to that conflict on the Cross, that brought
forth those words, My God, My God, why have thou forsaken me? I say consider
that expression, Was Paul crucified for you? Consider what it was to be
crucified, and if it were not best for thee, yet Christ deserves it.

Consider besides, has not he done as much for thee? he requires that thou
should not seek thy own things, but the things that are Christ's, he has not
sought his own things, but denied himself for thee. He might have enjoyed
happiness and glory with his father for ever: but he denied himself, and was
willing to part with his glory and riches, 2 Cor. 8. He that was rich became
poor for our sakes, that we through him might be made 2. Cor. 8.
rich. He was willing to part with every thing, to part with his glory, and
endure shame; to part with his life, and subject himself to the cursed death of
the Cross. He requires no more of thee then he has done for thee; and is not
he worthy, and deserves at thy hands that thou should serve him upon all
occasions, and stir up thy grace, that thou should not let it lie sleeping,
sometimes out of negligence, sometimes of purpose to serve thy self.

Besides, consider what he has done for thee, and see if he have not
deservedit? When thou were subject to death, he has taken thee out of the
jaws of death, and has given thee life: when thou were loathsome, he washed
thee, and put beauty upon thee, when thou were a bondslave he made thee a King,
etc. And not only these standing favors, but consider that every day he gives
thee meat, and drink, and clothes, is it not he that takes the care of thee?
Consider what thou art that he does this for; art thou not in thy self, and
every man a more vile wretch then the dust thou treadest on? a vile, condemned
person, a lump and heap of sin and misery? Now that the Lord should respect
such a creature as this, to be crucified for him, to deny himself, to lay aside
his glory, to do so much for him when he stood in such a condition.

Besides all this, he has done it out of love, as the Apostle expresses it,
he loved me, and gave himself for me. Gal. 2. 20,
Love begets love, as fire begets fire, and makes a man ready to do any thing.
If a man consider that Jesus Christ abounded in love, there is no creature in
the world that ever loved another so much as Christ loves his Church. He loved
thee with all impediments, he loved thee though thou did forget him, and
recompense him evil for good, and dishonouredst him again and again, yet his
love continued the same to thee. Thou feast by experience he abounds in love to
thee; he has all the properties of love, he is not easily provoked, he is long
suffering, he is bountiful; he takes a small thing in good part. Let all this
work on thy heart, and say Christ is worthy, he deserves it: And besides all
this, if thou stir up thy strength, and put it forth with loss to thy self for
his sake, to his use, consider, he regards it, and looks on all thy works and
sufferings, Rev. 2 I know thy works Rev. 2.
and thy sufferings, that is, I know every thing that thou do for my sake, I
take notice of every thing thou suffrest for my sake. So that every man is to
take this into consideration, to put him on to do this, that the Lord sits in
heaven, and considers what cost thou art at for his sake upon any occasion,
what pains thou take in matters that concerns him, what solicitude is in thy
heart for him: what thoughts thou bestowest in any business of his to bring it
to pass; this he observes. Remember, he considers what advantages thou
deprivest thy self of in thy estate, or otherwise, to do his work; he considers
what friends thou losest to keep close to him, what advancement and preferment
thou partest with for his service. I say there shall none of these be lost, not
a cup of cold water, that is, not the least of these actions; there is not one,
but it is upon Gods score, he reckons it among his debts that he will be sure
to pay. All this shall further thy account, all this is seed sown to the
Spirit, all these good works shall lie at thy door to do thee good one time or
other.

Now add to all this, the consideration of thy engagement how thou art tied. I
would ask any man (for I speak to those that are in Covenant, to those that
have strength in them.) Our duty is now to exhort you to stir up your strength,
and to use it in difficult cases for Christ's advantage, I say consider what
thou have done, thou have given thy self to Christ, and if thou have given thy
self, does it not follow that with thy self thou have given all things? As
Christ when he gives himself to us, he gives all with himself, My well beloved
is mine, and I am his. This is true on both sides; so I say whatsoever is
Christ's is ours, and accordingly whatsoever is ours should be his. So I must
think with my self, is it so great a thing for me to part with my wealth and
liberty for Christ's sake, or with life, and all? all this is none of mine. A
Wife, when she is married, nothing is hers, all is her husbands; the Lord that
I bestow it upon, it is all his, I must not think it a great matter that is
spent for his advantage: There is that agreement between us, so much we
profess, when we are baptized in his name. You see that is added in that place,
1 Cor. 1. Were you baptized in the name of Paul? as if he should say, what do
you adhere to these men? Christ was crucified, and not Paul; so you were
baptized in the Name of Christ. The meaning is this, That a man when he is
baptized (as you know it was at men's conversion then) he enters a Covenant in
Baptism, and binds himself to him in whose Name he is baptized, that is, he
then gives himself to him, and all that is his; that is, to be baptized in his
name. As in Circumcision, they were bound to keep the whole Law: so when a man
is baptized into Christ, he is bound to seek the things of Jesus Christ, and
not his own any longer, he is tied to it, he has made a vow to do it. Consider
this, and see if there be not reason that thou should deny thy self? What if
it be a difficult case? what if it cost thee somewhat? what if it cost thee thy
own pains, that thy own business lie still? what if it cost thee much money,
that thou lose in thy Estate? what if it cost thee friends? what if it cost
thee imprisonment, or whatsoever? yet consider, if thou have not reason to stir
up thy strength for Christ's advantage, to do him much service. Let it not lie
there, and say, such a thing should be done, and it were well done of him that
can put himself forward to it: but thou must do it thy self, thou art his
Disciple, thou art tied to it: for when a man is married to Chiist, he must
resolve it the best way to give himself to please his Husband. Is it not the
best way? shall not a man provide best for himself by seeking the things of
Christ and not his own?

Lastly, has not Christ deserved it at thy hands? is he not worthy? Mat. 10.
33. you have that expression, He that for sakes not father and mother, is not
worthy of me, As Mat. 10. 33.
if he should say, when you come to me I require this, that you forsake your
selves, and hate father and mother if need be, that you do not love father, or
son, or mother, but let all go. If you say, this is a hard condition, I will
put you to this, says the Lord; have not I done as much for you, besides that
which I will do? will not Heaven pay for all? will not I give you an hundred
fold for the present? have not I been crucified for you? he that will not do
this, he is not worthy of me, as if he should say, I am worth more then that.
So, if a man say it is a hard task, that he should not seek his own things, but
stir up his strength with any loss to himself for the advantage of Christ; is
not the Lord worthy of more? and thou art unworthy of any interest in Christ,
if thou think him not worthy of this; he that hates not son and daughter, that
neglects not that natural love to them for me, is not worthy of me.

GODLINESS OUR GLORY.
2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; from
such turn away.
THis duty which is commended to us in these words will well fall in with our
general scope; which we have told you was to show you

First, What we are out of Christ.

Secondly, What we have by him, and how we are ingrafted into him.

And thirdly, What we are to do for him.

Now we have told you that you are to labor for faith, and love, and good
works, which we have already finished.

But men are apt to have a form, a show, and appearance of all this, whenas
they have not the life and power. Therefore that you may not be deceived, we
have thought good to add this to all the rest, take heed how you content your
selves in having a form of godliness only, without the power of it.

The Apostle in this place as you may see intends to describe the diseases of
the latter times, which are the times into which we are fallen. And you may see
in the former part of the Chapter how many the diseases of the soul are: so
that the diseases of the body, as many as they are, do hardly exceed the
diseases of the inward man. He tells them that in the latter times there should
be men that should be lovers of themselves, coveteous, boasters, proud,
blasphemers, disobedient to parents, unthankful, unholy without natural
affection, truce breakers, false accusars, incontinent, fierce, despisers of
those that are good, Traitors, heady, high minded, lovers of pleasures more
then lovers of God. And then he puts this as the last of all, having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof.

There is something in that why he puts it down last: for when men hear
themselves accused of all those things formerly named by the Apostle, perhaps
they will be ready to answer, We hope we are not so bad, I hope we serve God, I
hope we are worshippers of God as well as others, I hope we are not Athiests.
Says the Apostle, deceive not your selves in that. I deny not says he, but
that notwithstanding all these diseases which are all mortal diseases, you may
yet have a form of godliness, but it is such a form as is disjoined from the
power of it: therefore even that he puts among the rest, having a form of
godliness, but denying the power thereof.

It is true, this form is good, his meaning is not to reject that; for
wheresoever there is the power of godliness there is also the form; that you
must take for granted, it is impossible that they should be disjoined.
Wheresoever there is true gold, there will be a yellowness, there will be all
the qualities of gold: though many times you have counterfeit pieces, that
carry the color having not the true qualities of the metal. So here the
Apostles intent is not to reject the form: but all the scope of the Apostle,
and the main matter which he drives at is, that men should not have the form
without the power, and life, having a form of godliness, but have denied the
power thereof.

The first point that we will commend to you out of these words (for you see
they need not much explication, they are very plain) it is this, (before we
come to that which is the main) that

It is Godliness which is required by God, and that is only Doct. Godliness
only required, and accepted of God.
acceptable to him.

You see that lies in the front of the text, and first offers it self to our
view. For when the question is about the form, and the power of godliness, it
must needs be taken for granted, that godliness is a thing required by God of
every man. The very light of nature will teach a man so much that, there must
be godliness. Now when we come to consider what this godliness is, then there
comes in a second consideration, not a form of it, but the power. So we will
begin with that first, that godliness is here required of every man. It is
godliness which is not in the form but in the power.

So then here, first of all we must consider, that nature 1. Nature is not
enough.
is not enough but there must be godliness. Nature is not enough, that is,
natural virtues, for God has caused, nature to bring forth many excellent
virtues which are the common gifts of the holy Ghost, as they are called. For
there is a natural patience, a natural weakness, a natural temperance. Some men
by nature are more sober, more temperate, more abstenious from inordinate and
loose courses: but it is not this that will be accepted with God. It is true
indeed these, are very beautiful, and aimable in their kind, considered in
their own sphere. As you know the flower that the grass bears has a beauty
in it, and all natural virtues, are like the flower of the grass; that is,
nature is but flesh, and this flesh has a flower growing upon it, and that
flower has a beauty and excellency in it, yea it is a flower of Gods own
making: but yet God does not accept this as a thing wherein he delights:
because these natural virtues they neither come from him, that is, not from his
sanctifying spirit; neither do they look to him, and therefore it must be
godliness and not nature.

Secondly, It must be godliness, and not moral virtues, for that goes a step
beyond nature; natural virtues are 2. Nor moral virtues.
bred and born with us: but moral virtues are something more: for they are
begotten, or acquired in us, by practice and education, and the engraving of
the moral Law concurring together. And these have an excellency much beyond
natural virtues, and they are very fair in the eyes of men; but abominable in
the sight of God: because these moral virtues have no respect to him, therefore
the Lord has no respect to them. Wherefore I say, as it must be godliness, and
not nature; so it must be godliness, and not moral virtues,

But yet you must go one step further, it must be godliness; and not only the
actions of Religion and worship which may be exhibited and offered to God, and
yet 3. Not actions of outward worship.
may proceed from self-love, and may tend to a man's self, as making himself the
utmost end of it. For you must know that a man may go far in the duties of
godliness, and in the outward actions of Religion; and yet I say all that he
does may proceed from self-love, and he may make himself the utmost end of all.
That is, when a man considers that God is the governor of the world, that he
alone has the keys of hell, and of death, the power of salvation and
damnation, and of all good and evil in this life, which are but degrees and
stairs which lead to those two ends hereafter. A man when he considers this,
may out of the strength of natural wisdom, do much for God, and to God, and yet
for all this, not have this true godliness here required.

For even as a man may be very obsequious to another, and very observant of
him, upon whom he depends, from whom he looks for some good thing, or in whose
power it is to do him mischief, and hurt. So when a man looks upon God as the
great governor of the world, who is able to do him good or hurt; he may do
many duties of his service and worship, he may be exact in the performance of
many things, and yet for all this not make God his utmost end: but uses him
only as a bridge to carry him over to his own end, which I say a man may
naturally do. Therefore godliness is none of these three; not natural virtues,
not moral virtues; no nor a great degree of the actions of Religion, which a
man may perform, and yet not be truly godly. I say it is none of these, for in
all these, the creature may be turned upon his own hinges; it may be moved out
of its own principle, it may look to it self in all these; and see an
excellency, and happiness in it self, within its own compass, within its own
circle.

Whereas true godliness, empties a man of himself, and teaches him to seek
God, and to magnify him in all Godliness what.
things, to look at him in all things. For you must know that godliness is a
grace, not begotten by nature, nor acquired by practice, but infused by God
which does habituate the soul, and all the faculties of it to turn to and fro,
as the will of God shall direct it, and that for his sake. And it does it after
this manner.

First, it takes a man off from his own bottom, and makes a man see that there
is nothing in himself. Again, it pitcheth a man upon a higher end then nature
can reach unto. And when it has done these two, the third will easily follow,
it makes a man follow God, and seek God in all things, for you must know that
so long as a man depends upon himself, so long as he is bottomed upon himself,
so long as he seeks his happiness within himself, so long he will look to
himself, and no further. Therefore for a man to look to God altogether, he must
first be taken off from himself, and he must be pitched upon God.

So that godliness has another Alpha and Omega then either nature or moral
virtues have. It has a higher wellhead then nature, and consequently, it
looks higher, and runs higher then nature with all its strength. After this
manner does godliness teach a man to look to God, and to follow God in all
things. It is the nature of every man living to look to himself, and that
constantly, till he find something better then himself to rest upon. Now
godliness enlighteneth a man, and teaches him to know, that his good is
contained in God, more then in himself, therefore he is willing, no longer to
depend upon himself, and to seek himself, and to place his happiness upon
himself, but in God. And then he is resolved to follow God in all things.

This is the property of godliness; this is a godly man. As we use to say in
our common speech that, such a man is a Lutheran, because he follows Luther in
all things: so such a man is an Aristotilian, because he follows Aristotle:
such a man follows his Prince, or such a great man, and therefore so we term
him by such a name: so I say, he is a godly man that looks to God in all
things, that resolves to follow him, to set him up, to magnify him, that goes
by the rule that he has appointed, he is properly a godly man. Therefore the
word here used will help in us the describing of godliness.

The word translated godliness, in the Original, signifies to honor, or to
worship, or to prize, or to esteem much. So that a godly man is he that prizeth
God much, or esteems him much, that extols him, and magnifieth him in his
apprehension. This therefore in a word is to be a godly man, to exalt God as
God in his heart. There are two things in that.

You must do it in your hearts, otherwise the Lord regards it not. It is true,
men give him generally an outward worship only, but does he look to that? does
he regard your presenting your selves before him in the congregation? It is
good that it should be so; but is it that which he chiefly regards? No; it is
the inward reverence of the heart that he looks unto.

And again, you must Exalt him as God in your hearts. To exalt God what.
You will say, What is that? It consists in these Two things.

First, He that will do that, must be utterly emptied of himself; that is, he
must see no beauty, nor excellency, nor goodness in himself, he must make
nothing of himself, think of himself as a man not worth the looking after. And
not so only, but he must see also an emptiness of all power and ability to
help himself. And this does not bring the creature upon his knees only, but it
lays him flat upon the ground with his face in the dust, and viles him in his
own eyes.

When a man shall see that he is not able to sustain himself, together with the
sight of the worthlessness that is in him, not having any thing to move another
to do it. I say this is one thing, wherein this exalting of God consists.
When a man sees neither any beauty, or excellency in himself, nor any power or
ability to help himself, nothing to deserve help nor ability to afford himself
any help. But this is for the first thing, wherein the exalting of God as God
does consist.

There is a second thing, and that is to see (on the other side) all fullness
in God, to see in him all excellency and beauty, and all goodness, and all
power and strength, and out of that to magnify him, to extol him in your
hearts, to set him high as he is God, to love him above all. In a word, to look
upon him as being all in all things, to answer our being nothing in every
thing. These two must concur together to make up godliness, to enable us to
exalt God as God in our hearts, to be fully convinced that there is nothing but
emptiness in our selves, and withal to see all fullness in God; for so long as
a man sees any thing in himself, so long as he thinks that there is either
excellency in himself, or strength and power in him, so long he will lean upon
himself, and trust himself, and proportionably, he will draw his heart from the
Lord. And again on the other side, in what measure a man sees an emptiness in
himself, and a fullness in God, in that measure he will withdraw his heart from
himself, and every creature, and pitch it upon the Lord. By this time then you
see what this godliness is which is here commended to us.

And now I have declared to you what it is, to win your hearts to a more full
assent to this, that nothing but godliness is accepted; we will show you some
reasons for it: For a man will ask this. What is the reason that God delights
not in nature, or natural virtues, or in moral habits? Why does he not delight
in these? Why will he accept of nothing but godliness?

First, there is this reason for it, because the Lord loves Reas. 1. Godliness
only is like to God.
nothing but that which is like himself; as indeed no man does, nor no
creature. No man loves any thing but that which has a likeness, a
consimilitude with something within himself. For all love you know comes from
similitude, all delight comes from likeness.

Therefore the things that have no similitude with us, we neither love nor
delight in them. Now therefore when God looks upon man, and sees his own Image
upon him; when he sees that stamp upon a man, he loves it, and delights in it,
for it is like himself. But now whatsoever is from nature, whatsoever is but
moral virtues, it is but from the earth, and is earthly, it is but from the
flesh, and it is fleshly. But that which is supernatural, that which is infused
into us from God, that Image of his which is stamped upon us, is from Heaven,
and is heavenly; it is from the Spirit, and it is spiritual. Now God that is a
Spirit, and is holy, he loves that which is spiritual and holy, he loves his
own Image wheresoever he finds it. Now godliness is only heavenly; for all
other beauties that seem so gaudy to us, are but from the earth, and are the
beauty of the flesh, therefore the Lord delights not in them: the Lord loves it
not with the love of complacency, so as to be well pleased with it. That is one
reason.

Secondly, the reason why the Lord does love nothing but godliness, that he
loves none of the rest, so as to delight in them: for there is a kind of love
that he gives them, as you know our Savior Christ looked on the young man in
the Gospel, and loved him: but I say he does not delight in them, he loves them
not with that special and peculiar love, because all these ornaments they do
but beautify the creature in it self. Now no creature may rejoice in it self,
or boast in it self, no creature may magnify it self, which it would do if it
might find an excellency in it self. Therefore the Lord will have the creature
to find no excellency in it self, and therefore he does not magnify these
things, he sets no price upon them. And the Lord would have the creature to
know so much, he only magnifies and esteems that which draws the creature from
it self, makes the creature his; therefore he prizeth and esteems only the
emptying graces. You shall see the Scripture does not magnify those moral
virtues that Aristotle, and Plutarch, and Seneca, and the rest of those
Heathens magnified. For the scope of the Scripture looks another way, and
magnifieth those emptying graces most. As faith (for instance) which emptyeth
the creature of it self, and makes a man to see nothing in himself, not to
trust in himself, but teaches a man to look for all from God, therefore the
Scripture magnifieth faith, O woman great is thy faith! that is, this is the
thing that only makes thee amiable; this is it that makes me set a high price
upon thee. And so in that speech to the Centurion, I have not found so great
faith, no not in Israel. It was that which set Jacob in that high esteem with
God, that which got him that title of honor to be called Israel, it was his
faith. And why is it, but because the Lord regards that only in the creature
which makes a man his, which draws a man nearer to him, and more out of
himself? Now this godliness does; for it makes a man to see nothing in himself,
but all in God, and therefore to follow God altogether, to seek God altogether.

Now all other ornaments, all natural and moral virtues do beautify and adorn
the creature within himself, they make a man to see something within himself,
now no creature is to do this; no not the creature when it was in the flower of
all its bravery. When Adam and the Angels would begin to look on something in
themselves, and forget God, and to think that they were some body, and would
stand upon their own bottom, then they fell. For the creature of it self is as
a glass without a bottom, if you set it down it breaks, for it has Simile.
nothing to sustain it, but as long as a man holds it in his hand, so long it
is safe. Such a thing is every creature in it self. Angels and men, they are
without a bottom when the Lord does not hold them in his own hand, when they
will go about to stand of themselves, they fall and break, and that was the
cause of the fall of the Angels, and the fall of Adam, and of all of us in him,
viz. selfdependance.

Our repairing again, the restoring of the creature, must be by learning to be
altogether Gods, to magnify God, to look to God, and to look to him
altogether: for that is indeed only prized and magnified by him. And this is
the second reason wherefore godliness is only accepted by God; because it
teaches a man only to mind him, to look to him, to draw near to him; it makes
a man altogether his, and not his own.

We will add one more, the Lord regards only godliness and nothing else,
because it gives him all the glory. Reas. 3. It gives God glory.
Now only the Lord may seek his own glory, because he has no other end beyond
himself. Every creature you know is made for a further end, and therefore is
bound to seek something above it self, even as it stands subordinate to that.
Every man is subordinate; a man in the Commonwealth must seek the good of
that. Every man is subordinate to God, therefore he must seek the glory of God;
for the subordination will so carry it. But now the Lord, he has none above
himself, therefore he may and does seek his own glory; now nothing gives glory
to God but godliness.

In 1 Cor. 11. The man is the glory of God, and the woman 1 Cor. 11.
is the glory of the man. The meaning of it is this; look how the woman is the
glory of the man, so is the man the glory of God, that is, a man must have
nothing in himself, for then he would have some glory to himself, but he must
be wholly the Lords, he must be wholly fashioned and accommodated to him, (as
the woman to the Husband) for then he is the Lords glory. Even as a picture,
you know it has nothing of it self but all from the Painter, therefore the
picture is the glory of the Painter, we use to phrase it so, because it has
all from him; we call it the glory of the Painter, because it shows his glory.
And so a woman has all from the man, and she should seek to imitate him,
because she is the glory of the man, she is to have no power of her own.
Therefore that is to be observed, which is said, ver. 3. that the Ver. 3.
head of every man is Christ, and the head of the woman is the man. That is,
Christ is the head of every man, as the man is the head of the woman. Now
because the man is the head of the woman, the woman is to have no power upon
her head, that is, no ensign of power; this is to be subject to the man. After
the same manner Christ is every man's head, that is, no man is to have any power
of his own, he is to do nothing of himself, or for himself, but to do all for
Christ, to be perfectly subject to him, even as the creature to the creature,
even as the clay to the Potter; for Christ is the head of the man, and God
says, he is Christ's head. That is, Christ as he was the Son of God, and the
Mediator, he looked to God, and was altogether subject to him.

Therefore I say it is that the Lord looks at, nothing but godliness, because
godliness gives him glory, all the rest gives glory to the creature but not
to the Lord. So much shall serve for the reasons. We will come to make some use
of it. You see now what godliness is, and the reasons why the Lord accepts
nothing but godliness, why nothing is pleasing to him but godliness.

First, Then let us make this use of it, let us not content our selves then
with any thing that nature has wrought Use. To content your selves with
nothing but godliness.
in us; let us not content our selves with moral virtues: let us not content
our selves with common care of worshipping of God, nor with all the outward
actions and shows of Religion only, for all this is not acceptable to God, as
you see: but let us labor for this which is called true Godliness; this is all
in all. Therefore you shall find that the Apostle Saint Peter, 2 Pet. 1. he
exhorts you 2. Pet. 1.
to this that we are now about, Says he add to your faith virtue, to your
virtue knowledge, to your knowledge temperance, to your temperance patience,
and to your patience godliness. Mark, what is his meaning in this? surely this,
As if he should say, when you here me speak to you of patience, and temperance,
etc. and that all these are goodly virtues, you must add godliness to all, or
else they are nothing worth, the Lord will not regard them; that is, you must
look to God in them all, there must be more then nature in you, you must reach
at an higher end then nature can, and therefore content not your selves with
any of these.

But you will say, what do you cast away nature and civility? are these nothing
worth these moral virtues? Object.


No; my brethren this is not my meaning, they are of very much worth as we said
before, Jesus Christ looked Answ.
upon the young man and loved him. There was that in him which was truly
aimable within its compass, and sphere. But it is one thing to be lovely to
salvation, and another thing to be aimable in its own degree and kind.
Therefore we do not say we cast away these, they are very necessary, God has
placed them there himself: but as we have said heretofore, Godliness does make
use of all these: these are like the stream, and the wind that must carry along
the ship. If it were not for these natural powers and virtues, we should not be
able to do the duties of godliness. Only this we say, there must be some what
superadded to it, that godliness must sit at the stern, and turn the rudder,
and rule the compass, and guide the scope of the ship to the right haven.

So that I say godliness does not take away nature but adds to it. As you
know your riders of horses; when a rider comes to a horse full of mettle; he
does not take away that mettle, he does not extinguish it, but he endeavors to
improve it, in a right way, he fashons it, and brings it under, and makes it of
use for the rider. Even so Godliness, when it comes to a man, if it find much
mettle in a man, many excellent virtues which nature has planted in him: many
moral virtues which customs, and education has edded to it: Godliness it casts
not away these, but orders them, and breaks them, and subdues them, and makes
them serviceable to God, and man.

So does the Physician when he comes to his patient, he does not overthrow all
the humors in the body, and extinguish them, but only he corrects them, only
he adds to those that are defective, and takes down those that are excessive,
and composeth, and helps them into a right frame. Even so does godliness with
nature, it composeth, and orders, and adds to nature, it elevates nature,
it puts a higher end upon it, it adds a spiritualness to it. As for example,
nature has made a man to love himself, to love his Children. It is natural
affection that has taught a man to grieve for that which is evil, and
obnoxious to himself, when it is upon a man. Godliness now does but make a
right use of this. When nature has dug a fountain of tears, godliness does
but turn the stream the right way. When nature has put such a principle in us
as love, godliness comes and teaches us to love this, and that for God, and
from God.

Therefore our exhortation is, that you would but add godliness to all these.
You will say, what is that? That is, learn to be emptied of your selves, to
cast away all these as St. Paul did, to reckon them as dross and dung, that you
may be found in Christ. As you must do this for justification, so you must do
it in matter of sanctification: for you must know this, that when Christ comes
to dwell in a man, that man must no longer live to himself, and for himself,
but to the Lord, and for the Lord. Now every man, the less he lives to himself,
and in himself, the more he will live to Christ, and in Christ. Therefore I
say, the thing we would exhort you to is this, that you would contend with your
selves, and reason the matter seriously, why a man should no more look to
himself, but to God altogether. For a man is a reasonable creature, and it is
certain, that till a man see reason why he should not look to himself, he will
do it: but let him be persuaded, it is best for me to look no more to my self,
to stand no more upon my own bottom, but it is safest for me to seek the Lord.
I say this reasoning with our selves, so as to be convinced of it, will bring
us to serve God altogether.

For when you are come to this once, to see that it is only God in whom all
your happiness is, you will no longer look to your selves. Therefore you must
learn to consider well of those speeches, God is only wise, and only good,
and only excellent; consider well of them. We think that he is wise, that he
is good, but not only wise, and only good, the more you do this, the more
godly you grow; the more you are out of conceit with your selves, the more you
grow into a high opinion of God, to set up him, the more the Lord dwells in
your hearts: for you must know, there are degrees of Gods dwelling in a man's
heart. As a vessel, the more it is emptied of that which was in it, the more it
admits of other liquor that Simile.
is poured into it. As it is in a house, another man may dwell in it, but I may
keep a room in it; but when there is no In-mate in the house, then a man is
said to dwell in it plentifully, to be altogether in it, to be the Lord of
every room. So it is when God comes to dwell in the heart of a man; so far as a
man bears rule in his own heart, and keeps possession there himself, so much
less is God there. And so much less as he is in himself, so much less as he
rules in himself, so much more plentifully does God dwell there, because God
rules most when a man does subject himself to him altogether, that is, when he
does nothing but his work, when he considers what it is that the Lord would
have him to do in every thing. When a man resigns up himself to God, he resigns
up his affections and all, to be ruled and regulated according to his will, to
act according to his pleasure. When a man is to speak any thing, he will be
still looking what warrant he has from the Lord, and so when he is to do any
thing.

Oh my Brethren, that we could do but this. As men when they serve great Kings
and Princes, when they see that their making or marring depends upon them;
whatsoever may displease them, that they will curiously and carefully look to
avoid, and what may please them, they will exactly observe. Is not the Lord,
the great King of heaven and earth? should we not look on him altogether? This
is without exception, no man shall err in this.

In following a man, a man may hurt himself, he may be led into by-ways, that
may turn to his disadvantage; but in following God it is not so. Take the
wisest man that is, yet he is subject to some error, but the Lord he is
righteous altogether, his ways are perfect. Therefore if a man would take that
resolution to himself; Well, I will look upon my self no more, nor to any
creature, but I will deny my self altogether, and look to God, and see what he
will have me to do, whether I sink or swim, whatsoever becomes of me: this is
the wisest man, and the happiest man; and this is the property of godliness.
And as you do this the more, so the more you are godly men. And the root of all
this is, when a man makes no account of himself, and sees God in all: for a man
will have a ground for what he does.

And if you could bring your hearts to this, to see all your happiness in God,
and all your safety there, you would soon deny your selves in every thing else,
and seek him altogether.

And now only we will add, by reason of the Sacrament which is to be
administered. You that are now to Application to the Sacrament.
receive, have occasion especially to make use of this; though it be a work
that we have all to do, as at all other times, so especially at this time. But
you will say, what is this to the Sacrament? You must know what the Sacrament
is, and then you shall see how close this will come to it; Mark 16, we find
these words, He that believes Mark 16.
and is baptized shall be saved, he that will not believe shall be damned. What
is the meaning of that, He that believes and is baptized shall be saved? The
meaning is this, says he, if you will believe in Jesus Christ, if you will
take him for your Lord and Husband; and if you will be baptized. What is
Baptism? When you are baptized, you are baptized in the Name of the Father, and
of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, that is, you shall give up your selves to
God altogether. You shall bear his Name, you shall be no more your own; for you
are baptized into his Name, and you are called, after his Name, as the Wife is
called after the Name of her Husband; so you shall be called Christians. Now
when you take this Sacrament, you must do this really; for does the Lord care
for the title? no, but you must give over your selves to him really. So that
when you are to be called by his Name, the meaning is, you must do it in the
substance, you must give up your selves to his service indeed. That is, you
must do two things in the Sacrament. First, you profess this to all the world,
that whereas before you served other gods, or served your selves, now you
profess to all the world that you are the servants of God. So that we say, when
you come to receive the Sacrament, you not only profess that you are
Christians, but you bind your selves to be so really. I say in the receiving of
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, there are these two things done.

First, the Lord engages himself to you, I will be your Master, I will be your
General, I will be your Husband, And again, you engage your selves to him, that
he shall be your Lord, and you his people, that he shall be your Master, your
General, and you will be his servants and his followers. This is done every
time you receive the Sacrament; the Lord renews his Covenant with you, it is
done at your first coming in, at your first ingrafting into the Church by
Baptism: but the Lords Covenant is renewed in this Sacrament: therefore that
you may not forget it, he says, Take this is my body; that is, take this as a
sign of it, that I have given my self for you: and when you take it, it is a
sign that you give your selves up unto the Lord. So that think with your selves
therefore, when you come to the Sacrament, you profess your selves to be
Christians, godly men, that is, men that will serve God, and serve Christ
altogether. This Sacrament I say, it is but a renewing of the Covenant, for
that is the end of it, it is but the celebrating of the nuptials anew. As
sometimes you know men will keep their marriage-day a Festival yearly. So we do
in receiving the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; as Jonathan and David, they had
made an oath together before, but they renewed it again and again, that they
might be strengthened and confirmed in one another love. So this is your
worthy receiving of this Sacrament, to strengthen your former Covenant with
God. Therefore it is good when you are to receive, to think how much since the
last time, your hearts are estranged from God; how much you have forgotten God.
He is your Lord, your Master, you must be his servants: therefore renew it now,
and bring your hearts back again. This is indeed the very renewing of the
Covenant, and a drawing near to God; and it gives strength unto you, and makes
the union more firm; that is, the more that we are persuaded that he is our
Husband, and that we have married our selves to him, the greater is the
strength of affection. And you shall find it by experience, every grace is
strengthened and enlarged by this, and every sin is abated, and mortified, and
subdued; This is done in the eating of his flesh, and the drinking of his
blood. So that every Sacrament day a man renews his assurance, he renews his
union with God in Christ: this is properly feeding upon Christ, you are
strengthened by it, your hearts are more established in well doing, there is
more joy, and more peace, your faith is increased, which increases every
grace; you are more weaned from the world. As when the heart of the wife
draws near to the Husband, it is more weaned and alienated from strangers.
This I say is to eat the flesh of Christ, and to drink his blood: when withal
you add a right application of all that Christ has done, for the enabling of
you to the duties of godliness.

A FORM of GODLINESS NO GODLINESS Without the POWER.
2 Timothy 3. 5. Having a form of Godliness, but denying the power thereof; from
such turn away.
YOu know the point that we delivered to you in the morning out of these words;
That

It is Godliness that is required of every man, that is only acceptable to the
Lord. We gave you the reasons of it, and made some Use of it. And before we
come to the other point, or to some further Use that we should make of this, we
will add a word or two to that which we pressed in the morning, that we should
not content our selves with any thing but godliness. For we are apt to be
deceived in this case, to mistake, and to think that our common care of serving
God, and that moral virtues and civility are godliness. But it is enough for
you to know that the Lord accepts nothing but that which is more then nature,
that which himself has wrought in us by his holy Spirit. Aristotle himself,
though a Heathen man, was able to say, that natural virtues are very like the
true, they come so near it, that there is nothing more like. As Natural virtues
like true virtues.
natural meekness will do as much as the best moral meekness; nay as much as
any spiritual meekness: stupidity will do as much as Christian courage, and
natural temperance and ability in a man to rule and govern himself. There are
many of these natural virtues, which for the outside (for I speak of that) and
for the show, for some kind of performance, may go as far as those that are
spiritual. But there is a great difference between them; because the one sort
proceed but from nature, and they look but to a man's self. And you shall find
they always have this property, they are done without difficulty, without
resistance, without any reluctance, therefore they are not praiseworthy, there
is no thanks for any man to do such an action.

Indeed they are beautiful things as I told you then, the flowers of the
grass, the flower of the flesh is beautiful, they are the works of Gods own
hand, for he has wrought them in us, but he himself must have the glory, and
not we. That which we must look for is spiritual virtues, spiritual graces,
which the Apostle exhorts us unto, Add to your patience, virtue, to virtue,
temperance, and brotherly kindness, and then to all add godliness. Godliness
which makes a man look to God, it has always the flesh to resist it, it does
what it does with some difficulty and reluctance. For the stream of nature is
still running a contrary way. This is that you must labor for; therefore
remember this rule, that godliness is something always above nature. If
therefore there be no more in you then what you have by nature, or by
education, or practice, be assured it is not right. As you see it in the Simile.
earth, the earth is able to bring forth grass, and some kind of flowers of it
self; but if you will have it bear corn and wine, things of a more precious
nature, there must be plowing, and sowing, and planting; there must be some
other seed cast into it then is found in the earth: there must be some work of
man upon it. So it is with our hearts, by reason of those engravings of the
moral Law, and the work of nature in us, we are able to do much, we are able to
bring forth many excellent flowers, we are able to do many things that are very
good and beautiful, though they be not spiritually so. But that which is
godliness, that is it which must be wrought by a supernatural power, there must
(to follow the metaphor) be plowing and sowing: that is, no man living has
this thing which we call godliness in him, but it must be wrought after this
manner. Godliness how wrought.


First, there must be a plowing of the heart, he must be humbled, he must be
taught to know that he is a child of wrath, a man that never has had any of
this plowing, that has never been thus humbled in the sense of sin, and the
apprehension of Gods wrath, he may be assured that he has nothing in him but
nature, he has nothing in him that is of a supernatural work, that is, the
work of the sanctifying Spirit, he has nothing of that yet wrought in him, for
that is never done without plowing.

Again, this is not all; for a man may be plowed, he may have quick and sharp
terrors of conscience, and yet have no feed sown; there may be harrowing you
know where there is no fowing. It was the case of Judas and Achitophel, and so
it is the case of diverse others, and therefore we must go further; there must
be seed thown into the heart by the hand of God, by the sanctifying spirit;
that is, after a man^ heart has been thus hurried, he must come home to God by
Christ, and have his heart calmed by the assurance of Gods love. When he is
thus united to Christ by faith, after he has been humbled, then the Lord
sows seed; what seed? The immortal seed of his Word, which by the operation
of the sanctifying Spirit of God, works that in the heart which is above all
natural principles. Now when this is done, there is a crop which God is
delighted in, a crop pleasing and acceptable to him. For we shall never bring
forth fruit to the spirit, till the same spirit has sown our hearts with these
spiritual and supernatural graces.

This only I add, that when I have exhorted you not to content your selves
with moral virtues, that you may know in a word what this godliness is. That it
is first a thing that is always exercised with reluctance, always with
difficulty, you shall always find a contrary stream of corrupt nature running
against it, you shall always find the flesh rebelling against it. And secondly,
it is always wrought with plowing and sowing. And if you find not these two in
your selves, be assured that that which is in you is not godliness. So much for
this first Consectary or Use that we draw from this doctrine.

Secondly, we must exhort you from hence now to do the thing, and exalt God for
God in your hearts; to be Use 2. To excel God for God.
godly men, (to use the phrase of Scripture) to make him your God, and to have
no other gods before his face. You will say, What other gods? Not to make your
riches your god, as covetousness is called Idolatry, Quest. Answ.
not to make your belly your god. Now that is but a part for the whole; that
is, to make no kind of creature your god, nothing in the world; not to make the
praise of men your god, etc. Now what is it to make these things a man's god? It
is to exalt these things for God in a man's heart, when you place your summum
bonum in any of these, that if they be taken from you, you think your selves
undone, and if you enjoy them, you think your selves well, and in a happy
condition. In a word, it is to do the same to these that you should do to God.
When a man shall think, well, I live in credit among men, I have a good estate,
I am at liberty, and all things go well with me, I am now well, and if I be put
off from this condition, if my estate be taken away, if my credit with men be
taken away, then I am undone; when a man's heart is thus affected with these
things, he makes them his God; for he gives them that which is proper to God,
to think that these things can make him happy or miserable.

Therefore you shall observe that the phrase of Scripture To. 3. 10. is, that
they have not the fear of God before their eyes. Romans 3. 10.
That is, a man that does exalt God in his heart, he looks upon God altogether,
he is always before his eyes. That is he thinks himself happy so long as he
has his favor, he fears nothing but the loss of that, therefore whatsoever he
does he has still his eye upon God, As when a man fears any thing he will be
sure to have his eye upon that, because that is the thing which he thinks can
do him good or hurt. So I say when a man has God before his eyes, when he
fears him altogether, when he dares do nothing without his warrant, this is
to exalt him for God.

Contrary to this was David's miscarriage, 2 Samuel 12. Thou have (says God by
Nathan to him) cast my commandments behind thy back. Indeed David did it out
of infirmity upon a special temptation; but when a man shall do it in his
general course, that he shall always cast God behind his back; this is not to
exalt God for God in his heart, but to cast him away. And a man is said to cast
him away, when he is not still observing of him, when he is not always seeing
what his will is, and what his commandments are.

Therefore we should labor to do what the Psalmist prays for, that the Lord
would turn away our eyes and our hearts and affections from regarding vanity,
that is from receiving any thing into our hearts which is vanity, that so our
hearts may be placed upon God altogether, to fear him, to delight in him and
nothing besides. This is the thing we ought to do to the Lord; and this is
Godliness, this is to exalt him.

Now to do this we must do two things.

First, To look for all from God. And then the second will easily follow, we
shall be ready to do all for God, I say to do this effectually.

First, We must learn to know God aright, to have our 1. To look for all from
God.
hearts so filled (as it were) so satisfied and contented with him, that we
need to look for nothing else. When a man's heart looks upon God as an adaequate
object, as the main principle of his happiness, that the having of him is
essential, and substantial to his happiness, and he looks upon all other things
but as accessories only, he cares not how other things go; he has learned so
far to know God, that his heart is fully satisfied with him, he is content to
have communion with him though he have him alone. So that he looks upon riches,
and poverty, upon honor, and disgrace, upon good report, and evil report, as
upon things of smaller moment, that if the worst befall, it is no great matter,
because he has the Lord. He that has the sunshine what cares he for a
candle? A man that sees God, and enjoyes him, and is satisfied with him, he
regards not other things.

And then when a man sees God is this manner, the second will follow, he will
be ready to do all for him: for those two will follow one another. As the yvie
though it have no root of it self, it cleaves fast to the tree, and depends
upon it. Let a man be brought once to this, to see that he has nothing of his
own, and that God is all in all to him, he will easily depend upon God, and
cleave to him; but still remember that God be all in all. That as it is said
(Col. 3.) of Christ, there is in him neither Jew Collos. 3.
nor Gentile, but Christ is all in all to us. That is, we must make God all,
and he must be so in all things. And in this we fail for the most part; we can
be content to have God for part, but to make him our all, to seek all our
comfort from him, all our happiness, and to do it not only in some things but
in all things, herein we come short. But when we are able to do this, to look
upon God as all in all to us, then we shall be ready to do all to him: and that
is the other thing that we must do, to refer all to him to care for nothing but
to please him, to do all in sincerity, to do it to the Lord.

For otherwise, it is not godliness, you may do much, but you may do it for
by-ends, for vain glory, for selfrespects: but that which we exhort you now
unto is, to do it for the Lord in sincerity. For the Lord has a quick eye, he
observes narrowly whatsoever you do, what ends you have in all your actions. It
may be you do much, but if it be not done for him, you have a reward indeed,
but this is not that which is acceptable to God. For as it is said of the word
of God, Heb. 4. that it divides between the Heb. 4
flesh and the spirit, between the marrow and the bones. What is the meaning of
that? that is, it divides between the actions of the flesh, and of the spirit.
That when any man does a business of the Lords, the word discernes it, because
it. is the word that comes from the spirit. So here when we do any business,
the Lord sees how far the spirit has a hand in it, and how far the flesh, and
he discerns exactly between them, though it be as near as the bone, and the
marrow. As if he should say, even as the bones, and the marrow, even as the
joints and the sinnews, the eye of man cannot see into them, yet the Lord
searches the reins to the bottom, he discerns what of the flesh, and what of
the spirit is in every action. And my brethren, you should learn to do thus to
your selves, to judge your selves after this manner; to consider in all the
actions you do, whether you do them in sincerity to the Lord: for it is
godliness no further, it, is something it may be which is good, some moral
virtues it may be, or else an act of Religion, and public worship, but it is
not godliness except it be done for the Lord. Therefore you must do th^se two
things, (...) him for God in your hearts, look for all from him, care for no
comfort but what comes from him, it is no matter what you loose so you have
him, you reckon him the main, you reckon him essential to your happiness. Other
things if they be better or worse, so it is, it is no no great matter. And
again to do it in sincerity as to God.

Last of all, if this be the thing that the Lord looks for from you, then
labor to excel in it, because it is the Use. To exalt in godliness.
best excellency you have: for that in a man which is only acceptable to God
is certainly the best thing in him, and the more he excels in such a thing, the
more acceptable. Every man seeks after excellency, why should we not labor to
excel in this? that is labor to be very godly to do very much for the Lord.
Every man is ready to do something for some body, he will do something for his
friend, for his Wife, for his Children, for his Prince, for his country, and
it is well, you should do all this: but now look upon the Lord, and see in how
many respects you are bound to him more then to all these. And think if I ought
to do for all these, how much more ought I to do for the Lord? And therefore
consider what you have to do and how much you are bound to him, and labor to
excel in godliness, that is to do much for God. A man will do much for himself,
he will devise what is for his own good, he will project it, and study it with
solicitousness; now a man is bound to love God above himself, and therefore to
do more for God then for himself. This is a thing that is much forgotten among
us, and by those whom we call godly men, they forget it, they think not what
they have to do for the Lord.

You have many opportunities afforded to you, remember that to be a godly man,
is as you have opportunities, as to do much for God, so to do much to him. God
observes what talents every man has, what occasions, what hints every man has
to do him service, what advantages, what power he has in his hand, and he
looks that all these should be improved for his advantage. It is no better then
thievery, and robbery to take these from God, and to bestow them upon your
selves. As you reckon it in a steward to be the greatest theft to turn his
masters good and benefit to his own profit: so when a man shall have an eye to
himself in all these things, it is an extreme robbery of God, for you knew you
should use them all for God. And the more you do for him (for he sees it, and
observes it) will recompense every man a hundred fold. No man pays wages so as
he does: but we will not stand to urge this; because I would not be kept from
handling that which is the main scope of this text.

Having a form of Godliness but denying the power thereof.

The second point that we would deliver to you, it lies so plain that there
needs no further opening of the text for the gathering of it, it is this, that

Most men have but a form of Godliness, though the Lord require Doct. 2. Most
men have but a form of godliness.
the power of it.

We will even deliver it plainly as it lies. It is a point that needs no proof,
and I wish it did, I wish that it were not written in Capital letters in the
foreheads of most men, that he that runs may read it. For if we look about us
we shall see a form of Godliness every where: but the power and life of it is
exceeding rare. Our business will be rather to consider the cause of this
disease. What the reason is that the form of godliness is to be found
frequently enough, and the power and life of godliness is so rare, and so
seldom to be seen. And we shall find these reasons of it.

First, Men will have a form of godliness: because there Reas. 1. To satisfy
conscience. Romans 2. 16,
must be something to satisfy that conscience which every man has. For there
is a natural conscience which the Apostle speaks of, Romans 2. 16. speaking of
the Gentiles he says this of them, their thoughts accusing or excusing one
another. So that there is a natural conscience even in men that yet know not
God aright. Now that natural conscience must have something to satisfy it, it
will not be at rest else: Now because men are unable to judge, and discern
aright, therefore a form of godliness is enough for them, they are quieted, and
satisfied and contented with that, although they have not the power thereof it
self. Even as children you know are contented with counters, because they do
not know their worth. Satan deals with us in this case as we do with them, when
they cry, and are unquiet, such flight things of no moment contents us though
they be as empty, and as beggarly as counters, and rattles, because men are not
able to judge what the conscience will have: something it must have to satisfy
it. he gives us that which is but a form, which is but counterfeit, that has
not the power, and life of godliness: and hence it is that men are contented
with it.

Secondly, Another cause, why the form is found every Reas. 2. A form is easy.
where, but not the power, it is because the form of godliness is very easy,
but the power and life of it is very hard and difficult. It is an easy thing
to do the things wherein the show, and the form consists. It is an easy thing
to come to Church, to hear the word, to here prayers; it is an easy thing to
read a prayer every day in private, it is an easy thing to have such a
formality in serving of God, these are things that are done with facility. But
come now to the power and life of godliness, that mortifieth thy lusts, that
subdueth thee and keeps in thy affections, that searches thy heart, and thine
inward intentions, that requires other aims, and ends. It is another thing to
do this; it is a very hard thing, for a man to cross himself, to deny himself.
Let any man examine himself in those things to which he is strongly inclined,
when he shall find in himself that he has such, and such opportunities, in
such, and such companies, in such, and such occasions, how hard a thing it is
for him now to stick to the rule, and to subdue, and mortify his sinful lusts.
I say the power of godliness does this.

And again, it does not suffer you to do holy duties in a customary manner; but
you do them in another manner, you do not only pray, but your prayers will be
frequent, and fervent. And so for hearing, your hearing will be in another
manner, it will be hard and difficult, though the form be easy. And because it
is easy, therefore it is that men content themselves only with a form of
Religion, but deny the power of it.

Again, Thirdly, another cause of it is this. Satan resists Reas. 3. Satan and
the World resist not a form.
you not when there is but a form, nor the world opposes against thee, when
there is but a form. For Satan knows that the form of Godliness alone will
never hurt him, and therefore he does not trouble men, nor is he busy to
withdraw men out of that form by any temptation; but now when he comes to a man
that sets upon godliness indeed, there he will not be idle, but be ready to
betray him every way, and will leave no temptation unattempted; because he
knows that the power of godliness plucketh a man out of the power of Satan.
And as Satan resists not, so the world does not much resist it, because it does
not much cross the world; for the world will surely resist that which crosses
it. By the world I mean the multitude of men, the common sort of men, I say
such as these resist not the form of godliness, because it crosses them not.
Indeed the power and life of godliness is very cross to the World: those that
are strict to practice indeed according to their knowledge, that have Religion
not only in show, but in truth, that walk exactly and precisely according to
the Rule, these men go a contrary course to the world, they go against the
crowd, and against the stream of the world, and therefore the crowd of the
world goes against them; for the world loves her own: now a form of godliness
may be notwithstanding, a man may be the worlds own; but when a man has the
power of godliness he is not the worlds own, but he is another; and therefore
is it that men hate and oppose, and cry down the power of godliness. Hence it
is too that men are so discouraged in laboring after the power, and that it is
so rare among men, because the world so opposes, and hates it.

And not only so, this is not all, but the flesh resists it: the flesh does
not much resist the form, because there is no great contrariety between the
form and the flesh; therefore you see carnal men, Papists, etc. that know not
the power of godliness; they will be very exact in all. formal performances of
duties. But now the flesh resists the power of godliness, it runs with a
strong stream against it, it fights against it. So that hence it is you see,
that the power of godliness is so rare, because that the devil, the world and
the flesh, resist the power, and they do not so to the form. And this is the
third cause, why the form is so common, and the power and life is so rare, and
seldom found amongst us.

We will add yet one cause more of this general disease, why we have the form
without the power: that is, Reas. 4. It agrees with the common light of nature
because in men there is a common light which will go so far as to approve of
the formality of Religion; but they want so much light as to distinguish of the
power and life of Religion, to approve that. I speak now of a man's own heart,
not of others. There are two things in Religion; there is a formality, a common
care of worshipping God, a form of godliness. And there is besides this, the
life and the power: that which is called the new creature, that which is called
regeneration, that which is called the change of the heart. Now a man that has
the common light, that is not yet sanctified, he can go so far as to approve
the first, to say, it is good in me, and it is good in others, it is fit that
God should be worshipped, something should be done. A man has as much light as
the moral Law, and as a common illumination can afford him. And therefore we
see men that are not yet regenerate, that are not acquainted with the life of
Religion, they can approve of moral honesty, of just dealing between man and
man, of a common care of serving of God, which indeed is good and excellent;
only we find fault with this, that there is no more; if there be no more, it
is but a form. Now I say, the common light which every man has, will go so far
as to approve this. But come now to the life and power, there is required a
sanctified light, a peculiar light, which is given but to few: no man has it
till he be regenerate and born again, till God has put it into him by his holy
Spirit. Now because this light is rare, it is but thin sown: hence it is that
there are but few that find out the beauty and excellency of the power of
godliness, but rather dislike it, and disapprove it, because they have not
light enough to see it. But the common light is frequent and ordinary, and
hence it is that the form of godliness is common, whereas the life and power is
rare.

And you may add this to it, that is the reason why men are so shie of it,
every man wonders at it, as things that are rare, every man wonders at them, as
we do at new fashions, as men gaze at new Stars and Comets. The form because it
is common, it is therefore approved, it passes amongst men without wondering;
but the other is rare and seldom found, and therefore it is gazed at, and
wondered at, and pointed at. But though this be common among men, and brings men
but to the form of godliness, yet the Lord requires the power of godliness; it
is not the form alone that God regards. And what need we add any reason for
this? you know men regard not complements and shows, they look to reallities;
Therefore we will rather hasten to make some use of it.

If this be so, that the form of godliness is so common Use. To examine whether
we have (...) (...).
without the power, let every man look the more carefully to it, that it be not
his case. In epidemical diseases, that run over a people, or a City, or a
Country, if a man have but the beginning of such a sickness (...) sickness
which is but like it, he is very curious, (...) the disease is common. If any
of us have a disease li^e the plague, we will be exceeding careful, to be (...)
whether it be the plague or no: especially at those times when it is a common
disease. This therefore should make us more careful to examine and search our
hearts, whether we have this disease or no, this form of godliness without the
power. For it is a very dangerous disease; though many of the other diseases
named in this Chapter seem to be more heinous, that men should be traitorous,
heady, high-minded, lovers of pleasures more then lovers of God, etc. yet I say
there is no disease so dangerous as this, because it breeds in a man a false
opinion of peace. A man thinks he is in a good estate when he is not; he thinks
all is well with him when it is not so: therefore it is a more dangerous
disease then any of the other here mentioned. As we say of a Consumption in the
first beginning of it, there is nothing that is more hardly discerned, nor
nothing more difficulty cureable and dangerous then it is afterward. So we may
say of a form of godliness without the power, there is nothing more hardly
discerned, and nothing more dangerous, nothing more killing. And I wish that we
were as careful to find out the Symptoms of the diseases of our souls, as we
are of the diseases of our bodies. But the truth is, we make it the least of
our care, and the least of our study, and enquiry to acquaint our selves with
those spiritual distempers, the issues whereof must needs be death. And the
worse the soul is, the less it feels. The more sick any man is of this disease,
of having a form of godliness without the power, the less ready, and the more
backward he is to examine whether he be sick of it or no. That is the general
fault of men, they will not try and examine themselves.

There are two things that keep men off from discerning aright whether this
disease be in them or no. The Two things hinder this examination.
one is unwillingness to search and examine, wherein men do like to a man that
has a broken Estate; he is always unwilling to search and to dive into the
bottom, he is loath to be discouraged, loath to be disquieted. And another is,
disability to judge. One of these two keep us off, either our unwillingness to
search, or our inability to judge. But now this I say to you, though I should
say no more, me thinks this should be enough. It is a disease of the soul, and
it is a dangerous disease, it concerns your lives. But for the other, our
disability to judge; we may say something more of that. Children and fools,
weak men, they are deceived with counterfeit things, that have but a show and
appearance; so are the great part of the world deceived with this: they would
try, but are not able. Therefore that you may know what this power of godliness
is, we will in brief show you what is meant by it, that you may learn to get
it; and how it differs from the show and form of godliness. And this we will do
exceeding briefly. And we will declare it to you what this power of godliness
is, and how it differs from the form; by these five expressions Fire
differences between the power and form of godliness.
which will be as so many differences arising from the very Word.

As first of all, when it is godliness indeed, it differs from the form, even
as true things differ from that 1. It is true.
which is counterfeit. That is, it is true godliness, and the other is but
counterfeit. Now a thing is said to be counterfeit, when it has many
properties of the true, and many qualities of the true; but yet it wants that
same property, that we say is inseparable to the true. The form of godliness
has many things in it like godliness; but that which indeed distinguishes it,
that wherein the truth of godliness consists, that it wants.

But you will say, how shall we know this? Quest. Answ.


You shall know it partly by the wearing, and by the use. A counterfeit thing
is discovered by the use, as counterfeit colors they wear out, they last not
long; a counterfeit drug is known by the working of it: a bow that is not
sound, but rotten, you shall know it when it is used. When a friend is put to
it, and comes to the trial, you shall know whether he be counterfeit by that.
So put this godliness to the act, see what it is when you come to performances,
when you come to bring things into execution, you shall find, if there be
nothing but a form, it will fail you in those cases. It will not do the thing,
it carries a show indeed, but when you come to real and spiritual performances
of the duties of godliness, when it comes to the wearing, when it comes to the
use, there it fails and holds not out.

And again, as it is discerned by this, so likewise there are some certain
properties of it, which the form of godliness always wants. For as all graces
have some peculiar properties, as effectual faith, diligent love, and patient
hope, so has godliness. Now it is too large a point to run through the
properties of godliness, but a wise man that has his senses rightly exercised,
he needs not to stand to examine the truth of his godliness by the use and
wearing of it, but he may examine it by that he has learned, by that which he
knows to be the true properties of it. As a skilful man needs not to try the
drug he has, by the operation and working of it, because he is skilful. Take a
man that is accustomed to taste wine, a small taste serves his turn, by that he
can presently discern of the quality and properties of that wine, whether it be
strong or small, although he drink not much of it. You should learn to have
this skill, and that is the thing we teach you to be accustomed to know the
true from the false. It concerns you much, it concerns you above all other
things. If you buy cloth that you take to be well wadded or dyed in grain, if
afterward you find it to be but a washy color, it is but the loss of that
cloth. And so if counterfeit gold be put upon you, it is but the loss of that
gold. But if it come to this, what do you lose by it? you lose the salvation of
your souls. What if a man have a counterfeit deed of his Lands? he loses but
his Estate; but if a man have a counterfeit pardon, it costs him his life, he
loses that by it. Such is this godliness, your life and salvation depends upon
it. Therefore try it, not only by the use of it, but by those rules and
properties that have been given you. This is one way to know it. It is true
Godliness, and not counterfeit.

Secondly, the second way, taken from the word here 2. It is powerful.
we find, it is powerful, whereas the form is weak, and powerless, and
inefficatious, having a form of godliness (says the Apostle) but denying the
power. So that if you would know whether it be right godliness indeed that you
have, consider whether it have the power of godliness or no, whether it be
strong in you; for if it be weak and inefficatious, that it is able to do
little, certainly it is not godliness. And therefore you may know it by the
strength of it, it is powerful. As you may see by all that which makes up
godliness. The Word of God is a powerful Word, that Word that begets this
godliness. Therefore the Apostle says, 1 Thessalonians. 1. 5. The Gospel 1 These. 1. 5.
came to you not in word, but in power. And St. Paul speaking of it in another
place, he says, It is the power of God to salvation. I say it is a powerful
Word that does the thing for which it is sent; It has such a power to heal the
soul of a man that is sick to death. As we say of Medicines, that they are good
when they are powerful, to do the thing that they are applied for. So this Word
is powerful to work this change, to beget godliness.

So the Holy Ghost is a spirit of power, and therefore Acts 10. 38.
Act. 10. 38. It is said, that Jesus Christ was anointed with the Holy Ghost
and with power. That is, wheresoever the Holy Ghost is, there is much power
accompanying of it, therefore you have them commonly put together, the Holy
Ghost and Power. Till you be endued with power from on high, that is, till you
receive the Holy Ghost that shall make you powerful. Even so certainly it is,
that as the Word and the Holy Ghost, which make up godliness in the hearts of
men are powerful and mighty, so is godliness it self very powerful.

You will say powerful, in doing what? Quest. Answ.


It is powerful in bringing all into subjection to it, it brings every
thought, and every lust, and every unruly affection into subjection. It is as a
powerful Kingdom set up in the heart of a man: for there is a Kingdom of
Christ, which is set up in the heart of the regenerate, and he rules by his
Scepter, the rod of his mouth, his word, and that Kingdom is powerful to bring
all into subjection. As it is, 1 Cor. 4. 19. 20. The Kingdom of God is not in
word, but in power. That is the Kingdom of God, wherever it is found,
wherever it is set up in a man's heart that is regenerate; it not only
teaches him what he shall do, consisting in word; but it powerfully rules
there; it brings all into subjection there: it makes a man strong to bring down
all his lusts, to mortify all his corruptions. That as we say of a good rider,
he is powerful to master, and to break the horse, he is powerful to guide, and
to overruled him. Such a thing is godliness in a man's heart. Let a man's heart
be never so rebellions; yet when this Kingdom comes, it is a Kingdom of power,
it brings all into subjection.

So again it is powerful in enabling us to perform, not only to purpose, and
intend well, but it enableth us to do also, it does not only breed in us good
conceptions as oft-times men have, but when the children come to the birth,
there is no power to bring forth. So many times men have good purposes, and
desires, but there is no power to bring them into execution. But now this
godliness enableth us to do, to perform all that we purpose.

Again it enableth us to resist. When a temptation comes a weak man is not
able to stand out, the banks are too weak for the stream, they are not able to
resist the billows, the tempest; but godliness makes a man powerful to do all
this. The form is but weak, it makes you able to desire, or to purpose, and
resolve it may be, but it does not bring the thing to act, it does not
overcome, and overmaster your unruly lusts, it brings not all things into
subjection. It enableth you to take good purposes to your selves, but you have
not ability to perform those good purposes. They are in a weak heart, like new
wine in old vessels, they are weak they last not, they continue not there. So
it is where there is this form only, and no more, men purpose well; but have
no strength to bring them forth. And so again where there is but a form you are
weak in resistance, you are not able to stand out against temptations, but when
you are assaulted with suitable temptations agreeing with your own lusts, when
the occasion is present, and the temptation is strong, you are able to do
nothing by way of resistance when there is but a form. But where there is true
godliness, there is a power, and ability. You see these two things then, It is
true, and not counterfeit, whereas the form is counterfeit. Secondly, where
there is godliness indeed there is a power; but where there is a form only
there is weakness, and no power. I will but name the rest.

Thirdly, Where there is true godliness, there is substance; 3. It is
substantial. Quest. Answ.
where the other is only, there is but a shadow of it.

You will say what is the substance?

The substance is that reality in every duty. As for example, to receive the
Sacrament, to receive it after a common fashion as men do it, that come to it
out of custom, with some kind of slight, and overly preparation; but they fail
in the substance; the substance of receiving is to receive it with faith, and
love. And so again to hear the word: to hear it negligently in a common
fashion, is but the shadow of hearing; there is something like to hearing,
which carries a resemblance of it; but the substance of hearing is to hear, so
as to practice, to hear and obey; to hear so that the word may work powerfully
upon your hearts: this is the reality, and substance of it. And so to pray, in
a customary manner is the shadow; to do it in an humble and holy fashion is
the substance, and reality. Godliness if it be right it is substantial. It is
not a mere shadow, and resemblance. But I can but point at things.

Again Fourthly. Godliness wheresover it is indeed, it goes through with the
work, it brings the thing to 4. It goes through with the work
pass; but where there is only a form, it sits down in the middle, it gives
over, it holds not out.

Fifthly, And lastly, to conclude all, the form is but partial, 5. It is
universal.
but true godliness is total, and universal, it makes a man do every thing, it
makes a man able to suffer every thing. Where there is but the form only, it
makes a man but partial in the duties of godliness, he is but here, and there
in it. These things I should have enlarged; but so much shall serve for this
time, and for this Text.

A PATTERN OF Wholesome Words.

OR, Paul's Charge to Timothy, IN A Treatise on 2 Timothy 1. 13. being the sum of
sundry Sermons Preached by the late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus
Christ, JOHN PRESTON.

Dr. in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Mr. of Emanuel College
in Cambridge, and sometime Preacher of Lincolns Inn.

LONDON, Printed by I. T. for Francis Eglesfield at the sign of the Marigold in
St. Paul's Churchyard, 1658.

A PATTERN OF Wholesome Words:
2 Timothy 1. 13. Keep a true pattern of wholesome Words.
IN this Epistle Paul speaks to Timothy, as to a Minister. After the
salutation, he adds two exhortations.

First, To stir up those which were in him.

Secondly, Not to be ashamed of the testimony of the Gospel, verse 8.

Next of all he adds this Exhortation, Keep a true, etc. In the words as there
are two parts, so two points.

First, The words of a Minister must be wholesome.

Secondly, He must have a pattern or systeme of wholesome words: (...) The word
in the Original is, have, hold, a pattern.

The words of a Minister must be wholesome.

The Greek is (...), and that stands in two things.

First, In nourishment.

Secondly, In healing; That is, they must be such, as will make a supply of
that which is wanting, and if any be fallen it will heal them. They must be
like Ezechiel his tree, the fruit whereof is good for meat, and the leaves for
medicine.

Now that the words of a Minister may be wholesome; four things are to be taken
heed of.

First, That there be no evil, no poison in them; for first, evil words corrupt
good manners, if in our ordinary talk there must be no evil, much less when a
man stands in Gods stead. And besides, they belly God in them, for he spoke them
not. Gods words are pabulum animarum, the food of souls. Now such as the meat
is, such is the complexion: so what food the soul feeds on, such is the temper
of it, if on wholesome food, a good heart, if on unwholesome, an evil heart.

Secondly, They must be such, as are not only pleasing to the pallat, and
delightful to the taste, as some Sermons that are neatly made, which like
music tickle the ears for the present, but leave no fruit behind them: but
they must be good for substance.

Thirdly, They may be such as go down to the Stomach, and yet not breed good
blood; and that is when the wo^d is delivered in vain Philosophy, and in
pythanology; for these breed windy and flatulent humors, whereas the words of
ministers ought to be such as the holy Ghost speaks, they must be full of
spirit, and full of power.

Fourthly, They must take heed that they be not raw, frigid, and undigested;
but they must have heat and vigor. As raw meat nourishes not at all, or very
little; so indigest words hinder nourishment. Therefore Ministers must be like
the furnace in Daniel, seven times hotter then the rest. Ministers are the salt
of the earth, if Dan. 3. 19.
therefore they have lost their savor, wherewith shall Math. 5. 13.
they season others; if they be cold how should they heat others, if dead how
quicken others; therefore Paul bids Timothy, verse 6. stir up the Gifts of
God which are in him. When therefore words are unfit and weak, they hinder
nourishment. Object.


But some may say, what positive rule will you set down that words be (...),
Wholesome words.

Conform them to Gods Word; the purer the Word, Answ.
the wholesomer, 1 Pet. 2 2. As new born babes desire the sincere milk of the
Word to grow thereby: As it is true in Philosophy, Nutrimor ex iis, ex quibus
constamus, We are nourished of the same things of which we are made; as the
word of faith begot us, so it must nourish us. Now that is pure which is plenum
sui, and has nihil alieni, that is, no other thing mingled with it, as we say
that is pure air or water that has nothing mixed with it; so that is the pure
Word, when no heterogenea are mixed, but the Word only (either for substance
or unfolded) is delivered. So Paul in this Text, bids Timothy keep the true
pattern of wholesome words, which he had heard of him; if these things persuade
not, I will add some Reasons.

First, because Ministers are feeders of the people; If Reas. 1. John. 21. 16.
thou love me feed my sheep. The Word of God is the childrens bread, and it
is unlawful either to defraud them of it, or to give them other instead of it:
Now there can be no feeding, unless the meat be such as is fit for nourishment;
for otherwise it will not make them fat. Ministers are the Stewards of the Word
of God: Now 1 Cor. 4. 2. It is required in a Steward to be faithful. Now their
unfaithfulness stands in two things.

First, to the children, when they rob them of their portion of the bread of
life and salvation, and become guilty of their blood, Acts 20. 26. I take you
to record says Paul that I am free from the blood of all men, as if he had
said, if I had spent my time in things that would not profit you, I had been
guilty of your blood.

Secondly, They are unfaithful to God, they are his flock, feed the flock of
God, Acts 20. 28. Now what will God say when he shall come and find his flock
starved; suppose that a master give his servant provender, and he either for
idleness or turning it to his own advantage, does not feed his cattle; but
starve them, will he not be displeased with him? what then shall that great
shepherd say to those Ministers, who by idleness, or turning it to their glory
and advantage, do not feed his flock? 1 Cor. 3. 17. They that destroy the
Temple of God, them will God destroy.

Again they must be pure words, no Heterogenea must be mixed. And why; because
if there be, it takes away the efficacy of the word, it will not work because
God delights not to work with it, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes, etc. as if he
should have said, that if the word be not sincere they cannot grow by it, so, 1
Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me to preach the Gospel, not in wisdom of words least
the cross of Christ should be made of none effect, that is, if I had preached
in wisdom of words, none would have been converted; and so Christ should have
died in vain.

But may we not adorn it, it will add strength to it? Quest. Answ.


Saint Paul says, that it will do so in our own conceit, but the foolishness
of preaching is the strength of God unto salvation.

When the walls of Jericho fell down, it was not the Rams horns that did it;
nor was it the water that healed Naaman, but God that sanctified those plain
means. So God having sanctified the foolishness of preaching, it is powerful
to the conversion of many; And if one speak with the tongue of an Angel, if God
did not sanctify it, it would not be effectual.

Secondly, Because God is jealous of his word which is the rule of his worship;
what jealousy is, we may see by Reas. 2.
the Emperor who would not only have his wife without fault, but also without
suspicion of fault; so God would not only have his word to be without mixture,
but he would not have it to come nigh it, and therefore we must consider that
Ministers are Ambassadors and interpretors.

First, Ambassadors and therefore ought to deliver their embassage as nakedly
as may be, they are interpreters, and therefore the less they mix of their own,
the better it is; so the more purely the word is delivered, the better it is.
The Orators of Athens were then suspected when they began to speak besides the
matter, making excursions into florid expressions.

So there is a suspicion in the Ministers when they mix their words with Gods,
God is not pleased with it.

Secondly, Because the native color of the word is best, when it is without
any other tincture, if the face be fair enough what needs it painting? other
things since the fall being out of order there are arts to reduce them; but the
word is pure as being immediate from the spirit, it is enough to adorn the word
with it own ornaments, it needs no beauty but it own, it is best when it is
steeped in it own liquor; because whatsoever is added unto it, does not adorn
it as conceits do an oration, but detracts from it something: as for men of a
masculine virtue to be calamistrati est compti, for them to be effeminate, it
does not add but detract from their gravity, so the word being of a Masculine
Oratory, when such light things are added, it detracts from the beauty of it.

Thirdly, Because words are pictures and characters of Reas. 3.
things. Preaching is the Character of the word, and the word is the character
of Gods mind. The word is the (...), the first pattern, preaching the (...)
made according to that pattern, it must resemble that, and the more the better,
the excellency of the picture is, that it come as near the thing pictured as
may be; as our measures must be no bigger then the standard: so must our
preaching be equal to the standard, viz. the word of God.

May we not add something to it to beautefie it and make it acceptable to the
ear, and digress from the Object.
standard a little?

It is not enough that it be either broader or longer then Answ.
the word, but as it must be like the word, as for matter so for manner, look
what oratory you find in the Word, that use, and though you cannot reach it,
yet you must aim at it. A Painter would have his Picture like the person
pictured in every thing, in the cast of the eye, and color of the face; so
must it be in preaching: as in the Word there is no affectation, you must
square your preaching to that.

Fourthly, Because we must abstain from the appearance of evil, suppose the
drink be never so good, yet if it be Reas. 4.
muddy, the stomach goes against it, when the husks of meat gives a suspicion
of rottenness, the eater is offended. That therefore no offense be given, we
must deliver pure words as near as we may.

May we use no art, nor author?

I speak not against the use, but the abuse of them, the Object. Answ.
coralaries and uses are these.

First, If the Minister must keep a pattern of wholesome words, whatsoever then
is different from wholesome words Use.
must be abstained from; and hence two sorts of words are reproved.

First, When there is a tincture of error and falsehood in 1.
their words, that are not sound for Doctrine, squinteyed words that speak not
plainly but border on error, as when words tend to Popery and Arminianism,
this is the means to bring heresy into the Church, for it comes into the
Church as water into a ship, that comes insensibly and by little and little,
but sinks the ship on a sudden; and therefore it is said, the envious man
sows tares in the night when none saw him, whereas if he had sown in the day
every one would have resisted him, or at the least have taken heed of him. Paul
says they come creeping into widows houses, but it is secretly and unawars,
whereas if they did knock at the door and come in violently, every one would
have a weapon to keep them out. so, Gal. 2. 4. they come in privily to spy our
liberty. Therefore it is a true saying, Principia Haereseos sunt verecunda, the
beginning of heresies are bashful, and if they were not so promoted, the
endeavors of them that trade in heresy would not become so effectual; for who
will take poison by it self, but when it is mingled with milk, and a fish will
not take a bare hook, but when it is baited; for when so it is not easily
discerned. If one bring a plain piece of brass none will take it, but if it be
guilt and have the Kings stamp on it, one may be deceived; so when heresies are
propounded in words that are not distastful, many are deceived; all deceit
comes by similitude (as we may say) of virtue, saepe latet vitium proximitate
boni, vice often lies hid under a show of good, so of truth falsehood often
lies under a likeness of truth. It is an act therefore of prudence to discern
between things that are alike, for every one can discern between things that
differ; besides what reason is there that if the meaning be good, the terms
should be ambiguous, when we see how ready people are to take things by the
wrong hand, and the most Orthodoxal writers have been mistaken, though the
Fathers have writ well, yet how much have they been wrested by the Papists to
maintain errors, though indeed there be some fault in them, Let us come to Paul
whose words are without exception. Peter says many did wrest 2. Pet. 3. 16.
the word of God to their own perdition, great need then is there that words
should be plain, easy and perspicuous, therefore the fathers that lived
presently after Pelagius admonished the people, saying, Cavete fibras
virulentiae, Pelagianorum, take heed of the strings of the heresies of the
Pelagians.

Hence may arise this question whether it be good to Quest.
symbolize with our adversaries, whether it be a good policy to be used, that
they do not fly further from us.

Such is not the policy of God, but of Satan. First Answ.
mark Gods institution of the Church for the Jews, if he did ever appoint
symbolizing with Nations. How often in Leviticus, would he not have them do
many things, because the nations did them, when as otherwise they might have
been done; For what other cause did he command the Cananites to be slain, man
woman and children? why else would he have the Kings burnt, and their ashes
cast into the brook Kidron, and their names blotted out of men's memories if it
were possible? Therefore this course should not be affected, because it is
contrary to Gods policy, and that God has thus done, look into the stories of
the Church, and see if there was ever any good by done it, we may find that
much hurt has been done; what contentions, rents, and schisms have been made
in the Church? how many Churches have been ruinated by it? As Arius his heresy
was stirred up by this: wherefore we must do with heresies as men do with a
fire in a town, leaving not a spark least it stir up novum insendium a new
fire, least it fall out in cutting up of heresies, as it is in cutting up of
weeds, if the seeds do but fall, there will be new weeds though not presently.

God commands that all heresies should be resisted, therefore there must be no
removing of some, and admitting (...).
of other, that God has commanded so, Ier. 15. 19. when Jeremy went on in such
a course that the people began to contend with him, he being weary of their
clamors began to turn unto them, nay says God let them return to thee, but
return not thou to them, and good reason that a string out of tune, should be
set to that in tune, and not the other set out to that. And therefore it was an
excellent answer of a man to some that were better States men then Church men,
That Religion was of a stiff nature it would break, not bend, there must be no
coming half way in religion. Now when God commits a thing to us we must do it
thoroughly. One example we have in Moses, who, when God bad him take all away,
he would not leave a hoof: so that if there be but the husks of heresy to
cover it they must not be left; no not so much as that which may cover the feet
of heresy. For then we do detractare mandato, detract from Gods Commandment:
and especially they that sweep Gods house they must not suffer cob-webs to be
in it, least they breed spiders and they new cob-webs, and so the Church become
as defiled as ever it was.

3. It draws not them to us, but it is as tares that it may take hold of and
pluck us to them, and as stirrups that thereby they may get into the saddle.
Again it is not in Heresies as it is in the symbolizing Elements; that they
easily be transmutated one into the other, therefore so far as in our power is,
let (...) take that council concerning heresies, that Solomon gives of water,
to stop every crevis, for else it will run in and make a breach, and offer an
inundation; so let not us entertain a word of heresy, especially let Ministers
keep the hedge whole that there be no gap where the foxes may enter in, for the
small grapes must not be neglected; see and understand the place, Cant. 2. 13.

2. A second fault is, when words are not sound, for matter that concern
practice, as for defense of usury, unjust nonresidency from Livings, etc. we
must take heed that in these we fail not of wholesome words. And that for that
place, Mat. 5. 19. He that breaks the least Commandment and teaches men so,
shall be the least in the Kingdom of Heaven. It is a fearful note that is
affixed to the name of Jeroboam, this is he that made Israel to sin. I
confess it is good to know liberties, as well as restraintments, and I would
have none to put a sore upon men's consciences, except on good ground; if
matters be doubtful, then let them alone, only that which is sure must be
spoken in the pulpit, yet of the two it is safer not to do them when dubious;
he that teaches any thing not to be lawful, had best be sure least he make
Israel to sin, and least his words be like the words of Humeneus, that fretted
like a cankar, an evil that soon over^^ reads the body; Men in this case are
like tinder, and one or two words may set them on fire, it is sure that to live
at ones living, and not take upon usury, is safest. And if men will do it, let
not the Minister have a hand in them; for it is a fearful thing to have other
men's sins set on our score, though our own be but small.

3. A third is such as are unwholesome, but more frequent, The two former
wounded Religion in the legs and arms, but this does Petere Iugulum, kill it
at the heart, and that is when Religion is disgraced in the general by
Puritanism, or what terms soever. If these words were only heard in Taverns,
and desperate deboised persons spoke ^h desperate words, it were no great
matter; but for the pulpit to bend this way, is unwholesome. Words against
sin are like fire in green wood, that if it be not followed, it will die; but
in this case an intimation is enough, and it passes like lightning into men's
hearts and consciences; one push sets down the hill, but it requires much
labor to get up. One stroke with the oars sets down the stream, but it is hard
to go against the stream: since therefore men are tender in this case, these
words are to be taken heed of: all that men can do is not enough to cry down
sin, and all the arguments that can be used cannot restrain them. If all
Ministers should join together to cry down the Atheism of the times it were not
enough. How much to blame are they then that disgrace Religion, and make it run
into the rocks and dare not look out. These Elimases cast dirt in the face of
it on every side, and well may they be called Elimases, for as he perverted the
straight ways of God, so they make Religion seem crooked as water does a staff,
and as a false glass makes the face look deformed, and God pronounces a woe
against such, Woe to them that make sweet things sour. It is no jesting matter
to bring an evil report upon the holy land; for God said they should not enter
into it, but die in the wilderness. But because these have something to say
for themselves, we will see their defense, and I will we could quench their
tongues set on fire by the fire of Hell.

Object. 2. They say they speak against Hypocrites.

Answ. It were well if it were so, and I would wish their words were as sharp
as raisors to them, for they make others fare worse; but then what need this
generality of Obloquies? all are not Hypocrites; as in a great payment, some
bad gold may crowd in, so among Christians may be found Hypocrites. It is a
sign therefore that in thus speaking they call religious men Hypocrites, and
Religion hypocrisy. Consider what makes an Hypocrite, not the ill report of
bold calumniators, for then Christ should not be blameless; If they call him
Beelzebub, how much more you, Act. 28. 22. The Jews tell Paul his sect is every
where spoken against.

Neither do some slips, or some gross sins make a Hypocrite, 2.
for then David, Solomon, Peter, and all the Apostles should be Hypocrites. For
in many things we sin all; but the course of life contrary to the profession,
as some flashes of goodness make not a good man, so some slips make not an evil
man: therefore in thus speaking they speak against Christians.

It is not to be expected that Religion should be spoken 3
against under the name of Religion, For if the Devil could speak against it,
he would not speak against it under the name of Religion, but Hypocrisy; when
therefore these words are so general, and he that speaks them knows they will
not be so taken, it is a sign that Religigion is spoken against under the name
of hypocrisy, and religious men under the name of H^pocrites.

They say they speak against the shows; cannot men Obj. 3.
be religious say they in secret, but they must hang out flags of it, and be so
much in appearing?

Where the truth of Religion is, there will be shows; Answ.
painted Religion and painted fire cannot heat, break ^orth or ascend; but if
it be true fire, or true Religion, it will break forth and show it self, as
they say in the Spanish proverb, three things cannot be kept in, fire, love,
and a man's cough: so I may add grace as a fourth. As there cannot be a candle
in a Lanthorn, but it may be seen through the horn; so there cannot be true
grace but there will be shows: so that shows cannot be separated from
Religion which is true, no more then light from the Sun, or heat from the fire.

Shows are commanded as well as substance, for as the (...).
Glory of a King is in the multitude of his Soldiers, so the Glory of Christ
is in them that profess his Name, we are commanded as well to confess in mouth
as to believe in heart.

What need speaking against shows in these blasting times, which have nipt
them in the head, when all that 3.
can be said is not enough to keep men from denying of Christ.

They say although they know not what to call it, yet 4. Obj.
they love religion and religious men: therefore they mean not them, and they
think it much uncharitableness to be so judged of.

Many while they thus speak that they conceive it not to Answ.
be religion that they speak against, I may say of them as Peter said of them
that crucified Christ, they did it of ignorance; for had they known that, they
would not have crucified the Lord of life: so if they knew it were religion
they spoke against, they would not speak thus; But it is their misery that they
know it not, and it is but a little excuse to say I was a blasphemer (says
Paul) but I did it out of Ignorance and zeal; so Christ says the Jews knew not
what they did, and yet his blood shall be required of them, Yea, it is upon
them as we see at this day, and Jude says, they spoke evil of the things they
knew not, and yet their sentence is, they shall be reserved to the blackness of
darkness. So though they know not that it is religion that they speak against,
yet they are persecutors and God accounts them so. Saul heard a voice saying,
Saul Saul why persecutest thou me? when he himself thought he had done well.
And if they say Lord we know it not, I will answer them, that in as much as
they did it to these, they did it to me, In other cases there is a difference
and some plead for ignorance, as if a man kill another man in stead of a stag,
he is no murderer; but if a man strike at Religion with his tongue, though he
knew it not, he is a blasphemer, because he is bound to know; for if a man be
brought up among heretics, he is an heretic because he is bound to the
contrary. Let these therefore that have used these speeches kick no more
against pricks, least they bring that curse on them which was on them that
brought an ill report upon the holy land, viz. that they should not enter into
it.

The second use is for hearers, that they have a part Use. 2.
in this exhortation as well as Ministers; as they must deliver nothing but
that which is wholesome; so they must receive none else: and there are two
duties for them.

First, As the Minister must not mingle any thing in his preaching, but that
which is sound, so hearers must be careful not only that they do not here
gross points of heresy: but if there be any tincture of error in the points
they hear, they must not maintain them: As one that has an Antipathy with a
thing, (as with a serpent) will not only be afraid of it whilst it is alive,
but he is loath to handle the skin of it, though it be stuffed with hay: So
hearers should be afraid of the tincture of the skin of heresy. A man cannot
be too curicus of infectious things: for as he will not come into the house
where they are, so he will not touch the cloth of those that have them: For we
ought to hate the garment spotted with the flesh.

First, Hearers must be rightly disposed to receive that which is wholesome,
and therefore three duties in scripture are commanded to hearers.

1. To be able to discern that which is wholesome, and that which is not, 1
These. 5. 21. prove all things, 1 Ioh. 4. 1. try the spirits, that is, get
spiritual tastes, whereby you may judge of it; for as the pallat or the taste
diserns corporal food; so there is a faculty in every regenerate soul for this
end, that it may discern betwixt that meat which is wholesome, and that which
is not. As a natural man's taste is a sign of natural life, so a spiritual
taste is a sign of a spiritual life; and it is certain, that they whose
pallats are not vitiated with corrupt humors, can judge of their meat, Romans 12.
2 be transformed in the renewing of your minds, to try, (as a Toutch-stone
does the silver) what is the acceptable will of God from that which is not. And
they that find not this taste in them, either they have no spiritual life, or
else their pallats are vitiated with corrupt humors. If therefore we want this
discerning taste, we must labor to get it, if we be sick and our pallats do
corrupt, we must labor convalescere, to wax whole that so we may judge a
right. For as the best hearers love the purest word, so the hearers whose
hearts are full of corruption love the froth of eloquence.

Secondly, To desire that which is good, 1 Pet. 2. 2. As new born babes desire
the sincere milk of the word. As if he should have said, there are no babes but
they will desire the dugge. Perhaps you may keep them quiet with apples a
while, but they will cry for it at length. And if you have once tasted of the
sweetness of the Word, you will desire it; when you have found out what meat is
nourishing, then desire it; that is, choose the savourest meat, read the books
that are must profitable, delight in them above others; and if we were truly
thirsty and hungry we would do so. A thirsty man stands not to look at the
carving of the cup, but drinks off the wine: and a hungry man had rather have a
good meals meat, then hear a whole noise of musicians, and he will not stand
commending, but he will fall to his meat, though this be too little practiced;
for many when the Word is delivered find no relish in it, but are ready to
complain of the plainness, and simplicity of the spirit, which to do is to do
as children, that bites the nipples of the teats that gives the sweetest milk.
And this secondly shows their vanity, for when they meet with a Sermon partly
good, partly not, wherein Heterogenies are mixed (for otherwise I know not how
better to call them) this is sure to go into their table books, I mean not
sound and wholesome points, but pretty sayings, and frothy matters; and these
are not unfitly compared to our sileing bowls, that let all the milk run
through, but retain the hairs and that which is naught, that sticks in them;
for how choice soever their eloquence is, it is but as hairs in that case,
although they be flowers in an oration, yet are they but weeds in a Sermon.

Thirdly, To hold that which is good, to retain and keep it in memory, 1 Thessalonians.
5. 21. The Greek word is (...) that is, hold it fast, let it stay in your
affections, comprehend it, when you have heard it, keep it, let it not slip
away, but practice it, and this is to hold it. Now this is done by recalling
and by repeating the Word after it is delivered. This is commended in Mary,
that she laid up the Word in her heart, she laid it as one that lays a thing
up to have it to use against another time. Why is Luke 2, 51:
this Word recorded if not to be imitated? suppose they were the words of
Angels, are not Ministers the Angels of God? So it is said that the Holy Ghost
brought to the disciples minds all the things that he had told them. Now John
14, 25.
the Holy Ghost would do no unnecessary thing, and does not Christ speak as
well to us as he did to them, only with this difference, to them he spoke
immediately, but to us by his Ministers. What other was the fault of the first
ground, the seed lay on a while, whilst the ^ower was by, but after it was
stolen away by the Devil, because it was not repeated and wrought in the
memory; so when a S^rmon is done, if it be soon forgot, as we have a natural
proneness thereunto, the Devil has a hand in it, and this has brought Gods
Judgments on many; therefore take heed says our Savior how you hear, Luke 8.
18 when Christ delivered any thing in public, the Disciples repeated it in
private, and came to Christ and asked him of such things they doubted of, Act.
17. 11. The men of Berea searches the Scriptures whether these things were so
which they had heard, which they could not do without repeating. Where there is
a double duty performed.

First, they did repeat it, Secondly, they tried it. To make this evident,
consider these four things.

First, not repeating the Word of God after it is preached, does quench the
spirit, and that is sin, 1 Thessalonians. 5 24. Now it is quenched thus, In the time of
preaching (for that is the time when the Holy Ghost breaths into our hearts, as
he did into Cornelius) when he stirs up motions and we let them die, and recall
them not, we quench and grieve the spirit, for then it is a mercy of God to
trouble us, the time of healing being nigh if he step in (as it was in the pool
of Bethesda) while the heart is soft, therefore put in the plough and join with
God; for we must not be like those that are Sea-sick, while they are on the Sea
they are troubled, but as soon as they get to shore, out of the Church door,
they are well enough: If God at any time breaths his Word into us, we must do
as Mariners do, who because they have not wind at their call, when it does
blow, they hoise up sail, and go on their Journey; the Word and Spirit blow
when it lists, therefore we must take opportunity to set our souls in the way
of Heaven, to recall the motions which have been stirred up in the inner
Chamber of our hearts, and to make use of them, lest by often neglecting them,
the Spirit grow weary, and cease to strive any more.

It is despising of prophecy which is a pearl, Mat. 7. 6. Christ will not have
him admonished that before contemptuously 2.
refused it, because he will have no pearls be cast before swine. If
admonitions be pearls, then much more instructions; if a private admonition be
a pearl, then sure public instructions: Now that is despising of prophecy,
which is made plain thus. Suppose a man give another a pearl, while the giver
is by, he looks on it and beholds the beauty of it, but when he is gone, he
casts it away and trampleth it under his feet. So it is, if while the Word is
delivering we attend to it, and when Sermon is done reject it, and look no more
on it, but cast it away, is not this a despising of prophecy? It is food of
the soul, and therefore not to recall it, is as it were children to take* meat
of their parents hands, and perhaps taste of it, but after cast it away; or it
is as if sheep should tread their fodder under their feet. So it is when the
Word is delivered (for it is the food of the soul) to receive it, and after to
cast it away.

It will not profit us except it be remembered and hid 3.
in our hearts, we shall get no good by it; meat though it be eaten, yet if it
stay not with us, it will not nourish us: unless therefore we labor to gather
something from it, and retain it, it will not breed succum and sanguinem,
nourishment in us as it ought. But this is much neglected of among men, for as
many go into Gardens, some to see the variety of flowers, some to smell of
them, but only it is the Be that fastens on them and gets Honey out of them:
So many come to Church, some to see what variety the Minister has, some get
sweetness for the time, but only they that do insidere and notare, lay them up
and mind them, get profit by them. See this in other things, let a man hear a
Philosophy Lecture, or Logic, never so long, if he recals not what he hears,
it will be long enough ere he be an Artist, and are not Gods Ordinances much
more to be respected?

Not respecting of it takes Gods name in vain, and the (...).
Judgment of it is fearful, viz. He will not hold him guiltless; And that
which is a taking of Gods Name in vain, is plain thus. The creatures are made
known by many things that are not their names, as by qualities and accidents,
but whatsoever God is made known by, is his Name: therefore to abuse his
creatures, o^ the works of his mercy, since he is made known by them, is a
taking of his Name in vain; and these that do so, God will not hold them
guiltless; if not those that take his Name in vain in other things, much less
in this, therefore the Word is like Ionathans Bow, it never returns home empty,
it is like the Sun that softens wax, but hardens clay; so that if the Word
light on a muddy heart, it makes it worse, if on good, it softens it, and makes
it better. There is not a Sermon which is heard, but it sets us nearer Heaven
or Hell. On the contrary, not repeating is the cause that many are always
learning, but never come to the knowledge of the Truth: Suppose all that is
delivered be not profitable, mind that which is, and know there is a necessity
laid on these. If a man be convinced of the truth, let him take heed how he
omits it, for if he do, he shall be beaten with many stripes, because sin
grows out of measure sinful.

If whatsoever be delivered be meat to nourish, Physic to heal, then we must
learn to esteem it much: What is Use. 3.
the reason that men account of the Philosophers Stone so much, if it could be
got? Why do men labor all their lives for it, and spend their Estate to get
it, when they see so many before them to have lost their labors? It is true,
it heals all the diseases of the body, but this heals all the diseases of the
soul, and this may be attained, the other cannot. Let us therefore as Solomon
bids us, buy the truth, that is, beat any pains for it, lose outward
contentments for it, and when we have got it, sell it not for pleasure,
idleness, or things that will not profit us; and this we would do, if we were
as sensible of spiritual diseases as of bodily, for then we would turn the Word
over and over, and find plasters for our sores If a man be troubled with the
Stone or Gout, whither will he not go? and what will he not give for remedy? so
if a man have but the least grain of grace in him, he shall find spiritual
diseases as sore as temporal. If we did see our diseases, we would to the Word
and get them healed, we would gather reasons and apply them in particular* 1*
Suppose a man have a disease like a Fever, an inflammation of lust; see what
reasons the Word has against it, and apply them in particular. First, if they
take their pleasure, they shall lose their profit in God; for an hours pleasure
eternity of pain. This consideration caused Job to make a Covenant with his
eyes not to look on a maid. Secondly, consider what great punishments are to
the works of sin and iniquity, Job 31. 3. strange sins have strange
punishments. Thirdly, sweet sins have bitter punishments; this sin of lust, or
any other pleasing sin is sweet, therefore the punishment must be bitter, as
sweet as honey at first, but as bitter as gall after, as soft as oil, but as
sharp as a raisor. Fourthly, it is an irrecoverable disease, they that go into
it return not again, neither take hold of the ways of life, that is,
ordinarily they do not. Make a plaster of these reasons, and apply them, and
they will heal.

2. Suppose a man has a swelling of pride, see what 2.
the Scripture says of it. First, God resists the proud, he sets himself
against him; think then that God is thy enemy, the mighty God, that does what
he will in Heaven and Earth. Secondly, God sends the proud empty away, he may
fill him with honor, and things that may do him more hurt, but he sends them
away empty of good things. Thirdly, God knows him afar off. Fourthly, it brings
destruction, when a wall swells it is nearer breaking; so when the heart is
pu^t up, it is nearer destruction: apply these reasons, and they will prick the
bladder of pride, and make it flat, and will bring down the pride of the heart.

Suppose a man has a Paralysis, or a Palsy of anger, 3
that a man would be quiet and cannot: Consider first, Anger rests in the bosom
of fools; all anger comes of folly, else when a man's anger is over, why does he
repent him of what he has done? Secondly, it comes from pride; cure pride, and
heal anger. Thirdly, it is a shame to be angry, for a fool is known by his
anger, but a wise man covers his shame. It is a shame to be drunk, so to be
angry; for anger distempers the soul as drunkards does the body: for all these
are as drunkenness and the actions that proceed from them as vomits.

Suppose a man has a leturgy of idleness, consider first it brings beggary,
secondly it makes our Sacrifices dead, 4.
our prayers cadaverosa sacrificia, carcases of sacrifices, and have neither
life nor soul in them, as the carcass has the lineaments of the body but
wanting soul, none delight in it; so prayers have the lineaments of a dury but
wanting life God abhors them. Apply this medicine and it will quicken us, and
make us shake off this disease.

Suppose a man has a humor of vain glory, see what the Scripture says of it.
First he has his reward, his applause 5.
is the reward, and he shall have no other. And will it not be a terrible thing
when a man has performed a duty, and has applause of men and no more, for God
to say to him, thou have thy reward. Secondly it is an empty thing (...) like a
bubble, with a man's breath it is soon broken.

Suppose he has a plurisie of security, consider first, I (...).
Prove. 32. ease slays fools, its an ordinary thing whereby fools forget
God. Secondly it brings sudden destruction as a plurisie brings present death
if a man be not let blood, Esa. 47. 11. Evil comes and he knows not the cause
of it, mischief falls on him and he knows not how to put it off, desolation
comes suddenly and he knows it not, labor therefore to be let blood speedily.

Lastly, suppose a man have an unfavoury breath of evil (...).
speeches. First pray with David, Psalm. 141. 3. Set a watch O Lord before my
mouth, and keep the door of my lips. Secondly as unsavory breath comes from
unsound lungs, So evil speeches come from an unsound heart; therefore preserve
good things in thy heart, and the speeches that come from it will be good: For
out of the abundance of the heart the mouth speaks, What goods are in the
workhouse are brought in the Shop.

Let therefore this plaster be laid to the sore and abide there, for so it
must si morbus sit contumax, if the disease be violent.

As the word heals those that be sick, so it nourishes and strengthens
bab^s, and those that are bruised reeds, who complain with Paul that they
cannot do as they would, they are unable to pray and perform good duties as
they would, they find themselves still weak, they are able to grapple with an
easy lust but a strong one is too hard for them, they are able to creep but not
to run the way of Gods commandments. Go to the word, be conversant there, and
it will strengthen thee though insensibly, as daily sucking makes a child
battle, though they see it not, so if one be conversant in the word he will
grow stronger by it, and will make himself as a greyhound comely to run, and
run apace, not only in plain ways, and like a child that cannot get up a pair
of stairs, but it will make him climb the craggiest rocks, and will make him a
victorious King, able to overcome strong temptations, as St. Paul said to the
people when they asked him how they should do when he was gone, he said I will
commit you to God and his word of grace, intimating that if they had that, it
were no matter whether they had him or no. Therefore if one have lost his first
love, his first beauty and color, let him go to the word and it will bring it
again, because it takes away the sickness that takes away the color, only
some cautions must be observed.

First, It must be constantly read, it is not enough when we are hindered of
other businesses, then to take a bo^k in our hands by accident; but it must be
read constantly, his is commanded the King who has the greatest bu^s, Deuteronomy.
17. 18 Ios. 1. 10. The word is commanded to be read day and night, if we must
read it day and ^ight, the least that we can do is to read some part of it
ev^ry day. The best way therefore is to bind our s^lv^s (...), as (...) priv^te
prayer, so to reading, for it is a part of the ^rifice, this is evi^^nt in
David that did edee^ (...) (...) his appointed food, he had rather miss his
meat th^n this Word, he had rather keep a constant course in reading the word
then in his appointed food.

Secondly, It must be read with delight and meditation, Psalm. 1. 2 The blessed
man delights in Gods Law, and meditates in it day and night, viz. he reads and
does delight in that he reads and meditates in it, for both go together, and
therefore he is like the tree planted by the waters side, that brings forth his
fruit in due season, but he that reads it without delight is as a dry tree that
sucks no sap from the root, and hence it is that meditating is put for reading,
Ios. 1. 8. Thou shall meditate in it day and night, and so I take all places to
be meant where meditation is commended; for want whereof a man is confused in
those things that he most delights in, and will be excellent in, therefore the
word must be read with delight.

Thirdly, It must be read with prayer, if we receive not our ordinary food
without prayer, much less spiritual, why then should we read the word without
it; the means indeed has a nourishing faculty inherent in it, but yet we must
pray, or else it will not put forth his force, the word bath a nourishing
faculty going along with it whereby it nourishes, but the holy Ghost must work
and cooperate, and unless he do so, it cannot profit, and this is the reason
why many hear and profit nothing, because the holy spirit works not with it,
and it works not because they pray not for it, that so they may have it, Luke.
11. 13. God will give his holy spirit to them that ask him, had we not need
then to pray as David did, Psalm. 119. Lord teach me thy statutes, and open mine
eyes to see the wonders of thy Law, he reads it, but he knows that prayer will
fetch down the spirit, pray then for it, for that puts a nourishing faculty
into the Word, and the word nourishes not without it. If we do thus it will
strengthen us if we be weak, and heal us if we fall into a consumption of grace.

Fourthly, It must be read or heard in faith, that was the reason that it
nourished not, and why it did not strengthen because it wanted faith, look what
seed is thrown into baren ground it takes no root downward nor brings no fruit
upward: such is the word to an unfaithful heart, but look what seed is sown in
good soil and that is fruitful, so is it with the word being heard with faith,
1 These. 1, 2. 13. It wrought in all those that believed, as if he should have
said, it is believing of the word that makes it effectual, otherwise it is as
the shining of the Sun to blind eyes, and falling of rain upon rocks. Though
they of themselves do lighten, and be enough of themselves to lighten and make
them fruitful, yet the fault is not in the Sun nor the rain. The word is a
sword, but faith sets an edge on it to divide between the marrow and the bones,
that makes it lively, without which it is a dead word, there is no life at all
in it. See it in particulars, the word says, Thou shall not steal, Thou shall
not take the Name of the Lord thy God in vain, did you believe this and
seriously consider this that it is Gods commandment, it would be effectual
unto you to make you beware, were that in Romans 7. duly considered, that the
least sin keeps on in the state of damnation; it would make them look about
them and try whether they were in the faith or no. If that in Gal. 5. were
seriously considered that whosoever is in Christ has crucified the flesh, and
the affections of it, that if any lust be alive in us we are not Christians.
Were this well weighed it would make natural men know that they were in a
damnable estate.

It is profitable therefore in reading of the word, to join with it such
disjunctions as these which follow, either it is the word or it is not, if it
be, then it is true or not true. If true, then infallible, for so it is if it
be the Word of God, and thus ought we to build on it, and guide our course of
life by it, Prove. 12. 13. if that were considered, viz. That none should be
established by wickedness; then men would not get goods, by inordinately and by
unlawful means, nor in an indirect manner, if that 1 Cor. 6. 9. were
considered, that no fornicators nor adulterers, shall enter into the Kingdom of
Heaven, if this I say were believed and applied in particular, men would not
continue in it, nor rest tell they were washed and sanctified, if threatenings
in the word were thoroughly believed, they would make us fear, if the promises
were believed, they would make us rejoice, if the commandments were believed,
they would make us obey.

Concerning outward things, if one bring another news of any true good, if he
believe, how does he rejoice; on the contrary, if we tell one of an evil about
to happen to him, as if a Physician should tell a man he should die presently,
if he should believe it, it would make him sad, if one told another of a good
course of life, if he did believe it to be so, he would take it; so if there be
any promise in the word if it were believed it would make a man to rejoice, if
we did believe any threatenings we would fear them more then any cross, if we
did believe any direction we would follow it, faith is the pen that writes the
word in the heart, to wit in the will, which has an influence in the whole
man, therefore God m^kes his convenant that he will write his word in their
hearts.

Fifthly, It must be received with an honest heart, Luke 8. 15. it is required,
and it is the quality of the fruitful ground to receive the seed of the word
into an honest heart, that is when a man comes with resolution to do whatsoever
he sees to be Gods will. And it stands in two things.

First, To be easy to be convinced of a truth, to be hard to be convinced of an
untruth, is a sign of an honest heart, Ier. 4. 3. 2 These that Jeremy told they
should not go into Egypt would not believe, but said he spoke falsely, and the
reason was because they were unwilling to sta^ in Judea, whence it is plain
that if the will be bent to do a thing, the understanding will hardly hold the
contrary.

Let reasons be brought out of the Scriptures to prove usury unlawful, and to
prove that sabboths must be kept holy, if men will not be kept in, or will not
be so straight laced, they will not be convinced, the spirit must convince
them. Otherwise for the Minister to speak without the spirit, is as it were to
bring, a letter (...) written without a candle to read being dark, For the
Minister may bring reasons, but if the spirit light us not to read them they
will not profit us nor convince us.

Secondly, It stands in doing whatsoever we are convinced of. See an example of
an honest heart to be considered in Cornelius, Act. 10. 33. we are here
present, says he to Peter, to hear whatsoever is commanded of God to hear,
viz. to obey. See in Nathaniel, behold a true Isralite, in whom there is no
guile. This is guile in a man's heart, when he makes a show to do many things
and deceives himself in doing them. See in Paul when he was stricken down to
the earth, Act. 9. he said, Lord what will thou that I do? and I will do it.
And so he did not only in doing but suffering for him: and such a heart is in
every man after conversion, for till then he will not give his shoulders to the
yoke. See an example of an honest heart seemingly in Iohanan, Ier. 42. where he
bids Jeremy to go to God and see if they should go down into Egypt, there he
made a show that he would do whatsoever God commanded: yet after he tells him
he intends it not, unless the word should run with the streams of his
affections, Ezech. 14. 3. these men says God have set up idols in their heart,
yea and a stumbling block before their faces. So that there is an Idol in the
hearts of many, when they come to hear, and that hinders their profiting by it,
and hearing by accident that makes it worse, as we see in Physic impurum
stomacum quo magis nutrieris eo magis laseris, an impure stomach the more it is
nourished the worse it is, because the stomach is of that nature that either it
assimulates the meat into nourishment, or else rejects it, but unto an unhonest
heart the word is a reproach, and therefore when in the Word it meets with
admonitions it swells and is moved at them as if it were provoked by a
defamation.

This concerns Ministers only, if the words of a Minister must be wholesome,
then Ministers must behave Use 4. The fourth Corollarie.
themselves accordingly. And there are six advertisements for them;

First, That concerns the act of doing, and the five other the manner.

First, If the words of a Minister must be wholesome, then he must be diligent,
because his words must be health and Physic, if he neglect this, then he
hinders them both of the profit of health and Physic. And as none must do
this, so especially not those that have a flock depending on them. For if he be
worse then an infidel that provides not temporal food for his family, what is
he then that provides not spiritual food for them that depend on him, as much as
a family does upon a master? if he loves not his brother that has this worlds
goods, and sees him want, and gives not to him, how then does he love God,
that has spiritual food and sees others want and gives it not? As we count
rich men cursed who are hoarders up of corn when the year is plentiful, by not
bringing it into the markets; So there is no famine of the word, knowledge does
abound as water in the sea, yet a famine is made, because Ministers bring it
not out into the congretions that the people may feed thereof and live. As any
thing has more in nature, so it communicates more to others. The greatest
luminary gives the greatest light, the fullest fountain the most water, the
most fruitful soil brings forth the most fruit; so ought we in good things to
do as the preacher did, Eccl. 12 9. The more wise he was, the more he taught
the people knowledge.

The Word is Physic, therefore they are the Physicians and must heal them,
least they take that complaint, Ier. 8. last, Is there no balm in Gilead, is
there no Physician there? Why then is not the health of my people recovered?
Let us make up the similitude a little, the word is balm, the Ministers the
physicians, the people patients, now we reckon him no better then a murderer,
that being sent to a sick man should take his fee, and all this time he is with
him, spend his time in sporting, and let his patient die; so if the people that
are sick for knowledge, send for a Physician, a Minister, and give him his fee,
and he neglect them, and they perish, he is a murderer. Though many perish, ex
morbo and non ex defectu medici, by reason of the disease and not the defect of
the Physician, yet this is the fault in most. Again if the word be food, then
the Ministers are shepherds, and a shepherd must not feed himself with ease and
pleasure, (not but that these may be conveniently taken,) but he must not spend
his time in them. See if this induction be not made, Ezech. 34. 23. Woe to the
shepherds that feed themselves, should not the shepherds feed the flock? they
eat the fat and clothe them with the wool: they kill them that are fed by
other.

But here because they think they feed when they do Quest.
not, the question may be, what it is to feed them?

It consists in three things. First, Let every one feed Answ.
his own flock; it is best for the mother to feed her own child, while it is
done by step-mothers its not so well done, because they want natural love, the
opinion of propriety makes them more careful, and that which is most remarkable
is, that the want of large wages does not discourage from it, and it is not
substitutes and proxies that shall give account for the sheep, but the shepherd
himself.

Secondly, Let it be frequently done, not once a quarter, or once a month, The
people are weak, therefore they must be fed with a little and often, line, upon
line, precept, upon precept, for weak stomachs will not bear much at a time,
but it is best to give them often and a little, hence it was that Paul, 2 Timothy
4. charged Timothy before God, and our Lord Jesus Christ to be instant in
season. See what Canons the Counsels have induced hence, and thou shall find to
preach in season, and out of season, is to preach twice every Sabbath day, when
the people meet together, for then it is seasonable to instruct them, and not
to let them go away without their food. And out of season is as often as
opportunity is offered, and the Minister is able.

Thirdly, Let them be fed with convenient food, let it be such as they can eat,
else they may die for all that. Therefore it is not enough to preach unto them,
but to Catechize them to their capacity. For want of this it is that Ministers
though they have been diligent in preaching, yet the people perish, and are as
ill at seven years end as before.

Now two things are required to make the food convenient, the matter and the
manner.

First, The matter, that their terms be not too high, so that the people
understand them not.

Secondly, The manner, some people are so weak, that a continued course does
not profit them. And it were to be wished that Ministers would do this: teach
them in a Catechizing manner; For then many souls would be saved, which die for
want of knowledge. Yet the people though they were ignorant, they should not
spend their whole life in Catechizing, for these people are like narrow mouthed
bottels, pour water in drop by drop, and they will receive it, but if you pour
it in by full streams, it will fall beside. So if the ignorant be taught line
by line it will profit them, when a continued course is too high for them, it
will not, therefore the Minister must deliver the word in such manner as they
can fittest receive it, and this is laid upon their charge, for they must
instruct the people. And if they find that this course does not do it, they
must feed them with food convenient for them, to express it by a similitude,
children are put to a nurse which should give them milk, but if she spreads a
table with wholesome meat constantly, which is too strong for them, and if
their parents come and find them dead, shall she be excused though she say it
was not her fault, for she provided meat for them. So it is if the Minister
provide wholesome meat on the table twice a Sabbath, yet if the people perish
because they cannot eat it, he shall not be excused, and therefore Ministers
ought to consider the pretiousness of a soul, and they must be careful that if
the people perish, it must not be for wants of knowledge, they may preach to
them, and yet they may perish for Cathedram habet in Coelo qui corda docet, He
it is that sits in Heaven that turns the heart, only they must inform the
understanding.

The other five advertisements concern the manner.

First, Their preaching must not be a general discourse, Advert.
but a particular. And this is gathered from the text thus, because general
discourses fit not, neither heal nor nourish, but are like lightnings that
break the air, but light upon no particular subject; if they do it is seldom;
so these general discourses make great shows, but men are not inflamed with
them. As if a Minister should find faith in a text, and discourse of it, but
never apply it, Ministers are fullones animarum the fullers of the souls, and
it is not enough for them to bring soap, though it be of the best, but they
must apply it to scour the blots out of men's hearts and consciences.

They are builders, therefore it is not enough to square the stones, and bring
profitable matter, but application makes the building go forward, and that is
the laying of one stone upon another, yea it is that wherein practicing
consists, interpretation and application, to expound and apply; what else did
Paul mean, when he bad Timothy Tim. 2. 15.
to divide the word, to wit, not to deliver it in gross, but tell them in
particular, such a thing serves to cut down such a sin: for when the word is
applied it is a searching plaster. First to draw out corruption and then to
heal. I appeal to every man's breast, if the word be not more effectual when it
is applied, for then men fall down and say that God is in them of a truth, viz.
you speak in the evidence of the spirit, 1 Cor. 14. 25.

If the matter be good and substantial it is no matter, the Hearers may apply
it, therefore it is supervacaneous Object.
needless to do it.

This is all one, as if a Chyrurgion should say to a Patient Answ.
that has a swelled arm, I have prepared a knife, and cannot he launch and cut
his arm himself? as this would be a folly in them, so it is in Ministers to say
so, for it is as dear cutting off spiritual hands and legs, as it is to cut
corporal; therefore it is not enough to bring good matter, but they must press
it on them, not in a word or two, or by intimation only, but to lay it on them
with as full a hand, and as seriously as they can, and as perticularly as they
can. Men are so mannerly this way, that they will be ready to lay admonitions
on other men's consciences, rather then on their own, this thing will they say
belongs to such a one, but not unto me, Heb. 13. 22. suffer the word of
exhortation a while. He speaks as a Physician there to his patient, suffer me
to see the wound and to put a tent into it; which shows that there is a
backwardness in our selves, and therefore if Ministers will do any good, they
must apply the word home.

Secondly, As they must apply, so they must not misapply. And this is gathered
from the Text thus; Physic if Adver. 2.
it be misapplied it will not heal. And meat misapplied will not nourish. And
this misapplying of the Word may be double.

First, General.

Secondly, Particular.

First, General, when they give milk to them to whom strong meat belongs, and
when they give strong meat to them to whom milk belongs.

And this second is most failed in, when Ministers preach to ignorant people,
and walk as it were in clouds. When they deliver the Word in scholastical
terms, this is as it is in the fable, to put meat into a narrow mouthed pot,
though the Crane get it out yet the Fox cannot. So though Scholars can pick
out the meaning, the plainer people cannot; it is the fault of some to preach
University Sermons to the people, which they have made for a more learned
auditory. It is all one as if a man should come to a fair where there were none
but poor people, and bring Jewels to self, he might carry them home again, the
people would not buy of them because their purses would not reach the price, or
because they know not the use of them; but bring spades and such things as they
have use of, and you may sell them: So when they preach these Sermons to the
people, though they be pearls, yet they be such as the peoples capacity cannot
reach to; but bring plain Doctrine, such as they have use of, and you do them
good.

The second particular, and that is when that particular part is misapplied
concerning healing, and nourshing, conf^ting and dehorting; this is twofold.

First, Concerning Time.

Secondly, Persons.

First, For the time, either when they comfort too soon, or where comfort does
not belong, so that they are like a wound too soon healed, that breaks out
worse, Esaias 50. 19. God has given me the tongue of the learned to minister a
word in due time to him that is weary; they that be weary must be refreshed.
Again, secondly, they stay too long ere they comfort, 2 Cor. 2 7. Let not the
Incestious person stay too long least he be swallowed up of grief.

Secondly, When it is misapplied to the persons, when they speak peace to whom
God speaks not peace, and when they speak to the grief of those whom God would
not have cast down, Ezekiel. 13. 10. They cry peace where there is no peace, and
dishearten those that are sincere, that is to apply playsters where there is no
sore, and to strengthen the hands of the wicked. But of this I will say no more
but that, Prove. 17. 15. He that justifies the wicked and condemns the just both
of them shall be an abomination unto the Lord.

Thirdly, Their words must be pleasant, they must not Adver. 3.
be such as people loath. This is gathered thus. Meat will not nourish unless
it be eaten, and if they like it not they will not eat it, and so will not be
nourished; therefore the words must be such as please the appetite of an honest
and good hearer, such as excite and sharpen. Ministers must be like shepherds
that give the sheep the tender grass, and not the blown fodder; and therefore
the Steward was commended that brought out of his treasury things both new and
old. So Ministers may bring variety of dishes, but with this caution, that they
be out of Gods pantry, Eccles. 12. 10. He taught the people, and in teaching
for the manner, he sought out pleasant words, and upright writings, even the
words of truth where three things are observable.

First, He took not what came first to hand, but sought out pleasant words. 2.
He had veriety. 3. They; were pleasant and yet upright.

The choicenesse hindered not the truth, nor the pleasantness their
uprightness. So Ministers must make their words as pleasant as they can, yet
they must have no flowers but out of Gods Garden, no honey but out of his Hive,
no physic but out of his Shop, and they must be as eloquent as they can make
them. It is commended in Apollo that he was an Eloquent man, but it was in
confuting the Jews; so long as it runs in a right channel, let it run with as
strong a stream as it can, yea the Ministers are bound to this, for cursed is
he that does the work of the Lord negligently; and therefore they must use all
their art to this purpose: And this made Paul cry (...) Who is fit for these
things?

But some may say, What must they do that their words 2 Cor. 2. 16. Object.
must be pleasant?

First, They must be good for substance, well wrought, there must be strength
and power in them, they must be Answ.
wine, not water, silver not dross, cream not whey, let them be of the best.

Secondly, Let them be new for matter and manner, for things common breed
loathing, the best dishes if we feed every day on them, we shall loath them in
the end. Manna though it was the best food, Angels food, yet the Israelites
grew weary of it, and the word is not only common when it is not new, but it
loses the efficacy; Physic if it grow familiar to the body, it will not work;
so when admonitions are familiar there is not so much notice taken of them,
they pierce not so effectually, nor enter into the soul.

Fourthyl, Their words must be methodically delivered. Advert. 4.
This is gathered thus; the word is meet, as meat will not nourish unless it
be retained, no more will the word, and that is not retained without method. He
that preaches without this puts water into a sieve that will run out, so the
word confusedly taught runs out and stays not with them; if it do, it does
them no good, they may be compared to the walls of Besaxtim the joynters
whereof were so close that, unum continum putares Lapidem, you would think it
were one stone, though it be a commendation in a wall, it is not in a sermon
for three reasons.

First, The end of preaching is not only to stir up the the affections, but to
enform the judgment, and that is performed when it is remembered, now the
memory is strenghtened by method: and although the other kind of preaching may
please (as it is doubtful; for long ways are most tedious where there is no
turning) yet when it is most remembered it does most good, and it is then most
remembered when it is most methodically delivered.

Secondly, The end of preaching is to beget knowledge in the people, and this
is done by method: for it helps the understanding and the memory.

Thirdly, Its necessary that the word be repeated, now method helps that, when
one thing is linked to another. And this is needful because we have more then a
natural forgetfulness in good things, and the Devil is ready to steal away the
word that is sown in our hearts; since therefore we are so forgetful, and the
Devil so ready, we had need of all the helps we can: and therefore Ministers
must make their points plain, and frame their method to that purpose.

Fifthly, Their words must be all spiritual, holy, substantial, not frothy or
light, and how much is this better Adver. 5.
then to fetch in haeterogenea that cost so much labor; what racking is there
of wits to please the people, and what choice of phrase, when plain preaching
profits more; we may say of these as of smiths small plates, wherein they show
their workmanship; they cost much pains but profit least; so these spend their
enterals like the spider, and do no good but only to show their skill: is it
not better to take grapes from the tree then painted grapes, to fetch in
haeterogenea; because this is much failed in, we will show the causes of it.

First, They then shall want applause, and bring contempt to themselves. 1.


They shall get better applause then they should have if they had the other,
viz. the applause of God. Shall the Heathen man esteem his conscience, pro
amplissimo Theatro, and shall not we esteem the testimony of our conscience
above other things, we that have the life of Christ in us and believe the
scripture, that God rewards them that do good, and shall we be carried away
more to please the inordinate appetite of curious hearers, then for conscience
toward God. Hear what Saint Chrysostom said of him self, for it is remarkable,
When I first began to preach I was a child and delighted in rattles, in the
applause of the people, but when I was a man I began to despise them; so ought
Ministers to be rather delighted fletu then plausu populi, with the weeping
then the applause of the people.

But secondly, their auditory will not relish it when Pithanologia is not mixed
with their preachings.

Though they be bound to please a good hearer, yet they are not bound to please
the inordinate appetite of hearers; and if their taste be vitiated, they must
see quid morbus, non quid ager postulat; What the disease, not what the sick
party requires. There is a disease called malacia, [(...) Pica] wherein the
party desires coals and ashes, for the humors that possesses the mouth and the
stomach. Now a good Physician will not give him coals, but labor to purge him
of that disease, and feed him with good meat; so suppose the Auditory be
inordinate Hearers, they must not be pleased, for morbi augentur similibus,
diseases are increased by their likes, but they must seek to purge the peoples
stomachs of these impure humors, and feed them with wholesome food. Is it not
for more reason that those which are of uncircumcised ears, should be healed,
then that the Word should be mingled to please them? Is it not better that they
should be purged to taste the pure water, then that their food be squared for
them?

But for the quoting of humane testimonies, etc. if they be lawful to be used,
why should we be restrained? And herein before I come to the reasons, I will
promise these six rules or grounds, wherein I will lay down the restraints and
liberties, the cases wherein we may, or may not use them.

First, whatsoever we deliver in preaching, must be per 1. Ground.
se credibile, and that by primary authority in it self, not derived from
others, this is plain.

(1.) Because the Ministers are Ambassadors, yea Gods own mouth, Ier. 15. 19.
Now this they cannot be, unless they deliver the word purely.

(2.) Because the hearers must receive it as Gods word, and if they must so
hear it, Ministers must so preach it; therefore purely.

(3.) Because in preaching we preach to the consciences of men, and this we do
not unless the word be Gods; for he beholds the conscience, and tries the heart
and the reins; and therefore unless we speak it from God we cannot do this.

(4.) That which we deliver in preaching, must be received with faith, and that
not humane, whereby I believe there was a City of Rome, and such a man as
Pompey, though I saw him not; but divine, and that is true, that omnis fitles
fundatur in Verbo Dei, that all our faith is grounded on the Word of God; and
unless that all that we deliver be Gods Word, this faith will not be grounded
on it; so that this is true, that all exhortations must by the Word be
interpreted or applied, not the sayings of men, or quotations of Authors,
because the Mininister is Gods Ambassador, and the Word must be delivered as
Gods Word by faith, otherwise we shall never speak to the conscience.

To this ground are four liberties.

First, we may use them in case of application, though the rule it self is to
be proved, and confirmed by Scripture, yet when we come to apply it to the
manners of men, if for proof, that they are guilty of such a fault, we produce
an Author, we shall rightly do it. So Paul, Tit. 1. 12^ One of your own
Prophets have said, the Grecians are liars, evil beasts, slow-bellies. Mark the
manner of speech; he proves not thereby, that they ought to be such (for that
he takes as proved otherwise) but when he comes to apply it, he tells them that
one of their own Prophets said so, so 1 Cor. 1. 11. It has been declared to me
by them of the house of Cloe, that there are contentions amongst you; he does
not prove by any of the house of Cloe, that there ought to be contentions
amongst them; but when he came to apply it, he tells them that some of the
house of Cloe told him so. If we were to show the gross Idolatry that was in
the wisest of the Heathen, and produce Homer or Plato to show it, we should use
them right. So if we were to show the Atheism and wickedn^sse of the Popes; if
we use Platina, or any other of their Prophets, to show it, we use them right.

Secondly, we may use them for instances, as suppose we were to prove that the
moral Law was written in the heart by nature, we may prove it by Romans 2. if
when it is proved we bring an instance out of Plutarch or Seneca, we shall
rightly use them.

So for Historical relation, if we were to prove the change of the Sabbath, we
might do it by Scripture, but if we did produce the History of those that lived
presently after the Apostles, we in so doing shall use it aright. So for the
fulfilling of prophesies, when we find prophesies in Esaias, Jeremy, and we bring
Heathen Authors to show the event of them, we shall use them aright.

Thirdly, in case of consutation, if we were to confute error, we may produce
Authors, that so we may not seem to fight with our own shadow, and to fasten
that on them which is not true. So Christ used the Pharisees, Mat. 23. that
said, Whosoever swears by the Temple it is nothing, but whosoever swears by
the gold of the Temple is a debtor. And as he did it in the general, so may we
in the particular.

Fourthly, comparatively, to shame Christians with the practice and judgment
of the Heathen, who see more in their own light, then we do in the Sunshine of
the Gospel, 1 Cor. 11. 14. Paul proves by the Law of nature that it is a shame
for a man to wear long hair; does not the Law of nature teach you, that if a
man have long hair, it is a shame unto him? If in this case we say an Heathen
Writer saw this, and why should not we? thus we use them aright.

Secondly, Christ receives not man's testimony, John 5. 2. Ground.
34. and he gave the reason, ver. 36. Because I have a greater witness then
that of John. If it be objected that John bare record of Christ, and all the
Disciples were sent forth as witnesses of him in all Judea and Samaria.

I answer, they were not co-witnesses, but declaratory witnesses, as a Praeco
or Crier witnesses that he speaks nothing but that which is suggested from the
chief Speaker, and a Scribe, that he writes nothing but that which was dictated
unto him from another, and those which had been present at some things, that
they relate nothing but what they have seen and heard. And this distinction of
a declaratory witness, I have from that place in John, where it is said, He
confirmed his witness by signs and wonders. Now none can be witnesses
declaratory, because they see not Christ, nor have their doctrine immediately
from the Holy Ghost. May I not say it is so interpreted, because they agree in
it?

No, the Scripture receives no witness but his own; as the light cannot be seen
but by the light, so the Word is not to be interpreted but by the Word; to say
this is the sense, because Augustine, Calvin, and other Writers say so, it is
not reason enough: if we will give a sense, it must be because the litteral
sense is so.

Secondly, because the sense of it agrees with other places of Scripture.

Thirdly, because it is answerable to the analogy of faith. To this restraint
there is this liberty, though the Word receive not the witness, yet the men
that deliver it may. So Amos, in the 11. Chapter uses an external argument,
when he would evidence that he was a true Prophet, he uses this witness, ver.
14. I was a heardman, and the Lord took me as I followed the flock: so Paul,
Gal. 2. 9. Cephas and John gave to me the right hand of fellowship. So in
preaching, though the Word need no witness, yet the men that preach it may; and
that

First, in case of partiality, if the nature of the point be such, that gives
suspicion of partiality, as in a point of controversy, we may allege these
that are not partial: as for the Supremacy of the Pope, when they allege that
place; On this rock will I build my Church. If we being thought partial, did
allege Augustine, who lived before the Pope challenged to himself Universal
Authority, and proved that by this Rock was meant this profession, we use them
aright.

Secondly, if the person be suspected of novelty, he may produce an Author to
show that what he says is not new, but that which was used before. This reason
Augustine gives, why he uses Cyrill and Optatus, in his Book against the
Pelagians, not to confirm, but to show that he neither spoke nor taught any
other doctrine, but that they did before. And therefore it is observeable, that
Fathers in their Sermons did not quote them. And well were it if those that
followed them so much in other things, would follow them in this. But in case
of controversy, so they did, and that with this caution, to show that it was
no new doctrine they taught; so we may show that we teach no new thing, not
only by modern Writers, but also by ancient.

Thirdly, in case of singularity; to remove that, we may produce the confession
of Churches, Canons, and Councels, and the consent of Orthodoxal Fathers.

Fourthly, in case of explication of an Hebrew word, that we produce examples
of men that write in the same tongue, and show the meaning, for as much as the
Holy Ghost writ in that language, we shall use them aright. So for Chronology
and Geography in explication of Daniels weeks against the Jews, if we produce
Authors to show how many Kings of Persia there were, how long they reigned, we
use them aright.

Thirdly, the third ground is taken from the Office of a Minister, a Minister
as a Minister ought only to use 3 Ground.
Gods Word, not man's; the reasons are,

First, from his Name, he is a Minister of the Gospel, therefore not a Minister
of humane learning; humane sentences are humane sayings, 1 Cor. 4. 1. We are
dispensers of the mysteries of God, and not of men.

Secondly, a Minister as a Minister speaks from God to men, but when he
produces humane sayings, he speaks from man to man.

Thirdly, as he is a Minister, so the weapons of his warfare are spiritual and
mighty through God, not carnal, that is not humane sayings. Therefore when he
uses humane learning, he speaks not as he is a Minister, 2 Cor. 10. 4. Humane
testimonies are carnal weapons, therefore to this there is this liberty; that
although a man do that, not as he is a Minister, yet if in preaching some
passage require it; he may speak from men to men, and fight with carnal
weapons. True it is, that when a man confutes with carnal and Philosophical
reasons, he shoots with their own bow and contends with their own weapons, yet
may they use them.

(1.) For such reasons, though they be humane, yet they may convince; so
Goliahs head was cut off with his own sword.

(2.) Though they beget no faith, yet they may dispose to it.

(3.) Though they build not up so directly them that believe, yet they are
helps to take away scruples, and to answer objections and temptations, and in
this regard he may use them; only with some due cautions.

When the nature of the point, and the Auditory requires 1.
it; such points seldom fall out, but when they do, we may do it.

That it be done with intimation, that it is an external argument, lest those
that hear it mistake it. 2.


This observed, a Minister may lay aside the person of a Minister, and use men's
arguments and reasons, Acts 17. 23. speaking to the people that were ignorant,
says, I saw it written on the Altars to the unknown God: when he would prove
that they were created, he says, In him we live, we move and have our being,
as one of you have said we are all his off spring. As if he should say, this
Poet has authority with you, else it were but a weak argument, and if he did
it, so may we. Suppose we were to prove the Scriptures to be the Word of God,
we may prove it, because its that on which faith is grounded; if in this we do
produce humane reasons, we do aright.

The fourth ground concerns the use of humane learning, and it is this. That
the excellency of humane 4. Ground.
wisdom is not to be used in the testimonies of God. That is, not in preaching
the Gospel. I allege the Apostles own word, I came not unto you in the
excellency of speech, or of wisdom; contrary to those that think, if the Divine
truth be found, learning may be laid in it, and the ground work may be wrought
with gold. If any think themselves straightned in this opinion, see 1 Cor. 2.
1. I came to you says Paul, not in excellency of speech or wisdom; what wisdom
does he mean? not Divine wisdom, for that he had in abundance, but humane
wisdom, (...), I came not to show the testimony of God by it, But I esteemed to
know nothing among you, but Christ and him crucified; That is, I accounted
nothing else worth the knowing: to this there are these liberties.

It may and ought to be studied, as it prepares the understanding to deliver
the Divine truth, and therefore 1.
Students are to be exhorted to study it as a necessary help, so that he is a
Layman that wants it.

It may be used in preaching, yet not in the substance 2.
and words of the Author, for that is to mingle chaff with wheat. It is
certain, all our weapons must be spiritual, yet we may sharpen our weapons at
the forge of Heathen Writers, they may have an influence into our Sermons, as
the Stoics say. When we give hey unto our beasts, we look not for hey again,
but for fruit, wool and milk So we must not utter them in the same words, but
digest and turn them in succum and sanguinem, that the understanding may be
strengthened, and then we may deliver them the better. The Israelites must not
put the jewels that they took from the Egyptians into the Temple in the same
manner, but melted. So humane Writers may not be used in the same fashion we
take them, but melte^ and turned into another shape, we may use them. Paul is
plain for it, I came not in the excellency of speech or wisdom; where two
things are spoken against (1.) the mingling of the Word with corrupt glosses,
(2.) delivering it so mingled.

The fifth gro^nd concerns humane el^quence, and that 5. Ground.
is this, we must not use the excellency or wisdom of words, but deliver the
word in the plain evidence of the spirit and of Power. That is, that there be
no mingling of humane learning with divine mysteries in showing the testimonies
of God, though the words be pure matter, we may not set an excellent style upon
them, but plainess which becomes the gravity of it. The word may be delivered
in an high still, yet so as pearls, that it may shine in its natural
brightness, otherwise it rather beautifies the speaker then the word; I appeal
to the consciences of men, if in these deliverances it does not sapere aliquid
humani, and though we think not so at the first, yet many on their death beds
have said it. If this seem to slight, see the Apostle, I came not says he in
humame wisdom, that is in tricks of wit, and in the thirteenth verse which
words we speak not in the words that man's wisdom teaches, but which the holy
Ghost teaches. He was not only careful that his master was found, but that
his words were also plain, 1 Cor. 1. 17. Christ sent me to preach the Gospel,
not in the wisdom of words. And what can be meant by this but that curiousness
of style, which rather weakens then strengthens the work. To this there is this
liberty; that when we cannot well express our selves otherwise, when some
sentence taken out of an Author, will more pithily express our mind, we may use
it, only these cautions observed.

The phrase must not be light or metrical speeches, that 1.
it stand not upon paranomasias and verbal conceits, that it do tickle the ears
and move laughter, or poetical allusions, as the hire of a whore might not be
brought into the temple though it was silver, because of the baseness of the
thing whence it was raised, so though they be as fit as others, yet they must
not be brought into sermons because of the base ground whence they were raised.

Let it not be done frequently or with affectation, but occasionally when we
meet with it, and so that ordinary 2.
people may know that it comes by the way, the better to express our mind.

In this case it is not meet the Author should be named, 3.
for if it be to express our mind the naming of the Author is needless. See
the ground of this liberty, 1 Cor. 15. 34. where when the Apostle would use
that frame of words or expression which came into his mind he is silent
touching the Authors name. And if the Apostle out of a Poet, why may not we out
of some other, express our mind.

Let not the words be light, but full of gravity, fitting 1.
the matter in hand.

It must not be done frequently but seldom. 2. 3.


It is not always convenient to name the Author, Christ uses this in his
preaching. Sometimes he took a proverb to express himself, and sometimes
alludes to such sayings among the Jews, and if we take short speeches to
express our selves more pithily, we do no more then Christ and Paul did.

The sixth ground is concerning the use of unknown 6. Ground.
tongues and it is this. That the word is not to be spoken in an unknown
tongue, 1 Cor. 14. half a chap. spent in the proving this. Whence I gather
that to an auditory of Scholars a man may speak a sentence in it own words;
because to them it is known, only this must be observed, that it be not vainly
done, as in quoting Scripture in Latin sometimes, when English would serve to
express it better.

2. Upon the same ground I gather, that to an auditory of Common people we may
not use a Latin phrase or sentence because to them it is not known.

It is true indeed we may not speak a whole sermon in Obj.
Larine, but some words we may use.

Where God absolutely forbids a thing, he forbids it Answ.
not secundum majus and minus but altogether.

But we interpret it afterward. Obj. Answ.


Notwithstanding that is not to be done, for

1. It is idle and needless, why may not English alone serve? it is an idle
word, and if that be at no time to be spoken, much less in preaching the Gospel.

2. It is usually done out of ostentation. For when men hear them they think
they do it to show their learning, and so do it out of vanity; if the auditory
be mixed a Latin word may sometimes be used, if wholly Ignorant then not at
all. By this you may see how far we may go in using humane sayings. Now the
using of them in other cases as for ostentation and vain glory or such like, is
not to be done.

I will add some reasons, and answer some objections.

1. Reason. We may not do it because ordinary quotations of Fathers (not in
some named Cases) have the nature of a confirming testimony, though we intend
it not yet the nature of the work is such, though it be not intentio agentis,
yet if it be conditio operis, it excuses him not, as if a man swear and say I
thought it not, it excuses him not, if we quote Saint Augustine it is as much
as if we quoted Saint Peter, or Saint John, If it be without intimation, though
we intend illustration, and not confirmation, yet the condition of the work is
such, Suppose a stranger come, what difference would he know between Saint
Augustine, and Saint Peter.

2. It is needless, for whatever we deliver out of other authors it is either
dissonant or consonant to the word. If it differ, why do we use it at all, if
it be agreeing, the word is profitable of it self, Christ receives not witness
from men, and to do that, is to bring a candle into the Sunshine, or to cast
water into the Sea. When the Sunshine of the Gospel makes a thing clear, what
needs the candle of humane testimonies be used.

3. God delights to work by his own ordinances. The word is the power of God to
Salvation, if we were able to speak with tongues of Angels, and God wrought not
by it, it would not convert a man, but would be like pens without ink, or
conduit pipes without water. To work is proper to the holy Ghost, as it is
proper to fire to heat, and he only makes the means effectual. The Rams horns
will do more if God work with them, then the best trumpets. And the waters of
Jordan will heal when all therivers in Damascus will not, and when God says my
word is sufficient unto Salvation, what need others; and this is Paul's reason,
why he was not ashamed of the simplicity of the word, because it is the power
of God unto Salvation. Suppose their sayings were more choice then Scripture
(as some think they be) yet to convert the heart they are not so effectual.
Gold is not so good as iron to make a knife, but if a man would have a knife to
cut, steel is better, so suppose they were choicer sayings, yet to convert the
soul the word only must be used.

Suppose upon the use of humane learning some should 4.
be converted, the praise would be to man's wisdom and not to Gods, 1 Cor. 1.
17. I preach not so, says Paul, least the Cross of Christ should be in vain,
as if he should say it would be attributed to my oratorical persuasion and not
to the power of God, if I should preach in the wisdom of words.

The Word is not bettered by it but made worse, the 5
Word is better without, and that in three respects.

1. It is more powerful without it, it cuts deeper. The Word is a two edged
sword, the more naked the sword is, the deeper it cuts, but when we clothe it
with humane sayings, it is put into a scabbard; so the purer the Word is, the
more effectual it is. Therefore Paul said, I delivered it not in eloquence of
words, least Christ's Cross should be in vain.

2. It is never the whit more beautiful, for add mixture of heathen beauty with
it, but more beautiful without it, as they say of a Diamond, quicquid
absconditur perditur, so much as is hidden is lost, though it be in gold,
because it is better all might be seen; so to have the Word purely delivered,
is better then if it be covered in golden sayings, and so much as is buried is
lost, because it is more excellent. Gold is not covered because it is better
then iron; and when the Word which is Gold is mixed with humane sayings, why say
we that it is adorned?

3. The Word is not better in regard of the perspecuity of it, 1 Cor. 2 1. Paul
would not speak in the excellency of speech or of wisdom, because it is the
power of God unto salvation. As if he should say, if I should so preach, it
would not be evident that God spoke by it. A glass the freer it is from
painting, the better it transmits the light; so the freer the Word is from
humane sayings the better it transmits the power of the Holy Ghost.

6. It is against the example of the prophets, Christ and the Apostles in their
preaching to the people, and howsoever we are not to live by example, but by
rule, when we have to do with men, but when the example is Christ, then it is
absolute; Now we find it in all probabillity that they did not quote them,
though their Sermons be not fully but briefly recorded, yet we do not find in
their Epitoms any quotation of Authors, but says the Lord Jehovah, the Lord of
Hosts, etc. Neither let any object they had no Authors, for the Church
continued long before, there were as ancient as these, there were Colleges and
schools of prophets, besides the Apocrypha.

7. Consider that the use and custom is not good, it is dangerous when
quotations come into request, the Scripture goes out, and Religion falls,
the exalting of humane wisdom is advanced.

As when Popery overspread the earth, quotations were much in use. Luther
renewed the Doctrine of Christ and preached it purely, The Authors grew out of
request; the Scriptures rose up and grew. And we read in Sleiden that Luther
being to dispute with Cardinal Cajetan, d sired that nothing might be quoted
but the Scripture, but could not obtain it; and Religion had never gotten the
upper hand, had not the Scriptures been heard more then they were before; we
are apt to give too much to them, and deifie them; and though the Fathers were
Excellent in their times, yet it is too much to deifie them, though the
Scriptures be chief Judge, yet they are Assessors, yea the truth is they are
more esteemed then the Scripture with many, for we retain no other sense then
what they have agreed on, not but that they may be used, but for them to step
into the Pulpit and speak when God does, this is too much.

In this regard we ought to abstain, because it is doubtful 8.
whether they may be used or no; in doubtful cases men will be scrupulous, and
whatsoever is not of faith is sin; so that this is the case, though we are not
sure they may be used, yet we are sure they may not; in this case choose the
surest part, and leave that which is doubtful, we may quote the Scripture, but
whether Fathers or no, it is doubtful, and we ought to choose that which is
certain.

The Scriptures are sufficient and able to make a man 9.
perfect to every good work, 2 Timothy 3. 16, 17. some interpret it in all works
of the Ministry; what is there that can be desired, that is not here? Here is
milk for babes, meat for strong men, Heb. 5. 14. if thou desire elegant
dressing, Eccle. 2. The Preacher sought out pleasant words: if powerful
dressing, which is chiefly to be aimed at, this is fittest; no writing so full
of arguments to convert the soul, and work on the soul as this: go no further,
but content your self with it.

It is done for illustration, not for confirmation, therefore Object.
it may be done.

The ground of this answer is in the first reason, for Answ
whatsoever is intended, yet it is conditio operis, why should they bring in
Paul and Jeremy to be a testimony, and the sayings of Thomas Aquinas, brought
in after the same manner, not to be a testimony as well?

Suppose it be not brought in but to press the exhortation, 2.
because the argument must be pressed as well as proved, it has the nature of
a confirming argument.

We may take examples from the doings of men as we Object.
are Ministers, why then may we not illustrate it from their sayings, as Christ
did?

There is a great difference, because it is evident he uused Answ.
similitudes from their doing, to expres that by which he spoke to the people,
because they arise from sense; its an illustration and expressing that which is
obscure, but saying is an inartificial argument.

If we may bring in things we find, why should we rob them of their credit, and
not name them? Object.


I appeal to the conscience of men, whether they aim not at their own credit
more then the Authors; and we Answ.
shall find it to be their own for which they name them, otherwise if we should
deliver nothing, but name the Author, why not for all that we receive from
them; which none expects.

Although we receive knowledge from Authors, yet we 2.
are not to bring it in altogether such as we find it, but we must cast it into
a mould and digest it; many times flowers grow afresh from old stalks; the
sayings of Authors are fresh flowers, but when they are inserted unseasonably
they wither.

If that be of moment, why do we not name all, as well one as another? why do
we not name the 3.
meanest, as if it were a fault to rob the rich, and none to rob the poor?

May we not use them for ornament to set it out better. Object.


Though the things be ornaments in themselves, such as have excellency in them,
yet they are not so to the 2.
word, they beautify not that, for all ornaments come not from the thing put
to it, but from the suitableness of it. Those speeches that would adorn an
oration, will not a Sermon. There is an Eloquence that adorns a speech, but
agrees not to the gravity of the Word.

In the opinion of some men they beautify the Word; Object.
and what is the beauty of pearls but opinion?

In the opinion of those that be weak, possibly it may Answ.
be so, but those that are perfect, think them no ornaments, but contrary, 1
Cor. 2. 6. you will be desirous, says Paul, of enticing words; its true, the
weak will, but we preach wisdom to the perfect. That is, strong men will think
it wisdom, though others despise it; weeds in Corn adorn it to children, but
wise men will account the worse of it; so to the weak, mingling of it will
adorn the Word, but to strong men it is better without it.

May we not guild it to the pallat of the hearer, that so Object.
it may go down the better?

Were it only a simple dressing of meat, it were not amiss; Answ.
let the Preacher seek out pleasant words, but when there is such sweetness
that it hinders nourishment, there is no reason the pallat should be pleased,
but the stomach cleansed to taste it; if the pallat should be followed, some
there are that relish not this impure meat, why ought it then to be pleased?
they ought, because they desire wholesome food.

Modern Divines have greater knowledge in the tongues; 1.
the Fathers, some were Latins, some Grecians, some Hebrewitians, none had the
skill of all three, as Calvin and Beza had.

They differ in interpreting Scripture; see the best, 2.
Augustine upon the Psalms, and you would wonder how wide he is in his
interpretation. I spare to name them, I acknowledge this, against Pelagius he
was wonderfully assisted from God; such broad difference there is in his
writings and in his Sermons. Compare Calvin with the best, and he went beyond
him, so that in opinion of Divines, he is the best since the Apostles, Qui
maximus textualis est optimus Theologus.

The Fathers spent their strength in particular controversies 3.
against Pelagius, Arius, etc. that their chief strength ran that way, and when
the water runs strong in one channel, it is weakened in another; but modern
Writers are stronger in general, and when they wrote against the heresies, they
were wonderfully assisted; so that there is no greater difference betwixt them.
Their errors were more then the errors of modern Divines. Augustin^, after his
retractations fell into error, the reason was, because he lived in the days
when God made way for Antichrist. Calvin was raised up to abolish him. Where
was heresy so great as in Popery? and therefore it was more needful that those
that rose up in darkness should have more assistance then ordinary, so that
modern writters are as well to be quoted. Now what remains but that we do
consider what is said and be convinced, and practice that we know. Why go we
beyond the doors to them, that is in an inordinate course? Why do we go into
the wide waste to gather flowers, when the scripture is the garden of Eden, it
is true we may find violets by the way, so may we in common writers, there is a
choisness in them, but nothing to this. They may shine as glowworms in the
dark, but having the Scripture, why do we so tenaciously adhere to them?

If any man say it seems not so to us, we relish it not. It is hard to relish
it, and if the disposition be so, we may speak as long as we will but convince
none putandum de quaestibus, we cannot make honey seem sower to the taste,
only this, be not ruled by the pallat, but labor to bring it into taste.

But some man may say, what is the right line which is index sui and obliqui?

I will now therefore declare what the right manner of preaching is, only this
I desire that it be without censure of those that think otherwise. That we tie
no man but that he practice it as he sees it grounded on the Word of God and on
good reason.

And first I define what preaching is, It is a public interpreting or dividing
the Word, performed by an Ambassador, or Minister, who speaks to the people
in stead of God in the name of Christ.

1. It is a public interpreting, and this is one main d^fference by which it
differs from private delivery of it. So Paul says we suffer not women to
preach in the Church, though they may privately, so that this is essential to
it.

2 Interpreting or dividing the word or parting of it.

Interpreting, Nehem. 8. 8. They read in the book and 1.
gave the sense, that is they did explicate it in paraphrastical terms.

Dividing, 2 Timothy 2. 15. Study to show thy self approved 2
unto God a workman that needs not to be ashamed, dividing the word aright.
Now I take the dividing to consist in these three things.

In collecting some point from the text taken out to be handled. 1.


In gathering places of scripture that tend to the proof 2.
and confirmation of it: for notions be scattered in Scripture as cards that
are mingled, but when every shuit is gathered and put together they make up a
pair.

In application of it to the particular persons of men, 3.
but of this afterward.

Performed by an Ambassador or Minister, for if a private 3.
man, not designed by the Church, speak publicly, it makes him not a preacher,
for he must be an Ambassador, commissioned.

In the stead and name of Christ; for if an Ambassador 4.
speak from himself and not from Christ, he speaks not from God to men, but
from men to men, 2 Cor. 5. 20. We are Ambassadors for Christ, as if God did
beseech you by us. Ministers are Ambassadors sent on purpose from Christ, and
what they speak is in Christ's Name, and declare what is told them. The Apostles
from Christ, and we from them as praecones. In this consider the matter and the
manner. The matter of preaching is the word, the adequate object of it is that,
Luke. 16. They have Moses and the Prophets let them hear them, 1 Pet. 4. 11. If
a man speak let him speak as the Oracles of God.

The manner in which two things are considerable. (...). 1. 2.


For the manner of interpreting.

For the manner of dividing.

First, It is necessary that there be Gramatical Analysis of the sense of the
word, if need be: some are so plain that they need it not. Let a Rhetorical
Analysis be added as explaining the metaphors and figures in it, and then let
the sense be given, which being confirmed. First from the scope of the text.
Secondly from the collection of other Scriptures. Thirdly from the Analogy of
Faith. Let the Logical Analysis be given because it makes a thing to be better
known when it is known in the Parts.

From the manner of delivering the word to the people in it there are two
things, First, A discovering the point. 2.
Secondly, The applying of it. It may be wondered why the delivering, etc. is
divided into proposition and applycation? but I answer, it is not simple but
relative diviing of it to the people, and that includes, First, severing, and
Secondly, applying also. Suppose we were to give a loaf of bread to children,
the parts must be divided from the whole. Secondly, It must be given unto them,
So let the point be gathered from the text and and severed one from another,
and Thirdly, let it be applied.

First, For severing in it there are two things. First, let it be collected
directly, for a clear collection gives light to it; here then is to be noted
that the point must be such a conclusion that the medius terminus be in the
text.

Let it be evident to them that it is so collected, that (...).
the main thing may have a good ground that it be not slightly but evidently
collected.

Secondly, For applying it in two things.

1. The preparation and clearing it. 2. Deducting from it.
The preparation which consists in explication and confirmation. (...).
First, explication, when the main point is collected and severed from the
text, it is a proposition that has a subject and a predicate, if either be
obscure, it is needful it should be opened, and here is a place where common
places may be used, sometime it may be omitted if the point b^perspicuous, or
used more or less as he sees good.

Secondly, Let him show the extent of it by two things. 1. bringing it to
particulars, 2. When it needs limitations to give caution.

Secondly, Confirmation, and that two ways.

First, By conferring it with other places of Scripture. So did Paul; here this
rule is observed, that the places be not many, but pregnant, and that we do
not barely name the words, but open them, and show how the point is confirmed
from them.

Secondly, Let reasons be added, and though the point otherwise be cleared for
the truth, yet add Reasons; Because when we know the ground, we know it the
better, and it increases a man's assent, and makes him yield the more. Here we
may annex answering of Objections, or resolving of questions, replying that
which is deducted from the point; In it two things are considerable.

1. The substance of the thing deduced. 2. The working of it on the hearts of
the hearers.
Two consectaries of this may be added to four heads.

1. For Doctrines informing the judgment. 2. For confutation of Errors. 3.
For reproof of sin. 4. For Exhortation to some virtue, or to the performance of
some duty.
The ground of these four is in 2 Timoth. 3. 16. All Scripture is given by
inspiration, and is profitable for Doctrine, that is the first. So for reproof
or redarguation, that is the second. For correction, that is the third. For
instrustion or exhortation, that is the fourth. If there be a question whether
these words be so meant, See 2 Timoth. 4. (...). Be instant in season and out
of season to rebuke, to reprove (the word is to check for sin) Exhort with
all long-suffering and Doctrine.

Object. 1 Cor. 14. 3. It is said, the Scripture is profitable to comfort, why
is not that a distinct head?

Answ. It is to be refered to the head of doctrine, for if it be a thing the
judgment is informed by, as properly a doctrine the (...) the work of it is on
the minds of men, and they are several as the Consectaries are. First, the
working of a Consectary that tends to preaching. 2. Show how evidently it is
delivered from the main points, for then it works kindly upon the hearts of the
Hearers, and frees the Minister from finister respects at that time. 2. If the
nature of the point, or the condition of the Hearers do require it, then reduce
other places of the Scripture that tend to the pressing of it.

3. Answer objections by clear distinctions.

Secondly, in confutation applying of it; First, it is necessary that it be
showed how evidently it is drawn from the main point, for that will be like the
breaking out of a great light that scatters mist. 2. Let the errors be
evidently declared. 3. Let reasons be brought to confute them, and annexed to
that in the Text, so that first, they be sound. 2. That they be clear to the
understanding of the Hearers; and here may be an addition of answering
objections.

2. Showing ones opinion. 3. Resolving scruples.

3. For reproof that they may be absolute in six degrees. 1. Let the sin be set
forth in its colors, and weighed in the balance of the Sanctuary, and so the
heinousness of it may be seen. 2. Let it be described to the full, by bringing
it down to the particulars, else it will be too big a net, and men will find
evasions, but if it be brought to the threads of particulars, none will get
out, and if it be delivered in gross, it will fasten on none. 3. Let the
persons be notified that are guilty, not by name or circumstances, that the
Congregation may know, but that they may be convinced in their consciences, and
that is done by delivering the signs of the vice we reprove. In diseases we see
not the Radices, but the Symptoms of it, so we see not sin in the heart, but
in the practice. Therefore signs are good. 4. Let reproof be renewed, not naked
as it is drawn from the Text, but with other reasons, to make us afraid of
committing it, as from the danger, the consequents, the effects, and Gods
judgments on such sins: and here if speeches be edged with Rhetoric, to make
a division between the marrow and the bones, it shall be fitly done. 5. The
secret reasons must be answered, that keep men in the practice of sin, for if
there be but one objection unanswered, the reproof will not fasten on them, for
no man sins but by false reasons, therefore they are called deceitful lusts,
and this is required, 2 Cor. 10. 4. The weapons of our warfare are spiritual,
casting down imaginations, the word is (...)

6. Let such medicable rules be prescribed, as may keep men from it.

4. In exhortation to some virtue, or to the performance of some duty; this is
absolved in five degrees.

1. Let the virtue exhorted be commended to the people, and set forth in the
beauty of it, that so they may be stirred up to love and like it. 2. Let it be
showed how defective men are in practice of it; for men are as ready to
arrogate in that, as to derogate in other things, to think they have it when
they have it not. And this is done two ways; First, by bringing down that duty
to particulars; more motes are seen in a little of the Sunshine, then in the
whole shade. Secondly, by describing the particular speeches and actions of
men, showing the difference between them; and this discovers the disagreement
in the minds of men.

3. Let exhortations be renewed not simply, but with motives to stir up to
embrace the virtues, and to this it is needful that we use a cloud of
arguments, let the speech be framed with such figures as becomes it. So that,
First, it be with gravity: secondly, with concealing of art.

4. Let the false reasons be showed that keep us from embracing of it; for
either we think the practice of it brings into danger or difficulty; therefore
let these be done away.

5. Show them the way, the means how they may go on, as if it be demanded what
ground of Scripture, for this? I answer, for interpreting and dividing the
Word, we have precepts, the working of it is from example, only let these
cautions be added: First, In all points this kind of handling is not to be
used; for sometime Explications, Reasons, or Consectary may be omitted as
occasion serve, these transitions are not always manifested; but so the right
rule be known, we may put them together as it seem good: I should have added
several other directions, but I must defer them till another time.

AN ANTIDOTE AGAINST HEART-FEARS.
JOHN 14. 1. Let not your hearts be troubled.
THe point that we delivered out of these words was this; That Doct. Our hearts
should be stablished in the day of fear.


It is the will and advice of Christ our Lord and Master, that our hearts
should be established, and not be troubled in the day of fear.

Now after we had delivered the reasons of this point, we came then to set down
some means, how we might be capable of this advice and instruction, that our
Lord and Savior persuades us unto. Some of the means I have already opened
unto you; four we handled in the fore-noon. Means to keep the heart from fear.


The first was, to set our selves another task, another employment, and so
divert our thoughts and affections 1. To divert the thoughts another way. Heb.
10.
from fears about these outward things. This point we opened at large, and
showed what effect it took in the case of Saint Paul and other Christians, Heb.
10. In Abraeham, and his family in removing out of the Land where he had
possessions: being he was mindful of another possession in Heaven, and
regarding not the possessions he left.

Again, a second means we delivered was this, to get a clear light to burn by
us, that so we be not mistaken in 2. Get a clear light by us:
the apprehension of things: for this ground was here delivered, that nothing
works upon the heart and affections of a man according to the truth of it, but
evermore according to the apprehension. Indeed if the apprehension be joined
with truth, then it works according to the truth of it; or else the
apprehension stirs up the affections. As in that example, Mark. 6. 49. The
disciples were troubled Mark. 6. 49.
when they saw Christ himself supposing that he had been a spirit.

A third means that we delivered, and opened at large in the fore-noon, was to
take heed of promising our selves 3. Not to promise our selves much from the
world:
great matters from the things of this world: for this is a truth, when a man's
hopes lift him up to Heaven, if he be disappointed of this home he is thrown
down to Hell. Therefore we should use the things of the world, as if we used
them not, according to Saint Paul's exhortation: then when a man uses them as
if he used them not, he will be as if he had them not. Other things I added for
the opening of this point.

Fourthly, The last thing that I touched in the fore-noon it was this, to
labor to be humbled, labor I say, to be 4. Get a humble heart.
humbled under the hand of God: for as it is said a froward proud heart finds
nothing good, nothing that it is contented with but it will pick quarrels with
God, measure out what portion he will; So on the contrary, a spirit that is
truly humbled, finds nothing but that which is good: Whatsoever God affords a
man that is truly humbled, he takes it for a great savor and mercy. I opened
that place, Isay. 49. the Lord says the pastures of his Isay 49.
people should be in the High ways, and on the tops of the Mountains. There is
the poorest feeding of all, the grass is the shortest, there is nothing to be
gotten, yet sheep will live and do well with such feeding, where the fat oxen
would be starved: so a poor and mean Saint will pick a contented life, where a
proud heart gets nothing but vexation, and trouble.

We proceed to a fifth means; for there are three more. 5. To be strong in Gods
strength. Ephesians. 6. 10.


The fifth means we must add, which ought to take place before any other, and
that is it which the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 6 10. be strong in the Lord, and
in the power of his might: What is that? that is account and esteem the power
of the Lord as your own. Now if a man had so much strength, and power of his
own as the Lord has, he would make no question that any man should be able to
encounter with him, or any trouble or temptation in the world. Now if we were
persuaded that the power and strength that God has, were ours, that he would
be ready to put it out for our comfort and deliverance that would stablish our
hearts; as David says, be strong and he shall stablish your hearts: be strong,
and rely on him, and then that will strengthen, and stablish your hearts.

And here before we euter into conflict with trouble, take heed that we do not
strengthen our selves in other things: this breeds a man much vexation of
spirit in the day of fear and danger; because he gives his heart to rely upon a
broken staff, the arm of flesh, and when these come to break, and disappoint
him, he falls to the ground. Therefore, my brethren, however we be provided in
regard of second means against the time of trial, as for example, it may be we
have healthful bodies, good estates, and are full of friends in this country,
and in foreign countries, where we may betake our selves whatever may happen;
yet we must look on these things as David did on his sword and his bow when he
went to the battle, I will not trust in my bow, my sword shall not help me.
Mark, he says not that his bow should help him, or his sword deliver him. Now
surely David knew what his sword was, and what his bow could do: but before he
set out, he gave these his good word, he made sure before hand that these
should not be his strength: and if he did overcome, they should not carry the
praise and thanks of it, but he would be sure to reserve these for the Lord,
which were his due. So we should do in other things, though we have this and
that means to support, and sustain our selves, take heed that we be not strong
in these, for these will deceive us.

You know, though a man of himself be never so weak and frail a creature, as
indeed our hearts being conscious and privy, we are but earthen vessels, very
brittle, capable of troubles, and sorrows; and many pains, and much
bitterness, and we have but little power to withstand them: now this is a cause
of trembling and fear, But suppose we were weaker then we are; and frailer, yet
notwithstanding if we have one to assist us, and second us and stand by us,
that is able enough, as able as we desire, this makes us partakers of that
strength. As for example, a feather, or any light thing that is easiest tossed
with the wind, if it be tied fast to a rock, it partakes of the same firmness
and stability with the rock. So we though we be never so frail, and easily
tossed up and down with the storms of afflictions and troubles in the world,
yet if we bind our selves with cords to the Lord, the Scripture pronounces
such to be a rock, constant. It is a metaphor that Christ uses.

Look to the tract of the ancient fathers, the patriarchs, and other servants
of God, where they found the Lord, we shall be sure to find him; he stands
still, he is a rock now, as he was at the foundation of the world. Two helps to
it. (...) To consider what God has done for others.
Now then there are two things to be considered that will help us to do this,
to be strong in the might of the Lord.

First, Consider what God has done, how he has dealt with others in this case
when they were under temptations, when they were in the point and heat of
trial. Look in Psalm. 22. there are diverse places in that Psalm 22.
Psalm to this purpose, I will only name them. Not far from the beginning, Our
Fathers trusted upon thee, and thou heardest them, and they were delivered. And
so in the verse following there is a place to the like purpose, they cried to
thee and thou deliveredest them, they trusted on thee and were not confounded.
This was one means whereby David got this strength of the Lord, because the
Lord always dealt so with other of his servants, all those trusted in thee and
were delivered. They made thee their strength, they were strong in thee, and
they found thy strength to support them. And so in other places, Psalm. 119. 53.
you shall find such a place David was greatly perplexed, and Psalm. 119. 53.
troubled much; but says he yet nevertheless I called to mind the days of
old, and was comforted within me. So I comforted my self by calling to mind the
days of old.

This is a great matter of comfort, and a reason why we should be strong in the
Lord, because the Lord has always done so for others, there was never any that
went away disappointed, but sped of that they sought for. Now if a man should
hear a report of a fountain, that were excellent to cure such diseases: the man
before he goes perhaps he has no great conceit or opinion of it, but yet he
will try: but all the way as he goes he meets with companies that come running
one after another, and they tell him that they went as diseased as he, and he
hears no news to the contrary at any hand, but they all agree that they are
perfectly sound: this man will not imagine his case to be worse then the rest.
So brethren, if you lock back and consider all the examples of the children of
God in all ages, if you hear but of one man that trusted in the Lord, and was
not delivered, and supported, then let all this fall to the ground, let all we
have said be accounted nothing: but if the Lord have never disappointed any,
let it be acknowledged as a truth, and encourage us to come to him.

Again, more particularly, consider what he has done ^2. What he has done for
us.
for us since we knew him, and were acquainted with him, since we came under
his Government and protection. I make no question but he that has had the
hardest measure, hethat has felt the worst since he came into the world, yet
he has had some pledge of Gods mercy and favor toward him. Now this course
we ought to take at all times, when we receive any favor as a pledge of Gods
love, we should lay it up in our storehouse and treasury. For the pledges of
Gods love there is a double use to be made of them; Carnal, natural men go
without that which is best, and most comfortable; for the present use it may be
what they take, that is welcome; for God delivers them out of sickness, out of
fear, etc. to a better estate and favor. Now a godly man besides the present
comfort should lay up the things themselves. For there will be a day and time
of necessity when we shall need these comforts, to strengthen our hearts. For
always the Lord deals not alike, he gives not always a full cup, now it is
necessary that a man should be provided with grounds of comfort for a day of
need. In Luke 9 44. there is a Luke 9. 44.
notable place. Christ there wrought a great miracle, he cast out a devil; and
when the work was done, he comes to his Disciples, and bids them make this use
of it, Lay, or put these words, Let these sayings sink down into your ears.
When they were all amazed at the mighty power of God, at the power of Christ
that had wrought this miracle in dispossessing a devil; but when they wondered
every one at the thing that Jesus did, Christ said to his Disciples, Let these
sayings, etc. that is, these works, mark what I have done, what you see you
have an experiment of my power; and then he gives the reason, For the Son of
man shall be delivered into the hands of men, etc. but they understood not
these sayings. You will say how could this be understood? it seems hard, Let
those sayings sink down into your ears; for the Son of man shall be delivered
into the hands of men. As if he should have said, remember, now you have an
experiment of my power and Godhead, let it be a means to strengthen you; for
the days will come when your faith will be put to the trial, when I shall be
delivered into the hands of men, when you shall see me crucified, and then you
will be ready to stagger, and waver in your hearts: Therefore now when you see
an experiment of my power and ability, lay it up in your hearts, that you may
be stablished in that day. So in diverse places in the Psalms. David took that
course when he was in trouble, and fear and perplexity; he brings out of his
Treasury ancient things, pledges of Gods love, and so he recovered himself.

So, if a man can but get hold of a promise of God, he may work himself, and
wind himself into the Arms of God; for this is like a rope, or a line taken
out from him, if a man take hold of it by Faith, and depend upon it; That is
the power of the Word of Truth, Isay 50. 9. Isay 50. 9.
I said not to Jacob seek my face in vain, but I the Lord declare faithful
things. I declare faithful words. So when God I say, has given a man a promise
that he will not leave him nor forsake him. First there is in every promise of
that nature, there is a spiritual truth in it; and in the heart of a man that
is a believer, there is a spirit of Faith likewise; and these two know one
another. Now the spirit of Faith in the man meets there with the spirit of
truth and power in the Word (in regard it comes from God) these join together,
and draw a man close to God. So though a man see not God, yet he rests his
soul, and stays upon him, because he leans on that promise.

As as a Mariner at Sea that casts an Anchor, that holds Simile.
the Ship, he sees not the Anchor, that falls to the bottom, yet he knows the
Cable will hold it safe, the Ship may toss the length of it, but no further.
So the Anchor that the soul has in the promises of God, it is fixed; now
though a man see him not stand by and strengthen him in the trial, yet he has
the Word of truth for it. And these promises, though it be a long time ere they
speak, yet at such times as these then they speak. Before then, they are sealed
up, and it is not known perfectly what treasure is in them, whether they be
empty, or any thing worth; but when there comes a day of trial, now is the the
time; the Lord has made such promises for such a day.

And here I must give you a caveat concerning this means. If you will be strong
in the Lord make not haste, that is the phrase that is used, he that believes
makes not haste: That is, he gives the Lord liberty, he lets him move round in
his sphere, he is not ready to snatch deliverence out of his hand, but let the
Lord take his own leisure; for then he will do things best. And this is an item
that must be understood. The Lord notwithstanding those promises that are
plentifully made for the safety and preservation of his, yet many times he
deferres the fulfilling of them to the last cast. Many times he will use all
that liberty that he has left himself: for indeed therefore it is left, he may
use it when it seems good in his eyes: I mean a liberty in regard of the means
how he will help, and of the time when he will help us; but further we know he
has left himself no liberty, but has bound himself, and it is impossible he
should deceive us, if we rest and rely on him for this, and cast our selves in
the arms of God. Nay we make no question, as long as we have the promise of
God and keep our hearts, and our faith close cleaving to that, we are sure the
Lord in his own time will remember us, and come to us to deliver us.

Remember that which is said Psalm. 9. Salvation belongs to the Lord. Therefore
if it belong to him, let us take heed Psalm 9.
that we ascribe it to him not to be strong in any other. Even as the making of
any thing in Art belongs to such and such a Trade, shoos to a shoo-maker, there
are none makes them but those of that trade, and so for other things: so
Salvation belongs to the Lord, there is nothing in heaven or earth that can
work salvation but he; all the help that is done in the earth he does it
himself.

Now the only way for a man to make him his friend that is able to work it, is
to ascribe it to him, to acknowledge it belongs to him, that he has been the
do^r of it from the foundation of the World, and so will continue this blessed
trade, and gracious manner of working and doing for his. So much now for the
fifth means, be strong in the Lord.

A sixth means is this, We must likewise compel, 6. Means. To consider all
shall work together for the best, Rom, 8. 28.
and work our hearts to take this cordial, you have it, Romans 8. 28. We know
says Saint Paul that all things work together for the best to those that love
God. I say, let us have this persuasion in our hearts ready, that all things
shall work together for the best: therefore, they shall not hurt thee: Now he
says they work together, that is to be marked; the Apostle says not that this
or that thing alone works for good to the servants of God. As now there are
diverse ingredients in a receipt; if a man take one or two or three, they may
poison and kill, and be deadly, but altogether being tempered by the Physician,
are a preservative, and save life. So if a man stay Gods leisure, as before I
said, to add one thing to another, to do that he has to do, as well as that
he has done; when you put all together, and make the up shot of all, you shall
see and acknowledge it for the best. David says, It was good for him to have
been in adversity. Now certainly whatsoever has been true, in regard of the
time past, has been true for the present then as now. It was as true for David
when he was in adversity to say it is good for me to be afflicted, as well as
after when he was come out of it to say it was good that he had been; for if it
were not good, then it was never good. Therefore in regard of this, the
assurance that all things shall work for good, we are commanded to give thanks
in all things, Ephesians. 5. Ephesians 5. 25.
25. There is great reason to thank God for all things, since a part and
portion of our comfort and happiness is in all things, in John. 16. Christ
uses these words, he John 16.
tells them that they should mourn, and the world should rejoice, but their
sorrow should be turned into joy. Now I conceive the meaning of those words not
only to be this, that they should have an exchange in time; their sorrow, and
mourning should not last always with them, but they should have a condition of
comfort. But this I take it is further employed, that that joy and those
comforts that succeeded their sorrow, that happiness should be answerable in
the degree and quantity, to that sorrow, and sufferings they had. For you know
when one thing is turned into another the more of the substance there is of
that from which the conversion and change is made, so much accrews to that in
which the change is made. As for example, in John. 2. we read of a change of
water into wine. There were six water pots John 2.
full. Now so much water as there was, so much wine when the miracle was
wrought. If there had been twelve pots more, if they had been all full, there
had been so much wine as there was water. So (brethren) the more sorrow and
trouble, and affliction any man undergoes here; when a change comes, when the
Lord comes about to us, and turns all, comfort comes in more abundance, it
comes in more plenty. This I take to be the meaning of David, Psalm. 30. 11. he
uses the same Psalm 30. 11.
word that Christ does to his disciples, thou have turned my heaviness into
joy; and the latter part of the verse seems to favor this interpretation, thou
have loosed my sackcloth, and girded me with gladness, implying that as David's
sorrow was large enough to make a garment of sackcloth: so his joy was large
enough to make him a vesture of gladness.

So we have this assurance that all shall work for the best; whatsoever God
has in hand to do with us, and however he deal by us, we shall see it to be
best in the latter end: For God can draw light out of darkness: take that rule
that is the purest comfort, and light that is drawn out of darkness; I say God
will do it; though^^ be hard, he will set his mighty hand to do it. In Judges.
14. Sampson slew a Lion that came roaring Judges 14.
upon him: put the case that six Lions had come upon him roaring, if Sampson
had been sure of the victory, and to have slain them as fast as they came on
him, it had been no matter how many he had meet with: especially considering
that within a few days after (as we see in the story) he came, and in the
carkase of the Lion he found honey. This Lion resembles the troubles and
afflictions of this world, that come roaring upon us, and threaten a deluge,
and confusion: but we have the promise of God that cannot deceive us, God will
not suffer us to be tempted above that we are able, but with the temptation
will give an issue. Now what if they come never so thick, and roar never so
loud? what if the waves threaten to overwhelm us? (as David says) we are sure
of the victory before hand. As Samson found honey in the carkase, so when we
look back upon affliction conquered and subdued, we shall find honey in the
carkase, that is abundance of comfort, and experience of the love of God
helping us to go through them, and overcoming them.

But you will say, it is true, it may be God will give an issue, but it may be
a great while first; alas! what shall Object.
we do in the mean time? If we had any thing to support and sustain our selves,
this were something, we should be able to endure while Gods rod rested on us;
but this fills our spirits full of bitterness, this is that which is gall and
wormwood.

To this I answer, there is none of us that love our outward estate, that love
our Children, and houses, better Answ. To wait Gods time,
then a usurer loves his money, yet we see he usually takes this course, he
puts it out of his hand a long time upon security, knowing that being abroad it
works for him all the while, and will come home with advantage. Why then should
Christians make more ado, and trouble themselves more about this, if at any
time God borrow these things at their hands, their life, or credit, or outward
man; God takes them for a time that he may restore them again more rich, and
plentiful then he took them.

But you will say, how shall we do in the mean time? yet we are not satisfied:
alas if God should strip us of all Object.
comfort we do not know where to betake our selves, what will become of us, we
shall go out of home and harbor? userers though they do so and so with their
money, yet they keep so much by them that they may live upon, and they are rich
men, etc.

To this in a few words I answer, many times men that Answ.
love money, we see what hard shift they make to live, though their money
increase, we see they pinch and pine, so what if a Christian have nothing else
to find himself with the comfort and contentment of his being, what if he have
nothing to live by but faith, and a joyful expectation of deliverance, that he
sees coming though afar off? Such a man's case is not much to be pitied, Heb.
11. 35. there is a notable place. It is said, they are racked not accepting
deliverance, they made not reckoning of Heb. 11, 35.
deliverance, that is, they did not care for it, they did not desire it. What
was the reason? It is said, that they might obtain a better resurrection. So
they might have it at that day, at the great day, they cared not for the
present what pain they did undergo.

You know, it is a usual thing with men, if there be any Simile.
great sum or payment of money comes to them, they say they desire rather to
have the whole sum together though they stay longer then to have it by small
parcels, it does them little good. So if we were able to see and conceive it
were better for us to have it at the day of the resurection, it were better
then to have our comfort, to have that reward together as it were that the Lord
has provided and laid up for us.

You see the Lord himself, that is wise for his glory, and more provident then
we can be for our happiness and comfort, he has taken this course to make one
notible day of the world for his glory. You see in the mean time how he suffers
himself to be contemned, and suffers an eclipse of his glory: he suffers men to
live in rebellion, and opposition against him, he suffers men to swear, and
blaspheme his name. Now it is in his power no question to strike dumb the
swearer, as soon as the blasphemy is out of his mouth; and to strike the
Adulterer: yet these are wrapped up in silence, they hear no news from heaven of
anger. What is the reason of this? because God has made a day of great assize,
a more honorable day, and he has reserved this honor for that day, to make
that a notable day, as the Scripture calls it.

Secondly, I answer to the last objection, and that is more pertinent, and
comfortable to the heart, when we question how we shall do in the mean time
till deliverance be sent, if we be put upon hard service, and trials.

I answer it is a most usual and common thing in the Inward comforts supply
outward.
providence of God, and the dispensation of his goodness to his Church, when
men are at the lowest ebb in the world, and outwardly, then he makes a more
plentiful supply of the inward comforts and consolations of his spirit, Mark,
and remember; for now it is not a thing thaty ou must look to find till there
be occasion. A man cannot know whether this be true or no till he have
experience that the world leave him; when he has little comfort in the world,
then he shall find the truth of this. You heard that place opened at large in
the forenoon, 2 Cor. 5. 16. though our outward man perish our inward man 2 Cor.
5. 16.
is renewed day by day. He says not there, after our outward man is perished,
when God has pulled down the old building, he will build a new house: no, but
in the while he takes the ruins a pieces, the timber of the outward man, and
builds a new house, he makes it up in other comforts, so in 2 Cor. 1. 3. 4.
blessed be God the father of 2 Cor. 1. 3, 4.
Christ, etc. Who comfort us in all our tribulations, he says not that
comfort us after tribulation, but in the time of tribulation, so in 2 Cor.
11. When I am weak then I am 2 Cor. 11:
strong. This sounds as a riddle: that is, when I am full of infirmities, when
I am compassed with heavy dangers, I am at the best pass, and strongest in the
inward man. So David, Psalm. 94. 14. he says there, in the midest Psalm. 94. 14.
of my sorrows and troubles thy comforts refreshed my soul. David stayed not
till his sorrow was past; but then when his troubles were about him, the Lords
hand was to comfort him. And so diverse other places you shall find to the like
purpose.

Now if you look you shall find examples of this. When had Abraham the father
of the faithful, those frequent apparitions and revelations from God? was it
not after he had left his country? When he was in his own land, among his
possessions there was nothing but silence, but after he was abroad the Lord
appeared to him from time to time. And so in one place after this. As long as
Lot was with him to comfort him, there is no mention that the Lord revealed
himself to him: but that is the particular expression, Genesis 18. 6. Then says
he after Lot was departed Genesis 18. 6.
from him the Lord came to Abraham and fell a talking with him, and renewed
that great promise, that in him all the Nations of the world should be blessed.
So Jacob in his journey, when a man would have thought he had had the hardest
nights lodging, that ever he had since he was man upon the earth, when he had
nothing but heaven for his Canopy and a hard stone for his pillow, he had the
most glorious, and blessed vision of the ladder, that had the top of it in
heaven, and the foot on earth.

So Hagar, she never had an Angel to comfort her till she wept by the well, and
was cast out of her mistresses house. And so in the story of Joseph, we shall
not find it expressly said that God was with him, till he was in prison, and
there you shall find these very words. Not to name all passages to this
purpose, in Dan. 3. Those three Dan. 3.
children, as they are called, they never had the familiar presence of the
fourt^ man, till they were cast into the furnace. They might have gone long
enough, and served God, and faithfully too, and yet never have had that
interview, that presence in a visible manner of the Son of God standing by
them if they had not been cast into the furnace. So Christ himself till he
sweat drops of blood, we read not of Angels sent from Heaven, but then they
were present to comfort him, Luke 23. 43. And so in the Luke 23. 43.
history of the Acts we shall find still the Apostles when they were brought to
any danger, any trouble, any imprisonment, or the like, evermore there were
messengers sent from Heaven to them. So we may assure our selves out of all
these promises and experiences of the Saints of God, that then we are likeliest
to have the quickest commerce, and the clearest interview between Heaven and
us, we are like to hear oftest from Heaven, and have more plenty of comforts
from God, when we are deepest in trouble; when we are plunged in troubles in
the World, then the Lord reaches most plenty of joy from Heaven. Therefore as
Christ says John 16. concerning his presence with his Disciples, It is
expedient that I go, the Comforter John 16.
cannot come else, but if I go I will send him to you. So I say it is true, it
is expedient for us that God depart from us in outward things; for till he
leave us in these, the comforts of the Holy Ghost come not so purely to us, I
say there is need that they should leave us that we may have those comforts.
This is the sixth means, for us to assure our selves, and know this with Saint
Paul, that all things shall work for the best.

There is only one more remains, that is that which Means. 7. Prayer.
must go along with all the rest, Prayer. You know there is a large Charter
granted to prayer; but besides that general oue, Whatsoever we ask according to
his will we shall receive; there are special particular promises in this case,
that if any man, be driven to a strait and necessity, if he send this messenger
into the presence of God, he shall have a guard sent down presently to him.
Look in that place Phil. 4. 6. In nothing be careful, sait^ the Apostle, but
let your prayers and requests be made known to the Lord. And Phil. 4. 6.
what follows? The peace of God which passes understanding shall keep your
hearts and minds in the Love of God through Christ Jesus. As if he should say,
do but this, if you be in any extremity or distress, trouble not your selves
and your thoughts about it; but this is your course, your only wisdom is, let
your requests be made known to God with thanksgiving.

I told you before, we must give thanks whatsoever the case was, because light
is working out, for us as David says Light is sown for the righteous;
therefore a man has cause to thank God as well when he sowes, as when he
reaps, therefore the work must begin with thanksgiving; and then assure your
selves that the peace of God which passes all understanding shall keep your
hearts and minds through Christ Jesus. The word in the Original is properly, a
warlike guard, that saves from the assault of an enemy. Implying that if we
make our case known to God, and be thankful, then he will send such a safe
guard, such a garrison of peace about your souls, that you shall enjoy your
selves, and think your selves in a happy condition.

Now because we are apt to enquire, but in what manner, Quest.
how shall we find our selves in such a case? What constitution of soul shall
we have?

Says Saint Paul, this is more then I can tell you; it Answ.
is a peace which passes understanding: I cannot explain it, and tell you
that, what manner of peace it is; but this you shall have, this is the
operation, the nature and benefit of it, that it will guard your hearts through
Christ; that peace that comes first from Jesus Christ, shall keep your hearts
and minds from being troubled.

So our Savior lays the same ground in another place, John 14. 27. My peace I
leave you, my peace I give unto John. 14. 27.
you, not as the World gives so give I, Let not your hearts be troubled. As if
he should say, I leave you that which will preserve your souls in peace, peace
of conscience, assurance of the favor of God: therefore since you have that
means to keep you and save you, never let your hearts be troubled. In one place
Christ speaks thus to Peter, says he, Think thou not that I can pray to
my Father, and he will send me more then twelve Legions of Angels? but how then
should the Scripture be fulfilled. So I say, on the contrary, think you if you
pray to your Father in Heaven, that he will not send this peace to guard your
souls? how should the Scripture else be fulfilled? For there is one and the
same authority of Scripture, that if none for Christ's sake shall be frustrate,
or falsefied, much more (if there were any difference) is it true of every
particular promise of grace and mercy made to those that belong to God. So now
you have the seventh and last means, whereby to establish and strengthen our
hearts in the day of fear.

But now happily you will object and say, It is true, Object.
these things that you deliver may be good, and to purpose, but alas, I find
little strength in my heart, I am the same man I was, I find no great courage
or resolution wrought in me.

To this I answer; First, my brethren, you must first Answ.
gather sticks and make a fire, before you can warm your selves: you must first
gather these and the like savoury meditations out of the Word of God, before
you can find the strength and virtue of them upon your souls and consciences.
It is an old report concerning the Phoenix (it is no matter for the truth of it,
it concerns us not) when it is about to die, she gathers in Arabia, plenty of
spices that are odouri erous, Calamus and the like, and the Sun sets fire on
them, and the bird burns her self to ashes in the midst of the perfume: so my
brethren, if in the days of peace and health we gather sweet meditations and
considerations, out of the Word of God, we shall find in the day of need the
Holy Ghost will come, and set all on fire as it were; and so whenever you
offer your sacrifice to God, whether it be your life, or estate, or whatsoever,
it will not only be a savor of a sweet smell in the nostrils of God, but in
your own souls you will find it a sweet and comfortable thing to offer up your
sacrifice in the midst of those strong and sweet perfumes.

Again, whereas you say, you have not that great strength of spirit wrought in
you. It is no great matter; for the present, the Lord does not call you to
these troubles, he puts you not upon that service. You must know that such
things as these, that strengthen the spirit, God gives them not to boast of. If
a man had them now, what would he do? he would boast of them; such excellent
gifts as these are not for this purpose, but for our use and Gods glory. We
must look for this to be done in the day of necessity, when we have need of it.
Then we shall be just in the case of Sampson, Judge. 16. after his hair was cut
off, the Lord departed from him, and he Judge. 16.
was as another man: yet when the Lord had another piece of business for him,
at that time the Lord restored his strength, and so he pulled the beams, and
supports, and pillars of the house upon the Philistines heads. So the Apostles
of our Lord and Savior, Mat. 10. It is said, In that very hour, when you are
brought before Rulers, be not careful what you shall answer, for in that hour
it shall be given you. Now if a man had come before that hour and time, surely
the Apostles had been but like other men, they could have said no more for
themselves, they could no more have convinced their adversaries, etc. but the
Lord promised to give it in that hour. So brethren, this is a ground of
comfort, God will work strength in that hour, in the time of affliction, the
Lord sees we may do him service in that day, and therefore he will make us
strong.

But still you will reply, you are sure it is not so with Object. (...).
you, you have found experience of the contrary, you have had far less trials
and afflictions, then happily may befall you, or are like to befall you, and
you have found your selves much distempered. You will say, I was not able to
run with the footmen, how shall I hold out with the horse?

To this I answer diverse things. Answ. 1.


First, it may be a man's strength may increase more afterward, then i^ was at
the first, then the same burden is not the same, when there is a disproportion
of strength and enabling to bear it. As Abraham, Genesis 12. you shall find that
he was another manner of man, then he was, Genesis 12.
Genesis 22. for when the trial was but little, he began to Gen 22.
falter, when he went into Egypt: but when he came to offer Isaac, he was
courageous, and stuck close to God.

Again, secondly, I answer, there may be another reason 2.
why there may be a less affliction, and it may be born with much impatience,
when a great and heavy one may be born with more patience and more comfort. The
Great afflictions may be born with more patience then less.
reason hereof is this, because when a man has but one particular loss, when a
man has but a light cross, this serves only to provoke and stir up corruption
in him, and then a man (as it were) is armed against God, then he is ready to
fight against him: but now if the temptation or trial be a sore, and through
temptation, it will vanquish and subdue corruption, and bring him on his knees,
and so he falls flat before the Lord: In such a case I say, a man that has his
corruption subdued, though it were a trial tentimes greater, and more sore, yet
he may live upon better terms with the Lord, and more comfortably then another
man with a lighter cross.

As it falls out many times in the time of War and hostility Simile.
between two Cities or Nations, the weaker part in the time of War indures and
sustains more inconvenience and bloodshed, and loss of men, then after the
full conquest is made, especially if the government of the Conqueror be
moderate and just, as it is sometimes. So as long as a man stands out with God
in pride of spirit, and will not yield, he lives far more uncomfortably then
when he is truly humbled and subjected to God.

Thirdly and lastly, these general and greater afflictions may be born more
comfortably, and a less may more disquiet and trouble the heart; because when a
man has been afflicted but in some one thing, or a few things, and has many
outward contentments and comforts yet remaining to him; this is the usual
course of men in such a case, they think when their spirits are bruised and
wounded with grief of heart, they have lost such a friend, they have lost part
of such an Estate or credit, then presently they fall to other things that are
left them, and they think to make themselves whole there; when they have lost
their contentment in one particular they enjoy, they think to make them whole,
and to supply it with the outward things that remain. This succeeds not,
because the wound that is made in the spirit, by the loss of that whatsoever it
be thou art crossed with, it may be the anger of the Lord is mixed with it; it
may be the arrow of the Lord sticks in thy soul. Now if that be thy case, all
the outward application of comforts of the world will not do the turn. Only
that hand that struck the arrow in our side is able to pluck it out of us.

And we see nothing more frequent and usual in the world; men as long as they
have other things to solace themselves with, to set their delight on, they
never go to God. If a man go to God for comfort, it is (as it were) because he
shuts every door else against him, he has no passage else, that he must needs
go that way, or no way. Therefore as long as God affords men the things of the
world to solace and comfort them, they do their utmost to seek it there; but
when God takes away all things, and strikes away every prop, that he has
nothing to rest on: (as the Dove that Noah sent, that had no rest for the sole
of her foot, till she returned to the Ark) this forces a man of necessity to
the Lord. Now though the wound were ten times more grievous and heavy, coming
to the right Physician, the Lord that made the wound, he can cure it, and
comfort a man again. If a man have but a scratch with a pin, if he have an
unskilful Chyrurgion, the wound goes on to ranckle more and more, and at last
it costs a man his life. On the other side, if a man have a wound that is
dangerous, if he go to one that is skillful, this man recovers and lives in the
world. So many times, many men live with disquiet minds, they go to the world
and seek to be whole there, they seek their Physician there, and make the wound
that is made worse, and the latter end is worse then the beginning. But now,
though a man be never so empty of comfort, and be struck down, and the hand of
God be never so heavy upon him, if he go to God and seek to him, the Lord is
able to make him a comfortable man again, and to revive his spirit, and bring
him again from the grave. So we see that objection fully answered, that though
we be not able to stand under lighter afflictions, we may be able and strong
enough to bear greater. So much for this time.

THE LAW OF SIN and GRACE COMBATING.
Romans 7. 23. But I see another Law in my members warring against the law of my
mind and leading me captive to the law of sin which is in my members.
THat which is to be done for the solemnity of this day, Novem. 5.
(which has been most profitable, and necessarily set a part by the Church,
for the rememberance of our deliverance from the Gunpowder Treason) I leave it
to be performed by another. We have now pitched upon a text which will serve
for our particular use. This day indeed puts us in mind of a great Treason,
which was intended against the whole State, both of Church and Commonwealth;
and this will put us in mind of a Treason within us. Now it is true, that these
outward Treasons, and when we hear of Wars and rumors of Wars, such things as
are terrible to us, every man is ready to be affected and affrighted with
things of this nature, change of state, loss of goods, abreption of life, these
things are naturally terrible to us, the very hearing of them. But this now is
a War within, which is much more dangerous, and concerns every one of us to be
affected with a thousand times more, for it is a deadly War, a War that devours
the soul; the other destroys only the body, this is a War which kills us with
an everlasting death, when as the other is only the loss of a temporal life.
And this is a War which is for the most part forgotten, and not minded; for it
is a fight that makes no noise, it comes not with the sound of drums and
trumpets, it carries along with it no terrible appearance, hence it is that we
think of it but little. Now what do we serve for, that are the watchmen of
your souls, but to stir you up to a mindfulness of this War? to sound an allarm
to you, and if you will be stirred up to work your deliverance, well, if not,
we have delivered our own souls, and he that perishes, his blood shall be upon
his own head.

In this Chapter, in the verse before my Text, the Apostle Paul triumphs in
that liberty which he had through the grace of God; I delight, says he, in the
Law of God concerning the inner man, though I find many temptations to the
contrary. But when he had expressed that triumph, he comes now with another
caution, which he expresses in these words that I have read; But I see another
Law in my members warring against the Law of my mind, and leading me captive to
the Law of sin that is in my members. That is, I find in my self a strong
inclination, a strong habit of sin, carrying me violently to that which is
evil. Now this he sets forth by these properties.

First, he calls it a Law

Secondly, he says, it is a Law in his members.

Thirdly, he describes it from the opposite, it is such a Law as fights with
the Law of his mind.

Lastly, he describes it from the effect or event, and success that this Law in
his members has against the Law of his mind, it sometimes carried him captive
to the Law of sin, which was in his members. So that you shall find these five
things put together in the Text.

First, that there is a Law, that is, a strong inclination to evil which is in
every man's nature.

Secondly, this Law lies not idle, but it fights and warreth; I find says
he, a Law in my members warring against the Law in my mind.

Thirdly, though they do fight and contend, yet in every regenerate man it
finds resistance, therefore he says, It fights against the Law of his mind,
that is, there is a Law, a strong inclination to good in every regenerate man,
which makes resistance against this Law of sin.

Fourthly, though this Law of sin do find resistance, yet it sometimes
prevails; for he says, it leads him captive to the Law of sin, sometimes it
overcomes and overruleth.

Lastly, though it do overcome, yet never does any regenerate man lie under
this captivity; for in that he says it carries him captive, it argues
reluctance, a keeping a stir to vindicate himself from that bondage to his
former liberty. So you see by this the full meaning of the words. But for the
present, we will pitch upon these two points, which we will handle at this time.

First of all, That there is a Law of sin in every man's nature, strongly
inclining him to that which is evil. Secondly, That in every regenerate man
there is a Law of grace resisting that, and strongly inclining him to that
which is good. To begin with the first; I say,

There is a law of sin in every man's nature strongly inclining Doct. There is a
law of sin in everymans nature enclining him to that which is evil.
him to that which evil.

For the better understanding of this, we must know that there are two laws on
both sides. There is the Law of God expressed in the Scriptures which is
without, and there is a Law within every regenerate man, that is, the
regenerate part, that which the Scripture calls the spirit, and this agrees
with the Law of God in every thing; so far forth as a man is regenerate, so far
he agrees with the Law of God. Even as you see one tally agrees with another,
so does the regenerate part within, and the Law of God without, agree together.
On the other side again there are two Laws likewise. First the Law of sin which
is without us; that is, the very decalogue (as I may call it) or the summary of
evil which the Devil prescribes to his servants; and then there is answerable
within, another Law paralelling that Law of sin without, and that is a strong
habit, a strong inclination which carries the unregenerate man violently to
sin against God; and this the Scripture calls by diverse names, sometimes it
calls it The old Adam, sometimes it calls it flesh; because it deads and dulls
the spirit. Sometimes it is called the body of sin, because it is the very heap
of lusts. Sometimes it is called the body of death, because it leads to death
and destruction.

Now that I may fully open unto you what this strong What this inclination is.
inclination is, we will go no further then this very verse we have read; for
you shall have it described by these four things.

First, it is a Law.

Secondly, a Law in the members.

Thirdly, it is a Law that fights.

Fourthly, it is a Law that sometimes prevails, and leadr us captive. We will
go through them all very briefly.

First, It is said to be a Law; because as a Law it commands (...). It is a Law.
with authority; so does this incline us to ill, it commands strongly, so that
it will not be refused. And again, as it commands, so it forbids as powerfully,
and will not be denied. It commands that which is evil to be done by us, and
carries us strongly to it; and it forbids us the doing of that which is good as
powerfully. The Apostle speaks of some, 2 Pet. Having eyes full of adultery
that cannot cease^to sin.

Again, it is called a Law because it punishes and rewards as a Law does;
for a Law is nothing else but that rule that has threatenings joined to the
breach of it, and rewards for the obedience thereof. So has this law of sin
that is in us, if we do obey, it rewards us with pleasure, The pleasures of sin
for a season: if we disobey, it punishes us again with grief. As we shall see
Ahab when he had a little resisted this Law, how this Law of sin punished
him, it laid him sick upon his bed. And so Amnon when a stop was put in the
course of this Law that was in his members, it made him sick. In this respect
it is said to be a Law, because it commands powerfully, and because it
punishes and rewards as a Law.

Secondly, It is said to be a Law in our members; and 2. A law in the members.
that first, because it inclines us to evil, not morally evil; as when a man
persuades a man by strength of reason to a thing. But physically, and
naturally; that look what a natural inclination there is in the stomach to eat
and to drink, such a natural propensness and inclination there is in the heart
of a natural man to sin. As you see a wheel when a weight is hung upon it, it
goes, and it cannot choose but go. So is it with the nature of a man, it
inclin^s him unto evil naturally, and he cannot resist it.

Secondly, It is said to be a Law of the members because it discovers it self
in the members; that is, in the faculties of the soul, and the members of the
body, whenever they come to be used in the performance of any holy duty. For
at you se^ it is in the body, if there be a lameness Simile.
or soreness in any member, pernaps for the present you see it not, (...) feel
it not till you come to use that member. So it is with the Law of sin, in our
members when we fit at quiet and go not about any duty of holy obedience, this
Law lies still in the soul, and is quiet: but when the faculties are to be
acted, when the member is called forth to do a thing; when a work is to be
performed that is good, then the Law of the members discovers it self. Then you
shall find the lameness, the crookedness the soureness, the backwardness that
is in your hearts to do any thing that is good.

And last of all it is called the Law of the members; because, though it be
also in the will and in the mind, and in those higher parts of the soul, yet
chiefly it is operative in the members, there you shall see it most. As on the
other side, the Law of grace, though it be in the whole man, regulating, and
guiding the whole outward man, yet it rests especially in the mind and the
will; as you see Simile,
light is most in the candle though it shine through the horns of the
lant-horn: so this is called, a Law in the members, because though it reach to
the inward parts of the the soul, yet it is chiefly seen, and is most operative
in the members. Thus you see why it is called a Law, and why a Law of the
members.

Thirdly, it is added here that it is a warring Law, it is a Law that wars or
fights against the Law of the mind. 3: It is a warring Law. Simile.
Now it is said to be so, because it breaks the Law of God, it makes
resistance, it goes out of compass. So that as in a state, while men carry
themselves, orderly, and live by the Laws, they are reckoned good subjects, but
when they grow mutinous against the Laws, and their lawful Prince then they
are accounted rebels: so is it with our affections so long as they keep within
compass, and contain themselves in their own sphere that the Lord has
appointed them to move in, so long they are called ordinate affections: but
when they exceed their measure, and flow over their bancks, then they are said
to be warring lusts, inordinate lusts.

As for example in Rachel, the desire of Children was a lawful thing; but when
she came to be so importunate, and so unreasonable, so excessive in her desire
that either she must have Children or else she must die, then it was a warring
lust. So was Esaus desire of pottage. It is a lawful thing to desire the things
of this life, the comforts of this life, but to desire them in that measure: in
that excess, it degenerates from an ordinate affection, and turns to an unruly
lust. Such was David's desire of numbering the people. And therefore it is not
without cause that the Holy Ghost uses this expression here, I find, says the
Apostle, a Law in my members warring: For as the word in the Original
signifies, it wageth a war against the Law of the mind, even as one army does
against another. For there are a Legion of lusts, an army of lusts fighting
against an army of graces.

And if we shall a little open this to you, you shall see that it wageth war,
and exercises a fight, in that How it warreth.
manner that one army does against another: For

First, This Law in our members, these warring, fighting 1. They stop the
passages.
lusts, they take the bridges, they keep the passages, that is, when we are
about to perform any good duty, it stops us in our proceedings, and suffers us
not to do it. If a man have any good motion, or intention put into his mind, to
pray, to hear the word, or to do any other holy duty, then comes a
prohibition: this Law has a prohibiting party in the soul, that stays the
proceedings. As you see Saint Paul often complains that when he would do good
evil was present with him. That is, he found a prohibition in his flesh; so
that either the mind is taken off from the main duty, or it causes us to ommit
the duty, altogether; or if it cannot do that, it hinders us from such a lively
performance of it, that is required: or if it cannot do that neither, yet it
puts us upon the d^ing of the duty, for evil ends, for vain glory, etc. And
this is one part of the war, it stops the passages.

But this is not all, it does not only hinder us from doing 2 Provokes to ill.
that which is good, barely resisting; but it goes further it instigates and
provokes us to that which is evil. Therefore this Law is said to fight against
the soul by way of lusting, The flesh lusts against the spirit, that is, it
fights, as fire fights with water, or sickness with health: for as in
sickness, sickness not only hinders those operations which we might
otherwise perform, but it likewise weakens that strength, that vigor of the
body which should make us able to resist it: so is it with this Law in our
members it does not only hinder from doing good, but it weaketh those good
things that are in us yea it extinguisheth them, as we shall see it often by
experience, those that have good things in them by education and the like, how
they are deaded and damped when they suffer these warring lusts to prevail
against them.

Moreover as it hinders us in good, and instigates to evil, so it does it not
slugish; but as the manner is in 3. It is watchful.
war they keep watch continually: so this Law in the members, it never slumbers
truly, it never keeps any conditions of peace, but is ready to take all
occasions, it lies in continual ambush; and therefore if we sleep at any time
and stand not upon our guard, and watch; if we fall to surfe^ing and drunkness,
and neglect our watch by any kind of excess, it is ready to take the advantage:
as Ahab did of the Army of Benhadad, or as David did the Philistines at Ziglag,
he came upon them when they were all eating, and drinking, and dancing and
making merry. So this law in our members when we have forgotten our selves at
any time. When we exceed in our pleasures, for this you must take for a rule,
when there is any excess, be it in things lawful, that puts us into a
spiritual slumber, we lie open unto the advantage of our adversaries: therefore
the rule is be sober and watch, least you enter into temptation. That is you
shall surely enter into temptation if you watch not, and you cannot watch
except you be sober, that is except you be temperate in the use of all ^l
things: Let there be any excess in sports, and recreations, in meats, and
drinks, it casts us into a slumber, and then this enemy takes advantage against
us.

Therefore in a word, let us never think to have an end of this War, to be at
peace: for it does not only watch diligently; but if at any time this Law in
our (...) be wasted and spent, that is, if it give over for a (...) yet it gets
a new supply, and gather together its forces again. That lust that is dispelled
to day, gathers n^w forces against tomorrow. Partly, because i^ has ^ome
strong holds within us, to which it retireth for a (...). And partly because
there is a root of sin in us which breeds new blossoms. And as it is in your
gardens, though Simile.
you weed them to day, yet you shall find them full of weeds again within a few
days; so it is with our hearts, there is still a new root of corruption that
keeps place, and spro^ts up as often as they are suppressed.

And lastly, to add one thing more, it is such a War as 4. It uses stratagems.
is not without stratagems and wiles. That as it is in W^r, we do not only go
to it by main ^orce, but we use many devices, and advantages, and wiles, and
policies to prevail against the enemy. So in this War* you shall see here, this
Law in the members, if you observe the proceedings of it, you shall find how it
strengthens its faction in us by policies: so that when any good motion comes,
it has most voices to cry it down: therefore it works in us an ill opinion of
the ways o^ God, o^ the strictness and purity of Religion, it makes us think
well of luke-warmness. And besides, it possesses the ^^queports, the senses,
and admits no objects but those that agreewith it. And again, it draws us
from ourstrong holds, from prayer, from hearing the Wo^^, from holy
performances: as Joshua did the men of A^^, when he drew them from the City,
such a stratagem it uses, and that makes it dangerous to us; when we are drawn
from our strong holds, as the Conies from their borroughs, then it soon cos^ns
us, and easily takes us. Again, it takes away supply from the inward man; as
you see the Philistines in the time of hostility between them and the
Israelites, they would not suffer a Smith to be in Israel: so this Law takes
away the supply that should be given to the regenerate part. Again, it
affrights us with false fears, as you know it was the stratagem that Gideon
used in his War, he came upon the Host of the Medianites in such a manner, that
he put them all in a fear, he deceived them with a false fear. So this Law of
our members, affrights us with false fears, persuades us, that such and such
lusts can never be overcome; it tells us, that perfect walking with God will
never stand with the times, we shall never come to preferment, nor rise in the
world, if we observe the purity of Religion, and the like.

Again, it draws us from God, in that it sets us upon those things that are
contrary to him, it causes us to rebel against him. When his Law commands one
thing, it puts a contrary inclination into us, whereby we resist the Law of
God, and are led captive to this Law of sin, and indeed at last to death and
destruction. These things if we considered aright, we should not be so
negligent in maintaining this War as we are: this is the fight that this Law in
our members has. I say, consider the stratagems, it many times assaults us
with light skirmishes, and after brings in the main battle, which we observe
not. Thus Peter was foiled, he was first brought into the Highpriests Hall out
of curiosity, to see and to hear, and then afterward fell to the denial of his
Master. David was first drawn to less sins, and then to greater. So likewise
Solomon.

These stratagems it uses, which every man must be careful to observe, that he
may grow expert in this War. But I will not stand to enlarge this any further.
You see then these three things; It is a Law, a Law in the members, and a Law
that wars against the Law of the mind.

Now the last is, that it leads us captive, and that it 4. It leads us captive.
does so, you shall see from these particulars.

You know, one part of captivity or bondage, is for a man to be detained in a
strange Country, to be kept in prison, to be kept from his friends, and from
his business and employment at home. So does this Law in our members, it
detains us in our own Country, it keeps us from God, from the things that are
heavenly, where our coversation ought to be continually: it keeps us in prison,
it withholds us from those that are our proper companions.

And then again, you see in bondage there is no rest given to those that are
slaves, so this Law in our members, it breeds a restlessnesse, it gives us no
leave to eat, or drink, or sleep: that is, it so hurries the souls of men to
and fro, it so occupies the thoughts, it so takes up a man's affections, that he
is still busied in doing the things it commands, There is no rest says my God
to the wicked.

Again, in bondage there are hard tasks put upon men; as you know it was part
of the bondage of the children of Israel in Egypt, that the Egyptians gave them
more to do then they could possibly compass, they were to make so many tale of
Brick, and yet they were not allowed the materials. So is it in this captivity,
our lusts give us more to do then we can perform. The lust of pride and
ambition in Haman, we see it set him on more then he could possibly compass.
The lust of covetousness in Ahab for Na^aoths Vineyard, you see how hardly it
charged him, and what difficult things it put him upon.

Again, it adds this to it, if there be not a performance of what it
requires, as the Taskmasters in Egypt did to the children of Israel, they beat
them: so if we cannot do the things that these lusts sets us about, as the
Apostle expresses it, 1 Timothy 6. They pierce us through wi^h many sorrows. That
which is said there of the lust of riches, may be said of any other lust, when
it is not satisfied, it pierces us through with many sorrows.

Lastly, as in bondage a man is set on work, about business which is not for
his own good, but only for the advantage of his Master that commands him: so
does this Law in our members, it sets us about a work that stands only with
our hurt: Therefore in that place, 1 Timothy 6. they are called hurtful lusts,
that is, lusts that hurt the party, that fight against the soul, and indeed
(...) 1 Timothy 6.
only for the profit of the Devil. And herein they deceive us, so that we
think, that we do our selves a great pleasure, and that we act that which is
for our own profit and advantage, and yet in the mean time there is no thing
redounds to the soul but hurt, the advantage is only to Satan. We carry
Uriah's Letter, which we think to be for our own advantage, and indeed it is
for our destruction: Therefore as they are said to be hurtful lusts, so it is
added, they are foolish lusts, that is, we are fools for our labor, in
yielding to their commands. So now you see these four things: That as it is a
Law, a Law of the members, a Law that warreth, so it is a Law that in warring,
leads captive. And so much shall serve for the explication of the first point.
Namely, that there is a strong inclination in every man's nature, leading him
captive, or carrying him strongly to that which is evil.

Now Secondly, I add again to this, That

In every regenerate man there is a contrary Law, a Law Doct. The Law of the
(...) in the regenerate carries them to that, which is good.
of his mind, residing this Law in his members, and carrying him as powerfully
to do that which is good.

And this is a Law, even as the other is, because it commands and forbids
powerfully, it so commands us to do a duty, to perform an action of new
obedience, that withal it gives us strength and ability to perform it; as the
Apostle says, I am able to do all things through Christ that strengthens me.
And again, it forbids as powerfully, as we see in Joseph, when he had that
temptation from his Mistress, says he, How dare I do this and sin against God?
That is, there was a certain Law within him, that came with a prohibition, that
would not suffer him to do it.

Again, it punishes and rewards as the other; if we do well, and resist the
other, it refreshes us with joy unspeakable and glorious; if we do not obey
it, it breeds remorse within us. As we see in David, when he had sinned in
cutting off the lap of Saul's garment, his heart smote him. Now it is said to be
the Law of the 2. Why called the Law of the mind.
mind, because it wonderously enlarges the mind, to see the wondrous things
contained in the Law of God, it enlighteneth the mind, We are renewed in the
spirit of our mind, to see those things that others see not, to see the secrets
of God. You may read over the Bible an hundred times, and yet know nothing,
except you have it in the spirit of your minds.

Again, it not only reveals these truths to you that are regenerate, but
likewise it puts a strong inclination into your minds to do them. And therefore
it is a part of the Covenant, Ier. 32. 40. I will put my Law into their Ier.
32. 40.
hearts, that they may fear my Name, that is, I will so ingraft it in their
hearts, that they shall not only know my will, but they shall have a strong
inclination to do it; they shall be careful to please me, and fearful to offend
me.

Yea, not only so, it does not only enlighten us, and give us a strong
inclination to do it, but when we come to the performance, it gives us ability
to do it. Other men have good desires, and good motions and purposes, but when
they come to the birth, they have, no strength, to bring forth. New purposes
are in them, as new wine in old bottles, or as new pieces to old clothes.

When a man has an old nature still, though he have good desires, and now and
then, new purposes and resolutions, yet they abide not there, they are not
fruitful there; but this Law does not only put good intentions into a man,
but when they come to the performance, it gives the deed as well as the will;
He works in us both the will and the deed also. Now as this is a Law you see,
and such a Law of the mind.

So likewise, it is a Law that makes resistance: for that is intimated in these
words, Warring against the Law of 3. It makes resistance.
my mind, that is, it resists the Law of sin, and fights against it. In a
regenerate man, there is a certain strong habit, a certain strong inclination,
which is called the spirit, or the regenerate part, which runs in a contrary
course to the Law of sin: and whenever the Law of sin assaults us, this makes
resistance, and carries us a contrary way.

Only this is here carefully to be observed, that we be not deceived herein.
For this objection may be made; Object.
Is this proper only to regenerate men? There are many men besides that were
never acquainted with this work of regeneration, yet such a man finds
resistance in himself, he finds something in himself that opposes this Law of
his members. For there is a natural conscience in a man, there is another Law
which is like this Law of the mind, and it makes resistance in the natural man
as well as it; which is spoken of, Romans 2. 15. the Apostle there speaks Romans 2.
15.
of the Law written in the minds of the Gentiles; having not a Law, they do the
things that are written in the Law, being a Law to themselves, etc. So that you
must know and mark, that in a man that is yet but a mere natural man, that is
not yet regenerate, there may be a very strong resistance of that which is
evil: yea, he may make conscience of many things in secret, it may make him
keep a constant course in the performance of many duties, when no eye sees
him. There is a certain vigor and strength in the natural conscience, which
shows it self upon occasion, and yet it differs much from that Law of the
regenerate part, which fights against the Law of sin. You will say, how shall
we know it?

Because this is a matter of great moment therefore I Answ. Differences between
natural conscience and the Law of the mind in the regenerate.
will show you the difference in these five things.

First of all, when the natural conscience (the law that the Apostle there
speaks of which shows the effect in the conscience, when that) strives
against the Law in the members, it is no more but the contention of that one
part of the soul. There may be a light which discovers that which is evil,
which may cause a man to approve 1. In the combatants.
of that which is good: but this light is kept within the compass of the
conscience, and goes no further, it does not enlighten the whole soul. As you
may see, a spark of fire may lie in a dark room, which you may see there, but
it does not enlighten all the room as a candle does when it comes. After this
manner there may be many sparks of truth, which may lie in the conscience of a
natural man, there he sees them, and observes them, but they do not enlighten
the whole soul; that is, this light is not shed into the rest of the faculties,
the will and affections are not wrought upon by it; therefore the contention is
only in the conscience, and that part of the soul.

But now in the fight of the regenerate it is quite otherwise; there every
faculty, all the faculties fight in their courses, as it is said the stars
fought against Sisera. A man fights against it in his judgment, in his
understanding, in his will and affections. That is, a man that is sanctified,
he is enlightened to look upon sin with another eye then before. When he
looked on his beloved lust before, he looked on it as one that which was
pleasant and profitable to him: now he looks on it as poison, as an enemy, as a
thing contrary to him; so that he fights against sin in his judgment. And
while a man fights against sin in his judgment, though it may sometimes
transport him, yet so long as his judgment is right, I say when that is set
right, there is a continual fighting against sin: for it is one thing to know,
and approve; but when the bent of the mind is set against sin, then when the
passion is past he returns again, and goes on in the ways of godliness.

And then as he fights against this Law in his mind, so likewise he does it in
his will, as Saint Paul says, I do the things that I would not, as if he
should say, my will stands f^^m, though sometimes I am transported. And so
Joshua, I and my house will serve the Lord. That is, there was a fixed,
constant mature, resolute will to do that which was good. So David often we shall
hear him say, I have sworn to run the ways of thy commandments.

And as in the mind and will, so likewise in the affections, the affections
fight against this Law of sin, in a man that is regenerate, he fears anoath, it
is the expression, in, Eccl. Eccles. 9.
9. that is, his fear is set a work against sin. And so his desire, My heart
breaks for the desire I have after thy commandments, Psalm. 119. As if he
should say, If I had my desire, there is nothing that I would wish so soon as
to have my sinful lusts mortified, to have my soul enabled to keep thy
commandments. And so for joy, I rejoice greatly, says David, to keep thy
commandments. And so for sorrow, Peter wept bitterly. This is the first
difference in a natural man, the combat is only between the conscience and
the rest of the soul: but in the regenerate, the whole soul, all the parts and
faculties fight against this Law in the members, this law of sin.

Again as there is a difference in the combatants, so secondly, there is a
difference in the manner of the fight. 2. In the manner of the fight.
A natural man though he make resistance, yet it is but a faint resistance; he
fights as one that is not willing to overcome, or ca^es not whether he get the
victory or no; he gives but a faint denial. When a suitor is but faintly
denied, we know it makes him the more importunate. So we shall see balaam, when
the messengers came from Balaak King of Moab he indeed gave them a denial, but
it was such a kind of denial as that they saw he had a good will to the journey
notwithstanding; therefore they did not give over to importun him. So the
prophet that came to Bethel, when he began to enter into terms with the old
Prophet, we see he was not strong and peremptory in the resistance; a parleying
castle we know will not long hold out: when we come to these faint Simile.
denyals, and no more, there is no likelihood of prevailing.

Now the resistance that the regenerate part makes, it is a strong, and
resolute resistance, like that of Saint Paul when he was to go to Jerusalem,
why do you weep, and break my heart (says he) I am not only ready to be
bound, but to die for the Name of Christ? Like that of David, what have I to do
with you ye sons of Zerviah? So I say, this regenerate part, it fights not
faintly against the Law in the members, but it fights strongly, like a hearty
enemy, whom nothing will satisfy, but a conquest.

Secondly, for the manner of fighting this is another property in it that the
regenerate part does not dally with sin: for it fights out of enmity, and when
there is an enmity there, a man will not endure any thing, no not the very
appearance of evil. As a Pigeon that hates the Hauk will not endure the feather
of a Hauk. So it is with the regenerate part, it will not only abstain from
gross sins, but from every thing that is called evil from the tincture, from
the garment spotted with the flesh. Whereas a naturul man perhaps abstains from
the gross act, but comes as near as he can to the brink of sin. Many men will
resolve never to be drunk, yet you shall find them go to the tavern, and sit
there till they be overtaken. Balaam took up a resolution, I will go with you,
says he, but I will not say any thing but what the Lord shall bid me. there he
would abstain from the gross act, but you see what the issue was: even as the
Levite, he would not stay all night in Benjamin, by no means, but he would be
persuaded to eat his breakfast. This is the second difference, when the
regenerate part fights, the resistance is out of enmity, it hates all that is
called sin, it cleanses it self from all pollution of flesh, and spirit. The
other does not so, it resists only the gross acts, but dallies with that which
has affinity with sin.

Lastly, In this manner of the fight there is this difference that the natural
conscience though it strive and contend 3.
against the Law of the members, yet it does not fight against it as it is sin;
but against the shame, against the disprofit, against those evil consequences
that follow sin committed, against hell, against wrath, against eternal death;
for these are things sensible to him; but against sin it self as it is sin
he does not resist, but the regenerate part resists the sin it self, because
there is something within him that is contrary to sin, and therefore he makes
resistance against sin as it is sin; the other I say never makes resistance
against it as it is sin, but against the consequents and effects of it, and
this is the second difference, they differ in the manner of the fight.

Thirdly, They differ in the object, in the thing about which this contention
is; he that has only a natural 3. In the object of this fight.
conscience, to fight against the Law of the members, his strife is not about
things of that nature that the others are, moral vices, and moral virtues, they
know, and are sensible of; they resist the one, and stand for the other: things
that belong to outward credit and civil honesty, things that are morally good,
these things they are sensible of, and the contention is about them and no
other. You see Herod was careful about his oath, and why? because of those that
sat at Table with him, and this was the great matter that swayed him. And so
Darius had a contention when he put Daniel into the Lions den, but his promise
to the Princes overruled him. But there is another kind of contention in the
regenerate, about things of another nature, spiritual evils, spiritual
wickedness, he fights against those evils that are contrary to the image of
God, that are contrary to that purity and holiness that God requires. Other men
see not the things of this nature, therefore they cannot resist them. When the
Sun shines clear we know we may see the least moat; so where there is a clear
light of grace that shines in a man's heart, he sees spiritual evils which
another man sees not, he resists them, and his chief business indeed is about
them. Another man cannot perceive them, and therefore cannot resist them: this
is another difference, they differ in the object.

Fourthy, This fight differs in the success, there is a different 4. In the
success*
success and event in these two fights; a natural man though he have many good
motions and inclinations, and intentions suggested to him, yet he walks after
the vanity that is in his mind, that is his law: that is, though he have many
remorses and checks, yet if you observe him, in the constant course of his
life, he serves the flesh and the lusts thereof. But in the regenerate it is
contrary, though he have many evil inclinations, many evil suggestions, yet he
walks after the spirit, and not after the flesh, that is, his constant course
is good.

And if you object, are they not foiled many times? Object.
Did not David fall? and Peter fall?

I answer, It is true, they may be foiled in a particular Answ.
combat, and yet may get the victory notwithstanding. A man may have a blow,
such a blow as may make him stoop, and yet prevail against his enemy; so though
in a particular combat they may be overthrown, yet they get the victory over
their lusts. Therefore Peter, though he were so timorous at that that time to
deny his Master, yet afterward we find he was as bold as a Lion. So David,
though he was overcome in that particular combat, yet the victory was on his
side, all his life was chaste and pure, and holy afterward.

Last of all, there is a difference in the continuance of 5. In the continuance.
this fight; for a natural man does make resistance, yet he grows weary of
it, and lays down the wasters in the end, and yields to the sin; and says
thus with himself, Well, I see I shall never get the victory over this or that
particular lust, therefore I will contend no more against it. But now in the
regenerate this fight continues to the end. As you shall see in Peter, Peter
says our savior, when thou art old, they shall gird thee and carry thee
whether thou would not. There was a resistance, he was carried whether he
would not, he was carried where the spirit would, but where the flesh would
not, and this was when he was old, so there was a continual resistance: so it
was with Nicodemus; he began, and he held out, because grace in him was as a
spring that still enlarges it self more and more. In others it is not so.
Judas, he was like a pond, and not like a spring, though he held out a long
while, and was on Christ's side, and carried his colors, yet he continued not
so, Ioash, and Amaziah, they made resistance, but we see they continued not.
And the reason is, because in a natural man, the combatants do not continue,
those good things that are in him, are but as blossoms, they vanish; Now when
that which should maintain the contention vanishes, there must needs be an end
of the combat, but in the other it continues to the end.

A word for application very briefly. When we hear Use. Bewail our condition
under this law in our members.
that there is such a Law in our members; it should teach us to reflect upon
our selves, that we may be able to cry out as Saint Paul does, O wretched man
that I am, who shall deliver me from this body of death? For if a man had but
his eyes open, to see this Law in his members overspreading his whole soul, and
fighting against the regenerate part, against the Law of his mind, which should
be in every man, it would make a man amazed in himself; it would make a man
wonder that he had lived so long with himself, and knew himself no better.

And in this case it takes away that ordinary excuse that men have: for men are
ready to say, alas* I have resisted such and such a sin, I have a nature
exceedingly inclined to them. But alas thou art deceived in this: for this
Corruption of nature hateful to God.
is so far from excusing thee, as that this very thing that thou have a strong
inclination to evil, it makes thy sin out of measure sinful. For even as it is
in good actions, the more zeal there is, the better is the good work, so is it
in evil works, the more lust there is in every evil work, the greater is the
sin: for the more lust there is, the more sin: and the more wilful a man is in
sin the more is the sin.

Take a serpent, or a toad, that is hateful to the nature Simile.
of a man; though it hurt us not yet we loath it, because it is contrary to our
nature. So this Law in our members, this strong inclination to that which is
evil, though it should not break forth to actual transgressions, yet it is
hateful to the pure eyes of God; therefore we should humble our selves for
this, and not excuse our selves because of our evil nature. The worse thy
nature is, the more cause thou have to abhor thy self, and there is great
reason for it: because sin is worse in the root then in the branches; the
bitterness is more there as the soureness is more in the leaven, then in the
dough. As the heat is more in the fire then in the air that is heated by it. So
there is more evil in this nature of ours, then in any outward act of sin.

Therefore let no man excuse himself with this to say, I have a Law in my
members that prompts me strongly to sin against God. It is all one as if a
thief should excuse himself and say I am of a purloyning nature, I cannot
Simile.
hold my hands when I see any thing but I must needs steal. If a servant should
come to his Master, and say, Sir, I was drunk, and could not do your business,
would this excuse him? So this Law in our members, this necessity, this strong
inclination to evil, is it not our selves that have brought it upon us? we are
the authors of that Original sin. And besides that we intend it the more by
custom in sin: often relapses intend this Original corruption, and make it
prevalent.

You will say how shall a man do then? how shall a man Quest.
be saved?

I answer, except thou find in thy self this Law of the Answ.
mind resisting this Law in the members: except thou find another man in thee,
a regenerate part created in thee, that fights against this Law in the
members, thou can not be saved.

But you will say again, how shall I know it, seeing there may be a resistance
arising from the natural conscience? Object.


I answer, thou shall know it by thy constant and ordinary Answ. How to know
the law of natural conscience from the law of the mind in the regenerate. God
judges men by their constant course.
course, whether thou walk after the spirit or no. For we are not to judge of
our selves, or of any other by a step or two. If you will judge of a man by a
step or two, you shall find Noah drunk; you shall find Mases speaking
unadvisedly with his lips; You shall find David lying, and murdering, and
making another drunk; you shall find Iehosaphat making a league with Ahab which
God had forbidden him; you shall find Hezekiah boasting of his treasure, and
Peter forswearing of his master, and Paul, and Barnabas in such a passion, that
they were fain to part assunder, This you shall see, if you shall observe a
step or two only; and so you shall condemn the Generation of the righteous.

Again, on the other side, if you observe a man by a step or two, you shall see
Cain sacrificing; you shall see Saul among the Prophets, you shall see Judas
among the disciples, you shall see Iehu restoring religion, you shall see John
Baptist getting Herod into his house, and hearing him gladly. You shall see
Felix trembling at a Sermon. So that I say if you observe your selves or others
only by a step or two, you shall justify the wicked, and condemn the just:
for the best men have their swervings, and the worst men have their good moods.
A thief may sometimes go in the right way, Simile.
and a good man may sometimes miss the the right way, and go out of it:
therefore you must observe what your constant course is.

For the constant course of a man's life arises from the inward root and bent
of his disposition, and look what the inward bent of his disposition is, in
that he will be constant. Sometimes he may do the contrary, yet he will return
again. As you see waters that are naturally Simile.
sweet, if brackish waters break in to them, they grow salt indeed; yet if the
nature of that water be sweet, it will work out that brackishness, and return
to its former sweetness. So here, let a man's disposition be good, let his heart
be regenerate: let him be renewed in the spirit of his mind, though sin break
into him, yet he purges it out, he cleanses himself from it; though sometimes
he be stopped in a good course, yet he breaks over this damme, and falls to
his former course, that is to those holy ways that he was wont to walk in. So
it is on the other side, take but an evil man, whose course is to do evil,
though he may be stopped sometimes, and may have some good purposes, and
desires, yet his heart works them out, and he returns to his old bias. And
therefore you mu^try your selves by your constant course.

Take a swine, put him into a clean meadow, he keeps Simile.
himself clean: but let him come into a durty lane, and he will wallow in the
mire: and if you wash him again, yet if he come near such a puddle again he
will do the like, and why? because his swinish nature is not washed: and so
long as his nature remains his constant course will be suitable. So it is with
the unregenerate man, when his nature is not changed his constant course will
be evil. God may sometimes hedge a man in, and when a man is put into a way
where Simile.
there is a hedge on either side, so long as that lane lasts he must keep on:
but if he be at liberty, when he is at the end of that lane, he turns aside. So
I say God often times hedgeth in the ways of men. So he hedged in Ioash, so long
as Iehoiada lived, it is said he did that which was upright in the sight of the
Lord, but after when this hedge was taken away, when he died, he fell to
Idolatry. So much for this time.

SELF-SEEKING Opposite to CHRIST'S INTEREST.
PHILIP. 2. 21. For all men seek their own, and not the things that are Jesus
Christ's.
THe occasion of these words you shall see in the two verses going before them.
The The Apostle tells the Philippians to whom he wrote, that he would send
Timothy to them, which (says he) will be much for your advantage; and he gives
them this reason of it: for says he in the words before, he will be very
diligent to do you any good, to take care of your matters, which he sets out
comparatively, says he I have no man like minded, who will naturally, or
faithfully take care to your things. Now he gives a reason why he says he had
no man like minded to Timothy, that would faithfully and naturally take care
for their matters; for says he, this is the condition of men, this I have
found by experience, every man seeks his own things and not the things of
Jesus Christ.

So you see these words contain a complaint of that common condition that
common frailty, that general desease and corruption to which all men are
subject, every man is apt to seek his own things: every man is apt to it, and
for the most part does it, he seeks his own things, and not the things which
are Jesus Christ's.

The words are so plain that I need not to analyze, or open them, or stand long
upon the exposition. These three things you shall see may very easily be
observed out of them.

First, Whereas the Apostle complains of it as a great fault, and a sin, that
men seek their own things, and not the things of Jesus Christ; one conclusion
hence then is, that

It is every man's duty, or every man ought to seek the things of Jesus Christ
and not his own. Doct.


This you know must needs be a conclusion arising from hence; for if it be the
complaint of the Apostle of the corruption that is in men in this kind: then by
the contrary rule it must be every man's duty to seek the things of Jesus Christ.

Secondly, Though this be the duty of every man, yet when we look to the
execution, and performance of this duty, every man is ready to do the contrary
every man seeks his own things: and because every man does the contrary,
therefore the duty is the more precious. When a man denies himself because
there are so few that deny themselves, that makes self denial to be the more
regarded and esteemed, God makes the more account of it: for he has no need of
such men as will not deny themselves, and seek the things of Jesus Christ.
There is scarce any man but seeks his own things* therefore you need not wonder
why all the world is ready to go in a wrong way, a man in this business has so
few to keep him company. It is a thing that always has been, every man is apt
to seek his own things. Therefore let not a man be discouraged with it, it is
no more then has been, it is no more then you are (...) look for: for the most
seek themselves and their own things. Those that will seek the things of Jesus
Christ, the world accounts them busybodies because they are occupied about
things that the world likes not of, it has been the custom of all times to
seek their own things; and it is in every man's nature thus to do: he that does
best and does deny himself, yet he has the same nature with the rest; so then
that is the second observation, that every man does it, he seeks his own things.

And lastly from this opposition, every man seeks his own things and not the
things of Jesus Christ; there is this third conclusion, that for the most part
our own things, and the things that tend to Jesus Christ and his advantage,
they are contrary and opposite one to the other: for our natures are contrary,
there is an enmity between Christ and us, that which we do for Christ must
needs be contrary to our selves, that which is for the advantage of Christ, for
the most part is for our disadvantage. And the reason is I say because of the
contrariety between our natures and the nature of Jesus Christ and his ways.
Now we will begin with the first, that Doct. It is the duty of every man to
seek the things of Jesus Christ.


It is the duty of every man not to seek his own things, but the things of
Jesus Christ.

It is not only the duty of every man, but it is best for every man to do it.
It is a thing that you are all persuaded of, that you ought not to seek your
own things: and therefore to spend time in proving the point were a needless
labor, our business will be to persuade you to the duty; And to that end, we
will use no more motives, but those in the text. The one is taken from our
selves and the other from Christ. Reas. 1. From our selves.


There is this reason from your selves, why you should seek the things o^
Jesus Christ: because God has commanded you so to do. You know this is the
command, Thou shall love the Lord above all and thy neighbor as thy self.
Christ is to be loved above all, above your selves. Now for the most part when
we hear such a command as this; we look upon it as a legal precept, which only
shows a man his sin, and to be as a Scholemaster, a precept that no man can
keep. But you must know that it is not so: for every command is to be kept by
every regenerate man. It is said that not the least tittle of the Law shall
perish, heaven and earth shall pass away first. The meaning is not that no man
can be saved, nor no man is in Christ, but he that keeps every jot, and little
of the Law: but we must endeavor to keep even the very least tittle of Gods
commands with all our might:

If God will not suffer the least command to pass, but you must bend your
selves with all your strength to keep it, then this which is a main command to
Love God above all, you must think you are bound to keep it, and every
regenerate man does keep it in some measure, he keeps it in sincerity, and
truth with an upright heart, though he cannot rise to that degree, and height
as he should do.

Now I say, it is not only a command, but it is best for every man to deny
himself, and not to seek his own things, partly because his good is contained
in God more then in himself, and so he shall provide better for himself in
self-denial, by seeking God then by looking directly to his own matters. The
being of the beams (you know) are in the Sun more then in themselves. So is
every man's good contained in God from whom it flows, even as the beam does
from the Sun. A man shall provide better for himself in seeking Gods glory then
in looking immediately to his own preservation. Therefore you shall find, Deuteronomy.
10. 13. This is that the Lord thy God requires of thee that thou keep his
commandments Deuteronomy. 10. 13.
that he has given thee for thy wealth. Mark it, the commands of God are given
for our advantage. Whenever a man is a looser by keeping any command, though
it appear so, he is not so indeed, for every command is for our wealth. So I
say it is best for us, partly because our good is contained in God.

And partly also, because God is the end of every creature: now you know the
perfection of every creature stands in obtaining its end. Whatsoever the end of
any thing is, when it has gotten that end, it is brought into a perfect
condition. For there are certain rules that God has given to every creature to
walk by, to attain its end, that in attaining thereof it might attain
perfection; so he has given to the fire, and to the water, etc. when they kept
close to that rule there is the perfection of them. So he has given a rule to
the reasonable creatures to walk by, that is to walk in his commands, now in
keeping close to them that creature attains his happiness, he puts himself into
a happy condition. Now God is not bound to this; because he is the utmost end,
the utmost cause, there is nothing beyond him, and therefore he may do all for
himself: but if the creature do all things for himself, he destroys himself,
because there is a cause, an end beyond him. Now as there is this reason for
the duty, why we should do it in regard of our selves,

So also in regard of Christ. Partly in respect of his 2. In respect of Christ.
love and goodness, he has already showed to us: you know when a man has done
much for one he has reason to respect him. When Christ has done so much for
us, if there were nothing to come there is reason, and justice, and equity to
seek him, to do whatsoever may be for his advantage, that we should seek not
our own things but the things of Jesus Christ. And partly also why we should
seek the things of Jesus Christ, is in regard of the wages which are to come,
they are so large that he is not worthy to have them; he is not worthy to be
saved by him that will not do something for him, that will not deny himself,
and neglect his own things for his sake. So you see what reason there is for
this duty why we should do.

Now to make use of it, if this be a duty that lies upon every man not to seek
his own things, but the things of Use.
Jesus Christ; what remains, but that you consider how you have kept this, and
if you be failing in it, that you stir up your selves to do it in a better
manner then you have done formerly. Let every man therefore ask this question
with himself, have I sought the things of Jesus Christ? have I not many times
sat still for my own ease, for my own safety, for my credit, and profit, when if
I had stirred I might have done something for the advantage of Jesus Christ?
And consider that our behaving of our selves after this manner is not only
sinful, but it is very unreasonable, and disadvantagious for our selves: for
the more we lose for Christ the more we gain; he^ that will be content to be no
body in the flesh, he shall be the more in the spirit. For that rule holds
true, he that will lose his life shall save it: I say it holds true in every
thing else, he that will lose his credit, shall gain his credit: he that will
be content to let go his friends, or profits, or advantages, he shall be a
gainer by it. So that he that is most prodigal of all these things to spend
them for Christ's advantage, he that is most forward to suffer imprisonment, and
loss of goods, to endure infamy and disgrace for Christ's sake, he is the wisest
man, the happiest man, he provides best for himself.

For alas, (my brethren) what is it that we have of all our labors under the
Sun? but only the riches of good works, those only go with us. The good that
we do is only a foundation sure, and steadfast, as you have it, 1 Timothy 6. 19.
Laying up a sure foundation, that is, a foundation upon which you may build.

All other things that you have in this life, are of a contingent nature; but
your good works, the things you do for God, your seeking after the things of
Christ, they are of a sure nature, and will not fail you. Therefore let us
consider what we do in this case, when we come to any business wherein we are
to deny our selves, and let us think thus with our selves, what are these
things that I call mine own? The truth is there is no man that has any thing
that is his own: therefore when there is an occasion offered you to speak any
thing, you ought to say, this is not my credit, this is not my wealth, this is
not my strength; these are not my friends; this is not my estate, but they are
the Lords; and shall I withold them from him, when he stands in need of them?
this is to rob God of his due, it is sacrilege. This consideration will make a
man think that it is reasonable for him to do it when he considers that it is
none of his, but it is Gods.

It is a thing that we seldom consider of, whenever any opportunity comes,
it is as a messenger from God, and tells you that the Lord has need of such a
thing, and will you not bestow on him that which is his own? You know the story
what is said, 1 Chronicles. 29. when the people had 1 Chronicles, 29.
given largely to the Temple of the Lord, says David, we have given thee of
what was thine own, that is there is reason we should do this, we have done no
such great matter, it is thy own, and we have given thee but what way thy own.
So whenever you come to do any thing, you must know whenever the Lord gives
you an opportunity, for the improvement of your health, and credit, and friends
or estate, or whatsoever the Lord proves you by. This is that which is said,
Genesis 27. 1. Genesis 27. 1.
that the Lord would prove Abraham to try him, and he bad him go and offer his
only Son. I say when the Lord calls us to any occasion or opportunity, to deny
our selves, or to part with any thing for the advantage of Christ, at this time
he proves thee what thou will do, and if thou be content to lose thy credit,
to be disadvantaged in thy estate or any other way, he will deal with thee as
he did with Abraham, Abraham did not lose his Son, but he received him again:
so it will be with every one that loses any thing, or parts with any thing
for the advantage of Christ.

Now I beseech you consider this, that so you may quicken your selves to do
this duty. Consider what you are out of Christ, and what you have by being in
Christ, and what great reason there is that you should do all this, and more
for Christ, whenever God calls you to it; what reason there is for you to
part with whatsoever he calls ^or.

But you will say, what are these things of Jesus Christ which I ought to seek?
Quest.


I answer, that you may know it distinctly, the meaning Answ. Things of Jesus
Christ, what.
of it is this, when we are exhorted not to seek our own things, but the things
of Jesus Christ. That is, when any matter of your own, any advantage of your
own, any thing that tends to your own profit, or credit shall come in
competition with any thing that is Christ's, now to let that go, this is to seek
his things, and not your own.

But to pitch you upon some particulars, I will name to you these five.

First of all, if a man's estate come in competition with Christ, that he must
be a loser in that for doing something for Christ: here now to be content to be
a loser in thy estate that thou may advantage Christ, this is not to seek
thy own things, but the things of Christ. You shall see Saint Paul was willing
to do thus, it was his practice, and you shall see his practice in diverse
particulars, 1 Cor. 9. I was content (says he) to take nothing that I might
make the Gospel free, that I might further the Gospel. Thus did Moses, he was
content to let go the treasures of Egypt, and endure afflictions with the
people of God. When the treasures of Egypt, and the honor of being the son of
Pharaohs daughter came in competition with God, he lets them all go. So Heb.
10. 34. it is said of the believers that they suffered the spoiling of their
goods with joy, that is, Heb. 10. 34.
when the falling away from a good conscience, and the spoiling of their goods
me^ together upon a narrow bridge they were willing to suffer the spoiling of
their goods that they might keep close to the profession of their faith:

Again, if a man's credit come in competition with any thing that tends to the
advancement of Christ, now to be content to be despised, to be content to be
trampled on, that Christ may have glory, this is, not to seek a man's self but
the things of Christ. So you see St. Paul was content to pass through evil
report, and good report. And Moses was content not to be accounted the Son of
Pharaohs Daughter. And David was content to be spoken against of great men, and
to be the song of the drunkards, Psalm. 31. 13. Psalm. 31. 13:


Thirdly, if a man's case, and quietness, or convenience, his Wife, or Children,
or all that he has shall come in competition with standing for the truth. Now
to contend earnestly for the faith once given to the Saints, and to let all
these things go, this is to seek the things of Jesus Christ. So did Paul, he
was content to be hated of his own country men the Jews, to be driven from
City to City, and from Country to Country. So did Saint Chrysostom in
Constantinople, when the faction of the Arians prevailed, when it came in
competition, whether he would renounce his Bishopric, or subscribe to the
Arian Heresy, he was content rather to part with all he had, then to submit to
any sinful compliance.

Fourthly, if a man's life come in competition (as often times it does) now to
neglect it, to do as Saint Paul did, my life is not dear to me, that is, I do
not reckon it as a matter of any worth when it comes in competition with the
Lord Jesus Christ.

Lastly, when the doing of any business for the Church and our own business
comes together, now to do as Saint Paul did, 1 Cor. 9. with watchings, and
painfulness, with 1 Cor. 9.
hunger, and thirst, and cold, and nakedness did I serve God and wait upon the
Churches. This taking pains so the Church is the thing that Timothy is
commended for that he did not seek his own things, that is, he was not careful
to further his own matters, but was willing to suspend them in serving the
Church. This is not to seek a man's own things, but the things that are Jesus
Christ's. But this I name to you but in brief, that I might pitch you upon the
particulars, wherein a man is not to seek his own things, but the things of
Jesus Christ.

But the chief thing to be considered is, what it is to seek? for in the duty
there are but two things; the Object, the things you are to seek. And the Act,
what it is To seek, what.
to seek. To seek a man's own things, or the things that are Jesus Christ's, that
is, to do it with all intention, to do it with all earnestness; so the word
signifies, to do things as a man would do them for himself. Therefore you
shall see the Apostle using the same, if you take the word in the former verse,
I have no man like minded, who will faithfully, the word in the Original is,
naturally care for your matters, that is, when a man takes care for the things
of Christ, as he would take care for his own things; for a man naturally looks
to himself and his own matters. So to seek the things of Jesus Christ is to do
them after that manner, and that consists in these three things.

To do it 1 Willingly. 2 Diligently. 3 Faithfully.

First, A man must do it willingly: as you know when a man has any thing to do
for himself, he does it with willingness, this the Lord requires at our hands
to be willing to do them, which is much more then to do them. As the Apostle
says, 2 Cor. 8. 10. It is expedient for you who have begun not only to do,
but to be willing a year 2 Cor. 8. 10.
ago. It is a greater matter to do things with an inward willingness, and an
inward propensnesse of mind then to do the things themselves.

Therefore that condition is required, Jude 3. we are exhorted to contend
earnestly, that is that you do it with much intention of mind; to contend
earnestly as a man that is in an argument contendeth, or as a man that is
wrestling, after this manner you must contend for the common faith. For you
must know that it is not enough for a man simply to do a thing, but he must do
it with such an intention as is required. Therefore Titus 2. God Tit. 2. vlt.
has purified to himself a people, zealous of good works, that is, a people
not only ready to do them, but such as are earnest and desirous to do them;
when a man is inflamed with a strong and earnest affection to do a thing. So we
see in Romans 12. 11. among the exhortations there, Romans 12. 11. 2 Cor. 11. 18.
be ye fervent in spirit, or as the word is, burning in spirit. An example of
this we have in the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 11. 18. you shall there have an
expression of his own mind, in taking care for the things of Jesus Christ. I
am cumbred daily (says he) and have the care of all the Churches. The word in
the Original is, it lies upon me as a continual burden. It is not a thing that
I take up now and then by fits, but it is a thing that lies upon me always, I
am daily cumbred, says he, or I daily take care for all the Churches. My soul
is distracted, for so the word is likewise in the Original, my thoughts are as
it were upon the rack, when I think upon the things that belong to the
Churches. And then he says, Who is offended, and I burn not? that is, when
there is any disadvantage to the Church, when I see any man stumble, it is not
a thing that I look lightly upon, but I take it to heart, I am burned with
grief; that is, it takes a deep impression in me. Therefore you must not think
when you come to do any thing for Jesus Christ, to do it as of necessity: but
you must think, and plot with your selves, as about your own business; you
must seek for occasions, and when you see a door opened, to go in at it: for to
have abilities and not to use them, to have opportunities and not to employ
them, it is another manner of matter then we think it is; for not only thorns
and briars, but unfruitful trees are appointed for burning; and cowardlinesse
in doing duties, deserves a curse as well as the not doing them. Therefore
Judges 6 Curse ye Meroz because Judges. 6.
they came not out to help the Lord against the mighty. A man must not sit
still and say, if such a thing had come in my way, I would have helped the
Lord; but you must go out and seek occasions; this is to do it with
willingness and propensnesse of mind. Therefore the Apostle, Romans 15. 12 I
^aused the Gospel to abound from Jerusalem Romans 15. 12.
to (...): ^^r I was exceeding ambitious to preach the Gospel, not where Christ
had been preached, etc. that is, as an ambitions man, whether he be young or
old is never well, but is always seeking all occasions for his honor and
preferment; so says he, I was ambitious to preach the Gospel every where,
therefore I caused the Gospel to abound: that is the thing you must consider
that it is not enough to do these things, but to do them willingly, there is
that necessity put upon you. You shall see what an accent and Emphasis David
puts upon it, 1 Chronicles. 29. 14. (...) I thank thee that thou have put 1 Chronicles.
29. 14
(...) the heart (...) (...) people to offer willingly: he repeats it five
times; as it he should say, this is all in all that they (...) willingly. So
that therein it is seen that a man does that he does for God with a perfect
heart, when he does it willingly; when he does it otherwise, it is done with an
hypocritical and unsound heart. That is the first thing we must do in seeking
the things of Jesus Christ's we must do them with much intention of mind, wi^^
(...) willingness and forwardness.

Se^ As we must do them willingly, so we must do them diligently: many a man
will say, it may be I do 2 Diligence.
the things, (...) I do them with all my heart, willingly, but now this is
another condition that you do them diligently, Rom* 12 11. be (...) (...) in
doing ser^; and in Romans 12. 11.
Chap. 15. (...) (...) (...), ^e^ him (...) with (...); the like may (...) o^
all duties. For you must know that God observes the manner of doing things as
well as the things. Therefore Revel. 3. he says, I know thy labor. The word
in the Original is such labor is a man takes in harvest, I know how thou
sweatest at the work: so I say it is not enough to do the things except you do
them diligently.

You will say, What is it to do a thing diligently? Quest. Answ.


It is to do it with all our might, Thou shall serve the Lord thy God with all
thy might, that is, all the strength a man has he is to improve it, and to
employ it upon the Lord, and his business. For you must know, every man has a
different strength, one man has more authority, more wit, more liberty of
speech then another. As every man has a different strength, so he must bestow
all his strength; one man may do much more then another, and yet he may do the
thing he does exceeding remissely and negligently. Another man that does a
great deal less, yet doing it diligently, putting forth his whole strength, he
does a great deal more: therefore the Lord requires that every man should do
what is his proportion. Look how much thou go beyond another in thy might,
so thou must go as far beyond him in performance, otherwise it is done
remissely. As now take a child and a Simile.
tall man, that both go to a goal, when the child runs, the man man walks;
the child does it diligently with all his might, whereas the other does it
negligently. So is it when we do not improve all our might we have for the
advantage of the Lords Work. For you must know when any man has to do any
business, he is not to compare himself simply with another, to say another man
does no more: It is no matter what the thing is, but what proportion it holds
with thy strength and ability. When the Widow gave all that she had, the Text
says, That she gave more then they that put more into the Treasury; because it
was the utmost that she could give. As we say he has given most that has
least left behind; so he bestows most upon the Lord that leaves the least of
his strength unimproved.

And again, it requires not only that you put all your Constancy.
strength to it, but that you be constant in doing it; for if a man hold not
out, this man is not diligent, but negligent. It is a usual thing for men in
doing the Lords business to be weary in well doing, to give over welldoing;
therefore you must add that also to it, that if you will do it diligently you
must do it constantly. That was the commendation of Caleb; they that came from
Egypt went a great way in the wilderness, and brake through many difficulties,
but they gave over. Whereas Caleb had a constant spirit which clave to the Lord
that he went through. So the Apostle exhorts them, Heb. 3. Heb. 3.
Confirm your feeble hands, and weak knees, least that which is halting he
turned out of the way. This is accounted negligence, when a man grows weary,
that his hands begin to faint, and he begins to leave his way; therefore to
hold out in well-doing is to do a thing diligently, and this is the second
thing required to seek the things of Jesus Christ. First, To seek them
willingly. And then to do his work diligently.

Thirdly, and lastly, as to do it willingly and diligently, so to do it
faithfully. Many a man may be willing to 3. Faithfully.
do something for Christ, and to be diligent too for the time; but to do it
faithfully, that is without any respect to himself, not for his own ends, but
to do it for the Lord, and for his sake, that is that which is required.
Therefore whereas the word here in the new Translation is translated naturally,
the other Translation has the word faithfully, who will faithfully care for
your matters. So that for a man when he comes to do the things of Jesus Christ
to have an eye to himself, to be considering what will make for my advantage;
what profit shall I have by it? and so to be put on by that motive, this is to
do the work of Christ unfaithfully. And herein our hearts for the most part are
exceeding deceitful, when we have to do any thing for Christ, the flesh in us
is ready to have the first and the chief hand in any such business: that is,
selfrespects, and self-aims are ready to mingle themselves with the best
actions we do, unless we have a narrow eye to them.

You know Iehu did the work of the Lord very diligently, but not faithfully:
for his zeal was not for the Lord, but for himself. They that followed Christ
many of them followed him far; but it was not for him, but for the loaves,
because they were fed with them, and were filled. You see Baalam professed
much, that if Balaak would give him his house full of gold and silver, yet he
would not go from the Word of the Lord; but yet this was not done faithfully,
he had an eye to himself in all this. So I say, a man may do the things of
Christ diligently, and yet not faithfully. Two servants may both be very
diligent in their masters work, and yet there may be a broad difference between
them, the one has indeed an eye to his masters profit, the other to his own.

This is all in all therefore to consider whether the talents that we use, we
use them for our Masters advantage or our own. Thou may do very much, thou
may use thy talent as diligently as any man; yet if thou examine thy heart,
and deal strictly with thy self, thou may find that, these are used for thy
self and not for thy Master, which is the greatest folly in the world. For, my
brethren, what do we gain when we take a great deal of pains for Christ? surely
there is nothing ours, but the sincerity we do it withal. It is for other men's
advantage, the most glorious and specious, works we perform, the greater they
are, the more may be the profit and benefit of the Church by them: but there is
nothing thine own, but thy faithfulness and sincerity in doing them.

Therefore consider this, whether when we do any thing for Christ, we do it
faithfully or no, for in this our hearts are apt to deceive us. How many are
there, that pass not much for the doing of the thing so themselves may have
their end? Diotrophes was willing to work with the Apostle; but it was to have
the pre-eminence. How many great actions are overthrown for want of this
faithfulness that men do not simply do that which they do, but out of
contention, and vain glory they do it? How many great actions I say are
overthrown? So that when two men are both of them alike set to do a thing, both
are willing to do the work, yet because one may not have the praise of it, the
glory of it, because he may not be first, and chief in the business therefore
he lets it go.

I cannot better compare it, then to two men that are to carry a beam in at a
narrow door; both would be first in, Simile.
and when they do so, we see they carry it a cross, and in a twhart manner, and
so they cannot do it: if one would be first, and another second it might be
done with ease. So when the business of Christ is to be done, we go crossly
about it, and the work is left undone, because every one seeks for his own
particular pre-eminence.

But you will say, if it be a thing wherein the heart is so exceeding
deceitful, how shall I find whether I do that Quest.
I do faithfully with a single sincere heart or no?

Consider what thou do when thy own case and Christ's are severed: if thou
find that when thy own credit, Answ. How to know we do the things of Christ
faithfully. Simile.
and profit and advnage is involved in Christ's business, then thou art willing,
and forward in the work of Christ, and not otherwise, thou may suspect thy
self. When one servant follows two Masters that go before, while they go
together it is difficult to know to whom he belongs, but when they part, you
know who the Master is by the servants following of him. So there is a time
wherein Christ, and thy own cause go together, when Religion and thy own credit
go together, but when they are parted, and severed one from another; then
consider which thou followest, whether thou have the same diligence, and
solicitude in the business of Christ, when there is no interest of thy own
joined with it. Moreover consider what thou do, when thou have to do with
people that are ill deserving: for if thou do what thou do for Christ,
though men do not answer thy pains, but carry themselves in a contrary manner
to thee, yet if it be done for Christ thou will continue to do it. That was the
trial of Saint Paul's faithfulness, when the Jews set themselves against him,
and would have pulled him in pieces, yet he continued in the same faithfulness
in his service of Christ, and the Church.

If you shall give over because men use you ill, it is an Argument that you did
what you did not simply for Christ. If you do what you do to get the love, and
credit, and applause of men, when you miss of that you will then give over, and
that is a sign of insincerity.

Again, when an action is done, consider what it is that runs in thy thoughts,
when the business is past, consider about what thy mind is most solicitous,
whether about thy credit, to think what am I thought of? or about thy riches or
honor, what have I gotten by it? Or whether art thou solicitous whether the
business of Christ has succeeded? whether the affairs of the Church has
prospered: for herein is the trial of a man. A man is content to be a losser
for Christ, when he is willing to lose that which is dearest to him. As one
says, it is a man's excellency, to be content to lose his credit with men
rather then his conscience toward God: so I say when a man is careless what
becomes of whatsoever belongs to him, but all his solicitousness, all his
study, and taking care, is for the business of Christ. This was Saint Paul's
case too, he cared not so the work went on, what became of himself. So you see
here what the condition is that is required, to seek the things of Jesus
Christ, you must seek them diligently, and faithfully, that is you must seek
them as you seek your own things: for when a man has any thing to do of his
own, he does it willingly, and diligently, and faithfully, after that manner
you ought to do the things of Jesus Christ.

But you will say, this is a hard, and difficult thing for a man to seek the
things of Jesus Christ after this Object.
manner, who is able thus to do them? So to do them, in sincerite, and with
diligence, and faithfulness, as not to mingle any self-respect, or aim at his
own ends?

I answer, it is true, and the holiest men that are, have some such tincture in
their best actions; but they are not to be discouraged, so it be not the chief:
but they are to be humbled, and to strive against it. And this use (by the way)
you may make of it, that a man may see how little cause he has to be puffed
up, or to be conceited for his best actions, if he consider how unfaithfully he
has done them; how unwillingly, how negligently. But I say though these things
be in us, we are not to think that the things we do are presently done in
hypocrisy. The thing that we are to look to is that those aims, and respects
to our selves that are mingled with our best actions, do not prevail that we do
not allow them in our selves.

But you will say, how shall we bring our hearts to this, not to seek our own
things but the things of Jesus Quest.
Christ?

In a word this you must do, you must give your own selves to Christ: when a
man has once given himself to Answ.
Christ, he will be ready to give all that is his. In 2 Cor. 8. The Apostle had
occasion to speak of their readiness to supply the necessities of the Saints,
and he gives this as a reason thereof, because they had given themselves to
Christ. So the way to prepare your hearts to seek the things of Jesus Christ,
is to give your selves to Christ. Therefore no natural man can do it, because
he makes himself the end, he sets himself up for his end, because he has not
given himself to Christ. But a regenerate man is able to give all to Christ,
because he has already given himself to Christ.

But you will say, what is it to give a man's self to Quest.
Christ?

When a man is persuaded of this, that Christ will take care of him, and
provide better for him then Answ. To give our selves to Christ, what.
he can himself, he is willing to submit to Christ, and give himself to Christ.
A man will never go off of his own bottom till he be assured of a better
foundation.

And partly also it is done by changing a man's opinion of himself: for every
unregenerate man has a different opinion of himself to that which he has when
he is regenerate. One man thinks that that which consists in his private, and
outward happiness and safety, and therefore his profit, or credit, or
whatsoever may make up that, that he reckons himself, and that he will build
upon. But when a man is in Christ his opinion is changed, there is a new part,
a regenerate part in him, and where that is in a man, that he reckons to be
himself. What a man has an opinion to be himself, whatsoever makes up that
self that he will draw to himself. When a man reckons the regenerate part to be
himself, he is willing to be a loser by all other things, so that that self may
be a gainer: because he knows that all this while is no loser in himself, so
long as he grows in grace, and keeps a good conscience; so long as he knows,
and is persuaded that God will take care of him, far better then himself can
do, so long the building up of himself goes forward, and he takes care for
nothing else besides. This is for a man to give up himself to Christ. ^2. It
must be done with all in ention.


Secondly, it is not enough to give up a man's self to Christ: for though his
heart be prepared to seek the things of Christ, yet he must give diligence to
intend it. he must pray that God will set it into his heart, and keep it in his
heart, that upon all occasions when he is put to it he may 1 Chronicles. 29.
seek the things of Jesus Christ, that as you have it, 1 Chro. 29 It is David's
prayer Lord (says he) I beseech thee to keep this in the purpose of the heart
of this people for ever. When they had offered willingly: he knew that that was
an extraordinary matter and would soon slip out of their minds, thereforehe
prays that God would keep it in the purpose of their hearts for ever.

Now when a man seeks his own things, it is natural for a man, and that a man
does easily, but to seek the things of Jesus Christ that is above nature, and
then there must be much intention; a man must have something in him to move him
to mind it most, and above all other things. When a boat goes against the
stream, and against the wind you know there must be much labor Simile.
to drive it on. So to seek the things of Christ, it being above the the stream
of nature, there must be anintention from above, you must beseech God to keep
it in the intention of your hearts.

Now again to these two, when a man has given 3. It must be done by faith.
up himself to Christ, and when he does mind it, and intend it, and pray for
it, you must add to this faith without which no man can do it: for this
objection presently comes: what; must I seek the things of Jesus Christ, and
not mine own, what will then become of me? how shall I provide for my self, or
for my family, and those that depend upon me? Now there must be faith to give
this answer, the Lord will 1. In Gods promises.
provide for thee. For till a man think that there is another that has will
and power to take care for him, and to provide for him, it is impossible that
he should seek the the things of that other: but believe this once that God
will take care for thee, and then thou will be content to deney thy self. As if
a Master should say to his servant, be you diligent in my service, I will take
care for your meat and drink, and clothing, and when your apprentiship is out,
I will give you sufficient to live upon: if the servant believe this, he will
be willing to neglect all other things, and to seek his Masters profit, and to
intend his Masters business. So here we should seek the things of Jesus Christ,
for says he I will provide for you. I will take care for you, you shall want
nothing in this present life, you shall have all things necessary, and when
your appentiship is at an end, I will provide an inheritance for you. If you
will believe these things, and these promises, you will then seek the things of
Jesus Christ, and not your own things.

You have a promise for this, Mat. 6. seek ye first the Math. 6.
Kingdom of God, and the righteousness thereof, that is, mind this one thing,
seek not your own things, seek the Kingdom of God, and then all things else
shall be ministered unto you: that is, God will undertake to provide for you the
things of this life, you shall have enough of them. Now to believe this
promise, this faith in the promise, is that which prepares, and enables the
heart not to seek its own things, but the things of Christ.

Now you must have not only faith in the promise, 2. In Gods providence.
but faith in the providence of God: for a man may believe the promise, but
because he does not believe the particular providence of God, that he is not
only able, but that he does bring things to pass, and that all things are
guided by him, he is ready to doubt and to fear a loss if he seek the things of
Jesus Christ. As Jacob, and Rebecka, they had both faith in the promise, but
because they had not a faith in the particular providence of God about the
bestowing of the blessing, therefore we know how they missed. So Moses had
faith in the promise that God would provide meat for a months time, but he
knew not how; therefore you see how many objections he brought, shall all the
fishes of the sea be brought together? and all the beasts of the field? etc.
Therefore I say, put these together, when a man has faith in both, that is in
the promise of God, and in the particular providence of God, that enableth a
man not to seek his own things.

You shall see them joined together, 2 Timothy 3. for I 2 Timothy (...)
know (says the Apostle) whom I have trusted, and I am persuaded that he is
able to keep that which I have committed to him to that day. Mark it, as if he
should say do not wonder at me that I am willing to lose my liberty, and my
ease, or to endure so much cold, and nakedness, to expose my self to so many
perils as I do: for I trust God, I believe God, I have committed my safety and
my life, and my health, and all that belongs to me to him, and I know he is
able to keep it. So I say now when you are about any business of Christ in
which there is any difficulty, or any hardness; or any likelihood of losing any
thing, except thou believe the particular providence of God, and can commit
that which thou have to God, and say I dare trust him, and I know that he will
keep it for me, thou will never be able to deny thy self, and to do the things
of Jesus Christ: but if thou think, that what thou losest for God, God will
keep it for thee, thou will say thus wi^h thy self, I will commit this unto
God, I know it shall be reserved for me, and therefore whatsoever becomes of
these things, I will do the work, I will do the business of Christ, I will
employ my self in his service* this makes a man bold in the most difficult
cases. So David, I will lay me down (says he) and sleep, because the Lord
sustaineth me. That is, I care not for any thing, I have committed my self, and
my safety, and all unto God; and therefore when his heart was quieted, and
settled upon this that he knew wh^m he had trusted; he had faith in God, in his
promise, and in his providence, he had ground enough for rest. This is the
third thing that prepares us to give up our selves to Jesus Christ.

Now fourthly, We must add to our faith Love, for Love enableth a man to seek
the things of Jesus Christ. 4. By love. (...) Cor. 13.
Therefore, 1 Cor. 13. it is said that Love seeks not her own things. If you
would bring your hearts not to seek your own things, but the things of Christ,
get Love. That is, you must know that self-love seeks its own things: and the
more self-love is in any man, the more respect he has to himself, the more he
seeks his own things, which tend to his own advantage, but the love of another
makes a man seek the things of another, it makes a man bountiful, as Saint Paul
says, I am ready to be bestowed for your sakes. And therefore you have that
saying that love ed^fieth; that is, it makes the magistrate to take care for
the good of the people, the Minister for his charge, etc.

The Mother and the nurse, where they love, you see what pains they take, what
neglect they express of themselves, and all, that they may do good to the
Child: for that is the nature of love; And therefore when we do not seek the
things of Christ, it is an argument that we want the love of Christ, and the 2
Cor. 5.
love of God. You see the Apostle Paul, 2 Cor. 5. he gives this reason why he
sought the things of Christ with the neglect of himself. The Love of Christ
constrains me says he. As if he should say, though I undergo much scorn,
and discredit, and loss in the world: yea I am content to be thought to be out
of my wits, to be accounted any thing: for the love of Christ constrains me;
that is, it makes me ready to do any thing, seeing it is for Christ and his
advantage, I am willing to be so accounted of. Now how came he to this love of
Christ? why thus we judge (says he) that if Christ died for us, etc. So that
if you would bring your hearts not to seek your own things; but the things of
Jesus Christ, you must labor to have your hearts enflamed with the love of
Christ, and that you may do so, use the means that Saint Paul lays down; he
died for me, he is worthy of it, he deserves it of me, he has done this, and
this for me: therefore there is reason I should no longer live to my sel^;
therefore there is reason I should seek his things, that I should do his work.
Thus to stir up our hearts to love the Lord Jesus, is the means ^o prepare us
to seek him. And so you see the business we have to do: we are to seek the
things of the Lord Jesus, willingly, diligently, and faithfully. And also what
it is that prepares, and disposes the heart so to do.

First, to give up our selves to Christ.

Secondly, to labor to have it kept in the purpose of our hearts.

Thirdly, to have faith in the promises, and providence of God.

Lastly, to have Love to the Lord Jesus. And so much for this point, and for
this time.

PRAYERS PREVALENCY.
2 CHRONICLES. 32. 24, 25. And in those days Hezekias was sick unto the death; and
he prayed to the Lord who spoke to him, and gave him a sign, but Hezekias did
not render according to the mercies bestowed upon him, but his heart was lifted
up, and wrath came upon Israel.
WE made some entrance into these words in the morning; In those days Hezekiah
was sick to the death. Those words we have done withal. And he prayed to the
Lord: hence we observed this: That Prayer is the chief means to obtain any
thing at Gods hands. (...).


It was the means whereby Hezekiah obtained his recovery when he was sick to
the death. So it is a general rule that prayer is the chiefest means of all
other to obtain any thing at Gods hands. The reasons of it we gave in the
morning, we came to apply it. And the first Use was this. If it be the chiefest
means of all other, therefore Use. To esteem our prayers.
we should learn to esteem of our prayers more then we do, to set them at a
higher rate, to know what the efficacy of prayer is. When prayers are performed
in a customary negligent manner; when men think it may be they will be
answered, and it may be they will not, it may be they will do them good, it may
be not, no marvel if they miss of the effect. If men did believe that prayer
were so effectual to bring their enterprises to pass, they would surely be
more frequent and fervent in this duty. We showed you in the morning what the
efficacy of prayer was, we purpose to repeat nothing.

Only there is an objection or two, that we will answer, and so pass from
this point.

First, This may be objected, how can prayer be so effectual a means to obtain
any thing at Gods hands, when Object.
the Lord is purposed to do what he will do, and how can the entreaty of a weak
man change the purpose of God, or altar his mind? he knows what we have need of
beforehand, before we ask, and God is subject to no alteration?

To this I answer, It is true, when we seek to the Lord by prayer, he is not
changed by any of our petitions that Answ. God is not changed by our prayers
but our selves.
we make to him; but the change is wrought upon us; because we are made more
fit to receive mercy from him then before we were. Simile.
As for example, When a patient desires his Physician, to give him a cordial, to
give him some restoring physic, something that is pleasant to him; The
Physician delays, and defers, he will not for the present hearken to his
request, at length he does it. Why is it? not because the Physician is altered,
but because there is an alteration in the patient; he is now purged, and
vomitted; his body is cleansed, and so made fit to receive the cordial,
therefore the Physician yields to his request: there is some suitableness now
between him, and the physic which he requires: there is no alteration in the
Physician, but in the patient. So when we seek any thing at Gods hands we do
not cause him to alter his mind, but there is a change wrought in us: so that
when we think we bring God to us by our prayers, we rather bring our selves to
God. That is, when we contend with God in prayer, and use arguments to persuade
him, those arguments persuade our selves to repentance, to faith, to more
obedience and willingness to serve him, and so our hearts are drawn more near
to him; when we think we draw God near to us, in this action we draw our selves
near to him, and when our hearts are drawn near to him, when our faith is
strengthened by the arguments that we use, then the Lord is moved to do that
which before he was not moved to do. Not because he is altered, or any way
changed, but because the change is in us, we are more fit to receive the mercy
that we beg for then before.

Again Secondly, it may be objected, many obtain Object.
mercies, and blessings at Gods hands without prayer, therefore it seems that
prayer is not so great a means to obtain mercies; because they are ours
sometimes without prayer.

I answer it is true, men may have, and have usually Answ. Mercies bestowed
without prayer are not blessings.
many great mercies bestowed upon them without prayer, but there is a great
deal of difference: because that mercy which is obtained by prayer, it comes
with a blessing and it comes by virtue of the promise that the Lord has made.
And it is one thing to receive the same mercy in a way of blessing, and another
thing to receive it i^n ordinary course. The same comfort may come to one man
with a blessing, and may be conveyed to another man with a curse. There is a
twofold way of Gods bestowing of mercies. One is when he conveyes them to a
man by virtue of a promise. Another is when he bestows them by a common
providence. When God dispenses mercies by a common providence, thou must not
think thy self to be such a gainer in the receiving of such a mercy when thou
have not sought the Lord for it: it may be thou have more cause to judge thy
self better in the want of that mercy. Ahab had been better to have wanted a
vineyard. Jeroboam had better to have wanted the Kingdom. Gehazi had better to
have wanted Naamans courtefie; there goes a curse with those things that we
have in that manner, when we have them without prayer, or when we have them by
a common providence, when we receive them in the neglect of this duty; and yet
in the mean time we may have as much as others. And though this be that which
men are ready to object, yet this is the way to forfeit all that they have.

As you know when men will be ready to take in their Simile.
goods at the Custom-house, and to steal the Custom, ofttimes it is the way to
lose all the whole freight, and to for feit their whole venture. So it is here,
when we use the means that God has appointed, and walk in his way, and observe
his ordinances, then we shall have mercies at Gods hands. And when God bestows
them not in mercy as a blessing (for so he does not except you seek to him;)
you must needs conclude, that you not only have them as a curse, but in having
them out of his way, you forfeit all the rest. Therefore I say prayer indeed is
the means to obtain any thing at Gods hands. Hezekiah prayed, and he was
delivered.

But here, one causion is to be added, and that is, What prayer obtaines
blessings.
that it is not every kind of prayer, it must be such a prayer as the Lord
looks for at ^ur hands: it must be a prayer so qualified as he has appointed;
for though it be true that prayer be the key that opens the door into the Lords
treasury, and when we go about to open this lock, we must have this key,
otherwise we go in a wrong way, yet faith is the hand that must turn this key.
There are certain conditions required in prayer. Every customary formal,
ordinary prayer will not prevail with God. No; (...) Saint Paul says, I serve
him night and day, but I serve him in the spirit, you must pray in the spirit;
that is, when you pray to the Lord you must pour forth your spirits to him in
your petitions: your suites that you make to him must not be such only as your
understandings dictate to you; but the will and affections, the intentions of
your souls must go together in the performance of the duty, otherwise it is but
an hypocritical performance of the duty. For this is hypocrisy, Hypocrisy,
what.
when a man is neither willing to omit the duty altogether nor careful to do it
in that manner that he ought. Therefore, you must know that you may make a
prayer that is but the expression of your (...) and will he think you receive
such a prayer as the No, your prayers must be an expression of those holy
^esir^^, that arise from the regenerate part, it must be the voice of the
spirit in you: that is, the voice of the regenerate part stirred up, and acted
by the Holy Ghost. When your prayers are such prayers (though it be true (...)
flesh is mingled with them) they will prevail: for that is still required.

Therefore I say every prayer will not prevail, it must be such a kind of
prayer as God appoints. Now why has God appointed prayer? It is that our
hearts may be quickened and drawn near to the Lord, that our hearts may be put
into a fitter frame of prayer. And therefore when thou shall pray, and thy
heart* never a whit the warmer, never a whit the nearer drawn to God by it, the
business is not done. For the same rule is true in this as in other things; a
business we say is not done, when the end is not obtained, when the enterprise
is not brought to pass. So I say, you have not prayed, say what you will,
express what you will except your hearts are made warmer by it, and drawn
nearer to God by it, and brought to a better frame by it. When you edify your
selves, this is the prayer God accepts.

Therefore we must take heed of that common error, that because we hear that
prayer will prevail; therefore we use some certain formalities, and make some
petitions, and so we do make account to prevail with God; this is the common
error of people: we are deceived in this, it is not every kind of prayer that
will do it. An ordinary prayer would not have recovered Hezekiah, and restored
him to health. It was the fault of Gehazi when he had got the staff, he thought
to recover the child: but he wanted Elisha's spirit. A man may make a prayer to
God, but when he wants the spirit of prayer, he cannot expect an answer: for
the promise is not made to such: Therefore when we deliver this point to you,
that prayer is an effectual means to prevail with God for any thing, you must
understand that those conditions must accompany it that the Lord requires. And
so much for this point, he prayed to the Lord, Who spoke unto him.


We must be very brief in this, because we hasten to the next verse. Two things
we may observe out of these words. First, That

We ought to observe what answer the Lord gives to our prayers. Obser: We ought
to observe Gods answer to our prayers.


You see the Holy Ghost notes it here, he prayed to the Lord, and the Lord gave
him a good answer, he told him that the thing he desired should be done; I say
we should learn when we seek to the Lord, to consider what answer we have from
him. Otherwise we do as children that Simile.
shoot arrows, and consider not where they light. When we send our prayers, and
consider not what answer they have; it is an argument that we do it not in
faith, we do it not diligently, but in a negligent manner. When a Fowler lays
baits and snares to catch birds, if he believe them to be effectual, he will be
still looking to them, to see whether any thing be taken or no, to see what
success he has. When we come to call upon the Lord, we should consider
whether our prayers prevail, what success they have. You see Elias when he
prayed to the Lord, he sent his servant to see what answer the Lord had given;
and he sent him seven times to see whether any cloud appeared: he was very
dilegent to consider, whether the Lord gave him any answer to his prayers.
Whenever therefore we call upon the Lord, we should observe that.

For indeed in this our walking with God does consist: when we converse with
the Lord from day to day as we ought; It stands not in this only, that we open
our minds to him, and make our requests known to him; but that we should
consider what the Lord does unto us back again. If the Lord grant our requests,
we ought to take notice of it, that we may praise him, and give him thanks. If
he do not answer them, that we may consider what the cause is. Many causes it
may be there are why the Lord does not hear. It may be thou do not pray
aright. It may be thou retainest the love of some particular sin in thee. It
may be God does it for the trial of thee. It is good for thee to observe. When
any thing falls upon men amiss, and contrary to their expectation, or to their
prayers, they are ready to attribute it to other causes: it is good rather to
say that thou have prayed amiss, and that is the cause of it. When a man is
distempered in his health, either he will say that he has not taken physic,
or else it was not physic fit for him; it is still forgotten whether he has
prayed to God, or whether he has prayed amiss. In James 4. there the cause is
Jam. 4.
given, you have either not prayed, or prayed amiss, you ask and receive not,
because you ask amiss; therefore you do not obtain. It may be I say that that
may be the cause why thy prayers are not heard, that thou prayest amiss.

Therefore you should do in this case, as a fisherman does that has cast a
bait, and has waited long, and nothing Simile.
taken; he takes up the angle, and sees whether or no the bait be well placed,
and whether things be in the right order or no. When we see we do not obtain
any thing at Gods hands by our prayers, that we have sought the Lord, and got
no answer; let us look well to our prayers, and see whether there be not
something amiss there.

Besides, it may be when thou prayest, thou art mistaken in the thing thou
ask; it may be the thing thou desire is not good for thee: for there are
many cases wherein we seek to the Lord, wherein we are persuaded that if we had
it, it would be good for us; but if it were granted it may be it would be our
undoing. The Lord denies many things to a man in mercy, as he grants many
things to men in judgment. It may be thy great advantage that though thou
pray, and pray earnestly, yet thy requests are denied.

Again, it may be the Lord has done the thing, but in another manner then thou
expectest: many times the same thing is done, though not in the same fashion. A
man desires money and riches, it may be the Lord denies him that, and gives him
meat, and drink, and clothing. A man desires his enemies may be at peace with
him, God denies him this it may be, but he gives him a helmet to bear it off;
and so for other things. I say it is to be considered that the Lord may do the
same thing in another manner, though it be not in the same kind that we expect.

Besides, God may do it by another means then we look for. Commonly we pitch
upon some means, which we think, if it fail, all is gone, but the Lord may go
another way to work. I will instance no more in these things; for this is not
the thing that I must stand upon. Only I say that when we make our prayers to
God, we must consider what answer we have of them. And this we should do upon
this occasion of Thanksgiving After the great plague. 1625.
, when we have sought to the Lord in prayer, and fasting, as we have done, we
are now to consider what answer the Lord has given: he has removed the
judgment: we must set it down among the memorandums of his mercy, that he has
heard our prayers and healed our land. But I say, I must not stand upon this.
Doct. When we pray to God he is ready to hear.


The second thing that is to be observed is this. And the Lord spoke to him.
Observe, that

When we pray to the Lord, he is exceeding ready to hear.

As we see he was ready hear to hear Hezekiah. And so David, and Asa, and
Iehoshaphat, so he will do to us to the end of the world, when men seek to him.
Only, this must be considered, that the Lord has an ear open to our prayer:
but if it be no prayer, if it be but a liplabour, if it want the conditions of
prayer, the Lord rejects it. And this is not because he hearkens not to it, but
because it is no prayer. Therefore make account when thou go about to pray,
that God does incline his ear to hear, that is, he does not only hear the
prayers of his servants but also of those that are carnal men, of those that
are strangers, and that are without the covenant as yet. As you shall see, 2 Chronicles. 12. It is said that Rehoboam, and the Princes humbled themselves, and
sought to 2 Cor. 12.
to the Lord, and Rehoboam was not upright hearted: yet because he and the
Princes did humble themselves, the Lord did not destroy them but sent them
deliverance. So did he to Ahab, he heard him. And so it may be the Lord has
done with us in removing this judgment, though it may be our prayers, and our
humiliation, and fasting have been but overly, and perfunctory: yet it may be
the Lord has heard us: for he is ready to hear prayers. Although men's hearts
be not humbled aright in their prayers, yet when men are humbled in any manner
before him to show that he is ready to hear prayers, he hears them.

And this is a thing that should wound our hearts, and break them more then any
thing in the world to make us see that the Lord is patient, and long suffering:
that though the humiliation of men he not sound, and according to what he
expects, yet he is ready to remove the judgment.

And this use we should further make of it, that if the Lord hear when
humiliation is not found, what will he do when our prayers are servent and
sound, when our humiliation is perfect? This is a thing that we ought to take
notice of that when the Lord is so ready to hear, we should be encouraged to
pray, and to seek unto him. For when the Lord shall do as he has done with us,
when he shall stay the plague; when he shall say to it, as he does to the
raging sea, thus far thou shall go, and no further, when we look upon this, and
observe this dealing of the Lord, we should have a store house of such
experiments as these, that we may learn thereby to know the Lord, and to trust
him; that we may be encouraged thereby to seek unto him: For when such actions
as these are slighted, we take his name in vain, and the Lord will not hold us
guiltless if we take his Name in vain: no more will he if we pass by these
actions of his without taking notice. Therefore it is well that such a day as
this is set apart, that we may remember it, and consider what answer the Lord
gives our prayers, and acknowledge it: but I will not stand to enlarge this.

The next words are, And he gave him a sign.


You know there is a double ground of asking a sign; A sign asked on a double
ground.
One is when a man asks a sign, to tempt the Lord. As the Jews asked a sign,
not out of a desire to profit by it, but because they would see what the Lord
would do: and this Christ denied them, this is a sinful asking of a sign. There
is another asking of a sign, when it is to confirm our faith, when the
intention is good, and the heart is upright. Thus Hezekiah asked a sign, and
the Lord gave him a sign; hence observe, that

The Lord tenders a weak faith.

He will not quench the smoking flax, nor break the Obser. The Lord tenders a
weak faith.
bruised reed: but he is ready to supply it, when it is but as a grain of
mustard seed. When Hezekiah had not faith enough to believe what the Prophet
had told him from the mouth of the Lord, the Lord added a sign. But I come to
the next words.

And Hezekiah did not render according to the mercies the Lord bestowed upon
him.

Whence this is the observation I will deliver to you, that

When the Lord bestows a mercy, he looks for praise and Doct. The Lord looks
for thankfulness answerable to his mercies.
thankfulness, and that it should bear a proportion to the blessing received.

For so the words are brought in, Hezekiah prayed and the Lord answered him,
and gave him the thing he desired: but Hezekiah rendered not to the Lord
according to the Mercies bestowed upon him, implying that the Lord looked for
something at his hands, he expected that he should be thankful: Hezekiah was
ready to glorify himself, when the Amhassadors came from the King of Babylon,
and he did not render according to the mercies received. This the Lord
observed, and it is set down, noting that when the Lord bestows a mercy, he
looks that we should be thankful, and that our thankfulness should be according
to the mercies. This is a point that needs no proof, that the Lord looks
for thankfulness. Only I will show you why this is a thing that the Lord makes
so great account of.

You must consider, that this duty of thankfulness of Thankfulness a free duty.
all other that we can offer to the Lord, it is the most free, it is the
greatest testimony of sincerity and ingenuity in us, for when we pray to the
Lord it may proceed out of self love: but when we are thankful, that comes out
of love to the Lord: prayer may tend to our own profit, but thankfulness tends
to Gods Glory: therefore we should be the more abundant in this duty: because
the nature of this duty is such as is more commendable, it is more free, it is
a testimony of more sincerity and ingenuity in us. Besides it is a duty that
stirs us up more to think well of the Lord and to speak well of him; for when
we come to give thanks for mercies, it pitcheth our thoughts upon his goodness,
and upon the great works he has done for us; and this causes us to think
better of the Lord, and makes us the more willing to obey him, and therefore it
is an acceptable duty.

Again it is a commendable thing, Psalm. 33. 1. Rejoice ye righteous: for it is
a comely thing to praise the Lord. That is, Psalm. 33. 1.
it is a duty of that nature, that it is not only comely at some times; as
things are comely commonly with reference: for nothing in it self is comely but
in reference to such and such things: but now thankfulness is of that nature
that it is always beautiful, and comely at all times; because it i^ simply so,
and therefore it continues for ever. You know it is the commendation of love,
that it shall continue when prophecy, and faith, and other graces shall fail:
so it is the commendation of thankfulness that even in heaven it is comely; for
there we shall praise the Lord for ever.

But now you must know that the Lord does not only look for thankfulness, but
that we should render according to the mercies we have received: so that in our
thankfulness there must be these four conditions.

First, you must consider that when you come to give 4 Conditions in
thankfulness.
thanks for any mercy to the Lord; it is not such a freewill offering, as that
you may choose whether you will do it or no: but you must know that you are
bound to it: 1. It must be done of necessity.
therefore this word yielding here, it shows that it was such a debt as
Hezekiah did owe to the Lord. When you are to give thanks therefore, you must
not go about this duty as if you might do it, or not do it, and it is no great
matter: but that it is such a thing as the Lord requires. For when the Lord
bestows any mercy upon us, he keeps this property still in his own hands to
have thanks rendered to him. Suitable praise, and thanksgiving is the rent and
fine (as I may say) which the Lord would have us give him for all the things we
enjoy. Now when we do not give him praise, we with hold that from him which is
his due. As when a rent is due to a Landlord, and is not paid him, you detain
that from him which is his right. And you see in this verse that when Hezekiah
did not render according to the mercies received, wrath came upon him. When
wrath shall come upon a man for neglecting of a duty, it is an argument, that
it is not so free as that he might neglect it if he please; but that he must do
it of necessity. This is the first thing that you are to consider that the Lord
requires it exactly at your hands, it is a thing that you owe to the Lord.

Secondly, you must render according to the mercies 2. Proportionable to
mercies received.
received; that is, there must be a suitableness and proportion, between your
thankfulness and the mercies bestowed. Wherein two things are to be observed.
One is when you have many mercies you must be much in thankfulness, when all
that you have are mercies, you must always be giving thanks. You shall see it, 1
These. 5. In all things give thanks: for that is the will of God toward you,
that is, it is not enough to be thankful to God for some mercies, no nor for
mercies in general, to say, God be thanked for all his benefits, and so to name
them in the gross; but in all things give thanks; that is, for every particular
thing, for every mercy received. And this is a special thing, and a thing that
we are exceedingly apt to fail in, that we do not give thanks for all things.
If we could come once to take notice, and to particularize the variety of
mercies that we have received; they would be as so many sparks to kindle a
flame of love, and to knit us to the Lord, when as it may be mercies in the
general will not so much affectus. And besides when we give thanks so in the
general only, we are apt to forget them: but when we give thanks in particular
for things, this quickens us, and keeps us near to the Lord. Therefore you must
remember this, that in your giving thanks, you are to remember every thing in
particular, to render to the Lord according to the mercies bestowed.

Again, Thirdly, according to the mercies received. 3. According to the
greatness of mercies.
This is another condition, that the extent of your thankfulness be according
to the greatness of the mercies; For you shall observe in the Scriptures, that
when blessings are there mentioned, the Lord sets an ac^ upon the special
benefits; when he names what he had done for his people, as his people of
Israel, I brought you out of Egypt, and delivered you from Pharaoh, these, and
these great mercies I wrought for you, The Lord looks for great thankfulness
for great mercies. So when he speaks to David I took thee from the Ewes with
young and gave thee the Kingdom, etc. These great mercies. As you must be
thankful for all, so you must render according to the greatness of them. This
mercy bestowed upon Hezekiah was a great mercy, and that he was not thankful
for it accordingly, the Lord took it ill at his hands. Therefore that you may
fulfill this condition, you ought to look back to the former passages of your
lives, and consider what notable blessings you have received, what great
deliverances. And still remember that as the mercies go beyond them which
others have, so we must go beyond them in thanksgiving; for we ought to render
to the Lord according to the mercies received.

Fourthly, This is also required, that it be presently done; but Hezekiah did
not render according to the mercies 4. Presently;
received. It might have been said though Hezekiah had not yet done it, yet he
might do it afterward; for the Ambassadors came to him immediately after his
recovery: yet because he did not do it at that time, but deferred it, you see
the Lord takes the deferring to do it for an omission of it. The Lord looked
for this at his hands, that as he had received great mercies from him, so he
should be careful to render thanks, and to render it presently. It is a sin
against God in a special manner, although we should perform a duty, yet to put
it off and not perform it in due season. Every duty we perform ought to have
right circumstances: the very deferring of our thankfulness is that which
debaseth, and lesseneth it as well as the omission of it. David when he would
show himself thankful for the mercies he had received, he would not go to bed,
nor suffer his eyes to slumber, till he had found out a place for God. We
should therefore take heed of delays in this kind.

When we go about any ill action indeed it is good to delay; but in the service
of the Lord the more have the better. In the service of the Devil, and sin, the
more have the worst speed. To use an argument from the greater to the less. As
we see in Abraham there was two great commands that he had: the one was to put
away Ishmael; The other to offer Isaac: The Text notes this that in both of
them, he rose early, he did not defer it: For although they were duties very
contrary to his flesh, as he was a man: yet because the Lord commanded it, he
did them speedily. I say, if in these duties, (which were burdensome, and hard
duties,) it is noted in the text that Abraham did them speedily: what ought we
to do in the duty of thankfulness?

It was the commendation of Abraham's servant that he would not eat nor drink
till he had done his Masters business, and declared his message. When we have
business of the Lords to do, it is a sign of diligence to do it speedily. Why
is that noted in the servant of Abraham? Is it not for our learning? These four
things therefore are to be observed.

Now to apply this. If this be a thing that the Lord (...).
looks for at our hands, that we render according to the mercies received: Then
let every one of us, consider whether we have answered this expectation of the
Lord or no? Among men there is nothing so grevious as when their expectation is
crossed. When a man expects a thing from his Wife, or his Friend or his Child,
and receives not according to that expectation, there can be nothing more
grievous. When we answer not the Lords expectation, it causes his wrath to be
kindled. 4. In what cases God expects extraordinary thanks.


Now you shall find that in these cases, in case of great affliction, in case
of great deliverance, in case of great means; in all these cases the Lord
expects great thankfulness. When the Lord sends afflictions, and we do not
make use of them, when we are not drawn in by them, when we are not wrought
upon by them: This is a thing that provokes him to anger. You know what is said
of Ahaz, that when he was afflicted, he was worse, and worse. This is King
Ahaz, he rebelled yet more and more: A brand is set upon him. The Lord looked
for fruit from the fig tree, and when he found it not, he cursed it.

When the Lord shall send such a mercy as he has now to us, to remove this
visitation, be sure the Lord looks now for something more then ordinary at your
hands. Consider therefore how you answer his expectation.

And if you say, every one of us has not such interest in it: Those that have
been in the danger, and been in the fire, and have escaped out of it, let them
look to it. No, my brethren let us know that every one of us have an interest
in it: for let me ask you, When the Lord sends a sickness, and it lights but
upon one place of the Kingdom, yet the Lord is at controversy with the whole
Nation, he is at war with the whole land. For the end of a plague is to
discover the wrath of God, and that he is displeased with the whole people. Now
consider with thy self when the Lord has a controversy with the Land, who is
he that should answer this? there is no action of a whole body so considered
that can be expected, but every particular man, must take notice of it; and if
every particular man why does it not belong to thee as well as to another? The
Lord looks for this at the hands of every man that he should consider his
dealing in sending this sickness, and visitation, and that he should consider
again his mercy, in removing it to humble himself under the one, and be
thankful for the other.

And this thankfulness is to be inward, and in truth. I say this belongs to
every one of us. And remember, that if we answer not his expectation, wrath
will return upon us, as it is said it did upon Hezekiah as the text says, I
confess we have cause to fear that the Lords expectation is not answered among
us, that we have not profited by this judgment as we ought. Let us remember
this, that if we have not, a worse thing will befall us. For it is a usual thing
with the Lord to send diverse afflictions, to take away one to try us, and to
make known his patience, and if we do not amend, then lesser wedges make way
for greater, Levit. 26. Ier. 34.
as it is Levit. 26. If ye return not I will send greater judgments, I will
plague you seven times more. That in Ier. 34. is worthy our observation; when
the Lord had sent Nebuchadnezar to beseige Jerusalem; upon the Covenant that
they made with the Lord though it were feigned, the Lord drew him back, and set
them at liberty: but afterward, because they did not keep their promise, and
observe the Covenant that they had made, the Lord sent him the second time, and
destroyed them utterly.

Do we know what the Lord will do yet further? The Lord has removed this
sickness, but who knows whether he may not send a greater then this, if we do
not render according to the mercies received? although the sickness be removed,
yet be assured that there is wrath out, and it will seize upon us. Indeed it is
possible to defer it, and to stay it, yet if we do not render to the Lord, if
we do not humble our selves, we have cause to fear that there is not an end. In
2 Chronicles. 7. 14. See what conditions the Lord requires when he will heal a land
indeed, If 2 Chronicles. 7, 14.
my people humble themselves and pray, and seek my face, and turn from their
evil ways, then I will hear in heaven, etc. Mark it. The Lord never heals a
land to purpose, he never heals the wound to the bottom, but when their sins
are healed and forgiven, when the disease is taken away: till men turn from
their evil ways, till, they seek the Lords face, and his presence, till men
be humbled aright, till they do thus, their healing is but a skinning of the
wound, it will break out again.

Therefore we must not think that all is past because the Lord has removed it
for the present, he may send the sword, and a greater plague, and therefore we
are to consider this, and no man is to put it off. God observes how every man
is affected with these works of his: he that does not consider, but neglect it,
he takes the name of God in vain. In a special manner I say the Lord observes
this, how men behave themselves at such times, whether they do more for him
then they were used to do. These great actions of the Lord, ought not to be
passed by negligently, but he expects great answering of such great mercies.

But you will say, wherein does this rendering to the Lord according to the
mercies received, consist? What is this Quest. Wherein true thankfulness
consists Answ. Psalm. 107.
thankfulness? I answer, as it is said of love, so it may be said of
thankfulness, it must not be in word only, but in deed, and in truth. Not but
that it must be in word, Psalm. 107. It is required that we confess the loving
kindness of the Lord before men, we should be ready to speak of it, but that
is not all, it must be indeed, and in truth. And that consists in two things.

One is that our hearts be affected with the mercies, and loving kindness of
the Lord, that the heart be enlarged toward the Lord with love, and fear of
his holy Name. For when a man does kindness to another, that which wins love
is to consider the bountifulness of the man's disposition. When we observe the
Lords patience and longsuffering this should teach us the knowledge of the
Lord, and this should make us consider what a God he is, that so his mercies
may cause us to love him, and that thereby our hearts may be enlarged toward
him. So David in Psalm. 18. I love the Lord for he has done thus and thus, etc.
This is to be thankful indeed when our hearts are affected toward God, when we
think the better of the Lord: for therein David's affections were right, that he
was still speaking good of the Lord more and more, he is worthy (says he) to
be praised. So when we learn to trust the Lord, he has done thus, and thus,
therefore we will trust him. And when our hearts remember the Lord, when we
think of him continually.

And secondly, as one part stands in this, in the affection of the heart: so
likewise in our actions, then we are thankful to the Lord indeed, when we do
something for him; when our thankfulness is not a thing consisting only in
fancy, and notion and imagination, but when it produces action, and when we do
the works of the Lord more abundantly. When a man will set his thoughts on work
to study what he may do, or what he can do for the Lord. And when he shall do
this, not only for the reward to come; for that gives not a luster to the
action, but it proceeds from thankfulness indeed, when a man does that which
he does, because the Lord has done thus and thus for him, therefore he will
serve him. Herein our thankfulness is seen when we do something really,
because it is for the Lord.

Saint Paul as he abounded in thankfulness, so he abounded in labor. Jacob,
because the Lord had heard him, he would give him the Tenth of his goods, and
the Lord should be his God. So when we have received special mercies, we should
do some special thing for God, some extraordinary thing, to pray more, to be
more frequent and fervent, to be at more cost for the Lord upon such occasions,
to be more exact in reforming our lives, and more fearful of offending God.

In a word, as the Lord enlarges himself in mercies to us, so our hearts
should be enlarged to him to do as much as may be. And thus our thankfulness
is expressed when we have opportunity, when ever men come in place, and occasions
wherein they have opportunity to do service to God; now to venture more, to be
more zealous for his sake, to be more solicitous, to do something, to be more
intent for the glory of God; this is to be thankful according to the mercies
received: a man must set his thoughts on work to do something extraordinary,
when there is an extraordinary mercy bestowed.

To help us now to do this, is to remove that which hinders it. You shall see
what hindered Hezekiah, His heart was lifted up: he did not render according to
the mercies received from the Lord; for his heart was lifted up. In this there
are three things.

First, his heart was lifted up to other things to mind them, and it was not
lift up to the Lord to think of him, and to serve him. So that there was
forgetfulness in him; that is one thing intended, when a man shall lift up his
heart to other things, to mind other things, to do other things his heart
forgets the Lord. Therefore the Lord when he would have his mercies remembered,
he appoints something to keep them in mind. He has appointed the Sacrament of
the Lords Supper, do this in remembrance of me. The passover was appointed to
be taught to their Children, that when they should ask them what they did mean
by such a thing? they should tell them that the Lord had delivered them out of
the land of Egypt. Forgetfulness is the cause of unthankfulness: therefore to
remember the mercies of the Lord is one thing that helps us to be thankful,
that is, to observe the passages of his providence toward us, and about us.
Therefore we must exercise faith in his providence, that is, labor to see God
through every mercy. Those that want this eye of faith it is impossible for
them to be thankful. If we had the eye of faith the creatures would be as a
glass to help us to see God better. When Esau was kind to Jacob, he saw the
face of God in Esau, I have seen thy face as the face of God, says he, that
is, he saw the face of God through Esaus face. It is not the creature, it is
not thy friend that brings thee comfort. But as we say of a messenger that
brings good tidings, it is not the messenger that comforts the heart, but the
good tidings that he brings: this is to lift up the heart to the Lord, and the
contrary is to lift up the heart to vanity.

Secondly, to lift up the heart, that is by reason of that strength, and those
riches, by reason of that wealth and plenty which he had, his heart began to
swell within him, he began to bear himself aloft too much upon it to think
himself secure, this caused him to forget the mercies received. Indeed there is
a double exaltation of the mind. One is when a man lifts up his heart, because
he has the Exaltation of the mind double.
Lord to be his God: this is a holy magnanimity; this makes a man to keep on
his course like a Lion; and in this we are all defective. But there is another
lifting up, and height of the heart, when we think we are secure, by reason of
that support that we have of the creature, and so we begin to settle upon our
bottom, to rest on the creature, this was Hezekiahs fault. You shall see the
same phrase used, 2 Chronicles. 26. 16. It is said there 2 Chronicles. 26. 16.
of Vzziah, that the Lord helped him till he was mighty; but when he was strong
his heart was lifted up, he thought himself secure now: he thought he could do
well without God, and so his heart was lifted up. So Rehoboam when the Kingdom
was strengthened in his hand, he forsook the Law of the Lord, that was the
lifting up of his heart.

The last is, when the heart is lift up with a carnal rejoicing. You shall see
this in the text in Hezekiah, when the Ambassadors came to him he was glad of
them, there was a false joy. Outward blessings, the more they have of our love
the less God has of our thankfulness. Indeed there is a spiritual joy, and the
more of that the more thankfulness: but in Hezekiah it was a carnal joy, a
secure rejoicing in the outward things that God had bestowed upon him, and that
made him to forget his thankfulness. There is a joy that the Lord calls for in
his people, Deuteronomy. 26. 11, 12. he requires this, that they should Deuteronomy. 26. 11.
12. Psalm. 33. Psalm. 107.
rejoice in any case; because they should be thankful, therefore they are put
together often in the Psalm, as Psalm. 33. and Psalm. 107. rejoice in the Lord
and be thankful: but when the joy is carnal; when we rejoice immediately in the
very creature, this is that which hinders our thankfulness.

FREE GRACE MAGNIFIED.
REVEL. 22. 17. Let him that is a thirst come, and whosoever will let him take
of the waters of life freely.
NOt to stand to open the words, we may observe in them five parts.

First, an offer to all men.

Secondly, that God calls and inviteth us to come.

Thirdly, that whosoever will come must thirst.

Fourthly, that if they so come they shall take of the water of life.

Fifthly, and that freely.

I purpose at this time to speak of the second, viz. That God inviteth man to
come.

The point we will deliver is not a point of controversy, which we rather
decline, but a point of singular and great comfort, and that is that ^^^rious
Gospel which Paul did so much magnify, that mystery the Angels did so much
labor to pry into, that secret that was so much kept from the Jews, -and
revealed in due time to the Gentiles, and that is the offer of Christ to all
men in the world, that would take him without all exceptions of persons or
sins, God does not only or merely offer Christ, but he sends out his
Ministers and Ambassadors, beseeching us to be reconciled, he does not only
tell us that there is a Marriage of his Son, and that whosoever will come may
come, but he sends Messengers to beseech, and to use an holy violence and
earnest persuasion; yea, and not only thus, but he commands men and charge
them upon their allegiance to come, this is his commandment says the Apostle
that ye believe on him whom he has sent, yea he charge us upon death and
damnation to come, If you believe you shall be saved, If you believe not you
shall not be damned.

The first reason of this is, because God would not Reas. 1.
have the death of his Son to be of none effect, he would not have the blood of
his Son spilt in vain, and therefore he does not make a bare offer of Christ,
but he beseeches and compels men to come and believe on him: Saint Paul
uses the same reason why he would not preach with eloquent words, because then
he should convert none to Christ, and if none be converted to Christ, the death
of Christ would be in vain and of none effect, so say I, if God did not send
out his Messengers to beseech and persuade and command men to believe, the
death of Christ would be in vain.

The second reason is to show forth the riches of Gods mercy and the abundance
of his love to mankind, the Reas. 2.
same motives he had to give Christ, the same motives he has to entreat men to
believe, and this is his love, and this he shows to the elect, that they
might know the greatness and largeness of his love to them; and to the wicked,
that the glory of his justice might appear in their damnation, when they shall
see that they have displeased and despised so gracious an offer.

The third reason is, because it is acceptable to God Reas. 3.
that the Gospel should be obeyed, that is, that men should believe that they
might live and not dye; and therefore he says he desires not the death of a
sinner, and so are many speeches scattered in the Scripture, Oh that my people
would harken, why will ye die O ye house of Israel? these and many more shows
that it is a thing very pleasing to God that, men should not perish, but that
they come in and believe, and live for ever.

But here may objections arise, for when you hear that it Object.
is a thing pleasing to God that all men should believe, here it may be
objected. How can these two stand together, that God desires that men should
believe and live, and he it is that must give them ability to believe, and yet
does not, he has it in his power to make them to believe, and yet will not,
notwithstanding he expresses in the forenamed places of scripture such an
earnest desire to have men live and not die.

To this I answer, that the scope of all places in scripture Answ.
is, to show that if men will come in, there shall be no impedient upon Gods
part, and they show that he is full of mercy and compassion, the fault shall be
in their own stubborness and contempt, and these declare that it is more
acceptable to God to save them, then to condemn them, and that he is full of
mercy and ready to forgive, that he has such a disposition as was in the
father of the Prodigal. This I say is the main scope of those and such like
places of Scripture. But there is a double consideration of the will of God, it
is either simply considered, and so to believe and repent and obey, all these
are pleasing to him, for it cannot be but when any object is put into the will
of any, if it be suitable and agreeable to the will, it must needs
^well-pleasing to it, and therefore God being Holy and pure must needs be
delighted in the faith and repentance and obedience of his creature, but then
there is a secret will of God, by which he dispenses to man an ability to
believe, and this he gives to some and not to others, for reasons best known
to himself, and in this consideration all those places of Scripture are to be
taken and considered, that he will have mercy on whom he will, and whom he will
he hardens, and that it is not in him that runs, but in God that shows
mercy; so that according to the first consideration we must understand that it
is acceptable to God to have men to believe.

It may be objected, is it possible that the same will Object. 2.
should be carried upon the same object in different respects, as if God should
will the damnation and Salvation of Judas both at one time?

To this I answer, that it is most possible for a man to will and nill one and
the same thing upon the same object if it Answ.
be in different respects; as for example, a man may will his friends departure
from him, and yet not will it, he wills his departure out of a desire he has
of his friends good, and yet will it not out of a love he has of his friends
company, and so God here he wills that all men should be saved, and therefore
he beseeches men to believe, because it is agreeing to him, and it is so,
neither can it be otherwise because of the conformity the thing it self has
with his will; yet he will not use all means to bring this to pass, A father
will not have his son drunk, if he will tie him up in a chamber he will not be
drunk, yet he will not take such a course, though he has a will his son should
not be drunk, so God though he do will that men should believe and repent and
be saved, yet he will not be said to use all means for the effecting of it in
all men, because he will glorify his justice as well his as mercy.

It may be here objected that when God offers Christ to all, and beseeches
them and persuades them, and Objection 2.
commands men to come in and believe, and yet knows before hand that man of
himself has no ability to believe, It may seem that God has some collusion
and deceit in this, in that notwithstanding he knows men cannot believe of
themselves, yet he offers Christ and persuades and commands men to lay
hold on him by faith.

To this I answer first, that God may seriously offer Answ.
and give a thing, and yet know aforehand that the party to whom it is offered
will not receive it out of the stubborness and refractoriness of his own will.
A Prince may offer and give a pardon to a Rebel, and yet know aforehand that
the Rebel to whom it is offered, out of pride and contempt will not receive it;
so I say when God offers Christ, he offers him in good earnest, here is no
deceit, what he promises he will perform, he offers him to the reprobate, to
this I will add two similitudes, The one by St. Ambrose on those words The
Sun shines upon the just and unjust, now (says he) if any but of neglect or
carelessness of it hides himself in a place to keep the Sun off from him, the
fault is not in the Sun but in him. And another uses this similitude; the
death of Christ is like a medicine, that has efficacy enough to heal all
mankind, if they will apply it, now if men will not take it, and receive it, it
is not out of a defect in the thing it self, but out of the contempt and
stubborness of their own will.

It may be further objected here, God does Command Objection 4.
and beseech men to believe and to be saved, (which seems to be an
unreasonable thing) when as it is impossible for them to do so of themselves,
as if a man should beseech and command a man to escape out of prison, when he
is inthralled and bound with chains, or for a man to command or entreat a man
to come out of a Well when it is so deep that he cannot.

To this I answer first, that there is an end in speaking Answ.
to a man inspiritual bonds, to desire and command him to escape, for the very
words do put life into such a man, such is the word we preach, it has power
going along with it to put life into those that hear it, as Christ when he
spoke to the sick man to arise, it was to some purpose, such I say is the word
we do preach.

Secondly, I answer that these similitudes hold not, because it is very
difficult to exhort and command a man to do a thing when there is an extreme
impediment, as it is with a man in a Well and in Prison. But that is not the
case here, for if a man has but the will to come to Christ, there is no
external impediment, and therefore if we exhort and command men to come to
Christ, and they come not, we cannot only say that they cannot come, but
rather that they will not come; here then is reason enough for our exhortations
in this kind.

It may be objected that men cannot will to come, there is an impossibility,
though no external impediment, because Object. 5.
they cannot will.

To this I answer first, that it is false that men cannot will, in two cases
indeed it is true, either when the thing Answer.
is not revealed to a man, in such a case it may be truly said that a man
cannot will, because the thing is not made known to him, and therefore those
that never heard of Christ can not will Christ, and therefore they shall not be
condemned for not receiving of Christ.

Secondly, If the thing be revealed to a man, yet if it be revealed as a thing
impossible, in this case also a man cannot will; it is against the order of
nature for a man to will that which he conceives to be impossible to be
attained, for he must look upon it as a thing possible to be had before it can
be said that he can will it. But Christ is revealed to men in the Church, and
so propounded not as a thing impossible, but as a thing possible; now it cannot
be said only that they cannot will, but that they will not will, and therefore
when as men complain, that it is impossible to will, here is the glory of Gods
justice made manifest, because there is a freedom in the manner of refusing,
they might have had Christ if they would.

It is objected that the Covenant that is made by God, seems to be made with
the elect only, and therefore Object. 6.
the condition belongs only to them, how can Christ belong to all, seeing
the exhortation and commandment must not exceed the Covenant, for the benefit
is propounded to the Elect, and the condition to be required of none but of
such as are within the covenant.

To this I answer, that there is a Covenant of grace, and Answ.
that is double, either a general covenant propoudned without exception, Let
whosoever will come and believe in Christ he shall be saved, here is none
excluded, and that none are excluded out of this general covenant this reason
will show. Baptism the seal of the Covenant is to be administered to all within
the Church, to Infants though afterward they do not actually and visibly
believe. Now God would not appoint that the seal of the Covenantshould be given
to those to whom it does not generally belong. But secondly, there is another
Covenant of grace which belongs, peculiarly to the elect, for in this God
does not only promise to give salvation, if men believe, but he promises to
give them ability to believe, as may be seen, Ier. 31. 33. Ier. 31. 33. Ezekiel
36.
Ezekiel 36. In the first place God promises that he will put his law in their
inward parts, and that they shall not teach any more every man his neighbor,
but they shall all know me from the least to the greatest, and so the like in
other places, where God promises the thing, and ability of performing of it,
which belongs only to the Elect, But the other general Covenant belongs to
all without exception.

Lastly it is here objected, that the prayer which Christ Object 7.
made before his death, was but only for some I pray not for the world but for
those that thou have given me out of the world, and therefore the death of
Christ belongs to such only as he made intercession for.

To this I answer, that the intercession and prayer of Answ.
Christ does not fall upon his death, to make that belong to some and not to
others, for that is not mentioned in the intercession, but the prayer falls
upon the persons to whom his deathis effectual, and therefore he prays that
some may have ability to come (that they may believe and be saved) though
others have not. I pray for them, I pray not for the rest that belong not to my
election; Therefore where you find any other intercession of Christ in any
other place, you must understand, that it falls not on the act of his
redemption, but on such to whom his death is made effectual, for Christ is made
the second Adam, and by his death he has set open the gates of heaven to all
that believe, but to some he gives ability to come, and to others he denies
it.

So much for the clearing of this point; the use of it follows.

And first, if Christ be offered to all freely without exception, Use 1.
and also seeing God has commanded, and beseech men to come and receive him;
then let us take good heed of refusing of it, for if there be no greater mercy
then the offer of Christ, so then there is no greater curse follows, then if
it be refused. For the clearing of this point we are to know that we are all by
nature enemies to God, and this enmity we increase by our personal rebellions,
and so we are become liable to the curse, man now being in this condition, God
sends forth his messengers to beseech men to be reconciled, assuring them
that the pardon is general, no matter what they are or have been, but if they
thirst after Christ he is for them; but indeed you must take whole Christ, as
well as Priest or Prophet, as a King to rule over all your affections; hereupon
some take him and others will not, they think the condition too hard, and
therefore they will not forgo their profits and pleasurs, and their liberties
falsely so called, and therefore notwithstanding this year of Jubilee, they love
their old master still, that is the lust that they serve, and they would rather
be bored in the ear to serve them perpetually, they love the fleshpots of
Egypt, and loathe this spiritual Manna, notwithstanding it is the most precious
and excellent that ever was offered to mankind. Now this I say of all the sins
that can be committed, Original sins, All our personal rebellions provoke not
God so much to anger, as the rejection of his Son, for this contempt of the
Gospel, we know how angry God was with those that refused to come to the
Marriage of his Son, they had in many things carried themselves stubbornly
against God aforetime, yet God was never so angry as now, he was now angry to
the death. A resemblance of this we have in the Jews before they entered into
the land of Canaan, when they refused the offer that God made to them, nothing
angered God so much as this, they had committed gross idolatry, and many great
rebellions, yet the refusing of Gods mercies in offering them that good land
provoked God more to wrath then all the rest, and now he swears in his wrath
that they should not enter into his rest, and so cut them off, but Caleb and
Joshua, and God was angry afterward with them many times, yet his wrath came
not upon them to the uttermost till they had refused Christ, because the Gospel
was preached so freely, and Christ offered unto them, and they refused it,
therefore the wrath of God came upon them, as it is to be seen at this day.
This is a point that we had need to put you in mind of, because many when they
look back upon their former ways and see what they have done, consider not
what they do when they do refuse Christ Jesus, and the pardon that has been
offered, how they have taken the grace of God in vain, whereas I assure you,
whatsoever your sins be, sins often committed against conscience and knowledge,
which are the circumstances that aggrevateth sin, they are nothing to the
rfeusing of the pardon offered in Christ. To this end consider, that when
Christ is offered, it is not such an offer as when a man offers a thing, if
it be not taken the party offering loses nothing, but it is such an offer as
when the thing offered is spilt and lost, if it be not received and taken, not
as when a man inviteth another to a feast and he cannot come, the master is at
no charge, but when the promise is made, and the dinner prepared, and then the
guests not to come, it is loss, so it is in this offer of Christ, all is ready
Christ is slain, and his blood is poured out, if you do not come and take it,
you put away from you the blood of Christ, and so in as much as in you lies
you make the death of Christ of none effect, and so by consequence you shall be
guilty of the blood of Christ, and therefore the Apostle says, 1 Pet. 1. 19.
You are not redeemed 1 Pet. 1. 19.
with silver and gold but with the precious blood of Christ.

First, If you had put God to the loss of silver and gold and precious stones
it had been no great loss, but you have put him to the loss of Christ and his
blood, so that whosoever refuses Christ is guilty of the spilling of his most
precious blood.

Secondly, consider that the Gospel which you refuse agrevateth the sin, for
the Gospel disobeyed has much more terror then the law disobeyed, and
therefore the Apostle in, Heb. 2. verse 2. reasons to this purpose, for says
he, If the Law that was given by Angels, was steadfast, and every transgression
received a due reward, how shall we escape if we neglect so great salvation,
which was manifested to us by his Son, and so Chap. 10. If the Law that was
given by Moses, if he that disobeyeth that Law should die, how much more shall
he be worthy of punishment that trampleth underfoot the blood of Christ. First,
It is the refusing of Christ's most precious blood, therefore I say in these
respects, the Gospel has more terror in it then the Law disobeyed; For the
clearer understanding of this, you are to know that the Gospel has two parts.
Not only if you believe you shall be saved, but also if you believe not you
shall be damned, which shows that the Gospel broken is more terrible then the
Law, and therefore John Baptist the first preacher of the Gospel came with more
terror and severity then the Prophets did, he came in a course habit, and
severe in his doctrine, and therefore when he came to preach the Gospel, he
says, Now is the axe laid to the root of the tree, and those that are found
chafe shall be cast into the fire, and what was the reason, because the Gospel
was preached, therefore if it be refused, and this pardon rejected, God will
now sooner lay the axe to the root, then aforetime, and so indeed they found it
by experience afterward, for if we observe the Scripture from the time that
the Jews became a Nation, for all their transgressions he gave them not a
fullbill of divorcement, till Christ was preached unto them, and they refused
to receive him, then those natural branches were broken off and the wild Olive
ingrafted in, till that time I say the Jews were not rejected; by this
therefore we may see the danger of refusing the Gospel, God had endured their
provocations, yet now for their refusing of Christ he cut them off, and so he
will do to every particular person, for there is no Law that can be preached
that is so dangerously refused as the Gospel, and therefore we shall see the
Carriage that is appointed to the seventy Disciples which he sent forth to
preach the Gospel, that when they offered Christ, and the Kingdom of Heaven,
and remission of sins, if they will receive the mercy offered so it is, they
shall be saved, but if not, Tell them the Kingom of God is come near them
indeed, but seeing they have refused it, shake off the dust of your feet
against that City, and here you may see what terror there is in the Gospel, if
they would receive it, well and good, if not, shake off the dust of your feet
against them; and further consider that nothing but their refusing the land of
Canaan made God swear in his wrath that they should not enter into his rest,
God can bear with other sins, but this is a sin that provokes God to anger
more then the rest.

For the better understanding hereof we will compare the Law and the Gospel
together; you shall find these differences between them.

First, the condition of the Law is, do this and live.

The condition of the gospel is, Believe and live. The condition of the law is
much more difficult, the condition of the Gospel is more easy, and therefore
the sin committed against the Law is less heinous then the sin against the
Gospel.

Secondly, the command in the Law cost God nothing but his word, but the
command in the Gospel cost him the Death of his Son.

Thirdly, when we broke the Law we did it in the loins of Adam, with whom we
accompanied our voices and consent, but when we reject the Gospel we do it in
our own persons.

Fourthly, when the Law was broken there was but one breach to God, but in
rejecting of the Gospel there is a is a double Law transgrest, for when we had
cast our selves into a desperate condition with Adam, God offered us an help
and means of recovery, now the refusing of this makes sin the greater, by how
much the more the mercy is the greater, with the Angels Gods intent was to
exercise only a single, mercy, and therefore a peremptory command was given
them; If you will obey you shall live. But now this was not only offered to
mankind, but a second mercy was also offered a greater then ever was offered to
the Angels, now God offers thee a board to swim upon, after ship-rack; to the
Angels God would show but one kind of mercy, to mankind a double mercy, a
sparing mercy, a merciful mercy, and so a severer kind of justice upon the
refusal of it; and therefore the reprobates that live in the Church shall
exceed the Devils in Hell in judgment, because they have had more mercy
tendered to them then ever the Devils had, and therefore in this respect God
will exercise on them a more severe kind of justice. Let all these things teach
you how dangerous it is to disobey the Gospel and to refuse Christ.

Thirdly, you are to consider that Christ who is offered unto you is the
Chiefest of all Gods works, the utmost end that God propounded to himself in
making of mankind, it is he that is the top of his fathers glory, in whom the
glory of God most shines; therefore be assured God will not lose his, chiefest
glory, he will not lose one jot of his glory, much less the principal part of
it, and therefore he that refuses Christ, contemns the chiefest of Gods
works, and lays the chiefest of his glory in the dust, and therefore God will
not suffer that to be done without great judgment.

Whatsoever God is known by, that is his Name, whatsoever he makes himself more
known by that is his special Name, and his Name he will not suffer to be taken
in vain, and therefore he says, he will not hold him guiltless th^^ takes his
Name in vain, and certainly this will bring the heaviest, condemnation, the
offer of Christ being the greatest mercy that was ever showed to any creature
either in Heaven or in earth, and therefore the refusing of this mercy must
needs produce the greatest judgment: and for this Capennaum though exalted to
Heaven, was cast down to Hell, if it had had no more means th^^ Tire and Zidon
their condemnation should have been no more, but the means were greater,
because the Gospel was more plentifully preached to them, and therefore seeing
by this means they were lifted up to Heaven, their condemnation should be the
greater; and this is Gods manner of proceeding in all his ways, when he first
created Adam, had he no more then created him, his sin in transgressing the Law
had not been so much, but because he gave him a possibility of living for eyer,
therefore he was condemned to die for ever, because he rejected the mercy
offered; If we had been guilty of Adams sin only, we should have had the
judgment that Adam had upon breach of the condition. But we are offered
Christ, and to be heirs of Heaven upon condition of obedience to the Law of
faith, answerable therefore to the greatness of this m^^y shall be the
greatness of this cond emnation if we refuse it. Let all these things stir us
up most affectionately to embrace Christ, and consider what an injury and
offense it is against God to refuse Christ. Remember those compassionate
terms that he uses, Come unto me, And why will ye dye O house of Israel? And
I delight not in the death of a sinner, and many such like places, take heed of
refusing when God offers his Son, rather kiss the Son least he be angry
and ye perish, and remember not only to take him, but take him in time, now
God calls upon you, and if you will not hear, beware least when you call he
will not hear, when the day of sickness and extremity comes, then you will
find that Christ is Christ indeed, and that faith is faith indeed, and that
the feet of the messenger are beautiful, but then you shall not see them, for
this is Gods judgment, if they will not receive it in time of peace, he either
offers it no more, or else gives them no hearts to receive it, therefore
defer not the taking of his offer, take heed least God swear in his wrath you
shall not enter into his rest, if you refuse this excellent gift, Remember that
though it be true, that the whole time of this life be a time of grace, yet
there is an opportunity in which God offers grace, and after that offer, it
is no more; And therefore he would offer Jerusalem no more peace, because she
knew not the time of her visitation, and afterward God either offered her none
at all, or gave her not an heart to take it.

If God beseech and entreat men to believe, then it follows that faith is a
thing very pleasing and acceptable Use (...).
to God; if you therefore make the Querie of the Jews, Question.
What shall we do to work the works of God? I answer with Christ, believe on
him whom he has sent, So also if you ask what is the great Commandment? I
answer, that you believe in the only begotten Son of God, you can do nothing
so acceptable to God as to believe on his Son, for faith is the very life of
a Christian, that which distinguishes him from all other men. But what is this
faith? It is not a small matter to believe (as our adversaries afaffirm) which
rises out of the mistaking of the nature of faith, for it is not only to give
assent unto a proposition that it is true, but this justifying faith takes and
lays hold on Christ, now in taking there are two things to be understood.

First, You must let go all that is in your hands before.

Secondly, You must lay hold on the thing offered, so in faith, first, there is
an emptying quality where by a man is made empty of all that is in himself, he
must forgo father and mother, and pleasures and profits, and all to receive
Christ: Secondly, there is an apprehending quality to lay hold on Christ, a
forsaking of any thing that is precious, and a receiving of him, and a resting
on him with a purpose to serve him only with a perfect heart, and a willing
mind, it is true, there is much excellency and necessity in works; but faith is
the wel-head from whence all the streams of good works arise; And therefore
faith exceeds them, as much as the cause does the effect, for faith is the
spring of good works, the more faith the more works, where there is more oil,
there is the greater flame; faith then being the cause of works, it must needs
follow, that the stream cannot rise higher then the fountain.

Again, all the good works that we do, give not so much glory to God as faith;
now nothing is so dear unto God as his glory; and therefore faith is most
acceptable to God, and therefore it is said, Abraham believed and gave glory to
God, first by his believing him to be such a God as he professed himself to be;
and so that which makes him evident to all the world, to be a God most merciful
is, the receiving of Christ by faith: Further in this does the true worship of
God principally consist, now God delights in his worship, and the worship of
God consists not only in the bowing of the knee, but it mainly consists in
the inward persuasion of the heart, when a man is persuaded that God is a most
holy, a most wise; just and merciful God, and out of this he worshippeth and
obeys him, and this is an act of faith; Remember therefore that faith is that
which God does principally c^ll for, and therefore faith goes far before
works, in as much as without faith it is impossible to please God, Let us
therefore be exhorted to labor to believe, seeing it is a thin^s so acceptable
to God, and that this exhortation be not in vain, it is needful for men to know
whether they believe or no, to this end therefore I will give you two or three
signs of faith.

First if you would know whether you truly believe, whether you are within the
number of those that are within the compass of regeneration, consider whether
you be soundly humbled, for that is a preparation that goes before faith, and
without which no man is made ever partaker of Christ, for the direction of
Christ is made to those that mourn in Zion, not that it is simply necessary to
salvation, but because without this no man comes to Christ, I deny not but
God is able to send Lightning without thunder, he might have preached the
Gospel to Adam without the Law, but his will was not so, he first convinces
Adam of his sin, and then preaches the Gospel, first he made a preparation by
fire and an earthquake before he came in the soft and still voice; so God
humbles a man before he works by faith to lay hold on Christ.

The murderer will not seek to the City of refuge, before the revenger of blood
follow him, and this must not be done slightly, but your conscience must be
awakened to apprehend sin fully, and this prepares you for Christ, for in
these three things stands the sound conversion of a sinner to God: first,
humiliation, secondly, the taking of Christ as the chiefest good, thirdly, when
you will not forsake for him any worldly thing. And these three things follow
one another, for if sin be the chiefest sorrow, Christ must needs be the
chiefest joy, and if we once have Christ we can never forgo him; those
therefore that are not soundly humbled have cause to fear that they have no
part in Christ. Secondly, Consider whether you live in Christ or no, for if you
live not in him you have not received him, for who takes Christ^s ^n^r^ted
into him as into a living stock; if you would therefore know whether you have
taken Christ in good earnest or no (for many think they have Christ when they
have him not:) I ask you this question, do you grow in Christ, and wax green in
Christ, are you changed into the same nature with him? If you find these
things, it is a sure sign you have taken Christ, but if you find not this new
life in you, it is a sign you never received him, and this is not a light
cha^^^, but a great and manifest change, as apparent as the difference is
betwixt a dead man and a living man, because when a man takes the Son he has
the spirit of the Son within him, and if he has the spirit he has the
dispossition of the Son, the same life that the Son has; for the spirit is to
the soul, as the soul is to the body, and therefore if you find no life, it is
a sign you have no part in Christ.

Lastly, Consider whether you be broken off from the old stock upon which you
did grow, from whence you did take sap and bring forth fruit those therefore
deceive themselves that think they can take Christ and yet follow their
pleasure^, and covetousness, this cro^th their comixtures, and I assure you
they make the way too broad, for whosoever will receive Christ must p^rt with
all things else, though they be nev^r so dear to him.

FINIS.

