A New way of Conference, Being a DIALOGVE, Between PATRICK PASTGRACE A
PAPIST, And PETER PLEADWELL A PROTESTANT.

Filled with Mirth, and varnisht with Modesty.

By Laurance Price.

LONDON, Printed and are to be sold by Richard Burton, at the Horse-shooe, in
Smithfield, 1641.

A Dialogue betwixt a Papist, and a Protestant.
Protestant. WHat my old acquaintance Patrick, how fares your body? you look
like one that came lately out of purgatory, what has your holy Dame Pope Ione
hanted your Ghost?


Papist. Why Peter, I see you will never leave your old knavery while your
tongue will wag, and that I think was made of (...), I Will tell thee, it is as
easy a thing to see thee without a gybe in thy mouth, as it is to see a Tinker
without a trull at his heels.


Protestant. Why do thou think I mock thee?


Papist. I cannot tell what you call mocking, but if the lair word that thou
spokest of should come to his holiness ear, they would curse thee by Bell,
Book and Candell.


Protestant. Let them curse me and spare not for their curses will flee no
further then their eyes can see.


Papist. Art thou not ashamed to scandalize such a worthy company of reverend
Prelates, holy Friars, religious Nuns, and their followers.


Protestant, Hey hey, what have you got a Pope in your belly too? (...) this is
pretty sport indeed, but i will tell thee one thing for thy comfort Patrick, thou
must either in plain terms forsake the Pope, or shake hands with the hangman.


Papist. Do hear me Peter, if than did know in much as a^y do know, thou
would not refuse to go twenty miles on thy bare feets to hear Mass.


Protestant. Fie, fie, fie, prithee stand further from me, thy clothes stinkes
of knavery: thy body of baudery, and thy breath of popery.


Papist. What, what, what is the news now? are you in your rhyme doggrell (...)
if I catch you a rimeing i will rhyme with you.


Protestant. Begin of thou dare.


Papist. To read our Ledies salter,
And be washed in holy water,
Is that I desire.

Protestant. If thou had thy desert,
Thou shoulds be tied in a Cart,
Or be burnt in the fire.
How like you of that friend patrick,
Have you any more stomach to rhyme.

Papist. Yes faith i will have to there od rhyme, if it cost me a grote.


Protestant. Well to it then patrick begin again.


Papist. The Popes Bulls and Crosses
Will pay all the losses,
That in England have been.

Protestant. Not before such as thee,
And thy cursed company,
At the Gallows be seen.

Papist. Fie Peter, now thou hit shame too deep, yet i will try the other veny if
thou can worst me at the next bowt then; spare me not good Peter.


Protestant. Why then please your self, and we are all pleased, begin once
more.


Papists. Auy Mary's, and Creeds,
Crucifixes and Beads,
I will never forsake them.

Protestants. No more will your Sex,
That does England so vex,
Till the hangman do take them.

Papist. Come, come, I see thou art too hard for me at riming and therefore
lets fall to our former discourse again.


Protestant. I say still as I said at first; please one, and please all


Papist. Nao but Peter, as I take thee for a man of discretion, I also know
thee to he a newes-monger, therefore prithee tell me some news.


Protestant. Why Patrick, did I not see you yesterday in diverse places of the
City, as namely did I not see you in the morning in Cheapside, amongst the
Goldsmiths, at noone in the Exchange amongst the Gallants, at four a Clock
amongst the Brokers in long Lane, and at night in a baudy ouse, and would you
learn news of me?


Papist Why Peter, shou know I hate a Band worse then I hate a Turk.


Protestant. But patrick, I think thou love a whore better then thou love
a Christian, and therefore do thou tell the news.


Papist. Must I needs tell the news. why then pray thee Peter hear me, and I
will tell thee such news which has even made me stark staring-borne mad.


Protestant. Prithee patrick speak on, for such news I long to hear.


Papist. Why then i will tell thee Peter, as a friend, yester-day a little while
after thou had seen me, it was my fortune to meets with one singing, who
with a loud voice chanted forth in the last of thin month, such a mornefull
dity as made the very hair of my head stand an end to hear him, I would my
wife Besse had heene there for hi^ sake.


Protestant. What would she have done?


Papist. She would have either pincht him by the ears, scracht him by the
f^^e, or pick out his eyes, and had it not been for fear of the Law, I would
have stabbed him with my knife.


Protestant. Why then, I perceive you stand in fear of the hangman, but what
was the song that did so much molest thy mind?


Papist. Faith I cannot well remember the beginning out, but the concusion was
this

Now let the Mass Priests be jogging together,
To Rome or to Tyburne let them choose whether.

Protestant. And art thou angry with the ballet singer for singing that song.


Papist. I, mighty angry.


Protestant. Shall I tell thee Patrick, I think it to be the best Song, and
it is like to be the truest Song that was song in London streets this twice
twelve months.


Papist. Show me a reason Peter.


Protestant. Why this is the reason, our Nation have been so grosely abused by
Mass Priests, Jesuits and Recusants, and such like troublesome persons which
have caused strangers to hate us, neighbors to laugh at us, and our own
friends to fight with us.


Papist. Are friends so foolish as to fight one with the other.


Protestant. No, but that such knaves as thou art are willing to set them
together by the ears.


Papist. pray thee good Peter, and friend, tell me without jesting how this may
be, and if any fault remains in me, I will do the best endeavor to amend
it, and I trust that all my friends and acquaintance will do the like, and run
hand and hand with the proverb, every one mend a little.


Protestant. Since you are in such a good mind I will not put you by: but will
tell you my mind: this I am sure of, that all that are of your sex, and will
not be reformed, must depart out of our Kingdom.


Papist. What quite out of England! what if we depart the City, and live thirty
miles from it?


Protestant. That will not serve your turn, our Kings Laws will meet with
you.


Papist. Why then (...) ^y fly into Yorkshire, and he free from danger.


Protestant. Nay then you are like to the fish which leapt out of the fryingpan
into the fire, for there the bony Scots will have you by the loggs: and besides
all this the Papists have played such prankes in England of late, which puts us
in mind of eighty eight, the year before when there came such an invincible
navy of Ships, that they appeared like a mighty Forest of trees upon the sea,
wherein they brought hooks to hang men up by the joules, Knives to out our
throats, and whips of steel to whip (...) death.


Papist. Why these were not English Papists, they came from Spayn.


Protestant. For any thing I know, the English Papists may be full as bad if not
worse, tha^ Spaniards; further more in the happy and peaceful reign of our
dread Sovereign Lord King James, when his Majesty had called an assembly
together of the chiefest noble Lords, and peers of our Kingdom, O what a
damnable plot was there laid for the destruction, and overthrow both of our
King and Kingdom?


Papist. Why these were sent from Rome


Protestant. I think they were sent from Hell, for I am sure they brought
fire-workes with them but to conclude in a word, I Would wish thee to be as good
as thy word, either to amend thy life or else depart England.


Papist. Why what course would you have me to take?


Protestant. First I would have (...) ^erve God in every thing, and next obe^
Charles our gracious King, see that thou do^t thy ne^hbour love, and God will
of thy works aprove.


Papist. In my heart I am over joyed with thy Christian like council, and I
think a happy time that we met together, and thus much more I tell 'thee thou
shall see a speedy reformation in me, if God say amen, so for this time farewell
good friend.


FINIS.

