Confirmation Confirmed, AND RECOMMENDED FROM Scripture, Antiquity, and Reason.
IN A SERMON PREACHED In the Cathedral Church of St. MARY in SARUM, at a solemn
Confirmation there Administered, by the Right Reverend Father in God HUMPHREY
Lord Bishop of SARUM.

By JOHN PRIAULX D. D. one of the Canons Residentiary of that Church.

LONDON, Printed by I. R. for John Courtney Bookseller in Salisbury, M.DC.LXII.

To the Right Reverend Father in God, HUMPHREY By Divine Providence Lord Bishop
of SARUM.
Right Reverend Father in God,
IN obedience to your Lordships injunctions, this plain Sermon is surrendered to
the Press, which not long since was presented in the Pulpit, upon your
Lordships Summons to that Service. The acceptance it then met with, and the
hopes it might survive in the persuasions of the Auditory, were as much as I
could wish for from it: I must deprecate (if it be a fault) my own
backwardness that it should have gone farther.

Which backwardness arose not from any consciousnesse, that ought therein
contained, was contrary to the form of sound words, or the judgment of the
Primitive Church, or more particularly of our own, which ob consanguinitatem
doctrinae, as Tertullian speaks, may stand as near to the esteem of the
Primitive, as any other in Christendom. Indeed these were the Guides, by which
I steered my course; and if any thing should be found here differing from them,
dictum nolo, I disclaim, Idisown it before hand. Nor was it out of any
unwillingnesse, to do service to God and his Church in the present generation,
how crooked and froward soever it may be, through his mercy I am not afraid of
their terror. But it was only out of a jealousy of my own conceptions, as
too crude and weak either to bear, or bear up the Public, or to be
considerably useful to it. Your Lordship has been pleased to judge otherwise,
whether for the encouragement of the Preacher, or for the seasonablenesse of
the Discourse, though not for any great strength or beauty in it. And when I
found you were resolved that way, I was not willing to be any farther guilty of
what in my Sermon I had condemned in others. I began to think there was no
prudence in Inferiors, like to that of obedience unto lawful Commands, and to
remember that Precept of S. Hierome to Rusticus, in refernce to his Superior;
Credas tibi salutare quicquid ille praeceperit, nec de majorum sententia
judices, cujus officii est obedire, and implere quae jussa sunt, dicente Moyse
Audi Israel, and tace; and therefore resolved cheerfully so to do, and have
now in pursuance of that resolution, exposed this Discourse to the public
view, which I humbly desire your Lordship to Patronize, since you were pleased
first to command it.

The main substance of the Sermon is the same that was Preached before you,
only with your Lordships leave, I have here and there inserted some
enlargements, which were at first designed, but the straits of time allowed not
room for their delivery.

And now if the publication of it, may any way prove serviceable to the
advancement of Gods glory, or the satisfaction of dissenters, whom I have
labored rather to convince then exasperate; or may in the least contribute
toward the Churches peace amongst us, I shall have reason to rejoice in, and
to bless God for it.

Unto the promoting of which holy ends, both by your self and others, as God
has given your Lordship a large heart, and a double portion of his Spirit, so
that the Work of the Lord may prosper in your hands, and the fruit of it
redound to your account, in all blessings, temporal, spiritual, and eternal,
shall be the daily Prayer of

My Lord, Your Lordships most humble Servant. John Priaulx.

Confirmation Confirmed.
Acts viii. xvii. Then laid they their hands on them, and they received the
Holy Ghost.


THe words, and the work of this day are I suppose not unequally yoaked:
Confirmation is the business of both, whereof the Text holds forth the first
recorded instance, and in the judgment of the Church of old, a full precedent
for the practice of it.

An ordinance of late too long, and as those which (perhaps) were no friends to
it at first, by sad experience afterward have been driven to confess, too
unhappily withheld in unrighteousness, to the great detriment, and distraction
of this Church, whose Piety and The not practicing of this has cast us into
Confusions, and the practice of it must be it that must restore our Church
order, and heal most of our divisions. Mr. Baxter of Confirmation, p. 224,
Peace, were so much, and so nearly concerned in it.

Happy then are our eyes which see the joyful return of it again. We cannot but
cry, Grace, Grace, to its re-establishment.

May their feet be ever beautiful which bring such glad tidings, and their
hands never wither, nor grow faint, which reach out so great a blessing to us.

And may the Crown still flourish with the Gratitude and Obedience, Love and
Loyalty, of all his Subjects upon the head of the Lords Anointed, who like a
second Constantine, (...), a Bishop without the Church, has not thought it
below his Princely care See His Majesty's Declaration.
to present this Church, and Nation, with so promising an Olive branch of
Peace, after that Deluge of Confusion under which we have layn, and to commend
it to the strictest observance, and improvement of those which were entrusted
with the Administration of it. A Blessing for which not only the present
generation, but the children yet unborn will be bound to rise up, and praise
him. And then under so general (I hope) a cordial concurrence, such obligatory
Precedents, and Inducements; give me leave for the retrival of this Ordinance,
not only into your practice, but your affections too, to present you this day
with the first, and that an exact and Apostolic Pattern of it, as it will
appear in the opening of the words, which are these. Then laid they their hands
on them, and they received the Holy Ghost.

Which words may be sorted into these severalls; first, the Action it self,
laying on of hands the Ceremony of Confirmation. Secondly, the method or order
of proceeding to this Action in the particle Then. Thirdly, the Agents, or
Ministers of this Action. They, viz. the Apostles in particular, St. Peter and
St. John. Fourthly, the objects on which this Ceremony was exercised, in the
Pronoun Them, i.e. the Samaritans which believed and were baptized. Fifthly, the
end of this Action, or the effect following on it; They received the Holy
Ghost. These are the particulars, we begin,

1. With the Action, which is here set down as the Ceremony of Confirmation,
and that is laying on of hands.

Now this was the Concomitant or Appendix to another more principal, which was
Prayer, which also had the same design with this Ceremony here, as you may
read, v. 15. Indeed no blessing is bestowed at any time in, and by the Church
without prayer, but in the giving of the Spirit it is more especially proper,
the promise of it being made to this duty, Luc. 11.13. And then no Ceremony
more suitable to signify the purposes of Prayer, and of the Spirit in this
Ordinance, and of the Ordinance it self, then this of Imposition of hands,
which will best appear if we consider the Custom of the Jews, from whom this
Ceremony was derived, with their designs in the use of it.

1. Then, as Grotius in Matthew. 19.13:
Grotius tells us, manuum impositio apud Judaeos indicabat invocationem divinae
potentiae, the laying on of hands, implied the invoking of the Divine power;
for the hand being efficaciae symbolum, the Emblem of power and operation:
Judaei orabant ut sic Dei efficacia esset super illum, sicut manus efficaciae
symbolum ei imponebantur. The Jews prayed that efficacy of God might be upon
the party prayed for, according as the hands which were the Emblem of it were
laid on him, as the same Grot. Epist. 154.
Grotius speaks, and so might fitly intimate the lively influence of the Spirit
sought for in this Ordinance,

Which Imposition of hands, being also performed manibus expansis, with hands
stretched out, it was a sign of the liberal effusion of heavenly Grace upon the
Person on whom they were laid, as Symbolum erat gratiae coelestis quae
largissima manu a Deo conferebatur in pios. Pelarg. in Genesis 48, 14, 15.
Pelargus notes, for,

Secondly, this Ceremony was made use of as an Applicatory sign betokening the
restrained desires of him that prayed to the party whom he presented to God in
prayer, wherein as the lifting up of the hands signified from whom, and whence
they expected the blessing; so the laying of them on, designed the person on
whom they desired it should be bestowed. Hence, as Calvin Calvin.
observes, it was a solemn, usual Custom amongst the Jews, that as often as
they recommended a Person unto God, they laid hands on him, and accordingly to
our present purpose we find the use of it.

First, in their Benedictions, thus Jacob blesses Ephraim and Manasseh, laying
his hands on them, Genesis 48.14. and that manus decussatas, as it were to
Capitibus impositis intermutatis manibus, and quidem ita trasversim obliquatis
in se, ut Christum deformantes, jam tum portenderent benedictionem in Christum
futuram. Tertull. de Baptism. c. 7.
prefigure the Cross of him who had delivered him out of all his troubles. And
accordingly this custom was afterward observed by his Posterity, who were
wont to bring their children unto persons of renowned Sanctity, that by their
prayers, with the laying on of hands, they might be recommended unto Gods
favor, as Grotius in Matthew 19.13.
Grotius shows on Matthew. 19.13. and from hence Dr. Hammond of imposition of
hands for Ordination, sect;. 12.
some derive the use of this Ceremony in Confirmation, which was a kind of
benediction by the Fathers of the Church bestowed on the Novices of it.

Secondly, Hence we find the same in their Consecrations, and Dedications of
persons. So, to omit other places, Deuteronomy. 34.9. With which also it seems he
received a greater measure of the Spirit, Ainsw. in Number. 27.18.
Deuteronomy. 34.9. and it might denote three things. 1. The Separation of the Person
unto Gods use unto whom he was dedicated, and at this, as Calvin. Instit. lib.
4. Sect. 6. Vid Cameron. in Myrothec. in Heb. 2.6.
Calvin seems to conceive, the practice of the Church in this Ceremony did aim.
2. It might note Gods seizure on the person to that purpose by the hands of his
Ministers, and so signify Gods claim, and Acceptance of those which are
offered to him in this Ordinance. 3. It was a kind of Investiture in those
privileges unto which by this Ceremony the person was admitted, and
accordingly this Ordinance in the Church was used as a means of Transmission
unto the Sacrament of the Lords Supper, as De Ecclesiastica Hierarchia cap. 2.
Sect. 7.
Dionysius Areopagita, or who ever is the Author of that ancient Book which
goes under his name, witnesses.

And then this Ceremony being of such ancient and general use among the Jews,
and withal so aptly suited to the purposes of this Ordinance, Christ and his
Apostles were willing to bring down the laudable Vsances of the Synagogue, as
in many See Dr. Hammonds View of the Directory, Sect. 43
other things, so in this into the practices of Christianity, which is indeed
but Judaismus reformatus, as learned Seldenus de Synedriis, lib. 1. c. 8. Item
in praefat. ejusdem operis. Iudaismi (inquit) Veteris ut Parentis Divini
Christianismus, maxim primitivus, legitima, ac prophetica proles, nec in
paucis imitator,
Seldom speaks.

And accordingly we find it practiced in the Christian Church. Not to look so
far back as to Christ's imposition of hands on those Children which were
presented to him, Mark 16.10. where it is said, that he took the young Children
up in his arms, put his hands upon them, and blessed them, and that (as Vt
impositione manuum and precatione ad Deum pro illis bona reportarent, Deum pro
illis precando gratiam, and dona coelestia contulit, Cartwright Harm.
Cartwright speaks) that by imposition of hands, and prayer unto God for them
they might obtain good things; and again, by prayer to God for them, he
conferred Grace and heavenly gifts upon them, a fair Praeludium to, if not
Pattern for this Ordinance, but

To be sure we find it used by St. Peter and St. John in this place, by St.
Paul, Acts 19. and afterward we meet with it enrolled, Hebr. 6.2. amongst the
Fundamental Doctrines of Christianity, whether as a part of them as some
conceive, or as a seasonable opportunity for, and decent Ceremony at the
teaching of them, as others; Impositionis mannum (...) Episcoporum in
Confirmatione Neophytorum Anselm in loc.
recommended it is, together with Baptism, unto the constant use of the
Church; and that in so clear characters, that Calvin Calvin in locum. Sic and
Rivetus. Impositio manuum cujus mentio fit, Heb. ^.2. Referenda (...) ad
solennem baptizatorum benedictionem, quae a pastoribus solebat fieri, and
postea Minister Christi nomine iis benedicebat, eos precibus publicis
commendando ac in Christianismi vocatione confirmando divinae gratiae
imploratione manuumque impositione, Rivet. Catholic Orthodox. Tract. 3. Q. 9.
Sect. 3.
on the place was driven to confess, hujus ceremoniae originem fluxisse ab
Apostolis, that this Ceremony was derived from the Apostles, and so had the
less reason in his Institutions to tax Calv. Instit. ilb. 4. c. 9. Sect. non
inficior nonnihil hallucinari Hieronymum, etc.
S. Hierome for calling it an Apostolical tradition, and then that will advance
very near to a Divine Precept for the use of it; or if no such were to be
found, yet as Si Scripturae autoritas non subesset; totius orbis in hanc partem
consensus instar praecepti obtin^t. Hieron. contr. Lucifarian.
S. Hierome contra Luciferianos speaks, if we had no Scripture Authority for
it, the consent of the whole world this way ought to be obeyed as a Precept, or
as Interim (...) exempla Apostolorum, and Veteris Ecclesia vellem pluris
aestimari, imo deberent ^^bis esse instar legis divina, Zanch, in 4. Prccept.
Zanchy upon the like ceremony used in Ordination, tells us, the examples of
the Apostles and the Ancient Church would be more esteemed then they are; Yea
(says he) they should be looked on by us as a Divine Law. A good rule, would
the times and the temper of men now bear it.

And then as to the use of the Church afterward Cassander in Consult.
Cassander may assure you semper in Ecclesia religiosissime observatam; that
Confirmation was ever religiously observed in the Church, neither was this
Ceremony questioned by any for almost fifteen hundred years, except only the
Theodoret. lib. 3. Haretic. sab. and ad Cantic. cap. 1. v. 2.
Novatians, in favor to the irregularity of their Vpstart Bishop, as we may
conceive, who yet if they returned to the Church, might not have Admission
without it, as appears by the seventh Canon of the Council of Laodicea Council.
and Laodic. c. 7.


And here I might give you in heaps of Counsels and Fathers for the abetting
of this practice, but I shall content my self to point at some few.

First then for Councels, you may take Vid. Council. Eliber. Can. 38.77.
Arelatens. 1 Can. 8. Arelatens. 2 Can. 17. Laodic. Can. 7.48.
the Eliberitan, the two Councels at Arles, that of Laodicea, the first
contemporary to the first Council of Nice, the two next within twenty six, and
the fourth but sixty eight years after it. All which speak punctually to this
business, as appears by their several Canons.

Secondly for Fathers, take three or four in lieu of the rest. So Tertullian
tells us, that Tertull. de Resur. Carnis.
Caro manus impositione adumbratur, ut anima Spiritu illuminetur, the flesh is
overshadowed by the laying on of the hand, that the soul may be enlightened by
the Spirit. And again, Tertull. de Baptismo.
Manus imponitur per benedictionem advocans, and invitans Spiritum; the hand is
laid on by way of benediction calling down, and inviting the Spirit.

Add to him S. Cyprian Cyprian Epistola ad Iubajanum.
in his Epistle ad Jubajanum, where having spoken of this passage of the Text,
he tells us, quod nunc quoque apud nos geritur, that the same is still
practiced in the Church; and if you please to look on that place, you will find
a full conformity in every particular to the pattern here. I might join to
these S. Hierom Non quidem abnuo hanc esse Ecclesiarum consuetudinem, ut ad eos
qoi long in minoribus urbibus per Presbyteros, and Diaconos baptizati sunt
Episcopus ad invocationem Sancti Spiritus manum impositurus excurrat Hieronym.
contra Lucifer.
and S. Augustine Augustine. lib. 3. de Baptism. contra Donatistas, c. 16.
, and indeed what not? and if afterward the instances of the later times were
needful, I might also show you the full consent of the Vide Apolog. Waldens.
Waldenses, the Seminary of the reformation, and of their Partners Vide tibi
cui titulus Ratio Disciplinae ordinesque Ecclesiastici in Vnitate fratrum
Bohemorum. Vbi Forma Noviti^s recipien di Consule p. 46. edit. Comeni^^^^ vid.
and notus Comen^^ in loc.
the Fratres Onitatis of Bohemia, but I need not multiply more Authorities in a
matter of Fact which I find few doubting of, and therefore shall pass on from
the Action in the next place to show you,

2. The method of proceeding to it employed in the particle Then. Then laid
their hands, etc.

And the method you see in this Church was this, men were first brought to the
Faith by the preaching of the word, and then were they Baptized, and then, and
not till then the Apostles proceed to the confirmation of them by prayer, and
laying on of hands.

It was fit the begetting word should go before the strengthening word, the
Sacrament of regeneration, before the (...) of Confirmation. To give this last
before the other were ordinarily to set a seal to a blank, to desire strength
where there was no life.

Take this for your rule, it is good not to proceed in Gods Ordinances by
leaps, Pachymer. in Dionys. Areop. ad c. 2. (...) 3. Sect. 4. in Ecclesiastic.
Hierarch.
(...), not to leap disorderly upon those Ordinances and Stations for which we
are not sitted, but to go from strength to strength in our appearances before
God in Zion, Psalm. 84.7. And then as Confirmation ought not to be Administered
till Baptism be presupposed, so regularly neither ought the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper to be given to those which have not been first confirmed; as the
former was the Practice here, so the latter is the Rubric after Confirmation.
command of our Church, and was ever the practice of the Primitive. Hence the
Auctor imperfecti operis in Matthew. Gratia corporis Christi illis solis danda
est qui jam per baptismum facti sunt filii Dei, and per manus impositionem,
Homil. 17.
Author of the imperfect work on Matthew going under S. Chrysostomes name,
tells us, that the grace of Christ's body is to be given to them only which are
already become the Sons of God by Baptism, and Imposition of hands: and so
Albaspinaeus Confirmatio namque extremam quasi manum perfectionis addere
videbatur, and fastigium imponere, qua quis Christiani nomine, and Eucharistiae
sumptione dignus putaretur. Albaspin. in Council. Eliberen. cap. 7.
vir antiquorum Ecclesiae rituum scientissimus, as Bishop Usher justly styles
him, a most knowing man in the Ancient rites of the Church, averres, that
Confirmation seemed to give the last stroke to, and to lay on the roof of that
perfection by which a person was accounted worthy of the name of a Christian,
and the participation of the Eucharist. And so in Dionysius Ar^opagita, we find
that after Confirmation the Bishop declared the party to be one meet for the
receiving of the (...). Dionys. Aerop. Eccles. Hierarch. c. 2. Sect. 7.
Holy Communion, having (says he) sealed or annealed the man with the Divine
ointment, he declares him henceforth to be one that has a right to the holy
and most perfecting communion of the Lords Supper.

Nor let any repine at this suspense, you shall ever find that the Ordinances
of God have most honor and efficacy in their proper order, and the souls of
men thrive best in their proper places and ranks. Strong meat may be little
better then poison to him who is only fit for milk. The womb is the place of
the Embryo, if you rip up that, that the child may be sooner at the breast, you
give it air not to breath, but die in.

And as there ought to be care taken for the administering of Gods Ordinances in
their due rank and order, so likewise that they be administered by that Rank and
Order of men only, which are empowered thereunto.

There have been indeed pretenders which desire to have an hand in this
business, as still there will be in matters of Privilege and Preheminency.
But the first practice will be ever the best rule: the first Church the surest
mistress of the latter, whose example ought to be our guidance, as the Harm.
Confess. Prima Ecclesia posterioru^ vera, and optima magistra, and praecundo
ducit nos.
Bohemians say in their Confession. Here then let us to our pattern again, and
so for your direction take notice of the.

3. Particular observed in the words which intimates the Ministers of this
Ordinance in the Pronoun They. Then laid They their hands. And who these were,
the fourteenth verse will inform us, even S. Peter and S. John, two of the
Apostles whom the Church sent down to Samaria to confirm those new converts.

But what needed that message may some say? was not Philip there already, who
by the preaching of the world, and working many signs and wonders, had gained
them to the Faith, and also Baptized them? and why might not he undertake this
business also. It is true he was a Deacon, but not such as the later times
have fancied the Steward only of the Almes-box, but one that de jure might
both preach and Baptize. Nay farther he was an Evangelist, and that in some
men's apprehension (how groundless you may see by this instance) might be
enough to entitle him to all the powers of the Church. You know how warmely,
though as vainly it is urged in the case of Timothy, and Titus, and yet Philip
the Deacon, Phillip the Preacher, Phillip the Baptist, Phillip the Evangelist
might not, and therefore would not attempt the work for all this.

Will you know the reason? Chrysostom. in Loc.
S. Chrysostom upon the place will tell you, because he had neither (...), nor
(...) neither the gift, nor Authority for it, this being as he after speaks
(...) a special prerogative of the Apostles, and indeed we find it ever
reserved to their hands in Scripture. As for that only instance given to the
contrary of Ananias a Disciples laying on of hands on S. Paul, and the promise
that he should receive the Holy Ghost. Act. 9.17. Calv. Institut: lib. 4. cap.
19. Sect. 10. and Tractat. devera Ecclesiae reformanda ratione cap. 12. Quem
Ananiae Episcopatum dabunt ne alienum arripuisse manus videatur.
which is alleged by M. Calvin, and his Followers.

I conceive it may be fairly answered.

1. That Ananias his Laying on of hands was only in order to the cure of S.
Paul's blindness as is intimated ver. 12.

2. That the promise of the Holy Ghost referred to S. Paul's Baptism, which was
to ensue, wherein questionless the holy Spirit was conferred: though in
somewhat a different respect then he was in Confirmation.

3. And which may suffice to choke this objection, it is clear, the imposition
of hands there spoken of was not a part of Confirmation, as appears by the
story, for it went before S. Paul's Baptism, so ver. 18. whereas Confirmation
in the Practice of the Church then: (as indeed in reason it ought,) still
succeeded after Baptism for ought we read, it being also probable that S. Paul
as well as the rest of the Apostles was Confirmed miraculously, and immediately
from heaven; and then this instance will be no bar to what was formerly
asserted.

Yea, but will some say, supposing it belonged only to the Apostles then,
Their persons are gone, and their office ceased; and so ought this Rite too,
Calvin. Instit. l. 4. cap 19. Sect. 10.
or must be administered by Officers of another Rank, Number Episcopi omnino sunt
Apostoli? are Bishors indeed Apostles: (...) Calvin's Question upon the Case.

Here then, Let me tell them that the Office of Apostles is not ceased, nor was
so to do with their Persons, as appears by Christ's promise Mat. Matthew. 28.20.
28.20. I am with you always unto the end of the world, Now this could not be
meant of their Persons, who in a few years were to leave the world, it must
needs therefore be understood of their Function, which either must be succeeded
to, or else it was as temporary as their persons.

Indeed in the Apostles there was something extraordinary, as immediate
Mission, unlimited Jurisdiction, and miraculous Operations, which were not
necessary to be perpetual, Great helps it is true for the first founding of the
Church, which being constituted, and become able to subsist without them,
reasonable it was that they should cease as Manna did when Israel was come into
the Land of Canaan.

But then the ordinary offices, and powers of Apostles as Preaching, Baptizing,
Confirming, Consecrating, Ordaining, Governing, which were necessary for the
continuance of a Church, at least the well being of it, in these they ought to
be, and were succeeded, or else there offices must fail or be executed by
persons not empowered to them. And then for Vnity's sake likewise fit it was,
that some rank of men should be the Common Receptacles of all these powers,
that so they might issue forth to others as far as the necessities of the
Church should call for: with more order and Peace, and this sort of men were
Bishops, called at first Apostles as (...). Theodoret in Com. ad Ep. 1. ad Tim.
Theodoret observes, till afterward in process of time they left that name to
the Prime Apostles, and took that of Bishops, as of a more humble import, and
which formerly had been common even unto Presbyters.

But then those now called Bishops were in the judgment of the Church the
proper Successors of the Apostles, so Irenaeus advers. Haeres. lib. 3. c. 3.
Irenaeus having told us before that Bishops were constituted by the Apostles
in the Churches, he add's after quos and successores relinquebant suum ipsorum
locum magisterii tradentes, that they left them their successors, delivering
to them their own place of rule, and guidance in the Church, and so Cyprian Ep.
69. ad Florentium Pupianu^.
S. Cyprian ad Florentium Pupianum asserts that the Praepositi (that is Bishops
in his language) Apostolis vicaria ordinatione succedunt, they succeed the
Apostles, ordained as Vicars in there places, upon which words Pamelius Notes
that it was the third time he had so said. And so Hieron. Ep. ad Marcellam
adversus Montanum.
S. Hierome surely no flatterer of that Order; in his Epistle ad Marcellam
adversus Montanum says, apud nos Apostolorum locum Episcopi tenent, with us
the Bishops hold the place of Apostles. And Hieronym. in Psalm. ubi not
numeramus 45
again upon Mal. 45. as we number it verse. 16. where we read in stead of thy
Fathers shall be thy children S. Hierome paraphraseth it pro patribus
Apostolis, filii, Episcopi, ut Episcopi Apostolis, tanquam filii Patribus
succedant instead of Apostles as Fathers thou shall have Bishops as sons who
may succeed the Apostles as sons do their Fathers. I might add the praegnant
testimony of Clarus a Mascula dixit Manifesta est sententia Domini nostri Jesus
Christi Apostolos mittentis, and ipsis solis potestatem a patre sibi data^
permittentis, quibus nos successimus, eadem potestate Ecclesiam Domini
gubernantes, Aug. lib. 7. de Baptism. contra Donatistas c. 43.
Clarus a Mascula recited by S. Augustine, lib. Sept. de Baptismo contra
Donatistas, and tell you farther how Basil the Great calls, Episcopacy (...),
and (...) the praefecture, or praecedency which the Apostles had from God, and
these are fair witnesses, in whose judgment you see there are Apostles still,
and who they are which by the Verdict of the Church may claim that title, and
so Calving number Episcopi sunt omnino Apostoli? is answered.

But he has another Calvin. Instit. lib. 4. c. 19. Sect. 10.
An soli sint Apostoli? if they be such, are they the only such? may these,
and these only lay on hands, that will not go down neither.

To this I answer first in General that as to a full Apostolic power in the
sense before mentioned, and the primary derivation of it, they and they only
are such, 2ly. as to this ordinance in particular, as we find no other Stewards
of it in Scripture besides the Apostles as we have showed, so if we look upon
the after practices of the Church, Cyprian Ep. ad jubaianum.
S. Cyprian relating to the passage in the Text tells us, quod nunc quoque apud
nos geritur, we have the same custom, ut qui in Ecclesia Baptizantur
Praepositis Ecclesiae offerantur; that those which are Baptized be presented to
the Bishops of the Church, that by our prayer, and the laying on of hands they
may obtain the holy Ghost, as he goes on in his Epistle ad Jubajanum
forementioned, and so Augustine. de Trin. lib. 15. c. 26.
S. Augustine lib. 15. de Trinitate Quem morem in suis praepositis etiam nunc
servat Ecclesia, which custom the Church observes by her Bishops at this time.
And from hence does Chrysostom. in loc.
S. Chrysostom draw the same practice, in his Comment on the Text (...) says
he, (...) hence we see the principal, and chief of the Church, and no other
performing this work. I shall close up this with that saying of Hieronymus
contra Luciferianos.
S. Hierome, quod si hoc loco quaeris quare in Ecclesia baptizatus nisi per
manus Episcopi non accipiat spiritum Sanctum, quem nos asserimus in vero
Baptismate tribui. If thou shall ask why in the Church the Baptized receives
not the holy Ghost, but by the hands of the Bishop; though we aver the same
spirit is received in Baptism rightly administered: to this he answers, Disce
hanc observationem ex ea Authoritate descendere, quod post ascensum Domini
Spiritus Sanctus ad Apostolos descendit. Know (says he) that this practice
takes its rise from that Authority, where it is said, that after the Ascension
of our Lord, the holy Spirit descended upon the Apostles, implying the Bishops
to be their Successors, and that to them and not others it belongs to derive
this gift in confirmation; and in this channel both Fathers, and Councels
generally run, no laying on of the hands of the Presbytery in this business,
at least not in any proper right of their own.

As for those 2. instances commonly brought to the contrary, first of the
Presbyters in Egypt which Hilarious Sardus relates, for he is the Author, and
not S. Ambrose, and that of no great credit neither if S. Hierome may be
believed: secondly of those Priests in Sardinia in Gregory the great's time,
which Calvin also presses, for brevity's sake I shall not acquaint you with my
own conceptions, but refer you rather to what has been lately spoken by that
Blessed man Dr. Hammond (...) in opere posthumo de Confirmatione.
Dr. Hammond in his Posthumous piece upon confirmation, as also by that very
learned Prelate, whose name in this place for modesty I spare, in his Elegant,
and Accurate Epistle Epistola preliminari ad lectorem.
before the said work, from whom you may receive abundant satisfaction; and
what would the Vintage of Abiezer be unto the Gleanings of Ephraim? By what
has been spoken you see the judgment of the Church in this Question, and so
an answer to Calvin's other, An soli Episcopi sunt Apostoli.

And indeed great reason there was for this reserve to this Function.

First, For the honor of Episcopacy, and thereby the Unity of the Church ad
honorem Sacerdotii that is S. Hierome's reason contra Luciferianos, for the
honor of this sacred Function, Why? of what import is that? Let him tell you,
as mean as some think of it. Ecclesiae salus (says he) in summi sacerdotis
dignitate pendet. The safety of the Church depends upon the dignity of her
chief superiors, to whom (as he adds) Hierom contra Luciferian. cui si non
exors quaedam and ab omnibus Eminens detur potestas, tot in Ecclesiis
efficientur Schismata, quot Sacerdotes.
if some eminent offices of power above others were not given, there would be
in the Church as many Schisms as Priests: I wish our late times had not made
too sufficient a comment on those last words, and of this by the way it is,
that Venerable Vid eruditissimum Hammondum de Confirmatione p. 53.
Bid speaks, when he tells us that this was not granted to every Priest
propter arrogantiam, not out of the pride of Bishops as some falsely gloss him,
but to prevent the Ambition of Priests, who would be apt to grow insolent if
they had all offices in common with their superiors.

Second reason was from their relation to the Church as they were the Primary,
if not only proper Pastors of those Churches unto which they related, as we
find them every where styled with a kind of appropriation among the Ancients,
and it is observed that simply, Pastores, or Pastores Ecclesiae, none are
called besides them selves for the first six hundred years. To them the
Regiment of the whole Church was committed at first, the Presbyters being but
their Assistants in Cities, and Villages, admitted in partem solicitudinis into
a part of their care, first casually, and cursorily, and then by station, and
fixed residency, when Parishes were divided and endowed. Hieren. contra
Luciferianos.
Inde venit (says S. Hierome) ut sine Chrismate, and Episcopi Iussione, neque
Presbyter, neque Diaconus jus habeat Baptizandi, hence neither the Presbyter,
nor Deacon has right to Baptize without Chrisme, and the command of the
Bishop. Only the multitude, and instant necessities of Baptism increasing,
and so a power being granted to Presbyters, and Deacons as occasion served to
dispense it, reasonable it was that those which passed not through the Bishops
hands in that Ordinance, he should take recognition of them as of the rest in
this of Confirmation, as being a part of his Flock and cure.

Thirdly, It being the Priests office to bless the people, and that also being
an Act of Authority, Heb. 7.7.
as we see Hebr. 7.7. in common congruity none so proper for this action, none
from whose performance ex officio the success might be so readily expected as
he that was the Summus Sacerdos, the chief, if not the only Pastor of the
Diocese.

And thus you see the hands which are to manage this work, in which I have
stuck the longer, because perhaps the main controversy about Confirmation at
this time sticks there too, I come on next in the.

Fourth place to the objects on whom these hands were laid, and those were the
Samaritans, the believing, baptized Samaritans.

1. They were Samaritans, and those were at first a mongrell generation of
Idolators, as you may see 2. Kings 17. Afterward from San Ballat's time a set
of Shismaticks, who had erected Altar contra Altar, an altar in Mount Gerizim
in opposition to the Altar at Jerusalem, an altar built as Benjamin in his
Itinerary relates, R. Benjamin in Itinerario.
of those stones which the Israelites had set up after their passage through
Jordan, an Altar in some kind Sacrilegious as well as Schismatical, and then
hateful they were to the Jews even to a Sic Iesum vocant Samaritanum propter
Consuetudinem ejus cum Samaritanis, and ex eo quod discipuli ejus cum
Samaritanis commercia habuerant, convitium illud Iudaeorum ei impactum est
Samaritanum illum fuisse, 1. Iudaeum Apostatam and sane gentem Samariticam
utpote quae Cuthaeorum, and Iudaeorum colluvies, habebant sibi prae aliis
invisissimam, and veluti Gentiles. Atque ut alias fieri solet quo angustius
post defectionem interstitium, eo gravius utrinque odium. Seldom de jure
naturali and Gentium secundum Hebr. l. 2. c. 5. p. 182. vid eund. p. 144.
Proverb as you see John 8.48.

Howbeit the Pentateuch they embraced, and so were in Confinio Lucis, nearest
to the Jews in their religion, and it was good to be borderers upon that. As
their seat was between mount Sic Benjamin in Itineratio.
Gerizim, and mount Ebal, so was their condition near to cursing, but near to
blessing too, and now the blessings of mount Gerizim prevailed, they were the
second Stage in Christ's gesses for the Gospels progress, as you may see Acts
1.8.
Acts 1.8. The time was come wherein Aholah should become Aholibah, they which
had separated themselves from the living God, and set up a tabernacle of their
own, should become the tabernacle of the Lord that I may allude to their
Predecessors Ezekiel. 23.4.
Ezekiel. 23.4.

We should not despair of the worst of schismatics, God can graft them in when
the natural branches fall off. Jerusalem you see rejects the Gospel, which
Samaria will entertain, and accordingly they did, for they believed, and were
baptized ver. 12. of this chap.

1. They were believers, what really such? no question many were, but some
might not be so, as appears by Simon Magus in this chapter, nor had the
Apostles a power to discern the hearts of men, whereby to know whether they
were such, or no, Simon Magus else in probability had not crept into Baptism.

It was then by their profession of it that they judged them such, and from
thence we may take this direction.

That none ought to be admitted unto Confirmation which have not first made a
profession of their faith, and purpose of holy living.

For as a personal faith is the condition before God of title to the
privileges of Adult members of the Church, so the profession of this faith is
the formal, proximate condition of their title before the Church, withoutwhich
profession they ought not to be admitted to such privileges. The Church cannot
otherwise know that they own the Covenant made in Baptism between God, and
them, which also is the remote Foundation of after privileges. Hence the
Chrisme in Pseudo-Clemens is by a Metonymie styled (...), the establishing of
their confession, or profession.

If you desire to know what kind of profession is hereunto required, I conceive
with others, that it ought first for the matter of it to be a profession of
true Christianity, 2 for the quality of it, His Majesty's Declaration.
it ought to be (as his Majesty speaks) a Credible profession, that is such as
seems to be understanding, serious, voluntary, and not made void by any
contradiction in word, or deed; I mean such a contradiction as shows that we
lie, or speak against the testimony of our own hearts.

This ought to precede Baptism in those that are of age, and Confirmation in
those that have received that Sacrament in their Infancy, of the first of these
the Ancient Church was very careful, and that both the Jewish, and the
Primitive Christian.

First the Jewish, for amongst them, Baptism in the Admission, of those which
were styled Proselyti, Justitiae, Proselytes of Justice was constantly in use,
and that looked upon as a means of regeneration, and the Person so Proselyted
(...) as an Infant New born, Vide haec eum sequentibus apud Seldom. De
Synedriis l. 1. c. 3. and de jure naturali, and gentium secundum Hebraeos l. 2.
c. 2. etc. 3.
as the Talmudists speak in Gemarah Babylon, ad tit. Jabimoth, and was said to
be received (...) under the wings of the Divine Majesty.

Now in order to their Admission unto Baptism in those that were adult, they
were wont to advise them several times of the weightinesse of the business
they went about, of the holiness of that people to whom they desired to be
joined, of the rewards promised to the just, and the punishments threatened to
evil doers, and of an after life when this was finished; as also of the
difficulty of observing the Mosaic precepts, diligently enquiring into the
purpose of the person; whether he desired to enter this estate (...) out of
love to their religion, and with a sincere heart; after this followed the
parties profession of the whole Jewish religion, and of his assent to it in
every part, and this was done before the (...), or the Triumviri which were to
take that profession, which if they judged sincere, the Party was admitted by
Circumcision, Baptism, and Sacrifice, at least by the two latter, into the
rank and privileges of an Israelite. If any had slipped in without this
examination, or there were grounds to presume that he had but dissembled in it,
though the Rites of his Initiation were not repeated, no more then Baptism
among Christians, Seldenus ubi supra.
yet was he not publicly admitted, till by the sentence of the Sanhedrim it
appeared, that freely, and out of love he had given up himself to their
Religion, and that willingly he embraced it. Thus you see the care of the
Synagogue in this particular, which was after Copied out.

Second By the Christian Church. If we look upon the Scripture, to omit other
places of a like import, take but that of S. Peter, 1 Pet. 3.21. where Baptism
is called, The answer of a good conscience toward God: the word (...)
signifying as all Learned men do agree, metonymically, or by Synecdoche, the
answer, or rather the (...). Nazianz. Orat. in Sanctum Baptisma. Grot. Annot.
Stipulation consisting of the Interrogatories of Baptism, and the answer
returned by him that is Baptized, undertaking to believe, and live like a
Christian, as Grotius fully shows in his Annotations.

And then answerable unto these Patterns was the practice of the Primitive
Church afterward, as appears by their care about the Catechumeni. These had a
Qui Doctor Audientium dicitur, Cypr. Epist. 24.
Catechist allowed them, for their instruction, besides the assistance of that
Vid. Dionys. Areopag. Ecclesiastiae Hierarchiae cap. 2. Sect. 2. and cap. 7, 8,
11.
Christian friend which was to bring them to the Bishop. Neither came they to
Baptism nisi de rebus Fidei plane instructi, till they were instructed in all
matters of Faith, the mysteries of the Lords Supper only excepted; nor were
they Baptized nisi postquam ea omnia se credere jurassent, till they had sworn
their belief of them, says Albaspinae us Vide Albaspinaeum in Tertull. de
Paenitentia fol. 289.
: and as to their purpose of living, they solemnly swore to forsake sin, so the
same Author. After this followed their (...), their solemn abrenuntiations of
the Devil, and his Pomps, which were Dionys. Areop. de Ecclesiastica
Hierarchiae cap. 2. Sect. 6, 7.
thrice pronounced with their Faces toward the West; and then their no less
solemn professions of their Faith, thrice made toward the East, which
professions were entered into a Dionys. Areop. de Ecclesiastic. Hierarch. cap.
Sect. 5.
Register, and Subscribed. Unto which were added in diverse Churches, several
Scrutinies; and so in the fourth Council. Carthag. 4. Can. 85.
Council of Carthage, Can. 85. we read of a crebra Examinatio, an often
Examination, which was to go before Baptism, which Scrutinies were about
Albinus de divinis offic. Cap. de Sabbato Sancto Paschae,
their Faith, and Manners, and purpose of holy living; and these held publicly
in Conspectu totius Ecclesiae, in the sight of the whole Church, as appears by
S. Augustine, lib. 2. de Symbol. ad Catechumenos. In brief, Fidem Christianam,
Christianumque vivendi genus, and mores sese amplexos, persequuturosque
jurabant antequam baptizarentur; so Albaspinaeus ubi supra. Vide and Justin.
Martyr in Apologia ad Antoninum sub fine.
Albaspinaeus. They swear that they embraced and would stick to the Christian
Faith, would live and behave themselves as Christians; and all this before they
were baptized. So great (...) care was taken by the Church then, for the
securing that profession we plead for, in those which were of age. But now our
case being usually such, that our Children are Baptized when they are Infants,
it has been the wisdom of our Church to provide, 1. Order of Confirmation.
That their Confirmation be deferred till they come to years of discretion; and
2. That then having learned what was promised in their behalf by their
Sureties, they may with their own mouth, and their own consent before the
Church, ratify, and confirm the same; and also promise, that by the Grace of
God, they will evermore endeavor themselves faithfully to observe, and keep
such things, as they by their own mouth and confession have assented to. And
this is as much (if duly performed) as any in reason can demand for a
Church-assurance, that men may be looked upon as Believers. But that was not
the only qualification of these Samaritanes, they were

2. Baptized, and what ever Wickliffe in Vide Bellar. de confirmatione cap. 12.
Bellarmine is said to have affirmed, rigtly too, by S. Philip, Legitimum, and
Ecclesiasticum Baptismum consequuti fuerunt, says S. Cyprian. Iubaianum.
Cyprian, they had received lawful Church-baptisme: and yet the Apostles which
best understood the Orders, and wants of the Church, lay hands on them: quod
deerat a Petro, and Johanne factum est, says the same Father, what was wanting
was supplied by Peter and John: wanting? to what? not to their Baptism sure,
that was granted before, but to the Baptized, being capable of this Ordinance,
something was.

And if any shall ask the Question we meet with in Eusebius. Emissenus, sive
Eucherius Lugdunens. Homil. in Pentecost.
Eusebius, Emissenus, or Eucherius Lugdunensis, as some will have it, in his
Homily upon Pentecost, Quid mihi prodest post mysterium Baptismatis,
ministerium Confirmantis, what profit shall I receive by the ministry of
Confirmation, having received the mystery of Baptism? St. Cyprian will tell
him: the id quod deerat, what was wanting to these, namely ut oratione pro iis
habita and manu imposita, etc. That by prayer made for them, and laying on of
hands upon them, the Apostles might invoke, and pour on them the Holy Ghost:
and from thence we may gather,

That Baptized persons may have yet further need of Confirmation, for the
ministry of the Holy Ghost unto them.

In the former verse we read, that the Holy Ghost had not fallen on any of
them; there was need of a further Ordinance for that, which being performed, we
presently find in the Text, that they received him; which brings me to the

Fifth and last Particular, the Effect or Consequent, of this laying on of the
Apostles hands, in those words, And they received the Holy Ghost.

True say some, we believe and acknowledge, that the Ceremony was then very
allowable, while the Holy Ghost was to be communicated, as here to these
Samaritans, which was in a miraculous manner; to enable them to speak with
Tongues, to Prophecy, and the like; but alas, the gift is lost, and so the
Ceremony may be well left too; to this purpose Mr. Calvin. Instit. l. 4. c. 19.
Sect. 6, 7.
Calvin, Institut. lib. 4. cap. 19. Sect. 6. in which Section, and that which
follows, he inveighs against the Ceremony, and the Administratours of it, to
say no worse, with more intemperance then became the wisdom of so Learned a
person, in so grave a matter.

For answer whereunto, we grant that it is true, that in those times miraculous
gifts did commonly follow the laying on of the Apostles hands, but that was not
all that was thereby designed, nor all that was meant by the Holy Ghost, nor
perhaps was common to all that are said to receive him, and in those that were
partakers of them: those gifts were commonly but the splendour and
efflorescencies, or as Letters testimonial of better to be sure, of greater
value and benefit to the Receiver, though they carried less pomp and show in
the worlds eye.

There were more purposes of the effusion of the Spirit then one; and he that
receives him to any of those purposes, especially the chief, though not in some
Accidental, transitory particular, may be as truly said to receive him as
another which has that also. Indeed as St. Augustine. Tract. 6. in Epistol.
Johan.
Augustine speaks, those were signa tempori opportuna, signs very useful for
those times: August lib. 3. de baptismo contra Donatistas c. 16.
neque temporalibus, and sensibilibus miraculis attestantibus per manus
impositionem modo datur Spiritus Sanctus, sicut antea dabatur ad commendationem
rudis fidei; and Ecclesiae primordia dilatanda, the Holy Spirit now given by
imposition of hands, is not accompanied with temporal and sensible miracles as
then he was; for the first establishing of the Faith, and the enlargement of
the Church at its beginning: sed invisibiliter, and latenter intelligitur, but
yet secretly, and invisibly, Charity through the bond of peace (as he speaks)
is still inspired into men's hearts, so as they may say, that the love of God is
spread abroad in our hearts by the Holy Spirit which is given us: thus that
holy Father.

Indeed as the Apostle speaks, There are diversity of gifts, gratiae gratis
datae, gifts for edification; and gratiae gratum facientes, graces for
sanctification, but the same Spirit that works both, 1 Corin. 12.11. And
these last were mainly had respect to in this donation, as will appear if we
consider, first the promise of Christ concerning the gift it self; secondly the
Characters of the Receivers of it.

1. John 7.38, 39.
The promise of Christ, you have it John 7. where in the 38, verse he speaks of
some eminent, but inward gracious effects to be wrought upon, and in the hearts
of Believers, for that is meant by these words, Out of his belly shall flow
rivers of living waters, i. e. He shall have such an abundance of grace, that
it shall break forth into all manner of Christian actions, and then ver. 39.
the Evangelist tells us, that This he spoke of the Spirit, which they that
believe in him should receive, for as yet the Holy Ghost was not, (i. e. among
them, or in them, in so powerful a manner) because Jesus was not yet
glorified. Where you see, that inward grace was the main of Christ's promise,
and that also to be fulfilled upon the descent of the Spirit. See S. Peter to
the same purpose, Acts 2.38. Act. 2.38.
where he wishes his Hearers to repent and believe, telling them they should
receive the Holy Ghost; he gives the reason in the next verse, for (says he)
the promese is to you and your children, and to all that are afar off, even as
many as the Lord your God shall call: which words imply, that the gift was to
be permanent in the Church, the promise being, that the Holy Ghost should be
given to all which at any time should be converted: this could not possibly be
true, if meant only of miraculous gifts, which, it is plain, soon after ceased.

2. The Characters of those which received the Holy Ghost seem to speak no
less, so Acts 4.31. Act. 4.31.
The Character of those that were filled with the Holy Ghost is, that they
speak the word with boldness, that is, courage, and Christian resolution i and
so Acts 6.3. Wisdom; Act. 6.3, 5.
and v. 5. Faith is made the Character of such a one as had received the Holy
Ghost; and so Acts 11.24. Act. 11.24.
it is said of Barnabas, that he was a good man, and full of the Holy Ghost,
and Faith, and then Christian courage, Wisdom, Faith, and the like, abide
still I hope: and if the Spirit be given in these, the main gift is not yet
ceased. Hence S. Augustine. Tract. 6. in Epistol. Ioh.
Augustine very smartly asks the question, ita perverso cord aliquis vestrum,
Is any of you of so perverse an heart, as to deny that these (speaking of some
on whom he had newly laid hands) have received the Holy Ghost, because they
have not the gift of speaking with Tongues: and afterward he adds, Si vis
nosse quia accepisti Spiritum sanctum, If thou will certainly know whether thou
have received the Holy Ghost, Interroga cor tuum, ask thy heart; that will tell
thee, unless perhaps thou have received Confirmation, and not the virtue of
it: if thou find the love of the Brethren there, thou may be sure thou have
received the Holy Ghost: thus S. Augustine.

So that by the Holy Ghost, not only the gift of miracles, but the internal
graces of the Spirit are to be understood, which being really the greater, and
chiefly intended in the gift of the Holy Ghost: if these still continue in the
Church, so may the means of their conveyance too, though miracles be ceased.

We know that Preaching at the first was attended with miraculous events, and
so was Excommunication, which had not only influence upon the soul, or the
Church State of a man, but an habeas corpus, for the body too, and so Faith was
the great engine to work miracles in those times, and we think these ought not
to have vanished out of the Church with the miracles which sometimes
accompanied them.

Yea, but may some further say with him in Eusebius. Emissenus Homil. in Pentecost.
Euseb^us Emissenus, If this be so, that Baptized persons have yet need that
the Spirit be given to them, quantum video non totum de font suscepimus, si
post fontem adjectione novi generis indigemus, it seems we have not received
all we ought at the Font, if afterward we need a supply of another kind; will
not this derogate from the honor and perfection of Baptism? is not the Holy
Ghost then received? shall we empty the Font to fill the hands of the Bishop?

I answer no, we do not; Baptism we allow as perfect in its kind, and as to
the present condition of the Receiver, and if he die presently, regeneratio per
se salvat, the Sacrament of regeneration is sufficient, and death is a kind of
Confirmation to him who from thence forth sin no more. We grant likewise, that
the Holy Ghost accompanies it, as S. Hieronym. contra Luciferianos.
Hierome shows contra Luciferianos, and the Fathers which are most for
Confirmation still allow it, and our Church tells us, that Children being
Baptized have all things necessary for their salvation. Neither make we
Confirmation of such necessity, as if a man might not obtain the Spirit, and be
saved without it, where it cannot conveniently be had, which is all that S.
Hieronym. ibid. Ad honorem potius Sacerdotii, quam ad legis necessitatem.
Alioqui si ad Episcopi tantum imprecationem Spiritus Sanctus defluit lugendi
sunt qui in Viculis aut in Castellis, aut in remotioribus locis per Presbyteros
and Diaconos baptizati ante dormierunt quam ab Episcopis inviserentur.
Hierome means by his quam ad legis necessitatem, not so much for any necessity
of Law, as appears by his following words, though some draw strange inferences
from it. And yet for all this, there is room for a (...) in them which are
reserved for age, and further conflicts; for a collation of further grace by
Confirmation, and yet it is the same Spirit in both, but with diverse effects,
as Eusebius Emissenus speaks, the Holy Ghost which descends with saving
influence upon the waters of Baptism, gives fullness of innocence at the Font,
but in Confirmation he gives strength and increase of Grace; in Baptism he
regenerates us to life, after Baptism he confirms us for the battle, ad
militiam fidei, for the warfare of Faith, as the Bohemians speak in their
Confession, though some boggle so much at it; which the same Father explains
very appositely. As a Commander (says he) when he takes one into the number of
his Soldiers, does not only set his mark or badge upon him, but also
furnishes him with Arms for the Fight: so to him that is Baptized, the
benediction of Confirmation is a kind of Ammunition or Defense. We are Listed
in Baptism, but in Confirmation our old Arms are scoured up, and new are
bestowed upon us, and yet by the same Spirit still. Which as he is given in
diversity of gifts, so sometimes in different degrees of the same gift: the
Apostles received him thrice says Nazianz. (...), according to the measure of
their present capacity, and that at three several times; before Christ's
Passion, after his Resurrection, and again after his Ascent into Heaven: at the
first time (...), more obscurely; at the second (...), Nazianz. in Sanct.
Pentecost.
more lively and expressly; at the third time (...), more perfectly then at
the former, so Nazianzene, Orat. in Sanct. Pentecost. and we find their inward
grace still increasing, so that those which shrunk from Christ at his Passion,
Matthew. 25.56. head the scattered members of his Church after his Resurrection,
but then when Pentecost was come, they Preach the word boldly, and undauntedly;
for then, as Leo Sermon. 2. in Pentecost dicit Apostolos accepisse Constantiam
illius spiritus quae omnem formidinem for as mitteret, and furorem persequentium
non timeret. Quia Spiritus Sancti nova abundantia repleti ardentius velle, and
efficacius posse caeperunt, pro. ficientes a praeceptorum scientia ad
tolerantiam passionum, ut sub nulla jam tempestate trepidantes fluctus seculi,
and Elationes mundi fide supergrediente calcarent, and morte contempta omnibus
Gentibus Evangelium inferrent.
Leo the Great in his second Homily on that Festival speaks, They received
that stability of spirit, which shut out all carnal fear, making them not to
dread the fury of their Persecutours, being filled (says he) with a new
abundance of the Holy Spirit, they began to will more ardently, and were
enabled to perform more powerfully; their knowledge was now improved into a
patient suffering of afflictions, so that not being shaken with any tempests,
by a surpassing Faith they trampled under foot the waves and risings of the
world, and contemning death it self, brought in the Gospel of truth unto the
Gentiles: thus Leo of them.

And indeed if we carefully look upon the Scripture, we shall find an eminent
gift of the Holy Ghost to be expected after our first Believing, even such as
ceased not with miracles, so Gal. 4.6. Because ye are Sons, God has sent forth
the spirit of his Son into your hearts: first Sons, and then is the Spirit
sent, which yet in some kind they must have before, or else could not have been
Sons: and so Ephesians. 1.13. In whom after ye believed, (mark that) you were
sealed with the Holy Spirit of promise; and of this the same Apostle, 2 Cor.
1.21, 22. Now he that establishes us with you in Christ, and has anointed
us, is God, who has also sealed us and given the earnest of the Spirit in our
hearts. As there is preventing, and converting, so there is an establishing,
corroborating Grace, which is conceived to be meant in those places; fresh
supplies, new strength, for advance, and perseverance in holiness; such as
make us not only Plants, but Pillars in the House of God, fixed, and
immovable, such as will make a man stand steady upon a billow, calm in a
tempest; not only to bear up, but to rejoice in tribulations, passing through,
not only the baits and pleasures of the world with scorn and contempt, but
even distress, persecution, famine, nakedness, peril, swords, with the
courage of More then a Conqueror, Romans 8.35, 37. which is the grace intended
and sought for in Confirmation, and for which reason it is also so called.

The Fathers, (says judicious Hooker lib. 5. Sect. 66.
Hooker) every where impute unto Confirmation the gift of grace of the Holy
Ghost, not which makes us Christian men, but when we are made such, assisteth
us in all virtue, armeth us against all temptations and sin: and the same is
the judgment of our Church, which orders, that Confirmation be administered
unto them that be Baptized, that by imposition of hands and prayer, they may
receive strength and defense against all temptations to sin, and assaults of
the World and the Devil. And thus you see how Confirmation is no prejudice to
Baptism, but may prove a great advantage to the Baptized.

Yea, but will some further say, those in the Text presently received the Holy
Ghost, but are we sure that this Ordinance shall prove effectually confirming
unto us?

I answer, you have a powerful means to this purpose: Saterdotal benediction
(as Flacius Illyricus in Clave Script.
Flacius Illyricus in Clave Script. speaks) is not a bare good Prayer, but as
it were a Pledge, and testimony of Gods love; of special power and efficacy to
open heaven unto those that are partakers of it. And then though the Spirit he
not included in the outward Ceremony, yet that being in fair appearance of Gods
own appointment, Calvin in Act. 13.3.
haec Signorum est utilitas, and efficacia quod in illis Deus operatur, and
tamen unus manet gratiae author, This is the benefit and effect of Signs, that
God works in them, and yet there is but one Author of grace, God himself; thus
Calvin.

2. Let me tell you, that Ordinances are duties, in which we must wait Gods
pleasure for the blessing: we leave not off to pray, because we are not certain
what we pray for shall be presently granted to us.

3. I answer, if you come prepared as you ought, you may be sure of a blessing
in some degree, otherwise the Eucharist may prove a judgment to unmeet
Receivers; Quicquid recipitur, recipitur ad modum recipientis, it will be to
thee according to thy Faith.

And thus I have at last past through the Doctrinal part of the Text, on which
I have stayed the longer, as fearing lest under the great desuetude of this
Ordinance, the true notion of it may have grown somewhat obscure too.

And now to deduce the several Uses which would naturally flow from the
reviewall of the past particulars, it would be a task perhaps too unmerciful
for your (I fear almost tired) patience: and therefore I shall take a shorter
course, and having proved to you the Right, and Catholic use of this
Ordinance, together with the high ends, and aim of it give me leave to close
up all with a passionate Exhortation; and request to all those, who desire the
good of this National Church, that they would endeavor their uttermost in
carrying on this blessed means, of retriving the piety, and exemplary Lives of
all it is members, now God by restoring peace to us, has opened so wide a door
for its full entrance: And here this Exhortation might

1. Make its humble address to the Dispensers of this Ordinance, into whose
hands God and the Church have put it.

And then if need were, and it became my place and rank, in a matter of such
weight, to advise my Superior. I could not do it more pithily and succinctly,
then in his own words; Epistola praedicta.
that this ministration be carried on Curate Auguste, Severe a due care taken
as to the preparation for, a becoming gravity, and sacred solemnity, with all
circumspection, and impartiality in the administration of it.

But blessed be God, we find all this done in so Apostolic a manner, that as
there is great cause of our joy and thankfulness, so there is little reason to
importune him with our needless counsel and advice.

Only I wish, that this holy example may provoke all that are any way
concerned in this work, to come on cheerfully to the help of the Lord in it.
Here then my business will mainly lie with those of an inferior rank: and

First, With you my Reverend Brethren of the Ministry, on whom the care for
preparing Candidates for this Ordinance mainly lies: who are as so many Vid.
Dr. Hammond in loc.
(...), unto which it is conceived that S. Paul alludes, 2 Cor. 11.2. Guides,
and Tutours in this business: Whose task it is to instruct them, to endeavor
to win their consents to Christ; to inspect their lives, and their
sufficiency, and meetnesse for this Ordinance, and accordingly to give the
Bishop information.

The truth is, there will not easily be any miscarriages in this matter, but it
will lie at your doors, as arising from your want of care, or faithfulness in
this business. In preparation for it (upon which notwithstanding all the
clamours rise) you have as much liberty to act, as any godly sober-minded man
can wish for. There is nothing reserved from you, but the administration of it,
unto which as I have showed, you have neither a capacity, nor just pretense:
for which also the Order of the Church have, and I question not the Piety of
those which are entrusted will so provide, that there shall be no ground of
complaint on that account; and then I hope, that those a least will not shrink
from the burden, which have so stiffly claimed, that that and more belongs to
them.

My Brethren, I question not but many of you, in the midst of our confusions,
have been heretofore the Lords Remembrancers, earnestly entreating him, to
arise, and to have mercy upon Sion, and to make our Jerusalem the praise of the
whole earth: and now Beloved, the Lord has arisen, and (...) appeared in his
glory, for the raising of this poor Church out of its ruinee, and whosoever
fears the Lord, and is willing, may go up in his rank and place, to build the
House of the Lord: and in such a time as this, shall we withhold our hand, or
discourage the Master Builders by our backwardness, or negligence, who have
rather reason to bless God, who has reserved us to see this day, and has
honored us with such an opportunity of being useful in so great a work; and I
beseech you therefore in the Lord, let us faithfully and rejoycingly set our
hands and shoulders to it.

Here then in order thereunto, give me leave to recommend some few duties to
you, I shall but name them.

1. Prove. 27.23.
Be diligent to know the state of your flock, Prove. 27.23. to find their wants
and weaknesses, that so you may apply seasonable succors, and suitable
remedies unto them.

2. As a Key to this, add Personal conference, and private instruction, We
have many weak and sickly Parishes, and therefore you ought to be (...), to
walk your Circuits in the Visitation of them; not to think all your business
lies in the Pulpit, but to be instant in season, out of season, exhorting with
all long-suffering and doctrine. Remember S. Act. 20.20.
Paul's example, Acts 20.20. he went about from house to house to teach them;
and if S. Paul who had the care of all the Churches, held himself obliged to
this duty, how much more we, that have but a small Parish to look to? And then
in the carrying on this Instruction, in especial manner to work up their
hearts and apprehensions, to a due esteem of their Baptismall Vow, which is the
Contract for their Christianity, that when they come publicly to profess it,
their professions may be serious, and well grounded.

3. Adjoyn to this the public use of Catechizing, those (...), Those
discourses which are as Midwives to bring in living members into the Church of
God, as Dionys. Areopag. Ecclesiasticae Hierarchiae cap. 6. Sect. 1.
Dionys. Areop. calls the Catechism, Eccles. Hierarch. cap. 6. Sect. 1. The
people have more need of it, and if rightly managed, may profit more by it then
by many of our Sermons, which also are therefore the less beneficial to them,
because these grounds are wanting: whilst we go to build them up, the
foundations shrink from under them, as having never been well laid. And here
the Church has excellently provided a Catechism, so full and pithy, and yet
so plain and brief, as that I know not what could have been better suited to
the necessities and conceptions of common people.

4. Deal truly and impartially in your Informations, and Certificates; give not
Tickets to notorious Ignorance and Profaneness; why should you draw the blood
of others on your own heads, and withal betray the Churches Purity and Honor?

5. Above all, see you lead exemplary and unblameable lives: How can you expect
they should believe those truths, of the power of which they find little
evidence in your selves. How unfit are they to hand others to the receiving of
the Holy (...), which seem possessed themselves of the impure one? An ill living
Minister will Preach more Atheism by his Life, then Christianity by his
Doctrine. But I hope such scandals to the Church, will either be amended, or
those in Authority will confringere vasa inutilia, beat out the bottoms of
those useless Vessels, and set them aside.

2. My next Address will be to Masters and Parents, who by the Law, are to
send the Servants and Children to be Catechized by the Curate, that thereby
they may be the better fitted for Confirmation; and here I wish we had no
reason to complain of too much backwardness in many; it were well if that Law
had some quickening power put into it, to make it more effectual. But then
that is not all their duty, they ought also to be private Catechists: you have
Abraham's example for it, Genes. 18.19. Genesis 18.19.
I know him (says God) that he will command his children and his household
after him, that they shall keep the way of the Lord: and it will become us, as
to be followers of his faith, so of his practice too; you have a clear command
for it, Deuteronomy. 6.7. Deuteronomy. 6.7.


My 3d. Address will be to the Candidates for the Receive^^ of the benefit of
this Ordinance; that they endeavor after a right preparation for it.

1. By getting a sound knowledge in the Principles of Religion.

2. By a serious Repentance of their former failings.

3. By bringing with them, serious, and enlarged desires after grace. Petite de
Patre, petite de Domino, peculia, gratias, distributiones Charismatum
Subjiciente, petite and accipietis, says Tertull. de Baptismo.
Tertullian upon a like occasion, at the latter end of his Book de Baptismo:
Ask the Father, beg of the Son, for some special gifts and graces, who is now
ready to make a distribution of them. Ask, and you shall receive. Open your
mouths wide, and they shall be filled. It will be to you in some proportion
according to your desires; and then let me advise you to walk afterward, aes
those that have engaged themselves to God in the solemnest manner; such as have
pretended to take a stock, and earnest for their work, even the supplies and
earnest of the spirit. And thus I have pointed at some of the main duties in
this business, give me leave in the next place, to give you some Motives, the
more to Ingratiate them, and I shall set an end to this Discourse, and so
release your patience.

For your encouragement then, let me tell you, that the carrying on of this
work will be very serviceable for the advancement, 1. Of the Purity and Piety,
2. Of the Peace and Quiet, 3. Of the Joy and Comfort of the Church, and all
true Christians,

1. It will advance the Purity and Piety of our Church in its members, and that
both in the reality, and also in the reputation of it.

First, In the Reality of it, and so

1. In the Re^^^vers of this Benediction, woe are the Seminary of the Church for
the future. 1. The Ordinance it self may be a means to convey strengthening
grace to them, that is the design of it. 2. These Novices being brought first to
know, and then to own Christianity, in so solemn a manner, and with so solemn a
promise, that by Gods help, they will faithfully endeavor to discharge that
obligation in every point, and persevere in it to their lives end; the grace
for which, is begged by the Bishop and the present Congregation in their
behalf. This resolution and promise, before so many Reverend Witnesses, will in
any reason have a mighty impression on the Receiver, and a strong influence on
his actions for the future, as the Learned Dr. Hammond speaks, in the view of
the Directory, Vid. Dr. See D. Iackson speaking of Self-denial: Here (says he)
Novices in Religion commonly begin to balk, and no wonder, since few are called
to any strict personal account, of that which others have undertaken for them,
at their first admission into the bedroll of Christians. But if the Contents of
that triple Vow were distinctly and fully unfolded, as soon as we have any
knowledge of good and evil, and all the several branches of Gods Covenant with
as great care and solemnity, as often inculcated as Moses commanded the Law
should be to the Israelites Children, and lastly the Vow it self Confirmed, and
Ratified, by our personal protestation in the sight of the Congregation, the
fear as well of God, as shame before Men, in whose presence we made this good
profession, would bind many of us to more Christian behavior, then the best of
us, as the world goes, dare make show of, as also restrain us from many deadly
enormities, which now admonished of, we will not account any sins. Thus
prepared to receive it, it would be over much infidelity, to distrust the
plentiful infusion of inherent sanctifying grace, at our solemnities of
Confirmation, etc. Dr. Jackson of Justifying Faith, page 413, 414.
Jackson.

2. It will help to advance the Piety of Ministers in their Calling, by
engaging them to a greater sedulity and faithfulness in their work, and
exemplarity in their conversations.

3. It will stir up Parents and Masters to a better discharge of their duty,
in the instructing their Children and Servants, When they see (as Mr, Calvin
speaks) that their negligence herein, will draw a public disgrace upon
themselves, Instit. lib. 4. cap. 19. Sect. 13.

4. It might help also to stir up Piety in the Ignorant and Profane, by
awakening their security, and shaming their barrenness, whiles they see the
proficiency of others, which are admitted, and themselves shut out, from the
participation of Gods Ordinances.

And then as this would help to advance the Piety of the Church in the Reality,
so

2. In the Reputation of it, it would set a Crown upon the Churches head; it
would be looked upon, as an Assembly of the firstborn, whose Names are enrolled
in heaven, as a Corporation of Saints, and Men would flow in to the glory of
it. And then, as this would make much for the advancement of the Churches
Piety, both in the Reality, and the Reputation of it, So.

Secondly, It may serve much for the restoring and settling of the Churches
Peace amongst us; it is a way admirably fitted for it, as promising an (...), a
reconciling Principle as may be: For,

1. It would help much to settle our Doctrines, and so to remove, or keep out
those many Heresies and Schisms, which have been the Make-bates of late years
amongst us; there would be more consent in the Faith, men would not so easily
be carried away with newfangled opinions, whilst this method of Admission to
the Communion, would be a method of Christian Doctrine too, as Calvin Institut.
lib. 4. cap. 16. Sect. 13.
Calvin speaks: there would be a common Standard for all. In particular, it
would stop the mouths of Anabaptists, which decry Infant Baptism, as that
which lets in persons to the society of the Church, and the further privileges
of it, without any personal engagement unto Christ; which engagement, they
would see as formally and solemnly entered into at Confirmation, as they can
pretend by any fancied methods of their own.

2. It would help to Sodder our affections, which have been of late years so
disjoined, by the unhappy Controversies about Church Membership. This Ordinance
would comply with all Interests, would satisfy the any-wayes rational
pretensions of all Parties, and so an end would be set to that otherwise
irreconcilable difference, which has so long distracted us, and in which men
have groped for peace at Noonday, the light of this Ordinance being sufficient
to have directed them, had they not turned their backs upon it. There would be
no more need of the Anabaptistick Club, nor the Presbyterian Consistory, nor
the Independents Covenant, nor the Erastians Council-house for the Stating
Church Members, whilst they should find their work done by better hands, and
those Commissionated thereunto by God and the Church.

3. It would make much for the Order and Peace of our Communions; Men would not
repine at their Fellow Guests, whilst they could not look on any of the
Company, but as persons engaged to the same Christ with themselves; or if they
forfeited their Standing, might have them turned out of the Church, by the
power of the Keys in Excommunication. And then

4. This Ordinance, it is that must make a kindly way for that, and it will do
it with much sweetness and full conviction, when men shall be (...), condemned
of their miscarriages by their own professions and engagements, and therefore
will have all the reason in the world to submit to the censures of the Church.
The exercise of which Discipline, would be a great Fence to the Peace, as well
as the Purity of it. Brethren, we may talk much of the Peace of the Church, but
if ever we mean to settle it, it must be upon the Principles, and according to
the prudence of the Ancient Church of Christ. Were Confirmation, the ancient
methods of Penitence, Excommunication, and Communicatory Letters to stop the
shifting of Vagabond Christians from one Church to another, brought in amongst
us, with due caution, severity, solemnity, and accommodation, to the difference
of the times, we might hope to see those happy days again, which were once the
glory of the former, and are now the admiration, scarce the belief of the
present age. And then as this would be a powerful means to advance the
Churches Piety and Peace, So

Thirdly, It would be a great help unto it is Joy in all the Members of it.

1. It might minister much matter of Joy to the Reverend Fathers of it, whilst
they should see by the preparations for this business, so great a part of their
work discharged; whilst they should see the Lambs of the Flock brought in to
them in the Arms of the Ministers; and though themselves were ready to sink
into the Grave, they might behold a Seed springing up for Gods service and
praise, and the Church like to flourish.

2. It might cheer the hearts of inferior Ministers, whilst they saw the
travel of their souls, and might come before God and say, Behold me and the
children which thou have given me: it might give them great comfort and
freedom of spirit in their Communions, whilst they should see the Table of
the Lord, Like an heap of Wheat set about with Lillies, Cant. 7.2.

3. To the confirmed persons it might minister great Joy, in consideration of
the happy estate whereinto they were entered. Tertull. de Baptism cap. ult.
Tertullian makes it a question, whether such persons might not fast, as our
Savior did, after the descent of the Holy Ghost upon him, to which he answers,
Quis enim prohibet nisi necessitas gaudii and gratulatio salutis? they might,
were it not that a necessity of rejoicing lies upon them, to welcome that
Salvation which is now brought home to them.

4. It might be a comfort to Parents, to see the success of their care, and to
the Witnesses, to see themselves discharged of it.

5. It would be matter of great Joy to all true Christians amongst us, who
cannot but glorify God for the professed subjection of these Neophites, 2 Cor.
9.13. When the Biccurim, or First Fruits, were carried up to be presented
before the Lord, in the place which he had chosen to put his Name there; the
people gathered together from several places, that they might not go alone; a
Pipe struck up (...) them till they came near to Jerusalem, and they went along
their way singing, verse 1. of the 122. Psalm: when they came nigh to
Jerusalem, the Governors and Captains went out to meet them, and being entered
the Gates, they sang the 2. ver. of that Psalm; the Artificers of Jerusalem
saluted them; they went through the City with a Pipe striking up before them,
till they came near to the mount of the House of the Lord, when, taking every
man his Basket upon his shoulder, they sang Psalm 150. and so continued singing
till they came to the Courtyard, where they were received by the Levites
singing the 30. Psalm, thus Vide Ainsw. in Deuteronomy. 26.2.
Maimonides and the Babylonish Talmud, in the title Biccurim. It seems it was a
time of exceeding great joy, unto which therefore the Prophet Isaiah is
conceived to allude, cap. 30.29. Now if the bringing up of the First Fruits of
their grounds were so joyful a solemnity, how much more should it be, when the
fruit of our Bodies, the Firsts fruits of the Church, are brought before the
Lord? one would think it should put the whole Country into a Procession with,
and holy Congratulation to them, with praises unto God for them. What a joy
should it be to all that truly fear God, to see that Gospel-Prophesie, Isa.
Isa. 44.3, 4, 5.
44.3, 4, 5. fulfilled before their eyes, where it is said, I will pour water
upon him that is thirsty, and floods upon the dry ground: I will pour my
spirit upon thy seed, and my blessing upon thine offspring: And they shall
spring up as among the grass: as willows by the watercourses. One shall say, I
am the Lords: and another shall call himself by the name of Jacob: and another
shall subscribe with his hand unto the Lord, and surname himself by the name of
Israel.

Finally, By this means God will be highly glorified, and then he also will
rejoice in us, and over us, to do us good: if his Spirit be received amongst
us, and have a quiet dwelling with us, we need not fear a Deluge: where the
Spirit is, Genes. 6.3.
there is liberty, and safety, and joy, and peace, which passes all
understanding, which God of his infinite mercy grant unto us all, for the
merits of his dear Son, To whom with the Father and the Holy Spirit, be
ascribed and rendered, all Honor, Praise, and Glory, for ever, and ever, Amen.

FINIS.

