A PARADOX Against LIBERTY.

Written by the Lords, During their Imprisonment In the TOWER.

A POEM.

Contrahes Vento nimium secundo

Turgida Vela. LONDON: Printed for James Vade, at the Cock and Sugar Loaf in
Fleet Street. 1679.

A PARODOX Against Liberty.
A Prison, or the Isle, are much the same;
They only differ in Conceit and Name.
As Art the first, Nature Immures the last;
Only in the larger Mold her Figure's cast.
All Islanders are in a Prison pent,
And none at large, not those of the Continent.
Each Mariner's a Prisoner in his Bark.
The living World was imprisoned in the Ark.
And though it be abroad adays, the Light
Still lodges in the prison of black Night.
The Sea it self, is to its bounds confined,
And Aeolus in Caves shuts up the wind.
Nothing in nature has such vast Extent,
But is imprisoned in its Element.
The Fish, in watery Dungeons are enclosed;
Men, Beasts, and Birds, to Earth and Air disposed.
If to enlarge their narrow bounds, they strive,
The fatal freedom rarely they survive.
And as with them, we hope with Us 'twill be,
When from their Prisons took, Death sets them free.
Man can no more a native freedom boast;
That Jewel never was found, since first 'twas lost.
'Twas then transported to the Stygian Coast.
But still there is something which we do esteem,
Only because it is like the polisht Gemme,
And this we Freedom call; its credit grows
From a false stamp, the gilded outside shows:
Which avaritious Man attempts to get,
Cheated and ruined with the Counterfeit.
Like Children, Soapy-bubbles they pursue,
And the fantastic Vision, take for true;
But whilst they think bright forms they do embrace,
Ixion-like, they find a cloud in the place.
Consent of Crowds, exceeding credit brings,
And seems to stamp Truth's Image on false things.
Not what is a real good, but what does seem,
Still shares the blind and popular esteem.
Whilst Sense and Fancy overruled their choice,
And Reason in the Election has no voice.
But Souls in vain have Reason's Attribute,
If to their Rule, they cannot Sense submit.
Hence the Heroic mind makes no complaint,
But freedom does enjoy, even in restraint.
When Chains and Fetters do his Body bind,
He then appears more free, and less confined.
Discord and Care, which do distract him here,
In durance take their leave, and come not there.
False Friends and Flatt'rers, then, take last adieu,
Who often swore how faithful and how true.
Things their dishonest bosoms never knew.
These, like the Swallows, in cold weather fly;
A Summers fortune only draws them nigh.
Flatt'rers a sort of fatal Suckers be,
Which draw the Sap 'till they destroy the Tree.
Fair Virtue to their Optics when they bring,
Seems a deformed and antiquated thing.
Vice they commend, whilst Virtue is despised;
The blackest by these Negroes most are pris'd.
These slaves to Vice, do hug so hard and long,
Till like the o'refond Ape, they kill their Young.
Ambition in the Mind's a Fevrish Thirst,
Which is by drinking, dryer than at first;
And these will feed the humor till it burst.
When Parasites the Arbiters are made,
They Will place the Garland on a Bedlam's head.
Riot, Excess, and Pleasure car' the Day,
And Lust (the worst of Tyrants) bears the sway,
At whose black Throne they blind Allegiance pay.
Morose and dull they do account the Grave;
And the Meek-man, fit only for a Slave:
The Humble, of a Nature poor and base;
The Chaste, sprung from a dull insipid Race;
And Temperance, a Gallant's chief disgrace.
In Virtues garb, the great Man's Vice they dress,
Giving it Names which sound of Worthiness.
They call his Pride the Grandeur of his Mind,
And for his Lust the Name they have designed
Is a complaisant Air, that makes men kind.
Profaness is his Wit; and his Excess
By a Gay janty Humor they express;
All his Debauches too must be no less.
Thus they lap ruin up, and guild our Crimes;
But Vice destroys, like Ivy, where it climbs.
In us, the dangerous state The Ambitious see
Of Greatness, Avarice, and Flattery.
Gifts, Honors, Office, Greatness, Grace of Kings,
Raise the Ambitious upon treacherous wings;
'Till from the mighty heights they giddy grow,
And fall into the Ruin lies below.
If the first fail, which do support our state,
The last our Fall serve to precipitate.
This with too dear Experience we have bought,
And learnt a Lesson, which too late was taught.
Prosperity's a Drug, that must be taken
Corrected, ( Opium-like) or else it is bane.
A more Lethargick quality's in her,
Than ever yet in Opium did appear.
Her fatal Poison to the Mind she sends,
And uncorrect, in sure destruction ends.
Whilst in the way her gilded snares she lays,
Easy and credulous Man she soon betrays;
Who sees her Roses and her Lilies here,
But her concealed Snakes does never fear.
Prosperity's repasts puff up the Mind
With unsubstantial and unwholesome wind.
It Is a Hault-Goust which Epicures do use,
And choicer Viands squeamishly refuse.
But when Affliction moulds your daily bread,
It Is then the staff of Life with which she is fed.
Affliction (like the river Nile) bestows
Her fruitful blessings wheresoe'er she flows:
And if when she withdraws, strange Serpents rise,
Not in her streams, but in the Soil, it lies.
Which (like the great Apollo) she strikes dead,
By the same Influence they first were bred,
If she return, and show her hidden head.
Great Minds (like the victorious Palms) are wont
Under the Weights of Fortune more to mount.
Strongly suppressed, and hurled upon the ground,
Filled with sublimer thoughts they more rebound.
Still careless whether Fortune smile or frown,
Whether she give, or take away a Crown.
Our Walls are Tyded, and by that we know
She always ebbs, when she does leave to flow,
And constant in Inconstancy does grow.
Make an attacque all Injuries that can,
They fall like Waves beneath a rising Swan.
Freed and secured from all discordant Care,
Here we our heads above the billows bear,
Till from our shoulders they transplanted are.
And from their summits, with dumb gapes proclaim,
Of a Quincumvirat the traitorous shame.
But during all this Storm, we still do find
An Anchor and a Haven in our Mind,
Not beaten now, though then exposed to the Wind.
As Nightingals, our bosoms we expose,
And sing, environed with the sharpest woes.
Degraded from vain Honor, here we grow
More great and high, as Trees by lopping do.
Honor's like froth in each Man's glass of Beer;
It Is least of use, though topmost it appear.
The common Vouchee for ill acts she is grown;
It and Religion all our Mischiefs own.
She raigns in Youth with an unruly heat,
And in her falser Mirror shows them Great,
Till Age and Time convince them of the Cheat.
Rash heads approve what sober Men despise,
And the fantastic Garb offends the Wise;
She rarely now is seen, but in Disguise.
True Honor and plain Honesty's the same;
From various Dwellings, comes the various Name:
For whilst she is gay in Courts, she is Honor there,
But Honesty with us in Durance here.
In differing States, most things have difference:
What pleased this day, the next offends the Prince.
The Prosperous loath what the Afflicted love;
Prisoners abhor, what free, they did approve.
And still there is power in each Man's choice, to make
Himself content, if he can wisely take,
And think his own (though hard) a happy Stake.
In every state does some Contentment dwell,
And here we find a Palace in a Cell.
Good is good every where, and every thing,
And Good can of it self no Evil bring.
All Good's a raye of the first Light alone;
When Ill approaches, only that is our own.
Virtue's not gained by spending of our days
In pleasure, Princes Courts, or from their Rays.
At Virtue's Coast by Travel we arrive,
And so by Travel Virtue's kept alive.
She dwindles if she want due Exercise;
But used, grows brighter, and still multiplies.
Virtue increases, Snow-ball-like, rolled on:
A lazy Virtue's next of kin to None.
Prisoners indeed they be, that do lay by
At once their Freedom and their Industry.
If Men turn Drones within these hony'd Hyves,
It lies in the Pris'ner's heart, and not his Gyves.
The Good grow better here, the Bad grow worse;
The Spur that makes this go, does jade that Horse.
Hence the great'st part are malcontent and sad,
Since that the Good are fewer than the Bad.
A Bliss that springs from penitential joy,
Is the Minds balsome in each sharp Annoy;
Fools only their own Comforts do destroy.
To this Retirement we can freely go;
It Is the great'st pace of Majesty below:
Our stirring out imports the World to know.
The Goaler's Sentinel to guard our Doors,
And Castles are contained in the narrow Floors.
More happy and more safe, secured from Foes,
Than those whom Troops of Enemies enclose.
Much more as Prisoners, our high bliss we boast,
Being secured from such a mighty Host
Of deadly Foes, so fierce with wrath and might,
Our selves so feeble, and unfit to fight
Against the black band of Vicious and Profane,
Who Thousands do undo in each Campain.
In the Assault, we seldom brook the Field,
But fly like Hares, or else like Cowards yield.
Yet this the World esteems an hard estate,
And Us, who feel it, count unfortunate.
Show then, Philosophy! the state wherein
Such Safety, and so much Content is seen.
Wherein less rugged or steep hind'rance lies,
TO obstruct the Path unto Perfection's prize.
The useful Rod's only bound up for this,
To whip and lash the Childish on to Bliss;
Who sullenly refuse the Rod to kiss,
And so the Blessing in the Whipping miss.
Some, like the Whale, only designed to play
In fruitless pleasures, drive the flying day;
As Boys with Clackers drive the Lent away.
Whilst here, we stop the hours of Time, that flies,
With Contemplation's nobler Exercise.
Maugre all Goals, think we e're long must dye,
And then enjoy an endless Liberty;
Death will redeem from long Captivity.
Man's Life's a Piece spun of a various Thread;
In some it is fine, in some a courser Web.
The Threads across, the Occurrences of Fate,
Cut early from the Loom by Death, or late.
The Dread of Kings, Death, does not us dismay;
To Dye's less, than be Tantaliz'd each day.
What Man complains, with Weariness oppressed,
That Night is come, the only Time to Rest?
FINIS.

