THE READY WAY to Everlasting Life: OR, A perfect Remedy against the Poison of
SIN.

In this little Book is contained many several and excellent virtues, which
being well read, heard, understood, and made use of, it will both direct and
instruct all sorts of people old and young, rich and poor, men and women, and
children, how to order their lives in this world, so that they may enjoy the
blessings which Christ has prepared for them in the world to come, which is
life Everlasting.

Here is Consolation for the Soul.
Here is comfort for the Body.
Here is ease for a troubled Conscience.
And here is content for the mind.
O hear ye this all ye people, ponder it with your Ears, all ye that dwell in
the world, high and low, rich and poor, one with another. Psalm. 29.1, 2. By,
L. P.

Printed for R. Gilbertson. 1665.

The ready way to Everlasting Life: OR, A perfect Remedy against the Poison of
Sin.
IN the first place, my invitations I prefer to all people, but especially to
them that are stricken in age, and are ready to go to to their Grave. I invite
you therefore to observe those directions which are necessary for Salvation; and
withal to consider what a small quantity of time you have to live in the world:
we read in the Scriptures that Adam lived nine hundred and 30 years, and he
dyed, Seth lived nine hundred and 12 years, and he dyed, and also the days of
Canaan was nine hundred and ten years, and he dyed, and all the days of
Methasala was 9 hundred sixty and nine years, and he dyed, as you may read it
large in the 5. Chap. of Genesis. We also read and know that David was a
valiant man, Solomon a wise man, Sampson a strong man, Absolon a beautiful man,
and Adam a rich man, for the Lord God made him Lord and Master of all other
creatures, Genesis 1, 28. yet all those dyed, and as they came from the Earth,
even so they returned to the dust. What reason has any man therefore in our
times to flatter themselves and to forget that they must all go to the earth
from whence they came, seeing by daily experience that no man can add one
Cubite to his own stature, nor no man can prolong his own life one hour, nor
can all the men of the world resist the will of God, for Gods will must be done
both in earth and in heaven, as you may read in Matthew the 5.

Is the case so plain then, that all men must in a short space forsake the
world for ever? why then I would entreat all men to follow these directions,
and to forsake sin before sin forsake them.

Moreover I would desire every man and woman that as they would prepare and
make themselves ready to go to a rich and glorious wedding on the very next
morrow where is all kinds of varieties of what your hearts can crave, or your
tongue ask for, so would I have you every day to make ready and prepare your
selves to go to God, as one that have a long journey to go, or to ride, will be
up early in the morning to set forward on the way lest by his negligence he
should come too late to his journies end, and so be kept out of his appointed
lodging: in the like manner I would entreat all those that are willing to be
the Servants and Disciples of our Lord and Master Jesus Christ, to prepare
themselves with all speed that possible they may, or can, to come to the place
where their Lord and Master is, which is indeed a place of happiness: there is
mirth without mourning, joy without sorrowing, there is light without
darkness, and life without death, where they that are once brought in, shall
never be turned out, to which happy and Heavenly place the Lord in his good
time bring us all, Amen.

The ready way to the Everlasting place which is before spoken of, I shall by
Gods assistance direct you unto.

Your way must be, First to ask God forgiveness for all the time you have
misspent, and every day, and every hour to repent you of your wicked living in
this sinful world: you must henceforth whilst you do live in this world, Pray
unto God to give you grace and the assistance of his Holy Spirit, so that you
may ever hereafter serve God and obey his holy word and will in a better manner
then you have don heretofore; you must also deal your bread to the hungry
cloth the naked, suffer the harborlesse comfort the fatherless, be good to
the poor distressed widows, visit the sick, and according to your ability do
good to all men that are in want; for he that stopeth his ears at the cries of
the poor, shall cry himself and not be heard. Proverhs the 10.

Moreover, you must not think that when you have done those good things which
are ere spoken of, that you have done enough to bring your soul to heaven
without any more to do, but you must believe in God the Father, Son and
Holy Ghost, and how that Christ came that was the only Son of God the father
into this world, on purpose to save the souls of all true repenting sinners,
and to be Tormented for us here in this world, because we should not be
Tormented in the world to come: as it may appear in all parts of the
Scriptures, which were written from the time of the worlds creation to the
latter end of the holy Bible Book, but most chiefly the 4 Evangelists have
every one discribed the manner of his coming into the world, the time of his
life, the day of his death, and in what manner, and for what cause he dyed:
whilst he lived on the earth he showed wonders and did miracles, he made the
blind to see, the lame to go, and raised the dead to life; al which was done to
make it known to all the world that he was the wonderful and powerful son of
God, and able to do whatsoever it pleased his Father to have done, and to put
us in remembrance and believe that he is the Savior and redeemer of all that
trust in him; further more, for our sake he suffered hunger, thirst, cold,
imprisonment, reproachful words, spightful deeds, bitter stripes, false
accusations, taunts and scorns, Buffeting, Whippings, and Spittings on the
face; And at the last, he was Crucified upon a bloody piece of Timber, between
2 notorious malefactors, being nailed fast on the Cross through hands and feet:
and now let all Christians not only look upon, but also remember to think upon,
what Christ our Lord has undergone to redeem our souls from the slavery of
the devil, to bring us into the sounder belief; consider what was brought to
pass through the power of the Almighty after that the Villains had so cruelly
murdered Christ, which was, and is a King of Kings, and Lord of Lords,
Revelations: 19, 10. They took him down from the Cross, they laid him in a
grave where never none was laid before; they roul'd a mighty great stone
against the Sepulcher door, they hired watchmen to keep all fast, and to be
brief, they thought they had made all things so sure, that Christ his body
should never be removed therehence in have, but by the great power of the Lord
there came a Heavenly Angel to the door of the Sepulcher and rould away the
stone which was laid to keep Christ in the Grave; mean while the watchmen being
sorely amazed at the sight of the Angel, they ran away trembling with fear, so
Christ arose from the dead, and the grav have no more power over him after that
he appeared to his Disciple, and to others several times to show that he was
recovered, and that he had overcome death, but Thomas one of his disciples
would not believe that the Lord was risen from death, til such time that he put
his finger into the wound which the spear had pierced, and seen his hand which
had been nailed to the Cross: wherefore our Savior Christ came into the place
bodily where Thomas was, and showed him the side which the Spear had pierced,
and the hands and feet of his which had bin nailed to the bloody tree; which
when Thomas had seen and felt, (he confessed and said unto Christ, thou art my
Lord my God) but Jesus says unto him, Thomas, Because thou have seen me, thou
have believed me, Blessed are they that have not seen and have believed. John's
Gospel, 20, 28. All this done to strengthen our belief, and to show us that
as he himself is risen from the dead and ascended into heaven, so can he also
raise and quicken us if we lay hold on him, trust in him, and faithfully
believe that he came into the world and suffered all those things to be done
for his love that he bore unto mankind, and to save out souls from perpetual
damnation. God in his mercy give us grace to make good use of our times, and so
behave our selves, whilst we remain in this world, that after this life is
ended we may enjoy everlasting happiness in the Kingdom of Heaven with God the
Father, through the mighty merits of Jesus Christ his only Son, to whom with
the Holy Ghost be ascribed all honor, glory, power, praise, might Majesty and
thanksgiving, both in this world and in the world to come, Amen.

The next matter is here to be expressed is instructions for youth, which if
youth will observe and follow they shall find it to be sweeter then the honey,
and the honey comb. Psalm, 19.

Solomon the wise bids his Son delay no time, but says thus to all; Remember
thy Creator in the days of thy Youth, as you may read, Eccles. 12, 1. which
sentence of his may very well agree with the proverb, How that, that which is
bred in the bone will never out of the flesh, so I say, that he or she that
will not serve God when they are young, will hardly be brought to do God any
good service when they are old: wherefore I desire all sorts of youthful
people to have a special regard to what shall be spoken, and withal to do
their best endeavor to follow these instructions, Ephesians 6 Children obey
your Parents in the Lord, and Honor your Fathers and Mothers, so shall your
days be long. and your lives happy.

The cause why so many youthful people now a days run headlong into desperate
dangers and sudden mischiefs, is this, because they will not hearken unto the
words of wise Solomon, who says thus: My Son attend unto wisdom, and how down
thine ears to understanding, Proverbs 5. Beloved these are precious words, and
worth the harkening unto, for He or She that has understanding can never do
amiss let the world run which way soever it will, a wise man will be content
with what Estate or condition soever he be in, whether it be riches or poverty,
sickness or health, oppression or liberty, right or wrong, all is one to a wise
man, for he puts his trust in God, who will surely deliver him out of all
his troubles in due time, according as David the Prophet says, in his Psallms,
Many and numberless are the Troubles of the Righteous: but the Lord delivers
them out of all again: A wise man is able to undergo and endure reproachful
words, evil Actions, Abusive Deeds; Spightfull Neighbors, Unkind Kindreds: Ye
and although it were so that the whole World should set themselves against him,
yet he is sure that they can do no more to him then God will give them leave to
do for he has learned such a faithful lesson of his Master Christ Jesus, that
he can say with a safe conscience: Blessed are they that are persecuted for
righteousness sake, as you may read, Mat ^^, 10.

Besides a^^ this, wisdom has a great many Virtues belonging unto her which
have not yet been spoken of, as it shall presently be made known to all that
will give ear to what shall be expressed in this profitable discourse.

If any one desires to be rich, let them repair unto Wisdom, for without
Wisdom there is no good to be done: a wise wan is able to discern the good
from the bad, the just from the unjust, the right from the wrong, and he that
finds wisdom, finds life, and shall obtain favor of the Lord, and how can
a man be poor, that has those blessings bestowed upon him? Proverbs 8, 35.

Furthermore, a wise man will take heed of what company he comes into; for a
man cannot touch pitch but he must be defiled! Good wine is chosen by the
smell, by the color, and by the taste, so must you choose your Companions by
their Religions by Wisdom and by virtue, does not very days experience tell
us, How that they which goes and commonly hannteth evil company, are counted to
be as bad as themselves; And have we not heard nor known, that at sometimes
there have true men bin taken in thieves companies and all sent to Prison
together Yea, and some have lost their livs only by keeping of evil company.

It is an old saying, that company is good whether it be to Heaven, or to Hell;
but I say thus, that one were better go to Heaven alone, then to Hell with a
multitude of Wicked People: And better it is to be alone by ones self then to
be in company with Ungodly people; a man cannot lie amongst dogs but he must be
bitten with fleas, nor can any one haunt and be in evil company, but he must
be evil thought on and spoken of, therefore I desire all people, whether they
be old or young, to be wise and to fly from sin, as they would fly from a
biting Viper; and also to fly from evil company, as you would fly from the
Devil.

And now to conclude, I desire you all to observe and make good use of these
instructions, and to lead your lives in such a godly manner whilst you remain
in this world, so that after this life ended, Christ may receive your souls
into his heavenly Kingdom, Where is Joy world without end.

FINIS.

