THE PRESENTMENT And Humble PETITION OF THE GRAND JURY FOR THE County of
Middlesex. To the Honorable and Right Worshipful the Justice of the Peace for
the County of Middlesex, at this present General Sessions held at Hick's-Hall,
begun the 18 th. day of May, 1681.
Shows,
THat We the said Grand Jury, being by our Oaths obliged to enquire into the
State of the Peace of the County, hold our selves bound to show unto this
Court, what we find and Apprehend concerning the same. Upon the most diligent
enquiry and Observation that we can make.

We find that the peace of this County and the whole Kingdom is in no security,
by reason of the continual Contrivances of the Papists and their Adherents
against the Protestants, to throw their wicked Conspiracies upon them, and we
have reason to fear daily that the peace may be broken, by means of some of
their wicked designs to enrage some inconsiderate people.

We find that His Majesty's Person is in no security whilst the Papists have
hopes, and a visible appearance that there may be a Popish Successor to head
them, and destroy the Protestant Interest, if they can by any wicked means and
Hellish Villainies, procure His Majesty's Death, which God (in his Mercy)
prevent.

We find the minds of the people greatly disquieted and distracted, with fears
of what may happen to them, remembering the destructions that have been made in
the City of London and elsewhere; and we perceive daily endeavors by
Jesuitical Councils, to distract and divide the Protestants into Parties, and
to incense each of them against the other, to suggest ill and false opinions of
their Parliaments, and to villifie the Authority of the Commons, and to
misrepresent their proceedings,

We find wicked secrets, endeavors to make breaches between His Majesty and
the Commons of England in Parliament by Printed Papers and otherwise, to being
the Commons in Parliament into the hatred and contempt of the Nation, which we
conceive to be of most dangerous consequence, tending even to the Dissolution
of the constitution of the Government.

And we find the Papists and their Adherents much encouraged by the frequent
Dissolution of Parliaments, and the whole Kingdom put into a Languishing
condition.

All which Evils in our apprehensions can be only cured by the Sitting of
Annual Parliaments, until the business of the Kingdom be done, (as the Laws for
holding Parliaments do intend) that being the only means to keep the whole
Administration of the Government in due Order, and therefore the peace of the
Kingdom inviolable, which Parliaments shall (as have been used heretofore)
constantly inspect the effects of all Counsels given to His Majesty; None will
dare to advize him against his own and the Kingdoms Interest, whereby only the
people may enjoy what was left them by their Ancestors, and Justice may be done
upon all dangerous Offenders and Conspirators against His Majesty, and the
Religion, Lives, and Liberties of the Subjects.

We therefore Humbly Offer it as our Requests, that your worships and this
Court, will (in that most acceptable and effectual way, which shall seem meet
to your wisdom) make their most humble and earnest Desires and Prayers known to
his Majesty, for the immediate holding of a Parliament, which may Sit for such
time as the Imminent danger of his Majesty and the whole Kingdom has made it
necessary and indispensible; that so his Subjects may enjoy the benefit of the
Laws, as the constitution of the Government intends them in their Parliament,
which is to make sufficient Provision for the safety of his Majesty, and the
Security of the whole Kingdom in their Religion, Laws and Liberties.

And your Petitioners shall ever Pray, etc.
FINIS.
LONDON, Printed by George Croom, in Thames Street near Bennards-Castle, 1681.


