SVN-BEAMS OF GOSPEL LIGHT, Shining clearly from several Texts of Scripture,
opened and applied. 1. A heavemly treatise of the devine love of Christ. 2. The
Christians freedom. 3. The deformed form of a formal profession. 4. Christ's
fullness, and man's emptiness.


By JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in ordinary to King James, Mr.
of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON, Printed for JOHN STAFFORD, and are to be sold in Bracke Horse Alley,
1644.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST. Showing, 1. The Motives 2.
The Means 3. The Marks 4. The Kinds
thereof.

Delivered in five Sermons, by JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in Divinity, Chaplane in
Ordinary to his Majesty; Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge, and
sometimes Preacher at Lincolnes Inn.

MATTHEW. 22. 37, 38. This is the first, and great Commandment: thou shall Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for John Stafford, in Chancery Lane, over
against the Roules. Anno Dom. 1640.

The Names of Doctor John Preston his Several Treatises.
1. A Treatise of the Attributes of God containing 17. Sermons upon diverse
Texts. 2. Four Treatises viz. 1. A remedy against Covetousness upon Coloss.
3. 5. 2. An Elegant and lively description of spiritual life and death upon
John 5. 25. 3. The Doctrine of self dentall, upon Luke 9. 23. 4. A Treatise of
the Sacrament, upon (...) Ioh. 5. 14.
3. The Saints daily Exercise, or a Treatise of Prayer upon 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17. 4.
The New Covenant in 14. Sermons, upon Genesis 17. 1, 2. Unto which is added 4.
Sermons upon Eccles. 9. 1, 2. 11. 12. 5. The Saints Qualification, containing,
viz. 1. A Treatise of Humiliation in 10. Sermons, the first 9 upon Romans 1.
18. The tenth Preached before the common house of Parliament upon Numb. 25. 10,
11. 2. Of Sanctification or the New Creature in 9. Sermons upon 2 Cor. 5. 17.
3. Of Communion with Christ in the Sacrament in 3. Sermons upon 1 Cor. 10. 16.
6. The Doctrine of the Saints Infirmities upon 2 Chronicles. 30. 18, 19, 20. 7. The
Brestplate of Faith and Love, containing 18. Sermons upon three several Texts,
viz. Revel. 1. 17. 1 These. 1. 3. Gal. 5. 6. 8. Five Sermons Preached before his
Majesty, viz. 1. The New Life, upon 1 John 5. 15. 2. A Sensible demonstration
of the Diety, upon Esaias 64. 4. 3. Of Exact walking, upon Ephe. 5. 15. 4. The
Pillar and ground of Truth, upon 1 Timothy 3. 15. 5. Sam. Support of sorrowful
sinners upon 1 Samuel 12. 20. 21, 22.
9. Two Treatises of Mortification, and Humiliation, upon Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2.
1, 2, 3. Together with the livelesse life, A Treatise of Vivisication. 10. His
Remains, containing 3. excellent Treatises, viz. 1. Iudas's Repentance. 2. The
Saints Spiritual strength. 3 Paul's Conversion.
11. The Golden Scepter, with the Churches Marriage, being three Treatises in
one volume. 12. The Fullness of Christ, upon John 1. 16. 13. A Heavenly
Treatise of the Divine Love of Christ, in Five Sermons, upon 1 Cor. 16. 22.
A brief Collection of the principal heads of these five ensuing Sermons.
Sermon the first.
THe explanation of the two words, Anathema, and Maranatha fol. 2. Doctrine 1.
That to love the Lord Jesus, is so necessarily required of us, That he is
worthy to be accursed that does it not. fol. 3. What Love is in g(...)ill.
ibid. How this Love dot(...)w it self. ibid. Five kinds of Love. 4. Three
qualities of love. 5. What this Love of the Lord Jesus is, It is a holy
disposition, arising from faith, whereby me cleave unto the Lord Jesus Christ;
with full purpose of heart to serve and please him in all things. 8 Five
reasons why they are worthy to be cursed that love not the Lord Jesus 11. 12
Use 1. It is a great sin not to love the Lord Jesus Christ. 12 An Objection
answered. 14 Five true signs of this Love of the Lord Jesus. 15

Sermon the second. Use 2.
Try whether, what you do is out of Love. 19 Five notes of trial of this Love
of the Lord Jesus. 21 Six Objections answered. 30, 31, 32.
Sermon the third.
Five notes more of the trial of the Love of the Lord Jesus Christ. 37 Diverse
Objections therein answered. 38 Use 3. To humble our selves for want of that
Love. 33 Eight reasons why we ought to love the Lord Jesus. 44 Diverse
Objections thereunto answered. 45, 46, 47, 48, 49.

The fourth Sermon. Use 4.
The 4. Use is, to exhort us to love the Lord Jesus. 53 Five advantages which
do arise from the Lord Jesus. 54 Four means to be used, to strengthen our
Love in the Lord Jesus. 60 Diverse Objections therein answered. 61, to 67.
Sermon the fifth.
The kinds of Love that the Lord accepts. 73 Diverse Objections thereto
answered. 75. 76 Wherein grounded Love does stand. 77 The Object on whom our
love is to be set. 79 Of the curse of those that love not the Lord Jesus. 82
Three Objections answered. 83. 84. 85. 86. A Soliloquy of the devout soul to
Christ, panting after the love of the Lord Jesus. 89.
To the Reader of these pious and plain Sermons, Grace and PEACE.
CHristian Reader, it was an old complaint of an Heathen, that the noise of the
old Philosophers opinions did hinder their dunghill gods from hearing their
prayers: And it is no very new complaint of a Christian, that the many idle
subtleties of the School have so drawn up Divinity to the highest pegge of a
curious mind, that it hinders the heart from moulding it into Prayers and
practice.

This grave and serious Divine, whose living Sermons are here commended to thee
when he is dead, saw it with both eyes. Therefore though he was no small
master in subtleties, yet all his thoughts were bent to draw them down from
the floating brain, to the feeling heart; that his hearers might be better
brought to know and do. As this has been his course in all his writings
before extant; so is it in this, that now comes to thy hands. How might he have
hid himself in the thorns of speculation? How high might he have flowne in
the curious extracts of every word of this Text? But he, that delighted to
speak ten words to edification, rather then ten thousand that could not pierce
every ordinary brain, contented himself to fill up deep foards to make them
passable, and to wade the sweet and shallow streams of the love of the Lord
Jesus.

He might, from hence, have set himself upon the mount of cursings, and
showred down worse then fire and brimstone upon delinquents: but the meekness
of his spirit carries him up to the mount of blessings, to learn good souls
through death to find life, through threatenings to meet with comforts.

He, being lifted up by the Divine love of Christ, does describe love, and our
love to Christ: He soars to the equity, and necessity of it: He rests not
before he have given you the means, motives, marks, gains qualifications,
and objects of this love. How feign would he have thee love the Lord Jesus,
that thou may avoid the curse, and enjoy the blessing! He knew nothing more
necessary for a good Christian then this love. First, he must be a Christian by
faith; next, he must live a Christian by faith and love too: He can do
neither without the love of Christ to him; and this he can not have but in his
time: he shall have faith in Christ, and love to the Lord Jesus.

There is neither thing, nor love in all the world more comfortable to a good
man then this: Sin presses hard down, and pulls him back from heaven; Satan
baits both the hands, and hooks of the world, prosperity, and adversity, to
entangle him; Death brings him down to the bed of darkness, the land of
oblivion, and lays him up as a despised lump: But if he have this love, when
all vanishing bubbles fly away; this mounts him up into the bosom of God. As
water, be it conveyed in Pipes never so low, yet in the same Pipes it will rise
up as high as the Spring head: so this love springing from the bosom of God,
though it be shed abroad, and run through the channels of our hearts on
earth, yet with a willing motion it mounts up to Christ again, and carries us
along with it in despite of storms. Where we love, we live: where we love, we
desire to be; and God has so ordered, that this appetite shall not be in vain.

And as for other Loves, see whether the Love of the Lord Jesus do not
surpass them all Love other things, and yet often they slide away from thee,
so that in them thou have but a momentany joy: But love thy Lord, and, doing so
he he abides with thee for ever, and is to thee a spring of everlasting joy.
Love other things, and they cannot know the sincerity of thy heart, how much,
and in what manner and measure thou love them: But love thy Lord, and he
knows better the love of thy heart then thy self: Thou may say unto him, as
did Peter, Thou know all things, thou know that I love thee; and shall
find entertainment answerable. Love other things, and thou have vexing care
over them, both about their gaining, keeping, and losing: But love thy Lord,
and thy care is sweet for him; yea, he cares for thee in all thy ways. Thou
can lose nothing by it, no not thy heart, which though it go out to him, and
he keeps it, yet he gives it to thee again, and that better then it was, to
comfort thee in thy whole course.

Love other things, and thou find not them at all times, nor so often as
thou would: when thou have need thou can not speak to them so often as
thou would, neither do they harken to thy words as thou could wish: But
love thy Lord, and he is with thee always to the end of the world: Thou
may speak to him at any time, by night, or by day; he hears thee at all
times, and gives thee thy hearts desires. Love other things, and thou can not
know their secrets; there may be something in them which may be vexations
unto thee in the issue; there may lie a snake under the green grass, a filthy
load under a sweet flower, and a worm in the heart of a defired apple. But
love thy Lord, and he will reveal the mystery of Godliness, and his hidden
secrets of truth unto thee according to his word; yea, thou shall see that
nothing but that which is glorious in it self, and good for thee, is either in
him, or about him.

Love other things, and they put thee to many a trouble; they hinder thee in
thy prayers, and all thy service to God, because thou do always think, and
dote upon them: But love thy Lord, and he brings into thy heart and
conseience, peace which passes all understanding. The more thou love him
when thou prayest, the more he gives thee to thy self; yea, the more he gives
thee to himself, and fills thee with holy comfort. Love other things, and they
are without thee still; thou can never bring them to any more intimate
communion, save that which is common to thee with Epicures: But love thy Lord,
and he dwells in thee, and thou in him, for he is Love.

Love other things, and they seek at thy hands a profit and gain to
themselves, or else they perish in thy love. They will take advantage upon thy
love to work upon thee for their own perfections: But love thy Lord, and he
seeks thy profit and perfection: he always endures to glorify himself in
doing thee good. Love other things, and most times they will deceive thee, they
are often liars, variable, and inconstant: But love thy Lord, and thou shall be
assured: he is most true, and unchangeable, and thou may build upon him,
that he will not fail thee nor forsake thee.

Love other things, and ofttimes they cause grief and heaviness, and so do
highly displease thee: But love thy Lord, and it banisheth fear and sad
confusion of face, because thou can see nothing in him that can displease
thee. Lastly, love other things, and thou know not assuredly whether thou
art loved of them again: But love thy Lord, and thou may be assured that he
answers thee with the same; yea, with better; for he cannot but love a
blessed child of the begetting of his own will.

By how much more excellent this love is then the love of all things else, by
so much the more must thou press to enjoy and practice it. Every thing
naturally desires that which is best for it. If it have it not, it is from the
error about the object, or the miscariage of the appetite. That therefore thou
may fail in neither, but may have the best object, and the best appetite
cleared from clouds of ignorance and sin unto thee, these five Sermons of an
experienced master in Israel are tendered unto thee. If thou reapest benefit by
them, give glory to God, who would not have this lamp of love kept under a
bushel, and buried in oblivion. If thou receivest the least encouragement, from
these foregoing lines, to make use of this light, know that they proceed from
the love of thee in Christ, in him, who desires thy prayers, that he may love
the Lord Jesus both in life and death. Farewell.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF DIVINE LOVE.
Sermon I.
1 COR. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be
Anathema, Maranatha, Let him be had in execration, or let him be
excommunicated unto the death.
THese words have little dependence on the words before going; which are these,
The salutation of me Paul with my own hands. It was the custom of the
Apostle, that the Church might not deceived with counterfeit Epistles to set
his name to those he wrote: And that he would not do alone, but did always
add some gracious sentence, as commonly this, The grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ be with you all. And there he adds that sentence, which so suits with
the spirit and mind of S. Paul, that it might easily show it to be S. Paul's
Epistle; a man so abounding in the love of the Lord, as he is zealous against
such as love him not. We shall find, in all S. Paul's preaching, that faith and
love, were that which he drove at; those two roots, those two pillars on which
the Church is built, from whence all the rest flow: Hereby teaching Ministers
what they should beat at, what should be their aim: And so people are taught
hence what to do: they must water these two roots well, and then the branches
will flourish. Our wisdom should be to look to these; for these being
strong, all will be strong: If these be weak, all will be weak If any man
love not the Lord Jesus, let him be had in execration; yea, accursed unto the
death. His scope is to commend love to the Corinthians. If I should cast about
me to commend some special thing unto you now at the closing up of my Epistle,
I know nothing better then this Love of the Lord Jesus. And there are two
reasons why you should love him, first ye were in a miserable and accursed
condition if you do it not. And the second is from the object you are to love,
he is the Lord and so may well challenge your love; Jesus your Savior, and so
has well deserved it: so that we have here an exhortation, and two reasons of
it. The words have little difficulty. Somewhat I will say of the two words in
the original Anathema and Maranatha. The word Anathema signifies the
separation of a thing unto destruction. Maranatha is a Syrian word, signifying
cursing; taken from the Hebrew root, and signifies more then Anathema. The
Apostle doubles this curse to show the greatness of the punishment It is a great
punishment which he would express in two languages. The general doctrine we
will observe from these words, is this, That to love the Lord Jesus is so
necessarily required of us, that he is Doctrine. 1
worthy to be cursed that does it not. Sometimes in Scripture the promise is
made to faith, sometimes to repentance, sometimes to love. Love is so required,
that without it, a man is worthy to be accursed; yea, and shall be cursed. I
will but open and apply this; not standing to prove it. And First, I will show
what love is in general: Secondly, what this love of the Lord Jesus is; to
show which there will be shown how it is wrought: And thirdly, how they come
to be worthy to be accursed, that love him not. And first for the first. Love
is among the affections, which are planted in the Will; and it may be described
thus, It is a disposition of the Will and Heart What love is in general.
of man, whereby it turns and inclines to some good, which it apprehends to
be agreeable to its own nature. The Will is carried to nothing, but that
which is apprehended to be good. Now this love is a principal act of the
Will: and it must be an agreeable good to him, whose Will inclines unto it;
for an envyous man may confess the excellencies of another man, but he hates
them; he suffers by them; they seem not to be an agreeable good to him. And
this may be illustrated by the contrary. Hate is that whereby a man turns
from a thing which he apprehends contrary to himself. This Love shows it self
How love shows it self.
in two effects: first, it desires the preservation of what it loves, that it
may be kept safe: secondly, it desires Union with it, that they may draw nearer
one to another. That you love, which you desire may be yours, with which you
desire conjunction: Now sometimes a thing may be nearer, sometimes too far
off; therefore it desires such a neerenesse as may stand with its convenience.
And this is common to all love; if you love a Glass, you will take care that
it be kept clean, and whole, and for your use: so, if you love a Horse, you
will take care that he be well, and in good case, and that he be yours. The
same we see in the love of a Father to his Son, of one friend to another.
This is the nature of Love. Now Hate contrariwise, desires the destruction of
that which is hated, that it may be taken out of the world; and if that cannot
be, it desires separation from it, as far as may be. And thus you have seen
the nature of Love in general. Now there are diverse kinds of Love: There is a
Love The kinds of Love.
of Pity, when you desire the preservation of a man's person, and the removing
of some ill quality; As, our Savior mourned in Spirit, for the hardness of
their hearts; he did pity them, and yet was angry with their sin.

There is a Love of Desire, when a thing is dered to be kept safe for our use:
And this is for 3
the inferior faculties, as the sigh loves a pleasant object should be
continued.

There is a Love of Complacence, when we look on a thing, in which all the
faculties are 4
pleased; not only the inferior, but the superior, as the Mind and the Will.

There is a Love of friendship, when a man loves where he is loved again, when
love is reciprocal; there is an intercourse of Love.

There is a Love of dependence, when we love him on whom we depend; and thus
we love God, when we look upon him, as on whom all our good depends: so that
we love him more than our selves, because our good depends upon him, more than
on our selves.

We will add the qualities of Love; there is 1 The qualities of Love.
a natural Love, planted in us by nature: as the of parents to their children,
of one man to another: this love is indifferent, not good in it self; good no
otherwise, than directed on a good object.

There is a sinful Love, arising from sinful habits, 2
which seek things convenient to it. As nothing is better than love on a right
object, so nothing worse than love on a wrong object. As natural Love puts us
in the condition men: so this sinful Love makes men worse than beasts, and
equals them with the Devil.

There is a spiritual Love, arising out of holy qualities, which seeks an
object agreeable to it. 3
And this makes a man above a man, and in some sort equal with the Angels. Men
are as they love. GOD judges us by our affections, we are judged by what we
love. He that loves wickedness, is truly a wicked man; he that loves
holiness, is truly holy. This foundation that we have laid, though it may
seem somewhat remote, yet ye shall find it of use to hold up this building,
before we have done with the point.

The second thing that we have to declare, is, 2 What this love of the Lord
Jesus is.
What this love of the Lord Jesus is. Now the best way to show what this is, is
to show how it is wrought: now for the working of it, there must be two
Antecedent things which must make way for it; and they are Humiliation and
Faith: for every one believes not this to be needful; and if they do believe
it, yet they may be opposite to it, because it is not agreeable to their
nature, That a man must be broken so, and molded again, before he can have
this love which is wrought by Humiliation and Faith. And they are wrought on
this manner, when we preach the Gospel, and offer Jesus Christ unto you: for
the duty of a Minister, is nothing but this, to offer Jesus Christ himself
unto the world. To us a Child is borne; To us a Son is given: for, unto you
is borne a Savior, that is, Christ the Lord. This is the sum of the Esa. 9.
Luke (...).
Gospel; this is the news which we bring: God has given us his Son; we
offer you not forgiveness John 3. 16.
of sin, But the Lord Jesus. And when he has given us him, will he not with
him give us all things also? Christ must first be given, and when you have
him, you shall have all: in him Romans 8.
are the promises, yea and Amen. First have Christ, 2 Cor. 1. 20.
and then the promises belong unto you, not before. The Gospel is nothing but
this; we are to manifest, that God the Father is willing to give you his Son.
We are his Spokesmen, to beseech you to take him, that you would take him as
your 2 Cor. 5.
husband, to be ruled by him: none, before you are humbled, can marry you to
Christ. You must be divorced from all other things, and believe that Christ
will take you; and this is Faith, the other Humiliation. And then when you can
receive him, you will love him. Now when we preach thus unto the world, what
answer do we find? Why, there are some that will not believe that there is
such a Lord: and then our work is to persuade, that Christ is such a Lord; and
this was the Apostles work, and theirs at the beginning. But when we entreat
you to take Christ for your Lord, your answer is, as theirs who were invited to
the feast. This, and this excuse they have to hinder them, to believe, that a
Christ is propounded, and men regard him not, they will not look after him.
Now, that Christ may be received, there is required Humiliation and Faith:
Humiliation opens their eyes, by the Law, and spirit of bondage, that they see
themselves miserable men, men condemned to dye. Now when God has discovered
our misery unto us, and we rightly apprehend what our estates are, then we
begin to look on Christ as a condemned malefactor on his pardon; as a
Captain on him that comes to redeem him; as a Widow that thought she should
live well enough alone, but now when all her goods as seized upon, and they are
now to carry her to prison, would be content if any one would marry her. When
a man shall see what he is without Christ, one that is condemned, that must
perish if he have him not; then he looks on Christ, as upon one most
desirable, to prize him, to thirst for him; and if he know that Christ will
then receive him, oh then he cannot but love him; for Love (as has been said)
is to a good apprehended; fit for us. Now without this, we will think of
Christ, as if we might be well enough without him: But when the heart is thus
prepared by Humiliatio^, oh that all the World would vanish for Christ! Then
comes the Gospel, and tells us that Christ is willing to take us, to redeem us,
to be ours. And then when we take him, the match is made up: and thence arises
this conjugall Love. The Apostle prays for the Ephesians, that Christ may
dwell in their hearts by Faith, Ephesians. 3. to unite them to Christ, to marry
him; then presently it follows, That ye may be rooted and grounded in Love:
so that Love follows this, and not a flash, but it roots us in Love. The act
of justifying Faith, is the taking of Christ for rest. Now when ye have taken
him thus, then you will love him, and then all that follows will be effects of
this love: so that this love of the Lord Jesus, is this; to wit,

A holy disposition, arising from Faith, whereby we cleave unto the Lord Jesus
Christ, with full purpose of heart, to serve and please him in all things.

Whereby we cleave to him. Love inclines, and knits our hearts to him, as it
did David's to Ionathans. And so Barnabas exhorted them to cleave unto the Lord
with full purpose of heart, Act. 11. Neither is this idle; but makes a man
desirous to please the Lord in all things. A man is said to love the Lord,
when out of a persuasion that Christ is most desirable, and willing to receive
him, he cleaves to the Lord with a desire to serve and please him in all
things. Faith that begets Love, is not only a persuasion that the Lord will
be merciful, and forgive us: (For a prisoner may see the Judge willing to
pardon him, and persuade himself that he shall be pardoned, and yet love not
the Judge, because he looks not on the Judge, as on an amiable person,) but a
receiving and resting upon his amiablenesse. There is another affection; when
the heart is so framed, it apprehends Christ for its only good, its
happiness. Faith is not only an act of the mind, to believe that God will
pardon us; but of the Will and heart also, to take Christ for our Husband; so
that all the parts of the heart are inclined and bent after hem. If you believe
with all your heart, says Philip to the Eunuch, Act. 8. If a Spouse should see
one willing to have her, that is not enough to make up the match; she may not
think him fit, she may be unwilling. But suppose there be one that she
loves above all, whom she thinks to be most fit for her, yea she thinks she
shall be undone if she have him not: but yet she is not sure that he will
have her, but thinks it is very probable that he may be induced unto it. So
this is Faith, when a man sees Christ only worth his love, he would gladly be
divorced from all, so that he might have Christ oh he cannot be without him,
yet there is somewhat betwixt them, he cannot firmly believe that Christ loves
him, but yet does not think that he is wholly averse from him. Though thy
persuasion be not full, yet if you have this thirst and desire, this hungering
after Christ, you may be comforted. This shuts out such as have a persuasion
of the pardon of their sins, and yet have not this love, this prizing, this
desiring after Christ; and takes in such as do thus love and prize him, yet
find not that full persuasion of his love; so that this love is that which
follows Humiliation and Faith, the breaking of the heart, and the moulding of
it up again: when we see our need of him, and his willingness to receive us,
then we will take him, which cannot be without this love to him.

Now we come to the third thing, the reasons why they are worthy to be
accursed unto 3 Why they are worthy to be cursed that love not the Lord Jesus.
the death that Love not the Lord Jesus. This may seem strange and harsh. What
then becomes of all unregenerated men? The Apostle means, sure, such as
continue in their not loving the Lord, or such as have sinned against the holy
Ghost. But the former sense I take to be the best, neither is this any strange
thing: for it is one part of the Gospel. There are two parts of the Gospel, If
you believe, you shall be saved; if you believe not, you shall be damned. Sometimes
it is Mark ^0.
if you repent you shall be saved; or if you do not you shall perish, so if you
love you shall be saved; if you love not, you shall be accursed: now why should he
pitch on such a frame of words to express their condition?

Because when Christ shall come and be a suter to us, when he shall woe us,
and offer himself 1 Reason.
to us, and we will have none of him, then the Son waxes angry. When he
shall offer himself unto us, and none will kiss him, then he Psalm. 2.
waxes angry unto the death, and they perish in the way. The greatest love not
answered, turns to the greatest hatred: so when the Father sent to Mat. 22.
call them to the feast that were invited, and they refused it, this made him
wrath; when we shall come to preach Christ to men, when this light hid from
the beginning of the world shall shine, and you shall despise it and contemn
it, know that now is the axe laid to the root of the tree. God will bear it
at your hands no longer. Now if a man will not Love the Lord Jesus, let him be
had in execration, yea let him be accursed unto the death.

If a man did not keep the Law, he was to be 2
cursed, now there was a double keeping of the Law: A Legal, which answers
the exact rigor of the Law; an Evangelicall, which is an earnest endeavoring
to keep the Law, and to make a man's heart as perfect as may be. Now there
being more mercy in this, there is a greater curse on the breach of it. Now
Love is the fulfilling of the Law; and not to love the Lord, is, not to keep
the Law, and therefore the Curse follows it.

If a man love not the Lord Jesus, it is because 3
he loves something better than him. It may be you love your Wealth more than
Christ: And are you not worthy to be cursed for it? It may be you are lovers of
pleasure more than of God, and does not this deserve a Curse? It may be you
love the praise of men, before that of God; and is not this to be accursed?
Adultery was punished with death; and what punishment then is enough for the
going a whoring from such a God, after such vanties?

Again, Cursing belongs to Hypocrites; Woe be unto you Seribes and Pharisees,
Hypocrites, Matthew 23. Now, what a man does not out of love, is done out of
hypocrisy; which is, to do the outward action without the inward affection:
as counterfeit gold has the same stamp and color with true gold. But as we
cast away counterfeit silver and gold, set it apart to destruction, nayling
them up, that they may be known, so will God deal with such as serve him
outwardly, without this love to him.

Love is that which commands all in a man. It is as the rudder to a ship; all
follows love. 5
When a man love not the Lord, all go's from him. Now when the whole man shall
go from the Lord, is not such a one worthy to be cursed, yea to be had in
execration to the death?

If this love of the Lord be so necessary, then see what a sin it is, what an
execrable thing it Use 1. It is a great sin, not to love the Lord Jesus.
is, not to love the Lord; and what you are to think of your selves, if you
love not the Lord. When Jesus Christ shall be propounded unto men, and this
light is great, but men do^ resist it, and not embrace the Lord: when we see
this, we should have such a spirit as Paul, (for this was out of the abundance
of his zeal) we should, I say, be stirred against such with an holy
indignation, Act. 17. Do not I hate those that hate thee? Psalm. 139. yea I
hate them with a perfect hate. This thou have, that thou hate the works of
the Nicholaitans, which thing also I hate, Revelations 2. And this was a sign
of Lots sincerity, that his righteous soul was grieved, and vexed with the
unclean conversation of the Sodomites, 2 Peter 2. If you can see Christ
scorned and re jected, and his Word slighted, and his blood trampled on, and
you your selves are not moved with it, you are not of Paul's spirit, who
speaking of some, whose God was their belly, whose glory was their shame; of
whom (says he) I have told you often, and now tell you weeping, that they are
the enemies of the cross of Christ, Philip, 3. Whence came this, but out of
the abundance of his love to Christ, and mankind? I wish ye would all look
to your selves, whether you are in this number or not, of those that love not
the Lord. This is such a sin, as the curse is doubled upon it: And the
punishment is but to show the measure of the sin. He thunders not out his
curse against him that opposes the Lord, or resists him, but against him
that loves not the Lord. The Apostle, as Moses, gets him up to the Mount Ebal;
and whom does he curse? Even all such as love not the Lord Jesus. This Doctrine
thoroughly considered, may let in a crevice of light to thee, that now thou
may look on thy self, as on an execrable thing which God hates; and thou
may see GOD, even stretching out his power to confound thee, yea thou may
see the Gospel cursing thee.

But what terror is there in the preaching of the Gospel, you will say? Ob.


O much more (my Brethren) than may be expressed; for the curse of the Law was
not so Sol.
peremptory; though we have plain words for it, yet it was not without all
condition. But God swears to this curse, as if we were thus cursed if we
would continue not to love him. The Law is the proper instrument of humbling,
yet the Gospel humbles more; for sin is the matter of Humiliation. And there
be sins against the Gospel, yea greater sins than against the Law: when
thou hear the curse of the Law, Cursed be he that continues not in every
thing that is written in the book of the Law; to do them, Galathians 3. You
will say, you will go to Christ, and he shall do it for you: But when the Gospel
curses such as love not Christ, to whom will you go to love God? Another man
cannot love for you. And if you think this be too harsh, let this verse sound
often in your ears.

If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be accursed unto the death.

This cannot be altered, it is the Word of God; ask then thy self this
question, whether thou love the Lord, or no? And put not your self off with
your Hope, but try your Love; for Love will have sensible strings in the heart;
it will drive you close to the Lord, to keep in with him, to have communion
with him.

Do thou then feel, that thou art never well, but when thou art with him,
and yet do thou Signs of Love
not love him? Do thou walk with God, as 1
Enoch did? Will any of you say, that a Wife loves her Husband, which with her
good will, will never be with him?

Love is also very dilligent and laborious, you will never leave, till you get
near him whom you 2
love; no labor will be tedious, to get his favor; many years seem a few
days to Jacob, to serve for Rachel, because he loved her.

Again, Love is not of a deferring nature, but 3
is impatient of all delays.

Again, Love is content with it self; it does not need to be hired to love,
Amor est sibi ipsi 4
dulce pabulum: it carries its meat in its own mouth. If you love the Lord
Jesus, you would not ask what wages you should have to love him.

Again, Love is a strong impulsive quality, it 5
carries you on impetuously unto the Lord, it is a fire that breaks through
thick and thin: so that he that loves, cannot sin wilfully, if he would;
he cannot but obey, he cannot do any thing against the Gospel, he must do
all things for it. The Love of Christ constraines me, says S. Paul, 2
Corinthians 5. Look how a man is carried with a strong stream, or by a strong
man whom he cannot resist; so his love compelled him; I preach, and preach,
and men think me mad, but I cannot but do it: the love of Christ constraines
me, and as it constraines me, so there is nothing more different than
constraint, and not to do it. The effects of this Love are so violent, as if
they were compelled; but for the manner of working, nothing is so contrary to
it as compulsion; for you love him, and are carried to it, as a stone to the
center, you would do no otherwise.

So ends the first Sermon.
A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST. Sermon II.

BY JOHN PRESTON, DD.

Matt. 22. 37, 38. This is the first, and great Commandment: thou shall Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

Psalm. 31. 26. Love the Lord O all ye his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for John Stafford 1640.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST.
Sermon II.
1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in
execration, yea let him be accursed unto the death.
THat love to the Lord Jesus is so necessarily Point.
required, that he is worthy to be accursed that has it not.

Then hence you are to consider Use 2. Try whether, what you do is out of love.
your condition, and to examine your self; it may be this is thy condition,
and it may be a thing you never considered of, or at least you never knew the
danger of it. Therefore now see what your case is. The best service we can do
to you, is to show you your estates, if ye be right, to comfort you; and if ye
be not right, is it not best for ye to know, while it may be amended? Thou that
live in the Church, and have gone far, examine thy self in his, Have thou
done all out of Love? Thou have kept thy self in good course: thou keep the
Lords day, and live like a Christian, thou do many things indeed. Bu^ let
me ask thee this question, Do you all out of love? for without love all is
naught. If a man should be a Martyr, (which is the highest action;) yet
without this love, it were to no purpose, 1 Corinthians 13. Put the case a man
should do many things for thee, yet if he do it not out of love to thee, you
cannot regard it; Neither circumcision, nor uncircumcision availes any thing,
but faith which works by love, Galathians 5. It is all one, whether you pray
or not; hear or not; live well or not, if it be not out of love. What was
said of circumcision or uncircumcision, may be said of any duty; all that you
have done, is as nothing, if it be not out of love: try your selves by this,
for I know not in all the frames of Theology, such a touchstone of Hypocrisy,
as this. This most unmaskes a man of any thing. As it was with the Apostle, The
Law revived, and he died, Romans 7. So, it may be, you have thought your self
a living man; see then if you love, deceive not your self any longer.

This is a Doctrine of much moment; if GOD would conveigh it with Majesty, by
the power of his Spirit, it would amaze and startle the stoutest stomach to
hear, Cursed is he, that loves not the Lord. If you love the Lord, he will
bear much with you: see what a testimony he gives of David, for all his
failing. But do what you will for him, without love, and he will regard it
but as a Complement. As men count that a Complement not to be regarded, with
which the heart go's not, o does God: look therefore, that you love the Lord
Jesus, for it is a thing of great consequence, the curse follows you, if you
do it not.

You are now therefore to examine your self, Whether you love or no? And to
help you in it, I will lay down some marks of this love; bu^ first set down
with your self this conclusion, If I love not the Lord Jesus, I am an accursed
man.

Do you feel this love in you? have you a Notes of trial of this love of the
Lord Christ.
sense of it? Ammon was sick of love, so that his friends could see him wear
away: so the Spouse, I am sick of love, Canticles 2. And 1
do thou love the Lord, and can not feel it? Do thou feel thy heart
working toward God? This love is a thing that one would think needs no
marks, you cannot but see it. It is noted in Love, so, that if you did love
the Lord, you would have a longing desire after him: there will be joy in the
fruition of him, anger against all impediments to it, grief when he withdrawes
himself, hope when there it any probability of enjoying him, fear to lose
him. Now do not deceive thy self; thou love the Lord, thou will say, but is
this love to his person, or to his kingdom, his goods? When thou presentest
Jesus Christ alone to thy self, can thou then love him? The Virgins love
him, the Harlots love him. And there is a great deal of harlotry love in the
world, to the Lord Jesus. It was one thing to love Alexander, another to love
the King. It is true, Christ is a great King, that can do much good or evil
in the world, and so many may love him. But can thou answer this question,
Love thou me? with Peter, Lord thou know that I love thee, John 20. Thou
that know my heart, and the secret turnings of it, can bear me witness
that I love thee.

Do thou love his company? Love is seen in nothing more than this. Do
thou love his 2
presence, to walk with God? Do thou observe all his dealings to thee from
morning to night, refer all still unto him? Art thou still in dealings with
him? Still thou have something to do with him; there is not an hour that
passes thee, wherein thou have not recourse unto him: when Christ takes a man
unto himself, he comes and sups with him, Apocalypse 3. Have thou then this
communion with Christ? Does he sup with thee, dwell with thee? Now, communion
stands in speaking to another, and in hearing him speak to us. When you pray,
then pray you formally, as one that is glad when the duty is over? oh if you
loved the Lord, you would never be better, than when you are at prayer. And you
would go to prayer, as you would go to speak with your dearest friend. So do
you hunger after the Word, which is the character of Christ his Will, his
Love-letter? Put the case a Woman should have her Husband at the East Indies,
how welcome would a letter be to her from him? Therefore Moses that loved God,
desired to see his glory, Exodus 33. to know him better, to grow more
acquainted with him. Now, that the Word does to thee, it shows to thee that
glory which Moses saw.

If you love the Lord, Holy Days and Sacrament-daies would be as Feast-daies,
and Wedding-daies; for then you meet with God more nearly. Do you then put
off your coming to the Sacrament, and would you not come near it for the
speech of some, and yet will you say that you love the Lord? where love is,
there is delight. A man delights in his fellowship, whom he loves, whom ye
have not seen, yet ye love him; yea, whom, though ye see him not, yet ye
believe and joy with joy unspeakable and glorious. Do you then delight in his
presence? for delight will be in the enjoying of that we love; joy follows
love.

To delight in a man's company, is that mark of love which cannot be
dissembled. Do thou then love the appearing of the Lord Jesus? 2
Thessalonians 3. If one should bring you news that you must go to the Lord,
or he would come to you to morrow, would this be acceptable news to you? Does
he bring good tidings? If a Spouse should have her betrothed husband beyond the
Seas, and should hear of his return; if she should say, that it were the
worst news that could come to her, would you think that she loved him? No,
there could not come a more welcome Messenger to thee than such a one, if thou
did love the Lord. Blessed are the dead that dye in the Lord (for so says
the Spirit) from henceforth they rest from Rev. 13.
their labors. So says the Spirit, not so says the Flesh. So much the more
spirit a man has, so much the more he will say, it is blessed, and the more
he will pray submittingly for it, quickly. Indeed a godly man, when the flesh
is predominant, and the spirit under hatches, then he may be desirous to be
spared a while; oh spare me a little, as the Spouse may sometimes wish her
Husband, deferring his coming, when she is not fit to receive him; the house
is not ready, not clean enough.

A Crown of Righteousness, says the Apostle, is laid up for all them that
love the appearing of the Lord Jesus. 1 Timothy 4 8. And the second time shall
Christ appear to salvation, to all them that look for him, Hebrews 9. Art thou
then one that looks for Christ, that desires nothing but union with him, he
will come to thee to thy salvation. If men look not for him, will he come to
them to salvation? It may be in some disease, when thou can take no pleasure
in the world, you wish that you were with Christ. Nature may have a great hand
in this.

But in thy youth, in the midst of all worldly contents, when thou art in thy
pleasant Orchard, with thy Wife and Children about thee, having what thy heart
can wish, can thou say then, Now would I most willingly leave all these to
go to Christ? when you prefer his company above all things, count that delight
the best, that comes from communion with him; then thou love the Lord Jesus.

Love is exceeding bountiful, apt to do much 3
for the Lord, and to suffer any thing gladly. The Apostle, in the first
Epistle to the Corinthians, Chapter 13. sets down many excellent properties of
Love; she that loved Christ, had a box of Ointment; it may be it was the best
thing she had, it may be it was all she had, yet she bestows it on Christ. So
Abraham, when God would have his Son, he go's willingly about it; not
formally, not out of necessity, but he rose up early to do it. It may be
there will come a time when God shall need thy Wealth; it may be, thy Credit.

Now, you can deny him nothing, if you love him. So, Dalilah would not be
persuaded that Sampson loved her, so long as he kept back any thing from her.
If there be any thing so near unto thee as thy life, and it be told thee
that the Lord has need of it, he shall have it. Thou will say, It was a wise
action of David, to pour out that water as an offering to the Lord, which he
so longed for, and obtained with the hazard of the lives of three of his
Worthies. As when a man has a good bit, he will send it to his friend: so in
another place, he would not offer to the Lord of that which should cost him
nothing, 2 Samuel 24. But what can I bestow upon the Lord, thou will say? If
thou art a Preicher, preach the Gospel for Christ; so, every man in his
calling, let him do somewhat for the Lord, and if he shall call for by life,
let it not be dear unto thee. And as love is thus bountiful, so it seeks not
its own, 1 Corinthians 13. And now, how f(...) will bae found hat love Christ?
we may well complain with Paul, All men seek their own, and ^one the things
of Jesus Christ, Philemon 2. Paul that loved the Lord, how was he affected?
he regarded: o^ himself, took not care what should become of himself, he
took the care of all the Churches upon him: Who is offended, and so by taking
offense, falls away, and I burn not? Art thou a Minister, and love the Lord
Jesus, thou will not be so careful for a living, and that it be a convenient
one, but thou would preach as Paul, though for nothing; for every man might
do much for the Lord, if he sought the things of the Lord; if he did plod
with himself, how to bring advantage to Christ.

And then if this should come in, if I do this, I shall hinder my estate, lose
my friends, it would be nothing: the love of the Lord would be far better to
thee than any thing, Love does much for the Lord; Faith works by Love, he
loves much, that does much. Paul, as he was abundant in love, so in labor. If
you love me, says our Savior, keep my Commandments. Are you willing then to
take much pains for the Lord? Do thou feed the lambs of Christ? If thou
art a Minister, or if thou art in the way to that calling, art thou diligent to
fit they self for it? And love not only works, but it makes that the
commandments are not grievous. The wife may serve her husband, and the servant
him, but with a different affection. The covetous man when he is before some
great man that can imprison him, or put him to death may part with his wealth,
or if with one that can greatly prefer him, in hope of that, he may be
brought to part with his money; But willingly he will not. But you must find
delight in that you do: when you do a kindness to one that you love, you do
but do your self a kindness on that party. And in this sense what thanks
deserve you? you do but satisfy your love. As a mother loves her child, and
does the offices of kindness to it with delight, though she shall never have
any thing for it. If you had this love, you would come to say, It is meat and
drink to do your Fathers will. Now, you need not be hired to eat and John
4.
drink.

Lastly, love suffers all things. Are you willing 1 Cor. 13.
to suffer any thing for the Lord? when David did a religious act, Michol
looks upon him with another eye, as men look now on religious actions. It is
no matter, says David, I will bear it, for I did it to the Lord, who chose
me before thy fathers house. And if this be to be vi^e. I will be yet more
vile. Can you endure to be pointed at, scoffed and mocked, for the Lord? It was
a sore trial to have his wife so against him, yet we see how he did bear
it. Bonds and afflictions, says Paul abide me in every City; But none of
these things move me, neither count I my life dear unto my self, so I may
Acts 20, 24.
finish my course with joy. Are you able to do thus? But I canno like, you
will say, to be put to it you do not know, it may be you may lose your
wealth, your credit, and respect, among those whom you loved, and this is
somewhat: yet love makes it as nothing. We see when a man loves a Maid,
neither Father nor Friend, nor the speech of people will move him to give over.
True, this is a sinful love, but yet shows what the nature of love is. Nay I
will go furth^r, you will suffer all with joy, Strengthened with all might
according to his glorious power unto Col 1. 11.
all patience and long suffering with joyfulnesse. So when the Apostles were
whipped where the shame Acts 5.
was more then the pain, yet they rejoiced that they were thought worthy to
suffer for Christ.

Put all these together, Are ye bountiful, that if the Lord should put you to
any cost, cost of purse, labors of life, he should willingly have it? Do ye
take care for the things of Christ, plod how ye may glorify him? Do ye do
much, and suffer much for the Lord? Take these notes no further then ye see
reason for them: And know that this is that word of the Lord, if you love not
the Lord Jesus, you are cursed.

The next property of love is, it desires nothing so much as love again. If a
man be ser 4
viceable to another, and not out of love, so he be officious to him, he is
content. But love will be paid in it is own coin, it will not have mercy
without grace. A kingdom without grace, will not content it. It is very
observant in this kind, Quis fallere possit amantem? They will be very curious
this way. They must see love in every thing, or else they can take no delight
in it. It is not a kingdom that can quiet them without the love of God.

How ever it go with corn, wine and ovle, th i^ prayer is, Lord lift thou up
the light of thy Psalm. 4.
countenance on us. If a man's turn were served, so he might be freed from
hell, and made happy, and then love him, this man loves not the Lord. That
which Absalom did in hypocrisy, we are to do in truth, Sam. 14. What avails
it me that I enjoy (says he) my lands, and that I live in Jerusalem, so long
as I may not see the Kings face? So if God should give you abundance of all
your hearts can wish, free you from the fire of hell, yet this will not content
you without you see his face, if you have this love. And thus if Gods people
humble themselves and seek his face, he 2 Chronicles. 7. 14.
will hear in heaven, and have mercy on them: when a people are oppressed and
in captivity, they may come to the Lord and humble themselves, but for their
own liberty, they may seek their own good in it, as they, Howled on their
Hos. 7. 14.
beds for corn, wine, and oil: but Gods people seek his face, his favor;
examine thy self then, if when his countenance is clouded, and he hides his
face, thou art impatient, thou can not bear it, then thou may assure thy
self that thou love the Lord. Thus did David Psalm. 51. when he wanted the
sense of Gods favor, how did he complain he would have no denial, and
therefore never gives over entreating till he is answered.

Do thou love the Lord? then thou love the Saints. This is a true and
common note, 5
every one has it in his mouth, 1 John 3. If you love the Lord, you will love
the brethren. Do thou then love the Lord, and hate evil in other men? If you
love not your brother whom you see daily, how can ye love the Lord whom ye
never see? God is remote from our eyes that we cannot behold him. Now his
image is stamped upon the Saints, and so is visible to us. We see them daily,
they converse with us. Now, if we love not them, we cannot love God. For, the
love of Christ is that holy disposition which you conceive in your mind of
him: Now, the like for kind is in the Saints. As those that do the lusts of
the Devil, are of his disposition, that is, are as it were little Devils: so
in the Saints, there is the same disposi^ion, the same mind that was in Christ
Jesus for kind.

But you will say, I would love them, if I thought they were not hypocrites. Ob.


Take heed, thou may persecute Christ under Sol.
the person of an hypocrite: what if thou strike at an hypocrite in seeming?
yet a true member of Christ is found wounded by thee. And when thy heart shall
rise against thee, out of the side of the likeness of religion, and true
piety, what would you do if the substance were there, i^ he had grace in a
higher measure? Christ pitches on this note above all others. It is far
easier to love a holy man then to love God. For he lives amongst us, we have
him continually before our eyes. Do not say then you love such as are a far
off, you care not for these.

But you will say I love them well enough, do you so? Do you delight then in
their company? Ob.
Are you in your natural element when Sol.
you are among them? This you will do by a natural instinct if you love the
Lord Jesus. Again, do you hate sin in all? the same ground will cause you
to hate sin, which moves you to love grace. Do you then hate sin as in
dislike, and distate in regenerate men and their society, be it never so
pleasant, so profitable?

But what would you have me to hate men then? no, but hate their sins, and
love them Ob.
with the love of pity.

Let thy heart melt to consider their case, and desire their good, love them,
but so as it may Sol.
stand with the love of the Lord Jesus. Look then to your selves, and examine
your selves by these marks, see that you have this love; if ye have it not,
you are among the number of these men which are to be accursed unto death.

But I hope I deserve not so bad, my nature I hope is not so vile, as not to
love the Lord Jesus. Ob,


Nay, thou hate him, do you not wish that Sol.
there were no such Lord to come to judgment, that thou might live as thou
please? Could thou not wish that thou might ever here enjoy these
pleasures, and never come at him? Now to wish that one were not, what is it but
to hate him? Quem metuunt oderunt: We say men hate him whom they stand in
fear of. Do you then fear and quake at his coming? surely then you are
haters of God.

But I hope we are not haters of God. Why, Ob.
this is not so ^^ra^ge. The Apostle tells us that there were such as loved
their pleasures more then Sol.
God. 2 Timothy 3. yea, and that there were haters of God also. Romans 1. 30. And in
the second commandment God ^hreatens such as hate him, Exo. 20. and thou
may be one of them. For if you cannot endure his Company, if your heart
rise against his image, it is plain you are a hater of God.

What? you would make me out of love with Ob.
my self. What do you preach damnation to me? it may be all these signs are
not in me; Am I then so accursed?

Yes: we do preach damnation to all that are Sol.
in such a case, and we are to threaten the curse. And thus the Lord esteems
of thee, and it were good that you thought so of your selves in time. It is the
Ministers duty to separate the precious from the vile, to distinguish between
men; To show you truly what your conditions are. Therefore apply this Text
unto your selves, every one. If I love not the Lord Jesus, I am an accursed
man, yea to be had in execration to the death, which might make you loath your
selves, in dust and ashes. It might make sin alive in you, and bring you to
love this Jesus.

So ends the second Sermon.
A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST. Sermon II.

BY JOHN PRESTON, DD.

Matt. 22. 37, 38. This is the first, and great Commandment: thou shall Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

Psalm. 31. 26. Love the Lord O allye his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for John Stafford 1640.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST.
Sermon III.
1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in
execration, yea let him be accursed unto the death.
NOw because this love is so needful, we will add more signs for the trial
of your selves. For we cannot be better occupied.

A sixth sig^e therefore is 6
this, he that loves, will be apt to praise and speak well of that he loves,
and he will exceed in it: yea, he is very glad when he hears others speak
well of it. So if we did love the Lord, we should be apt to speak will of him,
we would be much in the speech of him. When the heart is full of this love of
God in Christ, out of that abundance in thy heart, thy mouth will speak. But
thou speak but little of God, and that little is brought in by company, thou
art cold in thy praising of him: why thou do not love him, see in David, a
man that loved the Lord. How much was he in the praising of him? Nay, he could
not be content to do this alone, but he must have all creatures to praise
him and to speak good of his Name: Even as a servant that commends his Master,
invites others to serve him. This love enlarges the heart and opens the mouth.
O Corinthians, our hearts are enlarged toward you, and our mouths are opened,
2 Corinthians 6. 11. This is an argument that our hearts are enlarged, that we
abound in love, when our mouths are opened. So that thy heart is straightened
toward God, if thy mouth be not open to his praises.

But I cannot speak as other men, I am no Ob.
scholar, if I had elocution gifts, learning, I could thus speak.

This is no excush, it is the nature of love to make men eloquent, the passions
make eloquent. Sol.
As we say, Pectus facit eloquentes, and magna pars eloquentiae constra animo.
Are you hen apt to speak well of God? But this, you will say, is but a small
matter, who does not? Oh yes, we are wanting in that manner of speaking of him
which love requires. We do not speak of him with that affection, that
sensiblenesse, that may inflame others to love him. See the Spouse in the
Canticles: Oh says she, My love is fairer then ten thousands. And thus will
the soul that loves God do. It will tell of his mercies abroad. It will
speak good of his Name. And that not as a duty only, but as a thing in which
it takes especial delight: Love follows the judgment, you cannot love the
Lord, but you will think well of him. See then what thy speeches are
concerning him: see if thy heart do nimbly indite, and thy tongue be as the
pen of a ready Scribe Psalm 45.

Consider whether you endeavor to do any thing for Christ without
expostulating, and indenting with him. Whether you are ready to do all things
freely to him, without consulting with another about it. Amicitia non est
revocanda ad calculos. A friend must not be strict in taking his account, for
then he plays but the Huckster, he does but buy and sell. When thou art
trying and expostulating then whether such a duty be necessary or no, whether
another will not serve the turn; this is a sign thou do want love. A
Minister that has this love, when he is to take a Living, will not so much
enquire what reward he shall have, as what service he may do to God in it. If
you did love the Lord you would not stand, saying, is it necessary to keep the
Lords day so strictly? You would be ready to do what ever has but a shadow
of pleasing him. Oh how you would be glad of such a day, so free from other
business, wherein you might sequester your selves from the world, to attend
upon God, and to enjoy him? So for a family prayer, thou would not ask, can
it not be omitted without sin? This questioning will not stand with this
love: for the person thou servest is the Lord, and thou must not be as a
mercenary servant. A wife will be devising things to please her husband. So,
what shall I render to the Lord (says David.) So Paul was abundant in labors
and sufferings. If Paul would have done nothing but out of necessity, he had
never done half so much, say then, I will even go do my duty, perform my
task, If I must pray in my family, then I will: If I must keep the Lords day,
I will make a shift to wear out the day; This I say argues a heart void of
this love. We must know that Christ has died to purchase to himself a people
zealous of good works: such as do good works with desire or dear delight;
that would feign do a great deal more then they do. Would you then do no
more then just will bring you to heaven as you think? Do you set limits to
your performances? you have not this love. Why? you pray that you may serve
Christ on earth as the Angels do in heaven, and yet will you say such a man
goes faster, it is no matter, this pace will bring me to heaven, and so never
mend it? This is a sign of no love to the Lord Jesus.

If you did love the Lord, ye should find an holy affection of anger and
zealerising against such as offend him. Anger waits on love. Love is an
affection that makes forwards to the thing beloved: and if any thing stand in
the way, Anger removes it hastily.

If thy heart then be not stirred when God is dishonored, his Church spoiled,
and Religion goes downward, thou love him not, can you endure to hear your
self scandalized? No, and why? because you love your self. To see then the
blood of the Lord Jesus trampled on, neglected so, as no man should regard it,
to see the Saints in adversity, and not to be affected, argues that your heart
is void of this love of the Lord Jesus.

Eli when he heard the news of Isreal's flight, his sons death, it must needs
grieve him, but all this while, his heart was composed: But the worst news (as
usually it does) comes last. The Ark of God was taken: Then his heart was
amazed, he could no longer subsist, but he falls down backward and breaks
his neck. But it may be ye do not hope to attain to the grace of El^; why,
look then on his daughter in law, one of the weaker sex; All that ill news
moved her not so much. Oh the Ark of God was taken, that was it which she
pitched upon, her son that was borne could not alay this grief.

But the Arc is not taken (you will say) Ob.
there is not the like cause now with us.

No? are not many Churches desolate? when Sol.
you see so many Churches ransacked beyond the Seas, do you not see the Ark of God taken in a great measure? when you see Popery increasing, and the Saints
wallowing in their blood? If you take not this to heart, it is because the love
of Christ is not in you.

If Christ lose a man, if any be offended, and fall away, I burn, says the
Apostle. When the King, Ier. 36. took that book and burnt it, it is noted of
those that stood by, that they did rend their clothes. God takes it as a great
sign of a profane heart, when one shall not take such dishonours of his to
heart, when he rends not his clothes at the sight of such a thing. Paul when
he saw the idolatry that abounded in Athens, was enflamed in his spirit. Acts
17.


See what a commendation God gave to Phineas for his zeal against Zimri and
Cosbi, he would have it remembered as a special note of his love to him, which
he would not let go unrewarded. If thou do not then pray for the Churches
welfare, If thou art not affected with the loss and disadvantages of the
Church, as with thy own, thou want this love.

A ninth sign is not to dare to do any thing that displeases him. If you do
a thing amiss 9
that would be displeasing, you had rather that all the world should see you,
then him whom you love. Now you know God always behold you: you should
therefore be always alike careful. They shall fear the Lord and his
goodness, Hosea 4: The Lord for his goodness; they shall fear to lose him.
Above all consider when you have offended him, how you take that to heart. When
you know there is a breach between you and the Lord, and you can be content,
and rest in it, this is a shrewd sign of no love. When man and wife shall fall
out, and grieve not for it, but let it pass, not seeking to be reconciled, it
is sign of cold love between them.

Think with your self there is no man whom you profess to love, but you
would not willingly provoke. And dare you say that you love the Lord, and yet
ye will grieve and vex him?

If you love the Lord, there would be an hungring in you after him: there
would be still 10.
an hanging that way. All impediments would be broken through, the heart would
still be moving thitherward. It would be bending thither. It would admit no
repulse. As the woman of Canaan, Matthew. 15. it would not be put off. As the
stone rests not till it comes to the center, so nothing can keep you off from
the Lord, no pleasures; away with them: nor any difficulties, no you cannot
rest without him.

Say not then with your self, though you love him not now, yet I may love him
hereafter, and I may love him hereafter, though not so much. No, love desires
present union, it hates all delays. Consider this: if you did repent out of
love, your repentance would be present, and what repentance is it which is not
out of love?

Then hence thou art to humble thy self, if thou art failing in this labor of
love. See how Use 3. To humble our selves for want of this love.
great a fault it is, not to love the Lord: and learn to blame thy self
exceedingly for it. And that you may do this, I will show you what great
reason you have to love the Lord.

Consider that he is worthy to be beloved. As 1. The reasons we have to love
the Lord.
David said, he is worthy to be praised, so may we well say, he is worthy to
be beloved. And why? because he has all that is amiable in him. If you see any
thing lovely in the creature, it is eminently in him. Shall not he that made
the eye see? he that made the ear hear? shall not he that gave these
perfections to the creatures have them in himself more eminently?

This perfection of his beauty, is that which causes the Angels so much to
admire and adore him, to be taken up in the admiration of his excellencies.
Observe that in any man whom you love; there is something not to be beloved:
But CHRIST is wholly delectable, there is nothing in him not fully to be
beloved. See how the Spouse describes him in the Canticles, how she sets him
forth in every part of him most to be desired. If you could but see the Lord.
If it did but please him to show himself unto you, as he promised to show
himself unto him that loves him, John 14, 21. If the Lord, I say, would give
you a glympse of himself; if by the light of the Spirit you could see him, you
would acknowledge him worthy of your love. And this is the reason that some
love him, and others do not, because he discovers himself to some and not to
others. As he did to Moses, where let us see a little his expression of
himself.

The Lord, the Lord, Exodus 34. this is but the Casket, the Jewel is within.
If Gods Spirit should open these words unto you, you would see him the fairest
of ten thousand, Jehovah, Jehovah. Of every creature (you may say) somewhat it
was that it is not, and samewhat it is that it will not be. But God is
unchangeable Jehovah, in him is no alteration, he is not a friend to day, and
none to morrow, and such a friend you would desire to choose: as this Name
signifies, his immutable being, so his omnipotency, he is Almighty. Now what a
Loadstone of love is this? All the power in men, enableth them but to do some
things: as patience enables them to bear injurious acts; But the Lord has all
abilities, all ornaments, all excellencies, all is comprehended in this
Almighty: So that well may such a friend be desired.

True, will the poor soul say, he is well worth Ob.
the having. But he will not match with such a match as I am.

Oh yes, he is wonderfully pitiful and Merciful: as great a Prince of pity,
as of any thing Answ.
else.

Merciful: but I have no beauty, no grace in Ob.
me, no worth, no repentance.

But God is exceeding gracious. Kings are said Answ.
to be gracious, because there is supposed such a difference between them and
their Subjects, that they can deserve nothing of them: So God is gracious, he
does not look for any deservings in thee.

But I have provoked him by sinning, and sinning Ob.
often: This will make him put me off.

No, he is of great forbearance. Answ.


But if he do receive me, I must carry my self Ob.
well, pray, and do, that which I shall never be able to do.

Why no, he is very kind. Look what a kind Father, a kind Husband, would
do to a Answ.
Child, or a Wife, they are careful to give content: the like may you expect
of the Lord. He will wink at many infirmities, if your desires be found.

Though he say so, how shall I know that he will Ob.
do it?

To confirm this, He is true: he keeps covenant, Answ.
and has given ensamples of his mercy on thousands of them that fear him.

Oh, but still my sins are many and Ob.
great.

Be it so: yet he forgives iniquities, transgressions, and sins, original
sins, sins of weakness, Answ.
and sins of wilfulness.

This glory God showed to Moses. This is the description of himself, such a
one is Jesus Christ, O ye daughters of Jerusalem, and is he not worthy to be
beloved?

When thou have considered the worth that is 2
in himself, consider that he sues to thee for thy love. Suppose a Prince
should come and ask this at thy hands, would thou deny him? The weak
should sue to the stronger, but here the Lord God comes to thee for thy love.

This is that, O Israel, which he requires of thee, that thou love the Lord
thy God, Deuter. 10, 16. When such a God shall ask thy love, sue for it, shall
he be denied? We (the Ministers) are but Christ's spokes-men to woo for Christ.
See who it is that requires this? it is thy Sovereign Lord that might have
required thee to sacrifice thy children, thy life, thy goods, for his honor,
and can he not have thy love? Now, Israel, what does the Lord thy God require
of thee, but to fear him, to love him? as if he should say, the Lord has done
great things for you, and might require great things of you again. This may
melt thee then, that he requires nothing but thy love.

Again consider, he has planted this love in thy heart: shall he not have
his own then when 4
he requires? shall not he which planted the tree, eat of the fruit? shall
not he which gave this fountain of love taste of the waters of it?

Again, on whom would you bestow it, if you will not give it to the Lord? It
must be bestowed on somewhat, and it is the best thing you have to bestow. It
swaies and commands al in you. Does thy wealth deserve it? Do men deserve it?
Why, they are not to be compared to the Lord. Can any man do for thee that
which he does? besides, he forgives thee thy sins day by day. Think of his
excellencies.

Again, you are engaged to love him. you are married to him; you have given up
your names to 5
him in your baptism: so that now well may I call you an adulterous
generation, if you love him not, Ye are witnesses against your selves this day
(says Joshua) Joshua 24. if ye serve not the Lord. He takes great advantage
of their promise that they had made to serve the Lord: ye are now witnesses
against your selves if you do it not.

So all that hear me this day are witnesses against themselves. For in their
baptism they took the Lord for their God. Is he not your Master? where then
is your fear? is he not your Father? where then is your reverence? is he not
your Friend, where then is your love?

Again, he has bought us, yea, he has overbought us. If you should see a
flock of sheep, 6
and hear that such a man has paid such a price for them, far beyond their
worth, you will be ready to say, let him have them, he is well worthy of them.
And shall Christ be denied that which he has so dearly bought? he has bought
you from the world, from the power of the devil, yea, and from your selves, so
that they are not to set us on work, We are not our own, 1 Corinthians 6.
we are therefore to do a mothers business, and that is Christ's, who
requires love.

Besides all these generals, think of the particulars, which work most upon
us. See all his 7
passages to you, how kind he has been toward you. See how he has dealt
with you from your youth hitherto. Consider all his kindnesses bestowed upon
thee: see also what he has done in forgiving thee. Thou have sinned often,
and greatly, and yet still he has forgiven thee, and this is a great matter.
She loved much, because much was forgiven her, Luke 7. He feeds thee,
clothes thee thou have not a nights rest but he gives it thee, he it is that
keeps thee from all dangers: that cares for thee when thou can not take care
for thy self. The creature cannot help thee, withou(...)ee command it to
help thee, he has stood close to thee in all exigents. And this most of all
affects us: in some great danger when all forsake us, we cannot but love him
most dearly that then sticks close unto us. Thus has the Lord done unto thee,
with this Nathan urges David, and aggravates his sin? The Lord has done thus
and thus unto thee, and if that had not been enough, would have done more. 2 Samuel 12. 8. Take up the same practice with your soul; the Lord has done thus
and thus for me, and shall I not love him? would we not hate that man that
should not love and respect him from whom he has his whole maintenance?

Lastly, consider that he loves thee. Now as 8
fire begets fire, so let love beget love. The Son of God has loved thee and
given himself for thee, Galatians 2. Consider Christ has loved thee, and has
given a good experiment of his love, to wit, himself for thee. And if he had
given thee himself whole, it had been a gift inestimable: But he has given
thee himself broken, crucified to thee, who have been a rebel against him.
See his love he looks on thee when thou think not o^ him, he took care for
thee when thou tookest none for thy self; Nay, then thought it he not too
much to dye for thy good. Oh the height, the length, the breadth, the depth of
the love of Christ which passes knowledge! you can never Ephesians. 3.
know this love of the Lord, it astonished Paul.

All this may stir you up to fear the Lord. This shows you what reason you
have to do it: And it may be an intentive to you, or at the least may cause
thee greatly to condemn thy self for not loving him. Let these at least make
you think well of the Lord, and ill of thy self, that you cannot love. It
will go heard if he be refused: his wrath will be kindled, Psalm. 2. after
that he has sued to thee, and thou rejectest him, he will not put it up, but
will make his wrath known on thee, which GOD forbid.

So ends the third Sermon.
A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST. Sermon IIII.

BY JOHN PRESTON, D D.

Matt. 22. 37, 38. This is the first, and great Commandment: thou shall Love
the Lord thy God with all thy heart.

Psalm. 31. 26. Love the Lord O all ye his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for John Stafford: 640.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST.
Sermon IIII.
1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in
execration, yea let him be accursed unto the death.
IF it be of so much moment to love the LORD, that they 4. Use. To exhort us to
love the Lord.
are accursed that love him not, let me exhort you then to do it. The motive
in the Text puts a necessity upon the duty, but to draw you on by the cords of
love. See what you shall get by it. It might be a strong argument, you shall
perish if you do it not: But let us see the advantages that will come to us by
it.

I will make you to keep Gods commandments The advantages which arise from
the love of the Lord Jesus.
with ease and delight: and this is no small benefit. This love makes you go
about the work, as the Ship with wind and sail. The journey must be gone:
now they that have not love, must row and take a great deal more pains. This
is the love of God, that you keep his commandments. And his commandments are
not grievous, 1 John 3. This makes us keep the commandments, so ye may fear,
you will say. Oh, but love makes them easy. It will be very hard to do them
without love. How hard a task had it been for Paul to have done so much as
he did, without this love^ See what love makes mothers do to children. This
love of Christ constrained Paul: it carried him on like wings; it compelled him
to do thus and thus. And is this then nothing? yea, it shall make you abundant
in the work of the Lord. For this commands all the faculties, and it winds
them up to their highest pegs: and this it will make you to do out of an
inward principle. There is a great difference betwixt a horse that runs freely,
and one that is forced by the Spur: Shall not this then cause you to set a
high price upon this love?

There are scarce any so desperate, but they would say, they would feign keep
GODS commandments, were they not so hard. Now this love will make them thy
delight, it will make them easy and pleasant unto thee.

This is the surest testimony to your own soul of all others, that you are
translated from death to life. An hypocrite cannot love the Lord, he may do
the outward works, he may hear the Word, and be diligent in his calling. But
here is the difference, he does not this out of love. This is that
distingnishing character which distinguishes a Christian; as reason does a man.
If you can find this love of Christ, this hungring after him, that tendering of
the heart toward him, that your heart is to Christ, as the Iron to the
Lodestone, you must rest with him. If you can say, I have no great marks of a
child of God, I have many infirmities, but yet this I can say, I love the
Lord; my life for thine, thy case is happy; heaven and earth may pass away,
but thou can not miss of thy happiness. What ever you have without this,
can be no sound testimony unto you of your blessedness; and this alone may
secure you of it.

This love does make you lose nothing: whereas in the loving of other things,
the more you bestow, the less you have. When thou give thy heart to God, he
gives thee thy heart again, and sets it on work for thy own good; He
teaches us to profit, and leads us by the way which we should go, Esaias 48.
17. As Christ said of the Sabboath, the Sabboath was made for man: so may I say
of all the commandments, when you give your hearts to the Lord, he sets them
to keep the commandments, but to this end, that it may be well with thee. Oh
that there were such a heart in this people, to fear me, and to keep all my
commandments that it might go well with them, and their children for ever.
Deutrenomy 5. 20. Thou have thy heart again, when thou give it to God. But
here is the difference; before, thou were but an unjust professor of it, now
the Lord has made thee Steward of it: for he has given you leave to love your
wives, children, and your lawful recreations, only now you love them at his
appointment, as he will, whereas before you did it as you listed. Nay, the Lord
does not only give you your heart again, but returns it better than it was,
new pointed. As the earth receives in the puddle water, which it sends forth
clear and pure. All the streams of thy love run as fresh for thy good as
ever they did, and more. That only which was amiss^ in them, is taken away.
Let not this feed thy understanding only, but find it good in thy practice.

By this you shall have much comfort and joy, and this is that which all men
desire. What is that 4
which keeps you from loving the Lord? Oh, you have a conceit, that then you
must iose your pleasures, and your delights. No, it is the most comfortable
action in the world, to love the Lord: delights follows action, as the flame
the fire. Now the best action has the greatest delight. The Philosopher could
say, Happiness was to love the most amiable object; Est amare optimum amabile,
to love the best amiable known, is the best act. Whom not seeing, yet you
love, joying with joy unspeakeable and glorious, 1 Peter 1. It is a pleasant
thing to love a creature like thy self, thy children, thy friend. But the
creature is not perfect, and it may be it loves not thee again. But Christ is
perfect, and loves thee, thou can not lose any love by loving of him. Oh what
a pleasant thing it is to love the Lord, to live with him, to sup and dine with
him, to be able to say, I am my welbeloveds, and my welbeloved is mine! When
you shall consider the world hates you, what a comfort will it be, to know that
the Lord loves you! that when the world uses you ill, you may fly unto Christ
his bosom, and lay open all your grievances to him. To love, and to be
beloved, are the most pleasant actions. Now to love the Lord Jesus, is so much
the more pleasant, than the loving of other things, as he is a more excellent
object than other things. Besides, is not every thing best in its own place,
conformed to its own rule, carried to its own end? Take it in thy body, when
all the parts of it are strait, all the faculties and humors in a right
temper, serving to their proper ends, then there is delight and comfort: so,
Love, when it is settled upon its own object, sets all things straight, whence
wonderful joy cannot but follow; Amor rectus omnia recta habet, as the
Schoolman well observes.

Consider this, the love of the Lord makes you 5
a better man, gives you a greater excellency, which is a thing which all men
desire. Look on the excellency of the creatures, it proceeds from their
forms; as the excellency of a Pearl above other stones comes from its form:
for we know that the matter of all these things is common. Now the object to
the faculty, has the property of the form; for it gives name and distinction.
Now this love makes God and spiritual things, as it were the form of the
will. And according to this form is the Excellency of the man. Every man is
better or worse, as his love is pitched on a better object. He that loves a
base thing, is base; and he that loves a thing somewhat better, excels that
man; but he that loves spiritual things, is the most noble. Look on the
lower faculties, when the sensitive appetite enjoyes its proper object, then a
man has his perfection in that kind. Thus, when the will is fixed on Jesus
Christ, its best object, then a man has his full perfection. If water be
united to Wine, its made better; when the body is united to the soul, how
glorious a creature is it! how glorious a creature then will thy soul be, when
by love it is united to the Lord! This love puts a greater excellency on the
soul, than the soul does on the body. Love brings the soul to God, and makes
him all in all to us; so that what we cannot desire, we may have in him: have
ye not then cause to wish that ye loved the Lord? True, you have said enough
to inflame us. But how shall we do it my brethren? if you are brought
unfainedly to desire it, half the work is done; when the Disciples prayed,
Lord increase our faith, Means to love the Lord.
Matthew. 18. Christ answers, If you have faith; but as a grain of Mustard seed,
you may say unto Mat. 18.
this Mountain, be thou moved, and it shall be moved. But this is not the
means to get faith. No, but this commends faith. And if out of this
commendation they could come to prize and admire it, and so pray earnestly for
it, God would give it them. Let this therefore be the first means to help
thee to the getting of this, to the Lord Jesus.

First, pray heartily for it, Lord I desire to love 1
thee, I see thee most amiable, and would feign love thee. This Petition is
according to thy will, Lord grant it me.

How would this prevail, how could God put off such a request?

But I have prayed, and I have not obtained it. Ob.


But have thou prayed importunately, as the woman to the unjust Judge without
giving over? Sol.
This is a precious grace, and therefore God will have us bestow some pains in
the getting of it. We shall not obtain it easily, that so we may prise it the
more, and keep it the more charily. The grace of Christ, says Paul, was
abundant with me in faith and love, 1 Timothy 11. 14. This is that which the
Apostle magnified so much, that God had given him love. The grace of Christ was
abundant toward him in giving him love.

But how does prayer do this? Quest.


That little love which moved thee to pray, by exercise, is increased and is
become greater. Answ. 1.


Prayer brings thee in acquaintance with God. 2
Before acquaintance there may be a wishing well to another, but there cannot
be that love to another which is required in friendship.

And it may be Christ will show himself unto 3
thee, as we see when he himself, Matthew. 17. prayed, his garments were
changed, and he was transfigured.

But especially prayer does this by prevailing 4
with God, as we see the prayers of the blind man prevailed with Christ. And
do you think that Christ now in Heaven has put off these kind affections
which he had on the earth? will he not also hear, if you should pray to him?

But this you will say is a common means to obtain all grace. Ob.


Yes: but of this love in a special manner: because love is the most peculiar
gift of the Holy Answ.
Ghost. Now the Holy Ghost is obtained by Prayer. Our hearts are so carnal, so
fleshly, that we cannot love the Lord; and he is so holy, so good, that we can
no more love him, unless he himself kindle this flame of love in our hearts,
than cold water can heat, unless it had another principle. Contend therefore
and strive with the Lord for his Spirit which works this love, who has
declared also unto us your love in the Spirit. Coloss. 1. 8.


Secondly, desire the Lord to show you himself, that Jesus Christ would
manifest himself unto you. And this is the greatest means of all, to work
love. He that has my Commandments, and keeps them, is he that loves me,
and he John 14. 21.
shall be loved of the Father, and I will love him, and show my self unto him,
when Christ shall show himself to you, when he shall open the clouds, and let
you see his beauty, his glory, Oh then you cannot but love him.

There is a great difference betwixt the Ministers showing of you Christ, and
his excellencies, and the Holy Ghosts. Though we could speak with the tongue
of Angels, yet it would be but as the dead letter to Christ's showing of
himself. When he shall show you your ^ilenesse, his excellency, your
sinfulness, his holiness, your misesery, his mercies, you must needs love
him. Paul when he had revealed Christ, what he could, to the Ephesians, he
prays for them, that God would give them the Spirit of wisdom and revelation,
Ephesians 1. 18. As who should say, the labor is all lost, if you should see
no more than I preach. You love not a man till you know him your self; the
Lord showed himself to Moses, David, Paul, which made them love him so much.
Go therefore to the Lord, and pray as Moses Lord show me thy glory; and beg
it earnestly at his hands: and that which was done extraordinarily, shall be
done to thy soul. That was but a showing of the Lord by a right light, which
is done more or less to every one.

But this is an act of the Lord, what shall I Ob.
do to it?

Consider what the Scripture says of him, Sol.
what the Saints say of him, but most of all what he has been to thee. See
with what patience, love, and mercy, he has carried himself toward thee, as
when we converse with a man, out of his several actions we gather his
disposition, and so frame an Idea of him in our mind.

We must humble our selves, labor to see our 3
miserable conditions, for that will bring love. So Paul when he considered
that he was the worst of all, it made him love more then them all. So Mary
when she conceived how unfit she was to conceive by the Holy Ghost, she sung
that song. When we look on our selves, and see our own sins and miseries,
our love to Christ will be increased. When a man shall have a true
apprehension of himself and his misery, and can expect nothing but death and
damnation, and then Christ should come and say, no; But he shall live: this
wounds a man's heart with love. Look on your secret sins, your relapses, your
misery by sin, and then on Christ's coming with his mercies and favors, and
you cannot but love him. I say look on thy sins, weigh them with their
circumstances. Think that after so many adulteries Jerem. 2.
committed against Christ, yet that he should say, If you will come in, yet
will I receive you, this might shake thee and melt thy heart. He that loves
not th(...) Lord, sees not his misery, nor that good he has by him.

Strengthen thy faith: for the stronger thy faith is, the greater will thy love
be. A strong 4
hand rids more work then a weak. Take a man excellent in all gifts whom thou
much admirest, yet if he loved not thee, thou would not much care for such
an one: so though thou feast much excellency in Christ, yet thou can not love
him, unless thou have a persuasion that he loves thee. But how shall I know
that he will love me? he has made it known that he is thine, and that he is
willing, to become thy familiar friend; GOD has given him in marriage to thee.
To us a child Esaias 9.
is borne, to us a son is given. And Christ himself has shown sufficiently
his love unto thee. He has spent his blood for thee, yea, he continually
speaks to his Father in thy behalf, yea, he sues to thee for love, he loves
thee first, and sues to thee, as the man does to the woman; thou may be
persuaded therefore that he loves thee.

But I am not fit to be a Spouse to Christ. Ob.


It is true, and he knew that well enough. He Answ.
will take thee a Blackamoore, and afterward will put beauty on thee, Ezekiel
36. 16. Stand not thou on thy unfitness when he is thy Su^or.

But it may be he stands thus and thus affected Ob.
to such and such persons, and how shall I know that the Lord loves me and is
willing to take me?

I can say nothing to thee but this, and that is Answ.
sufficient, thou have his general promise made to all, Mark. 16. Go preach
the Gospel to every creature. There is a general mandate given to Ministers to
preach the promise to all, and why will thou make exceptions where God has
made none, and enterline his promises? We are commanded to offer Christ to
all, every one that will come may come and drink of this water of life freely.
The offer is general, though but some embrace it.

But I want godly sorrow for my sins. And Ob.
this is required before we can receive Christ.

Yet deceive not thy self, the matter is not Answ.
whether thy humiliation be more or less, only come. The promise is made to
all that come, they shall be refreshed. Indeed thou will not come till thou
art somewhat humbled, Thou will not fly to the City of refuge till thou art
pursued by the avenger of blood. But if thou come at all, God will fulfill his
promise. Stick not so much on the degree of thy humiliation. Take a man that
has committed high Treason, for which he is condemned and brought to the place
of execution, ready to suffer, but then there is a pardon offered him: And take
another guilty of the same fact, but as yet not condemned, and bring him a
pardon, he is even as joy full as the other, for he saw his case was even as
bad, only it was not so far gone, and he has not lived so long in sorrow.
So some men's sins are grosser, and their sorrow more violent, other sins
are less, but yet such as they see them like to damn them; they therefore are
humbled as truly, though not so violently. Therefore though thou have not had
so much sorrow as others, nor felt those terrors of the Almighty, yet if thou
have so much as will bring thee to Christ, and make thee stick close unto him,
so as thou would not leave him for any thing in the world; it is enough,
thou shall have him. Why then stick you? what hinders your faith? The
impediments must be on Gods part, or on your part: But it is not on Gods part,
for his promise is full, and large, most free; neither is there any on thy
part, for there is nothing required in thee, for which he shall set his love
upon thee. There are no merits desired on thy part, only accept him, receive
him, he will afterward put some lines upon thee. Art thou willing to take
Christ for thy husband, for better and worse, with a crown of Thorns, as well
as Glory? then the match is concluded, thou may be sure that Christ will be
thine.

But I have renewed my sins, and have fallen Ob.
into diverse relapses. I still provoke him and fall back, and GOD will not
endure such a wretch.

Yet he forgives sins of all sorts, he is abundant Answ.
in mercy, he is still forgiving, and never gives over. There is a fountain
opened to Judah and Jerusalem for sin and for uncleanness, Zach. 12. verse.
13. There is afountaine, not a cisterne, to wash in, which may be drawn dry.
Only this caveat must be put in, that we allow not our selves in any known
sin, but that we maintain war continually against sin, and by no means
admit any peace with Amaleck.

Another means is, to remove the impediments of love, which are two
especially, strangeness, 5.
and worldly-mindednesse, Strangeness dissolves all friendship. By this means
the interest of friendship may be broken off. This strangeness breeds
fearfulness when we go to God, and fearfulness weakness of love: whereas
boldness is the nurse of it. Herein is our love made perfect, that we have
boldness in the day of the Lord Jesus. As by neglecting fellowship with the
Saints, we come to lose our acquaintance we had toward them: so the
neglecting of maintaining our acquaintance with God, brings us quite at last to
leave him. Draw near therefore to God continually, and this will increase your
love to him. Be therefore often speaking to him and hearing him speak to you.

Be much in prayer, and often in reading and hearing. And do not these things
customarily, and untowardly, but with life and affection: go to prayer as you
would go to speak with your most dear friend, whom you most of all delight
to talk with. Let it be pleasant to thee to converse with him in all things;
when thou have any injury befallen thee, go and make thy cause known to him;
and when any sin has escaped thee, whereby he may be offended, give not over
till reconciliation be made, and thy friendship rewarded. Look especially to
thy ways, for sin alienates and restraines a man from God: therefore see
that that be removed as much as may be.

Worldly mindedness also hinders the love of God. This is the uncircumcision
of the heart. Hence is that, the Lord thy God will circumcise thy heart, and
the heart of thy seed, to love the Lord thy God, with all thy heart, that thou
may live. And until the heart be circumcised, it is filled with the love of
the World, so that he cannot love the Lord, at least, with all his heart, as
he ought.

There is no such quench-coale to the love of God, as the love of the World.
Pleasures and the love of carnal things are very apt to steal away our hearts
from God before we are aware. If we look not more narrowly to it, they may do
it. Examine your own hearts, and see if by how much the more you love the
World, by so much the less you are affected to the Lord. These things, as
Absalom, steal away our hearts from God, as he did the people from his Father.
If thou find not that love to God, which formerly has been, see what has
come between God and thy heart. Look if some pleasure or lust have not crept
in between: for these will separate between God and thee. See if there be not
in thy understanding conceits of things to be better then indeed they are: for
these will turn the heart from the Lord; but above all, look to thy will and
affections.

FINIS.
A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST.

Sermon V.

BY JOHN PRESTON, DD.

Matt. 22. 37, 38.

This is the first, and great Commandment: thou shall Love the Lord thy God
with all thy heart.

Psalm. 31. 26.

Love the Lord O all ye his Saints.

LONDON, Printed by Thomas Pain, for John Stafford. 1640.

A HEAVENLY TREATISE OF THE DIVINE LOVE OF CHRIST.
Sermon V.
1 Cor. 16. 22. If any man love not the Lord Jesus Christ, let him be had in
execration, yea let him be accursed unto the death.
NOw the next thing we have to do, is to show what kind of love the Lord
accepts; for he will not take any kind of love that is offered him, but only
such a love as he calls for, as he requires.

Thou must love him with all thy might, and with all thy strength. A public
person may do more then a private. His example may do much, or he may command
others, if not to do good, yet to refrain from evil.

God desires that thou love him with all thy strength; if thou know much,
thou must do much. Besides some things thou can do, namely, which others
cannot do without great difficulty. As some men are temperate, some patient by
nature. If thou art such an one, God requires more of thee then of another, for
he accounts that which thou can do, without setting thy might to it, as
nothing. It is not enough for thee to love the Lord, but thou must love him
with thy might. The might of a rich man, of a Magistrate, of a Scholar, or
whatsoever thou art, when thou shall come to the Lord with a small pi^tance,
when thou have opportunity to do a great deal more, the Lord will not take it
at thy hands. As a Landlord will not receive a small parcel, when the Tenant
may pay a greater sum. Neither is this a thing indifferent, for you to do,
or not to do: for God requires much of him, to whom he has given much. He
gives us all talents which he puts as prizes in our hands, which he expects we
should lay out according as we have received. Paul did no work of
supererogation, though he was abundant in the works of the Lord, continually
setting himself about the work with his whole strength.

Thou must love him above all things else; Above all creatures, above that
which is most 2.
dear unto thee, yea, above thy self. And if thou do not so, thou love
him but as a creature which will not serve his turn. He has done more for
thee then any creatue has or can do. He has dyed for thee, has given
himself crucified for thee, he deserves therefore more love then thy
pleasures, profits, or then any friend thou have. You are therefore to love him
above all, to embrace and cleave to him chiefly, to make him wholly thine.

But how can he (you will say) be wholly mine, Ob.
seeing so many have their parts in him?

Yes, he is wholly thine, and thou must be wholly his. He is infinite, and so
has no parts, Answ.
but is entire to every one, as every line drawn to the Center, may challenge
the whole Center for it is own, though there be a thousand lines beside.

But what? must I so love the Lord, that I may, Ob.
not love earthly things?

Yes: thou may love them, so that it be not with an adulterous love. Thou
may love them Answ.
for God, as by them you may be enabled to serve God the better.

But how shall I know this adulterous love? Ob.


When you love any thing, so as it lessens your love to your husband, that is
an adulterous love. Answ.
As when thou love some pleasure and delight so, as it takes up the mind and
hinders thee in hearing, and will not suffer thee to pray without distraction,
but thy thoughts must be upon it, this love is adulterate love. Thou may
rejoice, yet so as if thou rejoycest not. As this joy hinders not thy walking
with God, so thou may labor in thy calling with a love to it, yet so as it
does not draw away thy heart from God.

But this is very difficult (will some say.) Ob.


No, it is easy. When God has put this love into thy heart, the necessity of
it may make it easy. Answ.
Thou may do it, or thou can not be saved. Indeed it is impossible for
a man that has set his heart on riches, to remove it off again of himself.
And in this sense Christ speaks, when he says, It is so hard for a rich man
to enter into the Kingdom of heaven. But when God has wrought this love in
thee, and has revealed to thee the emptiness and vanity of other things, it
will be easy.

But I am not able to love the Lord above my Ob.
self and all other things.

Yes, thou may, if once thou art thoroughly persuaded that he is thy
chiefest good, and Answ.
how miserable thou art without him: thou will then be content to forsake all,
and to cleave to him alone.

A man that sowes Corn is content it should die, so as it may be quickened
again and bring forth increase. And therefore Paul, though he saw the outward
building of his body go to decay, he cared not, so long as he was renewed in
the inner. So when thou see thy good contained in him more then in thy self,
when thou see thy happiness laid up in him, thou will easily be persuaded
to leave thy self to enjoy him: For thou losest nothing by losing thy self,
thy whole happiness is in God.

Again, thou must be rooted and grounded in Love. This is that which the
Apostle so prays for, for the Ephesians, Ephesians 3. 17. There is a certain
love by fits which God accepts not. When men come and offer to God great
promises like the waves of the Sea, as big as mountains, oh they think they
will do much for God, But their minds change, and they become as those high
waves, which at last fall level with the other waters. If a man should proffer
thee great kindnesses, and thou should afterward come to him to make use of
him, and he should look strangely upon thee, as if he were never acquainted
with thee, how would thou esteem of such love! If we are now on, now off
in our love, God will not esteem of such love, and if you be not rooted in
your love, you will be unstable. Let then your love be well rooted, let the
foundation be good on which it stands: now that ^s on two things. 1 Wherein
grounded love does stand.


This love must be founded in faith. Therefore Ephesians 3. when the Apostle
had prayed that they might be strengthened in faith, he adds this also, that
they might be grounded in love. When thou art once rooted in faith, thou shall
be grounded in love. When therefore you come to believe, and consider whether
Jesus Christ belong to you, or no, do it not overly and slightly, but do it
thoroughly, Sift every thing to the b^an, give not over till thou art fully
satisfied, till thou can answer all objections, and rest in this persuasion,
that all is most true which has been revealed to thee of the Lord Jesus
Christ, and it is good for thee to rest upon it.

Your love must be built upon his Person. If you love his, and not him, you
will be unstable 2
in your love. If thou love him in his Person, thou changest not, for thy
love will be constant. But if thou love him for that he has done for thee,
because he has done thee much good, and given thee many favors, and tokens
of his love, and kept thee from many troubles, when he changes his dealing
toward thee, thou will change thy love to him. Thou will then do as Job,
receive good from the hand of the Lord, and also evil. Put case God should
take from thee, and send one affliction in the neck of another, this will try
thy love, whether in this case thou will stick close unto him. Sometimes God
hides his face from his children, and writes bitter things against them: If
then thou can love him, thy love is on his Person, a constant love.

Another condition of our love is, that it must be diligent. The Apostle
commends the Thessalonians 3
effectual faith and diligent love, 1 Thessalonians 1. 3. If you say you love
the Lord, and yet will do nothing for him, you have not that love which God
accepts. This love is operative, diligent, and not idle, and dead. We regard
not a dead drugge, a dead plant, we cut it up and cast it away: even so does
the Lord esteem of a dead love, and love that shows not it is life, it is
diligence to obey God. This love will cause thee to put on new aparrell, to
adorn thy life so, as thy love may take delight in thee. This will make thee
careful to beautify thy self with the graces of the Spirit. See therefore
whether thy love prepare thee for Christ. This love does that which John
Baptist did. It prepares men for the receiving of the Lord. If thou will come
then before him in thy old garments; it is a sign thou love him not. Again,
the operativenesse of it, is seen in opening thy heart to him, when he offers
himself unto thee. This will give thee a capable heart to entertain him, that
he may dwell plentifully in thee. This does make thee comprehend with (...)
Saints, what is the height, and Ephesians. 3.
breadth, and length, and depth of the love of Christ. This love is diligent in
cleansing the heart, that it will suffer nothing to remain there that may be
offensive to the Lord God that dwells with his people. This love therefore will
suffer no sluttish corner to remain in the heart, but keeps all clean. It
clenses a man from all filthiness of flesh and Spirit, 2 Corinthians 5.

Lastly, the diligence of love is seen in keeping of his commandments. If
thou do nothing for the Lord, thou love him not. So much love as thou
have, so much care will there be in thee to do his will; so much fire, so much
heat to stir for his glory: So much love, so much desire to walk in perfect
obedience before him.

And now we come to the object upon The object on whom our love must be set.
whom our love must be placed, The Lord Jesus. Consider whom it is, whom, if
you love not, I pronounce you thus accursed. It is the Lord Jesus, he is your
Lord, your Prince, your Savior, your Messiah, your Prophet, so that he which
loves him not, is worthy to be accursed.

First, he is our Lord. Now, to run from an ordinary Master is punishable, to
rebel against an ordinary King deserves death, but he is more, our Lord and
King in a more special bond. Besides, that he has made us, and preserves us,
we are his by purchase, and he has bought us dear, he has shed his blood
for us: so that he that will not love this Lord; let him be accursed.

Secondly, again he is our Savior, and in this 2
respecct love is now more due to God, then in time of innocence. When Adam
broke the Covenant and made shipwreck, Christ offers himself a Savior. Now if
we will not receive him, there is no more hope. He is the secunda tabula, left
to us after shipwreck, which if we let go, we cannot escape eternal
destruction.

Lastly, he is our Prophet, that Messiah, John. 4. 3
which tells us all things; That great Prophet whom Moses foretold, whom if we
believe not, we must be for ever accursed. The time of our ignorance God
regarded not, but now he will have an eye to us, after that the light has
shone unto us, and he has revealed himself, when this our Prophet has come
unto us and shown himself unto us. Now God olaimes our love: and if now we
refuse to love him, and to come in unto him, we are rebels. Yea, he is our
Priest, and would reconcile God unto us. Yea, he is made unto us a King, to
subdue our lusts and rebellious affections, to draw us to himself, as it were
by force: So that now if we love him not, we deserve the curse. Now mark, the
Lord has joined these two together, the Lord Jesus. We must take heed that we
separate them not. And we must see that we take him not only as a Savior,
but also as a Lord. He is not only the Author of the remission of our sins,
but he is our Lord to rule us. The preaching of the Gospel is nothing but the
offering of Christ, his whole person, and so you must take him, as a subject,
to be your Lord, as a Spouse to be ruled and guided by him, and then we shall
have the benefit which arises thence. We are willing to part with the sweet,
but we will have none of the sour: as that young man would have had Christ,
but he would not part with his wealth for him. But Christ tells him that he must
either part with him or them. Can thou be content to fare as I do? to be
rejected and scorned in the world as I am? then well and good, thou may
follow me, but otherwise thou can not. And if thou art content to do thus,
to suffer persecution, and to forgo all for him, thou shall have him, and all
the benefits that come by him; if not, thou art not worthy of him: he that
believes not the Lord Jesus, is condemned already. i. e. He that takes him not
when he is offered, is in the state of of condemnation. We must see therefore
that we take his whole person, as he is a Lord, as well as he is a Savior,
and not the latter without the former. If any man love not the Lord Jesus, let
him be had in execration, yea let him be accursed to the death. The Apostle
curses sueh as love him not, with a double curse. He expresses it Of the curse
of those that love not the Lord Jesus.
in two languages. They are men set apart to evil, appointed to destruction;
as some men are set apart to good, so are these to evil. They are shut up in
prison, such as God has set himself against. His eyes are continually upon
them for evil. Thus shall he be accursed that loves not the Lord Jesus. There
shall be a curse on his soul, for matter of grace, that as Christ cursed the
figtree, when he came and found no fruit upon it, never fruit grow more on
thee, and it withered away: So when Christ is offered, and this Gospel
preached, and thou refusest this grace, thou may find Christ so curse thee,
that thou be ever barren in the matter of grace. And if perhaps thou think
this no great matter, the curse goes further. Thou shall be cursed from the
presence of the Lord. Thou shall have no part nor portion in the light,
sweetness and comfort of his favor. And this Caine took to heart, though he
were a wicked man, and had before but Gods common favor: and so Saul was
exceedingly cast down, when as God would not answer him by any of those usual
means: but is this such a matter to be excluded from his presence? yea, and
at the time of death you shall find it somewhat, yea in troubles you shall see
it a dreadful thing (as they did) to want him to stand your friend. As Saul
did, though in his prosperity he little regarded it, yet when the Philistines
came upon him, he was driven to his wits end, because the Lord would not answer
him. But these are but spiritual things, I feel them not, you will say. But
yet the curse goes further, You shall be cursed also from the earth, that is,
from earthly comforts, which it yields to others. Now thou shall bestow all thy
travel and pain upon it, and be never the better for it.

But many a man receives him not, and yet is not thus accursed. Ob.


Indeed we see it not many times, and it may Answ.
be, the time of execution is not yet come. Thou may have Cains privilege,
though thou art accursed, that none shall kill thee presently: Thou may
enjoy thy health and wealth, and no man lay hold on thee here to hurt thee. But
thou art reserved to a more solemn day of punishment. And yet the curse goes a
step further, thou shall be cursed eternally. But that thou will say, is a
great way off; and you need not fear it yet. But consider what eternity is,
what those days of darkness will be, when the Sun of comfort shall set, and
never rise again upon thee. When it shall be always perfect night, and never
day. When God shall open all the treasures of his wrath, and power them with
full fury upon thee, when the storm of vengeance shall never be blown over,
but thou shall be overwhelmed in the midst of all misery, asthe old world was
in the deluge.

If this be the case of men that refuse, yea, that Use.
love not the Lord, then take heed to your selves. We the Ministers offer you
Christ when we preach, and you sit negligently before us, minding other
things, not caring to take the Lord. Take heed: this is your portion to be thus
accursed.

The Gospel has two parts: if you take Christ, you shall be happy, you shall
be saved. But if you will not love him and embrace him, you shall be damned.
Therefore think not that there is nothing but honey in it: yea there is a sting
that follows it, if it be neglected: Ministers are not to go a begging in
offering the Gospel, but are as Ambassadors of the Lord of Heaven. If men will
receive our message, so it is, otherwise the dust which we shake off from our
feet, shall be a witness against you, that so God will shake you off. God will
not have his Gospel refused, his Son despised; and therefore he counsels us, to
kiss the Son, lest he be angry, and we perish all in his wrath, Psalm 2.
Though he be a Lamb, and have behaved himself meekly amongst us, yet if we
provoke him, we shall know that he can show himself a Lion. If he be not
entertained in the still voice, he will come in fire, in a wind that shall rend
the rocks in sunder. Thus he describes himself, One that has feet like
burning brass, out of whose mouth proceeds a fiery sword, Revelation 1. Moses
went first to Mount Gerizim, to bless the people; and if that would not move
them, he go's up to Mount Ebal, and thence curses them: so the Apostle before
exhorts and persuades them to the love of Christ, but if they will not embrace
him on fair terms, he tells them what shall follow, they must be accursed.

But what if I take not the Lord at this instant? Ob.
I hope this curse will not befall me.

It is true, we cannot say so; for while this time lasts, we are still
commanded to offer Answ.
Christ; yet there will come a time, when there will come forth a Decree which
shall never be revoked. Take heed therefore, for this is very dangerous. The
Lord will not suffer his Gospel to be abused, or neglected: when once the
Husbandmen refused the Son, they were presently cast out of the vineyard, Mat.
21. This offends God more than any sin that we can commit. To refuse Christ
offered, is worse than drunkenness, theft, adultery, or the like, which men
count the grossest sins. My people would none of me, therefore I gave them up
to their own hearts lusts. This refusing him, made him swear that they should
never enter into his rest. As the Gospel offers greater favor than the Law;
so, swifter damnation attends the neglect of it. My brethren, take heed that
you receive not the grace of God in vain. While it is called to day, harden not
your hearts; yea, take heed of refusing it now. For, you know not whether this
offer may ever be made you again; and if it be, thou know not whether thou
shall have the grace to receive it, or no. Know, that the same Gospel is a
savor of life unto life, to such as receive it; but unto the others, of death
unto everlasting death.

But the Gospel is continued still. Ob.


It is true: but how many are there that live in the congregation, and are
never a whit the better, Answ.
though they hear the Word daily, because by the contempt of it, it becomes the
savor of death to them, and their hearts are hardened, so that they shall never
receive good by it?

FINIS.
Good Reader, if thou will see the reaches of a devout soul after this love of
Christ, expressed in these pious Sermons, read this Soliloquy following.

A SOLILOQVY OF A DEVOVT SOVLE TO CHRIST, PANTING AFter the love of the LORD
JESUS.
O Thou Love of all loves, thou chiefest of ten thousand; thou lovedst me
before I was, thou do love me when I am, thou do love me (if I be thine)
when I am here no more. Thy Loves are better then wine, but mine are worse the^
gall and wormwood. Thou love me who deserve less then nothing, I love not
thee who deservest more then all things. I have hid my self from thee as Adam,
yet thou have pierced through the dark cloud, and loved me. Thou have opened
thy self in the face of my soul, yet in the sight of this Sun I have not
loved thee. No baseness of mine has closed thy eyes, and kept thy heart from
me: yet every base pleasure, and pleasing lust has kept my heart and eye from
thee. Without my love to thee I cannot have my happiness applied, and enjoyed.
It is Faith that marries thee to me: but this faith must work by love, or my
marriage will end in a fruitless barrenness, and faithless separation.
Hitherto therefore I have loved thee, but for lust, not for love. I would have
thee save me, but I would not honor, and please thee. I can thus think of my
disloyalty toward thee; but thou knew it before I thought it, and more then
I can speak or think. Thou do think thoughts of love and peace to me, but
I mind the abuse of thy love, and the too late repentance of thee upon my own
terms. How can I be acceptable to thee, (My Love, my Dove, my undefiled,) Thou
spreadest out thy hands, and art ready for blessing me: but if I open my head,
heart, hand, I am apt to receive nothing but Anathema, Maranatha from thee. Can
love come to enmity, heaven to hell? I am hell (my Lord) thou art heaven: I am
hatred, thou art Love. Thou show hatred, yet in my wisdom am I very enmity.
Can I then expect either to have the blessing of Love, or to avoid the curse
of not loving? Oh show me thy face, for it is comely. Thou have often showed me
thy riches, and I have loved them: but oh show me thy self, that I may love
thee. I have seen by goodness, mer cy, compassion, merit, salvation, and have
cried out, (My blessed Jesus) make these mine. Now let me see thy self, that
thou my beloved may be mine, and all those riches in thee. From the sight of
thy riches I have desired to preserve my self: from seeing thy self I shall
desire to draw near to thee, and to cleave to thee for ever. O thou whom my
soul desires to love, show me then where thou lie at noone, that I may see
thee! I know where I shall find thee at the night of my life. I shall find
thee sitting on yonder throne, ready to say, either, Come ye blessed, or, Go
ye cursed. I do not know whether so short a view shall bring me to hear
either the one, or the othre. Show me then where thou lie at this my noone.
Now thy Sun does shine upon this my tabernacle, and I have some time to behold
thy beauty, that I may be in love with thy person: where then shall I find
thee? if I look to mount Tabor, I see thee in glory, and I cannot but love
thee for that. If I look to the garden, I see thee lying on the cold ground,
sweating drops of blood for me, and I cannot but love thee for that. If I
look to Golgotha, I see thee nailed to the Cross, and thy heart broached,
that I may drink thy blood and live, and I cannot but love thee for that. If I
look to mount Olivet, I see thee ascending far above all heavens, and I
cannot but love thee for that also. Indeed in Tabor thou had visible glory,
but it soon vanished: in the Garden and Golgotha, thou had little visible
beauty why I should desire thee: and in Olivet, thou wast quite carried out of
my sight. If then thou lie for me no where else, what hope have I to love
thee, O thou to be beloved of all. Art thou not in the tents of the Sheperds?
Do thou not walk in the midst of the golden Candlestickes? Do thou not
dwell in the hearts of men by faith? O let me see thee here below, in the
Church, in my self. Let thy glory go before me, that I may love thee for
ever, and ever, and be blessed in thee. Thou have a long time been manifested
to me in thy natures, offices, and marks for me, and these draw me to love
thee. Thou have been crucified before my eyes, and the virtues of it have
been cleared by the Ministry of the Word, and Sacraments. I have heard and
seen the promises, signs, and seals of thy dearest love, and these might
allure me to love thee. But (O thou chiefest of ten thousand) why have thou
kept thy self at such a distance? why have thou not been formed in me? why
have thou not dwelt in me, that I might see in thee the glories, and virtues,
of thy life, death, resurrection, ascension, and to be sick of love? Thou have
stood and knocked at the door of my unworthy heart for this end. Thou would
have come in and supped with me after the noonshine of the Gospel, with thine
own banquet. But, alas, there was no room for thee, because I desired first
to feast it out with the base guests of sinful lusts, before I would give thee
entertainment. The cause has been in my self, that I have not been better
acquainted with thee, and so, that I have not loved thee. O wretched soul that
I am, who shall deliver me from being an enemy to my self! I have bowed my
knees to the Father of thee, the Lord Jesus, that he would grant to me,
according to the riches of his glory, that I may have his assistance to empty
my self of all my wickedguests, that thou may come into me, and I may have
the better list and leisure to contemplate thy glory, and be grounded in thy
love, O my blessed Lord Jesus. Could I but get this, my gains would be
unspeakeable. Whatsoever thou command would be sweet, because I love thee.
If I could give thee my heart, thou would give it better to me again: for no
unclean thing can come out of thy hands. But (O my desired love) I have denied
thee; therefore, I deny my self. I have rejected thee; therefore, I reject my
self. Do with me as thou will, only first love me, and let me answer thee
with love again. And why should not I be confident to be heard in this, seeing
thou (my love) sit at the right hand of God making request for me. Speak
thou the word, and thy poor servant shall love thee. Say to my soul, My
Father has heard thy prayer, and then, I will love thee dearly. My Lord
Jesus, if I love thee, I live: If I love thee not, I perish under a fearful
curse for evermore. And shall it be thus with me, O thou that wilt not the
death of poor sinners, who pant after thee? No, no, thy merits and
intercession have prevailed with my God. I find the filth of domineering
sin, in some measure, washed from the windows of my soul, that the beams
of thy glory may pierce it, and draw my love after thee. Now do I begin to be
sick of love, and earnestly desire thy company here, by grace, and hereafter
by glory. I love to hear thee speak (let me hear thy voice for it is sweet)
and to speak to others of thee, and thy beauties. Thou have made me something
willing to do, and to suffer any thing for thee, Lord perfect this good work.
If I see the meanest persons like thee in thy goodness, My delight is in them;
I love them the better for thy sake. I dare not wilfully anger thee, and my
soul is vexed with them that do it. Thus the pulses of my soul (by thy
blessing) do begin to beat after thee. But (alas) when I consider how weak I
am in thy love to thee my Savior: when I find a thousand things creep in
betwixt thee and home, and steal my heart away from thee: when I feel how
easily I am diverted from thee and thy service, what comfort can my poor soul
have now? O my Lord Jesus, thou will not leave thy own work, and suffer thy
tender plant to wither away! when thou have sowed thy seed, have thou not
prepared the former and latter rain? Shall I not be able to do this through
him that loves thee and me? I may not run from thy love, thou art my Lord. I
dare not, thou art my Jesus. If thou live, let me know thy love to me. If I
live, let me feel my love to thee. Oh shed it more in my heart, that as in
believing in thee my person is justified, so in loving thee my faith may be
justified, and in having faith working by love, I may so constantly walk in
thy presence, that with comfort I may sing with the Bride, Come Lord Jesus,
come quickly, Even so,

Amen.
FINIS.
TWO TREATISES, VIZ. THE CHRISTIAN FREEDOM, AND THE DEFORMED FORM OF A
FORMAL PROFESSION.

By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON,
Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuell
College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

LONDON, Printed by I. N. for John Stafford, and are to be sold at his Shop in
Chancery Lane, over against the Roules. 1641.

THE CHRISTIAN FREEDOM: OR, The Charter of the Gospel, showing the privilege
and prerogative of the Saints by virtue of the Covenant. Wherein these four
points of Doctrine are properly observed; plainly proved both by Scripture,
and reason, and pithily applied, Viz. 1. That he that is in the state of grace
lies in no known sin, no sin has dominion over him. 2. That sin though
it does not reign in the Saints, yet it does remain and dwell in them. 3.
That the way to overcome sin, is to get assurance of the Love, and grace, and
favor of God, whereby it is forgiven them. 4. That whosoever is under the Law,
sin has dominion over him.


By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON,
Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuell
College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

ROMANS 6. 12. Let not sin therefore reign in your mortal bodies, that you
should obey it in the lusts thereof.

Printed 1641.

The Names of Doctor JOHN PRESTON his several Treatises.
1. A Treatise of the Attributes of God containing 17 Sermons upon diverse
Texts. 2. Four Treatises viz. 1. A remedy against Covetousnes, upon Coloss. 3.
5. 2. An Elegant and lively description of spiritual life and death, upon John
5. 25. 3. The Doctrine of self denial, upon Luke 9. 23. 4. A Treatise of the
Sacrament, upon 1 Ioh. 5. 14.
3. The Saints daily Exercise, or a a Treatise of Prayer upon 1 Thessalonians. 5. 17.
4. The New Covenant in 14 Sermons, upon Genesis 17. 1. 2. Unto which is added 4
Sermons upon Eccles. 9. 1. 2. 11. 12. 5. The Saints Qualification, containing,
viz. 1. A Treatise of Humiliation in 10 Sermons, the first 9 upon Romans 1. 18.
The tenth Preached before the common house of Parliament, upon Numb. 25. 10.
11. 2. Of Sanctification or the New Creature in 9 Sermons upon 1 Cor. 5. 17. 3.
Of Communion with Christ in the Sacrament in 3 Sermons upon 1 Corinthians. 10. 16.
6. The Doctrine of the Saints Infirmities upon 2 Chronicles. 30. 18. 19, 20. 7. The
Brestplate of Faith and Love, containing 18 Sermons upon three several Texts,
viz. Revel. 1. 17. 1 These. 1. 3. Gal. 5. 6. 8. Five Sermons Preached before his
Majesty, viz. 1. The New Life, upon 1. Ioh. 5 15. 2. A sensible demonstration
of the Diety, upon Esaias 64. 4. 3. Of exact walking upon Ephesians. 5. 15. 4. The
Pillar and ground of Truth, upon 1 Timothy 3. 15. 5. Sam. Support of sorrowful
sinners upon 1 Samuel 12. 20. 21. 22.
9. Two Treatises of Mortification, and Humiliation, upon Col. 3. 5. Ephesians. 2.
1, 2, 3. Together with the livelesse life, A Treatise of Vivification. 10. His
Remains, containing 3. excellent Treatises, viz. 1. Iudas's Repentance. 2. The
Saints Spiritual strength. 3. Paul's Conversion.
11. The Golden Scepter, with the Churches Marriage, being three Treatises in
one volume. 12. The Fullness of Christ, upon John 1. 16. 13. A Heavenly
Treatise of the Divine Love of Christ, in Five Sermons, upon 1 Cor. 16. 22.
THE CHARISTIAN FREEDOM, OR THE CHARTER OF THE GOSPEL, SHOWING THE PRIVILEGE
AND Prraeogative of the Saints, by virtue of the Covenant.
ROMANS 6. 14. For sin shall not have dominion over you; for ye are not under
the law, but under grace.
THese words are brought in thus; the Apostle exhorts them not to sin, but to
give their members as instruments unto righteousness: and to move them to
this, he tells them that sin was not their Lord now as it was heretofore,
and that it shall have no more dominion over them, and therefore he bids them
strive against it: and then he adds a reason of this, because they were not
under the law, but under grace, now Christ has changed their hearts: for while
a man is under the Law, sin has dominion over him; it tells him what to do,
but gives him no power to do it: but you have the grace of sanctification to
change your hearts, and enable you to every good word and work, so that you
delight in the Law after the inner man, albeit you see another law in your
members warring against the Law of your mind, and bringing you into captivity
to the law of sin which is in your members, as it is said, Chap. 7. ver. 23.

Whence we may learn, That he that is in the Doct. 1.
state of grace, lies in no known sin; no sin has dominion over him.

Now, sin is said to have no Dominion over a man, three manner of ways, viz.
in regard

1. It has no right to rule over him; it is no more our Lord, but is as a
servant that has no dominion, but is said to offer violence to us: as if the
King of Spain should rule over us, he has no dominion over us.

2. In regard it is not obeyed, for there it has dominion: as a Prince may
have right to a Kingdom, yet if he be not obeyed, he has no dominion.

3. In regard though it strive against us, yet it never gets the victory: for
though it assault us, yet if it get not the victory, it has no dominion over
us: this is proved by three Similitudes which must be explaned, viz.

First, it was our Master, and we its servants; but now we have changed our
Master, and are become the servants of righteousness, ver. 18.

Secondly, it is said that we were married to sin, and it had dominion and
command over us, as the husband over the wife; but now it is dead, and there is
a divorce between us, and now we are married to Christ, and he commands us,
and we obey.

Thirdly, it is said we are dead to sin, and alive to God, ver. 11. and
therefore we cannot live in sin: for, command a dead body to go about a
business, and he cannot, because he is dead.

Now the reasons of the point be these. The first Reas. 1.
is taken from Christ; we are ingrafted into Christ, and into his death, and
into the similitude of his resurrection, verse 5.

We are grafted as a graft into Christ, and all the old sap is taken away, and
we have new sap, and bring forth new fruit, and have no other, because we grow
in another tree, and we live to God: yet we may commit sin, though we allow
not our selves in it; for they that are Christ's, have crucified the flesh with
the affections and lasts thereof: if therefore there be any lust reigning in
us, we are not in Christ. Again, if any man be in Christ, he is a new
creature, and therefore he does not wallow in his old sins: so says God, I will
give you a new heart; and, all things are become new; and, old things are done
away: therefore we cannot lve in any known sin. Again, whosoever is in
Christ, has received of his fullness, and grace for grace; in him we are able
to do all things: and therefore if we cannot strive against old sins, we
are not in Christ.

Secondly, because we have the Spirit of God ruling in us, and therefore we
walk after the Spirit, and not after the flesh: now if we lie in any known
sin, we have not the Spirit, and therefore are not in the state of grace: if
any man have not the Spirit of grace, he is not the Son of God: now if he
walk after the flesh, he has not the Spirit, for the Spirit gives him ability
to strive against all sins.

Thirdly, he is borne of God: now, he that is born of God, sins not, that
is, sin rules not over him: for a man is said to sin that favors
wickedness, and sets his heart to sin: he sins not, because he is
like God, as a son is like his father; and therefore a wicked man is like the
devil, because he is his Father, and his wickedness is in him, and therefore
the devil is called the father of the wicked: and so every regenerate man has
all the righteousness of Christ, though not in the same degree; he has
perfect holiness of parts, though not of degrees: now then he has no member
of Satan in him, that is, no known sin which he loves.

Fourthly, because he has the whole law written in his heart, and his heart
is set to obey the whole law, and therefore he cannot lie in any known sin.

Fifthly, because he is wholly changed and translated to another man: which is
expressed two ways. 1. The whole drift of his mind is changed. As suppose the
earth were made free, the whole bent of it were to go upward; so a man is
wholly bent toward heaven, or else his heart is not changed: and if so, he can
lie in no known sin. 2. He is changed in his taste. S. Paul says, They that
are in Christ, savor not the things of the flesh, but of the spirit: every
sin is bitter to the regenerate man; if it be not, then he savoureth the
things of the flesh. To this is that agreeable, Keep this feast with
unleavened bread, and not with old leaven of maliciousness: we must be
unleavened bread to Christ, we must give no allowance to sin.

Sixthly, because they know God. The Lord says by his Prophet, I will write my
law in their hearts, and they shall know me: so that with this writing the law
in their hearts, they cannot but know sin; for they are changed in their
minds before they can know God: hence I infer that he that knows God, will
not change from the immutable God to the mutable creature; and they that do
it, do it because they know not God.

Seventhly, because he has faith, which will make him not lie in any known
sin: for all sins are either of the temptation of the devil, the flesh, or
the world: now, faith overcomes all these.

1. It overcommeth the world; This is the victory that overcommeth the world,
even your faith: but if the world could overcome the regenerate in any
temptation, then this were not true that faith overcommeth the world; but he
shall not be overcome by the glory and riches of the world.

Secondly the flesh; The just walks in his integrity. To this may be added,
that blessings are everywhere annexed to the keeping of the commandments;
Blessed are they that have respect unto thy commandments: If you lean to the
right band, or to the left, etc, Again, If you keep the whole law, and offend
in anyone, you are guilty of the whole law. But, besides these Scriptures,
there be other reasons to prove that the regenerate man cannot lie in any
known sin.

First, because he that lies in any known sin, has another for his Lord
and God, and so is an Idolater, and so cannot be regenerate, for he yields
to the same still; if it commands, he obeys; God commanding him, he
neglects it, and therefore makes it his God.

Secondly, because he that lies in any known sin, will be unconstant in the
serving of God: now God rejects such an one; for though the temptation to
that sin being removed, he serve God; yet that sin setting upon him, he
forsakes Gods service, and obeys it, and when soever occasion is offered, he
turns to obey it: now such unconstancie God hates. As among men a flower
though it be more beautiful than a pearl, yet it is not regarded so much,
because it is fading; and a ship may sail safe a great while, but yet falling
upon a rock makes shipwreck: so a man may make shipwreck of faith and a good
conscience; and such a one cannot be in the state of grace.

Thirdly, because he that lies in any known sin, will, if he had like
strong temptations, commit all the sins in the world; as be a man inclined to
covetousness or uncleanness, he would commit any other if he were as much
inclined to any other: now, such an one cannot be in the state of grace.

Fourthly, because if a man have a good heart, no sin can grow there, because
it is out of its proper place, and therefore cannot prosper: as plants that
grow in India, if they be set here, wither; so every sin in a good heart is
out of its proper place, and will not grow, but wither every day more and more:
but he that finds finne growing in his heart, his heart is not regenerate.

Fifthly, because he must hate the word of God and godly men: for when a man is
ready to commit sin, the word is at him to dissuade him, godly men dissuade
him; and therefore now if he do it, and they still rebuke him, he comes to
account the word a reproach, and he hates it and good men likewise. Thus Herod
is John's friend a great while, till he tells him of his beloved sin, and then
off goes his head: so he hates God, and wishes there were none, because he
resolves to sin, and God reproves him, and so he cannot be in a good estate.

Sixthly and lastly, because all his actions will have an evil tincture from
that his sin; it so swayeth all he does, that nothing is current in Gods
sight. As if a man were set to get honor, though he did not directly fall into
that sin, yet he squareth all his actions that way, he affects such
persons as may further that his intent, so that sin leaveneth every action of
his; and whenever any act of religion opposes him, he then forsakes all: as
if a man have a project to get a harvest that is not yet come, all that he
does, is for that end, he ploweth, sows, and the like; so it is with a man
that has a sin, and resolves to follow it, he byasseth all his actions by
that, therefore God abhorres him and all that he does.

First, this is to try us: hereby every man may Use 1.
know whether he be in the state of grace or no. If he lies in the least known
sin that is, he is but counterfeit; if though he be admonished, and told
that God will not have him to do such a thing, yet he does it, it is a sign
he is not in a good estate: as if a man knew and were persuaded he ought not to
abound in idle speeches, and yet will, it is a sign he is not in the state of
grace. So when he is commanded to pray, and yet does it not, or does it only
for show, it is a sign he is in a bad estate: or if he knew it a sin to be
idle, and is persuaded of it, and yet will, it is a sign his estate is not
good: so for immoderate gaming, if one be told he should not, yet will use it,
certainly he is bad: so for the lust of the flesh, the lust of the eyes, and
the pride of life, when a man shall spend all his time, and find all thoughts
bent that way for any one of them, certain it is his heart is not gracious;
for then these thoughts would not abound in him, but thoughts of growing in
grace; but if his morning thoughts be for satisfying of the flesh and the lusts
thereof, or his secret plots, he may justly fear it is a reigning sin: for
when all his projects and thoughts are upon one thing, as to be in fine
apparel, it is certain sin reigns in him, and so he is in the state of
damnation; as a Scholar that wholly aims at vain glory, and how to get honor
and credit, that sin reigns in him.

But there were many which seemed religious Object.
men, which had these infirmities in them in the Scriptures.

True, and many therefore not truly regenerated, Answ.
but seeming only so: now many make a fair show under the means, when falling
into temptations, they fall away: but if they be not commanded, or think not of
it, great faults may stand with true grace; but if they be admonished by their
conscience, or others, and told they must not do it, then their estate is not
good; for true grace cannot stand with these failings.

Now, the signs whereby we may know, whether we live in known sins or not,
are these.

1. Living in a known sin is of two sorts; 1. Known, when men sell
themselves to commit wickedness before the Lord, as Ahab did; when he powers
out himself to vanity, as when a man shall give up himself to drink or to
company, or to commit any sin of uncleanness, or gives himself to spend
all of his time in recreations, this is evident to the world and to his own
conscience. Again, when he plainly forsakes God and good courses which he
took before, as Demas did, this is plain, he lies in a known sin.
Secondly, the secret lying in sin, the signs whereof are these.

1. When a man commits it ordinarily: this is that Paul says, that the
Saints fall upon occasions: as if a man be sailing into France, a tempest
drives him into Spain; so the Saints face is toward heaven, but a sudden
passion may drive them another way. To commit sin ordinarily, is to commit it
when temptation assaileth, and occasion is offered, and impediments removed,
then he commits the sin ordinarily; for if there were such temptations
always, he would commit the sin always: as Pharaoh was good by fits, he
was often restored, and desired Moses to pray for him; yet when temptation
came, he would not let the people go, though before he had intended to do it.
So Saul, when opportunity was offered, would have killed David, though he swore
not to do it; and so Hazael: this is committing of sins ordinarily.

Secondly, When a man rejects admonitions, and the reprover. A poor child
is better than a foolish (that is a rich) King that will no longer be
admonished, for then his heart is evil: for if a man be willing to have his
lust mortified, he is well pleased with him that brings him a knife to cut it
off, because he does as he would have him to do: but when men are purposed to
lie in sin, they do as a man does with Physic that he loatheth, he hates
even the very pot it self wherein it was; so they hate them that admonish
them, even as dogs: but if they can endure the company of good men, it is a
sign their hearts are good.

Thirdly, Abstinence from occasions: for many say their infirmities make them
run into such and such sins; but if they were minded to leave their sins,
they would leave their evil company and all occasions. To this add the use of
the means: for he that purposes to forsake his sins, will use the means:
as if a man that is a drunkard, will keep drunkards company, he has not
purposed to forsake his sins, for then he would forsake and leave his evil
company: but if he use the means for mortifying the sins he loves, then
it is a sign he is willing to leave sin.

Now the means for mortifying sinful lusts in us, are these.

First, to make a vow not to commit that sin, nor touch the occasions; for
then it is a sign our heart is sincere: this is a comfort to those that have
made vows; which should be more used, not to make perpetual vows, but for
some short time.

Secondly, to fast and pray; for some lusts are not cast out but by these three.

Thirdly, to use godly men's company, for their practice and example helps them
to forsake their sins, to fast and pray.

Another sign of not lying in any known sin, is when a man prays for
admonitions, that God would stir up some to admonish him, and can be content
to search reasons out of the Scripture against it, and is glad when he hears
it reproved in the public ministry.

Fourthly, when we can be content to be deprived of many things which might
further our lusts, and to loath what sweetness might increase them; that is a
sure sign that sin rules not in us.

Fifthly, when a man confesses his sins particularly, and plainly: for this
is a sign he would forsake them: this reason the Scripture does show, because
then the conscience makes such a noise that he cannot deny it; for when a man
is purposed to continue in sin, he will not confess his sins, no not to
God: it is said when they came to John Baptist, They confessed their sins,
Matthew. 3. 6. So David says, I said, I will confess my transgressions unto the
Lord, and thou forgavest the iniquity of my sin. Psalm. 32. 5.

Sixthly, When he is easily convicted: but when men will not be convicted, but
seek out distinctions to maintain their sin, it is a sign it is prevalent
in them. Again, when they will not examine both sides, but run to commit it,
and stop their ears like a deaf adder, which refuses to hear the voice of
the Charmer, charm he never so wisely, and will not hear the reasons against
that sin, least they should be restrained. Therefore the righteous are said
to ponder their ways, and consider their paths, and to try everything, and to
take that which is good. Now, he that will but hear reasons against the sin
he does, he is none of these: but when he will not be convinced, which is the
first work of the spirit, it is a sign he is under the dominion of sin.

Seventhly, when a man abstaineth from sin not only out of a natural
conscience, but out of a spiritual; for a natural conscience may deceive him:
for there be three degrees of conscience: First, a profane man has some
conscience; Secondly, a civil man has more conscience; yet both natural:
Thirdly, a godly man has most conscience.

Paul speaks of the heathen, that they had a conscience that did accuse and
excuse them: but when a man does not commit sin, being enlightened by a
spiritual conscience, which is when a man has a love to the contrary grace,
and is carried with a certain desire to do it (as men eat) though there were
no reward, and hate the sin, and will not commit it, this is a good sign
that sin has not dominion over him: but a man may have a restraint from a
natural conscience, yet it may have dominion over him, because it is as a
barking dog, that keeps the thief from robbing.

Eighthly, when a man 1. Does not purpose to commit the sin; 2. Has
reluctancie in the committing of it. 3. Grieveth afterward, and rises with a
better resolution not to do it. But if this proceed from a natural
conscience, it is nothing: but if it proceed from a spiritual conscience and
hatred of sin, this is a good sign.

Ninthly, when after striving we have the victory: for we shall have the
victory if we strive aright. This takes away their excuse that say it is their
infirmity: but if they lie not in sin, they will have the victory over it;
else thou art not a King, for a King is victorious; yet a King may have rebels,
yea, he may be wounded, yet he keeps his power. So the Saints may have many
infirmities, yea they may have sound falls, yet in the end they have the
victory; God shall tread Satan under their feet: wherefore the Godly man's
heart, though he fails sometimes, is like a troubled fountain, which though
it be muddie, yet because there is a spring of grace in his heart, it works
it self pure again, and works out all the mud. Therefore content not your
selves with dislike of sin, but leave not till you have got the victory.

Tenthly, Observe whether thou delightest in those that commit the same sins:
if you do, you lie in sin, whatsoever you pretend. They do not only those
things, but have pleasure in those that do them. Romans 1. ult. This is a sign
of a desperate heart. For a man may be drawn to sin by passion, yet his
heart may be upright: but when he allows and loves it in another, then
there is no passion to lead him, but it is a sign his heart is bent to it: for
it is a sign of grace when you love those that excel in grace; so on the
contrary it is a sign of a corrupt and rotten heart, when we rejoice in
iniquity. As for example, suppose a man have a lust of uncleanness, yet
disliketh it in another, and likes those that excel in the contrary virtue,
it is a sign he is in a good estate; and this is true, because in another a
man has no passion to lead him away.

Eleventhly, when a man shall commit a sin clean to the contrary after
persuasion, and long deliberation, as in Jeroboam, Saul, and Ahab; these
committed their sins but once or twice: Saul had a commandment from Samuel
not to do it, he had many days deliberation upon it, yet he did; which lost
him his soul. David committed greater sins, yet God counted them nothing,
because he did not cast God away: but Saul had cast him off; so Jeroboam set up
the calfe on deliberation, and contrary to the persuasion of the Prophet,
therefore God cast him off. This was Balams sin, who deliberated what he
should do, yet having a secret desire of reward, did curse Israel; which made
God cast him off: this was the sin of Francis Spira, who was smitten for
committing of a sin of deliberation.

Twelfthly and lastly, when a man shall make no conscience of small particular
sins, wherein his judgment is convicted that they are sins, it is a sign
sin has dominion over him: this is plain by Scripture; He that is not
faithful in the greatest, he may do it, yet not be faithful. Again by
reason, if a small sin be a sin against God, then why make you no
conscience of the least? for God is offended with these as well as with the
greatest: so if ye make conscience of the greatest of the duties of Gods
worship, why do you not also of the least duties? for God is pleased with
these, as well as with the other. Some say they will be religious, but they
need not be so precise as some scrupulous men are: but let them examine
themselves: if the least sins be sins, they must also make conscience of
them: so if we must keep an hour of the Sabbath, there is the same reason of
the rest of the hours; so for idle speeches, and fashioning of our selves to
the world; so if we seek for preferment or riches, it is contrary to the
commandment of God: seek not to be rich; for they that will be rich, drown
themselves in perdition and destruction: so we must not keep company with
evil and unsanctified men: examine how we practice this in all duties
commanded, let us try our selves by abstaining from occasions, whether we
refrain our selves from the temptations of objects; for our speech must be
gracious, not by fits, but always; so we must be diligent in our Callings: if
out of conscience we do this, we are faithful; otherwise we are not: for the
same God which commanded us not to kill, commanded us not to commit adultery:
if then thou committest adultery, thou offendest God: so Moses would not leave
an hoof behind him in Egypt, because God commanded him so to do. Know you not
that no unrighteous man shall inherit the Kingdom of God? 1 Cor. 6. 9. So if
we abstain from foul sins, yet if we commit the least, we shall never go
to heaven.

It serves for encouragement for fearful Christians: Use 2.
for if sin shall not have dominion over you, then this may encourage you
against the sin that prevails against you sometimes; at last you shall have
the victory: it is true that many sins make war against many Christians,
and will not be overcome for a long time, it may be for one, two, or three
years; yet let us not be discouraged, but renew our strength again, and in
the end we shall have the victory.

Thirdly, we have here the privilege of Christians; Use 3.
for though they be servants while others be Princes, yet they are free in
regard of their lusts. To see a man led to his execution, we would not think
it were for his honor; so when ungodly men thrive in their worldy lusts, their
souls are led to destruction, when sin shall have no dominion over the
godly; but the ambitious and voluptuous men do whatsoever their lusts command
them, with a miserable bondage.

It is not enough for men to see their sins, or to Use 4.
blame them in themselves, or to purpose to amend or forsake them, but they
must strive to overcome them, or else they shall have no promise of the Gospel
applied unto them. Pharaoh was a wicked man, yet with heart he purposed to let
the children of Israel go; but when some temptation assaulted him, then he
would not let them go: so Saul purposed in his heart not to kill David,
insomuch that he swear to Jonathan he would not do it; yet afterward he
attempted it upon another temptation: but we must come to feel that sin
has no dominion over us, otherwise we shall hear that sentence, Depart from
me ye wicked into everlasting fire; and, Out of thy own mouth I will adjudge
thee, O thou wicked servant.

And so much may be sufficient for the unfolding the first point of doctrine;
proceed we to a second which flows from hence also, and that is this, viz.
That sin although it do not reign in the Saints, yet Doct. 2.
does remain and dwell in them: for proof whereof see this place of
Scripture, If any man thinks (says 1 Ioh. 1. 8.
Saint John) that he has no sin, he is a liar, and there is no truth in
him. The truth whereof will be seen in these things clearly.

1. Because our knowledge is imperfect, and therefore every grace is imperfect,
as our faith, and so our love; and therefore much sin must be in a man, in as
much as his grace is not perfect.

2. The flesh lusts against the spirit; therefore it is plain there is sin
in us, yea so much that often times it even captivateth us.

3. We have in this life but the first fruits of the spirit: now when we
shall have it in fullness, we shall have no more than enough; therefore having
now but the first fruits of the spirit, Mortification, and Sanctification,
sin is not wholly abolished in the Saints in this life, but does dwell in
them. The reasons hereof are,

1. To humble us, and to make us see what is in Reas. 1.
our hearts, and to make us know that the Lord brings us to the holy Land;
therefore God sometimes left the Israelites to try them; and so he troubled
Hezechiah to know what was in his heart; and so he sent a Messenger of Satan to
buffet S. Paul, lest he should be exalted above measure through abundance of
Revelations; and so the Lord does deal with every Saint.

2. That Christ may be acknowledged; for if we had no sin in us, we should
not acknowledge Reas. 2.
the benefits of his mediation so much as now we do: All are shut up under
sin, that he might have mercy upon all, Romans 3. 9. and 11. 32. that is, that
it might be manifested and declared, that they are saved merely by the mercy
of God in Christ, as is said, Romans 3. 26. Otherwise we should not rightly
value our justification and sanctification; but seeing him subduing, pardoning
our sins, we see what need we have of him, how that we are lost without him.

3. That we might exercise our faith. 1 Ioh. 3. 2. Reas. 3.
We are the sons of God, but it does not yet appear what we shall be, etc.
So God has hid his children under baseness, that their faith might be
exercised: for things we see, we may easily believe; but faith is of things not
seen: therefore God does as men do, hide Jewels under base places, where men
would look least for them: wherefore wicked men stumble, and are offended at
this, because they do not believe it; and therefore it is made an article of
our faith, that we need and believe the remission and forgiveness of sins.
But let us apply it.

1. This should teach us not to be discouraged Use 1.
for those infirmities that are in us, for there are such in every Saint. Sin
is a guest to evil men, but a thief to the godly, which they would not have
come in their hearts: so it is one thing to wear a chain as an ornament, and
another as a fetter to restrain them: therefore the godly ought not to be
discouraged, but to assure themselves they are under grace.

2. We must not censure men for the slips and falls we see in them: for we
must remember Use 2.
that sin dwells in them, we must not presently judge them to be
hypocrites: Be not many masters, says S. James, that is, censure him not, for
he stands or falls to his own Master. Rom, 14. 4.

3. This should teach us to be watchful, and not to think our labor is at an
end when we are in the Use 3.
state of grace; for sin still dwells in us, and though we have the victory
over sin one day, it will fight against us the next day: as in a garden the
weeds will grow, because the roots are not quite plucked up, and taken away; so
sin is in us, and therefore we must think it will fight against us and vex
us; and therefore I say, let us renew our strength.

Now for this, we must do these two things. First, weaken sin. Secondly,
pray to God to make us watchful.


And so I have also done with the second doctrine. Again, from the latter part
of these words, or reason of the promise made unto them in the former part of
this verse, that sin shall not have dominion over them, because they are not
under the Law, but under grace: I gather this conclusion, viz. That the way to
overcome sin, is to get assurance of the love and grace of Doct. 3.
God, and that it is forgiven them: the reason why the Apostle promises them
sin shall not have dominion over them, is, because they are not under the
Law, but under grace, that is, they had assurance of Gods love, and that their
sin is forgiven them: this is proved from that, Faith purifieth the heart;
and, You repent and believe the Gospel.

Now the reasons hereof are these four especially.

1. Because it is the means to get the spirit, without which no sin is
forgiven, which comes by Reas. 1.
faith; for it is not recieved by the law, for so says the Apostle, Received
you the spirit by the works of the law, or by the hearing of faith? Gal. 3. 2.

Secondly, it is the way to make us believe the promises, to make us believe
that we are transformed Reas. 2.
into a heavenly nature: for when we believe the promises are true, that works
love in us, and love transformeth us into the divine nature, without which no
sin is overcome.

Thirdly, because hereby we are able to resist the tentations, which are
either for the enjoying of Reas. 3.
good, or fleeing of evil; so that these promises propound more good than
sin can harm: sin threatened the loss of outward things, but the promises
propound eternal life, which is better than all things else in the world.

Fourthly, because we do delight in God: for when we do believe in God that
our sins are forgiven us in Christ, then we look at God as on a merciful
Father, and then we cease to delight in the world, and we begin to delight our
selves in the Lord.

The use hereof is, first, for direction, to teach us Use 1.
the way how to heal a sin, and that is to get assurance that it is pardoned
and forgiven; for legal terrors do not heal a sin, but it is faith that
purifies the heart, and purifying pacifies it: As a Traitor will not come in,
when he hears a proclamation out for his death; but when he hears he shall
live, and be pardoned, this makes him to come in: so we, when we only fix our
eyes upon the legal terrors, shall not heal our sins; but when we believe
they are pardoned, this heales them.

But sorrow and a broken heart are required for Object.
sinners to be assured of their forgiveness.

This sorrow is not so much commanded, but it Answ.
is that whereby God prepares his servants hearts, to make them see what need
they have of pardon, and so they may ask pardon: but the sorrow commanded is
that which follows belief; for the more I believe the promises, the more I
shall grieve for displeasing him.

But what is the way to get assurance of the forgiveness Quest.
of our sins may some say.

I answer, That that be done which is to be done on our part, believed which
God has promised. Answ.



First, The things to be done on our part, are these:

1. Confession plainly and truly: we must confess them to God, and to man,
when we our selves cannot overcome them.

2. Contrition; which is when a man is not stubborn, and resists Gods will,
and will please himself; to get his heart broken, and to say as S. Paul says,
Lord, what will thou have me to do? and then we are subject to his will. To
him will I look that is of a contrite heart.

3. Desertion, or forsaking of sin: for, He that forsakes not his sins,
shall not prosper; which is when we having the like occasions, yet will not
give way to him, but follow our own lusts.

Secondly, That that be believed which God has promised; and that is, that as
he has said, He will forgive our sins, upon such and such conditions, so we
believe it. And to make us to do this, these motions may persuade us.

1. Because he is merciful; in whose mercy there are three things, all very
material and moving. Motive 1.


1. It is natural to him, he is not weary of showing mercy: as the eye is not
weary of seeing, nor the ear of hearing, no more is God in showing mercy: but
in us it is not natural, but an infused quality, and therefore we are weary
when men provoke us often.

2. His mercy is infinite; but in men it is not so: therefore come within
compass of this quality, and he will exercise it; for no sin is beyond Gods
mercy: this keeps us from despair: for though they be great, yet God is able
to forgive them. As the rain waters as well the great field as the little
garden, and as the Sun shines as well on mountains as on Molehills, and as
it disperseth the thick mist as well as the least thin cloud, so does Gods
mercy pass by great sins as well as little.

But if our sins be exceeding great, aggravated Object.
with circumstances, and often committed, then we cannot imagine that God will
forgive us. This is Solut.
answered by the Prophet Isaiah; God is more merciful than man can be sinful,
he is more merciful than we can imagine: My thoughts are as much above I say
55 9.
your thoughts as the heaven is above the earth.

3. We see much mercy in men, and in the mother of a child: now, it is but as
a drop out of the ocean of Gods mercy, but as a spark to the whole element of
fire. If you being evil, can give good things to your children, how much more
shall your heavenly Father, etc. See what the Scripture says, I am merciful,
forgiving iniquity, transgression and sin: the first word signifies original
sin, the second actual, the third rebellion; all which God can forgive.

Secondly, because it is the end of Christ's coming Motive 2.
into the world: now, no man will do any thing, especially so great a matter
as to kill himself, for no end: Christ then dyed for the forgiveness of
sins. This S. Paul urges: the end of Christ's coming was to save sinners;
otherwise 1 Timothy 1. 15.
the cross of Christ had been of none effect, and his mediation of no use, if
men did not commit sins, or if God should not forgive them: therefore God
must needs be ready to forgive.

Thirdly, because God beseeches us to be reconciled Motive 3.
unto him through Christ: now, if God does this, if we seek earnestly, he
will hear us. The Prodigal being willing to come home to his Father, he met
him, and received him joyfully: so does God, he charge his Ministers to
compel men to come in, that is, to preach Gods mercy, that he will forgive
their sins; and therefore the most acceptable action to God is to bring a
sinner to him.

Fourthly, the charge laid on us to believe: we are charged on the pain of
death to believe; and Motive 4.
therefore it is most profitable for us, and most pleasing to him: he takes it
well at our hands that we should believe, and by the hand of faith lay hold on
him; which he would not do if he were not ready to forgive.

Fifthly, from the examples of others; let us see Motive 5.
what God has done for them, and it will make us believe: he forgave Manasses
as well as Joshua, he pardoned Mary Magdalen as well as Elizabeth, and Paul as
well as Peter: he has forgiven the greatest sins as well as the least, and
he will also deal so with us.

Sixthly, from the effects of it which are these. Motive 6.


1. It glorifieth God much: Abraham believed, and glorified God much: for the
greater the sinner is, the more honor is given to God: as the Physician has
the greatest glory by curing the greatest wound: so God has the greatest glory
by forgiving the greatest sins, which wound the soul even to death.

2. It moves us to love God the more. Mary loved much, because much was
forgiven her.

3. It mollifies the most; it causes them to relent, and weep much more. This
is plain by that place, where it is said, that when God forgave the greatest
sins, then they mourned and lamented, as in those Converts, Act. 2. 37.

4. It purifies the heart: for no man looks to keep his heart pure, until
he be assured of the forgiveness of his sins; for till then he cannot
look on God as on a Father: but on the contrary, when the sin is not
forgiven, God loses the glory of being a Father, and the glory of his truth,
and of his mercy; and that hardens the heart from relenting.

Seventhly, from the price which was paid, and Motive 7.
which no sin can go beyond: indeed, if Christ had paid but a finite price,
we might fear that our sins should not be forgiven. If a man were in debt
two thousand pound, and there were but one paid, he might be discouraged: but
when there is infinitely more paid than the debt is, this should make us
believe our sins are forgiven us whatsoever they be, seeing they be all but
finite.

Eighthly, from the tenor of the Promises, which Motive 8.
proclaim that they that believe and repent, and forsake their sins, shall
find pardon for them: as a King that proclaims that all traitors and rebels
shall be pardoned if they would lay down their weapons. Now, Non est
excipiendum ubi ^ex non excipit, There is no exception to be made where the law
makes none. God faith, yea therefore has said and sworn it, that he will
forgive our sins, that we may believe it.

But I have committed the sin often. Object.


Yet God will forgive thee. Though thou have often committed whoredom, yet I
will forgive thee, if thou turn Answ.
unto me, says the Lord, by the Prophet, of the house of Israel, Ier. 3. 1.

Hence then (to make some use of it) we may learn not to deceive our selves,
to think we are in Use
the state of grace, when we are not: for if we did truly believe our sins
are forgiven us, we would be healed: but if we have the same lusts, and keep
the same company, which we did when we were not changed, it is a mere
delusion, whatsoever we say or think.

And thus much for the third point too: there yet remains one more, wherewith
we will conclude the whole text; and that we may draw from the contrary to
what the Apostle here says; and indeed it is employed, though not expressed: for
if sin have no dominion over them that are not under the law, but under grace:
then on the other side must it needs be as true, That Whosoever is under the
law, sin has dominion over him, that is, He that refraineth Doct. 4.
sin only for fear of the law, and of judgments, sin has dominion over
him: this is the case of them that refrain sinning only for fear, and for
the salvation of their souls, or for educations sake, which have been brought
up in good families, or such as repent upon some amazement, like the bulrushes
which hang down their heads only while the shower lasts. And that,

First, because all such as are not under grace, but Reas. 1.
under the law, have not received the spirit, which comes by hearing the
Gospel: and no creature can change one creature into another, as lead into
gold, or a Wolf into a Lamb, unless it be by Gods spirit.

Secondly, to such Gods service is burdensome; and violent motious last not
long: they are weary in clambering up an hill: all natural motions are swifter
at the last than at the first; but these are like the Israe ites, who after a
time would have returned into Egypt again.

Now then, to end all with the time, let us 1. Be Use 1,
exhorted not to abstain from any sin for fear of punishment, but consider
whether thou would serve God for Gods sake, although there were neither
heaven nor hell: it must be our meat and drink, which men would do though
there were no punishment for the omission of it. Blessed is he that hungreth
and their steth after righteousness.

2. Hence we may learn not to defer repentance, Use 2.
till death, sickness, crosses, or age comes: then it may be you would not
sin, though with Balaam you had your house full of gold and silver: for it is
not the abstinence from sin that God loves, but the change of the heart.
Amaziahs heart was not right though he walked in all the ways of David. There
are men that have made a covenant with hell and death; but God will disanull
that covenant, or it will be but equivocall; many have sworn in their
sickness never to commit sin again, which afterward they have committed
again with greediness; many have dyed in the same without repentance.

3. Labor to see your selves doing duties with as much love as you can, and
with as little fear, because perfect love casts out fear. And so (beloved)
I have given you a brief survay of the several points contained in this
portion of holy Scripture: wherefore, if you know these things, happy are ye
if ye do them.

FINIS.
THE DEFORMED FORM OF A FORMAL PROFESSION: OR, The description of a true and
false Christian, either excusing, or accusing him, for his pious, or pretended
conversation: Showing that there is a powerful godliness necessary to
salvation, and that many have the form, but not the power thereof. In handling
whereof, These three things are plainly and powerfully explained and applied.
1. What godliness is. 2. What the power of it is. 3. What be the reasons why
some have but the form thereof: together, with the means and marks, both how
to attain, and to try our selves whether we have the power thereof or not.


By that late faithful and worthy Minister of Jesus Christ, JOHN PRESTON,
Doctor in Divinity, Chaplain in Ordinary to his Majesty, Master of Emanuell
College in Cambridge, and sometimes Preacher of Lincolnes Inn.

Not every one that says unto me, Lord, Lord, shall enter into the kingdom of
Heaven, but he that does the will of my Father which is in Heaven,

Math. 7. 21. Pure religion, and undefiled before God and the Father, is this,
to visit the fatherless and widows in their afflictions, and to keep
himself unspotted of the world,

James 1. 27. Printed 1641.

THE DEFORMED FORM OF A FORMAL PROFESSION.
2 TIMOTHY. 3. 5. Having a form of godliness, but denying the power thereof.
OUR Apostle S. Paul does in these words give us a part of a description of
wicked men in the latter times: and he brings them in by way of prevention or
objection, or answer to an objection, as if some should wonder that there
should be such kind of persons in the Church, as he in the former verses had
described; Covetous, boasters, proud, blasphemers, disobedient to parents,
unthankful, unholy, etc. do these live as the Church does? Do these retain
the Sacraments, and the like? Yes, says the Apostle, they do, we cannot
deny it; only this, They have a form of godliness, but etc. So that the
point of doctrine arising from hence, does plainly appear even at the first
sight to be this, viz. That there is a powerful godliness necessary to
salvation, and that many have but the form, not the power thereof.

Now, there be three things to be explained in opening of this doctrine, to
show 1. What godliness is. 2. What the power thereof is. 3. The reasons why
many have no more but the form thereof.


For the first, that you may the better conceive what Godliness is, I will
first show you what it is not.

First then, it is not bare nature; but that godliness What godliness is not.
which God requires of all men, is more then so. God indeed has commanded
nature, yea even corrupt nature, to bring forth many fruits of godliness; as
much abstinence from pleasure, much patience, much temperance, and such like,
which are all very beautiful in their own Spheres; but because they come not
from God, nor his Spirit of sanctification, or because they have no respect of
God, therefore they are not godliness, neither does God regard them.

Secondly, it is not the act of religion proceeding from self-love, though
offered to God, in regard that men see that God is the governor of the world,
that he has the keys of heaven and earth, and men may do much to God for
such respects, using him as a bridge to get to heaven by, making themselves
their utmost ends: and therefore this is not godliness: but what is it then,
you will say?

Thirdly, it is a divine grace infused into the soul What godliness is.
by God, whereby a man follows God, loves him, magnifies him, sets him up in
his heart above all, and manifests this in his life, and the whole course of
it, doing all for him and to him: and it is thus wrought; When the creature
comes to see no beauty in himself, and no help in himself: and since God is
full of all beauty, and all excellency, and all power, able to answer our
desires in every thing; when he comes to see and consider this, then he begins
to set up God in his heart; as the Jvy having no root, cleaves faster to the
tree, so likewise does he only to God, seeing that he cannot subsist of
himself; and when he comes to see that he depends on him for all things, he
will do all things for him, because all are from him: whereas before, seeing
something in himself, he magnified himself, and so withdrew himself and his
heart from God. And so I come to the next particular, viz.

What is meant by the power of godliness: and What is meant by the power of
godliness.
for that, you shall know there is a godliness, which is not only in words and
complements, but in deed and truth; for it not only puts upon a man a washie
color of perfection, but dies his heart in grain in holiness; and it differs
from the other in five things.

First, It is done in the Power, when it is not the bare picture, where there
are not only the outward lineaments of nature, but when there is life in it;
Five differences between the form and power of godliness.
and that you shall know when a man needs not to be called on to good duties,
but there is a natural principle of life in him, whereby he does them with
facility and constancy, as natural actions of life: when likewise he does
grow in them; for where there is life, there is also growth; and when he does
likewise desire that which may feed it, as the means which may strengthen him
in the doing of it; as if a man have life, he desires meat and sleep; and when
as there is life, then the works that come from a man, are not dead works, and
then you have the power of godliness, it is not a fashion only.

Secondly, It is not true, but counterfeit, when it is like the true, but not
the same, but wants some particular property that is to be found in the true;
as that which is counterfeit Balsame, which is like the true, but wants the
power of healing; and so likewise a counterfeit drug, and a counterfeit jewel,
which wants that property which the true has: and the want of this you shall
find in the use, and in the wearing: As a rotten bow is found to be rotten
when the arrow is drawn to the head; so if a man's godliness be counterfeit,
and he unsound, it will be discovered in the wearing, or in some particular
case, when he is put to it, or tried. A Jeweller will find out the property of
a Jewel, but an ordinary man cannot do it, but by use and the wearing. To
instance in some particular parts of godliness; the love of God, if it be true,
has these properties, that a man loves the brethren; for how can thou love
an immateriall holiness in God, if thou love not that holiness which is
stamped upon the creature like thy self? so likewise rectitude and uprightness
of heart; try it by this property, which our Savior Christ makes of it,
gracious speeches; Christ says, that that which is predominant in the heart,
the mouth will be full of: so for keeping of the commandments, if in truth
they have this property, that they be not grievous, they will do them with a
natural delight, and inward willingness: so for taking of Christ by faith,
every man believes he does so, but our Savior Christ tries it by this, Go
sell all that thou have, and thou shall have treasure in heaven: and so may
thou try thy self when thou art put to it by loss of goods, or credit, or
otherwise.

Thirdly, It is in the power, when it is strong and not weak, when a man has
power and strength in doing good duties: and hereby many are discovered, who
have good purposes only, which though they be hearty in them for a time, yet
they want power and strength; and this is the case of many which be in the
Church, who though they have the knowledge of the word of God, and approve the
truth in their consciences, desiring to be saved by the practice of it, and so
take up many good purposes, which yet come to nothing, because they want power
and strength. Consider therefore if thou have power and strength to perform
thy purposes, and then thou have the power of godliness; but not else. Many
will say, I am but flesh and blood, and what will you have me to do? now here
wants the power, as you may see in the fifth Chapter of Deuteronomy, from the
7. verse to the 29, the people there said to Moses, That what the Lord should
speak to him, they would do it; they said then what they thought, and what
they meant and minded, and the Lord says of them, O that there were such an
heart in them, that they would fear me, and keep my commandments, etc. They
wanted the power, though they had good purposes.

Fourthly, If thou would know whether thy godliness be in the power or no,
see whether thou have not only the shadow of it, but the substance; for there
is a shadow with the substance: as if thou pray, there is a formal doing of
it, which is as the shadow; but to pray in the holy Ghost, not in the voice of
thy own spirit, but out of Gods own spirit; not out of memory or wit, but out
of thy heart, and that an heart sanctified by the Spirit of adoption; this is
the substance. And so to hear for knowledge only, that is the shadow; but to
hear for practice, that is the substance: And so again, for us to preach the
Gospel, to do it because necessity it laid upon us, and there is a woe
denounced against us if we do it not, as says our Apostle of himself, there
is the shadow; But to preach with power, and authority, and not as the Scribes
and Pharisees, with the enticing words of man's wisdom, this is the substance.

Fifthly and finally, It is in the power when a man goes thorough the work: a
thing is said to be in the power when it is effectual, when a man brings it
to an end, and does it not by halves: so some begin indeed, but then they leave
the work in the rudiments: but if a man have the power, he will break through
all difficulties, he will leap over all till he has wrought out his
salvation with fear and trembling.

And thus having dispatched the two former particulars, I hasten to the third
and last of the premises, viz. The reasons why some have but the form, and not
the power: and they are especially these.

First, because the form is most easy, but the Reasons why many men have but
the form.
power is a matter of more difficulty: for the former it does not call upon a
man to cut off his right hand, to pluck out his right eye, and to deny
himself in things nearest and dearest unto him, as the power does; for it
requires a man should take pains in good duties, and go through them, not to
omit or slight the least of them in the least measure that may be, or to lie in
known sins; and farther, it requires a man should do this from day to day,
and that when it crosses the flesh most: this is an hard saying, and caused
many that they would no longer abide with Christ; they were willing to obey the
form, but not the power.

Secondly, because this power breeds hatred and opposition in the world, and
the world will cross it again: now then, when a man may retain the form,
and hold in with the world, a man may be of the world still, and the world will
love his own: whereas the power makes men Antipodes to all the world; this
makes many care for no more but the form. Fit for this purpose is that place,
Wisd. 2. 12. where the ungodly say of the righteous on this wise. These men's
lives are contrary to ours, and their doings reprove our thoughts, therefore
let us oppress them: and Christ tells us we must look for no other, saying, We
shall be hated of all men for his names sake; and it is no easy matter to have
all men in contention with us: this then is another reason hereof.

Thirdly, because it is enough to serve a man's turn for his unregenerate ends:
for men having a natural conscience, whereof they must stop the mouth, and it
being injudicious, and not able to judge of the power of godliness, they are
satisfied with the form: as when Children are wayward and wrangling, because
we know they are not judicious, we give them Nutts, not gold or silver to
still them, and it serves their turns as well; so is it here in the natural
conscience, it does judge the form to be enough to carry a man to heaven; and
who would do more than he needs must?

Fourthly, because if men have but the form of godliness, Satan troubles them
not, nor the flesh: but when men labor for the power of godliness, and go on
any further than the form, then Satan (knowing this will bring them to heaven)
has the power of hell against them, and he keeps a great busseling with them
to hinder them what he can: and so does the flesh too; but it will not resist
the form, for that will stand with a man's lusts; but if he be divided against
himself, he cannot endure it; as to deny a friend or a stranger, if he be
importunate, is a hard matter; but to deny a man's wife that lies in his
bosom, if she be earnest, is more difficult; but to deny a man's self when
he is importunate with himself, is most difficult; and yet this you must do,
if you have the power of it. Now to deny the power of it, is when it is laid
open to men and offered, and they with stubbornness of will resist and deny
it.

And so much for the opening of the words: now for the folding of them up
again, and first from the first, what godliness is,

Let us learn not to deceive our selves, for it is Use 1.
not (as I told you) natural or moral virtues only, no nor the doing of the
actions of religion, a man making himself his utmost ends thereof: content not
your selves therefore with any thing that is not godliness: let me speak
unto you as Peter to the dispersed brethren, where after that he had reckoned
up many virtues, patience, knowledge, temperance, etc. he bids them add to all
these godliness; as if he had said, all the rest are not availeable unless
you have godliness also: see therefore that all these be godliness, that is,
that they all come from God, and look to him; for this is the nature of
godliness, to come to the Wells head, and to search higher than nature, to have
another Alpha and Omega of all that is within us, or that comes from us, than
what is within us of our selves. And then again, if we be to preach to others,
we should learn to preach Christ and God, that is, to enforce all as from
them and to them; not only to exhort to moral virtues, with such instructions
as may be taken out of Seneca or Plutarch (though these have their use and
place) but as out of the Scriptures, let Christ and God come in, and show you
how all do come from God, and look to God: and so all you that are hearers,
be sure all you do be godliness, that is, coming From God, and tending to
him: for motions have their denominations from their terminus a quo, and from
their ends; as that is called calefaction that tends to heat: so is that truly
godliness that tends to God, and has respect unto him. Art thou a Student?
when thou studiest and take pains in thy books, see whether thou do it
for thy self or for thy credit, or do thou make God thy utmost end? examine
thy heart, and examine it narrowly: and so likewise you that are exercised in
other Callings, do you do them that you may do good to mankind in them, as
a servant that uses his talent to his masters service? then is this godliness:
so if you eat or drink, or recreate your selves, do you do it that you may
do good better, as men whet their sythes that they may mow the better? then
this is also godliness, for it tends to God and godliness.

But you will say, Do you altogether condemn natural and moral virtues?
must they do nothing? yes, you shall have this use of them, that they will
help as wind to drive the ship; only it is godliness is the rudder that guides
it, and aims at the right haven: as for example, you are commanded to love
your children, and your wives; you are bound to do this, if you had no
natural affections in you; only having these affections in you, you do it
with more ease; else you must drive the ship with oars, whereas now the wind
fills the sails, and you do it with more facility and ease: and so likewise
you are bound to be patient and meek, and you must be so, though your natures
be not so; but if your natures be so, you may the more easily be so, yet so as
godliness must set the Compass, and steer the ship. Moral virtues are like
good horses, that draw the Chariot, but godliness is the Auriga, the Coachman;
without which, take the most excellent things that nature is capable of, if it
be not guided by it, the Lord regards them not; for God regards nothing but
that which draws the creatures unto him; but now moraell virtues makes us rest
upon our own bottomes, and so likewise all things whatsoever they be that
beautify the flesh; for God will have no flesh to glory in it self; but let
him that glories, glory in 1 Cor. 1. 29. 30
the Lord. Nay, I add more, take the graces of the spirit, wherewith God
adornes his Saints, as an husband does his wife with Jewels, if you magnify
them, you do so much withdraw your hearts from God: therefore in heaven it is
said there is neither Sun, nor Moon; now what is that? there is no
excellency in any creature that is magnified there, but God is all in all, he
is Sun and Moon: and therefore in the Revelation of Saint John it is said,
and said to their honor, it is made their worth that they give all to God;
Glory and power be to our God Rev. 7. 12.
for ever; they fall on their faces, throw down their crowns, though created
glorious creatures. When the evil Angels began to reflect upon themselves, it
was their ruin, they fell from God: for the creature of it self is like a
glass without a bottom; if it comes to stand upon its own bottom, it
falls, and breaks; and so the Angels when they would stand of themselves, they
fell down to the lowest pit: and therefore of all graces, labor for emptying
graces, as Faith and Love; for these give all unto God, nothing to man's self;
and therefore they are the great graces in religion, which you must chiefly
labor for.

Secondly, from that there is a power in godliness, if it be such a powerful
thing (as you have heard it Use 2.
is) then this may serve to comfort us in the ways of it. Wheresoever it is in
truth, there it is in power: say that thou have such a light that thou can
not believe, that there be such roades as that thou can not walk by them, yet
if thou have godliness, thou shall be able to overcome; for the kingdom of
God consists in power. When God comes to dwell in any man's heart, he sends
godliness into it, which rules in it as a King in his Kingdom; think
therefore of it as of Monarchs as Alexander was, or those which Daniel speaks
of, it carries all before it, it brings every thought into subjection: and
therefore also the Spirit is called a spirit of power; and if you have
godliness, it comes from the spirit, and therefore is accompanied with
power; and therefore Christ is said to be full of the holy Ghost, and of power;
and so Stephen, and John the Baptist; And grace is said to be a powerful
thing: Be strong in the grace of God, and in the Power of his might.

Now, the reason why godliness has power, is, because God has put virtue into
it: As when you see such and such an herb have such a virtue in it to do such
and such a thing, it is because God has endued it with such a power; and so
has he done with godliness. If therefore thou have any thing to do in
religion, set on it; Have thou any lust to overcome? set on it, and let me
speak to thee as he spoke to Gideon, Go on thou valiant man in the might of
the Lord. The people of Israel traveling to the land of Canaan, saw the Cities
walled to heaven, and that the Giants were there, the sons of Anak; yet
Joshua bids them be of good comfort, and fear not, for the Lord would fight
for them, and deliver their adversaries into their hands: so, though you see
difficulties in the way to heaven: yet godliness is a powerful thing that
will carry you through all: therefore likewise the Apostle having prayed for
the Ephesians, that they might not faint at his tribulations for them, which
was their Ephesians. 3. 13, and (...).
glory, but that they might be strengthened with might by his Spirit in the
inner man, to comprehend with all Saints, the breadth, and length, and depth,
and height, and to know the love of Christ which passes knowledge; which
because they might think they should never be able to do, he adds, To him
that is able to do above Ver. 20 21.
all that we can ask or think, according to the power that works in us, be
all glory: as if he should have said, God is able to do it, and that by the
power which works in him; so suppose to subdue some lust of the flesh, be a
thing so hard as you think it will never be done; nay, you conceive it to be a
thing so improbable as that you are ashamed to ask it: yet, according Ephesians. 1.
19.
to that power which works in us, he is able to do above all we ask or
think: and therefore he prays that their eyes may be opened, that they may see
the greatness of the power that wrought in them; and it was not that they
might see and look at it idly, but for the use to serve their turns, that they
laying hold of it, and using of it, might be able to do these things which
they desire should be done, even such things to which a man's nature is as
untoward as water is to heat when there is none in it: only, as Christ said to
Mary, Believe and you shall see the power of God; thou must go to God for it
by faith, and God will show it forth unto you, and you shall have fruits of it.
The end of faith is not only to apply the holy promises of justification, but
of sanctification also: as for example, he has promised to baptize you with
the holy Ghost and with fire, that is, with zeal and other graces of the
spirit, which must give them power and strength; and all, that sin might not
reign in their mortal bodies. Go to God then and urge him with his promise,
and he cannot deny you. When men therefore think to excuse themselves by
saying, I am not able to do such a thing, what will you have me to do? it is
no excuse: for if they were but willing, it is all he requires of them; the
power, that belongs to God; which if men would but believe, and go to him, he
would undoubtedly give it them.

I therefore now ask thee, Would thou turn to God? Would thou overcome
such and such a lust of uncleanness, drunkenness? etc. be it what it will be:
if thou answer, No; then thou art justly condemned, thy blood be upon thy own
head: but if thou say, Yes, thou would; then come but to God, be resolute
to be religious in good earnest, and I will assure thee, he will vouchsafe
thee power to do it. The Apostle says, that God would confirm them unto the
end, that they might be blameless in the day of the Lord Jesus; for, says he,
God is faithful, he has said, he has promised it, he shall break his word
if he do not: let me reason it a little with you; Is it not an acceptable
request to go to God with all thy heart, and to say, Lord, I desire but the
power and strength to go through with thy own work? Do thou think he will
not hear thee? Remember Christ, the only Physician, how ready he was to heal
men of their bodily diseases when they came unto him; and he has not put off
his nature now: Do thou think the power of his death and resurrection were
but fancies, or a notion? If not, go on and fear not; for as God said to
Joshua, so shall thou find him to deal with thee, I will never leave thee,
nor forsake thee.

And so leaving what I have said, to your further Use 3.
consideration, I come to a third use, that seeing godliness is such a
powerful thing as you have seen, therefore you would take heed how you
deceive your selves with fond desires and purposes, that have no power, no
force in them, so as to think that they will serve the turn; no nor yet a few
feeble faint endeavors. I say to men that set on religious courses without
having their hearts changed, as Christ said unto his Disciples, Tarry ye in
the City, Luke 24. 49.
till ye be endued with power from on high: as if our Savior Christ should
have said, If ye go presently into the world, ye will not be able to go
through with your works; stay therefore with fasting and prayer till you have
received power from on high to carry you through: for new purposes in a man
that returns to his old nature, are like new wine in old vessels, they will
break the vessels and be too big for your hearts: it is therefore enough to
take up now a purpose, and begin to be diligent in your Calling or sanctifying
the Sabbath; for, it is impossible these purposes should live in an heart that
is carnal: for, as the soil must be suitable to every creature, or else it
will not live; so likewise you will never be able to perform these purposes.

In the first place therefore labor to get new hearts, as the bottom of these
purposes, which How to get the power of godliness.
may be as the root to give sap to them; for then they will live and grow in
you, when there is a soil to suit with them.

Secondly, get power in believing. Christ our Savior, when he came unto his
Country, it is said, He would not put forth his power to work many miracles
there: Why so? one would have thought he should rather have wrought them there
than any where else, both for his own honor, and the good of his Countrymen;
no place then was fitter for that than it: yet there he works few or none, and
the reason was, because of their unbelief, they believed not: so that it is
the want of faith that holds Gods hands from strengthening you; you will not (I
say) believe God, who has sworn (and it is not an idle oath) that he would
grant that we should serve him in godliness and holiness all the days of
our life. When the widow came to Christ to be healed of the issue which she had
many years, it is said that virtue went out of him to heal her, because she
believed: and though it have bin a disease of never so many years, yet if he
say, Be ye whole, it is no matter what the disease is, so God be the Physician;
and therefore believe.

Thirdly, pray, and furnish your selves with all the graces of the spirit: not
only go about things, but maintain a stock, fill the cisterne every day
within, whet and point the graces of God in you; for the inward man every day
is subject to decay, as well as the outward man: and do not take aim at your
selves, or at your strength, when you are in a good mood, or by the present
temper; for it vanishes if there be not a supply from day to day from grace
within, if you do not whet your souls every day.

Fourthly and lastly, if this be true, that many Use 4.
are partakers of the form that have not the power of godliness; that when we
come to look on the faces of our Churches, we find the form in many: but if
we come unto their dealings and carriages in private, ye shall scarce find the
power (it is as rare, as the other is frequent;) in their profession indeed
there is a form, but yet ye shall find religious servants as idle as others,
and wives as stubborn as others, husbands and masters as like Lions in their
families, and as false in their dealings as others: if this be true (I say) as
it is too true, then be not deceived, God is not mocked, but try and examine
your selves herein; for the Kingdom of God consists not in word but in power:
the Lord will not judge you according to your intentions and purposes, but
according to your works; and it is not he that says, Lord, Lord, shall inherit
the kingdom of heaven, but he that does the will of my Father, etc. Be not
then children in understanding for to take counters for gold, lay not out your
money for counterfeit things, be not fools to take pains, and yet not have
your turns served. Let me speak unto you as James does, If you say ye have
faith, and not works, can your faith save you? I say, if you have the form of
godliness, and not the power, will that save you? if you would not be deceived
then, examine your selves.

First of all, if thou do more than nature: see Five marks whereby to know
whether we have the power of godliness or no.
that thou be not the same man thou wast, that thou stand not up in the
same troop thou did; if thou do, thou have no more but the form of
godliness in thee; for if thou had, it would turn thy nature, and add wings
unto thee, making thee soar higher than nature: I am able through Christ that
strengthens me, and that, not to do some things, but all things. He says not,
I do purpose or desire, but, I am able to do all things; etc. Those therefore
that are able to stand against some lusts that are against their dispositions,
but not against all, are weak, and have not this power in them. It may be thou
art able to serve God when thou art poor, but what art thou when the world
comes in upon thee? thou art able to abstain from sins by nature, but
godliness (as we say of Physic) helps when nature fails: and as a natural
man with his sight sees far, but with an Optic glass sees further; so when
nature falls short, Art helps: as though by nature a man may measure or count,
yet if he comes to a large piece of ground, or a great sum, Art is required:
so though thou may do many things by nature, yet when godliness comes, it
helps out in things wherein nature fails: as Sampson could do many ordinary
things by his own strength; but when he came to take down or carry away the
gates of a City, and to pull down an house, it is still said, The spirit of
the Lord came upon him, the Lord went with him; and even so it is here.

Secondly, examine whether ye be godly in truth or no; for in Christ there are
said to be dead branches as well as living, that is, those that have the form
as well as those that have the power: but how are they distinguished? the dead
bear no fruit; and therefore as John said, Every tree that brings John 15 2.
not forth good fruit, God puts the axe to it: and so the three grounds did not
bring forthfruit. Examine therefore your selves whether ye be full of fruit or
no, whether ye abound in good duties or no, and do them with an honest heart,
for thereby the fourth ground is distinguished from all the rest.

Thirdly, examine whether ye hold out in time of trial or not, whether you are
able to approve your selves with joy, as the Apostle says of himself, that he
did when he was in trouble on every side, on the right hand and on the left, in
prosperity and in adversity. The third ground held not out in temptation; and
the reason was, because they had not depth of earth, that is, they wanted
power, and an inward stock of grace, for that is depth of earth: as a man that
keeps a great house, if he have not a stock able to supply him, he will soon
prove bankrupt, and for a tradesman (as ye say) if he be not diligent in his
trade, and follow it well, and make his returns, he will soon break; so also
when a man wants inward power, and an inward stock of graces to bear his daily
expenses out, he will soon become bankrupt.

Fourthly, every grace has some property annexed to it, which does distinguish
and difference it from counterfeit, as in faith unfeigned, laborious love,
patient hope, and the like.

Thirdly, take heed lest some lust overcome all, and so lust overtop all, and
be predominant, as the praise of men, or a respect of pleasure; as an Hawk (you
see) though she may soar and fly high, yet she will have an eye to the prey
below; and so have hypocrites. See therefore that ye serve God in singleness
of heart, and not with eye-service, that you do not harbor any lust within,
for that will spoil all at last: as weeds in a garden, if they be let alone,
and not plucked up, will over-runne the herbs; so is it with sin; if it be
suffered, though it be but a little one at first, yet it will like a leprosy
overspread the whole man: and therefore look to that, that some lust do not
overcome all in the end. And so I end for this text and time.

FINIS.
Plenitudo Fontis: OR, Christ's Fullness, and Man's Emptiness.

A Sermon Preached by JOHN PRESTON, etc.

1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have
received it, why do thou boast, as though thou had not received it?

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold in Black Horse Alley,
1644.

To the Anti-Arminian: OR, To every good Christian Reader.
Good Reader,
PLiny the great Naturalist, taxes some of the Greek, and Latin Writers in
his Plin. Praefat. Hist. Natural.
time, of folly at the least, for sending abroad their empty and worthless
Pamphlets with an over-praise in the Title, promising much at the first sight,
but utterly deceiving the Reader in his further search: But he that shall with
judgment read this Sermon, will find somewhat more then a naked title to
commend it. Sometimes the workman graceth the work: Sometimes the Work the
Worke-man; but behold in this Treatise they kiss each other, and are joined
together as a white Rose and a red Rose in one sweet Posie. But, that both
have been abused in the first Impression hereof, it appears as clearly (by
the Manuscript) as the splendant Sun within Earths spangled Canopy: for a^
those Passages, which will make the Arminians to stumble and (without doubt) to
fall in some measure, are (by the Imprimatur-ist) deleted; as if Arminianisme
D. W. 2 Leaves in some places.
were Englands true Doctrine. But now for thy comfort (Dear Christian) thou
have the Author's Sermon as it was preached before King James, without the
least diminution; And I sent it out with that prayer, or benediction that Jacob
sent with his sons into Egypt; God Almighty give thee mercy in the Genesis 3.
14.
sight of the man: In the sight of the great man, that thou may make him
humble: Of the poor man, that thou may make him content: Of the stubborn
man, that thou may hammer, and supple him: Of the penitent man, that thou
may bind up his wounds and sores. Of every man that thou may touch his
conscience, and wound his soul. Amen.

Thine in the Lord Jesus, P. B.

Christ's Fullness, and Man's Emptiness, etc.
JOHN 1. 16. Of his Fulness we have all received Grace for Grace.
SAint Augustine in his book De Civitate Dei, seems to stand amazed at the
Majesty which appears in this first of John, above all other passages of Holy
writ. And Calvine says, he does in this Chap: De^onare ab alto, giving it the
chiefest instance wherein a divine stupendous authority appears beyond all
the writing of men, Innins says, that he was never stricken with an
apprehension of the Diety, till he read this first Chapter, affirming it to be
the first and chiefest cause of his conversion from Atheism to a sincere
embracing of Christianity, you may see it in his life written by himself. And
in all this Chapter, I find not a richer and fuller sentence then this which
describes to us the fulness of Christ.

The parts of it are three.

First, here is a Fullness attributed to Christ.

Secondly, this is not a respective but a diffusive Fullness, that is, Fullness
not shut up in its own Banks, but running over for our benefit and use.

Of his Fullness we have all received, that is, all that ever had any Grace
took it from this heap, drew it from this fountain.

Thirdly, these receipts are amplified by the variety of them, Grace for Grace.
That is, Christ has given to us for all the Graces which he received of his
father for us; Graces answerable, as the Seal is said to give to the Wax print
for print, Character for Character, or as a father is said to give to the son
lymbe for lymbe, member for member, though not of the same bigness and
measure. In the same sense Christ is said to give to us Grace for Grace. So
that now you see here a full shop, many Buyers or Receivers, chose of wares, or
rather to use the Scriptures similitude: A full Table, many Guests, Variety of
dishes: Of his fullness we have all received The first part.
Grace for Grace. [We begin with the first. This Fullness is attributed to
Christ in 4. respects. [1. In regard of his person: So he was full. 1. with an
increate Fullness: for as the glory of God filled the Temple that Moses could
not enter in: so the humanity of Christ which answered 1. In regard of his
person.
to that type, was filled not only with the effects of the Diety as then, but
with the Diety it self, which is therefore said to dwell in him corporally or
essentially. [2. He was moreover filled with a Created Fullness, and so he
was said to be full of all divine good things, which John reduces to two heads,
Grace and Truth. Truth which comprehends all the virtues of understanding;
And Grace which comprizeth all beautiesand perfections of the will.

Secondly, this Fullness is attributed to Christ in regard of his offices [1.
as a Prophet. He was full of all the Treasures of wisdom 2 (...) regard of his
Offices.
and knowledge? So that all the Light which the World ever had came from him as
a Prophet.

All the Revelations which Adam, Abraham, and Noah ever had; All the Visions
which Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest of the Prophets ever saw; All the mysteries
which ever were declared to Paul and John, came from him, they all received
their light from this Sun, which from the first morning of time shone to the
dark world, without setting more or less, though the darkness comprehended
it not. Secondly, he was full as a Priest, full of favor with God, whence he
has audience, alwais full of Compassion to man, whence he is ready to
entertain any suits or Suitors; full of merit, whence sure to prevail in all
his requests and Intercessions [3. He was full as a King, full of authority,
all power was given him, in Heaven and in Earth, full of strength and might to
defend his Servants, and to resist his enemies till he has made them his
footstool. Lastly, full of royal Munificence, whence ready to supply the
wants of his Servants, and to give them in the end a large recompense of reward.

Thirdly, this Fullness is attributed unto Christ in regard of righteousness,
3. I^ (...)d of his R^gh^^ous^esse.
he was full of all righteousness original and actual, active and passive
general and particular, whence we have these b^^ si^s, following, [1. That he
who was so full himself is able to make us full, if we want faith or love, or
any other grace. [2. By this we know what a Mediator we have to deal withal^
even with one fall of love, fall of patience, full of tender compassion which
may invite us to come to him. [Lastly, we have this comfort, that though our
Righteousness be very weak and small, yet in him we are complete, Coloss. 2.

Fourthly, this Fullnes is attributed to him in regard of his Effects. 4. In
regard of his Effect.
Scarce was there ever any action that Christ did, but you shall see a Fulness
in it. At the first Miracle that ever he wrought, he filled 6 water-pots with
wine, afterward he filled 5000 guests with 5 loaves and 2 fishes, so that
twelve Baskets full of broken meats were taken up; So he filled the Netts with
fishes till they were ready to break again, and which was the best Fulness of
all, he filled the Disciples with the holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost, and
often afterward, whence they are said to be full of Joy, and the Holy Ghost.

If we would know the Reasons; It is partly in regard of Christ 1. Reasons from
Christ.
himself, he was the Corner Stone, therefore there is reason he should be
the fairest in all the Building. He was the Prince of our Salvation, therefore
it was meet he should be like Saul higher than all the people by head and
shoulders, far exalted above all Principalities and Powers.

But chiefly it was in regard of us and our emptiness, that with his Fulness
he might replenish our Vacuity, otherwise we could 2. From our selves
neither have seen him nor received of him. Not have seen him, for the
glorious Beauty of his Godhead was too bright for our eyes to behold. It was
therefore reason that it should be put into the Lantern, or Veil of Christ's
Humanity, that in that we might behold it. Nor could we have received of it,
for the Diety is an Inacces. sible Fountain; It was reason therefore that
Christ's Humanity should be the Cesterne or Conduit-Head to receive it for our
model and use.

But here one Question must be answered. Steven and other Saints are said in
Scripture to be full of the Holy Ghost, and how Quest.
differs this from the Fullness of Christ?

I answer, first they were said to be full according to their measure, Answ.
Christ out of measure, as a little Dish may be said to be full as well as the
Ocean. So they were said to be full, because filled according to the narrownes
of their present Capacity. But Christ was full according to all dimensions,
length, breadth, and depth of Fullness.

Secondly, in them there was Plenitudo Vasis; In Christ, Plenitudo fontis, that
is, there was in them a derived participated Fullness, but in Christ there was
a Fulness like the Fulness of a Fountain springing from himself, which is well
expressed by the Schoolmen, when they say, that the Fulness of the Saints and of
Christ differ, as Ignis and Ignita, the one like Torches kindled, the other
like Fire it self, for the Fulness of the Ocean is too little to express this;
For if you take a drop or two from it, it is so much lessened, rather the
fulness of the fire, which lights a thousand Torches, yet is not it self
diminished.

Thirdly, in them there was a Comparative Fulness. Steven was said to be Full
in regard of other lesser Saints; But in him there was an absolute Fulness
without all limits, without all comparison.

What shall we now deduce hence for Application to our selves?

First, that which is also the Scope of the Evangelist in this place; This
should invite us to come to Christ, and to take of this full heap. This
Incentive Paul often uses to inflame the desires of the Gentiles to come to
Christ, even the Riches of that fulness which is in him, which in the fullness
of time began to be exposed to all Comers, as he says, hidden before, but now
fully revealed; seen before but in Types and Shadows, now with open face;
before preached but to a few, now to every Creature under Heaven; before the
Spirit was given but by drops, but now he that has ascended on high, and led
Captivity Captive, has so given gifts to men, that he has filled all things.

Let us therefore be exhorted when we hear of such a fullness, not to take the
Grace of God in vain, but labor we to have our part in it, that as those
Corinthians, we may be made rich in Christ filled with all knowledge and every
grace. Content not your selves therefore to know this only, for that is our
common fault to content our selves with the Notions of such things without
practice.

But go to Christ as Bees to a meadow that is full of flowers, as Merchants to
the Indies that have full Mines, that you may experimentally find your selves
returning from him full fraught with the Treasures of Truth and Grace.

In other things fullnes invites us much; Ioseph's full Barnes in Egypt, drew
Jacob and his Sons thither: Canaan was a Land Ful^ flowing with milk and
honey, and that invited the Israelites to secke it: Solomon's abundance and
fullness of wisdom, caused the Queen of Sheba to come out of the South to
his Court. In every thing fulness does much allure and affect us. The Covetous
man though he spend but little, yet he desires to take it from a full heap, as
he says De pleno tollere acervo. How much more then should this fulness of
Christ work on us, especially since there is in him not only a repletive but
a diffusive fulness; not only plenty, but also bounty? But alas, if we look
upon the ways and actions of men, we shall find that men seek a fulness in
every thing else, almost, a fullness in pleasure and delights, a fullness in
honor and preferments; But this full Honey Comb is almost every where
despised, but happy he, the bent of whose heart God has turned the right way
to seek a fullnes of Faith and Wisdom, and a fullness of the Holy Ghost, who
cares not though he be empty of any thing else, so he be full of these?
though a looser in other things, so a Gainer in these. Such a one has chosen
the better part which shall never be taken from him.

Secondly, If there be a Fulness in Christ, we should answer it with fulness of
affection on our parts, fully believe and trust in him, fully love and adore
him, fully delight in him, for it is reason the affection should be answerable
to the Object. A little excellency desires little love and esteem; more
excellency more love, but where there is a fullness of al excellencies, that we
should procecute with fulness of all our affections. All the excellency in the
Creature in comparison of this, is but as a drop to the Ocean, and a spark to
the whole Element of fire. Therefore if we proportion our affections to the
object, which ought to be the Rule and square of them, we should bestow on the
Creature but a drop of love and delight, but the full stream of our affections
should be carried to him, in whom is the fulness of all perfection. It is
true indeed, that as men hide treasure from thieves under straw or baser
covering, so God hides this full excellency from the world under a base
outside, that his secret ones only might find it out, and others seeing, might
not see, but stumble at it. Thus he hid Christ himself under a Carpenters
son, so he hides Divine Mysteries under the mean Elements of Bread and
Wine, so the wisdom of God is hidden under the foolishness of preaching: and
under Sheepskins and Goat Skins, as the Apostle speaks, were hidden; and such
as the world is not worthy of, yet there is such a fulness of excellency
notwithstanding: for if ever we saw beauty in Sun, Moon, Stars, men, women,
etc. Or if ever we found delight in music, meats, drinks, friends, etc. All
must needs be more abundantly in God, who is the Author, Maker, and giver of
all these; As Solomon reasons; He that made the eye, shall not he see, so he
that made all these things, shall he not have them eminently in himself, for
as the worth of many pieces of silver is comprised in one piece of gold, so all
the petty excellencies which are scattered abroad in the Creatures, are all
united in God, yea the whole volume of perfections, which is spread through
heaven and earth, is epitomized in him; Why do we not then with Paul, trample
upon the Pomp and Glory of the world, for the excellent knowledge of Christ?
Why do we not with David, turn away our eyes, hearts, and affections from
beholding vanity, and pitch them all on him? Why do we not re-collect our
selves, and gather up our affections and thoughts, which are scattered and
busied about a thousand trifles, and bestow them all on him, in whom is the
fullness of all excellency, beauty, and perfection?

Thirdly, if there be a fullness in Christ, then let us be content with him,
having our hearts filled and satisfied with him.

First, in regard of spiritual things. Go we not to the brooks of Teman, the
broken Cesterues, and Pe^^ers packs of Rome, as Saints, Merrits, Churches
Treasury, etc. For if there be a fulness in Christ, hat needs not, for in him we
are all complete.

Secondly, for Temporal things let us be content with him alone, for he is our
fulness even in them also, for the better conceiving of this, we must know
that the first Adam brought a general Emptiness through all the world, for
though the world be full of pomps and pleasures, as John calls them, Lust of
the flesh, Lust of the eye, etc. yet it is properly empty, because not full of
that it should be: even as we say a well is empty, though it be full of air,
because it is not full of water which should be in it: for Emptiness is not so
much, Absentia Entitatis as absentia Entitatis debitae. Hence therefore not
only the hearts of men, but the creatures are said to be empty, hence Solomon
says Ecclesiastes the 1. Chapter, Vanity of Vanities, all is but vanity, that
is emtine^^e: and Romans 8. The Creature is subject to vanity: that is
emptiness: through him that subjecteth it. Hence the hea^ts of men are not
satisfied with the world, but as the Prophet speaks: They eat and are not
filled, they drink, and behold their soul is empty, because the Creature is
now but as the husk without the grain, the shell without the kernel, full of
nothing but emptiness, and being empty in it self, cannot give us
satisfaction; But Christ the second Adam has filled all things again, Epes.
1. last verse. He ^^ls all in all things, that is, not only the hearts of men,
but the things also. It is the Newter Gender. (...). Hence we may observe, that
many find a want in the midst of plenty, their hearts find no rest or
satisfaction in all they enjoy, but with the holy Regenerate man it is much
otherwise, though he have but a little wealth, a little food and raiment, yet
there is a secret fullness put into that little which makes it fit to give him
satisfaction, which is the meaning of that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37, 16. A
little thing to the Righteous, is better then great riches to the wicked,
because in that little it being filled with the blessing of the second Adam,
they find a fullness, whereas the wicked find an emptiness in the midst of
their greatest a^oundance.

If there be a fullness in Christ, then what though there be a fulness Use 4.
of sin and guilt in us, yet there is a fulness of Grace in him able to remove
it, and take it away. A fulness of mercy to receive our Supplications, a fulness
of merit to make an Atonement for our foulest sins, a fulness of Favor to
prevail with his Father in any requests. If therefore there be a fulness of
grace in Christ, as there is, be not discouraged, though thy sins abound, yet
his Grace abounds much more, they cannot be so out of measure sinful, as he is
out of measure merciful. Remember but the two Metaphors used in Scripture, I
will scatter your sins as a mist, and they shall be drowned in the bottom of the
Sea. Now the Sun by reason of its great force can scatter the thickest mist,
as well as the least vapor: The Sea by reason of its great Vastnes can drown
mountains, as well as molehils; So Christ by reason of that Vast Fulness of Grace
which is in him, is as able, yea as forward and willing to forgive the greatest
sins as well as the least, I say as forward and willing for mercy, though it be a
quality in us, yet it is a nature in God: Now what is natural, there is no
unwillingnesse or weariness in doing that, as the eye is not weary with
seeing, nor the ear weary with hearing; Therefore though our sins be never so
great and many, yet if this condition be observed, that we lie in no known
sin, that we have a full and resolute purpose, God bearing witness to our
consciences, not to do the least evil, nor omit the least good, in a word that
we make our hearts perfect to God in all things, for without this conditon
there is no remission of sins. But if this condition be observed, I say that
although our sins be never so great any many, yet they are not gone beyond
the price which has been paid for them, nor beyond the Grace of him with whom
we have to do, for there is a fulness in him.

Now I beseech you take not this Exhortation in vain, for there is nothing
more effectual to heal a rebellious disposition, to instill saving Grace, to
cause a finner to change his course, then to be fully persuaded that he shall be
received to mercy, and that his sins shall be forgiven in Christ: Even as the
These, while Simile.
the (...)e and Cry is after him, never returns willingly: Rebels and Pirates
whiles the Proclamation of Rebellion is out against them, never come in: But if
there be a Proclamation of pardon, yea and of some great Advancement, if that
be believed once, that, and noting else causes them to come in, and to become
faithful and loyal Subjects. Therefore let this fullness of mercy in Christ
be an effectual motive to us all, to come in to lay down the arms of
Rebellion, to choose God for our good, and to give up our selves wholly to him,
to serve him with perfect hearts and willing minds, all our days.

So much for the first part.

The second part I will as briefly dispatch, and not meddle with the third,
left I be tedious.

Of his Fulness weo have al received

WHence the second Point is [That al Grace is received] For as al Stars shine
in the light of the Sun; So do all the Saints through grace received. What else
distinguished John from Judas Simon Peter, from Simon Magus? but only Christ,
who shone upon one, and not upon another, when they sat both alike in
darkness, and in the shadow of death.

The Scripture is evident for this, Phil. 2. 13. The Deed is wrought in us by
God, and not the deed only, but the Will also which produces that deed, nor
that only, but the thought also which begat that well. For we are not able so
much as to thinks a good thought of our selves. 2 Cor. 3. 5. So that al grace,
yea al preparation to grace, and ability to accept grace are al from God:
contrary to what Arminius affirms: and not of our selves, and that for these
reasons.

Because nothing can work beyond the Sphere of us own reach, the effect
exceeds not the Cause, therefore it is impossible for corrupt nature either
to beget Supernatural grace, or to do any Action preparing, or bending, or
inclining the will to it: For as the water cannot heat (which is an Action
above the nature of it) until an higher principle of heat be first infused into
it; no more can mere nature do any thing tending to saving grace, having no
principle in it self whence it can raise it. Objecti.


And if it be objected (as it is by the Arminians) that though Grace do al,
yet to accept or reject it, to will or nil it, is natural to man as a free Agent.

I answer; that to will, is natural, but to will well, is supernatural, and must
rise from a higher wel-head than nature is. For as an hatchet will cut when
handled but with a common hand, but not make a chair, or stool, or any
Artificial thing except it have Influentiam Artificis quatenus Artifex, the
influence of an Artificer as he is an Artificer; So though to will be natural,
yet, to will well, to do a supernatural work in a supernatural and holy manner,
it cannot except it have the influence of a supernatural Agent to direct and
guide it.

If a man might accept Grace or refuse it, as he would. God were not God,
because he might be crossed by his creature, and his own will should not
absolutely bear rule, especially in that great matter of beleiving, and not
believing, and in putting difference betwixt man and man in the matter of
Salvation and Damnation: For according to Arminius, though God did heartily
desire the conversion of such a man, and offered him all the means of Grace
that could be, yet it is still in the free choice of his will to convert, or not
to convert; Their only answer here is, that seeing God has made a Decree,
that man shall be a free Agent, though he do most earnestly desire the
conversion of such and such men, yet because he cannot disa^ul his Decree, he
does, and must leave it to the liberty of the Creature to do contrary to even
that himself desires. But what is this else but to put God into such streights
as Darius was in, who would feign have saved Daniel, but because of his Decree
he could not? And if grief in Spirits and Angels be but Renisus volunt at is,
a reluctance of the will, as the Schoolmen affirm, what is this else but to
attribute grief unto God, and so to detract from his Blessedness.

Thirdly, if all Grace be not received, but a man may accept it or reject it as
he will, how can it be solved, but that a man must rejoice and boast partly in
himself, contrary to Paul's rule, and not wholly in the Lord, for ask the
question of all that are saved, what is the reason that you are saved rather
then another, their answer must needs be; I out of the liberty of my own will,
did receive and use well the Grace offered, when another did not. So that
according to Arminius, the Saints in heaven are not a jot more beholding to God
then the damned in hell, for the offering of Grace on Gods part, was a like
common to both, only he that is in heaven, may thank his own will that he chose
it, when onother refused it.

They have nothing here to answer, but only that the means of Grace are
dispensed by God with some disparity; But what is that when they maintain such
freedom of will, that he who has the greatest means may reject grace, and he
who has the least, may accept it?

Other reasons there are, but that I hasten: as that Grace is not Grace without
being received, no more then a man can be a man without reason, or a gift can
be a gift without being given, for no less does it imply contradiction to
suppose it to be a grace, and yet not to be freely bestowed by God, and
received by us.

Secondly, bowing of the will is an effect of grace, and grace is an effect of
the spirit. Now the spirit breaths, when, where, and in what measure it
lists. Again, if grace should spring out of our so^le, it should be but a
flower of grass, for all flesh is grass, but the grace of the mediator is of
a more durable nature, a flower that fades not, and a spring which is not dried
up.

Hence 2. Corrolaries. One to rectify our judgment. The other to direct our
praectise.


The first shows us the errors of Arminius, who has but refynedl the old
Pelagianisme, a dangerous error: for Arrianisme was like a land flood that
overflowed the whole world, but was soon dried up again, because it had not a
spring to maintain it, but the best ages of the Church had in them as he
called. Multas fibras virulentiae Pelagianae, because it is an error agreeable
to nature and reason, so that we have a spring within our own breast to nourish
and maintain it. But now to keep close to the point in hand, this point
shows the error of Arminius and Pelagius, who ascribe the beginning,
preparations, and ability of accepting grace to our own free will, although the
complement to God. Whereas you see by what has been said, that not only the
fuller streams, but every drop of grace, is received from his fulness. This
error proceeds from their not distinguishing aright betwixt acquisite habits
and infused, indeed in the acquisite, the acts go before the habits, and
prepare for them, but with infused habits it is clean contrary; It is with them
as it is with the natural powers of the soul, we have first the faculty of
seeing before we do see, and the faculty of hearing before we do hear, so
it is in infused habits, we have first the habits before we exercise the
operations of them, for even as the wheel does not run that it may be made
round, but it is first made round that it may run, so the heart does not first
do the actions, whereby it is put into a right frame, but it is first fashioned
and made a new Creature by grace, and then it does actions, and brings forth
fruits worthy amendment of life, for what is said of the soul, is as truly
said of Grace, it does, Fabricari Sibi Domicilium, prepares a room for it
self, uses no Harbenger, for nothing can prepare for grace, but grace.

And if it be objected, as Arminius does in his book upon the 7. Object.
to the Romans, that such as Senecae and Socrates, were much enlightened, did
approve the law of God according to the inward man, and had a kind of
universal common grace.

I answer, that this privilege cannot be denied to many among A^sw.
the Heathen, that as Alchimists, though they miss the end, yet they find
many excellent things by the way. So though they failed of the right end, the
glory of God, yet they were not destitute of many excellent common gifts,
wherein though one did go far beyond another, as Seneca beyond Nero, and so
others, yet as they say of sins, they do all alike pass the rule of rectitute,
though some go further beyond than others, so were they al alike destitute of
original Righteousness, although some more elongated from it than others, al
are alike dead in sins, though some (as dead bodies) more corrupted and
putrified than others.

And if it be objected, as it is by Arminius, to what end then Object.
are Exhortations and Threatenings, the propounding of Punishments, and Rewards,
if it be not in our power to accept Grace, and refuse it as we will.

I answer, that as the rain although it fall as well upon Rocks and Heathes, as
upon Valleys and Fruitful places, yet no man asks Answ.
to what end is the first and latter rain; So Exhortations and Admonitions
though they fall as well upon the Reprobates, and those that are desperately
wicked, as upon those that are docible and capable of better things, it is to
no less folly to ask to what end they are, seeing as the rain, so they are
to many beneficial and useful.

So much for the first Corollary, which serves to rectify Judgments.

The next is for Practice. If al grace be received, then defer not
repentance, for no repentance is accepted, but what proceeds Corol. 2.
from a Sanctifying grace, and that as you see is received, that is given by
God as he will. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but he
has compassion on whom he will have compassion, and whom he will, he hardens,
Romans 9. 15. As I said before, the Spirit breaths where, and when it lists.
Therefore we should as Millers, and Mariners are wont to do, who take the Gale
when it comes, because they know the winds are not at their command: Suppose
a man were to pass the Seas within 20 dais upon pain of death, if the wind
should blow the second day, third day, or fourth day, no wise man would omit
the opportunity, because he knows the winds are not in his power; So, if the
spirit shall breath into our hearts good motions of turning to God unfainedly in
our youth,* at 16. 17. or when ever, it is the greatest wisdom in the world
to take the opportunity, and not to put it off, who knows whether they will be
had again or no: How many thousand are now in Hell who thought to have
repented, and did not because they neglected those breathings of the Spirit
where they were offered? For there are certain acceptable times, after which
God offers Grace no more: happy he that knows that day of his visitation, and
as our Savior speaks, the things which belong to his Peace, in that his day,
which Jerusalem did not, which made Christ to weep over it, and which Saul did
not: and the Jews in Ieremiah's time did not, when God forbad Jeremy to pray
for them. For as there were certain times when the Angel moved the waters in
the poole of Bethesda, and he that then stepped in, was healed; so there are
certain acceptable times, wherein God troubles the hearts of men by his
spirit. Happy is he who then steps into a good course, that he may be healed to
Salvation. I say there are certain times, wherein God does (as it were) thaw
and soften the frozen hearts of men. And it is wisdom then with the
husbandman to put in the plough, while the ground is soft: for the heart in
such a case is like iron in the furnace, easily fashioned, but stay till it be
cold, and it will not be wrought upon. I beseech you therefore let us be
exhorted to take the opportunity, and not be like to those whom Isayah
complains of, who like bulr^shes bow down their heads for a day, while some
sto^me of inward or outward trouble is upon them, but when a fair Sunshine
day comes to dry it up again, lift up their heads as upright as ever before.

If a man would sit down and call his thoughts together but for one half hour,
and consider this seriously, I have but a little time to live here, it is
another place where I must live for all eternity, and it shall be with me for
all this eternity, as I spend this short time. I say if this were thoroughly
considered, I wonder that any thing else should take up the intentions and
thoughts of a man's heart, but only how to make sure his salvation. But alas we
are robbed of our selves through worldly delights, and do magno conaru, magnas
nugas agere, and so we spend our lives. But if we would not have with the
Merchant, Fortunam rudentibus ap^am, that is, an estate hanging upon ropes, and
depending upon uncertaineties, especially seeing grace whence repentance
proceeds, is as you see received, and not in our power. But we mistake
repentance, and that is the cause we defer it, it is not as it is commonly
thought, a sorrow for our sins only, nor a n^^ere leaving of sins out of
fear of hell, and desire to be said, which a man may do out of the strength
of natural wisdom, providing for his own safety, but it is a much different
thing, viz. putting life into a dead man: Ephesians 2. 1. Making a man a new
Creature, 2 Corinthians 5. 17. A change of the whole frame of the heart. As if
another soul dwelt in the same body, as he says; Ego non ego. In a word, when
a man is clean another man, then he was serving of God out of an inward
propensnesse and having the whole bent of his disposition turned to delight in
the Law of God without these by-respects. And that this may yet be made
clearer, and put out of all doubt, I would ask but this question; That
repentance which men take up in age, or in times of extremity, whence
proceeds it, if from self love, as it usually does in such cases, because
the soul is then strongly possessed with an apprehension of death and hell,
and another life, then there is no more then nature in it, for the stream
rises not higher then the fountain. A beast would do as much, which sinking
into danger, would struggle to save it self. But if it proceed from love to
God, why was it not done sooner, why not in the flower of our youth, yea when
it is done soonest, would we not be heartily sorry that it was not done sooner,
if it proceeded out of love to him. And if it thus proceed out of an holy love
to God, it cannot arise but from his holy spirit: the breathings of which
spirit as they are most free, so are they most precious. Therefore when such a
spark is kindled in our hearts, let us be careful to put fuel to it, and
not suffer it to go out again.

All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot help us again to them, yea the
best Ordinances are but as pens without ink, or empty Conduit-pipes which give
not a drop of true Grace. except Christ who is the Fountain please to conveigh
it by them. You know the Famous Story of Francis Spira, what bitter cries he
used upon his Deathbed: O that I had but one drop of Faith! One of the motions
which I have been wont to have, but yet could not have them! But died with
those desperate words in his mouth, I am Damned. Therefore let us take heed how
we let such motions rise up like bubbles in us, and break again; or go our
like sparks upon wet tinder, lest often checking, and snibbing, and quenching
the Spirit, in the end we be guilty of resisting the Holy Ghost, and God shall
swear in his wrath that we shall not enter into his rest. [Where by the way
observe, that this Doctrine teaches us not to be idle, and leave al to God, as
they slander it] but as Paul makes the Consequence, because God works in you
both the will and the deed, therefore work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling. Arminius contrarily, ourselves work in our selves the Will, and the
deed; Therefore we need not work out our Salvation with any such fear and
solicitude, since we may d^e it at our own pleasure and leisure.

But it will be said this is a hard case, although a man would repent, yet he
cannot: though he desire to serve God, yet it is impossible. Therefore to take
away this Scruple, we must know that God is exceeding free and open-handed in
giving grace (if it may be taken in time) and if we will not believe it, John
comes here and tells you, I have received of his Fullness, and not only I,
but al we have received, that is, al other Saints that either are, or have
been: and since John's time, many thousand thousands: And shall not such a
Cloud of Witnesses persuade us? If a Beggar do but hear of an open House
kept; or a great Dole, it affects him, and invites him to go: But when he sees
many come from it with armes-ful, and lapsful, and baskets-ful, then he is
confident: that adds wings to him; So if a sick man do but hear of a Famous
Physician, or a healing Well, it stirs him up to go and try: But when he meets
with 100 and 1000 coming from the Well, and telling him, I have been there and
am healed, I have been there, and am made whole, then he makes no question;
So does John here, Al we have received of his Fullness: Like a Bird that has
found out a full heap and calls his fellows to it. Say not therefore, oh my
sins are so great, and my wants are so many: But rather think thus with your
selves, if there was grace enough for so many, there is surely enough for me:
Only you must receive when it is offered in the acceptable time, lest often
grieving the Spirit, God suffers his Spirit to strive no longer. Genesis 6, 3. But
(as I said before) swear in his wrath that you shall not enter into his rest.

2 If al grace be received, then let us be affected as Receivers [1 In thank
fulness toward God] the most gracious a^e the most grateful. [2 In Humility
toward men] For what have we that we have not received? And shall our Purse
or Vessel boast it self against another, because the Owner has put more Gold,
or more precious Liquor into it, than into another, it may be of the same, or a
better worth? Or shall the wall which glistereth with the Sun beams exalt it
self against another which stands in the shadow, as if it had Luster from it
self, and not borrowed from the Sun.

3. Let us be affected as Receivers, in begging grace at Gods hands by Prayer.
Therefore it is said to be the Bucket of grace, and it is a true observation,
that a man of much Prayer, is a man of much Grace. Now Prayer is either
Private, or Public: [Private, is that wherein we express our private and
particular occasions to God every day, wherein we renew Repentance and
Covenants with God, of abstayning from the sins we are most prone to, and of
doing the duties to which we are most unapt, in a word, that wherein we do
every day set our hearts straight before God in all things. This is the very
Life of Religion, and in this we must be very frequent and fervent, binding our
selves with an inviolable resolution to keep a constant course in it, but of
this there is no doubt. [The next is Public Prayer, of which because it is
more questioned and not received by all with that Reverence it should, I will
add a word or two of it, and conclude.

That a set Form of Prayer is Lawful, much need not to be said, the very
newness of the contrary opinion is enough to show the vanity and f^l^enesse of
it: It being contrary to the Judgment of approved Counsels, Learned Fathers,
and the continual Practice of the Church.

Tertullian, who lived not much above an hundred years after the Apostles
death, says in his Book de Oratione, Premissa Legitima and ordinaria
Oratione, Ius est superstruendi Petitiones, etc, which shows that they had
some ordinary set allowed Prayers, to which, afterward some were added at more
Liberty. In Origen's time, who lived very near Ter^ullian's time: It is
evident that there were set Fo^mes of Prayer ^sed in the Church: for in his
11th Homily upon Jeremy, he ^epeath and expounds some passages of them, upon
which ^ccasion Ill^ricus says. Tunc temporis certas quasd^m formulas orationum
sine dubio habuerunt. Basil in his 63. Epistle says, that in his time there
were Letanies used in the Neocesarean Churches, and Ambrose in his time
affirms: Vsum Lae. taniarum ubique esse frequentem. Constantine the Great
prescribed a set Form of Prayer to his Soldiers, set down by Eusebius in his
fourth Book. And Calvin in his 83. Epistle to the Protector of England says,
that he does greatly allow a set Form of Ecclesiastical Prayers, which the
Ministers should be bound to observe.

But as I said before of the lawfulness, there is little question. That which
is chiefly to be reprehended, is of a secret disesteem of public prayers? By
reason of which, many neglect to come to them, and they which do, do it in a
perfunctory and overly manner, which is an extreme fault. Better were it, that
men would come to this disjunction; either it is lawful to use them or not; if
not, why do they not wholly abstain, and if they be lawful, why do they not
use them constantly, and in a reverent and holy manner. One thing there is,
which if it were well considered, would breed in the hearts of men another
esteem of our public prayers then there is. And that is, that besides the end
of obteyning the things we want (wherein yet public prayer has the promise)
there is another end in praying, and (...)t is to worship God, and to perform
a service to him, for proving of which, there are two places of Scri^tu^e
un-answerable, Luke 2. 37. Hannah worshipped God by fasting and prayers, the
word used is (...), w^i^h is the p^o^er word for worship, Acts 13. 2. They
ministered to the Lord and fasted, the word used is (...), whence the word
Litu^gy is derived. This me thinks should breed in the hearts of men a
reverend esteem of this duty.

Besides, how straight is that which is objected against the lawfulness of it,
as that the Spirit is s^inted, when we are fe^tered with words appointed.

Answ. The freedom of the Spirit stands n^^ so ^uch in the extent of the
words, as the intensnesse (...) they are uttered. Besides if this argu(...)
swell against conceived prayer, for if he (...) ger spirit then he that
prays, there is to (...) restraint.

Again it is objected, that we cannot pray for occasional necessities.
Therefore we bind not only to a set form: but men may, and ought to use
besides, private prayer, wherein we may express our private, accidental, and
particular occasions. And if they be more public, there are prayers before
and after Sermon, where in the Minister is left at more liberty? And if it be
yet more general belonging to the State or Church, we add it to the p^blike
prayers, as it is in the Gun-powder-treason, times of War, dearth, etc. But
there needs not much be said to convince the judgment: that which is chiefly
to be desired, is, that they may be better observed, and more esteemed,
especially seeing our public prayers be holy and good, (and which should be a
greater inducement) the Church has commanded them: And if the Church be to be
obeyed in indifferent things, as it is, much more in appointing of Gods own
Ordinances.

And if a set form of prayer be lawful, then the Lords Prayer must needs
excel, being dedicated by Christ himself, and is therefore to be more
frequently used, and withal Reverence both in mind and gesture. Nor does this
want the practice and approbation of the Ancient, it is Cyprians speech.
Quanto efficacius impertramus quod petimus Christi nominae si ipsius Oratione
petamus. And Saint Augustine. Disce et retinete orationem Dominicam, et inter
omnes sanctos Consono ore proferatis. Thus if we shall show our selves affected
as Receivers, in using both public and private prayer, we shall find that
success which John and the rest found, who of his fullness received Grace for
Grace.

FINIS.

