The Presentment of the Grand-Iury FOR THE COUNTY OF KENT, AT THE Assizes
holden at Maidstone the 12th day of March, in the Five and Thirtieth year of
the Reign of Our Sovereign Lord, CHARLES the Second, by the Grace of God, of
England, etc. Annoque Dom. 1682.
To the Right Honorable Sir Francis Pemberton, Knight, Lord Chief Justice of
His Majesty's Court of Common Pleas, and one of His Majesty's most Honorable
Privy Council.
WE do humbly Present, That the best and most effectual way to maintain and
preserve His Majesty's Sacred Person, the Church and State by Law Established,
together with the just Liberties, Privileges, and Properties of the Subject,
is an Impartial and due Execution of the Laws.

That Popery and Fanaticisme are equally dangerous to the Government: The
Papists having almost ever since the Establishment of the Protestant Religion
endeavored the Subversion thereof, but by the Providence of God have been
disappointed in all their attempts; but the Fanatics having in our own memory,
in the compass of a few years, actually maintained an open Rebellion, in the
face of the Sun Murdered the best of Kings, Subverted the Government both in
Church and State, and with an un-heard of Impudence justified All.

That We have reason to believe the same Destructive and Anarchical Ends, are
at this day driven by many Persons who underhand court a Popular Fame, the
same way and in the same Age to destroy the Monarchy again.

That although His Majesty's Incomparable Goodness and Clemency may perpetually
meet such Persons with His Gracious Pardons, yet We hope and pray that
according to His Majesty's Royal Father's Advice of blessed Memory, His Majesty
will be pleased never to trust them: Which is a wise and sure Principle,
whereby neither His Majesty, nor His Loyal Subjects, can ever be ruined again
by the same Instruments.

That all such as pretend to Moderation in Execution of the Laws where the
Government is apparently assaulted, are but Betrayers of their own Consciences,
their King and Country.

That the maintaining of the Succession of the Crown in the Right Line, is the
undoubted means for the Preservation and Support of this Monarchy, Church and
State.

We do also Present, That all Persons, whether Papists or Protestant
Dissenters, and such as utter disaffected Reflections against the Government,
are dangerous and of ill Example; and the Names of such ought to be represented
to the Lord Lieutenant, or his Deputies, that they be forthwith Disarmed,
according to the Laws and Statutes of this Realm.

We do also Present, That the separate manner of Divine Worship, used and
permitted amongst the Walloons and Flemings of Canterbury, and other Places in
this County, is of dangerous Example, and infections to His Majesty's Liege
Subjects, many of the Dissenting Persons from the Church of England daily
flocking to their Assemblies; and therefore We humbly conceive some Regulation
is fit to be made therein, according as to His Majesty's Wisdom shall seem most
fit.

We do also Present as our humble Advice, That all Persons that keep
Alehouses, Victualling-houses, or other Public Houses within this County,
shall bring a Certificate under the hand of the Parson of the Parish, or other
Incumbent there, at the same time that they come to renew their Licenses, that
they have duly repaired to their Parish Churches, and received the Sacrament
according to Law.

That Coffee-houses, and the Selling of Brandy by several Shopkeepers in Towns
Corporate, Villages and other places in this County, is a frequent occasion to
gather Persons together disaffected to the Government, who there take a Liberty
to intermeddle with affairs of State, to reflect upon their Superiors, and to
debauch the Affections and Loyalty of His Majesty's Liege People, by amusing
them with causeless Fears and Jealousies.

All which, We humbly submit to the Wisdom of this Honorable Court, and humbly
Pray, That His Majesty may be acquainted with the Loyal Presentiments and
Dutiful Affections of His Majesty's most Obedient and Loyal Subjects of the
said County:

Sir Edward Dering, Knight. Sir Nicholas Took, Knight. William Rooke, Esquire John
Cason, Esquire William Kingsly, Esquire Edward Roberts, Esquire Herbert Randolph, Esquire Caleb
Banckes, Esquire Richard Manly, Esquire John Mersham, Esquire Charles Wheeler, Esquire Roger
Pain, Esquire Walter Hooper, Esquire Henry Lee, Esquire Christopher Mists, Esquire James
Bicks, Esquire John Linch, Esquire John Simpson, Esquire Henry Friar, Esquire


LONDON, Printed for Jos Hindmarsh, Bookseller to his Royal Highness, at the
Black-Bull in Cornhill, 1683.


