THE Present State OF HUNGARY.

OR, A Geographical and Historical Description of that Kingdom, giving an
account of the Nature of the Country, and of its Inhabitants, of its Government
and Policy; its Religion and Laws; of its Division into Counties and Provinces;
of its Towns, Castles, Forts, Rivers Lakes, Mountains, Product, Mines,
Minerals, and other Rarities.

TOGETHER, With the Memorable Battles and Sieges that have happened there since
the time of the Romans; but more particularly since the Turkish Invasions.

To which is added, A short Account of Transylvania, and the lofty Titles taken
by those Turkish Emperors, who have made War in those Countries.

Land. Printed for H. Rhodes next door to the Swan-Tavern, near Brides-Lane in
Fleet Street, 1687.

Licensed, August 12. R. L. S.

A TABLE OF THE CHAPTERS.
CHAP. I. OF the Names of Hungary, its Limits, Division, Rivers, Lakes and
Mountains. Page 1 CHAP. II. Of the Country of Hungary and it is Inhabitants.
Page 3 CHAP. III. Of the Princes and Nations, that have made Progress in
Hungary. Page 5 CHAP. IV. Of a Chronological Succession of the Kings of
Hungary. Page 8 CHAP. V. Of the Authors who treat of Hungary. Page 11 CHAP. VI.
Of the Towns of Upper Hungary and their Description. Page 12 CHAP. VII. Of the
Towns of the Lower Hungary. Page 38 CHAP. VIII. Of the Rivers, of Hungary, and
their Description. Page 73 CHAP. IX. Of the Division of the Kingdom of Hungary,
into Counties, and their Names. Page 81 CHAP. X. Of the Estates of Hungary.
Page 84 CHAP. XI. Of the chief Palate. Nobility of Hung. Page 68 CHAP. XII. Of
the State of the Palatin of the Kingdom of Hungary, his Quality, Authority, and
Pre-eminence, with a List of those who in this last Age have been Elected to
that Office. Page 89 CHAP. XIII. Of the Arms of the Kingdom of Hungary, and in
what manner the Kings have given them. Page 92 CHAP. XIV. Of the memorable
Battles that have been fought in Hungary. Page 97 CHAP. XV. Of the Ceremon.
observed in the Coron. of the Kings and Queens of Hungary. Page 133 CHAP. XVI.
Of the Description of Transylvania, anciently united to Hungary and the Princes
who have Reigned in it, since the beginning of this Age, to the present time.
Page 142 CHAP. XVII. Of the Turkish Emperors, who in Progress of time have
invaded, subdued, and usurped the greatest part of Hungary Page 146
THE Present State OF HUNGARY: OR An Historical, and Geographical Description
of that Kingdom.
CHAP. I.
Of its Names, Bounds, Division, Rivers, Lakes and Mountains.

THE Kingdom of Hungary, belonging by Right to the House of Austria, but, in a
great part, invaded and usurped by the Turks, lies betwixt the 39. and 47.
degree of Longitude, and from the 45. to the 49. of North Latitude, or
thereabouts: It is part of the Ancient Pannonia, called Magiar by the Turks;
Wegierska, by the Sclavonians; Hungerland, by the Germans; Ongaria, by the
Italians and Spaniards; Hongrie, by the French; and Hungary by the English.

The Bounds of it are Transylvania to the East; Poland and Russia to the North;
Moravia, Austria and Styria to the West; and Servia and Bosnia to the South.

The Figure of this Kingdom is square, its Corners looking to the four parts of
the World.

It is divided into the Upper and Lower Hungary; the Upper is on the side of
the Danube, toward Poland and Transylvania; and the Lower on the other side of
the same River.

Heretofore it contained above Seaventy Counties, but at present it has only
about fifty; whereof before this last War Twenty six were subject to the
Ottoman Tyranny. It may be also divided into the part held by the Emperor, and
that which is under the Turkish Dominion.

Its chief Rivers are, the Raab, the Wag, the Gran, the Teisse, the Sarvilise,
which comes out of the lake Balathon, and the Donau. The less considerable are
the Newsidl^r, Reckzkerle, and some others.

The highest Mountains of Hungary are the Carpathian Mountains, toward Poland
and Transylvania. The richest are betwixt Buda and Strigonium, which have Mines
affording excellent Metals, and especially Quicksilver.

CHAP. II.
Of the Country of Hungary, and its Inhabitants.

THE Air of this Country is unwholesom, and especially to Strangers; and it is
observed to engender a great deal of Vermin. The Waters, excepting that of the
Danube, are not good, and the Author de Mirabilibus Hungariae observes, that
there are Fountains in Hungary, whose Waters are Poisonous, which increase and
diminish with the Moon, and are quite dried up when that Luminary is in the
Full. There are other Fountains in it also, that turn into Stone any thing that
is cast into them; others which are hot in Winter, and freeze in Summer; and
others whose Waters are sowrish, salt, etc. There are in i^ also several Mines
of Salt, Gold, Silver, Copper, Steel and Iron. The Soil is very fruitful, in so
much, tha^ some have thought, that Hungary alone was sufficient to furnish all
Europe with Corn. Its Pasturages are wonderful and so great is the plenty of
Wild Beasts and Fowl, of Fish and Cattle that the Country People live for mos^
part on the Flesh of Wild Boars an^ Venison. An hundred Carps have been sold
there for a Noble; and i^ has been observed, that in one yea^ above Fourscore
thousand Oxen have been brought from thence into Germany. The Hungarians are
Warlike, bu^ cruel, proud, revengeful, and so i^ united together, that it is no
wonde^ they have been a Prey to the Barbar^ans. They speak several Languages,
and especially Latin, which is very familiar to them; the Gentry are
magnificent, and all great Lovers of Horses, Hunting and good Cheer. The
Hungarians love not the Germans; yet the Nobility adhere to the House of
Austria, to secure themselves from the Oppression of the Turks, who value a
Peasant as much as a Gentleman. The strength of the Country consists in light
Horsemen. The Troopers there are called Hussars, and the Foot Heydukes.

CHAP. III.
Of the Princes and Nations, who have made any Progress in Hungary.

THE first of the Romans that made any Progress in Hungary was Julius Coesar,
other Captains continued them after him, until the time of Tiberius, who
entirely subjected that Kingdom. Afterward upon the Fall of the Roman Empire,
the Goths seized it, and that Kingdom became Prey to the Huns and Lombards, who
were driven out by the former in the eighth Century. For certain crue^ People
of Scythia, called Hongres, tha^ lived only on Blood, possessed them selves of
all that Country, which a^ present we call Hungary. They who treat of Hungary,
reckon Balamir o^ Balamber amongst the Kings of tha^ Country; he reigned fifty
six years and had a Son Mundsur or Mundiaque who died before his Father. Aptar
i^ also reckoned amongst those Kings and the two Brothers, Bleda, killed in the
Year, 444. and Attila, called the Scourge of God, who died in the year 453. His
Children made a cruel Wa^ against one another, and lost the Conquests of their
Father. The Huns made another Irruption into Pannonia, about the Year 744.
under the Conduct o^ one named Amie, who had Arphad for his Successor. These
gave the name to Hungary. Sultan, one of the issue of that Arphad, was, as it
is said, the Father of Toxa or Toxis, and this Man begot Geiza, the Father of
St. Stephen, with whom I shall begin the Chronological Succession of the Kings
of Hungary. He was Crowned in the year, 1000. or 1020. according to others.
Since that time the Hungarians had Kings, who governed them peaceably* enough,
until after the Death of Louis, called the Great, whose Daughter and Heiress
Marie was Married to the Emperor Sigismond of Luxemburg; but his Government
displeasing them, they called in Charles de Duras King of Naples, and Stephen,
Vaivod of Transylvania, who had his recourse to Bajazet the First, Emperor of
the Turks; from thence began the Miseries of that Kingdom, which since the year
1394. has been always almost the seat of War, and became a Prey to the Turks;
and especially under Amurath, Solomon, and others. The Kingdom of Hungary is
partly possessed by the House of Austria, and partly by the Infidels. The
former rendered it Hereditary after the Death of Louis the Young, who perished
at the Battle of Mohacs, in the year 1526. John de Zapol, Count of Scepua, was
saluted King by part of the Hungarians, and Ferdinand of Austria by the rest,
who carried it from his Competitor. The Estates of this Kingdom are divided
into four Bodies. 1. The Clergy. 2. The Barons. 3. The Nobles. 4. The Royal and
Free Towns. The Religion of it is divided, and the Manners of the People odd.
The Hungarians were converted to the Faith by Gisle Sister to St. Henry, who
married their King St. Stephen.

CHAP. IV.
A Chronological Succession of the Kings of Hungary.

IN the year 1000. or 1020. St. Stephen, died in 1038.

years months 1038. Peter the German reigned 4 0 1042. Ovon or Aban 2 0 1044.
Peter the German restored 2 0 1046. Andrew I. 15 0 1061. Bela I. 2 0 1063.
Solomon 11 0 1074. Geiza or Gezcza I. 3 0 1077. Ladislaus I. 7 0 1095 Coloman
or Colan 19 0 1114. Stephen II. 18 0 1132. Bela II. 9 0 1141. Geiza II. 20 0
1161. Stephen III. 11 0 1172. Ladislaus the Usurper 0 6 1172. Stephen IV. 0 5
1173. Bela III. 23 0 1193. Emeri 8 0 1204. Ladislaus II. 0 6 1205. Andrew II.
called of Jerushalem. 30 0 1235. Bela IV. 25 0 1260. Stephen V. 12 0 1272.
Ladislaus III. 18 0 1290. Andrew III. called the Venetian 11 0 Charles I.
called Martel. 1301. Wenceslaus 0 0 1305. Otho. 0 0 1310. Charles Robert or
Charobert 32 0 1342. Louis I. 40 0 1382. Marie 0 0 1383. Charles III. called
the Little 0 3 1387. Sigismond 51 0 1438. Albert of Austria 0 2 1440. Ladislaus
IV. 0 4 1445. John Corvin, called Huniades 0 8 1452. Ladislaus V. 0 6 1458.
Matthias Corvin 0 2 1490. Ladislaus VI. 25 0 1516. Louis II. called the Young
11 0 1526. John de Zapol 0 0 1540. John Stephen, or Sigismond 0 0 1527.
Ferdinand I. 37 0 1564. Maximilian I. 12 0 1576. Rodolph 36 0 1612. Matthias. 0
7 1619. Ferdinand II. 18 9 1637. Ferdinand III. called Earnest. 20 0

Ferdinand Francis Elected, 1647.

1657. Leopold Ignatius chosen in the Life of his Father Ferdinand the III. in
the year, 1655.

The Author has not here observed the precise year of the Election of these
Princes, but the year their Reign began.

CHAP. V.
Of the Authors that speak of Hungary.

THE chief are: Bonfinius, Eneas Sylvius, Bizar, Philippus Callimachus,
Experieus, Cellarius, Dillichius, Poretius, Estuanfus, Sambuch, Schodel, Peter
Ranzan, Melchior Soiter, Ciaconius, Stuarth, Roger, who has Published a Volume
of Hungarian Writers, Tharosius, the Authors of the Historys of Germany, Poland
and Naples, Thevet and Paulus Jovius on Matthias, Corvinus and Huniades, St.
Antonin, Blondus, Daviti, the Fables of the Kings of Hungary, Mercator,
Ortelius, Maginus Cluverius, Brietius, Samson, Du Val, Boissard, Volateran, Du
May's Description of the War of Hungary, Szenkely, Chron: Ferrarii, St.
Baudrand Lexic. Geog. etc.

CHAP. VI.
Of the Towns of Upper Hungary and their Description.

THE Kingdom of Hungary, as we have said, is divided into the Upper and Lower
Hungary, the Towns of the Upper Hungary, are these that follow.

PRESBOURG.
This Town lies upon the Danube, and is the Capital City of the Upper Hungary,
and of all that belongs to the Emperor within that Kingdom. It gives it is Name
to a County, which is a Province of Hungary, betwixt Moravia, Austria, and the
Danube; the Latin Authors call it Posonium and Flexum, and those of the
Country, Poson. This place is eight Leagues from Vienna in Austria, and as far
from Newheusel and Comorra; it is Fortified with a considerable Castle against
the Incursions of the Turks, which is mentioned by the Author of the German
Itinerary in this manner. Lib. 5.

Hic ubi Posonium consurgit turribus altis,
Limes Teutonicis, Hungariisque viris.
The Authors of the Hungarian History, which are bound up in one Volume, speak
of Presbourg, as well as Cluverius, Ortelius and Samson; it has the Title of
an Archbishopric, and in the Cathedral-Church, which is partly possessed by
the Fathers Jesuits, the Body of St. John Bishop of Alexandra is held in great
Veneration.

Pope Clement the Fifth being informed that the Hungarians were in Arms, and
would not submit to Charles Martel, Son to Charles II. King of Naples, thought
himself obliged to send a Legate thither, either for composing these Disorders,
or strengthening the Party of the Lawful Sovereign. For that effect he pitched
upon Gentil de Monteffiore, whose Merit had raised him from a Franciscan Friar
to the Dignity of a Cardinal, and who acquitted himself extraordinarily well in
his Commission. At first he used all ways of Mildness; but finding them to be
unprofitable, he employed Ecclesiastical Censures, and reclaimed the Hungarians
to their Duty. He celebrated a Council at Presbourg, in the year 1309. Where
sound Cannons were made; which were afterward approved by the Pope. In this
Town there are a great many Houses built after the Italian manner, which
contribute much to the Beauty thereof.

NITRIA.
Nitria or Nitracht, a Town in the Upper Hungary, is the Seat of a Bishop,
Suffragan to the Archbishop of Gran, and has it is Name from the River it lies
upon, which it gives to a County, whereof it is the Capital: It is under the
Jurisdiction of Newheusel, being five Leagues distant from it, and ten from
Presbourg, and continued always subject to the Emperor.

NEWHEUSEL.
The people of the Country call it Owar, and the Latin Authors Neoselium; it
lies upon the River of Nitria, or Nitrach, two Leagues from Comorra upon the
Danube: It is but a small Town, but very well seated, and the chief Town of a
large Country; the Turks took it in the year 1663. And the Emperors Army
having invested it the seventh of July, 1685. Retook it the nineteenth of
August following.

NOVIGRAD.
A little Town with a Castle upon a Hill, the Capital of the County of the same
name, lying on the Danube, betwixt Gran and Vachia.

VACHIA.
Vatzen or Veitzen, and in Latin Vaccia, is a Town lying upon the Danube,
betwixt Novigrad and Pest, and the Seat of a Bishop, Suffragan to Gran.

CASSOVIA.
This Town by the Hungarians is called Caschow, the Capital of the County of
Abauwiver. It is very well fortified, and lies upon the River of Kunnert, which
falls into the Teiss five or six Leagues from the Carpatian or Crapat
Mountains, betwixt Esperies and Borsanick. And though it be a free Town, and
have considerable Privileges, yet it has always acknowledged the Emperor as
King of Hungary, till of late, being engaged in the Rebellion of Teckely, it
was forced to return to the Emperor it is Lawful Sovereign in the year, 1685.

FILLECK.
Was formerly a strong Town of the Imperial Hungary, lying five Leagues to the
North of Agria, and as far to the West of Cassovia, upon the River Gayenne, in
the County of Zabel; it was reduced under the power of Teckely, and it is
Fortifications demolished.

ESPERIES.
In Latin Eperiae is a very well fortified Town in the County of Sarax in
Hungary, lying upon the River of Tarbez, toward the Mountains and upon the
Frontiers of Poland: It always belonged to the Emperor as King of Hungary, till
it was involved in the Rebellion of Teckely, from whom it was retaken by the
Imperial Arms in the year, 1685.

AGRIA.
This Town by the Germans is called, Eger, and by the Hungarians, Erlaw, lying
upon a River of the same Name: It is but a small place, hut extraordinarily
well fortified, and has always been the Seat of a Bishop, Suffragan to the
Archbishop of Strigonium, and the Bulwark of Christendom, and therefore it was
Besieged, but in vain, by the Army of Solomon: But at length, Mahomet the Third
carried it the 12. of October, 1596. Since that time it has been in the hands
of the Turks, who keep a strong Garrison in it. Three Leagues from this Town the
River of Agria falls into the Tyssa or Teisse, which is the Tibiscus of the
Latins. In the year 1552. the Turks first besieged Agria, with an Army of
Threescore and ten thousand Men. It was then no strong place, neither by Nature
nor Art; and yet the Courage of the Garrison supplied the Weakness of the place.
There were within it Two thousand Hungarians, and Threescore of the chief
Gentlemen of the Country, who brought thither their Wives, Children, and all
their Goods. They all took an Oath, that they would suffer the utmost
Extremity, rather than render the place; they put all their Provision into
public stores, and when the Turks summoned them to render the place, they put
out a Coffin upon the Battlements of the Walls, to show that they had resolved
to die, rather than to yield. The Town was for Forty days time incessantly
Battered with Fifty pieces of Cannon; but all that daunted not the Besieged.
Nay the Turks having made three Assaults in one day, were still beaten off, and
lost Eight thousand men. Above all things the Valor of the Women was
conspicious in so bloody an Action. One of them was fighting in presence of her
Mother and Husband, who was killed hard by her, and her Mother bidding her
carry off the Body and Bury it: God forbid, answered she, that I should Bury my
Husband before I revenge his death: and with that snatching up the Buckler and
Sword of her dead Husband, she threw her self into the midst of the Enemy's,
and left not off Fighting till she had revenged the death of her Husband by the
slaughter of three Turks. Another Woman carrying a great stone to cast down
upon the Enemy, was shot with a Canon Bullet, that carried off her head. Her
Daughter who followed her, without standing to bewail her loss, took up the
stone, and all bloody as it was with her Mothers Blood, threw it down upon a
crowd of the Enemy, who endeavored to mount the Wall. The Turks being
Witnesses of such obstinate Resolution, raised the Siege the Nineteenth of
October; and the Besieged sallying out after them, cut to pieces a great number
of the Infidels, and took most of their Baggage.

TOKAY.
A very strong Town with a Citadel upon the River Bodroch, that falls into the
Teisse. This Town lying in form of an Island, was taken by the Turks, and
afterward regained by the Emperors Army; but falling into the hands of the
Rebel Teckely, his Imperial Majesty retook it in the year, 1685. to whom it
belongs at present. This Town is Subject to Inundations, and yet the Land about
it is very Fertile, and bears excellent Wine called by that name. Below it the
River of Bodroch, running by Esperies, joins the Teisse.

UNGWAR.
A little Town, Capital of the County of Ung, lying at the Foot of the Carpat
Mountain, near the River Ung, the Boundary of Red Russia, thirty Leagues to the
East of Cassovia, and five and twenty to the North of the Teisse; it fell
likewise into the hands of Teckely, and was retaken by the Arms of the Emperor
in the year, 1685.

COLOCZA.
An Ancient Town lying near the Danube lower than Pest, was heretofore an
Archbishops See; it is encompassed with very Fertile Meadows.

ONOTH.
A Town lying upon the side of the River of Schaia, between Agria and Tokay.

DEBRECHIM.
A City lying in the County of Zobel, betwixt Tokay and great Waradin; it is
Rich, Populous, and of great Commerce and Traffic; upon the humble desire of
the Inhabitants, it was received into the Protection of his Imperial Majesty,
after the Reduction of Zolnock, and Cassovia: It continued Neuter during the
late Revolutions in Hungary, and sided not with the Rebels, allowing always
Liberty, as well to the Judges there established by the Emperor, as to the
Commissioner of the Port, to Exercise their Authority in it.

GIULA.
This Town lies betwixt the Rivers of Sebeskeres and Feyerkeres, upon the Lake
of Zarkad, a few Leagues below great Waradin, upon the Frontier of
Transylvania; as yet it belongs to the Turk.

ZOLNOCK.
This Town lies upon the River of Teisse, where the River of Zagiwa joins it:
It is the chief Town of the same name, and strongly fortified, having long
groaned under the Turkish Yoke; it lies forty Leagues to the West of Waradin,
and sixty from Buda. This Fortress was taken by the Baron de Mercy,
Lieutenant-Marshal de Camp, and by the Sr. Heusler one of the Emperor's
Generals, in the Month of October, 1685.

ZATMAR.
A small Town lying upon the River of Samos, on the Frontiers of Transylvania,
and the Capital of the County of the same Name; it belongs to the Emperor, and
is ten Leagues Northward of Waradin, and fourteen Eastward of Tokay.

ZARAVAS.
This is a Modern Fortress built by the Turks, since the breaking out of the
Rebellion, which Emersi Count of Teckely raised in this Kingdom: It lies upon
the River of Kiros, which falls into the Teysse, five German Leagues from
Zolnock, and twelve from Giula; but the situation of it is not as yet described
in the Maps: By the Conquest of this place, two Counties that depend on it have
been gained, which before the Rebellion held not of his Imperial Majesty; the
one is called the County of the Tarantalians, and the other of the Czongradians.

MONGATZ.
A Fort with a very strong Castle seated on the River Torza, betwixt Ungwar and
Zatmar near the Mountains; it has been a place of Retreat to the Rebel Count
Teckely, as it was before to Prince Ragotzi. The Countess of Teckely, Aurora
Veronica Daugh-to the late Count Peter Serine, and before Widow of the said
Prince, still delays to render it to the Emperor, as being uncertain what will
become of her Husband. In the mean time it is straightly blocked up by the
Imperial Forces.

TEMESWAR.
A great and strong Town upon the River of Temes, toward the Frontiers of
Transylvania; it is the chief Town of a P^ovince of that Name, which has the
Title of a County. The Turk has subdued both the Town and Country.

WARADIN.
This Town which is called Great Waradin, lying on the Drove, was of the
Ancient Dacia, and is at present in Transylvania.

It is situated to the South of the little River of Keuvres, which others call
Sobeskeres, and the Ancients Chrisus, that has its Source in one of the
Branches of the Carpathian Mountains, from whence it seems to wash away, and
bring along with its Sand little Spangles of Gold.

In the year 1242. the Tartars made themselves Masters of that Town, and used
great Cruelties i^ ^t, putting most of the Inhabitants to the Sword, without
distinction of Age or Sex.

In the year 1290. Ladislaus King of Hungary, built in it the fair Church of
our Lady, which is the Seat of a Suffragan Bishop.

This Town having a strong Citadel, is fortified with five Bastions; and the
Turks looking upon it as a favorable Post, for enlarging their Conquests on
the side of Transylvania, sent first in the year, 1598. a powerful Army under
the command of Omar, who besieged it in the month of September; but after may
Cruel and Bloody Attacks on both sides, the Turks were forced to raise the
Siege on the third of November: However in 1660. they took it, and made it a
place of Arms against Christendom.

This place is the usual Residence of a Sangiack, who depends on the Beglerbey
of Themeswar: And here it was, that Count Emery of Teckely, was surprised and
seized by the Bassa of the place, and sent to the Grand Vizier at Adrianople in
Chains. This was a great Transformation of him, who put in his Standard that
was taken in the month of September, 1684. by General Schultz at the Battle
near Esperies; his own Arms beset with two Lions Or, and two Argent holding in
their claws a Shable, cleaving the Imperial Eagle in two, and over-head a Ducal
Coronet, with a device in Latin and Sclavonick, of, Protector in Hungary: But
alas!

Quem veniens superbum
dies vidit
Hunc fugiens jacentem
GUTTA.
This Town is very well Fortified at that place, where the River of Waag
discharges it self into the Danube; it was Built since the last Wars, in a
Fenny place betwixt a branch of the Danube, the Waag and the Swatrz. It is a
Mile distant from Newheusel, and from the top of the Church of Gutta, one may
see the Town of Newheusel, and even distinguish the several Houses.

SCHINTA.
Esteemed a very strong place, long since Built to command the River, and all
the Country about; it has a Tower in the middle, with four Bastions, and
several great Guns.

TIRNAW.
Is a Town lying in an open Country, and may be seen at a great distance;
within these seven years it was reduced to Ashes, and is now almost entirely
Rebuilt.

TOPOLCHAN.
This Town lies upon the Banks of the River of Nitra, and was burnt down with
its Church during the late Wars, and could never be Built again since.

LEOPOLD.
This Town was Built after the loss of Newheusel, and much in the same Figure;
it has six very Regular Bastions, and well covered, lying Westward of the
River of Waag, and exactly opposite to Freistadt: It is not very far from the
place, through which the Tartars went in the late War, when they ravaged a
great part of that Country, and made many Slaves, as they did also in Moravia.
It was begun to be fortified in the year, 1665.

FREISTADT.
Is a very pretty Town, but the Turks not long since burnt it: The Count of
Forchatz, has a lovely Castle and a stately House in it, and the Capucins a
Convent.

TRENSCHEIN.
Is a very fair Town lying upon the side of the River of Waag, over which it
has a Wooden Bridge: The Market place of it is very pretty, the Jesuits Church
lovely, and the Castle very high; it is seen at a great distance, and belongs
to Count Illeshazi. There are a great many Springs of Mineral Waters, in all
the Country about it.

SERNOWITZ.
Is a Town lying upon the River of Gran, having a Castle built upon a Rock.

NEWSOL.
Is a pretty neat Town, lying upon the River of Gran; at the end of it there is
a very lovely Tower, and the Castle well deserves to be seen; because there is
a Church within it covered with Copper, wherein are a great many fair Wooden
Statues, and some Relics. It has a Bridge over the River, with a handsome
pile of Building, made to stop the Timber that is thrown into the River, ten
Miles above the Town in the Country, that is all covered with Wood. By that
means Wood is conveyed to Newsol without much trouble and cha^ges, which is
made use of for Working in the Copper Mines that are in the Town: It was taken
by Bethlem Gabor Prince of Transylvania, who making use of the Occasion of the
Revolt of the Bohemians, and of his Alliance which they demanded, fell into
Hungary and took many places in it. Before this Town of Newsol, the brave Count
Charles of Bucquoy, Knight of the Golden Fleece, being General of the Imperial
Army, found his Bed of Honor; for having retaken the Towns of Presbourg,
Tirnaw, Altenbourg, and others, and encamping before Newsol, where he
Valliantly carried on the Siege in the year, 1621. he was killed in a Sally in
the Month of July that year, after he had received Sixteen Mortal Wounds. The
following Inscription was made to his Memory.

Belli fulmen,
Hostium terror,
Suorum militum Pater,
Regum Praesidium, Equitum Aurei Velleris decus.
CAROLUS BUCQUOIUS.
Quem ad Ambianum Henricus IV.
Galliae Rex
Timendo laudaverat.
Novis hic laudibus atque victoriis se probavit,
Supremus Tormentorum constitutus Praefectus,
Ipso sole illustrior fama
Gaborem Imperii jugulo imminentem
Vienna repulit, Austriaque tota exegit:
Turrianum, Anhaltinum and Mansfeldium,
Perduellium Duces, contudit.
Dejecit affectato Regno Palatinum.
Pragam recepit,
Subegit Bohemiam,
Moraviam pacavit:
In Hungaria Posonium, Tirnaviam,
aliaque oppida,
Regi suo asseruit:
Denique dum ad Neosolium
Infestam obsessorum eruptionem fortiter
sustinens
Equo, quem in hostem admiserat longius,
trucidato,
Ipse, sedecim vulneribus saucius,
Lanceaque ad extremum confossus
Non finem vitae suae,
Sed melius and auctius quam apud
Mantinaeam,
Epaminondas,
Initium reperit.
ALTSOL.
Is a Town lying upon the same River of Gran, lower than Newsol, betwixt it and
the Town of Cremnitz.

HERN-GRUNDT.
Is a little Town standing on a pretty high Ground, though it be betwixt two
Hills. The place it stands on goes by the same Name, and is but a mile from
Newsol.

SCHEMNITZ.
The biggest of all the Towns in Hungary, where there are Mines, and in it
there is a great deal of Silver found daily. The Town is very well built, has
three fair Churches, and most part of the Inhabitants are Lutherans. It has
also three Castles; the first is the old Castle, that stands in the Town; where
one may hear pretty pleasant Music, at six of the Clock in the morning, and
six at night, which is performed by means of an Engine that they have found
out. The second is the new Castle, built by a Lady, who caused the Gibbet that
stood upon a Hill to be removed, and a stately Fabric to be erected in place
of it. The third is upon the top of a very high Hill, where there is always a
Sentinel to discover the approach of the Turks, and to give notice of it by
firing a great Gun. The Streets lie upwards and downwards upon the side of the
Hill, and all the Country is very uneven.

CREMNITZ.
This is but a very little Town, but has large Suburbs, and stands on very
high Ground. It is thought that St. John's Church, which is pretty near it, is
built on the highest Ground of all Hungary: It is the ancientest of all the
Towns where Mines are, and is also the richest of all the seven, which are
called Schemnitz, Cremnitz, Newsol, Koninsbergs, Bochantz, Libeten, and Tiln.

VIROVICHITZ.
Lying before the Isle of St. Andrew, is a place in high Esteem, for the lovely
Vines and good Grapes that grow there. Near it there is a demolished Stone
Building, upon the side of the Isle of St. Andrew, where it is said, that
heretofore there was a Stone Bridge.

MAROS.
Is on the other side of Vicegrad, near the Isle of St. Andrew. It has a very
lovely Church, and being a place that heretofore yielded voluntarily to the
Turks, the Christians are not much tormented there; but only pay a yearly
Tribute of very small Consequence.

PEST.
On the other side of the Danube toward the East, is the Town of Pest, that is
square and seated in a very lovely Plain: it looks very pretty from Buda,
because of its Walls and the Towers of its Mosques. It gives the Name to all
the Country about, which therefore is called, Comitatus Pesthiensis, the
County of Pest; for Hungary is divided into Counties as well as England.
Betwixt this place and Buda there is a fair Bridge of Boats, at least half a
mile over; it has been taken and re-taken, whereby it is much ruined, and the
Town of Buda which is over against it standing on an Eminence, whereas this
lies in a Plain, so commands it, that it can batter it down with great Guns;
unless on the side of the Gate of Agria, which is covered by the Town. The
Imperial Forces took it in the year 1684. when they invested Buda; but quitting
that Siege they also abandoned Pest; though now in this present year 1686. they
have again made themselves Masters of it.

HADWAN.
Lies upon the Zagywe to the North of Pest, and fortifyed with Earth, but not
so as that the Turks repose great assurance on it: It was taken by the
Christians in the year 1596. but afterward abandoned to the Turks in the year
1603. and is not above six Leagues from Pest.

To close up the Description of the Towns of Upper Hungary, I shall subjoin the
Latin Epigram, made upon the Revolt of the Towns that espoused the Party of
Teckely.

EPIGRAMMA. In septem Superioris Hungariae Fortalitia Duce Teckelio Caesari
Rebellantia.
CAstrorum septem crudelis and impia tellus
Quid Dominum contra perfida colla levas?
Oblita es famulam, saltem te agnosce parentem:
Hic tibi, ni Princeps esset, alumnus erat.
Divitiisne tumes? cecidit Campania dives.
An populo? Marathon millia quanta premit.
Sed tibi forte animos perjurus proditor auget,
Aspice quam stultum stulta sequare Ducem.
Sit licet ille ferox, and sit bellare peritus,
Sit licet ille potens, improba causa sua est.
Vincitur ut causa, pariter vincetur and Armis,
Bella placent justo non nisi justa Deo.
CHAP. VII.
Of the Towns of Lower Hungary.

BUDA.
BEfore the Turks invaded Hungary, the City of Buda was the Metropolis of the
Kingdom; the Ancients called it Curta, and the Germans Offen.

It is divided into the Upper and Lower Town, lying upon the side of a Hill,
the Foot whereof is washed by the Danube, which at that place is above half a
mile over: It has a Bridge of Boats over it, that joins the City of Buda, to
the little Town of Pest, lying on the opposite side. In Buda are to be seen the
Ruins of several stately Palaces, built heretofore by Matthias Corvinus King
of Hungary, and his Predecessors; which the Turks neglect, and let fall into
decay.

This is a large, fair, and well built Town, but ill peopled, and has hardly
any Inhabitants, but the Spahies and Janisaries of the Garrison, which is
always very numerous.

After the Death of John Zapol, Count of Scepus and Elba King of Hungary, his
Widow Elisabeth of Poland and his Son Stephen, called in the Turks to their
Assistance, against Ferdinand of Austria, who was elected King. The Germans
besieged Buda, and the Turks having defeated them, made themselves Masters of
the Town under pretext of Friendship, sending the Queen, her Son, and George
Martinisius, who had been chief Minister to the late King, into Transylvania.

This Town is the Residence of a Beglerbey, whose Authority extends over twenty
Sangiacks. The Bassa of Buda has more Authority than the others have, and the
Garrison consists commonly of eight or ten Thousand Men. Some take it to be the
Curta of Ptolomy, and others for the Aguincum of the Itinerary of Antonine. It
is very hard to be positive as to that, and all that can be said are but
Conjectures. But it is a Fable, that the Brother of Attila built it, and called
it by his Name Budaeus: For that Brother of Attila was named Bleda, and not
Budaeus, as the Fabulous pretend.

Solomon rendered himself Master of Buda the 20eth. of August, 1526. and in the
year 1527. Ferdinand I. King of Bohemia, Brother to the Emperor Charles V.
after the overthrow of Louis the Young, in the Plain of Mohacz, was proclaimed
King of Hungary, by Stephen Bathori Palatin of the Kingdom, and by the sounder
part of the Nobility; John Zapoliha, Vaivod of Transylvania, having been before
tumultuarily elected by the rest.

The same year, Ferdinand made himselt Master of the greatest part of the
Kingdom, and of Buda the Capital City, of which he made Thomas Nadasti
Governor; until the year 1529. that Solomon took it by the Treachery of the
Garrison, and shortly after laid siege to Vienna, which he was forced
shamefully to raise, after he had made many B^oody Assaults.

From whence, retreating to Buda, he re-established John Vaivod of Transylvania
in the Kingdom; having left in Buda, Gritti, a Renegado, with three Thousand
Janisaries, to defend it in Name of the Vaivod.

Afterward Ferdinand King of Bohemia, made General Rogendorf besiege it, in
the year 1530. but in vain.

In the year 1540. he commanded his General Leonard Fessius to Besiege it a
second time, having first possessed himself of the Forts of Vicegrad, Vaccia, and
Pest; and John Zapoliha being dead the year before, who left for his Successor
John Sigismond, a Pupil under the tuition of the Princess Isabel his Mother,
and George Monck; but Fessius having there endured the fatigues of a long and
troublesome Siege, was again obliged to draw off.

In the year, 1541. General Rogendorf renewed the Siege again a Third time; but
upon the coming of Solomon, he thought it best to retreat. In the mean time
that Ottoman Prince surprised the Town by Cunning, drove the young Prince and
his Mother out of it, and sent them to Reign in Transylvania, publishing that
he would keep it until John Sigismond, the Son of John Zapoliha the Usurper,
were of Age.

In the year, 1542. the Marquess of Brandebourgh, made as if he intended to
Besiege Buda, and in that design marched toward it. He attacked Pest, on his
march, but in vain, and retreated without any success.

The Count of Swartzenbourgh haing in the Month of March 1598. by a Wonderful
Stratagem retaken Javarin, or Raab, from the Turks, marched the same year in
the Month of October, under the Auspices of the Archduke Matthias, and laid
Siege to Buda, which after thirty days Attack he was forced to raise, because
of the continual Rains: And it is remarkable, that the Turks, who at the same
time Besieged the Town of Waradin in Transylvania, were likewise obliged to
quit their Enterprise for the same Reason.

The Christians again attacked that Town in the year 1602 under General
Roswurm, but having ruined the Bridge ever the Danube, and possessed the Town
of Pest, the Rigor of the Season obliged them to desist from their Design.

The Duke of Lorrain Generalissimo of the Imperial Armies, attempted the Siege
of the same place, having first made himself Master of the Castle of Vicegrad,
Vaccia and Pest, and thrice defeated the Ottoman Army; but the Season being too
far advanced, that he might not endanger the Army, he thought it convenient to
raise the Siege in the Month of October, 1684.

The Council of Buda.
Philip Bishop of Fermo, of the holy See, being sent by Nicholas III. for
treating some important Affairs with Ladislaus III. King of Hungary, in the
year 1279. celebrated a Council at Buda; the Constitutions whereof to the
Number of Thirty six, Oldericus Rainaldus has put at the end of the 14. Tome
of the Ecclesiastical Annals.

Churches or Funf-Kerken, and some other places, burnt Siget, and besieged
Canisa, which he would have infallibly taken, had the Succors that were
promised him been sent to him. The Grand Vizier having Intelligence of that
siege, advanced with a great Army, made him raise it, and then took Fort
Serini, which was afterward demolished, little Gomora, and other Places.

VICEGRAD.
The Latins call it, Vissegradia, and the Germans, Plindenburg. It is a strong
Town, built upon a very high Rock, the Danube running by the Foot of it, and
lies above Buda, and below Strigonium. In this place there is a Castle, upon a
little Hill, where the Abbey of Pily stands also. Heretofore the Crown of
Hungary was kept there, that Town in former times having been the place of
Residence of the Kings of Hungary; and the Remains of the Ruins of a very
stately Building of Free Stone, are still to be seen there. The Forces of the
Archduke Matthias, re-took that place in the Reign of Mahomet III. But the
Heydukes committed a piece of the greatest Treachery imaginable, and delivered
it up into the hands of the Turks, in the time of Sultan Achmet. Charles King
of Naples, who was also proclaimed King of Hungary, having been wounded in the
Head by Forchatz, was carried into that Castle, where under pretext of applying
a Plaster to his Head, they strangled him. The Crown of Hungary was heretofore
kept at Vicegrad, but the Turks having advanced so far, it was thought safer to
put it into the Castle of Presbourg. This Crown is of a pretty singular shape;
for it is very low, and has a Cross on the top with four leaves that go
completely round it, of which one is as big as the other three, or at least, as
two of them. It is infinitely esteemed by the Hungarians, because they believe
that an Angel brought it to their King St. Stephen: and the most August
Emperor Leopold, who reigns at present, is the two and fourtieth King that
has been crowned with that Crown.

S. MARTINSBERG.
Is a pretty handsome Town, and a very strong place, seated on the Top of a very
high Hill, from whence all the Country about may be discovered. It lies
betwixt the Fort of Raab, and the Town of Dotis.

DOTIS.
Dotis, Tata, or Theodata, is but four Leagues from Comora; it has a Castle
with Ditches round it, and not far from thence, there are some natural Baths.
It lies betwixt S. Martinsberg and the Danube, has been often taken and
re-taken, and belongs to his Imperial Majesty. The Count of Salms, General of
the Imperial Army, took it in the year 1565. with the Town of Vesprim.

VESPRIM.
In Latin Vesprinium, and in High Dutch Weisbrun, is a little pretty strong
Town, lying near the head of the River Sarwis, and the Lake Balaton eleven
Leagues from Strigonium, and five from Alba Regalis, being the Seat of a Bishop
Suffragan to Strigonium; it is the capital of the County of its Name, and has
a strong Castle upon the top of a little Hill, belonging to his Imperial
Majesty. The Count of Salms took it in the year 1565. with the Town of Dotis.

PAPA.
A little Town, but strong, defended by a Castle, and lying in the County of
Vesprim, upon the River of Malchaltz; it belongs to the Emperor.

SARWAR.
This place lies upon the Raab, betwixt Papa, and Sabaria, under Obedience to
the Emperor, having been re-taken in the year, 1567.

SABARIA.
Is an Ancient Town in the County of Iron Castle lying at the concourse of the
two Rivers of Guntz, and Regnitz, before they fall into the Raab. This Town is
affirmed to be the Native Town of St. Martin; and there are some who report,
and others that believe, that the Famous Poet Ovid died and was Buried in this
Town of Sabaria. They write, that having been Seven years Banished at Tomos,
near the Euxin Sea, he was afterward recalled, and died at Sabaria, upon his
return to Italy; where they say his Tomb was found in the year 1508. with this
Epitaph, made by himself, and cut on the outside of a stately Vault.

Fatum necessitatis lex.
Hic situs est Vates, quem Divi Caesaris ira
Augusti, Patria cedere jussit humo.
Soepe miser voluit Patriis occumbere terris;
Sed frustra, hunc illi fata dedere locum.
That Is to say.

Fate is a Law of necessity.
Here lies the Poet, whom the Anger of Divine Caesar, obliged to leave his
Country; often did he wish in his Misery that he might dye in his own Country,
but in vain; for the Fates have given him this for a Burying place.
And about the year 1540. Isabel Queen of Hungary showed Peter Angelo Bargeo, a
Silver Pen that Ovid made use of to write with; which not long before had been
found amongst the Ancient Ruins of Tearunum, at present called Belgrade, at the
mouth of the Save, that falls into the Danube, with these words Engraven round
it: Ovidii Nasonis Calamus, which that Queen highly prised, and kept it as a
Sacred thing.

GRAN.
This Town which is called Gran, Strigonium, or Ostrogon, lies on the
South Side of the River of Gran, where it falls into the Danube. It is divided
into the Upperr and Lower, Town both which are considerably strong and have
good Walls. The lower Town commands the Danube, and St. Thomas his Hill is also
very well fortified, because being close by the Town it might command it. In
this Town there are excellent Natural Baths, that are not too hot. Heretofore
it was the Metropolitan City of Hungary, and St. Stephen their first King was
born in it; as Stephen III. died there. The chief Ornaments of it are the great
Church of St. Stephen, who lies buried in it, the Archbishop's Palace, and the
Houses of other Canons: This Archbishop formerly put the Crown upon the Kings
Head the day of his Coronation. In the Upper Town there is a Rock, on which a
very strong Castle is built. The Neighboring Hills abound in Vines, and the
Country about with Springs of hot water, so that by reason of the Fruitfulness
of the Country, and the strength of the Town, the Kings of Hungary, in former
times had their Palace and kept their Residence there: Hardly any place has
maintained so many Bloody Sieges. For John King of Hungary* Besieged it, but in
vain; and he could not succeed in his Attempt. Solomon took it in the year,
1542. but the Count of Mansfield re-took it, for the Archduke Matthias. It was
once more Besieged in vain; but in Succession of time Sultan Achmet took it, by
means of an infamous piece of Baseness, that the Christians who defended it
committed; for having killed the Count of Dampierre the Governor, they
surrendered the place to Alybeg General of the Turkish Army. The Town of
Barckan, is exactly opposite to Gran, and there is a Bridge of Boats betwixt
those two places. It was before that Fort, that the Armies of the Emperor and
Poland gained the Battle against the Turks in the Month of October, 1683. when
they Besieged and took the said Fort, and the Town of Gran also the 23. of the
same Month, after they had gloriously raised the Siege of Vienna; which the
Grand Vizier Kara Mustapha had laid to it, with the chief Forces of the Ottoman
Empire, who were cut to pieces, and put to the rout there; and after that the
City of Gran, for the space of 80. years had groaned under the yoke of the
Turks. But the Barbarians, being impatient that such an important place should
remain longer in the Hands of the Christians, endeavored to regain it with an
extraordinary strong Army, and laid Siege to it the 30th. of July, 1685. which
they were forced to raise, with the loss of the Battle that followed after the
16th. of August, the same year.

The Isle of Schut.
This Isle, which the Latins call Insula Cituorum, called commonly Schut, and
Comora, or rather Comara, from its most important place lying on the North-East
point of the Island, that has that name, is Twelve Hungarian Leagues in length,
and Five in breadth, Sixteen Hungarian making Twenty German Leagues. It
contains about Three Hundred Villages, or Bourgs, and Fifteen Thousand
Inhabitants. Its next best place to Comora, is Samaria or Samareyn, for which
cause Munsterus says, that the Island is called Samaria, as well as Schythia
and Camaron, meaning Schut and Comara. This Isle is made by the Danube, which
dividing it self into four Branches below Presbourg, makes many lovely Isles,
full of tall Trees, of which this is the chief; at the end whereof and below
Comara the Danube unites all its Branches, of which that which comes from the
Upper Hungary, is called Waag; and the River coming from the North falls into
the Danube at this Island.

RAAB or JAVARIN.
A very strong Town situated where the Rivers of Raab and Rabuits, fall into
the Danube, is the Seat of a Bishop Suffragan to Gran, or Strigonium. The
Germans call it Raab, the French Javarin, the Hungarians Gever, the Italians
Giavarin, and the Latin Authors, Javarinum, Arabo and Harabo. The Fort was made
by Ferdinand of Austria, King of Hungary, before he came to be Emperor in the
year, 1550. and is one of the compleatest Strengths in Europe. It has two
Bridges, one on the side of Austria, and the other on the side of Alba Regalis,
or Stael-Weissenbourgh, it is fortified with Seven Bastions, and has Four high
Mounts, from whence all the Country about may be discovered. The First is the
Bastion, on which the Castle or Governors Palace is built. The Second is upon
the brink of the River of Danube. The Third stands upon the Holy Hill; and when
the Turks blew it up, there was a Man upon it on Horse back, who was carried by
the force of the Gunpowder into the Danube, without the least hurt either to
Man or Horse. The Fourth is that in the middle, which looks Eastward into the
Country. The Fifth is that which is called the New Bastion. The Sixth the
Imperial Bastion. And the Seventh is that of Hungary, on the brink of the River
of Raab. Here it was that the Turkish Governor was killed, when the Christians
surprised the Town, in the night time. It is very near the Isle of Schut in a
Plain that reaches out of sight, environed by a Branch of the Danube, and the
River of Raab, which makes many to give it that name: And it would seem that
nothing can be able to hurt it; unless it be a little Hill which is at a pretty
good distance from it too, and might be blown up when they pleased, if there
were occasion for it. Beyond it there is also a little Tower, in the middle of
the Plain, from whence the approach of an Enemy, may easily be discovered. This
Town may be near Three hundred paces in Circuit, and at each Angle of the
Figure, there is a Cavalier which commands the Fortification faced with brick.
Sinam Bassa besieged it in the Reign of Sultan Amurath III. He lost a great
many men there, and Twelve thousand were killed in one Attack; but at length it
rendered in the year 1591. by the Treachery of the Count of Hardeck, who was
Governor of the place, for which base Action he had his Head struck off at
Vienna. Some years after it was retaken by the Count of Swartszenbourg, and the
Count of Palfy who surprised it in the night time, in the year 1606. under the
Emperor Rodolph, and made a great slaughter of all the Turks that were in it: A
piece of the Gate, which was broken down by a Petard, is still kept in the
Cathedral Church, as the Instrument of the Victory; in memory whereof, the Town
fires yearly all their Guns, and make a Solemn Procession. Whilst the Turks
were Masters of that Town, they made a Dungeon for the Christian Prisoners,
into which there enters no Light but through a Grate that looks to the
Marketplace. But at present there are commonly Turks shut up in it, who beg
the Charity of those that pass that way, and sell a kind of Whips, which they
make in their wretched Confinement. George Drascovitz Bishop of that Town held
a Synod there in the year 1579.

The Emperor finding himself incommoded by the great number of Chiaus or
Ordinary Envoys who came often to Vienna, from the Vizier of Buda, and never
went back again without some Present, ordered for the future, that they should
advance no farther than Raab, unless they had a Permission, and that they
should receive their dispatches there. In consequence whereof there was in
December, 1685. a Turkish Aga there named Aga Scelebi, waiting for the
Emperors Answer, from whom he came to beg a Peace.

COMORA.
Gomora, Crumenum, or Comaronium, is a very large fair Town, lying at the
East End of the Isle of Schut; it looks to the Danube, and Waag, and is very
well fortifyed and peopled. The Fortifications of it have also been lately
enlarged, and a great deal of ground taken in, by means of a Line drawn from
the Waag to the Danube, and is fortified by four Bastions more.

TORTOISE.
Is reckoned a strong place, and has its Name from its Figure, which in some
manner resembles a Tortoise. Sinan Basha having taken the Town of Raab,
besieged this place with Threescore Vessels, and a vast number of Turks and
Tartars; but it was without success, and most part of the Tartars were killed
there.

PETRONEL.
Betwixt Vienna and Presbourg, where the River of Mark falls into the Danube,
lies the Town of Petronel, near the Hill, and Castle of Haimbourg. Petronel is
thought to be the place that was anciently called Carnuntum, which was one of
the strongest places of the Panonians, and in vain besieged by the Romans 170.
years, before the Incarnation of our Savior; who neverthe less, in Progres of
time made themselves Masters of it under Augustus, that sent thither a Roman
Colony, with the Forces which were called Legio decima Gemina, and Classis
Istrica. It was enlarged so much afterward, that it became the chief City of
the Upper Panonia, and contained all that lay on the South side of the Danube,
where at present we see Haimbourg, Altenbourg, and St. Petronel.

ALTENBOURG.
Is a Town environned by the little River of Leytha, and near that small Branch
of the Danube, which runs toward the Lower Hungary, eight Leagues from
Presbourg. It was formerly an open Village; but it has since been walled in by
the Hungarians, who call it Ovar, that is to say, old Castle, which suits with
the German name Altenbourg, that signifies an old Borough. It is near to the
West end of the Isle of Schut, and in the Hands of the Emperor, who in the
year 1646. gave that Lordship to Nicholas Draskowitch, Count of Trukostian, at
that time chosen Palatin of Hungary, that he might qualify him by that Dignity.

SIGET.
A strong Town lying on this side of the Drove, in the Wash of the River Alm,
with a Citadel fortifyed by a tripple Wall, and a tripple Ditch: It is the
chief Town of the County of that Name, and was taken by the Turks the seventh
of September, 1566. after a brave defense made by Nicholas Esdrin Count of
Serini, Great-Grandfather to Nicholas II, Knight of the Golden Fleece, who died
in the year, 1664. and three days after, Solomon who besieged it departed this
Life in the Town of Five-Churches, whither, falling sick in the Camp, he was
carried. This Nicholas I. was that Great and Valiant Warrior, who after the
taking of so many Towns, and gaining so many Battles, defended that great and
important Place of Ziget, against the Turks with an undaunted Courage to the
last; so that being no longer able to resist the formidable Efforts of that
Barbarous Enemy, he made the last Sally with Prodigious Resolution, and amongst
many Musket Shot which he received at the first discharge, one in the Head,
laid him Dead on the Ground. The Barbarians having cut off his Head, sent it to
Selim the Son of Solomon, who sent it to Mahomet Bassa, and he to the Basha of
Buda, who presently wrapped it up in a Cloth of Silk, and by two Boors sent it to
the Emperor Maximilian in the Camp of Turn or Bregeto, and from thence it was
carried by Balthazar Butschano to Tscacaturno, and there buried in St. Helens
Church, where Catharine de Frangipani his first Wife lay; this is the Epitaph
upon his Tomb.

Illustrissimo Comiti Nicolao Zerinio Torquati ex sorore nepoti, a Carolo V.
post Viennam obsidione solutam, quod in ea Adolescens adhuc and Tyro multa
praeclara confecisset, equo, auroque donato: Ad Budam and Peschtum pulchra per
facinora summa cum laud probato: Croatia, Dalmatiae, and Sclavoniae Bannato,
Bavernicorumque Regalium in Pannonia Magisterio singulari cum prudentia functo:
Copiis Caesaris ad dextrum Danubij latus a Ferdinando I. and Maximiliano II.
Imperatoribus Praefecto: Victis saepissime, fugatis, captis, caecisque
hostibus: Infaustissima postremum, funestissimaque Sigethi expugnatione, cujus
arcem contra innumerabilem Solymanni Turcarum Principis exercitum, facta eorum
ingenti and memorabili strage, diutius qum viribus par fuerat, defendit,
defuncto ibidem Solymanno, totius Orbis flagello, pulcherrime absumpto,
bellicae gloriae fortissimo, invictissimoque Duci, de se publieque B. M. P. P.

Vixit annos quadraginta octo: occubuit septimo Septembris, anno Virginei
partus 1566.

ALIUD.
"Hostibus ut vidit diris and caedere fatis
"Credita virtuti maenia celsa suae:
"Servatae a me olim, nunc me servabitis, "inquit,
"Arces and pugnans Zrinius occubuit.
"Imodo, te jacta quantum vis, Roma "Lyburnis
"Et sunt quae mortem pectora despiciunt.
FIVE CHURCHES.
This Town has a Bishopric Suffragan to Gran, or Strigonium; the Germans call
it Funf-Kircken, the Hungarians Otegiazack, and the Latin Authors Quinque
Ecclesiae. It lies upon the Rivulet called Kevirz close by the Drove, which
five or six Leagues from that, falls into the Danube. Five Churches is a strong
place Four Leagues from Siget, and in the hands of the Turks. Solomon II. took
it in the year 1543, and afterward died in that Town, during the Siege of Siget
in the year, 1566. which being so near, they had reason to say that he died in
his Camp. The Valiant Count Nicholas Serini Second of that Name, burnt this
Town, and the Bridge of Esseck, in the year 1664. and shortly after signalized
himself in a particular manner at the Battle of Raab, the Turks having
ingenuously confessed, that the Terror of his Name was the cause of the gaining
of that Battle. Not long after that brave Count ended his Life, in a very
Tragical manner, for being separated from his Attendance, and engaged in the
Thickets of a Wood, a Wild Boar enraged by the Wounds which it had received,
fell upon him, and having hurt him in the Knee, threw him down. The Count had
not the leisure to come to him again; for the violent Beast struck one of its
Tusks into his Head, and gave him that Mortal wound, whereof he shortly after
died in his Page's Arms. Such was the end of that Illustrious Captain, whom
Death seemed to have respected amidst the greatest Dangers to which he daily
exposed himself, and yet became a prey to an inconsiderable Beast. He was a
sworn Enemy to the Mahometans, and had for them as implacable a Hatred as ever
Hanibal had for the Romans. He was undaunted in Dangers, brave in Action,
indefategable in Labor, Mild in Peace, and moderate in his Pleasures. He was
very sober and took greatest pleasure in Hunting in the Woods, because it was
an Exercise that resembled the Labors of War. He was a man of a profound and
solid Judgment; and in a Word, one of the most zealous Defenders of the
Christian Religion, whose Courage, Valor, and brave Actions, ought in History
to procure him a place amongst the greatest Hero's. He died the 18th. of
November, 1664. about the four and fortieth year of his Age, and his Body was
Buried near to Sacathurne, the place of his Residence in Croatia, in the
Chapple that has been built in the same place of the Wood where he was killed,
and all round the Chapel these words are to be read: Neque diem, neque horum
scimus. The Chapel is full of all sorts of Trophies, Standards, and Colors,
which that Noble Warrior took from the Turks. His Epitaph is in Leonin Verse.

Fata, Leonini versus, deflete Serini,
Magnus bellator fuit and Virtutis amator,
Turcas prosternit, mortemque and vulnera spernit,
Hic vita exemptus, crudeli est morte peremptus,
Inter Apri ardentes, invenit funera dentes,
Atque hoc augustum meruit sub marmore bustum
ESSECK and its BRIDGE.
The Town of Esseck or Osseck, is thought to be the Ancient Mursa, or at least
it is not far from it. History will have it to be in this place, that
Constantus Son to the Emperor Constantine defeated the Tyrant Magnentius in the
year 359. This Town lies very low, and there are Trees growing in all the
Streets. On one side of the Gate there is part of a Roman inscription, which
begins thus: M. Aelian, etc. And on the other, the Head of a Maid on a Stone.
There is a very pretty Dial there also, brought thither from Serinwar; and one
of the finest pieces of Cannon that ever was seen in those parts: It is not
upon a Carriage, as others are, but upon great beam of Wood. This is a great
and populous Town, there being in it at least five hundred shops, many Mosques
and Haccars, which are large Inns for Travelers.

But that which is most considerable, is the lovely Wooden Bridge, (not to be
matched in the World) which was built by Solomon, in the year 1521. immediately
after he took Belgrade, partly over the Drove, and partly over the River of
Fenues close by, both which do often overflow. On this side the Drove it is
about Eleven Hundred paces long, and on the other side almost Eight Thousand,
all of good Oak. It is about Twelve yards broad, so that three Turkish Wagons,
that are bigger than ours, can go a Breast upon it. The River of Drove is not
broad at that place, and there are but sixteen Boats that support the Bridge
with great Trees that make the Arches. All who well consider that Bridge, and
the several Wooden Towers which are built upon it, with the vast number of
Beams that were needful to uphold so great a Fabric, cannot sufficiently
admire, how they could find Timber enough to build or to support it. The Brave
Count Nicholas of Serini, Second of that Name, burnt the part of the Bridge
that is over the Drove in the year 1664. but in six Weeks time they made
another Bridge of Boats, a little lower than the first. The Turks would not
re-build it in the same place, because the Piles that supported it, and that
were under Water when the Fire was out, stuck so fast in the ground, that it
would have cost them too much Trouble to get them out. Over this Bridge march
all the Armies that come into Hungary, and here it was that the unfortunate
King Louis thought to have put a stop to the Turks, that were coming against
him, under the Conduct of Solomon, in the year 1526. and indeed, if that Pass
had been well defended at that time, it is probable Solomon might not so easily
have marched forwards to Buda. Count Serini burnt the part of the Bridge that
was built over the Drove, to hinder the Grand Vizier from receiving Succors
from the other Counties of Turkey; and upon his return, he also burnt
Five-Churches, that lies Westward from Esseck. Count Leslie, General of the
Imperial Army, set fire again to the Bridge of Esseck, which for twelve hundred
Paces length was immediately in a flame; at the same time he took the Town of
Esseck, put all he met to the Sword, and having plundered it, and blown up the
Magazin and Arsenal, that were full of Ammunition and Provisions, he put Fire
to it, and reduced it to Ashes.

WALPO.
Is a Town lying upon a River of the same Name, which abounds in Fish. It was
taken by the Turks in the year 1642. and re-taken and sacked by Count Leslie,
in the Month of August 1685.

METRONIZA.
Is a pretty neat Town, and big enough to be the place of a Fair. It lies upon
the side of a Lake.

CIRMIUM.
This Town lying upon the River Bosneth, near the Save, into which it falls, is
the chief Town of the Province of that Name, which is also called Schremnia, in
the South part of Hungary, having been formerly a Bishops Seat; it has its
Name from Sirmus King of the Tribals: This is the ancient Sirmium heretofore so
Famous, which is at present so little esteemed. However, there grows excellent
Wine about it, and in this Province, it is said, that the Emperor Probus
planted Vines with his own hand, upon Mount-Almos or Arpataro. That Emperor was
killed there by his own Soldiers, who were vexed that he kept them in so strict
Discipline, and feared that they might be thought useless when that Prince had
quelled all the Enemies of the Empire; but afterward repenting what they had
done, they made him this Epitaph.

Hic probus Imperator
Et vere probus situs est.
Victor omnium gentium Barbarorum,
Victor etiam Tyrannorum.
That Emperor named Marcus Aurelius Probus, was the Son of a Peasant in
Dalmatia, and was killed in the year 282. Many Roman Emperors have been in
these parts, who were born, died, or signalized themselves by great Actions
there. For not to speak of Trajan, Caracalla, Gallien, Constantius, and several
others; the Emperors Aurelian, Probus, and Gratian, were born at Sirmium, and
Claudius Gothicus died there, or very near to that place. Jovian and
Valentinian, were born in Pannonia, and in the time of Photinus Bishop of
Sirmium, there was a general Council held in that Town.

CHAP. VIII.
Of the Rivers of Hungary, and their Description.

THE DANUBE.
THE Don or Donaw, by the Ancients called Danube, is the second River of
Europe, both for Greatness and Force; its source is in Swabia, in the County of
Fustemberg, where the Schwartz-wald is, and the black Forest. It passes by
Ulm, over against which it receives the Iler, which runs by Kempten, and near
to Memminguen, it passes by Donawert, near which and on the other side of it,
it receives the Lech, which runs by Ausbourg, and separates Swabia from
Bavaria; near to Donawert, the Danube enters into Bavaria, where it leaves
Newbourg to the right hand, Ingolstadt to the left; divides Bavaria from the
Palatinat, from whence it receives the Nabe; passes under the Bridges of
Ratisbonne and Siraubing, which are to the right; on the same side receives the
Iler, which waters Munick and Landshout, the Capitals of the upper and lower
Dutchies of Bavaria, receives at Passaw the Inn, which comes from the Engadines
amongst the Grisons, and crosses the County of Tirol, and there washes
Inspruck, that has the first Bridge upon the Inn, then Halle, in Tirol, and
Kufstain, etc. and gives to a part of the Town of Passaw the Name of Instat,
the first Town of Inn. A little below Passaw the Danube enters Austria, and
there waters Lintz the Capital City of Austria; above Ens it receives the
River of Ens, where the Town of Ens is, washes Crems in the middle Austria, and
Vienna in the lower; Vienna and Lintz are on the right side Bank, and Crems on
the left of the Danube. The Murau, which descends from Moravia, falls into the
Danube between Austria and Hungary, where the Danube continuing its course, on
the left hand washes Presbourg, the Capital City of the Upper Hungary, embraces
the Isle of Schut, on the Borders whereof are Owar or Walkenbourg, and Gever or
Javarin; and at the point of the Isle, Comora, all strong places, which for
many years have stood it out against the Turks. The Danube having at Comora
rejoined all its Branches, passes by Gran or Strigonium, runs betwixt Buda the
ancient place of Residence of the Kings of Hungary, and Pest, embraces the Isse
of Ratzenimarck; waters Colocz on the left, receives the Drove on the right,
and over against the Isle of Erdewdy, the Teisse on the left, over against
Salonkemen, the Save on the right, and below the confluence of the Save and
Danube lies Belgrade, in a Situation that ought to be esteemed, seeing of the
four Rivers that are near to it, the least runs above an hundred Leagues:
Beyond Belgrade we have but little knowledge of the Danube, and from this place
forwards the Ancients began to call it the Ister: On the right hand it receives
all the Rivers, which descend from Servia and Bulgaria, and on the left those
of Walachia and Moldavia, by seven Mouths it discharges it self into the
greater or black Sea. The whole Length of its Course may be six hundred
Leagues, to wit, two hundred in Germany, somewhat less in Hungary, and somewhat
more from Hungary to the Black Sea.

The TIBISQUE, and the BEDRACK.
That great River toward the East called Tibiscus, or otherwise the Teisse,
which has its source in the Country of Maromorus, at the Foot of the Carpatian
Hills, having received the Mariscus or Marisa with several other Rivers,
discharges it self into the Danube, betwixt Waradin, St. Peter, and Belgrade.
There are brought down this River great quantities of Salt Stones, dug out of
several Mines in Hungary and Transylvania, which are also sent up the Danube as
far as Presbourg. This River is reckoned the best in all Europe; nay, I may
say, in all the World, for Fishing; so that the People of the Country say
commonly, that there is nothing in that River but Water and Fish.

The River of Bedrack, which falls into the Tibiscus not far from Tockay, is
also so full of Fish, that in the Summer time when the water is low, the People
say that the Fish make the River to swell: It is none of the smallest Rivers;
for according to the Relation of those who have seen it, it is Thirty fathom
broad, and Eighty eight and a half deep. But there is no good fishing in it
with Nets, because the Channel of it is triangular. This great Fertili^y is
attributed to the Communication that its Water has with the salt Mines under
Ground, which impregnates it with a Principle of Fecundity.

The RAAB.
The River Arabo or Raab is to the West, which has its source in Stiria, and
falls also into the Danube. It is a River in much esteem, because it receives
the Lauffnitz, the Pica, the Guntz, and many other Rivers; but it is become
more Famous by the defeat of the Turks, under the conduct of Achmet, who at
that time was Grand Visie-, by the Imperial Army at St. Godard near to that
River.

The DROVE.
There is a very lovely River to the South, called the Drove, or the Drau,
which having its head in the Country of Saltzburland, that is a part of the
ancient Noricum, and running through the middle of Carinthia, falls at length
into the Danube near to Erdoed, or the ancient Teutoburgium, after it has run
about an hundred Leagues. The River of Mure falls into it.

The SAVE.
On the same side also is the River of Sava or Sau, which is very broad, and
having its source in Carinthia, falls into the Danube at Belgrade, after it
has run near an hundred Leagues, and been augmented by several considerable
Rivers that fall into it. It seems to be a very pretty River at Carnodunum or
Crainbourg, which is a neat Town near the head of it; but it is much enlarged
in its Course: It makes some pretty Islands, as Metubaris to the West of the
ancient Sirmium, and Sigestica or Sissex near Zagrabia, wherein there was
heretofore a very strong and famous Town. The Water of the Danube seems to be
whiter and more muddy than the Sau, and the Water of the Sau, blacker and
clearer than the Danube.

The GRAN and the WAAG.
In the North of Hungary there are some Rivers also, which having their sources
in the Carpathian Mountains, divide it from Poland; amongst others the River of
Gran, which falls into the Danube, close by Strigonium or Gran; and the Waag or
Vagus, which discharges it self into the same River, above Comara. Stuckius who
is an Eye Witness says, that that River is no less than the Po in Italy: It is
certain that at Freystadt, which is a Town about seventeen Leagues from the
place, where it falls into the Danube, it is very broad, and has a fair Bridge
there, the greatest part whereof was carried away by the Ice, in the year 1669.
A great way above this Place, and nearer its source, there is another very fair
Bridge at Trenschin.

The SARVIZZA, WALPO, and BOSNETH.
Besides all these great Rivers there are some others mentioned by Pliny which
he calls Fluvii non ignobiles, no inconsiderable Rivers. By Jeni or Nova
Palenka, runs the River of Sarviz za otherwise called Vrpanus* which has its
source close by Wesprin, and having run by Alba Regalis, makes a Triangle with
Buda and Gran, and then falls into the Danube.

By Walcover also runs the River of Walpo or Vulpanus, which has its head
above the Town of Walpo, that was taken by Solomon upon his March to Alba
Regalis or Stoel-Weissenbourg.

As to the River Bosneth or Bacuntus, it has its source near Mount Arpataro or
Almus, and falls into the River of Sau, near to the Ancient Sirmium that stands
upon its bank.

CHAP. IX.
Of the Division of the Kingdom of Hungary, into Counties, and their Names.

WE have said before, that the Kingdom of Hungary is divided into Counties as
well as England is. These Counties are the parts of the Kingdom, which are
called Provinces, and by the Greeks Monarchies, and the Lords who are Counts of
them, have the jurisdiction therein; it having been for the more easy and
exact Administration thereof, that the Hungarians thought fit to make that
division. The Sovereignty of part of these Counties is at present lodged in his
Imperial Majesty, as King of Hungary; and the other is usurped by the Turks:
The Counties subject to the King of Hungary, are these that follow.

Counties. Comitatus. Abanviver, Abanvivariensis. Avra, Arvensis. Barzod,
Barzodiensis. Kalo, Bihoriensis. Bistricz, Bistricensis. Sarwar,
Castriferrensis. Czepufs, Cepuziensis. Comara, Comariensis. Gewynar,
Geuinariensis. Gewer, Javarensis. Gran, Strigoniensis. Lypzce, Liptoviensis.
Marmarue, Marmaroviensis. Mauzon, Musoviensis. Neytracht, Nitriensis. Novigrad,
Novigradensis. Peretzaz, Peregiensis. Poson, Posoniensis. Kreiss, Risiensis.
Sellia, Saroniensis. Saroz, Sariensis. Semlyn, Selminiensis. Sopron,
Soproniensis. Torna, Tornensis. Transchyn, Tranchiniensis. Ovar, Turocensis.
Wa^asdin, Varasdiensis. Vesprim, Vesprimiensis. Ugoza, Ugoghensis. Ungwar,
Ungensis. Zagrabia, Zagrabiensis. Zalawar, Zaladiensis. Zatmar, Zalmariensis.
Zolnock, Zolnocensis. The Counties subdued by the Turks. Ekekes Feierwar,
Albensis. Barananyvar, Baraniensis. Bars, Barsensis. Bath, Bathiensis. Bodrogh,
Bodrogensis. Chanad, Chanadicensis. Chege, Zaboliensis. Hewecz, Hewesensis.
Sag, Hontensis. Czongrad, Orodiensis. Peloycz, Pelysiensis. Pesth, Pesthensis.
Posega, Posegiensis. Szygeth, Sigetensis. Zegzard, Simigiensis. Szerem,
Sirmiensis. Temeswar, Temesvensis. Tolna, Tolnensis. Thurtur, Torantaliensis.
Valpon. Valkoniensis.

CHAP. X.
The Estates of Hungary.

THE Estates of Hungary consists of four Orders. 1. The Bishops and Clergy. 2.
The Barons and Lords, amongst whom are comprehended the Palatin of Hungary, the
Ban of Sclavonia, and the Hereditary Counts of Provinces. 3. The Gentry,
whether they have Inheritances or not, and those newly enobled by the Prince,
for which the Patents ought to be presented in some of the Counties when they
have their particular Meetings, for the holding of the Convention of the
Estates. 4. The free and Royal Towns.

In the Estate of the Clergy, which makes the first, are reckoned,
The Archbishop of Gran, and his Suffragans, who are, The Bishop of Agria,
Chancellor of Hungary. The Bishop of Nitra. The Bishop of Raab. The Bishop of
Vaccia. The Bishop of Five-Churches. The Bishop of Vesprim, Chancellor to the
Queen.
The Archbishop of Colocza; whose Suffragans are: The Bishop of Zagrabia or
Agram. The Bishop of Waradin. The Bishop of Szerem. The Bishop of Alba Julia in
Transilvavania. The Bishop of Chenad. The Bishop of Bosne. The Bishop of Posega
in Sclavonia.

CHAP. XI.
The chief Palatin Nobility of Hungary.
BAthory Princes of Transylvania, Counts of Schepuse. Bothlen Falva, Counts of
Schepuse. Bubeck of Pessevez. Budiani, Counts. Draskowich Counts of
Tracosthian. Drugeth of Homonay. Esdrin Counts of Serini. Esterhazi, of
Galanta, Counts of Frackno and Sopronia. Fergatz, Counts of Nograd, Saros and
Sabol. Gara. Gareb, Counts of Windgradt. Hedervara. Illeshazi, Counts of
Lipton, and Trinchin. Ilsua, Counts of Alba. Kaonth. Nadasti, Counts of
Pochenedioz. Orsag of Guth. Palfy, Counts of Erdend. Pasman, Counts of Paves.
Paszta. Poloch. Poth, Barons of Hederwara, Counts of Simigin. Privi, Counts of
Viwar. Revay, Counts of Turocz. Rothal, Counts. Schasgotz, Counts. Seech,
Counts of Seech. Teckely, Counts. Wesseleny of Hadad Counts of Muran, Comora,
Pest, and Pilis. Zapolya, Counts of Scepuse. Zacky, Counts.
The Counts and Barons who were at the Diet of 1660. at Presbourg, were of the
following Families.
Bastian. Balassa. Berchery. Bossangi. Bosckai. Beirber. Beringi. Chaki.
Czobor. Caroli. Cikani. Druget. Dhomonaia. Drascowitz. Esterhasi. Erdoeidi.
Forgach. Frangipani. Franczi. Herdewara. Horwaths. Horeski. Jakwich. Illeshasi.
Keri. Klegowits. Kemeni. Kara. Kapi. Kolonisch. Konski. Kokarch. Listius.
Lippa. Melith. Meggeri. Maitingi. Megisai. Malakosi. Nadasti. Niari. Nodani.
Ozacki. Orchoci. Ostronsien. Palfi. Pasmani. Prengi. Pafkay. Petroci. Poloczi.
Pongrato. Pongrangi. Petreo. Ragotski. Revai. Rothal. Schezi. Sekengi.
Scengici. Szaniogh. Telegki. Weseleni. Wicay. Zichi. Zrin. Zahi. Zengchi.
Some of these Families are extinct since the late Wars.

CHAP. XII.
Of the State of the Palatin of the Kingdom of Hungary, his Quality, Authority,
and Pre-eminence, with a List of those who in this last Age have been Elected
to that Office.

THE chief Dignity of this Kingdom next to the King, is that of Palatin, who
calls the Estates during an Inter-reigne, and who has the first and most
powerful voice in the Election of the King. He also decides the controversies
that happen betwixt the King and his Subjects, since the Kings there are
subject to the Laws, and must not Transgress them. He has absolute Power in
the Armies, so that he can punish and reward all, as he thinks good, and bestow
as much Land as Twenty or Thirty men are able to Labor. He has great Revenues,
not only from the Salt Pits, but from other things also; and heretofore he had
the Rents of the two Isles on the Coast of Dalmatia, which now are possessed by
the Venetians. In short, so great is his Authority, that right or wrong the
Hungarians obey his Will, and follow his Resolutions; and it is a Dignity that
cannot be given to Strangers, but belongs only to the Hungarians, who many
times oppose their King by means of that Magistrate. It is not an Hereditary
but Elective Office. Here I shall mention those who in this last Age have been
Chosen to that Dignity.

1. Stephen Illishazi Count of Trenschin, Palatine of Hungary, chosen in the
year 1601. died at Vienna the 26. of May 1609.

2. George Turso Palatine of Hungary, chosen the Seventh of December, 1609.

3. Sigismond Forgatz, of Guymes, 1619.

4. Nicholas Count of Esterhazi of Galantha and Frakno, Palatine of the Kingdom
of Hungary, made Knight of the Golden Fleece, in the year 1628. Deceased in the
year 1645.

5. Nicholas Draskowich Count of Trakostyan, and of the County of Massovia,
Gentleman of the Bed Chamber to his Imperial Majesty, in his Royal Court of
Hungary, chosen Palatine in 1646. he died the Ninth of August 1648.

6. Paul Palfi Count of Erbent, and Plaffenstein, Palatine of the Kingdom of
Hungary, was made Knight of the Golden Fleece in the year 1650. he died in 1654.

7. Francis Count Wesselini of Hadad, Hereditary of Muran, Palatine of Hungary,
made Knight of the Order of the Golden Fleece in the year 1662. he died in 1667.

8. Paul Count of Esterhazi, Galantha, Frackno, and Sopronica, Palatine of
Hungary, made Knight of the Golden Fleece, in the year 1682. Counselor and
Chamberlain to the Emperor in his Royal Court of Hungary, at present Palatine
of that Kingdom.

CHAP. XIII.
Of the Arms of the Kingdom of Hungary, and in what manner the Kings have born
them.

THE Kingdom of Hungary bears Barry of eight pieces Argent and Gules. Prince
Sigismond King of Bohemia having Married Mary Daughter and Heiress of Louis of
Hungary, was in right of her King of Hungary, and afterward Emperor. He joined
the Arms of Hungary and Bohemia, which he bore upon the Eagle of the Empire,
empaling those of Hungary, with a double Cross of St. Stephen, which is
preserved with his Coat of Arms and Sword, used in the Ceremony of the
Coronation of these Kings. In his Coin of Gold there is a Reverse of the Globe
of the Earth, Crowned with an Imperial Crown, which the Emperors at present
place over their Arms.

John and Matthias Corvinus, who were Kings after him, bore quarterly the Arms
of Hungary, the Cross of St. Stephen; those of Dalmatia, and Bohemia, and upon
all those, the Arms of Corvin. In this manner they have been found upon a
Prayer Book in Velom, which belonged to Matthias Corvinus, and is kept in the
Bibliotheke of the Vatican. On the first page they are disposed in this manner,
quarterly. 1. Hungary, Barry Argent and Gules. 2. Gules a Cross double Argent
placed upon a Tuff of Earth vert, consisting of three little Hills. 3.
Dalmatia, Azure three Leopards Heads couped and Crowned Or. 4. Bohemia, Gules,
a Lion Argent his tail forked, nowed, and passed in Saltier, Crowned langued
and Armed Or, upon all the Arms of Corvin, which is Or, a Crow conturned Sable,
the head returning back to the right hand, in his Beak a double long Cross
placed in Bend. Louis King of Hungary Knight of the Golden Fleece, Son of
Ladislaus King of Hungary and Bohemia, bore quarterly the 1. and 4. Hungary,
the 2. and 3. Bohemia, Gules a Lion Argent, with a double tail, langued, and
Armed Or, upon these the Arms of Poland. The Helmet Crowned Or, and the crest
an Eagle nascent.

After them, this Kingdom entered into the House of Austria, which joined the
Arms of both together. The Archdukes, who have born so many Quarterings in
their Escutcheons, have born a chief empaling Hungary and Bohemia. Ferdinand
the Brother of Charles the Fifth, King of the Romans, and afterward Emperor,
bore a great Escutcheon quartered of Hungary and Bohemia; upon which he placed
another less Escutcheon, quarterly upon the 1. Austria and Ancient Burgundy
empaled. 2. Quarterly of Castille and Leon: Upon the 3. Arragon empaled with
Sicily: Upon the 4. party per fess, Lorrain upon Brabant. Upon all another
little Escutcheon empaling Guelders and Juliers, two Lions confronting one
another, the Eagle of the Empire was displayed behind the great Escutcheon
encompassed with a Collar of the Order of the Golden Fleece.

Rodolph, II. during the Diet of Ausbourg, coined a piece of Silver or Medal,
in the Middle whereof was the Eagle of the Empire Crowned with an Imperial
Crown, and collered with an open Crown supporting an Escutcheon quarterly of
Hungary and Bohemia, with another over all, empaleing Austria and Ancient
Burgundy: About this Medal or Coin, instead of an Inscription, were Four and
Twenty little Escutcheons of the Arms of Castillo, Leon, Arragon, Sicily,
Granada, Carniola, Carinthia, Swabia, Cellembourgh, Braganza, the Mark of
Sclavonia, Portuan, Habsbourg, Tyrol, Brabant, Flanders, Nybourg, Alsatia,
Holland, the Mark of the Holy Empire, or Antwerp, Croatia, Sclavonia, and
Dalmatia.

One may judge how much in the progress of time, the Kings of Hungary enlarged
their Country, not so much by what may be found in History, as by what is to be
seen at their Coronation. For there are Twelve of the Chief of the Kingdom, who
carry each of them a Banner, wherein are represented the Arms of Ten Provinces
of that Kingdom, which are, Hungary. Dalmatia, Vert. Three Leopards Faces: Or.
Croatia, Chequey Argent and Gules of Eight Ranges. Sclavonia: Or, a Cardinals
Cap Sable, bordered Gules, the Strings Pendant of the same. Galicia. Russia:
Sables, a Portal open, with an Ascent of two Steps, Or. Servia. Bulgaria.
Bosnia: Azure, an Arm armed Or, holding in the hand a Sword Argent, the point
upwards. Ludormiria.


CHAP. XIV.
Of the Memorable Battles that have been fought in Hungary.

ROMAN BATTLES.
THE Inhabitants of Hungary have had in Ages past many Brushes with the Romans,
and fought several Battles with them: that which was given in the Neighborhood
of Adom, a Town of the Lower Hungary, upon the Bank of the Danube, was one of
the Bloodiest. The occasion of it was, that at that time the Romans came to
Seize the Country under the Conduct of Mocrinus and Tetricus, but there they
received an utter overthrow.

Some time after the Inhabitants of Hungary having recollected their Forces,
gave the Romans a Second Battle in the precincts of Solna, wherein they again
obtained the Victory, and drove out the Romans, though they lost on their side
above Forty thousand of their own Soldiers.

THE BATTLE OF MOHACZ.
THAT unhappy Battle, wherein Louis King of Hungary lost his Life, was fought
the 30th. of August 1526. in the plain of Mohacz, a little Town of the Lower
Hungary upon the River called Carasse, close by the Danube, betwixt Botesk and
Esseck. Solomon, Emperor of the Turks, being come into Hungary, with a powerful
Army; the Chief Commanders of the Hungarian Army persuaded the young King, who
being hardly Twenty years of Age, was much wanting in Conduct, and had not
Forces sufficient to make head against the Turks, to give them Battle, without
staying for the Succors that were to come to him from Transylvania: They were
puffed up with their former Victories, and so swollen with a good Conceit of
themselves, that they ^hought none were able to stand against them, and that
their Reservedness might make the Hungarians enter^ain a bad opinion of the
resolution of their Army. The Event answered ^he rashness of that Counsel; for
that ^ovely Army of the Hungarians, consist^ng of the best part of the
Nobility, and chief Forces of the Kingdom, was ^outed and cut in pieces: The
King was ^ot killed in the Fight; but his Horse ^hrew him into a Mire, where he
^tuck, and died, after he had for a ^ong time fought Valiantly with the
Barbarians on the other side of the Town. His Body was found two Months after
the Battle, in the River ^f Czelepatuka, and was interred in ^he Burying-place
of the Kings, in the City of Alba Regalis. That unhappy ^efeat of the
Christians, and that ^ictory of the Turks, occasioned in the ^equel the loss of
the chief part of the ^ingdom of Hungary: The Bishops themselves as well as the
rest of ^he Clergy, made it apparent in that Battle, that they were very good
Soldiers for the common Cause of Christendom; for no fewer than six Bishops
were killed in that fatal Overthrow, and amongst them Paul Tomorie Archbishop
of Colocza, one of the chief who had advised the King to engage in that Battle:
His Head was carried to Solomon, who called it a foolish Head, and incapable of
giving its Master good Council. This is the Inscription that was made in memory
of that fatal day.

Ludovicus solo nomine secundus,
Ad coronas natus, non formatus
Diadema Hungaricum secundo, quarto aetatis Bohemicum,
Ut Immaturus acquisivit.
Ita mature secum utrumque perdidit;
Foelicior, si solus perire potuisset.
Eandem tamen cum Rege fatalis urna sortem
Experire coacta Hungaria,
Ducenta suorum millia eodem luctu deploravit:
Luctuosum praevisorum malorum initium,
Lachrymabile futurorum dolorum argumentum.
THE BATTLE OF S. GODARD.
THis Battle was fought the first of August, in the year, 1664. at St. Godard,
betwixt Kermin and Canisa, in the Lower Hungary. In this place, one half of the
Turkish Army passed the River of Raab, to attack the Imperialists; but hardly
were these Troops got over the River, when, without giving them time to
entrench themselves, the Imperial Forces under the Command of General
Montecuculi, being drawn up to receive them, forced them to fight, and utterly
defeated the greatest part of the Turks; the rest betook themselves shamefully
to flight, who crowding in great haste to re-pass the River, threw themselves
headlong into the Water, and were carried away by the Stream; so that the
Rapidity of the River, forcing along with it Men and Horses, they were drowned
in the deepest places; it being certain that more perished in the Water, than
by the Sword: And the Turks themselves acknowledged, that they lost many more
Men, than the Gazets of Europe mentioned. To which they added, that their
Histories did not speak of so great and so shameful a Disgrace happened to the
Ottoman Empire, since it had attained to so high a degree of Power, as that
Disaster was. The Turks left above Eight Thousand Men upon the place, and the
Glory of the day to the Imperialists, which was immediately followed by a
Peace, that the Turks proposed, and greedily embraced; of which these were the
Conditions.

1. That Transylvania should continue within its ancient Limits, and with its
ancient Privileges, under the Command of Prince Michael Abaffi. 2. That the
Emperor of Germany should have Liberty to fortify Gutta and Nitra. 3. That
the Turks should make no Innovation in the Regulation made for the Frontiers,
as well of Hungary, as of the other Territories of the Emperor. 4. That Abaffi
should pay six hundred Thousand Crowns to the Port, for the Charges of the War.
5. That all Acts of Hostility, betwixt the Emperor and Grand Signior, and
their Subjects, should for ever cease. 6. That the two Provinces of Zatmar, and
Zaboli, given to Ragotzi for Life, should again return to his Imperial Majesty,
and neither the Prince of Transylvania, nor the Grand Signior pretend any Right
to them. 7. That the strong Castle of Zechelhyd which revolted from the
Emperor, should be demolished, because neither Party would renounce their
Pretentions to so important a place. 8. That Waradin and Newheusel should
remain in the Possession of the Turks, who had carried them by their Arms. 9.
That for Confirmation of the Peace, the two Emperors should send Ambassadors
to one another, with reciprocal Presents of equal value.
THE BATTLE AND RELIEF OF VIENNA. The 12th. of September, 1683.
Instead of a Description of that happy day; I shall here publish the Letter of
the King of Poland, written in Latin, the Day after the Battle, to the Marquess
of Grana, then Governor of the Netherlands, with the Translation thereof;
nothing being more Authentic than the Contents of it.

JOHN III. By the Grace of God, King of Poland, Great Duke of Lithuania,
Russia, Prussia, Massovia, Samogitia, Livonia, Kiovia, Volhinia, Podolia,
Poldachia, Smalenscia, Severia, and Czernihovia.

ILlustme. grate nobis dilecte. Vocati in subsidium periclitantis Viennae,
lectis confestim militaribus Copiis quam angusti temporis spatio prius viarum
incommoda, distantiam loci, and ripas Danubij, demum cacumina montium and
saltus sylvarum Viennensium superaverimus, famam distulisse non dubitamus.
Nobis vel id Illustritati Vestrae refer placet, quod sine injuria communis
Christianorum solatij reticere non possumus. Deo auspice, Comite Serenissimorum
Principum, Ducum, and Electorum Fortuna, Christiani Exercitus, quorum nobis
cuncti detulerant Imperium, die hesterna in Campis praesentibus insignem and
saeculis memorandam de Turcis, and Tartaris reportarunt Victoriam. Magnus
quippe Turcarum Visirus integris Orientis and Hanni Crimensium superbus
viribus, jam non Viennae duntaxat intra triduum (ni subventum fuisset)
periturae, sed universae Christianitatis spem deglutiens, acie, and praelio
unius diei coesus, atque fugatus est. Peditatus vulgo Janisseri, utpote tardior
militia, aequalique cum Equestribus fugae insufficiens, in Castris deserta, and
Victorum relicta discretioni. Castra ipsa longitudinem and latitudinem duorum
fere milliarium exaequantia, capta, Tormenta atque integra res tormentaria cum
opimis spoliis in praemium victricium cessere armorum. Vienna gravi obsidione,
and extremis liberata periculis, suaque seeds reddita Caesari. Vlteriori
Victoriae mox metam posuit, ac turpi fuga sese recipienti host terrore panico
in Pannoniam monstrante viam, umbra fuit beneficium. Insidet nihilominus tergo
illius levior nostra militia; deficientesque in via partim caedit; partim in
captivitatem abducit. Porro and ipsi in Dei nomine eidem insistimus victoriae,
non prius destituri, donec, si ita propitiis visum fuerit Superis, hostili in
terra armis Christianis stativa pateant hyberna. Tali itaque rerum
Ottomanicarum sub-secuta confusione, si quidpiam aliquando Europae vires ubique
promptis accinctae armis dignum Christiano nomine auder^ contendant, nunquam
opportuniora rerum momenta praesentibus nancisci poterunt; Si namque ad
clangorem memoratae Victoriae, vel levis armorum terra marique succedat
ostentatio, proculdubio gemens sub tyrannide Graecia, ac ipsa Constantinopolis
perfido recalcitraret Domino, ad suasque respiceret origines. Idem de Epiro,
Macedonia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Dalmatia, Valachia, Moldavia, aliisque Regnis and
Provinciis raptis credendum, prout non levia praemissorum habemus indicia:
forte jam and illam continuam rerum humanarum Mahometano Imperio superesse
vicissitudinem, ut postquam ab exiguis profectum initiis eo creverit, ut
magnitudine sua laboret, rursus vertente fato and volubilis fortunae rota alio
inclinante, ad sua devolvatur principia and ubi satis in altum surrexerit,
lapsu graviori ru at: Sed his omnibus supremo Imperiorum Regnorumque Arbitrio
relictis. De Illustritate Vestra omnino persuasi sumus, habere illam tantum
pietatis and generosissimae mentis in res Christianas, ut non solum felicibus
hisce congaudeat successibus, sed eos communes sibi aliquando faciat, nullasque
ad mutua Christianitatis incommoda intermittat occasiones. Quod dum
profundissimis ingeminamus desideriis, optimam Illustritati Vestrae cum
prospero rerum successu precamur valetudinem. Dabatur in Castris Turcicis in
Tentoriis Visiriis ad Viennam die 13. mensis September. anno Dom. 1683. Regni
nostri X. Anno.

MOST Illustrious Lord, and most dear to us. Being called to the relief of
Vienna, which was in danger of being lost, we make no doubt, but that you have
been informed by the common Report, in how short a time, notwithstanding the
difficulties and length of the way, we came to the Banks of the Danube,
surmounted the tops of Mountains, and crossed the Forests of Vienna, with
Forces that we raised in diligence; but with Pleasure now we acquaint your
Illustrious Lordship with that which we cannot conceal without prejudice to the
common Consolation of Christendom. Know then that Yesterday the Christian
Armies, the command whereof was by all given to us, fighting under the
Protection of God; and assisted by the good Fortune of the Princes, ann Dukes
and Electors, obtained in the Camp where we are, a signal Victory and Memorable
to all posterity, over the Turks and Tartars. For the Grand Vizier of the Turks
proud with the Forces of all the East and of the Crim Tartars, and thinking of
nothing less than swallowing up not only Vienna, which in three days space must
have perished (had it not been relieved) but also all Christendom, is in one
days fight overthrown and put to flight. The Infantry, whom they call
Janisaries, not being able to fly so nimbly as the Horse, seeing they are
slower and more pestered, were left in the Camp, and abandoned to the
discretion of the Victorious. Their Camp, which took up near two German miles
in length, and as much in breadth, was taken, their Cannon, Ammunition, with
rich spoils became the reward of the victorious Armies. Vienna is relieved from
a dreadful Siege, and imminent dangers, and the Emperor again restored to the
place of his Residence. The Night put a stop to the course of the Victory, and
Darkness favored the Ignominious flight of the Enemy, who smitten with a
Panick Fear is retreated toward Hungary. Our Light Horse, nevertheless pursue
them at the Heels, and kill or make Prisoners all whom they overtake in the
way. We, moreover, in the name of God pursue the same Victory, being resolved
not to desist, until (if kind Heaven so think fit) we have opened for the
Christian Armies Winter quarters in the Enemies Country. And such at present is
the Confus^on of the Ottoman Affairs, that if the Princes of Europe, will
speedily Arm and undertake somewhat worthy of the Christian Name, a more
favorable Juncture than this can never be offered unto them; for if the News
of this Victory were seconded by some show of arming by Land and by Sea, there
is no doubt but Greece, that groans under the Tyranny of an Usurper, and
Constantinople it self would revolt from their perfidious Master, and endeavor
to recover their pristine-Liberty. Upon no slight grounds we may assert the
same thing of Epyrus, Macedonia, Bosnia, Bulgaria, Dalmatia, Valachia,
Moldavia, and other Kingdoms and Provinces that have been subdued by the Turks.
Perhaps, also the Mohammedan Empire, may now have a trial of the vicissitude of
Humane Affairs, and from small Beginnings being grown so great, that it labors
under its own weight, by a change of Fate and a turn of the Wheel of fickle
Fortune, it may relapse into its Original, and from so high an Elevation have a
greater fall. But all these things are to be left to the supreme Will and
Pleasure of Empires and Kingdoms. As for your Illustrious Lordship, we are
fully persuaded that you have so great Piety and such Generous Inclinations
toward the concerns of Christianity, that you will not only congratulate these
happy successes; but one day also contribute to the promoting of the same, and
omit no Occasion of furthering the advantage of Christendom. This we desire
from the bottom of our Heart, praying God to give your Illustrious Lordship
perfect health and all sort of Prosperity. From the Tent of the Grand Vizier,
in the Turkish Camp before Vienna the 13. September. 1683. and the Tenth Year of
our Reign.

Upon occasion of this great Victory, the following Chronogram was published.

aVstrIaCo aVXILIVM DeVS. And it was the Subject of a Medal, which was made
representing a double spread Eagle upon the Globe of the World looking to the
Sun, with this Inscription, Colliget Auxilii radios, and having in its Tallons
a Sword and Scepter: About the Globe was this Motto, Sub umbra alarm tuarum,
and underneath this, the Crescent reversed, with this Hemistich, Victamque
redegit in umbras. And in the circumference of the Medal, this Verse: Imperii
murum Austriaco interponit inorbe.

On the Reverse these Words were engraven.

1683.
Die 14. Julii
Vienna Austriae
A Turcis obsessa,
Sed Protectore altissimo,
Leopoldi Imperatoris industriae consilio,
Regis Poloniae Joannis III.
Presentis valido Auxilio.
On the one side was Written. In Person. Seren. Electoris Bavari, Saxon:
Et Imperi subsidio Commit. Caplieres Deput. Praesidente.


And on the other: Duce Lotharingio Caesaris locum tenente Generali, Comite
Starembergio Viennae.

And underneath all these Writings was what follows: Viennensium denique
Universitatis Senatus,
Officialium, Civium ac incolarum concordi obsequio, ab obsidione
Profligato host eodem Anno
Die 12. Septembris liberata.


There were many Sonnets made upon the same Subject in Vulgar Languages to the
Honor of the King of Poland; but that which was made on him in Latin, very
well deserves a place here.

JOANNI SOBIESCO.
DOminatione Polonico, Lutuanico;
Liberatione Austriaco, Pannonico;
Profligatione Ottomanico, Turcico;
Religione Christianissimo;
Pietate Catholico;
Zelo, and obsequio Apostolico.
Inter Reges sapientissimo,
Inter Duces praestantissimo,
Inter Imperatores, citra fabulas,
Solo nomine tremebundo,
Solo nomine Hosts profliganti.
CUI
Gloria militaris Regnum peperit,
Clementia firmavit,
Meritum perenabit.
QUI
Raro probitatis and constantiae exemplo,
Propria deserens, aliena defendens,
Docuit quo pacto sancta Jura foederum
Ineantur, excolantur, perficiantur.
Ottomanicam lunam fulgentissimo
Crucis vexillo
Aeternam eclypsim minitant^m,
Ita propere fortiterque a Christianorum finibus eliminavit,
Ut unum, idemque fuerit
Venisse, vidisse and vicisse.
Inter innumeros igitur Christiani orbis plausus,
Inter vindicatae Religionis and Imperii Laetitiam,
Inter cruentatae lunae extrema deliquia,
Agnoscant praesentes, fateantur posteri,
Non tantum enascenti Evangelio quo promulgaretur,
Sed etiam promulgato ne profligaretur,
Utrobique fuisse hominem a Deo missum
Cui nomen erat Joannes.
Now this happy Victory and Relief of Vienna, is so much the more to be prised,
that it is certain, according to the List which was afterward found in the
Grand Viziers Tent, that the Army of the Turks which Besieged it, consisted of
191800. men, and the Christian Army only of 81600. The great Standard, the
Horses Tail, and the Grand Viziers own Horse were taken by the Poles, who
obstinatly pursued them in their Retreat, and there was much booty found in the
Turkish Camp, which was wholly plundered even to the Tent of the Grand Vizier,
where they found great Riches in Gold, Silver, and other precious things: All
their Artillery, which consisted of above an hundred pieces of Cannon, was also
gained with store of Ammunition.

The great Standard we mentioned before, was carried before the King of Poland,
when he made his entry into Vienna, immediately after it was Relieved, and was
sent presently by that King to the Pope. On the one side of it was this
Inscription, We prophecy to you prosperity and good Success, God Pardon your
Sins, and grant you all his grace.

And on the other side. God Assist and Bless you, and dwell in the Hearts of
Believers, that the purity of the Faith may increase therein. Besides him there
is no other God, and Mahomet is his Prophet.

It will not be amiss here to insert the List of the great Lords, who besides
the Imperialists, were present at that Battle; of whom the Names follow, The
King of Poland. Prince Alexander his Son. The Elector of Bavaria. The Elector
of Saxony. The Duke of Lorrain. Prince Waldeck. Two Marquesses of Baden. Four
Dukes of Saxony. Three Dukes of Wittenberg. The Prince of Anhalt. The Duke of
Croy. The Prince of Salms. Two Dukes of Neubourgh. The Marquess of Barreit. The
Prince of Hannover. The Prince Lubomirski. The Prince of Savoy. The Prince of
Hogen Zoller.


And since the King of Poland had so great a Hand in this Victory, I hope the
Curious will not be dissatisfied, to see the League offensive and defensive,
which was happily made and concluded in the Month of April, 1683. betwixt their
Imperial and Polonian Majesty's, of which the substance follows:

1. There shall be only an Alliance defensive betwixt the two high Contractors;
but against the Turks there shall be also an Alliance offensive, which shall
last until both Parties find themselves in Rest and good Security.

2. This Alliance shall be Sworn and Sacredly confirmed by Oath, in presence of
the Pope, by the two Cardinals Pio and Barberino, as well in name of his
Imperial Majesty, as of his Majesty of Poland, and of his States.

3. His Imperial Majesty renounces all pretentions for the Charges he has been
at, for the good of the Republic of Poland, during the late War of Sweden, and
the Diploma de Electione Regis shall be given back and annulled.

4. On the other hand the Crown and Republic of Poland renounces all
pretentions it can have against the House of Austria.

5. The one shall not make a separate Peace, without the consent of the other.

6. The Heirs of the two parties and Successors in the Government, shall be
obliged to observe this Alliance.

7. This only is to be understood of a War against the Turks, and not of any
other.

8. His Imperial Majesty declares, that he will entertain 60000. men, whereof
he will send 40000. into the Fields, and keep the other 20000. in Garrisons.

9. His Polonian Majesty offers to bring 40000. men into the Fields under his
own command.

10. To the end the Preparations of War may be the sooner in readiness, His
Imperial Majesty promises by Anticipation to remit 200000. Crowns to the Crown
of Poland, on condition that that sum be raised out of the Tenth of the Pope in
the Kingdom of Poland, which he has granted for that effect.

11. His Imperial Majesty shall be obliged to recover the places that he has
lost in Hungary. The Poles in like manner shall be obliged to regain theirs in
Podolia, Walachia, and the Vkrain, and to act against Teckely with 6000. men.

12. Other Christian Kings and Potentats may be also received into this
Alliance; but not without the mutual consent of both Parties, and above all the
two Czars of Muscovy shall be earnestly entreated to enter into it.

I cannot conclude this Chapter, without calling to mind a pretty Emblem made
upon occasion of this Victory, by a young Prince, who reckons Emperors amongst
his Ancestors: The Emblem represents a Turk pitching a Net to surprise and
catch the Eagle; but who wandering and engaging too far in his own Toil,
became himself therein the prey of the Eagle, with this Inscription: Qui
captat, capitur, or Turca a capiendis captus.

Turca parans Aquilae insidias ac retia tendens
In somnis nuper visus adesse mihi.
O miseram! mecum tacitus, te funera, dixi,
Quae maneant, nescis, quo male cauta volas?
Interea in casses tendebat recta volatu,
Tollere jam praedam, praedo parabat ovans.
Unguibus at contra volucris (mirabile visu)
Tendentem insidias insidiasque tulit.
Sic raptus raptor, factus sic latro, rapina,
Praedonemque putans se fore, praeda fuit,
THE BATTLE OR DEFEAT OF THE TURKS NEAR PRESBOVRG.
THE Turks who were before Vienna, in the year 1683. finding it difficult to
bring their Provisions and Ammunition from the City of Buda, to the place where
they were on the side of the Danube; because the Garrisons of Raab and Comora
way laid all their Convoys, and much annoyed them; the Grand Vizier sent orders
to Basha Husani, to join Count Teckely with some Troops, who was on the other
side of the Danube, near the River of Waag, and to endeavor to make himself
Master of the City of Presbourg, to the end they might have the passage of the
Danube free, make a Bridge of Boats over it, and be provided of all things on
that side. The thing was well undertaken; for Twenty thousand of their Men
marched toward that Town: But the Duke of Lorrain, who at that time resolved
to increase his Army with the Regiments of Gran and Baden, which were in Raab,
and were not so necessary there, seeing the Turks had Besieged Vienna, and who
therefore had drawn near to Presbourg, to secure that Town from the attempts of
the Turks; having had notice of it, sent immediately against them Prince Louis
of Baden (who that day commanded the Vanguard) with some Squadrons of Prince
Lubomirski's men, and the Two Regiments of Palfi and Styrum, who at first
charged Teckely's men in such a manner, that presently they betook themselves
to flight. The Turks made a little longer Resistance; but at length also they
were forced to give ground with the loss of Eight hundred of their Men, and a
considerable Aga. The Imperialists gained there a Thousand Wagons with Baggage;
and certainly it was a lucky Hit for them to have beat the Enemy at that time,
because if they had delayed but one day longer, Presbourg had been lost, seeing
those within had promised to render next day to Teckely, and to furnish him
with all that was necessary for the Bridge of Boats: whereas the Imperialists
thereby not only preserved that Town, whither soon after they sent Six hundred
men to reinforce the Garrison; but also hindered the passage of the Danube, and
the means of providing the Army before Vienna with necessaries; besides that
they also ruined the Boats which Count Teckely and the Turks had gathered
together for making a Bridge: These last retreated toward the River of Waag,
from whence Count Teckely wrote a Letter, to Justify himself to the Grand
Vizier, which was intercepted by the Imperialists.

THE BATTLE OF BARKAN.
THE Generals of the Christian Armies, on the 10th. of October, 1683. advanced
toward Barkan (the Poles on that occasion being on the left Wing;) the Turks
seeing them approach, fell upon them with a dreadful Shout, and chiefly upon
the left Wing, commanded by the Lord High Marshal of Poland Jablanowisky, who
having the former Victory in his thoughts, charged the Turks so furiously, that
he constrained them to give ground; but the Duke of Lorrain with the Cavalry of
the right Wing, broke in upon them, with so great Impetuosity, that he put them
entirely to the Flight. Afterward some Regiments were commanded out to pursue
the Turks, who fled, and by them were driven partly in a Marish, and partly
into the Danube; because the Bridge, betwixt Barkan and Gran, broke in the
middle, so that most of them fell into the River, and were drowned, and the
rest who saved themselves in the Marish were killed, seeing in the first heat
they gave the Turks no Quarters; and it was not till toward the end that they
took a Thousand Prisoners, amongst whom was the Basha of Silistria. Prince
Louis of Baden signalized himself on this occasion, and was by his Conduct the
chief cause of the Victory, because the Imperial Cavalry acted all along
without the Foot. The Christians gained all the Colors, Tents, Cannon,
Baggage, and in a word, all that was in the Camp of the Turks, besides a
Thousand Horses that they made booty of. There are various Relations of the
loss that the Turks suffered in this Fight; some will have it that being
Thirteen thousand strong before the Defeat, they saved but Three or Four
Thousand at most, and amongst those the Basha of Mesopotamia who Commanded
them; all the rest, who were the Choice of the Turkish Army, being either
killed or taken. However it be, the Waters of the Danube were died with their
Blood; this Fight lasted about five hours.

From thence the Imperalists advanced toward Barkan, and Battered that place
so violently with great and small Shot, that presently they in the Town beat a
Parley, which being granted them, the Imperialists entered the place; but
shortly after a Fire happening in it, this little Hold was burnt down, and no
body could tell how the Fire happened. This Victory was followed by the taking
of Gran, which surrendered the 27th. of October, after four days Siege: These
were the Articles of Capitulation;

1. All the Cannon, Mortars, Ammunition, Magazines, and other Arms shall remain
in the Fort, except what is hereafter specified.

2. The Garrison shall have leave to provide themselves of Bread and Meat for
two days, and to carry with them all their Coffee, Sharbet, Clothes and other
Movables.

3 His Highness of Lorrain shall furnish the Garrison a certain Number of
Wagons, to carry their Goods to the Water, to be Transported downwards.

4. Some Boats shall also be given to the said Garrison, to be made use of for
transporting their Effects; and if they cannot carry them off all at once, they
may send for them at several times.

5. That if the before said Baggage cannot be Transported all at once, the
Garrison may put what is left behind into some Houses of the Lower Town, which
shall be kept by some of their Men, that all the rest may honestly and without
Let or Molestation follow after.

6. Since the Boat-men cannot be spared at present, the Garrison shall be
obliged to make use of their own men, to go down and up the River with the
Boats.

7. The aforementioned Articles being granted to the Garrison, the Gate of the
Castle shall immediately be opened to the Imperial Troops, that they may take
their Post there, and so soon as the aforesaid Wagons and Boats shall be
ready, the Garrison of the Fort of Gran, that is to say, they who are capable
to bear Arms, shall march out all at once.

8. All the Christian Prisoners in the Castle shall be released.

9. Lastly, the Garrison may freely march out, as has been said, with their
Wives and Children, Arms and Baggage, Horses and Camels, observing the
Conditions abovementioned, in the manner as they are expressed.

In consequence of this Capitulation, the Prince of Alepah of Syria, Commander
in Gran, and Basha of Nicopolis, and Samson Basha Colonel of the Janissaries,
marched out of the place with Five hundred Men carrying Arms to go to Offen;
whereupon the Duke of Lorrain, made Governor of Gran Colonel Calowith Governor
of the Castle of Presbourg, with a Garrison of 1000. Imperial Soldiers, and
some Hundreds of Hussars.

THE BATTLE OF GRAN.
AUgust the 16. 1685. The Dukes of Lorrain and Bavaria raised the Siege that
the Turks had laid down before Gran, and then engaged the Barbarians, to the
number of Fifty or Sixty Thousand men, gave them a total Rout, and obliged them
to abandon their Camp and Baggage; which Victory Three days after was followed
with the taking of Newheusel.

It will not be improper, I think, in this place to insert the Letter which
about that time, the Serasquier Ibrahim Basha wrote to his Highness the Duke of
Lorrain, which he sent by the Deftedar of the Timmariot's Achmet Desquelebi by
the Advice of the Grand Signior, the Contents whereof are word for word as
follows.

To our good Friend the Duke of Lorrain, Generalissimo of the Armies of the
Emperor of the Germans, Greeting:
We let you know as a good Friend, that Achmet Desquelebi Deftedar, or
Commissary of Newheusel, has reported that we your Friend, ought to send you
Letters, to which you might give Credit, if we desire to see a Negotiation for
Peace: It is for that Cause that the present are Written and sent to you; and
seeing we your Friends desire for the service of the Creatures of God, that
means of Tranquillity might be found out for the Subjects of both Parties, what
we say to you and beseech, as well as what we shall do (in pursuance of our
Word) has been approved (for so is the Will of God) by the Majesty of our
resplendent, Omnipotent, and formidable Emperor and King of the Superfice of
the Earth; wherefore we send you this Man, to whom we have entrusted some
things to be told you by word of Mouth, to the end you may be pleased to send
us a trusty Man on your part, to endeavor a Peace, it is hoped we may come to
a Conference; whereupon Farewell. Given in the Camp at Pest:

Signed, IBRAHIM.

CHAP. XV.
Of the Ceremonies observed in the Coronations of the Kings and Queens of
Hungary.

AFter all necessary Preparations have been made for the Solemnity of the
Coronation, the Ceremonies of it are performed in this manner: In the first
place, an Election is made of those who are to go and fetch the Crown, Scepter,
Globe, representing the World, Sword, Coat of Arms, the Royal Habits, and
Cross, in the City of Presbourg, where they are kept, with the Standards of the
Kingdom. They discharge this Duty, and carry them to the Church. The Palatin
takes the Crown, and places it on the right side of the Altar, where the
Archbishop of Strigonium says Mass; the Prelates sit about the Steps of the
Altar, and some of them lead the King from the Throne to the Altar, or from the
Altar to his Seat; the rest serve for some other Action of the Coronation. The
Kings Throne decked with Cloth of Gold, is pretty near the Altar, and opposite
to the middle of it, having over it a Cloth of State, of the same Stuff as that
of the Seat. The King kneels first upon the Steps of the Altar, and Kisses the
Cross, which the Archbishop of Strigonium presents to him; then takes the Oath
contained in the Roman Pontifical, saying the Words after the Archbishop, and
laying his Right hand on the Gospel, with Eyes lifted up to Heaven, as if he
called God to witness. After the Oath, he is anointed by the Archbishop on the
right Arm near the Elbow, and betwixt the two Shoulders: Then being clothed
with the Coat of Arms of King St. Stephen, he receives from the same
Archbishop, the naked Cuttelas of the same Saint, then gives it back to the
Archbishop, who returns it into the Scabbard, and then girds it to his side.
That being done, the King turned toward the Altar, as Defender of the Altars,
Religion, and the Church, draws the Sword out of the Scabbard, and brandishing
it three ways in the Air gives so many blows; then the Archbishop taking the
Crown, gives it to the Palatin, who holding it up on high with both his Hands,
and being upon the Steps of the Altar, asks aloud all that are present, if they
would have him Crowned for their King, and having three times put the same
question unto them, upon their answering in the Affirmative, he is crowned, and
receives from the Archbishop the Scepter in the right hand, the Globe in the
left, and all the marks of Royal Dignity: After that he sits down on the
Throne, as taking Possession of the Kingdom. Then all the Hungarians make loud
Shouts and Acclamations, wishing the King a long and prosperous Reign, and at
the same time, the Vocal and Instrumental Music, the Trumpets, Drums, and
Cannon, mingle their noise with the confused Voices. Mass being said, and the
Streets, through which the King is to go, being Boarded and covered with White,
Green, and Red Cloth, the King walks from the Church, where he was, to another,
wearing the Crown and Coat of Arms, some carrying before him the Royal
Ornaments and Standards, and a great many others walking before and after him.
At the same time pieces of Gold and Silver are scattered among the People, in
all the Streets through which the King passes, who coming to the other Church,
sits down on the Royal Throne erected there, and makes some Knights, striking
them thrice on the Back with the naked Sword of St. Stephen, as they are
kneeling before him. This being done, he comes out of the Church, and mounting
on Horse back, with the Crown and Coat of Arms, having the same persons on
Horseback, who walked before or followed him on foot, as he came in the same
Order he goes out of the Town, and alighting, with the Archbishop of
Strigonium mounts up upon a Theater, where lifting up the Right hand he takes
an Oath to the Hungarians to maintain the Privileges of the Nobility, do
Justice to all, observe the Laws of the Kingdom, and procure the good of the
Public.

In the mean time all are uncovered, and when he has taken the Oath, all again
shout, and amidst the noise of great Guns wish him all sort of Prosperity.
Afterward he mounts a stately and well-managed Horse, and spurs him toward an
adjoining ground, where putting him upon the Carrier, and drawing the Sword of
St. Stephen, he makes in form of a Cross, four strokes in the Air, turning his
Horse very nimbly, as threatening the four Corners of the World, and then there
is nothing to be heard but Volleys of great Guns. After this the new King
putting his Horse to a Walk, draws near the Lords who are Spectators, and with
them goes to his Palace, where he feasts them, sitting at Table with his Crown
and Coat of Arms, and being served by some Barons and Grandees of the Kingdom,
appointed for that Office; and when Dinner is over, they who have the charge of
the Crown, and Royal Ornaments carry them back to their place.

Now to show you the Ceremonies of the Coronation of the Queens of Hungary,
I Will give you here an Abridgment of what past when the present Emperess Anna
Maria of Bavaria Palatiness of Newbourg was Crowned Queen of Hungary in the
Town of Edimbourg in the year 1681. The Emperor in his Imperial Habits, and the
Domestic Crown of the Empire on his Head, went with his Attendants to the
Church of the Recollets, where he was received and sprinkled with Holy Water by
the Clergy of Hungary.

The Train of the Empress came after, before whom Count John Draskowich walked
with the Scepter, in place of Count Draskowich, the Steward of the Kingdom went
before. The Counts Stephen Zichy and Christopher Erdedy, both Keepers of the
Crown, came next, with the Lords who carried the Royal Jewels upon Cushions of
Crimson Velvet. Count Illishazi carried the Silver Cross, Count Nicholas Erdedy
the Scepter, the Palatin of Hungary the Crown, and Count Nicholas Draskowich
the Globe of the Empire. The Empress came after these, led by the Duke of
Diederichstein Master of the Palace. The Countess of Rapach chief Governante
carried up her Train, which was embroidered with Gold, Diamonds and Pearls, and
after her came the Palatiness and other Ladies of Court. The Emperess was
received at the Entry into the Church, by the Archbishops of Colocza and
Neutra, who led her to the Throne. In the mean time the Emperor having taken
his place on the side of the Gospel, went also to his Throne in the middle of
the Quire over against the great Altar, behind the Throne sat the Palatiness
with the chief Governante and other Ladies of Court, in Chaires prepared for
them. On the left hand of the Empresses Throne were the Lords of Hungary, who
carried the Jewels of the Kingdom, which were taken from them by the
Archbishop who put them upon the Altar. Before the Throne there was a Silver
Stool, where the Domestic Crown, which was brought to the Church under a
Cover, was placed. That being done the Gospel was read, at the end whereof the
Emperor went to the Altar with the Crown on his Head, the Scepter in his Right
Hand, and the Globe in the Left, and presented the Empress to the Archbishops
to be crowned. When his Imperial Majesty had taken his place, the Empress
advanced toward the Altar, assisted by the Archbishops, and kneeled upon the
first Step, whilst the Archbishop of Gran kissed the end of the Cross, and
presented her the Scepter and Globe of the Empire, which she took, the Scepter
in her right hand, and the Globe in the left, the Prelate all the while saying
some Prayers. That Ceremony being over, the Empress was led back to the Throne,
where the Archbishop having again said some Prayers, Te Deum was sung during a
Volly of 480. Musketshot, and a discharge of the Artillery upon the Rampart.
Then Count John Draskowich took the Scepter and Globe of the Empire out of the
hands of the Empress, in place of the Steward of Hungary, and gave them back to
those who had carried them before. That being done, the Empress was led to the
Offering by the Archbishops, and put a rare piece of Gold of Goldsmiths work
into a Silver Basin that was upon the Altar, and then returned to her Throne.
The Domestic Crown was taken off of the Head of the Empress by the Bishop of
Neutra, during the Offering and Communion, and given to be held by the Duke of
Diedericksteyn, who after the Communion gave it back to the said Prelate, to be
put upon the Head of the Empress again. The aforesaid Bishop led her to the
Communion, which being given her by the hand of the Archbishop of Gran, the
Crown was put upon her Majesty's head. The Ceremonies thus performed, they
returned in the same Order as they came, with the noise of Cannon, and the
Ladies were admitted to kiss her Hand. When they were at Table, his Imperial
Majesty ordered the Artillery once more to play, which concluded the Solemnity.

CHAP. XVI.
Of the Description of Transylvania, anciently united to Hungary, and the
Princes who have Reigned in it, since the beginning of this Age, to the present
time.

Transylvania, a Principality of Europe, is part of the Ancient Dacia, to the
West of Hungary, and to the East of Moravia, having the Carpathian Mountains to
the North, and Walachia to the South. It is four days journey in length, and as
much in breadth: That Name was given it by the Romans, because it is
encompassed with Forests as well as Mountains. The Hungarians call it Erdely,
and the Germans Siben bergen; because of Seven Towns which the fugitive Saxons
built there. Several other People settled there; but the Saxons I speak of
cultivated the Country best. The Romans afterward became Masters of it under
Trajan: In process of time it was united to Hungary, from which it was
dismembered in the year 1541. At present the Princes of it are Elective and
Tributary to the Turk. The Town of Transylvania are Hermenstadt, Clausenbourg,
Weisenbourg, or Alba-Julia, etc. It is a fertile Country, and has several
Mines and Medicinal Plants. Most of the Inhabitants are Greeks, Schismatics;
there are in it also a great many Heretics, and some Mahometans.

The Princes of Transylvania, who have reigned since the beginning of this Age,
are these that follow.

1. Sigismond Bathori, Knight of the Golden Fleece, Son to Christopher Prince
of Transylvania, who died in the year 1581. succeeded to his Father in that
Principality, and died at Prague the 17. of March 1603.

2. Stephen Bodtskey introduced himself by force into that Principality, and
his Usurpation was approved by the Turk, and at length by the Emperor upon
certain Conditions; he died of Poison in the year 1606. and named for his
Successor Valentine Homonay; but the States of the Country preferred Sigismond
Ragotski before him.

3. Sigismond Ragotski was elected Prince of Transylvania in the year 1606. but
having reigned a year, he resigned that Dignity to Gabriel Bathory Nephew to
Prince Sigismond in 1608. Sultan Achmet confirmed that choice, and the King of
Hungary, the Archduke Matthias did not oppose it.

4. Gabriel Bathory was elected Prince of Transylvania in the year 1608. and
was assassinated at Valencze in the year 1613.

5. Bethlen Gabor who had had a great Hand in that Death, being supported by
the Turks, seized the State and caused himself to be proclaimed Prince of
Transylvania in the year 1613. and by a Treaty made with the Emperor in 1622.
he continued Prince of Transylvania. He died the 15. of November 1629.

6. George Ragotski Prince of Transylvania succeeded to him; he died of his
Wounds at Waradin in the Month of June 1660.

7. Achatius Barchay by the Turks introduced into that Principality in place of
Ragotski, resigned it some time after, and was beheaded about the end of the
said year 1660,

8. When John Kemeni was chosen Prince, who was killed in the year. 1661.

9. Michael Abafti Count of Sicules, Prince of Transylvania who Reigns at
present, was chosen in the year 1661. by the Assistance of the Turks.

CHAP. XVII.
Of the Turkish Emperors, who in Progress of time have invaded, subdued, and
usurped the greatest part of Hungary.

Solomon, called the Magnificent, Son of Sultan Selim, immediately after the
death of his Father, whom he had poisoned, took Belgrade, and the Isle of
Rhodes, was the first that invaded the Kingdom of Hungary, and with his Armies
passed the Rivers of Save and Drove, in the year 1526. He was Victorious in the
Famous Battle of Mohacz, which I mentioned before, wherein Louis II. King of
Hungary unfortunately perished. At Bagdet he was crowned King of Persia, and
subjected Assyria, and Mesopotamia: He made six Expeditions into Hungary, and
took the strong Towns of Strigonium and Alba-Regalis: He also subjected
Aladulia, and the Kingdom of Aden; besides many other Towns upon the Red Sea:
He made Algiers Tri^utary, took Pialli, Tripoli, and the Gerbes, and after all
these Victories whilst he besieged the strong Town of Siget in the lower
Hungary, he died ^n Five-Churches, as has been mentioned before.

This Emperor took to himself the ^ollowing Titles, in the Credential Letters
of the Ambassador, whom ^e sent to the Emperor Ferdi^and.

I the Lord of all Lords, the Ruler of the East and West, who am able to do,
and ^ot to do whatsoever I please. Lord of all Grecia, Persia, and Arabia,
Ruler over ^ll things that can be Subject to a King and Lord; the Great Hero of
these Times, and mighty Giant of this vast universe; Lord of the White and
Black Seas, and ^he Holy City of Mecha, shining with the Brightness of God, of
the City of Medina, and the Holy and Chaste City of Jerusa^em; King of the most
Noble Kingdom of Egypt; Lord of the Country of Ionia, and Cities of Athens and
Sena, of the Holy Temple of God Zabilon and Bassio, Ret^aam and Magadim, the
Seat and Throne ^f the Great King Nashin Rettham, and Lord of the Island of
Algiers, and Prince of the Kingdom of Tartary, Mesopotamia, the Medes,
Georgians, and of all Greece, Morea and Anatolia, Asia, Armenia, Walachia,
Moldavia, and all Hungary, with a great many other Kingdoms and Dominions,
whereof I am Emperor, that thrice great Caesar, Sultan Solomon, the Son of the
great Emperor Sultan Selim, who have Authority from God to Rule all People in a
bit of Iron, and power to open the Gates and Doors of all Cities and strong
Holds, all the ends of the Earth, none excepted are delivered into my Hands; I
the Lord of the East from the Land of Tscin to the utmost bounds of Africa,
whom God has made a valiant Warrior in the edge of the Sword, amongst whose
most potent Kingdoms the impregnable Castle of Cesarea, is reckoned the least,
and the Empire or Dominion of Alexander the Great the meanest of my Hereditary
Dominions; with me is the Strength of the whole World, and Virtue of the
Firmament.


Zelim II. Emperor of the Turks, Son of Sultan Solomon II. called the
Magnificent, succeeded to him in the year 1566. being about Forty two years of
Age; this Emperor having subjected Nicosia and Famagusta, seized the Island of
Cyprus, a Kingdom belonging to the Venetians in the year 1521. but after that
loss the Christians gained the Famous Battle of Lepanto, the 7th. of October
the same year. Haly Basha was killed there, and it is not doubted, but that it
was the greatest Blow that the Ottoman Empire had for a long time received;
and, indeed, if the Christians had known how to make the best Advantage of that
Victory, they might without doubt have taken Constantinople, where all were in
a general Consternation: And to see how great a Victory that of the Christian
Princes was, we may only read the Triumphal Inscription exposed by the Romans
in the Capitol, in memory of it, and of Marco Antonio Colonna Duke of Paliano,
Knight of the Golden Fleece, Great Constable of Naples, whom Pope Pius V. made
General of the Ecclesiastical Forces, who solemnly received the Standard in St.
Peter's Church at Rome, and who in that memorable Battle commanded as
Lieutenant General, being upon his return received in Triumph in the City of
Rome.

Marcus Antonius Ascanij Filius, Fabricij nepos, Columnae Marsorum, and
Hernicorum Dux, inita inter Pium V. Pont. Max. Phillippum Hispaniarum Regem
Catholicum, and Rempublicam Venetam Societate, Classis Pontificiae Praefectus,

De Turcis Non. Octobris ad Echinadas,

Navali praelio victis,
DC. Navigiis in potestatem redactis,
Demersis and fugatis.
Christianos XV. mill. in libertatem assertis,
Hostium XXX. mill. caesis,
X. mill. captis,
Re optime gesta
Ut Victoria omnium maxima in mari parta.
Ex S. C. and Pij V. S. P. authoritate
More Majorum
Pride. Non. Decembris anno a Christo nato M.D.LXXI.
Triumphavit,
Ad ejus rei memoriam sempiternam,
Diem hunc antiquis Triumphalibus fastis adscribendum,
Et monumentum hoc in Capitolio ponendum,
Censuit S. P. Q. R. ut superiorum aemulationi,
Praesentis aevi gloriae, posterorum incitamento,
Testaretur, in promerendis honoribus, ac tribuendis,
Neque virtutem, neque benignitatem priscam
Adhuc deesse Romany,
Coss. Romans decreverunt, curaverunt.
Selim the Turkish Emperor, died of an Apoplexy the Thirteenth of December 1574.

Amurath III. Son of Selim II. began to Reign about the end of the year 1574.
He presently put to death five of his Brothers, according to the Cruel custom
of the Ottomans, and refused to prolong with the Emperor Maximilian II. the
Truce which he had concluded with Selim II. He took Tauris which he Plundered,
and defeated the Marovites and Drus of Mount Libanus: After that he made a
powerful Invasion into the Country of the Croats, who were worsted at first,
but they afterward killed Ten thousand Turks, and obliged the rest to let them
live in quiet. Amurath died at Constantinople, the 18th. of January, 1595. at
the Age of Forty eight.

Mahomet III. Son of Amurath III. began his Reign in the year 1595. by the
death of One and Twenty of his Brothers, and Ten of his Fathers Wives whom he
left with Child, and whom he caused to be thrown into the Sea. He never was at
the Head of his Army but once. The Christians under the Conduct of Count
Mansfield took Strigonium, Alba-Regalis under the Command of the Duke of
Mercaur in the year 1601. and the Lower Town of Buda, under the Archduke of
Austria. He lost the Forts of Vice grad, Balbocz, Petrinia, Haduan, Palota and
Vesprin; and on the other side the Knights of Malta seized Lepanto. The Armies
of Mahomet were beaten by the Vaivod of Walachia, and by the Prince of
Transylvania, who defeated Sinan Basha, and so Moldavia, Walaohia and
Transylvania shook off the Ottoman yoke. The Turks on the other hand had some
advantages, and re-took two or three Towns, as Pest Canisa and Alba-Regalis,
but that was not comparable to their losses. Mahomet demanded Peace of the
Christians, who refused it. He was an Infamous Man, so plunged into Debauchery,
that neither domestic Disorders, nor Foreign Wars could ever make him forsake
it; that made the Janisaries mutiny; to pacify whom Mahomet was forced to
deliver up his greatest Friends to their Rage, and pretended to banish his
Mother, who was thought to be the cause of all the Calamities of the State. He
caused his eldest Son to be Strangled, and the Sultana the Mother of him to be
drowned, having suspected her to be Guilty of some Treason against his Person.
He died of the Plague at Constantinople in the year 1603. the Thirty ninth year
of his Age, and Eighth year of his Reign.

Achmet I. of that name, Emperor, of the Turks, Succeeded to his Father,
Mahomot III. at the Age of Fifteen years, in the year 1603. His Moderation was
admired upon his coming to the Throne, in that having but one only Brother, he
did not put him to death according to the Custom of the Turkish Princes; but
shut him up in a Cloister of Mahometans. The Sophy of Persia taking the
advantage of his Minority, re-took Tauris and Erzerum. Achmet sent thither the
Basha Cigale, who not having acquitted himself well of his Commission, was upon
his return Strangled by 50. Capigis who met him at Bursa. Achmet regained
Transylvania, Walachia and Moldavia by the means of Botskay, who revolted from
the Emperor, and sided with Bethlem Gabor against Sigismond Bathory Prince of
Transylvania. Afterward finding himself Attacked on all hands, he put Four
Armies into the Field; one against the Persians, another against the Polonians,
one to oppose the Cossacks, and the last to guard the Tribute of Egypt; but all
of them having been unfortunate, as he was preparing for greater designs, he
died the 15th. of November 1617. in the Thirtieth year of his Age and
Fourteenth of his Reign.

Mustapha, Emperor of the Turks was Son to Mahomet III. and Brother to Achmet
I. he succeeded to him though he had a Son Osman Twelve years old in the year
1617. Mustapha being Twenty five years of Age was placed upon the Throne by the
Janisaries, who two Months after degraded him, being displeased at his reserved
way of living. Osman his Nephew Succeeded to him, and Mustapha, as some say,
led a recluse and solitary Life: But the truth is he was in Prison; however
being brought out by the Janisaries, he was again set upon the Throne the 19.
of May 1622. Next day after he caused his Nephew Osman to be put to death, and
having Reigned sixteen Months, the People being dissatisfied with his Conduct,
he was again confined to perpetual Imprisonment in the Month of September 1623.
and Amurath Brother to Osman was put in his place.

Osman, Emperor of the Turks, was the Son of Achmet I. and succeeded to him at
Twelve years of Age about the end of January 1621. He led an Army of almost
Four hundred thousand men against the Poles; but that Expedition was not
prosperous; he lost above an Hundred thousand men, atempting to force the Camp
of Threescore thousand Poles and Cosa^ks, Commanded by Prince Ladislaus. Osman
was obliged to make a Peace on disadvantageous Conditions. He thought that the
Janisaries had much contributed to that unhappy Success, which made him have a
mind to cashier them, and he was accused of having a design to remove the seat
of the Empire unto Damascus in Syria. That insolent Militia revolted and the
Unfortunate Prince was Strangled the 20. of May, 1622. die Order of Mustapha his
Uncle, whom the same Janisaries had raised to the Throne, as I said before.
Osman's Reign lasted but Four years, and about four Months. Sultan Osman took
the following Titles, in a Letter which he wrote at the desire of the most
Christian King to Basha Ferrovi and to Mula Cadi of Jerusalem, to restore the
Cordeliers to the possession of Bethlehem and of the Holy Sepulcher in
Jerusalem, which places had been possessed by the Armenians in the year 1625.

The Emperor Osman, Son of the Emperor Achmet, always Victorious; I who am by
the infinite Graces of the Almighty Creator, and by the abundant Miracles of
the chief of the Prophets, Emperor of Victorious Emperors, Distributor of
Crowns to the greatest Princes of the Earth, Keeper of the two sacred and most
august Cities, the fairest amongst all those of the World Mecha and Medina,
Protector of the Holy Jerusalem, Lord of the greatest part of Europe, Asia, and
Africa, conquered with our Victorious Sword, to wit, of the Countries and
Kingdoms of Greece, Themeswar, Bosne, Seget, Natolia, Caramania, Egypt, and of
all the Countries of the Parthians, Curdes and Georgians, of the Iron-Gate, of
the Countries of the Prince of the little Tartars, Cyprus, Diarbeck, Aleppo,
Erzerum, Damascus, Babylon, the Balzaradick, Arabians, Abechy, Thunis, Tripoli,
Barbary, and of so many other Countries, Isles, Streights, Passages, People,
Families, Generations and of so many Thousand millions of valiant Soldiers, who
rest under the Obedience and Justice of me, who am Emperor Osman, Son of the
Emperor Achmet, of the Emperor Mahomet, of the Emperor Amurath, of the Emperor
Selim, of the Emperor Solomon, by the Grace of God, the Retreat of the greatest
Princes of the World, and Refuge of the most honorable Emperors.


Amurath IV. was the Son of Achmet, and Brother of Osman; after the Death of
Achmet, the Janisaries as we have said, put Mustapha his Brother upon the
Throne, and afterward having sent him back again to Prison, they crowned
Osman. But in the sequel the same Insolent Militia re-called Mustapha, who
caused Osman to be strangled, and the Government of that Prince, being
disagreeable unto them, they remanded him to Prison. Amurath at the Age of
fifteen years was saluted Emperor in the Month of September 1623. and in the
year 1626. he besieged Bagdet; but the Persians defended themselves so
vigorously, that in the year 1630. the Turks were forced to withdraw. Amurath
had the Trouble of losing Hali Basha, and diverse places, which the Persians and
Arabians took from him. Besides that, the Poles and Cossacks, gave him the
allarm so hot, that the Viziers were resolved to dethrone him, if the Peace,
which he made with these People, had not altered their minds. Amurath concerned
himself indirectly in the Affairs of the Protestants of Germany, at the
Solicitation and under the Conduct of Ragotski; but it happened to the
Confusion of both. He had at length the Pleasure to be revenged on the
Persians. In the year 1638. He set out into the Field, as it is thought, one of
the most numerous Armies that ever the Ottomans had on foot, and making use of
the favorable juncture of the War betwixt the Persians and Mogols, he besieged
Bagdet, and took it in forty days time. Amurath enjoyed not that Victory long,
for his Debauches brought him to his Grave the 8th of February 1640. in the Two
and thirtieth year of his Age.

This Amurath IV. in a Letter which he wrote to the King of Hungary in the year
1640. took the following Titles.

By the Grace of the Almighty God in Heaven, we Soly-Mahomet only God upon
Earth, full of invincible Graces, and Omnipotent Emperor of Babylon in Judea,
from the Sunrising to its Setting, King of all the Kings of the Earth, King of
all Arabia and Media, Duke sprung from the Noble Stem of Greece and Armenia,
born Triumphant King of Jerusalem, Lord and Protector of the Holy Sepulcher of
Christ Crucified.


Ibrahim, Emperor of the Turks, was the Son of Achmet, and succeeded to his
Brother Amurath IV. in the year 1640. When this last died the Officers of the
Port had a great deal ado, to make him come out of the place where he had been
in a manner Prisoner for three or four years, suspecting it to be only a
pretext to render him Criminal. The Sultana his Mother persuaded him of the
truth, having shown him the dead Body of his Brother, he came out, and having
been crowned, he gave himself wholly over to Voluptuousness, which was fatal
unto him. The loss of one of his Sultana's, whom the Knights of Malta took in
the year 1644. betwixt Rhodes and Alexandria, made him undertake to be revenged
on Malta. But he turned his Arms against Candie, and took the Canea in 1645. In
the mean time he grew cruel, his Pleasures made him abandon all care of the
Affairs of the Empire, and he became insupportable to all Men. The Militia and
Officers conspired against him, and sent for the Mufti and other considerable
Persons of the Law, on design at first to put to Death the Grand Vizier: Then
they resolved to depose Ibrahim, who expressing a great Contempt, and much
Haughtiness, did so incense those mutinous Spirits, that they strangled him the
18th. of August 1649. and placed Mahomet his Son upon the Throne.

Mahomet IV. was Born the second of January 1642. and was raised to the Throne
ten days after the Death of Sultan Ibrahim his Father, who was strangled by the
Janisaries. In the years 1663. and 1664. He took in Hungary the Towns of
Newheusel, Fort-Serin or Serin-wart, afterward demolished, and some other
places. The loss he sustained at the Battle of Raab or St. Godard made him
resolve to make Peace, which he did the 17th. of September 1664. He has been
more unfortunate in the present War, wherein he has lost Gran, Newheusel and a
great many other strong Places and Battles mentioned before. He took the City
of Candie in the year 1669. after a very long and tough Siege. The Venetians
have taken many important Places from him in this War, both in the Morea and
elsewhere. His greatest delight is in Hunting, wherein he spends most part of
the year. For that reason it is that he resides commonly at Adrianople, that he
may be near the places where there is most Game. He goes often to Larissa, and
spends sometimes Eight or Ten Days together under magnificent Tents, pitched
half a League from that Town upon the Banks of the Peneus. The Turks in his
time have made many Conquests from the Poles, from whom they have taken
Caminiec, and some other places. Sobieski great Mareshal of the Crown, and at
present King of Poland, was at that time General of the Polonian Army, who
defeated the Turks at the Famous Battle of Gotzchin in the year 1673. He eluded
their Projects the two years following, and at length reduced them to desire a
Peace. Since that, the Turks undertook a War against the Moscovites, and got
some advantages over them in the year 1678. and the Poles having confederated
with the Emperor and Republic of Venice in the year 1683. continue to Harass
and make head against them in Podolia, Russia, and the neighboring
Territories. These are the Titles that Mahomet IV. takes to himself.

Mahomet Sultan, by the Infinite Graces of the Almighty Creator, and by the
abundant Miracles of the chief of the Prophets, Glorious, Great, Invincible,
and always Victorious, Emperor of the Emperors of Constantinople and
Trebizonde, King of Kings, Distributer of Crowns to the greatest Princes of the
Earth, Keeper of the two sacred and most august Cities, Mecha and Medina,
Protector of the Holy Jerusalem, Master of the great Sea, Lord of the greatest
part of Europe, Asia and Africa, conquered with our Victorious Sword, Lord of
the East and West, of the great Anatolia, Bithinia, of the great City of Nice,
Nichomedia, the great Chalcedonia, Phrygia, Lycia, Pamphylia, Tarsis,
Paphlagonia, Caramania, Capadocia, Cesarea, of the great and little Armenia,
Iberia, Georgia, Mingrelia, the Iron-Gate, Turcomania, of the Curdes,
Parthians, Medes, Persians, of Tauris, Assyria, Mesopotamia, Diarbeck, of great
Babylon, Balzara, Chaldaea, of the Holy Land, Syria, Judaea, Canaan, Galilee,
Jerusalem, Samaria, Phenicia, Palestine, Aleppo, Erzerum, Damascus, of the
great Antioch, of the Tyberiade and Caspian Seas, of the three Arabias, the
Stony Desert, and Happy, the Indian, and Red Seas, of Aleppo, Ethiopia, Egypt,
Alexandria and Grand Caire, of Barbary, Thunis, Tripoli, Fez, Morocco, Cyprus,
of Rhodes, all Greece, Peloponesus, Thrace, Great Romania, Macedonia, Thessaly,
Corinthia, Chersonesus, Albania, Bosnia, Servia, Bulgaria, Slavonia, Moldavia,
of Themeswar, Dacia, Hungary, Wallachia, Scythia, the greater and lesser
Tartary; and of an infinite number of other Countries, Kingdoms, and Empires,
Isles, Streights, People, Families, Generations, and of so many Thousand
Millions of Valiant Soldiers, who rest under the obedience and Justice of me,
who am Emperor Mahomet, son of the Emperor Ibrahim, by the Grace of God, the
Retreat of the greatest Princes of the World, and the Refuge of honorable
Emperors.

This Prince Mahomet IV. has Children: the Sultana Queen, who is his chief
Wife, brought him his first Son, she is called Eumenia, a Greek by Nation; he
has a Brother called Solomon and his eldest Brother named Osman, is a
Dominican Monk, called Father Dominick of St. Thomas, who was taken with his
Mother by the Galleys of Malta sailing to Alexandria upon a Pilgrimage to
Mecha. This Emperor is the greatest Enemy of Christendom: May Heavens grant,
that the projects of that Infidel Prince against the Christian Religion, may be
disapointed, and that the proud Empire of the Crescent may one day be subject
to the glorious Standard of the Cross, under the Auspices of that great Caesar,
who under the lovely name of Leopold has merited to be the first, and XIV.
Emperor of the most August House of Austria, who by his great Prudence and
exemplary Piety, by his Constant and indefatigable Pains, and by the Grace of
the Great God of Armies, has happily procured to Christendom, all these great
Victories to the shame and confusion of that fierce and barbarous common Enemy,
and under the Conduct of the Valiant Charles IV. Duke of Lorrain, that brave
Hero, to whom Christendom is obliged, that it had time to Relieve Vienna, when
with unparalled Speed he marched thither, and in view of the Enemy supplied the
place with Provisions, Ammunition and 12000 of the best men in the Army, who
defeated the Turks and Rebels before Presbourg; that having taken that Town,
had a design, to make a Bridge there over the Danube, thereby to facilitate the
passage of the Turkish Convoys to their Camp before Vienna, who flew like
lightening to save the King of Poland from the extreme Danger wherein he was,
being engaged with the Body of the Ottoman Army near Barkan, and who after
gained the Battle of Barkan that we mentioned before. This is that Prince who
considering that his Glorious Predecessors have Reigned in Jerusalem, when they
had driven the Mahometans out of it, has on that occasion given so many Proofs
of his Courage, that it may be said he there revived the Lorrain Princes, who
heretofore Conquered the East. He has spared neither Body nor Heart in
following their Footsteps, that he might Crown himself with Glory in the Bloody
Battle of Gran, which he gained. He is the very same who has so often repulsed
the Fury of the Turks, when they were most formidable: It is he, in short, who
re-took from the Infidels the strong place of Newheusel, which served them for
a Key to open them a passage farther into the Countries of the Christians, and
who after the example of the Glorious Godfrey, who filled Europe with
admiration in the year 1096. has so signalized himself that if he Reign not in
Jerusalem, as his Ancestors have done, he Reigns, at least, in the hearts of
those, who have been the Spectators of his Fortitude and Prowess.

Sic fidei ductus Zelo Bullonius Heroes,
Ille Ambivaritae Gothofredus Marchio Terrae,
Moenia dum Solymae, templumque Arcemque Sionis,
Non sibi, sed Coelo vincit, Diadema superbum
Sprevit, and oblatae gemmantia dona Coronae.
Huc Leopoldorum virtus animosa tetendit
Austriadum, quorum hic celsa Ptolemaidos arce,
Vicinisque procul Salidinum exegit ab oris,
Barbarico referens saga candida mersa cruore,
Quo gentilitii rubuere insignia scuti:
Alter Damiatae muros, Nilotica Claustra
Diruit, and Phariis tentoria fixit arenis:
Ambo, triumphati spoliis Orientis onusti.
Horum magnanimus modo per vestigia tendit
Austriades, Caesar Leopoldus Gloria Saecli:
Cui victrix Pietas famulantia dirigit Arma,
Et Comites secum deducit in agmina Divos.
FINIS.
A TABLE OF MATTERS.
A AChmet. Page 153 Agria. Page 17 Alba Regalis. Page 44 Altenbourg. Page 60
Altsol. Page 32 Amurath III. Page 151 Amurath IV. Page 158 Arms of Hungary.
Page 92

B. BArkan. Page 53 Battles of the Romans. Page 97 Of Mohacz. Page 98 Of St.
Godard. Page 101 Of Vienna. Page 105 Of Presbourg. Page 123 Of Barkan. Page 126
Of Gran. Page 131 Of Lepanto. Page 149 Of Candie. Page 161 Bedrac. Page 76
Borsneth. Page 80 Buda. Page 38

C. CAnisa. Page 45 Cassovia. Page 16 Charles Duke of Lorrain, his Elegy.
Chronogram on the day of the Relief of Vienna. Page 112 Ceremonies observed at
the Coronation of the Kings and Queen of Hungary. Page 133 Five Churches. Page
64 Cirmium. Page 71 Clergy of Hungary. Page 84 Colzoca. Page 21 Comorra. Page
58 Count of Bouquoy, his Elegy. Page 31 Counts of Serini, their Elegy, Death of
Nicholas, I. Page 62, 63 Counts of Hungary. Page 81 Cremnitz. Page 34 Marco
Antonio Colonna. Page 150

D. DAnube. Page 73 Debrechim. Page 21 Dotis. Page 48 Drove. Page 78

E. EMblem upon the Relief of Vienna. Page 121 Emperors of the Turks. Page 146
Esperies. Page 71 Epitaph of the Emperor Probus. Page 72 Of Ovid. Page 50 Of
Louis II. King of Hungary. Page 100 Of Count Serini. Page 67 Esseck its Bridge.
Page 61 Estates of Hungary. Page 84

F. FIleck. Page 16 Freistadt. Page 28 Funs-kirchen. Page 86

G. GIula. Page 22 Gran. Page 51. 79 Gutta. Page 2^

H. HAdwan. Page 3^ Hern-grundt. Page 3^ Hungary. Page 1. 3

J. JAvarin. Page 5^ Ibrahim. Page 160 John III. King of Poland. Page 105 His
Elegy. Page 114 His Letter upon the Deliverance of Vienna. Page 10^

K. KIngs, look their pr^per Names. Page 8

L. LEopold a Town Page 28 Leopold, the Emperor and his Elegy. Page 167
Lepanto. Page 149 Louis, II. King of Hungary his Death. Page 98

M. MAhomet III. Page 152 Mahomet IV. Page 161 Maros. Page 35 Matthias Corvin
King of Hungary. Page 93 Medal of the Deliverance of Vienna. Page 113
Metroviza. Page 71 Mongatz. Page 24 Mustapha Sultan. Page 154

N. NEwheusel. Page 15 Newsol. Page 29 Nitria. Page 14 Nobility of Hungary vid.
Palatine. Nobility Palatine of Hungary. Page 62 Novigrad. Page 15

O. ONoth. Page 21 Osman. Page 155

P. PApa. Page 49 Palatines of Hungary. Page 62, 89 Pest, Page 35. Petronel.
Page 60 Presbourg. Page 12 Princes that assisted at the Relief of Vienna. Page
118

Q. QValities and Titles Usurped by the Turkish Emperors. Page 146

R. RAab. Page 55. 77 Rivers of Hungary. Page 73

S. SAbaria. Page 79 Satwar. Page 49 Satmar, see Zarmar. Save. Page 78
Sarnowitz. Page 29 Servizza. Page 80 Schemnitz. Page 33 Schinta, Page 27 Schut,
an Isle. Page 54 Siget. Page 61 Sirmium, see Cirmium. Solomon. Page 146 St.
Martins-bourg. Page 48 Standard of the Turks. Page 117

T. TAta. Page Temeswar Page 24 Teckely, Count, his Defeat near Presbourg. His
Imprisonment at Waradin. Page 26 Tibiscus. Page 76 Tirnau. Page 21 Transylvania
and its Princes. Tokay. Page 20 Topolchan. Page 28 Tortoise. Page 59 Trenschin.
Page 29 Treaty of Alliance betwixt the Emperor and King of Poland. Page 118

V. VAccia. Page 15 Vesprim. Page 48 Vice-grad. Page 46 Vienna Succored and
Relieved. Page 105 Vizovichitz. Page 34 Ungwar. Page 20

W. WAlpo. Page 70. 80 Waradin. Page 25 Waag. Page 79

Z. Zaravas. Page 23 Zatmar. Ibid. Zelim. Page 148 Zolnock. Page 22

There is lately Printed for Hen. Rhodes, next door to the Swan Tavern, near
Brides-Lane in Fleet Street; the following Books.
THe Comical History of the States and Empires of the Worlds of the Moon and
Sun: Written in French, by Cyrano Bergerac, newly done into English in Octavo.

The History of Monastical Conventions, and Military Institutions with a Survey
of the Court of Rome. Or a description of the Religions and Military Orders in
Europe, Asia and Africa, for above twelve hundred years, being a brief Account
of their Institution, Confirmation, Rules, Habits, and manner of Living, the
Qualification of their Institutors, and the time of their respective
Institutions, extending to either Sex, etc. Together with a Survey of the Court
of Rome, etc. in all the Great Offices, and Officers Ecclesiastical and Civil
dependant thereon: As also the Ceremonies of the Consistories, Conclave and
those that have been used in the Creation of Cardinals; Election of the
High-Bishop or Pope, and his Triumphant Coronation, Procession, and that of his
taking Possession of the Lateran Church in Rome; with what is observed in his
Sickness, and the manner of Solemnizing his Funeral Obsequies; with many other
things worthy of Note, according to what has been recorded by Candid Authors of
diverse Nations, and faithfully Collected by J. S. price bound one shilling.

The Strange and Prodigious Relations, Customs, and Manners of diverse Nations.
Containing; First, the Ridiculous Rites, and Ceremonies of the Heathens, in the
Worship of their several Deities. Secondly, the various Changes of the Jewish
Religion, and the State it is now in: With a full Relation of the Apparitions,
that foretold the fall of Jerusalem; as also of the dreadful Famine, wherein a
Woman Roasted and Eat her own Child; with the Circumstances of the Final
Destruction of that Famous City, under Titus. Thirdly, The Rise and Growth of
Mahometanism, giving an Account of the Doctrine of the Turkish Alcoran. viz.
Their Commandments, and Strange Pilgrimage to Mecca, etc. With the Life of that
Grand Impostor, Mahomet; as also Remarks on the Life of Scanderbeg, with the
many Victories he gained over the Turks. Fourthly, the Schisms, and Heresies in
the Christian Church: Being an Account of those Grand Heretics, the Adamites,
Mugletonians, etc. and all intermingled with Pleasant Relations of the
Fantastical Rites, both of the Ancients and Moderns, in the Celebration of
their Marriages, and Solemnization of their Funerals: Faithfully Collected from
Ancient and Modern Authors, and adorned with diverse Pictures, of several
remarkable Passages therein; by R. D. price bound one Shilling.

Historical, and Political Observations on the Present State of Turkey;
describing the Policy, Religion, Manners, and Military Discipline of the Turks;
with an Account of all the Battles, Seiges, and other Remarkable Transactions
and Revolutions which have happened, from the beginning of the Ottoman Empire,
to this Present Grand Seignior. To which is added his Life, containing all the
material Occurrences, that happened during his Reign; together with the Present
State of Hungary, and History of the Wars, Price bound 1. s.

Conversations on several Subjects, written in French by M. de Scudery, and
done into English, by Ferrand Spence.

The London Jilt, or the Politic Whore, wherein is showed all the Artifices
and Stratagems, which the Ladies of Pleasure make use of, for the Intriguing
and Decoying of Men: Interwoven with several pleasant Stories of the Misses
ingenious Performances, in two Parts.

The School of Recreation; or the Gentleman's Tutor, to those most Ingenious
Exercises, of Hunting, Racing, Hawking, Riding, Cock-Fighting, Fowling,
Fishing, Shooting, Bowling, Tennis, Ringing, Billiards, price bound one
Shilling.

Coffee-House Jests, Refined and Enlarged, by the Author of the Oxford Jests,
the Fourth Edition, with large Additions, price bound one Shilling.

Wit's Cabinet, or a Campanion for Youngmen and Ladies: Containing the whole
Art of Wooing, and making Love; with the best Complemental Letters, Elegant
Epistles, Amorous Addresses, and Answers, in a most Pleasant and Ingenious
strain, with the newest Songs, Sung at Court, and both Theaters. The School of
Bacchus, or the whole Art of Drinking, taught by a New, and most Learned
Method. The Interpretation of all sorts of Dreams. The Art of Chiromancy, and
Palmistry. The several sorts of Cosmeticks, for Clearing, and Beautifying the
Face, and taking away all Freckles, Morphews, Tetters, Ring-worms, and
preserving the Complexion; together with the way of making all sorts of
Perfumes and Sweet-Waters. The use of Metals, and Precious Stones, and the way
to Counterfeit them. Several of the choicest Secrets of Art and Nature. General
Rules for Gentile Behavior of Youngmen and Ladies, in all Companies. Several
sorts of News, from diverse Parts, very Jocose and Pleasant, price bound one
Shilling.

The Christian's Guide to Devotion, with Rules and Directions for a Holy Life;
as also Meditations and Prayers, by S. Smith, the Second Edition, price bound 1
s.

The whole Duty of a Communicant; being Rules and Directions, for the Worthy
Receiving the most Holy Sacrament of the Lord's Supper, by the Reverend Father
in God John Gauden, late Lord Bishop of Exeter: The Second Edition, with
Additions out of that Reverend Prelate's Original Copies, price bound 1 s.

The History of Kara Mustapha, the late Grand Vizier, being a faithful Account
of the Rise, and several Degrees of his Fortune; his Amors in the Seraglio,
his Exploits, the true Cause of his undertaking the Siege of Vienna, together
with the Particulars of his Death. Originally Written in French, and Faithfully
Translated into English by F. Philo, price bound 1 s.

The Serasquier Bassa, or an Historical Novel of the times, containing all that
passed at the Siege of Buda, out of French, price bound one shilling.

THE END.

