Plenitudo Fontis: OR, Christ's Fullness, and Man's Emptiness. A Sermon
Preached by JOHN PRESTON, etc.

1 Cor. 4. 7. What have thou, that thou have not received? if thou have
received it, why do thou boast, as though thou had not received it?

LONDON, Printed for John Stafford, and are to be sold in Bracke Horse Alley,
1645.

To the Anti-Arminian: OR, To every good Christian Reader.
Good Reader,
PLiny the great Naturalist, taxes some of Plin. Pr^efar. Hist. Natural.
the Greek, and Latin Writers in his time, of folly at the least, for sending
abroad their empty and worthless Pamphlets with an over-praise in the Title,
promising much at the first sight, but utterly deceiving the Reader in his
further search: But he that shall with judgment read this Sermon, will find
somewhat more then a naked title to commend it. Sometimes the workman graceth
the work: Sometimes the Work the Worke-man; but behold in this Treatise they
kiss each other, and are joined together as a white Rose and a red Rose in one
sweet Posie. But, that both have been abused in the first Impression hereof,
it appears as clearly (by the Manuscript) as the splendant Sun within Earths
spangled Canopy: for all those Passages, which will make the Arminians to
stumble and (without doubt) to fall in some measure, are (by the
Imprimatur-ist) deleted; as if Arminianisine D. W. 2 Leaves in some places.
were Englands true Doctrine. But now for thy comfort (Dear Christian) thou
have the Author's Sermon as it was preached before King James, without the
least diminution; And I send it out with that prayer, or benediction that Jacob
sent with his sons into Egypt; God Almighty give thee mercy in the Genesis 3.
14.
sight of the man: In the sight of the great man, that thou may make him
humble: Of the poor man, that thou may make him content: Of the stubborn
man, that thou may hammer, and supple him: Of the penitent man, that thou
may bind up his wounds and sores. Of every man, that thou may touch his
conscience, and wound his soul.

Amen.
Thine in the Lord Jesus, P. B.

Christ's Fullness, and Man's Emptiness, etc.
JOHN 1. 16. Of his Fulness we have all received Grace for Grace.
SAint Augustine in his book De C^vitate De^ seems to stand amazed at the
Majesty which appears in this first of John, above all other passages of Holy
writ. And Calvine says, he does in this Chap: Detonare ab alto, giving it the
chiefest instance wherein a divine ^upendious authority appears beyond all the
writing of men Iunius says, that he was uever stricken with an apprehension of
the Diety, till he read this first Chapter, affirming it to be the first and
chiefest cause of his conversion from Atheism to a sincere embracing of
Christianity, you may see it in his life written by himself. And in all this
Chapter, I find not a richer and fuller sentence then this which describesto
us the fulness of Christ.

The parts of it are three.

First* here is a Fullness attributed to Christ.

Secondly, this is not a respective but a diffusive Fullness, that is, Fullness
not shut up in its own Banks, but running over for our benefit and use.

Of his Fullness we have all received, that is, all that ever had any Grace
took it from this heap, drew it from this fountain.

Thirdly, these receipts are amplified by the variety of them, Grace for Grace.
That is, Christ has given to us for all the Graces which he received of his
father for us; Graces answerable, as the Seal is said to give to the Wax print
for print, Character for Character, or as a father is said to give to the son
lymbe for lymbe, member for member, though not of the same bigness and
measure. In the same sense Christ is said to give to us Grace for Grace. So
that now you see here a full shop, many Buyers or Receivers, choice of wares,
or rather to use the Scriptures similitude: A full Table, many Guests, Variety
of dishes: Of his fullness we have all received The first part.
Grace for Grace. We begin with the first. This Fullness is attributed to
Christ in 4. respects. 1. In regard of his person: So he was full. 1. with an
increate Fullness: for as the glory of God filled the Temple that 1. In regard
of his p^^son.
Moses could not enter in: so the humanity of Christ which answered to that
type, was filled not only with the effects of the Diety as then, but with the
Diety it self, which is therefore said to dwell in him corporally or
essentially. 2. He was moreover filled with a Created Fullness, and so he was
said to be full of all divine good things, which John reduces to two heads,
Grace and Truth. Truth which comprehends all the virtues of understanding;
And Grace which comprizeth all beauties and perfections of the will.

Secondly, this Fullness is attributed to Christ in regard of his offices 1. as
a Prophet. He was full of all the Treasures of wisdom 2. In regard of his
Offices.
and knowledge? So that all the Light which the World ever had came from him as
a Prophet.

All the Revelations which Adam, Abraham, and Noah ever had; All the Visions
which Esaias, Jeremy, and the rest of the Prophets ever saw; All the mysteries
which ever were declared to Paul and John, came from him, they all received
their light from this Sun, which from the first morning of time shone to the
dark world, without setting more or less, though the darkness comprehended
it not. Secondly, he was full as a Priest, full of favor with God, whence he
has audience, alwais full of Compassion to man, whence he is ready to
entertain any suits or Suitors; full of merit, whence sure to prevail in all
his requests and Intercessions 3. He was full as a King, full of authority, all
power was given him, in Heaven and in Earth, full of strength and might to
desend his Servants, and to resist his enemies till he has made them his
soot-stoole. Lastly, full of royal Munificence, whence ready to supply the
wants of his Servants, and to give them in the end a large recompense of reward.

Thirdly, this Fullness is attributed unto Christ in regard of righteousness,
(...) (...) o^ his R^^hteousnesse.
he was full of all righteousness original and actual, active and passive
general and particular, whence we have these b^nifits, following, 1. That he
who was so full himself is able to make us full, if we want faith or love, or
any other grace. 2. By this we know what a Mediator we have to deal withal
even with one full of love, full of patience, full of tender compassion which
may invite us to come to him. Lastly, we have this comfort that though our
Righteousness be very weak and small, yet in him we are complete, Coloss. 2.

Fourthly, this Fullnes is attributed to him in regard of his Effects. 4. In
regard of his Effect.
Scarce was there ever any action that Christ did, but you shall see a Fulness
in it. At the first Miracle that ever he wrought, he filled 6 water-pots with
wine, afterward he filled 5 000 guests with 5 loaves and 2 fishes, so that
twelve Baskets full of broken meats were taken up; So he filled the Netts with
fishes till they were ready to break again, and which was the best Fulness of
all, he filled the Disciples with the holy Ghost in the day of Pentecost, and
often afterward, whence they are said to be full of Joy, and the Holy Ghost.

If we would know the Reasons; It is partly in regard of Christ 1. Reasons from
Christ.
himself, he was the Corner Stone, therefore there is reason he should be
the fairest in all the Building. He was the Prince of our Salvation therefore
it was meet he should be like Saul higher than all the people by head and
shoulders, far exalted above all Principalities and Powers.

But chiefly it was in regard of us and out emptiness, that with 2. From our
selves
his Fulness he might replenish our Vacuity, otherwise we could neither have
seen him nor received of him. Not have seen him, for the glorious Beauty of
his Godhead was too bright for our eyes to behold. It was therefore reason that
it should be put into the Lantern, or Veil of Christ's Humanity, that in that
we might behold it. Nor could we have received of it, for the Diety is an
Inacces sible Fountain; It was reason therefore that Christ's Humanity should
be the Cesterne or Conduit-Head to receive it for our model and use.

But here one Question must be answered. Steven and other Q^^st.
Saints are said in Scripture to be full of the Holy Ghost, and how differs
this from the Fullness of Christ?

I answer, first they were said to be full according to their measure, Answ.
Christ out of measure, as a little Dish may be said to be full as well as the
Ocean. So they were said to be full, because filled according to the narrownes
of their present Capacity. But Christ wa^ full according to all d^^ensions,
length, breadth, and depth of Fullness.

Secondly, in them there was Plenitudo Vasis; In Christ, Plenitudo fontis, that
is, there was in them a derived participated Fullness, but in Christ there was
a Fulness like the Fulness of a Fountain springing from himself, which is well
expressed by the Schoolmen, when they say, that the Fulness of the Saints and of
Christ differ, as Ignis and Ignita, the one like Torches kindled, the other
like Fire it self, for the Fulness of the Ocean is too little to express this;
For if you take a drop or two from it, it is so much lessened, rather the
fulness of the fire, which lights a thousand Torches, yet is not it self
diminished.

Thirdly, in them there was a Comparative Fulness. Steven was said to be Full
in regard of other lesser Saints, But in him there was an absolute Fulness
without all limits, without all comparison.

What shall we now deduce hence for Application to our selves?

First, that which is also the Scope of the Evangelist in this place; This
should invite us to come to Christ, and to take of this full heap. This
Incentive Paul often uses to inflame the desires of the Gentiles to come to
Christ, even the Riches of that fulness which is in him, which in the fullness
of time began to be exposed to all Comers, as he says, hidden before, but now
fully revealed; seen before but in Types and Shadows, now with open face;
before preached but to a few, now to every Creature under Heaven; before the
Spirit was given but by drops, but now he that has ascended on high, and led
Captivity Captive, has so given gifts to men, that he has filled all things.

Let us therefore be exhorted when we hear of such a fullness, not to take the
Grace of God in vain, but labor we to have our part in it, that as those
Corinthians, we may be made rich in Christ filled with all knowledge and every
grace. Content not your selves therefore to know this only, for that is our
common fault to content our selves with the Notions of such things without
practice.

But go to Christ as Bees to a meadow that is full of slowers, as Merchants to
the Indies that have full Mines, that you may experimentally find your selves
returning from (...) full fraught with the Treasures of Truth and Grace.

In other things fullnes invites us much; Ioseph's full Barnes in Egypt drew
Jacob and his Sons thither: Canaan was a Land Full ^^ow^ng with milk and honey,
and that invited the Israelites to seek it: Solomon's abundance and fullness of
wisdom, caused the Queen of Sheba to come out of the South to his Court. In
every thing fulness does much allure and affect us. The Covetous man though he
spend but little, yet he desires to take it from a full heap, as he says De
pleno tollere acervo. How much more then should this fulness of Christ work on
us, especially since there is in hi^ not only a repletive but a diffusive
fulness; not only plenty, but also bounty? But alas, if we look upon the ways
and actions of men, we shall find that men seek a fulness in every thing
else, almost, a fullness in pleasure and delights, a fullness in honor and
preferments; But this full Honey Comb is almost every where despised, but
happy he, the bent of whose heart God has turned the right way to seek a
fullnes of Faith and Wisdom, and a fulness of the Holy Ghost, who cares not
though he be empty of any thing else, so he be full of these? though a looser
in other things, so a Gainer in these. Such a one has chosen the better part
which shall never be taken from him.

Secondly, If there be a Fulness in Christ, we should answer it with ^ulnes of
affection on our parts, fully believe and trust in him, fully love and adore
him, fully delight in him, for it is reason the affection should be answerable
to the Object. A little excellency desires little love and esteem; more
excellency more love, but where there is a fullness of al excellencies, that we
should procecute with fulness of ^ll our affections. All the excellency in the
Creature in comparison of this, is but as a drop to the Ocean, and a spark to
the whole Element of fire. Therefore if we propo^tion our affections to the
object, which ought to be the Rule and square of them, we should bestow on the
Creature but a drop of love and delight, but the full stream of our affections
should be carried to him, in whom is the fulness of all perfection. It is
true indeed, that as men hide treasure from thieves under straw or baser
covering, so God hides this full excellency from the world under a b^se
outside, that his secret ones only might find it out, and others seeing, might
not see, but stumble at it. Thus he hid Christ himself under a Carpenters
son, so he hides Divine Mysteries under the mean Elements of Bread and
Wine, so the wisdom of God is hidden under the foolishness of preaching: and
under Sheepskins and Goat Skins, as the Apostle speaks, were hidden, and such
as the world is not worthy of, yet there is such a fulness of excellency
notwithstanding: for if ever we saw beauty in Sun, Moon, Stars, men, women,
etc. Or if ever we^ found delight in music, meats, drinks, friends, etc. All
mu^^ needs be more abundantly in God, who is the Author, Maker, and giver of
all these; As Solomon reasons; He that made the eye, shall not he see, so he
that made all these things, shall he not have them eminently in himself, for
as the worth of many pieces of silver is comprised in one piece of gold, so all
the petty excellencies which are scattered abroad in the Creatures, are all
united in God, yea the whole volume of perfections, which is spread through
heaven and earth, is epitomized in him; Why do we not then with Paul, trample
upon the Pomp and Glory of the world, for the excellent knowledge of Christ?
Why do we not with David turn away our eyes, hearts, and affections from
beholding vanity, and pitch them all on him? Why do we not re-collect our
selves, and gather up out affections and thoughts, which are scattered and
busied about a thousand tristes, and bestow them all on him, in whom is the
fullness of all excellency beauty, and perfection?

Thirdly, if there be a fullness in Christ, then let us be content with him,
having our hearts filled and satisfied with him.

First, in regard of spiritual things. Go we not to the brooks of Teman, the
broken (...), and Pe^^ers packs of Rome, as Saints, Merrits, Churches Treasury,
etc. For if there be a fulness in Christ that needs not for in him we are all
complete.

Secondly, for Temporal things let us be content with him alone, for he is our
fulness even in them a so for the better conceiving of this we must know that
the first Adam brought a general E^ptinesse through all the world, for though
the world be full of p^mp^ and pleasures, as John calls them, Lust of the flesh
Lust of the ^ye etc. yet it is properly empty, because not full of that it
should be: even as we say a well is empty, though it be full of air, because
it is not full of water which should be in it: for Emo^^nesse is not so much,
Absontia Entitatis a^ absenti^ Entitatis debitae. Hence therefore not onl^y the
hearts of men, but the creatures are said to be empty, hence Solomon says
Ecclesiastes the 1. Chapter, Vanity of Vanities, (...) is but vanity, that is
emtinesse: and Romans 8. The Creature is subject to vanity: that is emptiness:
through him that sub jecteth it. Hence the hearts of men are not satisfied with
the world, but as the Prophet speaks: They eat and are not filled, they drink
and behold their soul is empty, because the Creature is now but as the husk
without the grain, the shell without the kernel, full of nothing but
emptiness, and being empty in it self, cannot give us satisfaction; But
Christ the second Adam has filled all things again, Epes. 1. last verse. He
fills all in all things, that is, not only the hearts of ^en, but the things
also. It is the Newter Gender. (...). Hence we may observe, that many find a
want in the midst of plenty, their hearts find no rest or satisfaction in all
they enjoy, but with the holy Regenerate man it is much otherwise, though he
have but a little wealth, a little food and raiment, yet there is a secret
fullness put into that little which makes it fit to give him satisfaction,
which is the meaning of that of the Psalmist, Psalm. 37, 16. A little thing to
the Righteous, is better then great riches to the wicked, because in that
little it being filled with the blessing of the second Adam, they find a
fullness, whereas the wicked find an emptiness in the midst of their greatest
abundance.

If there be a fullness in Christ, then what though there be a fulness Use 4.
of sin and guilt in us, yet there is a fulness of Grace in him able to remove
it, and take it away. A fulness of mercy to receive our Supplications, a fulness
of merit to make an Atonement for our foulest sins, a fulness of Favor to
prevail with his Father in any requests. If therefore there be a fulness of
grace in Christ, as there is, be not discouraged, though thy sins abound, yet
his Gra^e abounds much more, they cannot be so out of measure sinful, as he is
out of measure merciful. Remember but the two Metaphors used in Scripture, I
will scatter your sins as a mist, and they shall be drowned in the bottom of the
Sea. Now the Sun by reason of its great force can scatter the thickest mist,
as well as the least vapor: The Sea by reason of its great Vastnes can drown
mountains, as well as molehils; So Christ by reason of that Vast Fulness of Grace
which is in him, is as able, yea as forward and willing to forgive the greatest
sins as well as the least, I say as forward and willing for mercy, though it be a
quality in us, yet it is a nature in God: Now what is natural, there is no
unwillingnesse or weariness in deing that, as the eye is net weary with
seeing, nor the ear weary with hearing; Therefore though our sins be never so
great and many, yet if this condition be observed, that we lie in no known
sin, that we have a full and resolute purpose, God bearing witness to our
consciences not to do the least evil, nor (...) the least good, in a word that
we make out hearts perfect to God in all things, for without this condition
there is no remission of sins. But if this condition be observed, I say that
although out ^^^nes be never so great any many, yet they are not gone beyond
the price which has been paid for them, nor beyond the Grace of him wi^^ whom
we have to do, for there is a fulness in him.

Now I beseech you take not this Exhortation in vain, for there is nothing
more effectual to heal a rebellious disposition, to instill saving Grace, to
cause a sinner to change his course, then to be fully persuaded that he shall be
received to mercy, and that his sins shall be forgiven in Christ: Even as the
These, while the Hue and Cry is after him, never returns willingly: Rebels
Simile.
and Pyra^es whiles the Proclamation of Rebellion is out against them, never
come in: But if there be a Proclamation of pardon, yea and of some great
Advancement, if that be believed once, that, and noting else causes them to
come in, and to become faithful and loyal Subjects. Therefore let this
fullness of mercy in Christ be an effectual motive to us all, to come in to
lay down the arms of Rebellion, to choose God for our good, and to give up our
selves wholly to him, to serve him with perfect hearts and willing minds, all
our days.

So much for the first part.

The second part I will as briefly dispatch, and not meddle with the third,
lest I be tedious.

Of his Fulness we have al received
WHence the second Point is [That al Grace is received] For as al Stars shine
in the light of the Sun; So do all the Saints through grace received. What else
distinguished John from Judas, Simon Peter, from Simon Magus? but only Christ,
who shone upon one, and not upon another, when they sat both alike in
darkness, and in the shadow of death.

The Scripture is evident for this, Phil. 2. 13. The Deed is wrought in us by
God, and not the deed only, but the Will also which produces that deed, nor
that only, but the thought also which begat that will. For we are not able so
much as to think a good thought of our selves. 2 Cor. 3 5. So (...) grace, yea
(...) preparation to grace, and ab^^^^ to accept grace are al from God:
contrary to what Arminians affirms: and not of our selves, and that for
th^^^e reasons.

Because nothing can work beyond the Sphere of its own (...), the effect
exceed^th not the Cause, therefore it is impossible for corrupt nature either
to beget Supernatural grace or to (...) any Action preparing, or bending, or
inclining the will to it: For as the water cannot heat (which is an Act^ (...)
above the nature of it) until an higher principle of heat be first infused into
it; no more can mere nature do any thing tending to saving grace, having no
principle in it self whence it can raise it. Object^.


And if it ^e objected (as it is by the Arminians) that though Grace do al,
yet to accept or reject it, to will or nil it, is natural to man as a free Agent.

I answer: that to will, is natural, but to will well, is supernatural, and must
rise from a higher wel-head than nature is. For as an hatchet will cut when
handled but with a common hand, but not make a chair, or stool, or any
Artificial thing except it have Influentiam Artificis quatenus Artifex, the
influence of a^ Artificer as he is an Artificer; So though to will be natural,
yet, to wi^ well, to do a supernatural work in a supernatural and holy manner,
it cannot except it have the influence of a supernatural Agent to direct and
guide it.

If a man might accept Grace or refuse it, as he would. God were no God,
because he might be crossed by his creature, and his own will should not
absolutely bear rule, especially in that great matter of beleiving, and not
believing, and in putting difference betwixt man and man in the matter of
Salvation and Damnation: For according to Arminius, though God did heartily
desire the conversion of such a man, and offered him all the means of Grace
that could be, yet it is still in the fice choice of his will to convert, or not
to convert; Their only answer here is, that seeing God has made a Decree,
that man shall be a free Agent, though he do most earnestly desire the
conversion of such and such men, yet because he cannot disa^ul his Decree, he
does, and must leave it to the liberty of the Creature to do contrary to even
that himself desires. But what is this else but to put God into such streights
as Darius was in, who would feign have saved Daniel, but because of his Decree
he could not? And if grief in Spirits and Angels be but Re^isus voluntatis, a
reluctance of the will, as the Schoolmen affirm, what is this else but to
attribute grief unto God, and so to detract from his Blessedness.

Thirdly, if all Grace be not received, but a man may accept it or reject it as
he will, how can it be solved, but that a man must rejoice and boast partly in
himself, contrary to Paul's rule, and not wholly in the Lord, for ask the
question of all that are saved, what is the reason that you are saved rather
then another, their answer must needs be; I out of the liberty of my own will,
did receive and use well the Grace offered, when another did not. So that
according to Arminius, the Saints in heaven are not a jot more beholding to God
then the damned in hell, for the offering of Grace on Gods part, was a like
common to both, only he that is in heaven, may thank his own will that he chose
it, when onother refused it.

They have nothing here to answer, but only that the means of Grace are
dispensed by God with some disparity; But what is that when they maintain such
freedom of will, that he who has the greatest means may reject grace, and he
who has the least, may accept it?

Other reasons there are, but that I hasten: as that Grace is not Grace without
being received, no more then a man can be a man without reason, or a gift can
be a gift without being given, for no less does it imply contradiction to
suppose it to be a grace, and yet not to be freely bestowed by God and received
by us.

Secondly, bowing of the will is an effect of grace, and grace is an effect of
the spirit. Now the spirit breaths, when, where, and in what measure it
lists. Again, if grace should spring out of our soil it should be but a
flower of grass, for all flesh is grass, but the grace of the mediator is of
a more durable nature, a flower that ^ades not, and a spring which is not dried
up.

Hence 2. Correlaries. One to rectify our judgment. The other to direct our
practice.


The first shows us the errors of Arminius, who has but refyned the old
Pelagianisme, a dangerous error: for Arrianisme was like a land flood that
overflowed the whole world, but was soon dayed up again, because it had not a
spring to maintain it, but the best ages of the Church had in them as he
called. Multas fibras virulentiae Pelagianae, because it is an error agreeable
to nature and reason, so that we have a spr^ng within our own breast to nourish
and main^^ine it. B^^now to keep close to the point in hand, this point shows
the e^^or of Arminius and Pelagius, who ascribe the beginning preparations and
ability of accepting grace to our own free will, although the complement to
God. Whereas you see by what has been said, that not only the fuller streams,
but every drop of grace is received from his fulness. This error proceeds from
(...) not distinguishing a right betwixt acquisite habits and infused, indeed
in the acqu^^te, the acts go before the habits, and prepare for them, but with
infused habits it is clean contrary; It is with them as it is with the natural
powers of the soul, we have first the faculty of seei^g before we do see,
and the faculty of hearing before we do hear, so it is in infused habits, we
have first the habits before we exercise the o^^rations of them, for even as
the wheel does not run that it may be made round, but it is first made round
that it may run so the heart does not first do the actions, whereby it is put
into a right frame, but it is first fa shioned and made a new Creature by
grace, and then it does actions, and brings forth fruits wo^thy amendment of
life, for what is said of the soul is as truly said of Grace, it does,
Fabrica^^ Sibi Domicilium, prepares a room for it self, uses no Harb^nger,
for nothing can prepare for grace but grace.

And if it be objected, as Arminius does in his book upon the 7. Object.
to the Romans, that such as Seneca and Socrates, were much enlightened, did
approve the law of God according to the inward man, and had a kind of
universal common grace.

I answer, that this privilege cannot be denied to many among Answ.
the Heathen, that as Alch^mists, though they miss the end, yet they find
many excellent things by the way. So though they failed of the right end, the
glory of God, yet they were not destitute of many excellent common gifts,
wherein though one did go fair beyond another, as Seneca beyond Nero, and so
others, yet as they say of sins, they do all alike pass the^rule of rectitute,
though some go further beyond than others, so were they al alike destitute of
or^ginal Righteousness, although some more elongated from ^t than others, al
are alike dead in sins, though some (as dead bodies) more corrupted and
putrified than others.

And if it be objected, as it is by Arminius, to what end then Object.
are Exhortations and Threatenings, the propounding of Punishments, and Rewards,
if it be not in our power to accept Grace, and refuse it as we will.

I answer, that as the rain although it fall as well upon Rocks and Heathes, as
upon V^^^^^^ and Fruitful places, yet no man asks Answ.
to what end is the first and latter rain; So Exhortations and Admonitions
though they fall as well upon the Reprobates, and those that are desperately
wicked, as upon those that are docible and capable of better things, it is to
no se^^e folly to ask to what end they are, seeing as the rain, so they are
to many beneficial and useful.

So much for the first Corollary, which serves to rectify Judgments.

The next is for Practice. If al grace be received, then defer not
repentance, for no repentance is accepted, but what proceeds Corol. 2.
from a Sanctifying grace, and that as you see is received, that is given by
God as he will. It is not in him that wills, nor in him that runs, but he
has compassion on whom he will have compassion, and whom he will, he hardens,
Romans 9. 15. As I said before, the Spirit breaths where, and when it lists.
Therefore we should as Millers, and Mariners are went to do, who take the Gale
when it comes, because they know the winds are not at their command: Suppose
a man were to pass the Seas within 20 da^s upon pain of death, if the wind
should blow the second day, third day, or fourth day, no wise man would omit
the opportunity, because he knows the winds are not in his power; So, if the
spirit shall breath into our hearts good motions of turning to God unfainedly in
our youth, at 16. 17. or when over, it is the greatest wisdom in the world to
take the opportunity, and not to put it off, who knows whether they will be had
again (...) no: How many thousand are now in Hell who tho^ght to ha^ repented,
and did not because they neglected those breathings (...) the Spirit where they
were offered? For there are certain acceptable times, after which God offers
Grace no more: happy he that knows that day of his visitation, and as our
Savior speaks, the things which belong to his Peace, in that his day, which
Jerusalem did not, which made Christ to weep over it, and which Saul did not:
and the Jews in Ieremiah's time did not, when God forbad Jeremy to pray for
them. For as there were certain times when the Angel moved the waters in the
poole of Bethesda, and he that then stepped in, was healed; so there are
certain acceptable times, wherein God troubles the hearts of men by his
spirit. Happy is he who then steps into a good course, that he may be healed to
Salvation. I say there are certain times, wherein God does (as it were) thaw
and soften the frozen hearts of men. And it is wisdom then with the
husbandman to put in the plough, while the ground is soft: for the heart in
such a case is like iron in the furnace easily fashioned, but stay till it be
cold, and it will not be wrought upon. I beseech you therefore let us be
exhorted to take the opportunity, and not be like to those whom Isayah
complains of, who like bulrushes how down their heads for a day, while some
storm of inward or outward trouble is upon them, but when a fair Sunshine
day comes to dry it up again, lift up their heads as upright as ever before.

If a man would sit down and call his thoughts together but for one half hour,
and consider this seriously, I have but a little time to live here, it is
another place where I must live for all eternity, and it shall be with ^^e for
all this etern^ty, as I spend this short time. I say if this were thoroughly
considered, I wonder that any thing else should take up the intentions and
thoughts of a man's heart, but only how to make sure his salvation. But alas we
are robbed of our selves through worldly delights, and do magno conat^, magnas
^^gas agere, and so we spend our lives. But if we would not have with the
Merchant, Forturam rudentibus ap^am, that is, an estate hanging upon ropes, and
depending upon uncertaineties, especially seeing grace whence repentance
proceeds, is as you see received, and not in our power. But we mistake
repentance, and that is the cav^e we defer it, it is not as it is commonly
thought, a sorrow for our sins only, nor a ^^cere leaving of sins out of
fear of hell, and desire to be saved, which a man may do out of the strength
of natural wisdom, providing for his own safety, but it is a much different
thing, viz. putting life into a dead man: Ephesians 2. 1. Making a man a new
Creature, 2 Corinthtant 5. 17. A change of the whole frame of the heart. As if
another soul dwelt in the same body, as he says; Ego non ego. In a word, when
a man is clean another man, then he was serving of God out of an inward
propensnesse and having the whole bent of his disposition turned to delight in
the Law of God without these by-respects. And that this may yet be made
clearer, and put out of all doubt, I would ask but this question; That
repentance which men take up in age, or in times of extremity, whence
proceeds it, if from self love, as it usually does in such cases, because
the soul is then strongly possessed with an apprehension of death and hell,
and another life, then there is no more then nature in it, for the stream
rises not higher then the fountain. A beast would do as much, which sinking
into danger, would struggle to save it self. But if it proceed from love to
God, why was it not done sooner, why not in the flower of our youth, yea when
it is done soonest, would we not be heartily sorry that it was not done sooner,
if it proceeded out of love to him. And if it thus proceed out of an holy love
to God, it cannot arise but from his holy spirit: the breathings of which
spirit as they are most free, so are they most precious. Therefore when such a
spark is kindled in our hearts, let us be careful to put fuel to it, and
not suffer it to go out again.

All the Creatures in Heaven and Earth cannot help us again to them, yea the
best Ordinances are but as pens without ink, or empty Conduit-pipes which give
not a drop of true Grace. except Christ who is the Fountain please to conveigh
it by them. You know the Famous Story of Francis Spira, what bitter cries he
used upon his Death bed: O that I had but one drop of Faith* One of the mottons
which I have been wont to have, but yet could not have them! But died with
those desperate words in his mouth, I am D^mned. Therefore let us take heed how
we let such motions rise up like bubbles in us, and break again; or go our
like sparks upon wet under, lest often checking, and snibbing, and quenching
the Spirit, in the end we be guilty of resisting the Holy Ghost, and God shall
swears in his wrath that we shall not enter into his rest. [Where by the way
observe, that this Doctrine teaches us not to be idle, and leave al to God, as
they slander it] but as Paul makes the Consequence, because God works in you
both the will and the deed, therefore work out your Salvation with fear and
trembling. Armin^^s contrarily, our selves work in our selves the Will, and the
deed; Therefore we need not work out our Salvation with any such fear and
solicitude, since we may do it at our own pleasure and leisure.

But it will be said this is a hard case, although a man would repent, yet he
cannot? though he desire to serve God, yet it is impossible. Therefore to take
away this Scruple, we must know that God is exceeding free and open-handed in
giving grace (if it may be taken in time) and if we will not believe it, John
comes here and tells you, I have received of his Fullness, and not only I,
but al we have received, that is, al other Saints that either are, or have
been: and since John's time, many thousand thousands: And shall not such a
Cloud of Witnesses persuade us? If a Beggar do but hear of an open House
kept, or a great Dole, it affects him, and invites him to go: But when he sees
many come from it with armes-ful, and lapsful, and baskets-ful, then he is
confident: that adds wings to him; So if a sick man do but hear of a Famous
Physician, or a healing Well, it stirs him up to go and try: But when he meets
with 100 and 1000 coming from the Well, and telling him, I have been there and
am healed, I have been there, and am made whole, then he makes no question;
So does John here, Al we have received of his Fullness: Like a Bird that has
found out a full heap and calls his fellows to it. Say not therefore, on my
sins are so great, and my wants are so many: But rather think thus with your
selves, if there was grace enough for so many, there is surely enough for me:
Only you must receive when it is offered in the acceptable time, lest often
gr^^ving the Spirit, God suffers his Spirit to strive no longer. Genesis 6. 3. But
(as I said before) sireare in his wrath that you shall not enter into his rest.

2 If al grace be received, then let us be affected as Receivers [1 In
thankfulness toward God] the most gracious are the most grateful, [2 In
Humility toward men] For what have we that we have not received? And shall
our Purse or Vessel boast (...) self against another, because the Owner has
put more Gold, or more precious Liquor into it, than into another, it may be of
the same, or a better worth? Or shall the w^l which glistereth with the Sun
beams exalt it self against another which stands in the shadow, as if it had
Luster from it self, and not borrowed from the Sun.

3. Let us be affected as Receivers, in begging grace at Gods hands by Prayer.
Therefore it is said to be the B^cket of grace, and it is a true observation
that a man of much Prayer, is a man of much Grace. Now Prayer is either
Private, or Public: [Private, is that wherein we express our private and
particular occasions to God every day, wherein we renew Repentance and
Covenants with God, of abstayning from the sins we are most prove to, and of
doing the duties to which we are most unapt, in a word, that wherein we do
every day set our hearts straight before God in all things. This is the very
Life of Religion, and in this we must be very frequent and servent, binding our
selves with an inviolable resolution to keep a constant course in it, but of
this there is no doubt. [The next is Public Prayer, of which because it is
more questioned and not received by all with that Reverence it should, I will
add a word or two of it, and conclude.

That a set Form of Prayer is Lawful, much need not to be said, the very
newness of the contrary opinion is enough to show the vanity and falsenesse of
it: It being contrary to the Judgment of approved Counsels, Learned Fathers,
and the continual Practice of the Church.

Tertullian, who lived not much above an hundred years after the Apostles
death, says in his Book de Oratione, Premissa Legitima and ordinaria
Oratione, Ius est superstruendi Petitiones, etc. which shows that they had
some ordinary set allowed Prayers, to which, afterward some were added at more
Liberty. In Origen's time, who lived very near Tertullian's time: It is
evident that there were set Forms of Prayer used in the Church: for in his
11th Homily upon Jeremy, he repeateth and expounds some passages of them,
upon which occasion Illiricus says. Tune temporis certas quasdam foro^^las
orationum s^^e dubio habuerunt. Basil in his 63. Epistle says, that in his
time there were Letanies used in the Neocesarean Churches, and Ambrose in his
time affirms: Vsum Laetaniarum ubique ^sse frequentem. Constantine the Great
prescribed a set Form of Prayer to his Soldiers, set down by Eusebius in his
fourth Book. And Calvin in his 83. Epistle to the Protect^ of England says,
that he does greatly allow a set Form of Ecclesiastical Prayers, which the
Ministers should be bound to observe.

But as I said before of the lawfulness, there is little question. That which
is chiefly to b^ ^^prehended, is of a secret disesteem of public prayers? By
(...) of which, many neglect to come to them, and they (...) do it in a
perfunctory and overly manner, which is an extreme fault. Better were it, that
men would came to this disjunction; either it is lawful to use them or (...);
if not, why do they not wholly abstain, and if they ^^lawfull, why do they
not use them constantly, and in a reverent and holy manner. One thing there is,
which if it were well considered, would breed in the hearts of men another
esteem of our public prayers then there is. And that is, that besides the end
of obteyning the things we want (wherein yet public prayer has the promise)
there is another end in praying, and that is to worship God, and to perform a
service to him, for preving of which, there are two places of Scripture
un-answerable, Luke 2. 37. Hannals worshipped God by fasting and prayers, the
word used is (...), which is the proper word for worship, Acts 13. 2. They
ministered to the Lord and fasted, the word used is (...), whence the word
Liturgy is derived. This me thinks should breed in the hearts of men a
reverend esteem of this duty.

Besides, how straight is that which is objected against the lawfulness of it,
as that the Spirit is stinted, when we are settered with words appointed.

Answ. The freedom of the Spirit stands not so much in the extent of the
words, as the intensnesse of the zeal wherewith they are uttered. Besides if
this argument were good, it would swell against conceived prayer, for if he
that hears, has a larger spirit then he that prays, there is to him the
same stinting o^ restraint.

Again it is objected, that we cannot pray for occasional necessities.
Therefore we bind not only to a set form: but men may, and ought to use
besides, private prayer, wherein we may express our private, accidental, and
particular occasions. And if they be more public, there are prayers before
and after Sermon, wherein the Minister is left at more liberty? And if it be
yet more general belonging to the State or Church, we add it to the public
prayers, as it is in the Gun-powder-treason, times of War, dearth, etc. But
there needs not much be said to convince the judgment: that which is chiefly
to be desired, is, that they may be better observed, and more esteemed,
especially seeing our public prayers be holy and good, (and which should be a
greater inducement) the Church has commanded them: And if the Church be to be
obeyed in indifferent things, as it is, much more in appointing of Gods own
Ordinances.

And if a set form of prayer be lawful, then the Lords Prayer must needs
excel, being dedicated by Christ himself, and is therefore to be more
frequently used, and withal Reverence both in mind and gesture. Nor does this
want the practice and approbation of the Ancient, it is Cyprians speech.
Quanto efficacius impetramus quod petimus Christi nominae si ipsius Oratione
petamus. And Saint Augustine. Disce et retinete orationem Dominicam, et inter
omnes sanctos Consono ore proferatis. Thus if we shall show our selves affected
as Receivers, in using both public and private prayer, we shall find that
success which John and the rest found, who of his fullness received Grace for
Grace.

FINIS.

