A Description OF WALES BY SR JOHN PRISE KNIGHT.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM HALL Anno Salutis M. DC. LXIII.

A Description OF WALES BY SR JOHN PRISE KNIGHT.

OXFORD, Printed by WILLIAM HALL Anno Salutis M. DC. LXIII.

A short description of CAMBRIA, now called WALES, drawn by Sir John Prise
Knight, and perused by Humphrey Lloyd Gentleman.
THe three Sons of Brutus, Locrinus, Albanactus, and Camber divided the whole
Isle of Britain into three Parts. The part contained within the French Seas,
the Rivers Severne (called in British Hafren) Dee and Humber fell to Locrinus
the eldest son, from whom it was called Lloyger, which name it has in the
British tongue to this day, in English it is called England, and now extends
it self Northward to the River Tweed; The 2d son Albananactus had all the
Country Northward from Humber to the Sea Orkney (called in the British tongue
Mor Werydh, and in Latin Mare Caledonium) for his Share; The 3d son Camber had
the remaining part lying within the Spanish and Irish Seas, and separated from
England by the Rivers Severne and Dee; this part was after his name called
Cambria, the Inhabitants Cambry, and their Language Camberaec, as at this day;
The Inhabitants of this part have kept their Country and Language about 2690
years, without commixtion with any other Nation. This Country Cambria, in
British Cymru, was called by the Saxons (a people of Germany that conquered and
inhabited that part of Britain called Lloyger) Wales, and the Inhabitants and
the Language, Welsh, which are words signifying strange; and the Inhabitants of
High and Low Germany do at this day call the Language they do not understand,
Walsh, and the people that speak it, Welshmen; so that they are much deceived,
who derive the word from a Queen called Gwalaes, or from a Prince named Wala;
neither is the fancy of Polydor Virgil, who says it was called Walia quasi
Italia, because the remaining part of the Romans in the Isle were driven
thither, to be approved of; Giraldus Cambrensis before him and others were
guilty of the same mistake. That the Country was called Wales and the People
Welsh by the Saxons (a strange Nation) is evident, in that the Welsh know not
what those words mean, their mother tongue teaching them only to call
themselves Cymru and their Language Cymraec; And that they were not Romans that
were driven into Cambria, the language does sufficiently evince, which has
words that have no affinity at all with the Latin: it must needs be granted
that many words are borrowed from the Latin, as it could not be otherwise, the
Roman Legions and Colonies having been so long seated in the Country, but they
are so different in termination that it requires some skill to discover the
words that are of Roman extraction.

The Saxons gaining still ground, the Britains were driven by them out of the
plain, champion country on the other side the rivers Dee and Severne,
especially by Offa K. of Mercia, who made a Ditch of great depth and breadth to
be a Meare between his 795
Kingdom and Wales; the Ditch begins at the river Dee by Basingwerke between
Chester and Ruthlan, and runs along the sides of the hills to the South Sea a
little from Bristoll; It reaches above a 100 miles in length, and is in many
places to be seen at this day; the Welsh call it Clawdh Offa; the Country
between it and England is commonly called (in Welsh) Y Mars, although the
greatest part thereof be now inhabited by the Welsh, especially in Northwales,
which yet keeps the ancient limits to the river Dee, and in some places
reaches beyond it.

Giraldus and others make the river Wy, in Welsh Gwy, to be the meare between
England and Wales on the South part, the breadth of Wales from Salow or
Willowford, in Welsh Rhyd yr helig upon Wy to S. David's in Menevia is a 100
miles; also the length from Caerlleon upon Use in Gwentland to Holyhead or
Caergybi in Anglesey, in Welsh Mon, is above a 100 miles; the Welsh tongue is
at this day commonly spoken beyond these meares, as in Herefordshire,
Glocestershire, and Shropshire.

About the year of Christ 870 Rodericus Magnus divided 870
Wales into three Territories or Kingdoms, which were these, 1. Gwynedh, in
English Northwales, in Latin Venedotia. 2. Deheubarth, in English Southwales,
in Latin Demetia. 3. Powisland. In each of these he ordained a Princely Seat
or Court for the Prince to live at most commonly, as in Gwynedh, Aberffraw
Aberfraw.
in the I Will of Mon or Anglesey; in Deheubarth, Caermardhyn, from whence it was
removed to Dinevowr, eight miles thence; Dinevowr. Mathraval.
in Powys, Pengwern or Ymwythic, in English Shrewsbury, from whence it was
removed to Mathraval in Powis land.

Of the Kingdom of Gwyneth or Aberffraw.
Rodri the Great gave Northwales to his eldest Son, and ordained that the
other two should pay him (each of them) yearly by way of Tribute 2001, as
appears by the Laws of Howel Dha. Northwales has upon the North side the Sea,
upon the West and Southwest the river Dyvi, which divides it from Southwales,
and in some places from Powis; it extends from the river Dee at Basingwerke to
Aberdyvi; on the South and East it is divided from Powis sometimes with rivers,
sometimes with mountains, till it comes to the River Dee again. It was of old
divided into four parts, the first and chiefest whereof was Mon, now called
Anglesey, in which at Aberfraw the 1. Mon.
Prince had his chief house; It is an Island separated from the maine land by
an arm of the Sea called Menai; It has in it three Cantreds or Hundreds,
which are subdivided into six Comots, as 1. Cantref Aberfraw to Comot Llivon
and Malliraeth: 2. Cantref Cemais to Talebolion and Twrcelyn: and 3. Cantref
Rossir to Tindaethwy and Menai. It has in it a neat, commodious town called
B^umarish, also Newburgh, and a passage into Ireland at Caergybi, in English
Holyhead. It is an egregious mistake in Polydor, to deny this Isle the name of
Mona, and allow it only to be called Anglesia or Anglorum Insula; and to give
the name Mona to the Isle of Man, whereas the Inhabitants and throughout all
Wales they know no other name for it, but Mon and Tir Mon, that is, the Land of
Mon unto this day, and that Man was never called Mon by any; the Inhabitants
themselves call it Manaw, as the Welsh also do. And Corn: Tacitus puts the
matter out of question, when in the life of Agricola he says the Roman
Soldiers swom over into Mona, which it was impossible for them to do into the
Isle of Man being above 20 miles distant from the maine Land.

2. Arvon, which is as much to say as, Over against Mon, is 2. Arvon.
the 2d part; it has in it four Cantreds and ten Comots.

1. Cantref Aber has in it three Comots, Y Llechwedd uchaf, y Llechwedd isaf
and Nanconwey. 2. Cantref Arvon has two Comots, Uwch Gwyrvai, and Isgwyrvai.
3. Cantref Dunodic has two Comots, Ardudwy and Evionyth. 4. Cantref Llyn
contains three Comots, Cymytmaen, Tinllayn, and Canologion. All these, except
Ardudwy, which is now a part of Merionethshire, are in Carnarvonshire. In this
shire are the Snowdon Hills, called Eryri, which for their fertility, height,
wood, cattle, fish and foul yield not to the famous Alps; and this Country is
without controversy the strongest for situation within Britain. Here are the
Towns of Carnarvon, called in old time Caer Segont ( Segontium Antonini,) of
Conwey, called formerly Caergyffyn* the Sea of Bangor, Pwllheli, Nevyn, the
Castles of Crickieth, Dolathelan, Dolbadarn: Dinas Dinlle, Clynnoc vawr, Ynys
Enlli or Bardsey, and other ancient places. This was the last part of Wales
brought under the dominion of the Kings of England: It has on the North the
Sea and Menai, upon the East and South-East the river Conwey, which divides it
from Denbighshire in most places, except it be toward the sea, where it passes
the river, and reaches about five miles beyond it; on the South-west and West
it is separated from Merionyth by high Mountains, Rivers and Meares.
3. Merionyth the third part of Gwyneth containing three 3. Merionyth.
Cantreds, each of which contains three Comots. 1. Cantref Meirion has three
Comots, Talybont, Pennal, and Ystymaner. 2. Cantref Arustly has, Uwchgoed,
Iscoed, Gwarthrenion. 3d. Cantref Penllyn, which has Uwchmeloch, Ismeloch, and
Micnaint. This Country keeps the said name to this day, but not all the same
Meeres it had in former times; It is full of Hills and Rocks, it has upon the
North the Sea, to which there is great resort to take Herrings. It has upon
the East Arvon, and Denbigh land, upon the South Powis, upon the West Dyvi and
Cardiganshire. In this Country are the Towns of Harlech, where there is a
strong Castle, Dolgelley and Bala, and here is the great Lake Llyn Tegyd, that
is three miles long; of which it is said, that the River Dee running through it
mingleth not with its water; moreover it is said that Salmons, commonly taken
in the River hard by the Lake, are never seen in the Lake, and that a sort of
fish called Gwyniaid are very common in the Lake, but never taken in the River.
Not far from the Poole is a place called Caergai, which was the house of Gai
K. Arthurs foster brother. This shire (like Arvon) is full of Cattle, Foul,
and Fish, and has good store of red Dear and Roes, but Corn is scarce.

4. The Fourth part of Gwyneth was called y Berveddwlad, 4. Y Berveddwlad.
which may be Englished, the Inland or Middle Country; It contained Five
Cantreds, and Thirteen Comots, as 1. Cantref Rhyvonioc, which has in it these
Comots, Vwchalet and Isalet. 2. Cantref Ystrat, which has Hiraethoc and
Cynmeirch. 3 Cantref Ros, which has Uwchdulas, Isdulas and Creuthyn, all which
are in the Lordship of Denbigh, except Creuthyn, which is a part of
Carnarvonshire, and has in it the Castle of Diganwy, which did belong to the
Earls of Chester, and in the Latin and English Chronicles is commonly called
Gannoc. 4. Cantref Dyffryn Clwyd, that is, the Valley of Clwyd, it is now
called the Lordship of Ruthyn, and has these Comots, Coleigion, Llanerch and
Dogueilyn. 5th. Cantref is Tegengl, now a part of Flintshire, it has these
Comots, Counsyllt, Prestatyn and Ruthlan. In this part of Gwyneth is the fair
valley of Dyffryn Clwyd, which reaches 18 miles in length, and is in breadth
4, 5, 6, and in some places 7 miles: Northward it borders on the Sea, and on
the East, West, and South it is enclosed with high hills: It abounds with all
manner of necessaries both for Man and Beast, as Cattle, Fish, Foul, Corn,
Hay, Grass, Wood, etc. The river Clwyd being increased by the accession of
Clywedoc, Ystrat, Whilar, Elwey and other rivers from the hills runs along
and divides it in the midst. In this Valley two miles from the Sea do stand
the Town and Castle of Ruthlan, famous for a Parliament K. Edward I. kept
there in the 12 year of his Reign. And two miles above it is the Sea of S.
Asaph called in old time Llanelwey, between the Rivers Clwyd and Elwey: four
miles thence and two miles from the river Clwyd lies situate Denbigh, the Shire
town for that County, in which there is a very fair, strong Castle built upon
a rock, which was very much enlarged and strengthened by Henry Lacy Earl of
Lincoln, to whom King Edward gave the Lordship of Denbigh: five miles above
this lies the town of Ruthin, wherein is a fair Castle, which did sometimes
belong to the Grays Lords of Ruthyn and Earls of Kent. This part of Gwyneth
has upon the North the river Dee and the Sea; upon the West, Arvon and the
river Conwey; South and East Merionyth and Powis; these be the Meeres and
Bounds of Gwyneth. So there was under the Kingdom of Aberfraw 15 Cantreds and
38 Comots. But Northwales, as it is now reckoned six shires, contains in it
besides Gwyneth a great part of Powis.

The British Chronicle says of Northwales, that it came by inheritance to
Women three times: 1. To Stradwen daughter to Cadvan ap Conan ap Endaf and Wife
to Coel Godeboc, Mother to Genaw, Dyvyr and Gwawl: the second time to the same
Gwawl wife to Edern ap Padern and Mother to Cunetha Wledic, which Cunetha being
a Prince in the North of England, about the year of Christ 540 sent his sons
to recover Cardigan his inheritance 540
from the Irish Scots and Picts, who had possessed themselves of those parts of
it which bordered upon the Sea; Tibiaon his eldest son dyed in Man, which the
Irish Scots had conquered; Gildas says, that of the Progeny of Glam-Hector,
that peopled a great part of Ireland, Yscroeth with his people inhabited
Dalrienda, a part of Scotland. Builke with his people came to Man. Builke cum
filiis suis inhabitavit Euboniam Insulam, vulgo Manaw, quae est in meditullio
Maris inter Hyberniam and Britanniam. The Children of Bethoun inhabited
Demetia, or Southwales, with Gwyr and Cydweli, until they were chased thence
by the Children of Cunetha. thus far Gildas. The sons of Cunetha being
arrived in North wales divided the Country betwixt them: first Meireaon the
son of Tibiaon the son of Cunedha had Cantref Meireaon to his part. Arustel
ap Cunetha had Cantref Arustly. Caredic ap Cunetha had Caredigion, now
Cardiganshire. Dunod had Cantref Dunodic. Edeyrn had Edeyrnion. Mael had
Dynmael. Coel had Coleyon. Dogvael had Dogveilyn. Ryvaon had Ryvonioc now
Denbigh* land. Maelor the son of Gwran the son of Cunetha had Maeloron, that
is, the two Maelors, Maelor Gymbraeg, called Bromfield, and Maelor Saesneg.
E^^^n Yrch had Caereneon in Powis. Vssa had Maesus^^^^^ now Oswestree: What
they say commonly of Oswald K. of Northumberland, that he was slain there, and
that a Well sprung up where his Arm was carried, is nothing so: for Beda and
all other writers testify that Peanda slew Oswald at Maserfelt in the Kingdom
of Northumberland, and his body was buried in the Abbey of Bardney in the
Province of Lyndesey. These names given by the Progeny of Cunetha continue to
this day. After this the Irish Picts which the Britains called Y Gwyddyl
Phictiaid overran the Isle of Mon, from whence they were driven by Caswalhon
Law her, that is, Caswalhon with the long hand, the son of Eneon yrch ap
Cunetha, who with his own hands slew Serigi their King at Llan y Gwyddyl, that
is, the Irish Church in Holy head. This Caswalhon was Father to Maelgon
Gwyneth, whom the Latins call Maglocunus, King of Britain: In his time lived
the famous Bard Taliessyn who was called Pen Beirdh, that is, the chiefest of
the Bards or Wisemen. Lucan in his first book of the Civil war between Caesar
and Pompey makes mention of our Bards thus, Plarima securi fudistis carmina
Bardi: This Maelgon had a son called Run, in whose time, the Saxons invited
Gurmond (who had come from Afric,) from Ireland to join with them against the
Britains, who by him and them were greatly distressed, drove first over
Severne, and slain, as many as were known of them to profess Christ. This Run
was Father to Beli, who was Father to Iago (or James) who, and not Brochwel or
Brecyval (as the English Chronicle says) was Father to Cadvan, the Father of
Cadwalhon, the Father of Cadwalader the last King of the Britains. Brochwel,
surnamed Ysgithroc, by reason of his long teeth, was Captain over those who
fought with Adelred alias Ethelbert King of Kent, and his Saxons and Angles,
whom Augustine the Monk had incited to make war against the Christian
Britains. Brochwel was twice put to flight by them not far from Chester, and
they cruelly slew a 1000 Priests and Monks of Bangor, with a great number of
Lay Brethren of the same house that lived by the labor of their hands, and
were come barefooted to desire mercy and Peace. Then Brochwel retired over
Dee, and defending the passages against the Saxons, until Cadvan K. of
Northwales, Meredyth K. of Southwales, and Bledrus or Bletius Prince of
Cornwall came to his aid, he gave the Saxons battle and slew of them a 1066,
and put the rest to flight. After this Battle Cadvan was chosen King of
Britain, and was the chief Ruler within the Isle.

3. The 3d time that Northwales came to a Woman was to Esyllt, the daughter of
Conan Tindaethwy, the son of Edwal Ywrch, the son of K. Cadwalader, The British
Annals say, Conan was the son of Rodric Molwynoc son of the said Edwal. She was
wife to Mervyn Bhrych and Mother to Roderic the Great.

The last Kings of the Britains finding Northwales to be a Country exceeding
strong, as being full of high Mountains, craggy rocks, great Woods, deep
Valleys, streights and dangerous places, and deep and swift Rivers, made it
their chiefest Seat. The chief Rivers in Gwyneth are, Dyvi, which springs in
the Hills of Merioneth, runs North-west by Mowthwy and Machynllaeth, and so
to the sea at Aberdyvi; it divides Northwales and Southwales. Dee, in Welsh
Dourdwy, springs also from the same hills, runs East through Penllyn and the
Lake Tegid, down to Corwen and Llangollen, between Chirke land and Bromfield,
where it bows Northward toward Bangor iscoed, so to Holt and Chester, thence
Northwest to Flint Castle, and so to the Sea. Conwey, which rises likewise in
Merionethshire, runs under Snowdon North-East, by the Town of Aberconwey to
the Sea. Avon Wynen, that falls into the sea at Traeth Mawr. Yvelenryd, which
the sea receives at Traeth bachan. Mouthau, that falls into the Sea at
Bermouth. Desynny. Alwen. Lleder. Llygwy. Machno. Ogwen. Cegid. Seint, which
runs to the Sea at Carnarvon. Gwrvai. Llivon. Llyfni. Dwyvor. Dwyvech. Erch.
Soch. Clwyd, which rises in Denbigh-la^d, runs down to Ruthin, and plain
North, not far from Denbigh, to St Asaph, and so by Ruthlan to the Sea.
Cefni. Dulas. Aled. Elwey. etc. Among the Mountains in Carnarvon and Merioneth
Shires there are very many Llynns or Lakes abounding with large Trouts; In the
River Conwey there is a sort of Fish called Brwyniaid, which they use to take
from the middle of March to the middle of April. And in two Pooles, to wit,
Llynn Peris and Llynn Torthenni, which are about three miles asunder, there is
a Fish called Torgoch, from his red belly, which, when the season is to take it
in the one, is not to be found in the other.

Of Deheubarth or Dinevowr.
This Kingdom although it was the largest, yet was it not Deheubarth or
Dinevor.
the best (in Giraldus his opinion) when the Division was made, in regard it
was much infested with the Saxons, and afterward with Flemings and Normans,
and for that in diverse parts thereof the Lords would not obey their Prince, as
in Gwent and Morgannwc: It was divided into six Parts. 1. Caredigion 1.
Caredigion.
was the first, it contained 4 Cantreds and 10 Comots, 1. Cantref Penwedic
which had in it these Comots, Geneurglyn, Perveth and Creuthyn. 2. Cantref
Canawl had these, Mevenyth, Anhunoc and Pennarth. 3. Cantref Castle had these
Comots, Mabwynion and Caerwedros. 4. Cantref Syrwen had these, Gwenionyth and
Iscoed: This part is at this day called in English Cardiganshire, in Welsh
Swydh Aberteivi. It is a champion Country without much wood: It has been
diverse times overcome by the Flemings and Normans, who built in it several
Castles, but could not keep it: It has on the East Northwales, the River Dyvi
and part of Powys; upon the South Carmarthenshire: on the West the River Teivi
and Pembrokeshire, and on the North the Irish Sea. In this is the Town of
Cardigan, upon Teivi, not far from the Sea: the Town of Aberystwyth, upon
the River Ystwyth, by the Sea: Llanbadarn Vawr once an Episcopal See, wherein
was a famous Sanctuary in times past, and a place of Religious and Learned men;
the Castles of Stratmeyric, Gwalter, of Llanrysted, of Dynerth, of the sons of
Wyneaon, of Aberheidol and many more, the Abbey of Strata Florida, the Towns
of Tregaron, Llandhewibrevi etc.

2. The 2d part was called Dyvet, at this day Pembrokeshire: 2. Dyvet.
It had in it 8 Cantreds and 23 Comots, which were these, 1. Cantref Emlyn,
that had these Comots, Vwchcuch, Iscuch and Levethyr: 2. Cantref Arberth had
these, Penrhyn ar Elays, Esterolef and Talacharn: 3. Cantref. Daugleddeu these,
Amgoed, Pennant, and Evelfre. 4. Cantref Ycoed these, Llanhayaden and Castle
Gwys. 5. Cantref Penbhro these, Coed yr ha^, Maenor byrr and Penvro. 6. Cantref
Ros these, Hulfforth, Castle Gwalchmai and Ygarn. 7. Cantref Pebidioc these,
Mynyw, Pencaer and Pebidioc. 8. Cantref Cemais these, Vwchnever, Isnever and
Trefdraeth: In this part are diverse Towns and Havens, as Pembroke, Tenby (in
Welsh Dynbech y Pyseot) Harford West ( Hwl^fforth) the fair Haven of M ilford
(in Welsh Aberdaugled^eu) St David's or M enevia (in Welsh M ynyw) the chiefest
Episcopal See in Wales; Fiscard or Abergwayn, Newport or Trefdraeth; these are
along the Sea coast, or not far off. There are diverse Castles therein as
Cilgerran, Arberth, Gwys, Llanhayaden, Walwyn, etc. This Part was won first by
the M ountgomery^ Earls of Shrewsbury, was after given to the M arshalls, and
so to Valence. The Princes of Wales were from thence most troubled with Normans
and Flemings, who remain to this day, and inhabit about Tenby, Pembroke and in
Ros, and can speak no Welsh, nor good English as yet. It has on the West and
North the Irish Sea, the Spanish Sea upon the south, upon the East
Carmarthenshire, and Cardiganshire on the North East.

3. The 3d part was Carmarthenshire, which had 4 Cantreds 3. Caermarddyn.
and 15 Comots, as 1. Cantref Fini^c, which has these Comots, Har^ryn, Dervedd
and Isgeneny. 2. Cantref Eginoc, which has these Gwyr, now in Glamorganshire,
Cydweli and Carnwyllion. 3. Cantref Bachan these, M alhaen, Caeo, and M aenor
Deilo. 4. Cantref M awr these, Cethineoc, Comot mab Elvyw, Comot mab Uchdryd
and Wydigada: In this shire are several Towns and Castles, as Caermardyn,
Dinevowr, the Seat of the Prince of the Country, Newtowne, Llandeilo,
Llanymddyfry, Emlyn, Swansey (in Welsh Abertawy) now in Glamorganshire a Town
by the Sea: the Castle of the sons of Uchiryd, of ^lanstephan and others: It
has upon the West Dyuet or Pembrokeshire, on the North Cardiganshire, on the
South-West the Sea, on the South-East Glamorgan, and on the East
Brecknockshire. It is reckoned the strongest part of all Southwales, as being
full of high Mountains, great Woods, and fair Rivers, especially Towy.

4. The 4th called Morganwc (now Glamorganshire) contained 4. Morgannwc.
4 Cantreds with 15 Comots: As Cantref Croneth with these Comots, Rhwng Neth ag
Avon, Tir yr Hwndrwd and Maenor Glynogwr. 2. Cantref Pennythen with these,
Meyskyn, Glynrhodni, Maenor Talavan and Maenor Ruthyn. 3. Cantref Brenhinol
with these, Cibowr, Senghennyth, Uwchcaeth and Iscaeth. 4. Cantref Gwen^lhwg,
which is now in Monmouthshire, with these Comots, Yrhardh Ganol and Eithaf
dylygion. In this part are many Towns, Castles and Ancient places, as Landaff
a Bishops See, Caerdyff, in Welsh Caerdhydd, Cowbridge (in Welsh Y bont Vaen,
that is, a Stone Bridge) Neath, Ab^avon, Bridgend, Lantwyt, Caerffili, St
Donats (the Seat of the ancient Family of the Stradlings) Margam (now the Seat
of the Mansells another noble Family) and other: It has diverse Rivers, which
run to the South Sea, as Lay, Taf, Tawy, Neth, Avon, Ogwr or Ogmor, and L
lychwr; It has on the South the Severne Sea, which divides it from Devonshire
and Cornwall, upon the West and Northwest Carmarthenshire, upon the North East
Brecknockeshire, and Monmouthshire upon the East.

5. The Fifth part was called Gwent, and is now in Monmouthshire; 5. Gwent.
It had 3 Cantreds and 10 Comots, as 1. Cantref Gwent, which had these Comots,
Ymynyth, Iscoed, Llefnydh and Trefygrug. 2. Cantref Iscoed these, Brynbuga,
Uwchcoed, Y Teirtref and Erging ac Ewyas, now in Herefordshire. 3. Cantref
Coch, which is now in Glocestershire and called the Forest of Deane: In this
part is the ancient City of Caerlleon upon Us^, where was in old time the Sea
of the Arch Bishop of Wales; here are also diverse Towns and Castles, as
Monmouth, Chepstow, Glynstrigul, Ros, Tintern upon the River Wy, Newport (in
Welsh y Castle Newydd) Usc (in Welsh Brynbuga) Grosmont, Raglan, White Castle,
Abergevenny and many other: It is a fair, fertile Country, but had this
unhappiness in former times, that the Gentlemen were never obedient to their
Prince: It has on the West Glamorgan and Brecknockeshire, Herefordshire upon
the North, the River Wy and Glocestershire on the East, and upon the South and
South East the Severne: Rivers, Avon, Elwyth, Munnow. etc.

6. The 6th and last part B recheinoc, now B recknockeshire, 6. Brecheinoc.
which has 3 Cantreds and 8 Comots, as 1. Cantres Selef, which has these
Comots, Selef and Trahayern. 2. Cantref Canol these, Talgarth, Ystradyw and B
rwynllys or E glwys Yail. 3. Cantref Mawr these, Tir Raulff, L lywel and Cerrig
Howel: In this part are these Towns Brecknock (in Welsh A berhodni) lying
situate by the Confluence of the Rivers Usc and Hodni, Hay (in Welsh Y Gelly)
Talgarth, B uellt, L langors. It has West Carmarthenshire and the River Tawy,
on the North Radnorshire and the Wy, Hereford and M onmouthshire on the East,
and Glamorgan on the South: It is for the most part full of Mountains, Woods
and Rivers, especially B uelht. The B ruses, M ortimers, B ohuns and Staffords
(after the dispossessing of the Welsh) have been Lords of this Country. These
six Shires forementioned with Radnorshire, formerly a part of Powis, are now
commonly called Southwales: It is a large Country having many fair Plains and
Valleys for Corn, high Mountains full of Pasture for Cattle, great and thick
Woods, Forests and Parks for red Dear and Fallow: clear and deep Rivers
full of Fish. The Rivers are, Severne which with Wy and Reidol spring out of a
high mountain called Plymllymon in Montgomeryshire on the edge of
Cardiganshire. Severne runs by Llanidlos full East, through Cydewen, by the
Welsh Poole, and under the Castle of Shrawarden to Shrewsbury, from whence it
turns Southward to Bridgenorth, Bewdley, Worcester, Gloucester,, and so to the
Sea near Bristoll. Gwy, in English Wy, runs South East by Rayader-Gwy to
Buellt, where Irwon meets her, thence to Glasbury, so to Hereford and Monmouth,
and to the Severne Sea at Chepstow, Mor Hafren, so they call the Sea that
severeth Wales from Somersetshire, Devonshire and Cornwall. Reidol runs
Northward and makes have to the Sea near Aberystwyth. Usc rises in a high
mountain called y Mynydd du* in the Southwest part of Brecknockshire, runs to
Brecknocke, so through Monmouthshire to the Town of Usc, Caerlleon and
Newport, and so to the said South sea. Tywy has its spring not far from Wy,
runs South to Llanymddyfri, thence Southwest by Llandeilo, and Dinevowr to
Abergwili and Caermarddyn, and so by Llanstephan to the sea. Teivi rises in
the edge of Carmarthenshire, runs Northwest by E mlyn, Cilgerran, Cardigan, and
so to the North sea. In Giraldus Cambr. his time there were in this River
(above other Rivers) a great number of Bevers, a kind of beast the Welsh called
Avanc; the name remains still in Wales, but what it was very few can
describe: It is not much unlike an Otter, only it is bigger, all hairy saving
the tail, which is like a fishes tail, broad and thick like a man's hand: It
uses as well the water as the land, has very sharp teeth, and is a very
sagacious Creature: He that will learn more of this beast, let him read
Girald. Itiner. l. 2. c. 3. There are a number of other rivers, as Tawy in
Glamorganshire* Taf in Carmarthenshire, two rivers called Cledhe^ in
Pembrokeshire, Remney, Gevenni, Arth, Aeron, Ystwyth etc.

There are diverse Lordships added to other Shires, that were heretofore taken
for parts of Wales, and have at this day the Welsh spoken in most of them, as
Oswestree, Knocking, Whitington, Elsmer, Masbrooke, Cherbury, Gaurs, Clunn,
which are now in Shropshire; Ewyas Lacy, Ewyas Haroald, Clifford, Winsorton,
Yardley, Huntingdon, Whitn^y, Loghardneys in Herefordshire.

Southwales, as all the rest of Britain, was first inhabited by Britains, who
remain there to this day, though in diverse places, especially near the Sea,
mingled with Saxons, Normans, and Flemings. Since the Norman Conquest their
Princes could never keep quiet possession of it, but by reason of opposition
from Strangers, and the disloyalty of their own people, and vexation and war
thereupon, they were for the most part compelled to keep themselves in
Carmarthenshire.

Of Powis or Mathraval.
To this Kingdom belonged the Country of Powis and the Mathraval or Powis.
Land between Wy and Severne. It was bordered upon the South and West with
Southwales, the rivers Wy and Tywy etc. upon the North with Gwyneth; and with
the Marches of England, from Chester to Wy, a little above Hereford, upon the
East; By reason of its nearnes to England it was most troubled with wars, from
the Saxons first, and afterward from the Normans, Lords Marchers, who daily
conquered some portion thereof, by which means it came to pass, that it was
the first part that submitted unto and served the King of England. This part
called Powis was divided into Powis Vadoc and Powis Wenwynwyn. Powys Vadoc 1.
Powis Vadoc.
contained in it 5 Cantreds and 15 Comots. 1. Cantref Y Barwn, which has 3
Comots, Dinmael, now in Denbighshire; Edeyrnion and Glyndourdwy* which are now
both in Merionethshire. 2. Cantref Y Rhiw whose Comots were these, Yal, now in
Denbighshire, Stratalyn and Hop, now in Flintshire. 3. Cantref Uwchnant has
these, Merfforth in Flintshire, Maelor Gymraeg, in English Bromfield, now in
Denbighshire, and Maelor Saesneg in Flintshire. 4. Cantref Trefred, which has
these Comots, Croesvain, Tref Ywayn, in English Chirke, and in Denbighshire.
Croesoswallt, in English Oswestree, and in Shropshire. 5. Cantref Rayder has
these, Moch^ant Israyder, Cyn-Llaeth and Nan^eudwy, all in Chirkeland and in
Denbighshire. The Lordship and Castle of Whittington, which came by marriage to
Fulke Fitzwarren. The Lordship of Oswestree, of which the Fitzalans have been
Lords several hundreds of years, Shrarden, the eleven Towns, etc. Clun, all
now in Shropshire, were in this part of Powis; so were also the Castles of
Holt, Chirke and Din^s Bran, now in Denbighshire. The Rivers Ceirioc and Alyn
run in this Part.

The 2d Part called Powis Wenwynwyn had likewise 5 Cantreds 2. Powis Wenwynwyn.
and 12 Comots. 1. Cantref Yuyrnwy, which had these Comots, Mochnant uwch
rayder, Mechain ^scoed and Llanerch hudol. 2. Cantref Ystlyc had these,
Deuthwr, Gorthwr Isaf and Stratmarchell. 3. Cantref Llyswynaf, had these
Caereneon and Mechain Uwchcoed. 4. Cantref Cydewen had Comot Conan and Comot
Hafren. 5. Cantref Conan had Cyveilioc and Mouthwy. All five, except the Comot
of Mouthwy which is now part of Merionethshire, are in Montgomeryshire: the
three first Cantreds only bear the name of Powys at this day. This is a
Country full of Woods, Hills and Rivers: it has in it these Towns, the Poole
(in Welsh Trallwng) Newtowne, Machynllaeth and Llanvylling. Arustly in old time
was in this part, but came afterward to the Princes of Gwyneth. In the time of
Edward the 2d these Cantre^s or Lordships came by just descent to a Woman named
Hawys Gadarn, Daughter of Owen ^ap Griffith ap Gwenwynwyn ap Owen Cyveilioc.
Arustly and Cyveilioc came to the Baron of Dudley, and was afterward sold to
the King. The Rivers Murnwy and Tanat are in this part.

The 3d Part belonging to Mathraval was the Land between 3. Ferlix.
Wy and Severne, which contained 4 Cantreds and 13 Comots, 1. Cantref Melienyth
had these Comots, Ceri, Swythygre, Riwalallt and Glyn Ieithon. 2. Cantref Eluel
has these, Uwchmyndd, Ismynydd and Llechddyfnog. 3. Cantref Yclawdh these,
Dyffryn Teyveydiot, Swydhynogen, and Pennwellt. 4. Cantref Buellt has these,
Swydh y vam, Dreulys and Isyrwon: the Rivers Teme, Ithon, Lug, etc. run through
this Part. Of this Part there is at this day some in Montgomeryshire, some in
Radnor, and some in Brecknock shire; they speak to this day Welsh in this part
and the Lordships adjoining, and it is reckoned a Part of Wales. Towns and
Castles in this part, Montgomery (in Welsh Trevaldwyn) a pretty Town, and a
fair Castle; the Castle of Clun (Colunwy) which belongs to the Earl of
Arundel, Knighton (in Welsh Trefyclawdd;) the Castle of Cymaron; Presteyn (in
Welsh) Llanandras; the Town of Kineton, and the Castle of Huntingdon (called
in Welsh y Castle Maen) which were first the Bohuns, Earls of Hereford,
afterward did belong to the Dukes of Buckingham. Castle Pain, Hay, Llanvair
in Buelht. These Lordships with Brecknock and Abergavenny did belong to the
Bruses Lords of Brecknock, but came after by sundry ways to the Bohuns,
Nevills, and Mortimers; So there are in this Territory or Kingdom of Mathraval
14 Cantreds and 40 Comots.

Camden, after whom there is no gleaning, will supply what is defective in this
Description.

FINIS.
An Advertisement to the Reader.
R EADER, If there comes into thine hands a Book entitled, British Antiquities
Revived, thou art desired to correct these mistakes in it, page 6. lin. 13. for
tenet read tenetur; p. 24. lin. last for Britain r. the Britons; p. 38. l. 18.
for St David's r. Sherborne. p. 42. l. 16. for 21th r. 20th. l. 18. for 17th r.
16th. p. 43. at the end of the Pedigree blot, not the Coat of, and the line
following; p. 44. l. 5. dele his Grandfather. lin. 13. for Mothers r. Fathers.
lin. 14. blot it out quite, and put in stead thereof G. a Lion rampant,
regardant Or.

George Owen Harry therein quoted is said to be Parson of Whitchurch in the
Lordship of Kemeys.

The Printer to the Reader.
BE Pleased, Gentle Reader, to take this short account of the British Annals
following, as also of this and the former Edition thereof. Caradoc of Lancarvan
collected the Acts and Successions of the British Princes from Cadwalader to
the year of Christ 1156. Of his Collections there were afterward several
Copies kept in the Abbeys of Conwey in Carnarvonshire, and of Strata Florida or
Stra^flur in Cardiganshire, which received addition as things fell out, being
ordinarily compared together every third year, to wit, when the Bards or
Beirdh belonging to those Abbeys went their ordinary Visitation (which they
called Clera) from the one to the other; They contained in them (besides) such
other occurrences happening within the Isle of Britain, as were thought worthy
the Recording. This Course continued in those Abbeys until the year of Christ
1270, which was a little before the death of the last Prince Llewelyn, who was
slain at Buellt. Of these Collections there were a 100 Copies at least in
Wales very anciently written. Humphrey Lloyd Gentleman (a painful and worthy
searcher of British Antiquities) lighting upon one of the Copies, translated it
into English, and augmented it somewhat, out of Matt. Paris and Nicolas Trivet
chiefly, but left it imperfect, God being pleased to take him away before he
had finished it, as he had designed. The Right Honorable Sir Henry Sidney Lord
President of Wales, having had a Copy of his Translation a great while lying by
him, employed David Powel Doctor of Divinity to Peruse, Correct, Augment, and
Continue it in order to the setting of it out in Print. The Doctor at his
request compared the translation with the British Book, whereof he had two
ancient Copies, and corrected it where he saw cause. Moreover he consulted all
Authors he could come by, that treat of the affairs of Wales, as Gildas, Asser
Menevens., Galfrid, William of Newborough, Matt. Paris, Matt. Westminster,
Thomas Walsingham, Ponticus Virunnius, Polydor Virgil, Jo. Leland, Jo. Bale, J.
Prise, Matt. Parker, Jo. Caius, William Lambard, and all the English Chronicles
Printed; and in MS. Gildas Sapiens alias Nennius, Hen. Huntington, William
Malmesbury, Marianus Scotus, Ralph Cogshall, Jo. Eversden, Nic. Trivet,
Florentius Vigorniensis, Simon of Durham, Roger Hoveden, and other which John
Stow Citizen of London had got together, the British books of Pedegrees, Jo.
Castoreus, Sylvester Girald. Cambr. with diverse other Pieces of Antiquity he
had received from the Right Honorable the Lord Burleigh High Treasurer of
England, who had also by his Letters directed him to all the Offices where the
Records of the Realm were kept: Out of which he gathered Notes (though not so
many as he would, if time and his occasions had permitted him) which with the
Book he Printed A. D. 1584, and Dedicated to the Famous Sir Philip Sidney
Knight. Some of the Notes he added where he sound they were wanting, and some
other, where the matter was delivered briefly and obscurely, for the better
clearing of the Text he inserted in their due places in the Book. Also he gave
in the Margent exact quotations of the Authors, as well where they agree with
the Book as when they are brought to Add to it, or for further Explanation. In
his Notes touching Families he was greatly furthered by the Pains of Sir Edw.
Stradling Knight, Thomas Powel of Whitington Park, and Richard Broughton
Esquires. And the Book would have come out much more exactly done, had it not
bin Printed almost quite off, when he received another Larger, and better
corrected Copy of the Translation from Robert Glover Somerset Herald: So much
touching the former Edition out of Dr Powell's Epist. Dedicat. As concerning
this latter, Robert Vaughan of Merionethshire Esquire. out of his zeal to preserve
the Antiquities of his Country was pleased to impart some choice notes, which
he had been above 40 years in gathering, and were (most of them) never before
in Print. These thou have of New, which, thou will find, do correct in many
places as well as augment the History. For the better understanding of the
ensuing History thou have in the beginning a Chorography of Wales; and at the
end an Appendix with an Index are thought necessary. Caradoc's Annals are
Printed in an English letter, Dr Powell's Additions in an Italian and thus
marked *, and Mr Vaughans Collections in a Roman with this mark prefixed*
Farewell.

W: H.

Cadvvalader Bhendiged, That is, The SAINT or BLESSED, in whom ended the
British Kingdom, whereupon the Government of Wales by PRINCES began.
CADWALADER the last King of the A. D. 680. Galfr. Mon.
Britains of the Noble Trojan Race, being by reason of a great famine and
mortality driven to forsake his Realm and native Country, went over with a
great number of his Nobility and Subjects to Lhydaw (now called Little Britain
in France) there to so journe with his Cousin Alan King of the Country. And he
had not been there long but intelligence arrived to him of the landing of
strangers, as Saxons, Angles, and Juthes in Galfr. Io. Castor.
his Kingdom of Great Britain, which they finding desolate and without
Inhabitants (sabe a few Saxons who had invited them in, and a small remnant of
poor Britons, who in Rocks and Woods by feeding upon roots prolonged a
miserable life) did soon overrun and possess themselves of a great part
thereof. And dividing it into several Territories and Kingdoms, inhabited
that part which was then and now (at this day) is called Lhoyger in the Brytish
or Welsh tongue, and in English England, with all the Cities, Towns, Castles,
and Uillages, which the Britains had builded, ruled and inhabited by the space
of 1827 years, under diverse Kings and Princes of great renown: whereupon he
purposed to return, and by strength of British Knights to recover his own land
again.

But having made ready his Navy for the transporting of his forces, which were
partly his own men, and partly such succors as he had received from his Cousin
Alan, an Angel appeared to him, who declared it to be the will of God that he
should not take his voyage toward Britain, but to Rome to Pope Sergius, where
he should make an end of his life, and be afterward numbered among the blessed:
for GOD had appointed that the Britains should have no more the Rule and
Governance of the whole I Will, until the Prophesy of Merlin Ambrose should be
fulfilled.

Having acquainted his friend Alan with his Vision, and the message of the
Angel, Alan immediately consulted all his Girald. I^iner. Cambr.
books of Prophesies, as the works of both Merlins; of Merlin Ambrose (who
lived in the time of King Vortiger) and of Merlin Sylvester, or Merdhin Wylht,
(who flourished (after) in King Arthurs time) and also the words which the
Eagle spoke Galfr. Cast.
at the building of Caer Septon, now called Shaf^sbury; and after long study
found the time to be now come, whereof they had Prophe^ied.

* Little Britain is a Country in France, called in Caesar's D. P.
time, Armorica, and after inhabited by Britains, who about the Little
Brytaine, or Brytaine Armorike.
year of Christ 384. under the conduct of Conan Lord of Meriadoc, now
Denbighland, went out of this I Will with Maximus the Tyrant, to his aid against
the Emperor Gratianus, and winning the said Country of Armorica (which Maximus
gave Conan Galfr. Mon. I. Cast. Math. West. Fabian. C^xton.
and his People) slew and drove out all the old Inhabitants thereof, planting
themselves in the same, where they to this day speak the British tongue, being
the third remnant of the ancient Britains.

The names of the Kings of Little Britain.
1 Conan Meriadoc. 2 Gradlonus. 3 Solomon 1. 4 Auldranus. 5 Budicus 1. 6
Howelus Magnus. This Howel followed King Arthur in his Wars. 7 Howelus 2. 8
Alanus 1. 9 Howelus 3. 10 Gilquellus. 11 Solomon 2. 12 Alanus 2. Of whom
Caradoc makes mention, descended of a Daughter of Run ( the son of Maelgon
Gwyneth, King of Great Britain,) which was married to the forenamed Howel the
2d, King of Little R. Caen* lib. 2. Pe^. 2.
Brytaine. 13 Conobertus. 14 Budicus 2. 15 Theodoricus. 16 Rualhonus. 17 Daniel
Dremrost, i. e. Rubicunda facie. 18 Aregstanus. 19 Maconus. 20 Neomenius. 21
Haruspogius. 22 Solomon 3. Slain by his own men, and then was that Kingdom
turned to an Earldom, whereof one Alan was the first Earl, who valiantly
resisted the Normans, vanquishing them in several Battles.
Concerning the words of the Eagle at the building of Caer Galfrid* Cast.
Septon in Mount Paladour in the time of Rudhudibras, in the year after the
Creation of the World, 3048. some think that an Eagle did then speak and
Prophesy: Other are of opinion, that it was a Britain named Aquila that
Prophesied of these things, and of the recovery of the whole I Will again by the
Britains, bringing with them the bones of Cadwalader from Rome, as in the said
Prophesies is to be seen.

Alan hereupon counseled Cadwalader to fulfill the will of God in going to
Rome, which he did; and after he had lived there eight years in the service of
God he dyed in the year of Christ 688, So that the Britains ruled this I Will,
with the out-Iles, of Wight: Mon, in English called Anglesey: Manaw, in
English, Man: Orkney and Ewyst, 1137. years before Christ, until the year of
his incarnation 688. And thus ended the Rule of the Britains over the whole I Will.

* The Britains being sore troubled with the Scots and Picts, 450
and denied aid of the Romans, sent for the Saxons to come to defend them
against their Enemies: who coming at the first as friends to the Britains,
liked the country so well, that they became their mortal enemies, and drove
them out of the same.

About the year of Christ. 590. Gurmundus an arch-pirate Galfrid. ^ast.
and Captain of the Norwegians, after that he had conquered Ireland, being
called by the Saxons to their aid against Careticus King of the Britains,
overcame the same Careticus in battle, and compelled him and his Britains to
flee beyond the rivers of Seaverne and Dee to Cambria (now called Wales) and to
Cornwall, and some to Britain Armorike, where they remain to this day, and
gave Loegria (now England) to the Saxons. And albeit that Cadvan, Cadwalhon,
and Cadwalader were since entitled Kings of all Britain, yet they could never
afterward recover the quiet possession of the whole Island. After the departure
of Cadwalader out of the Land, the Britains were governed within the Country of
Wales or Cambria by those men, whereof this history following does entreat,
which were commonly called Kings of such Provinces and Countries as they
possessed, until the time of Owen Gwyneth, who being in the days of King
Stephen, H. Lh^yd.
and Henry the second, was the first that named himself Prince of Wales, and
so the rest after him kept that title and style: and yet nevertheless, they
are sometimes called Princes before his time, and Kings after him, as I have
observed by diverse Charters and old Records, which I have seen in the Tower of
London and elsewhere. Howbeit, this Author calls the chiefest of them Kings
till the time of the said Owen, and since, Princes.

Some say that Cadwalader was the son of Cadwallan by R. V.
the sister of Penda King of Mercia, and that he is the same that Beda calls
young Cadvalla.

He bears B. a Cross patee fitchee Or. Which coat of arms was also borne
by his son Ivor, who was slain by the Saxons, and succeeded by his Nephew
Ive, who was Crowned and Anointed King, not upon the account of his being a
Britain, but because he had Saxon blood running in his veins, his Father being
one Renten of the British race, and his Mother of the Saxon. This Ive Reigned
37 years, he was a wise and a provident Prince, he bare the fore*mentioned
Arms of K. Cadwalader as long as he lived, and so did the rest of the Kings
until the time of King Edward the First, so Nic. Upon de officmilitar.
Humphred: Duc. Glocest.

After three years of his Reign he went to Rome, in the time of Pope Sergius
about the year of our Lord 690. so Polychron.

Cadwalader the Blessed being much weakened by a continual war with the Saxons,
which was attended with a great famine, and a raging pestilence, is said to
retire with his Nobility to Little Britain, where being kindly received by
Alan King of the Country he lived, until news was brought to him, that the
plague began to cool and cease; then having obtained aid of his Cousin Alan
for the recovering of his Kingdom he prepares for his return. But one night,
as he lay a bed, an Angel appearing to him, and telling him, that it was Gods
will he should go to Rome, and there spend the rest of his days in the
service of God, and that it was declared that neither he nor his posterity
should have the chief rule of Britain, until the time that his bones were
brought back from Rome to Britain, made him alter his resolution, and go to
Rome A. D. 680, where after he had lived eight years he dyed 688 or 689 in Pope
Sergius his time, as Galfr. Mon:; Cadwalader being much dismayed and perplexed
at the Vision, Quaesivit causam tanti maligni in Regnosuo, as is recorded in an
old Book, Cui Angelus respondens dixit, Negligentia Praelatorum, rapina
potentum, cupiditas Iudicum, detestanda luxuria, rabies perjurorum, and
inordinatus Cultus vestimentorum.

There are some Authors say, that the time of the great pestilence and
mortality, and consequently of Cadwaladers going to Rome was before the year
680. Beda says, the pestilence happened A. D. 664. Nennius or whoever is the
Author of the Tract beginning thus, Woden genuit Beldoc etc. (who by Leland,
Bale and S. Simon Dewes is said to live in the declining age of the British
Empire, that is, in the time of Cadwallan and Cadwalader Kings of Britain, and
Penda King of Mercia) averreth that the mortality aforesaid hapenned in the
Reign of Oswi King of Northumberland, and of Cadwalaeder King of the Britains.
Oswi began his Reign A. D. 643. and dyed 670, so that the year wherein, as
Beda says, the plague began, was about the 22 or 23 year of Oswis Reign, at
what time also Cadwalader ruled the Britains. For farther confirmation, there
is an old British Chronology written on parchment 400 years ago, which says
that from the battle of Caerlegion or Westchester fought A. D. 603 (between
Ethelfred King of Northumberland General of the English and Brochwel Ysgythroc
Leader of the Britains) to Cadwaladers going to Rome is 62 years, which 62
years added to 603 will make 665, the time about which the Pestilence, as Beda
and the rest say, reged in Britain. Ieffrey of Monmouth who says that
Cadwalader dyed in Pope Sergius his time on the 12 of the calends of May, seems
to mistake Cadwalader for Cadwalla King of the West Saxons, who went to Rome
688, being the 3d year of the Reign of Alfred King of Northumberland as Beda
in the 7 and 8 Chapters of the 5 book of his Ecclesiastical History, and also
S. Hen. Savil do affirm; upon Easter day following this Cadwallae was
Baptized and dyed the 12 of the Calends of May 689, but in our old British
Calendars we find the 12 day of November to be consecrated to the memory of K.
Cadwalader, which is to be reckoned the day of his death, or second Birth;
Caradoc (our Author) as well as Ieffrey is mistaken in the time of Cadwaladers
going to Rome, and probably upon the same grounds.

In the old MS. text we read that after Cadwalader, Ivor son of Alan King of
Little Britain ruled 48 years and then dyed. And after him Rodri Molwynoc, but
no year put down; the Translators (it seems) found in some Copies that Rodri
began his Reign A. D. 720: take 48 out of 720 there will remain 672 which
must be the year of our Lord, that Ivor came into Britain, by that account,
that is 8 years before Cadwalader went out of Britain, which is not probable,
so that we may conclude the account of time Ieffrey and Caradoc give us as to
this particular very uncertain. Add the three years Caedwalader resided in
Little Britain to 665 which out of Ninnius, Beda etc. is proved to be the year
of Cadwaladers going for Rome, his going thither may be said to fall A. D. 668,
unto which add the 48 years of Ivors Reign, the whole will be 716, wherein
Ivor may be supposed to dye, being but four years short of the year 720,
which the Translators assign for the beginning of Rodri Molwynocs Reign; the
reason inducing the Translators to assign that year (peradventure) might be
this, viz. that Ivas King of the West Saxons, whom they confound with Ivor,
went to Rome in the same year.

King Cadwalader was a Benefactor to the Abbey of Clynnoc Vawr in Arvon, as may
be seen in the Extent of North Wales, which is in the keeping of the Auditor,
and in the 2d volume os Monasticon Anglicanum published by M. Dugdale, to whom
I sent the following account of the endowing of the said Abbey as it was taken
out of the said Extent,

Ed: Rex Ex part Galfridi Trefnant nunc praepositi sive Rectoris Ecclesiae
Collegiatae de Clynoc Vawr.

Quidam Gwithaint dedit propriam Villam suam Clynnoc Vawr Deo and Beunon tunc
Abbati Abbathiae de Clynnoc Vawr pro anima sua and anima consobrini sui
Catwalani sine censu Regali and sine Consule....... alicui, quamdiu fuerit
lapis in terra: Ac personae subscriptae dederunt Deo and Sancto Beuno terras
subscriptas sicut Gwitheint dedit Clynnoc Vawr. viz.

Cadwalladrus Rex dedit Grayanoc.
Tegwaret Rex dedit Porthamal.
Mervyn Princeps dedit Carnguch.
Cadwgan ap Cynvelin dedit Bodveilion in Llyn and Bodvael.
Rodri filius Mervin dedit Denio.
Griffith ap Tangwn dedit tertiam partem Maestref.
Idwal dedit Penrhos. Rodri dedit tertiam partem Newgwlf.
Grean dedit Dorwyn [ vel Corwyn.]
Rodri filius Idwal dedit Botelog.
Gwithenet filius Tridoc dedit Llanllyuni and Coret Aberseint.
Cadell Rex dedit Kilcourt, Idwal dedit Clynnoc Vechan.
Tridoc dedit Coret Gwrvai.
Gwrvin a silva usque mare.
Idwal dedit Aber Braint. Cadell ap Rodri dedit Bryn hidugen.
Anarawd filius Rodri dedit Yscallen in Creuddyn.
Cadell dedit Botwynoc and Llwyn Dynwal.
Rodri ap Mervyn dedit Priscoll and Nant Soch in Llyn.
Cadell dedit Ethinoc. Rodri dedit Ilanor in Llyn.
Cynan filius Hival dedit Botelias in Llyn.
Anarawd dedit Bodagwyn. Anarawd filius Mervyn dedit Dolbebin.
Grevax filius I won dedit Dolcoedog.
Griffith ap Llywelyn dedit Aberllyfin.
Eliued filius Madoc dedit Maysang in suis terminis
Jago filius Idwal dedit Llechedern in Llyn.
Griffith ap Cynan dedit Boterid.
Trahayarn ap Caradawg dedit Treswyn.
Jago filius Idwal dedit Brynerit.
Griffith ap Llywelyn dedit Y Vainol.
Cadwgan dedit Llanvawr in Llyn.
Griffith ap Llywelyn dedit Trefrew.
Lunlion alias Coulion filius Llawfron dedit Hirdref in Llyn.
Jonas dedit Bodegros. Rodri filius Mervyn dedit Mowedd.
Cadell filius Rodri dedit Penhidgen.
Griffith ap Llywelyn dedit Tr^flagh.
Rodri dedit Penros in Twrkelyn.
Howel filius Cadell dedit duas parts Llecheiddior.
Griffith ap Llywelyn dedit Roswenesaf.
St Beuno, to whom the Abbey of Clynoc was dedicated, was the Son of Hywgi ap
Gwynlliw ap Glywis ap Tegid ap Cadell a Prince or Lord of Gl^wisig, Brothers
son to S. Cadoc ap Gwynlliw sometime Bishop of Beneventum in Italy; He was by
the Mothers side Cousin German to Laudatus the first Abbot of Enlli (in English
Bardsey) and to Kentigern Bishop of Glasco in Scotland, and of Llanelwey in
Wales. The said Centigerns father was Owen Regent of Scotland and son of
Urien King of Cumbria. Beuno having raised to life, as the tradition goes, S.
Wenifryd (who was beheaded by one Caradoc a Lord in North Wales because she
would not yield to his unchaste desires) was greatly respected by King Cadvan,
who gave him Lands, whereon to build a Monastery. Cadwallon Cadvans son also
gave him lands called Gwareddoc, where beginning to build a Church, a woman
came to him with a Child in her arms, who told him the said Lands were the
Inheritance of the said Child: this did trouble Beuno exceedingly, insomuch
that he and the said woman along with him went in all have to Caer Seiont
(called by the Romans Segontium, now Carnarvon) to K. Cadwallon, who then kept
his Court there. When he came before the King, he told him with a great deal
of zeal, he had not done well to devote to Gods service another man's
inheritance, and demanded of him back again the golden Scepter he had given
him as a consideration for the said Lands, which the King refusing to restore
was without more ado excommunicated by him; Beuno after he had pronounced his
sentence against him went his ways, but Gwyddeint a cosen german of the
King's having heard of it followed after him, and overtaking him gave him (for
the good of his own soul and the King's) the Towneship of Clynnoc vawr, which
was his undoubted inheritance: there Beuno built a Church about the year of
our Lord 616 about what time Cadvan dyed A. D. 616.
leaving his son Cadwallon to succeed him. Some say Beuno recovered S.
Wenifryd to life in the year 644, but that agrees not with the truth of
History. Not long before this time Eneon Bhrenin, or Anianus Rex Scotorum, a
Prince in the North of Brytaine leaving his Royalty came to Llyn in Gwyneth,
where he built a Church, which is at this day called (from him) Llan Eingan
Bhrenin; It is said that there, in the service of his God, he spent the
remainder of his days; K. Eneon was the son of Owen Danwyn, the son of
Eneon Yrth, the son of Cunedha Wledig King of Cambria, and a great Prince in
the North. He was cosen german to Maelgwn Gwyneth King of Britain, whose
Father was Caswallon Law-hir, brother to Owen Danwyn. The said Maelgon dyed
about the year of our Lord 586. Medif daughter to Voylda ap Talu traws of
N^nconwey was Maelgons mother.

Edvval Ywrch and Iuor.
AFter that Cadwalader had taken his journey toward 688
Rome, as before is declared, leaving his Son named Edwal* Ywrch, that is to
say, Edwal the Roe and his people with his Cosen Alan, Alan taking courage to
him, and not despairing of the conquest of Britain, manned his ships as
Galfrid. Io. Cast.
well with a great number of his own people, as with those which Cadwalader had
brought with him, and appointed Ivor his son, and Ynyr his nephew to be the
leaders and Chiefetains of the same, who sailing over the narrow seas, landed
in the West parts of Britain; of whose arrival when the Saxons were
certified, they gathered a great army, and gave Ivor battle, wherein they were
put to flight, and lost a great number of their People: and Ivor wan the
Countries of Cornwall, Devon-shire, and Somersetshire, which he peopled with
Britains.

Whereupon Kentwinus King of Westsex gathered a great number of Saxons and
Angles together, and came against the Britains, which were ready to abide the
battle: and when both Armies came in sight one of another, they were not very
desirous to fight, but fell to a composition and agreement, that Ivor should
take Ethelburga to wife, which was cosen to Kentwyn, and quietly enjoy all
that he had, during the reign of Ivor.

This Ivor is he whom the English Chronicles do call Ive H. Lhoyd.
or lew King of the West Saxons, that reigned after Cedwall, and they say that
he was a Saxon, for Kentwyn reigned but five years after Ivors coming to
England, and after him, his nephew Cedwall, who after he had reigned over the
West Saxons two years went to Rome, leaving his Kingdom to Ive his cosen:
This Ive or Ivor (whom the Britains call the son of Alan, and the Saxons the
son of Kenred) being King of the Saxons and Britains which inhabited the West
parts of England, after many victories achieved against the Kings of Kent,
Southsex, and Mercia, left his Kingdom to Adelred, or (as some call him)
Adelerdus, his cosen, and took his journey to Rome, where he made a Godly end,
about the year of our Lord 720.

* Of Cadwalader, Cedwall, and Ivor, there be diverse opininions. Some hold,
that Cadwalader and Cedwall are the selfsame man; and that the Saxon writers
call him Cedwall whom the Britains do name Cadwalader: who (as the Brytish
Chronicles do affirm) after his foresaid vision, did resign all his right,
title and interest in Great Brytaine, to the said Alan King of Brytaine
Armorike, despairing that either he or his should ever have any thing to do
there, so leaving his son Edwal Ywrch and his people to the ordering of his
cosen Alan he went to Rome. But this opinion seems to vary from the
assertion of Bernardus Guidonius. But certainly in my opinion it is more
probable that that this Cedwall was Edwal the son of Cadwalader, for the name
Edoal, which in the ancient Brytish copy is written Etoal, may well agree with
that which Guidonius writes: and an easy matter it were especially in proper
names for the C. capital to creep in, which is almost all one with that
character which the Lawyers do call a paragraph, and is used commonly in all
old
Text hands at the beginning of periods or sections. Of this matter thus
writes Guidonius, In suo pontificali Catalogo, sub Sergio primo.

Per idem tempus Ethoal Rex Brytonum, cum per december Rob. Caenal.
annos multis regulis obviasset, and plura mala illis irrogasset, tandem ipsis
in pacem devenientibus, super occidentales Saxones regnavit annis duobus.
Videns autem Brytanniam multis miseriis contritam, regnum sprevit terrenum
propter aeternum, and Romam veniens, paucis diebus transactis migravit ad
Christum. Et paulo post. Hic ex toto illud regnum antiquissimum Brytonum
corruit, quod omnibus fere regnis diuturnius fuit. A tempore Heli Sacerdotis
usque ad hoc tempus, per annos 1825. Rob. Caenalis lib. 2. per. 2.

That is.

At the same time Ethoal King of the Brytains, when he had by the space of ten
years warred with diverse Kings, and often put them to the worse, at length
coming to an agreement with them, he reigned over the West Saxons two years:
then perceiving Brytaine to be overworne with miseries, and preferring the
heavenly Kingdom before the earthly, he came to Rome, and within few days
dyed: and in him ended wholly that ancient Kingdom of the Brytains, which
continued in a manner longer then any other, from Heli the priest to this time,
by the space of 1825* years.

Further, it is not like that Iuor coming to the aid of Edwal his cosen would
ever seek the kingdom to himself and defeat the right heir: but very well
it may be, if this Iuor be that man whom the Saxon writers call Inas or Iue,
that after these Brytaines had arrived in the south part of this realm, and
fought diverse times with the Saxon kings, and continued in Cornwall,
Devonshire, and Somersetshire by the space of two years* they should meet
Centwyn in the field and so fall to an agreement, that Iuor taking Ethelburga
the cosen of Centwyn to wife should enjoy the kingdom of the West Saxons
after Centwyn, and that thereupon Edwal resigning his title and interest to
Iuor departed to Rome, and so died: as Guidonius says.

All this notwithstanding, it seems by the report of other writers of very
good account, that Inas or Iue king of the West Saxons Beda. H. Hunt. Cast. W.
Lamb.
(whose laws are extant in print, set out by master William Lambard Esquier, a
worthy searcher and preserver of the antiquities of this land) was not a
Brytaine, but a Saxon, who had war against the Brytaines diverse times, and
vanquished them.

Matthew West. reports that Inas or Iue fought with Gerent King of the
Brytaines.

I have an ancient book written (as John Leland thinks) by John Castoreus or
Bever, sometimes Monk of Westminster, who lived in the time of Edward the
third, which reports the History of Inas in this sort.

About the year of Grace 689. Ivor and Henyr sons of the Daughter of
Cadwalader sometime King of Brytaine, came over I. Cast.
from Ireland, and taking to their did the two Kings of Wales de stroyed the
Province of Chester, and sent messengers to the Saxon Kings, commanding them to
restore again to the Brytains the Country of Lhoyger, out of which they had
wrongfully expelled The request of the B^ytaines.
their Parents and Ancestors: adding that if they would not do so within
fifteen days, they should be sure not to enjoy it longer. This message Inas
the Noble King of Westsex signified to all the other Saxon Kings, who soon met
together in Mount Campden, to whom Sibertus King of Essex spoke thus:

Dear friends and companions, let us weigh and consider not only The oration
of Sibertus to the other Saxon Kings.
what we are our selves, but also what our enemies are which come against us:
they are the very Britains, whose Fathers and Ancestors our Fathers have bereft
of their inheritance, and expelled out of their own land, and now they justly
come against us to claim that which our Ancestors by violence have taken from
theirs. Let us therefore like other Nations choose unto us a Head; to lead,
direct, and govern us, whom, as chief Lord in time of Peace and War, we as
Members may obey and stick to, since without a Head there is no victory to be
looked for. Have not the Brytains after two years of their dispersion set upon
the ancient Saxons (a more valiant people than we are) fifteen times within
seven years? Did they not spoil their Kingdoms, kill their people, and leave
such as remained alive sore wounded and maimed at their departure?

The rest of the Saxon Kings agreed to his mind, and with one assent chose that
worthy Knight Ina King of Westsex to be their Sovereign, who having taken
their Homage, advanced his Standard, and marching forward against Ivor and
Henyr set upon them, so that they were feign to forsake their Tents, and fly
into Wales.

Thus Inas having obtained the victory with the other Saxon Kings (saving
Sibertus who by reason of his age and impotency had gone home before) returned
to Southampton, where his Cosen Adelard informed him that Ivor and Henyr had
gathered and levied a puissant Army afresh to set upon the Saxons: whereupon
Inas foreslowed not the matter, but went against them, and laid siege to the
Castle of Snowdon, compelling the Brytains to fly to their ships, and while he
was at Bangor with the other Saxon Kings, and the Nobles of Wales he kept the
feast of S. David, and then dismissed the other Kings home to their Country,
until he should have occasion for them again: and departed himself with
Adelard his cosen to Queen Ethelburga being then at Manchester and continued
there almost three months.

In the mean while Adelard minding to travel about all Wales met three spies,
of whom (being by him taken and examined) he learned that Ivor and Henyr were
returning again with a huge strong Army, such as all the Saxon Kings would not
be able to resist. Then went he and showed Inas what he had heard: wherefore
Inas forthwith certified the other Saxon Kings of the same, commanding them
without delay to be ready at Chester with Horse and Armor to go against their
enemies, and to defend their Country from violence. They accordingly met at
Chester, and following the Kings Standard gave the Brytains battle, and put
them to flight. Howbeit, the Britains eftsoons invaded England, into which
they made seven inrodes in two years, destroying Towns and Villages
wheresoever they came, and never returning without rich booties; Inas after
this victory returned home, and reigned over the West Saxons 36 years, and then
bequeathed his Kingdom to his cosen Adelard. Thus much out of Castoreus.

This Ivor made the fratrie of Glastenbury, called in the British tongue Ynys
Avalon.

* Joseph of Arimathea being sent by Philip the Apostle, as Gildas. Polydor.
Gildas reports, came into this Island in the days of Arviragus King of
Brytaine about the year of Christ 53. and instructed the Brytains in the
doctrine of Salvation, in the I Will of Aualon, where he built a Church for the
Christians: which Church this Ivor (if it be he that governed the West Saxons)
converted to an Abbey, which he endowed with large possessions, and was the
more famous, because the Bodies of the said Joseph of Arimathea Bale.
and King Arthurs were there buried.

He gave also great lands to the Church of Winchester. In the second year of
Ivors Reign, Bryth a Subject to Egfrid King of Northumberland, did overrun
and destroy a great part of the Country of Ireland. In the fourth year of his
reign there was a great Earthquake in the I Will of Man: and the year following
it rained blood in Brytaine and Ireland. The Milk like wise and the Butter
turned to the color of blood. The second year after that the Moon appeared all
bloody.

After the departure of Ivor to Rome, Adelard or Adelred took the rule of the
Saxons. And Rodericus, or Rodri Molwynoc the son of Edwal Ywrch, did take the
rule of the Brytains in the West part of England.

One Welsh History says, that Iva was the son of one Assar King of Little
Brytaine, and that he reigned 48 years, but another affirms Ivor, Alan, and
Idwal to have been the sons of Cadwalader, and to have governed Wales.

Idwall Prince of the Britains not being able to withstand the continual
assaults of the Saxons brought over with him into Cambria a remnant of Britains
who were miserably afflicted both with War and Famine, and governed them
(under the name of Welsh men) 30 years. Dr Morgan says Edwal lies buried at
Caergybi, towit, Holyhead. Bp Nicol. Robinson's MS.

I. Dee thinks that Ivor was son in Law to Alan by marriage of his daughter
Agatha, but I find by good Records that she was married to Edwal Ywrch.

Sr John Pryse Knight thinks that Ynyr the cosen of Ivor is the same that the
Saxon writers call Yne or Ynas, who was King of the West Saxons, and went after
to Rome, as is here set down, but John Harding does write plainly and
distinctly of them both, Ynyr a Briton, and Yna a Saxon.

About this time was solemnized a Marriage in North Wales between the son and
heir of the King of Man and Nest the daughter of Cadell the son of Brochwel
Yscythroc ap Elise ap Cynllaw ap Eli of the race of K. Gorthyrn. Prince Mervyn
Bhrych was the son of the said Prince of Man by the foresaid Nest.

In some copies of the old Text we read thus, viz. Two years after 688 there
was a great slaughter in Ireland, and the next year there was an Earthquake;
four years after that it rained blood in Great Brytaine and Ireland, and the
Milk and the Butter turned to Blood. Two years after that the Moon looked like
blood. A. D. 704 Elfric K. of England dyed, and was buried at Damnam. The year
after the night was as light as the day. The year after dyed Osbric K. of the
Saxons. And the year after that S. Michaels Church was consecrated. A. D. 720*
it was a very hot Summer.

Roderike Molwynoc. Roderike or Rodri, the Son of Edwal Ywrch.
ROderike began his Reign over the Brytains An. 720. 720.
against whom Adelred, King of Westsax raised a great Army, and destroying the
Country of Devonshire entered Cornwall, where Roderike with the Brytains gave
him Battle, wherein the Brytains were Conquerours. This battle is called
Gwaeth Heilyn.
The year after the Brytains obtained two other victories against the Saxons,
one in Northwales at a place called Garth Maelaw^, and another in Southwales at
Pencoet. At this time Belin the son of Elphin a Noble man amongst the
Brytains dyed. The year following died Celredus King of Mercia and Ethelbaldus
was made King after him, who being Ethelbald King of Mercia.
desirous to annex the fertile soil of the Country lying between Severne and
Wye to his Kingdom of Mercia, gathered an Army, and entered into Wales, and
destroying all before him, he came to the Mountain Carno, not far from
Abergevenny, where a sore battle was fought between him 723.
and the Brytains in the year 728.

The year 733 died Beda a Priest, brought up in the Abbey 733. Or Jarew.
of Wyrnetham, a great Clerk that wrote many works, a mong which, there is one
entitled, The Ecclesiastical History of the English Nation, Dedicated unto
Cleolwolf King of Northumberland. This year Adelard King of Westsex, and
Ethelbald King of Mercia joined their powers against the 734 Wastald was Bishop
of Hereford.
Brytains, and gave them battle, and after a long fight and great slaughter on
both sides, obtained a bloody victory. The year 735. Adelard King of Westsex
died, and Cudred 735.
reigned in his stead. And the year following dyed Ywen.
. Edwyn King of the Picts. And in the year 746. there was a great Hol. pa: 193
battle fought at Hereford betwixt Cudred and Ethelbaldus, where after a long
^ight Cudred had the victory. Also the next year ensuing he gave the Brytains
an overthrow and dyed shortly after.

* The Brytains seeing they could prevail but little against H. Hunt. Hol.
page 189. and 193.
the Saxons joined in league with Cuthred King of the West Saxons, who then was
out with Ethelbald King of Mercia, whereupon the said Ethelbald entered into
Wales with a strong army, and the Brytains met him, and were there discomfited.
After that Cuthred and Ethelbald met in the field, where Ethelbald was put to
flight: but anon after they two were made friends, and joined together their
powers against the Brytains and overcame them.

After Cudred in the year 749. was Sigebert created King, Math. West.
who for his evil behavior was expelled by his Nobles out 749
of his Kingdom, and was miserably slain by a swinebeard, Sigebert King of
Westsex. Kenulph.
after whom Kenulph was made King of the West Saxons the year 750. About the
same time died Theodor the son of 750
Belin, a man of great estimation among the Brytains. Not long after there was
a great battle fought betwixt the Brytains and the Picts at a place called
Mictant
Magedawc, where Dalargan King of the Picts was slain. Within a little after,
Roderi or Roderike Molwynoc was driven by the Saxons to forsake the West
country, and to come to seek his own inheritance in Northwales, where did rule
at that time the Children of Bletius or Bledericus Prince of Cornewal and
Devonshire (who was one of them that gave Adelred and Ethelbert the overthrow
at Bangor upon the river Dee who had enjoyed the government of Northwales ever
since Cadvan was chosen King of Brytaine until this time.

* By this History it should seem that the Brytains continued their Government
in the West part of Loegria until this time. But certainly the consent (in a
manner) of all writers is, that the Brytish Kingdom ended in Cadwalader, after
whom the Brytains had nothing to do beyond Severne, being con^^rained to keep
themselves within the Countries of Cambria and Cornubia. It is also written by
diverse, that Ivor and Ynyr at their first arriving in Brytaine, were repelled
by the Saxons, and driven to Wales, where Ivor ruled as Prince many years, whom
this Roderi or Roderike the son of Edwal the son of Cadwalader succeeded.

When Roderike King of the Brytains had reigned about 30 years he dyed the
year 750. leaving two sons after him, Conan Tindaethwy, and Howel.

Tho. Maelor says Rodri Molwynoc founded and endowed the Monastery of Ynys
Enlli (in English Bardsey) adjoining to Llyn in Carnarvonshire. Reedify and
augment it he might, but it seems to be of an ancienter foundation, for we find
in our Records mention of a Monastery and an Abbot there before his time. S.
Dubricius Archbishop of Caerleon resigning his ^ishoprick to S. David went to
Bardsey from the Synod of Brevi, which was held against the Pelagians about the
year of Grace 522, with most of the Clergy of that Synod along with him, there
to spend the remainder of their days in a Monastery, where being remote from
the World they might the more entirely and unanimously devote themselves to the
service of God. One La^datus was then Abbot of Bardsey, who is taken notice of,
that being summoned to that Synod he did not appear. Aneyrin gwawdydd
mychdeyr^ Beirdh, that is, Aneirin the Satyrist King of Bards (brother to
Gildas Albanius the British Historian who dyed about the year 512,) writes
thus of the retirement of St Dubric and his followers to Bardsey,

Pan oedd Saint Senedd Bhreui
Drwy arch y Prophwydi
Ar ol gwiw bregeth Dewi
In mined ^ ^nys Enlli etc.
This further relation following we have in a MS. remaining with the Auditor of
North Wales, which was written by one that had the keeping of the Records at
Carnarvon.

BARDESEYA.
Notet hic lector quoddam and mirabile and sanctum and inter mirabilia Walliae
in Chronicis annotatum. Ad primam autem Monasterii hujus Insulae fundationem
Dominus ipse Deus qui petitiones cordis justorum implet, ad deprecatum Sancti
Laudati primi Abbatis ejusdem Monasterii inivit pactum cum ipso Sancto,
statuitque ei and miraculose confirmavit sibi and successoribus sui^
claustralibus ibidem sancte and miraculose victuris in perpetuum certum, and
praestitutum ordinem and successum (mirabile dictu) seriatim moriendi:
videlicet, quod eorum major natu, vel aetate grandaevior prius, ut ex tepore
solis ardoribus maturata prius ab arboribus vindemiantur. hoc mortis instinctu
praemonitus ipse maturior aetate hujus loci quisque Canonicus vigilaret utique
qua hora fur hujus vitae venturus esset, ut omni hora praeparatus a corporis
ergastulo fratribus valedicens eis in coelum praevolaret. Istudque pactum ipse
fidelis Deus ut quondam Israelitis irruptum servavit, donec claustrales
praedicti religiose vivere desierunt, and sanctuarium Dei ibidem stupro and
sceleribus nefande profanarunt, ob id quidem rupto Dei faedere, nunc minor,
nunc major, nunc eorum medius aetate, incerta morte, incerto mortis tempore,
communi mortis jure hac vita defungitur, cessavitque religio and vita
monachalis, cessavitque and miraculum. Tu autem Domine miserere nostri.

Laudatus the first Abbot of Bardsey was the son of Nudd hael ap Senyllt of
the Tribe of Maxen Wledig or Maximus the tyrant: His mother was Thevoi daughter
to Lotho King of the Picts, called in our British antiquities, Llewddyn
lwyddawc o ddinas Euddyn in y Gogledd, that is, Lotho the popular, or ruler of
hosts from Edenborough in the North. S. Beuno and Kentigern Bishop of Glasco in
Scotland and of Llanelwey (now S. Asaph) in Wales were his Cousin-germans,
their Mothers being sisters.

Rich: Powel of Ednop Esquire. says that Marchweithian Lord of Isaled in Rhyvonioc
in Denbigh land and one of the fifteen Tribes of Gwyneth lived in Prince Rodri
Molwynoc's time 720. A. D. 720.


The Arms of Marchweithian.
He bears G. a Lion rampant A. armed B.

Isaledi Baro Marchution, primaevus ab illo
Saltantem rubro niveum gerit orb leonem,
Tempore Roderici Molwynoc floruit Ille,
Hinc genus Isaledi generosa prosapia manat.
His inheritance was Carnedd synydd, Dincadvael, and other lands within the
hundred of Isaled, as appears by the extent of the Lordship of Denbigh, which
was made 8. Edv. 3. at what time Cynwric Vaughan being the ninth in descent
from Marchweithian lived: from thence it may be conjectured when Marchweithian
lived. St Tho. ap William's book.

Families descended from Marchweithian. The family of Berain in Denbighshire
now incorporated into the family of the Salesburys of Lleweni by the marriage
of Katharine of Berain the daughter and Heir of Robert Vaughan of Berain Esquire.
with John Salisbury the son and Heir of Sr John Salisbury Knight, by whom
she had Sr John Salisbury of Lleweni Knight who lived in the reign of K. James
and was much noted for his great strength of body. Katherines second husband
was Rich. Clough of Denbigh Esquire. and a Merchant of Hamborough. Her third
husband was Maurice Win of Gwedir Esquire. and after his decease she married
Edward Thelwall of Plas y ward Esquire.

Robert ap Rees (Chaplain to Cardinal Wolsey) and his son Ellis Price of
Plas Iolyn Dr of Law descended from this Tribe, and were in their time men of
great Power in their Country. Dr Ellis Price is supposed to be one of those
Cambridge Scholars that disputed at Cambridge with Throgmorton and other Oxford
Scholars A. D. 1532. which Caius in his first book of the antiquity of
Cambridge speaks of. William Price of Rhiwlas in Merionethshire Esquire. now
living a Colonel for his late Majesty King Charles the first, and one of the
Members of the long Parliament that sat at Oxford descended from the
forementioned Rob. ap Rees. So also Rob. Price D. D. now Bishop of Fernes and
Laghlin in Ireland. Win of Voelas Esquire. Price of Plas Iollyn in Denbighshire
Esquire. Henry Vaughan of Pantglas in Carnarvanshire Esquire. who was slain in his
late Majesty's service at the taking of Hopton Castle in Shropshire 1643
descended from him. Thomas Vaughan Esquire. his son does now inherit both his
Fathers estate and Loyalty.

In the old Text we read A. D. 754 Rodri dyed, three years after that dyed
Edpald King of the Saxons.

Conan Tindaethwy. Conan Tindaethwy The Son of Rodri Molwynoc.
COnan Tindaethwy began his Reign over the Brytains 755
the year of our Lord 755. About two years after, there was a great Battle
fought at Hereford 760
betwixt the Brytains and the Saxons, where Dyfnwal the son of Theodor was
slain. And this year died Athelbert King of Northumberland, and Oswald reigned
in his stead. About this time, there was an order taken for the right keeping
of the feast of Easter in Wales by Elbodius 768
a man both Godly and Learned: for the Brytains eber before I. Bale, Cen. 1.
page 67.
that time differed from the Church of Rome, in celebrating the Feast of
Easter, and the difference was this. The Church of Rome by order of a General
Council holden at Nice had appointed, that ever the next Sunday after the 14
day of the moon should be Easter day, so that Easter should be ever either the
15, 16, 17, 18, 19, 20, or 21 day of the moon, and neber the 14 day it self,
nor never pass the 21. And the Brytains did use to keep their Easter upon the
14 day, and so to the 20 as it fell, so that sometimes when it was Easter day
with the Brytains, it was but Palme-sunday with the Saxons: from this diversity
grew a great contention about the year 660. betwixt Colman and Hylda upon the
one part 66^
defending the Rite of the Brytains; and Gilbert and Wilfrid on the other part,
who could scarce afford to call the Brytains and Scots Christians, because they
kept not Easter within the days appointed.

* I read that this Hylda (which was the niece of Edwin King Leland. I. Bale,
Cen. 1. p. 81.
of Northumberland, and brought up by Paulin and Aedan) did in a public Synod
withstand Wilfrid and other Monks about the keeping of Easter alleging for
herself (out of Polycrates) the fact of Irenaeus, who withstood Victor Bishop
of Rome in that behalf, and the custom of the Church of Asia observed by S.
John the Evangelist, Philip the Apostle, Polycarpus and Melito, and taught in
this Island of Brytaine by Joseph of Arimathea, who first Preached the Gospel
in the same.

In the year 763. was Offa made King of Mercia, and 763
Brichtrich King of the West Saxons. In which year dyed 773
Fermael the son of Edwal: and the year following, 774
Cemoyd the King of the Picts. The year 776. the men of Southwales destroyed a
great part of Mercia with fire and sword. And the summer following all the
Welshmen gathered themselves together, and entering the Kingdom of Mercia did
there much hurt.

* The Saxons bordering upon the Country of Cambria or Io. Cast.
Wales, did daily incroach so upon the lands of the Welshmen beyond Seaverne,
that they had gotten much of the same into their hands, especially toward the
south part of the Country. Wherefore the Welshmen put themselves in armor, and
set upon the Saxons, and chased them over Seaverne again, and then returned
home with a great prey, and thus they did oftentimes, killing and destroying
all before them, and always bringing home with them much Cattle, which thing
caused Offa to conclude a peace with the other Saxon Kings, and to bend his
whole force against the Welshmen.

Whereupon Offa King of Mercia caused a great ditch to be Io. Castor. Math.
West.
made, large and deep from sea to sea, betwixt his Kingdom and Wales, whereby
he might the better defend his Country from the incursions of the Welsh. And
this Ditch is to be seen in many places as yet, and is called Clawdh Offa, that
Clawdh Offa.
is, Offas ditch, at this day.

* King Offa calling to his aid the other Saxon Kings gathered a huge army, and
came over Seaverne into Wales: upon whose coming the Welshmen (being not able
to encounter with such a multitude of armed soldiers) left the plain and even
Country by Seaverne side, and the land between it and the river Wy, and
withdrew themselves to the Mountains and Rocks, where they might be most in
safety* until the enemies were gone out of the country; nevertheless they
made continually diverse invasions by stealth into the land of Mercia, and
always returned with advantage; the Saxons keeping themselves encamped could
do no goed against them, for they durst not pursue them to the Mountains and
Woods, for fear of being entrapped by such as kept the passages and streights.

Offa perceiving this expelled them all quite out of the Country between
Seaverne and Wy, and planted Saxons in their places. And annexing it to his own
Kingdom of Mercia caused this famous ditch to be made for the security of his
people from the invasions of the Welsh. Hereupon the seat of the Kings of Powys
was translated from Pengwern (now called Salop) to Mathraval, where it
continued long after.

In the year 795. the Danes came first into England; six 795
years after they came again, and destroyed a great part of Matt. West. page
189.
Lindsey and Northumberland; they over* ran also the greatest part of Ireland,
and destroyed Rechreyn.

Also about the same time there was a battle fought at Ruthlan, between the
Saxons and the Welshmen, where Caradoc King of Northwales was slain. This
Caradoc was the son of Gwyn, the son of Colhoyn, the son of Ednowen, the
son of Blethyn, the son of Blecius or Bledricus Prince of Cornwall and
Devonshire. Also this year dyed Offa King of Mercia, and Egfert his son
reigned in his stead.

In the year of our Lord 800. Egbertus was made King of Westsex: and Kenulphus
the year following created King of Mercia. Arthen also the son of Sitsylht
the son of Clydawc King of Caerdigan dyed the same year. Likewise Run King
of Dyuet, and Cadelh King of Powys died in the 808
year 808.

* This was a troublesome time, and no settled Government as yet established in
Wales, and therefore such as were chief Lords in any Country are here called
Kings.

The next year after died Elbodius Archbishop of Northwales, Io. Bale.
before whose death the Sun was sore eclipsed. In the year 810 was the Moon
eclipsed upon Christmas day. 810
The same year S. David's was burnt by the West Saxons. There was also a
general murrein and death of cattle throughout all Wales. The next year
ensuing Owen the son of Meredyth, the son of Terudos dyed* and the Castle
of Deganwy was destroyed with Thunder. Conan Prince of Wales, and his brother
Howel could not agree, insomuch that they tried the matter by Battle, wherein
Howel had the victory.

* This Howel the brother of Conan, King or Prince of Northwales, did claim
the I Will of Mon or Anglesey for part of his Fathers inheritance, which Conan
refusing to give him, they fell at variance, and made War the one against the
other.

This Mischief grew from a Custom in Wales, viz. the division of the Fathers
inheritance amongst all the Sons commonly called Gauel-kind. In which
division the elder son had the better share, but the younger had always the
ancient seat and mansion house. And this custom did not only in time weaken
their Families, but was also a cause of continual strife and feud amongst them.

And the next year there was much hurt done by Thunder, and in diverse places
many houses burnt to the Earth. The same year dyed* Gruffyth the son of Run,
and Griff^i the son of Kyng^^ was slain by the treason of Elice his Brother.

Howel fought with his brother Conan another Battle, and slew a great number
of his people, whereupon Conan leavied an Army in the year 817 and chased his
brother Howell out of the I Will of Mon or Anglesey, compelling him to fly into
Man. And a little after dyed Conan, chief King of the Brytains or Welshmen,
leaving behind him a daughter called Esylht, which was married to a Noble man,
called Mervyn Vrych, the son of Gwyriad, or Uriet, the son of Elidur, and
so forth in the right line to Belinus the brother of Brennus King of the
Brytains, and his Mother was Nest the daughter of Cadelh King of Powys, the
son of Brochwel Yscythroc, (that fought with the Saxons at Bangor who was
Prince of Powis.

* This Brochwel is called by the Latin writers, Brecivallus Galfrid. I. Cast.
Matthew. West.
and Brochmaelus, of whom I find this written in Historia Divae Monacellae.

Fuit olim in Powysia quidam Princeps illustrissimus nomine Brochwel Yscithroc,
Consul Legecestriae, qui in urbe tunc temporis, Pengwern Powys (nunc vero*
Salopia dicta est) habitabat: cujus domicilium seu habitaculum ibi steterat,
ubi Collegium divi Ceddae nunc situm est.

That is.

There was sometimes in Powys a noble Prince, named Brochwel Yscithroc, Consul
or Earl of Chester, who dwelt in a town then called Pengwern Powys, and now
Salop, whose dwelling house was in the very same place where the College of
Saint Chad now stands. This man with Cadvan King of Brytain, Morgan King of
Demetia, and Bledericus Galfrid. Cast.
King of Cornewal, gave an overthrow to Ethelfred King of Northumberland, near
the river of Dee, Anno gratiae 617. The Ancestors of diverse in Wales at this
day, are known (by ancient books and records) to have descended Paternally from
him.

The Arms of Brochwel Yscythroc.
S. three nags heads erased A. or (as others say) S. a cheveron between three
Naggs heads erased A.

The Blaneys of Trefgynon, and the Pursells of Nantcriban in Montgomery-shire
are descended from Brochwel Yschythroc.

The pedigree of John Blaney of Trefgynon Esquire. John the son of Lewis the
son of David Lloyd Blaney of Tresgynon the son of Thomas ap Ievan Lloyd of
Maesmawr, which Ievan Lloyd was the son of Griffith ap Ievan Blaney, which
Ievan (that took first the Surname of Blaney) was the son of Griffith ap
Llewelyn Vaughan ap Llewelin ap Me^lir gryg ap Griff^i ap Iorwerth ap Owen ap
Rodri ap Gwaeddan ap Brochwel ap Aeddan ap Congen ap Elise ap Gwyliawg ap Beli
ap Maelmynan ap Selyf ap Conan ap Brochwel Yscythroc K. of Powys.

Edward Lord Blaney of Ireland was younger Brother to Lewis Blaney aforesaid,
and Father to Sr Arthur Blaney Knight and Colonel for his late Majesty CHARLES
the First, who conferred on him the honor of Knighthood, as a reward for his
service. This Sr Arthur married the Daughter and Heir of the foresaid John
Blaney of Trefgynon.

Brochwel ap Aeddans Coat. Party per pale Or and G. two Lions Rampant
endorsed, counterchanged.

The Pedigree of John Pursell of Nantcriban Esquire. John the son of Edward
Pursell of Nantcriban the son of Thomas the son of Rich. Pursell of Dintle,
the eldest son of Nicolas Pursell, the son of Richard the son of Thomas
Pursell the son of Ievan ap Llewelyn by Margaret the Daughter and Heir of
Thomas Pursell, Ievan ap Llewelyn was the son of Llewelyn ap Griffith ap
Ievan ap P^hirid ap Howel ap Trahayrn ap Cynwric ap Pasgen ap Gwyn ap Griffith
ap Beli Lord of Gilsfield ap Brochwel ap Aeddan, and so to Brochwel, as in the
foregoing Pedigree.

The Arms of the Pursells.
Nebule A. and G. on a Bend S. three Boars heads erazed of the first tusked Or
and langued of the second.

Brochwel Yscythroc was a great friend and favourer of the Monks of Bangor,
whose part he took *against the Saxons that were set on by Augustine the Monk
to persecute them with fire and sword, because they would not forsake the
customs of their own Church, and conform to those of Rome; some say he fought
against Ethelred A. D. 607, in which year there were slain about 1200 of the
said Monks by the instigation of that blondy Apostle Austin; Tantum Religio
potuit suadere malorum? Thus the Roman Religion (not the Christian) was first
planted with blood in this Island. Augustine did set out from Rome about 588,
arrived in Brytain 596, A. D. 603 he held a Synod in the borders of Wales at
Augustines Oak or Worcester, to which there came the seven Bishops that were
under the jurisdiction of the Archbishop of Menevia.

Septem illi Episcopi hi fuerunt, viz.

1 Henfordens. 2 Tavens. 3 Paternens. 4 Banchorens. 5 Elwyens. 7 Morganens.
A. D. 610 Elbodus was by Augustine and his Clergy made A. D. 610.
Bishop of North Wales, he having first obliged them by his writing in defense
of the Church of Rome against the Brytains and Scots, who would not receive Law
from her to the prejudice of their own Church, which they reckoned no less
ancient and absolute then the Roman.

Of Bangor Monachorum or Bangor Iscoed.
Bangor Monachorum (so called from the famous Monastery that was in it) lies
situate in Maelor or Bromfield not far from Caerlleon or Westchester. Both
Town and Monastery have so felt the injuries of time, that at this day there
are hardly any r^ins of them remaining; there is now only to be seen a small
Village of the name, but no footsteps of the old City, save the rubbish of the
two principal gates, Porth Cleis and Porth Wogan, the former looking toward
England, the later toward Wales; they are about a mile distant the one from
the other, so that it is easy to conjecture how large the City might be; It lay
between those two Gates, the river Dee running through the middle of it; The
old British Triades tell us that in the time of the British Kings there were in
the Monastery of Bangor 2400 Monks, who in their turns (that is, a hundred
every hour of the 24) continually (Night and Day) read prayers and sung
Psalms, so that the service of God went on there still without intermission.

Off a King of Mercia, and Meredith King of Dyvet dyed in the battle fought at
Ruthlan 794. 796 the Saxons killed Caradawc 794.
King of Northwales. This Caradawc could not be the son of Gwyn ap Collwyn,
for Gwyn ap Collwyn lived 200 years and above after this time, nor yet Caradawg
ap Alawg King of Pennarddal^wg (now Hawarden) who in the time of King Cadvan
(200 years before) was slain by Owen Penyverw the son of Tyvid in revenge of
the wrong he had done to his sister St Wenifryd; But he may very well be
Caradoc Earl of Hereford the only one of that name that I read of living in
those times; this Caradoc descended from Coeliog Myngrudd of the North of
Brytain was fain to leave his Country, Ethelbald King of Mercia having
despoyled him of his estate in the year of our Lord 760. Probably Roderic or
his son Conan gave him Lands in Northwales for his support, which might be an
occasion why he should be called King of Gwyneth. He might well be that
Caradoc, that 28 years after the battle of Hereford was slain by the
Mercians, being much enraged for the death of their King Offa. This Caradawc's
son Lluddocca ap Caradawc had one daughter called Rhieingar mother to Tuder
Trevor of Bromfield, who was in her right Earl of Hereford, and is reckoned to
be the Tribe of the Marches.

In one copy of the old Text we read thus* A. D. 760 there was a battle fought
between the Brytains and Saxons called Gweith Henfordd. Dyfnwal the son of
Tewdwr dyed the same year. 768 the Brytains were fain to change the time of
their ancient observation of Easter, and Elbodius a servant of God was the
Author of the change.

775 Cubert Abbot dyed. 776 Offa destroyed South Wales. A. D. 779 (in the
summer) y distrywyd y Brytanyeid gidac Offa. 790 Pagans came into Ireland and
Rechren was destroyed.

Merwydd King of Buelt and Gwerthrynion (called Marmodius Rex Wallensium in a
Latin book at the end of Matthew Paris his History of the last edition) being
in regard of his so near neighborhood much wronged and oppressed by King Offa
became General of the Brytains, against him and his Saxons. The said Merwydd
descended from King Vortigern.

Ranulph: Cest. lib. 1. cap. 49. Polychron: relates that in K. Edward the
Confessors time no Welshman durst with any weapon come over Offa's ditch, and
that in his time both Welsh and English inhabited promiscuously without
distinction on either side of it, in the Counties of Cheshire, Salop, and
Hereford.

Mervyn Bhrych and Esyllt the Daughter of Conan Tindaethwy.
THE first year of the Reign of Mervyn Bhrych and Matthew. West. Sim. Dunel. H.
Hunt.
Esylht his Wife, Egbert King of Westsex entered Wales with a great Army, and
destroying the whole Country unto Snowdon hills, seized into his hands the
Country of Rhyvonioc in Denbighland. About this time, there was a sore battle
fought in Anglesey, called the Battle of Lhanvaes.

In the year of Christ 819 Kenulph King of Mercia destroyed 819
West Wales, and the summer following, he oberran Powys land, doing much hurt,
and soon after dyed, and Kenelme Reigned in his stead. About the same time also
Howel King of Man dyed. The year 825 Ceolwulph was made King of Mercia, and
Reigned two years. After whom Bernulph was created King, who was overthrown at
Elledowne by Egbert King of the West Saxons, who also brought to his subjection
the Countries of Kent and West Angles. Not long after, about the year 828
Bernulph was slain by the East 828
Angles. After that there was a great Battle fought ^at a place called
Gauelford, betwixt the Brytains and the West Saxons of Devonshire, and many
thousands slain on either side, and the victory^ uncertain. The year 829
Egbert overthrew 829.
Wyhtla^e King of Mercia, and made him subject to his Kingdom. He also passed
Humber, and conquered the Land The Kingdom of England began.
beyond, so that he was the first Monarch of the Saxons, having brought the
Seven Kingdoms into one, and changed the name of Brytain linto England,
calling the people Englishmen, and the language English: for the people that
came into this I Will from Germany, were Saxons, Angles, and Juthes. And of the
Saxons came the people of Eastsex, Southsex, Middlesex, and West Saxons. Of the
Angles came the East Angles, middle Angles or Mercians, and all on the North
side of Humber. And of the Juthes came the inhabitants of Kent, and the I Will of
Wight* And the seven Kingdoms were these:

1 The first Kent. The seven Saxon Kingdoms.
2 The second Southsex, containing Sussex and Surrey. 3 The third East Angles,
containing Northfolke, Southfolke, and Cambridgeshire. 4 The fourth Westsex,
containing Barkeshire, Devonshire, and Somersetshire. 5 The fifth Mercia,
containing Glocestershire, Herefordshire, Worcestershire, Shropshire,
Staffordshire, Cheshire, Warwikeshire, Darbyshire, Notinghamshire,
Lincolneshire, Northamptonshire, Oxfordshire, Buckinghamshire, Bedfordshire,
and half Hartfordshire. 6 The sixth was East Saxon, containing Essex,
Middlesex, and the other half of Hartfordshire. 7 The seventh Kingdom was
all the Lands upon the North side of Humber, and it was divided into two
Kingdoms, Deyra and Bernicia. Deyra was the land betwixt Humber and Tine,
Bernicia from Tine to the Scottish sea.
All these were brought under subjection by Egbert King of the West Saxons: and
this Realm was called England the year after the coming of Brutus to this I Will
1968 after the coming of Hengist 383, and after the departure of Cadwalader 149
years. Which name although it has continued to this day, for the space of 755
years, yet was it not very lucky to the Saxons: For even upon this change of
name, and union of the Kingdoms, followed the cruel invasion of the Danes;
and after that, the conquest of the Normans, of whom the Kings of this time are
descended. But to return again to my matter. The year 833 the Danes in great
companies 833
landed in diverse places of this Realm, and fought diverse Battles with Egbert,
wherein sometime they and sometimes he had the better. Afterward in the year
836 they landed in West Wales, and passing through Wales to England (with the
accession of many Welshmen which joined with them against Egbert fought him,
but he overthrew them all at Hengestdowne, and dyed the year following.

* This Egbert King of England wan the City of Caerlheon ar Ran. Cest.
Dhowrdwy or Chester (the chief City of Venedotia,) out of the hands of the
Brytains, in whose possession it had remained until that time. He caused also
(as some writers do affirm) the brazen image of Cadwalhon King of Brytaine,
to be thrown down Matthew. West. Chron. Wig.
and defaced, commanding that no man upon pain of Death, should set up any
such again, and that this Land should be called no more, Brytain but England,
and the people Englishmen. He also made proclamation (by the instigation of
Redburga his wife, who bare an implacable malice toward the Brytains) that no
Brytain Io. Cast.
should remain within the confines of England, commanding that all and
singular which were of the Brytish blood should within six months with their
Wives and Children remove out of his Kingdom, upon pain of losing their Heads.

After the death of Egbert, his son Ethelwulph reigned, who gave his daughter
in marriage to Berthred King of Mercia and tributary to him. He had great
wars, and much ado with the Danes, who with fire and sword destroyed the
coasts of England. The year 841 dyed Idwalhon a Noble man of 841
Wales. And two years after was the battle of Kettell betwixt Burchred King of
Mercia and the Brytains, wherein (as some write) Mervyn Bhrych King of the
Brytains was slain, leaving behind him a son called Rodri Mawr, that is to say
Roderike the Great.

Mervyn Bhrych King of Man was the son of Gwyryat and Nest the daughter of
Cadell ap Brochwel ap Elise King of Powis. The said Gwyryad was the son of
Elidir, whose mother was Celeinion daughter of Anarawd Gallgrwm ap Mervyn Mawr
ap Cynvyn, etc. in a direct line to Maximus the Emperor. Elidirs Father was
Sandef ap Al^wn ap Tegit ap Gwayr ap Dwig ap Llowarch hen a Noble man of King
Arthurs Court lineally descended from Coel Godebog.

Howel the Brother of Conan Tindaethwy in his distress fled to Mervyn Bhrych,
by whom he was kindly entertained. To gratify his Noble Landlord, Howell used
such means afterward that Mervyn married Esyllt the daughter and heir of his
brother Conan. Howel, after he had about five years enjoyed the Isle of Man
with other Islands and Lands in the North given him by Mervyn to hold under
him, dyed A. D. 825. After his death the premises reverted to Mervyn, who with
his Ancestors had always held the same under the Kings of the Brytains.

A. D. 831 dyed Saturbin Bishop of Menevia. Burchred was not King of Mercia
before the year 852, ten years after Mervyn^ death, therefore it may be said
with more probability that Mervyn was slain in a battle fought between
Ethelwolph and the Brytains. He lost his life valiantly, after he had governed
Wales 25 years.

Of Cilmin Troedtu one of the fifteen Tribes of Gwyneth.

He lived in the time of P. Mervyn Bhrych, and Prince Rodri the Great A. D.
843. He was Mervyns brothers son, and he came A. D. 843.
along with his Uncle when he came from the North of Brytain to marry Esyllt
the daughter and heir of Prince Conan Tindaethwy, as we read in an old MS.
history.

The Arms of Cilmin Troedtu.
Quarterly 1. A. an Eagle displayed with two heads S. 2. A, 3. fiery ragged
sticks G. the 3d as the 2d, and the 4th as the first, over all upon Escutcheon
A. a man's leg cooped alaquise S. Rich. Powell of Ednop Esquire. calls him the Tribe
of Uwch-Gwrvai in Arvon, and in a Tract of the fifteen Tribes added to his
Pentarchia he writes these verses of him.

Nobilis Arvoniae Cilminus Satrapa Droedtu Rich. Powell.

Bicipites nigras aquilas extollit in albo
Quadrato, binas pandentes fortiter alas
Front sub adversa baculos tres cortice nigro,
Quarta tamen primae, par tertia parma secundae,
Fert tibiam medio descissam parmula nigra,
Unde tulit nomen Droedtu quasi nigripes esset,
Roderici Magni patruelis floruit aevo.
Many of his posterity were wise men and Learned in the ancient Brytish Laws,
and Judges in the Courts of the Princes of Wales, as Morgenen Ygnad ap Gwrydr,
and Cyfnerth his son, both whose Law books we have fairly written on
Parchment. Morgenen Ygnad ap Madoc. Morgenen Ygnad ap Meyric, and Madoc goch
Ynad, famous Lawyers and Judges. Robert ap Meredith ap Hwlkin Lloyd of Glyn
Llivon Esquire. a worthy Gentleman living in the time of King Henry 7. descended
from this Tribe. And this Robert is Ancestor to the Glynnes of Carnarvonshire,
viz. to John Glynne of Glynllivon Esquire. to Thomas Glynne of Nanlley Esquire., also
to the Glynnes of Lleuar and others. Sr. John Glynne of Biscester in the County
of Oxford, an eminent Lawyer, and His Majesty K. CHARLES the 2d's Sergeant a^
Law, is descended from the said Robert, being a younger son of Sr William
Glynne of Glynllivon Knight.

Cilmins seat is thought to have been at Glynllivon.

British Rythmes containing the names of the fifteen Tribes of Gwyneth.

A. D. 843
Cilmin. 1150.
Hwfa. 1170.
Bran. a d Gweyrydd call
877.
Collwyn. 1175.
Maeloc. 1150.
Nevyd.
1041.
Edwyn. 650 or 876.
Braint. 1079 or 1170.
Hedd, ai peddyd,
720.
Marchweithian. 846 or 913.
Marchudd, bydd bid,
Dau Bendew 1015 or 1079.
Bradwen 1194.
Ednowain gain, gida 1061.
Gwerngwy
Gwyr ungorph gadernid,
I rhain y bu oi rhan bid,
Gwindai pymthec Llwyth Gwyndyd.
Braint ^ir of Isdulas in Rhos in Denbighland is reckoned one of the fifteen
Tribes of Gwyneth. Rich. Powel of Ednop says he lived long before Cilmin and
Marchweithian forementioned, in King Cadvallons time 650. but a M S. of Mr.
Richard Matthews of Vale Crucis (of Guttyn Owens hand writing) gave me occasion
to suppose he lived a great while after, about the time of Rodri the Great, or
of his sons. His progeny it seems has not much increased, there are not many
(at this day) known to be descended from him, though some there are.

The Arms of Braint her.
Vert. a Cross flowery Or. others say, Or a Cheverson S. between three roses A.

Isdulae Dominus magnatum maximus Heroes
Arma Brianus habet cognomine Longus in Auro,
Nempe rosas flexum tres albas insuper atrum,
Saxonis incursus retudit, Regisque Britanni
Cadvallon fuit ille sororius atque satelles, Galsrid.

Exonia Pendam captivum abduxit, and urbem
Restituit captam, pulsis Saxonibus inde,
Northumbriq, magum Pellitum Regis in aula
Sustulit obstantem Britonum conscendere classem,
Misit in auxilium quam Rex Aremoricus hospes.
Roderike the Great, Son of Mervyn Bhrych and Esylht.
ROderike the Great began his Reign over Wales, the year after Christ his
incarnation 843. This Prince divided all Wales into three territories, viz. of
Aberffraw, Dinevowr, and Mathraval. He had War with Burchred King of Mercia,
who with the aid of Ethelwulph entering North Wales with a great power destroyed
Anglesey, fought diverse times with the Welshmen, and slew Mervyn.
Meyric a great Prince among them. About the year 846 Meyric Bishop of Menevia
was slain by the Saxons*

The year 846 the Danes over-ranne a great part of England, 846
and having fought with Athelstan King of Kent, brother to Ethelwulph, had
their Winter quarters in England. Matthew. West. Io. Cast.
This year also was Ithel King of Gwent or Wentland slain in fight by the men
of Brecknock. This year 854 Kongen King of Powys died at Rome, being slain by
Pagans, as some 854
say, or (as others) choked by his own men. And two years after dyed Cemoyth
King of the Picts, and Jonathan Lord of Abergeley. About 854 the black Nation,
to wit, the Danes and Normans wasted Anglesey. About the year 856 Ethelwulph
856
took his journey to Rome, he made his Kingdom tributary to the Pope, and paid
the Peter Pence to the Church of Rome.

The old Saxons do bring the Genealogy of this Ethelwulph Matt. West.
to Adam, after this manner, viz. Ethelwulph the son of Egbert, the son of
Alcmund, the son of Eaffa, the son of Eoppa, the son of Ingils the
brother of Inas, the son of Kenred, the son of Coelwald, the son of
Cudwin, the son of Ceawlin, the son of Kenrick, the son of Cerdick, who
was the first King of the West Saxons, the son of Esly, the son of Gewise,
of whom the people were called Gwysses, the daughter of Gewyn, the son of
Wingy, the son of Freawyn, the son of Fridagare, the son of Brendy, the
son of Beldegy, the son of Woden, from whose issue came Kings of many
Nations, the son of Frethewold, the son of Freolaff, the son of
Frethewolf, the son of Finny, the son of Godulph, the son of De quo
Sedulius in Paschali carmine.
Geta, the son of Teathwy, the son of Bean, the son of S^^ldy, the son
of Seafe, who Reigned in a Country called Anglia, lying betwixt the Goths and
the Saxons, from whence the Angles came first to Brytain, he was the son of
Heremod, the son of Itermod, the son of Hadey, the son of Wale, the son
of Bedwy, the son of Sem, the son of Noe, and so forth to Adam.

* There is another Pedigree laid down by the same Author, of Matt. West. page
275.
Offa King of Mercia, ascending up even to Adam, not in all points agreeing
with this; the Author writing the latter, seems oftentimes to forget what he
had written in the former. The like also I find in John Castoreus, at the end
of the history of Edward the I. Castor. Matt. Paris page 126.
Confessor. And another in Matthew. Paris: in the History of King Henry 2. A. D.
1155. And these four Genealogies seem to ascend by the same men, although the
names do sometimes vary.

This Genealogy have I set down here, that the Reader may understand thereby,
how that not only the Brytains, but all other Nations have been ever desirous
to set forth their antiquity and progeny, which was no hard thing to do for
such as had not been inter-mingled with other Nations, and that had ever among
them such as from time to time did profess that Art, and commit to writing the
Progeny, the names of the Wives and Children of all that were of any estimation
in the Country. In these two things, Wales ever surpassed all other Countries,
having not mingled with any other Nations, until of late years with the
English, and also having those that professed the art of Genealogy; who
although they have sometimes erred, or rather willingly to humor the
vainglorious Beirdh.
coined false Genealogies, yet surely are able by their books to bring any
Gentleman's Genealogy to Ancestors that lived nine hundred years ago, and but
few farther, except those descended from the kings of Brytaine.

The Italians, before they mingled with the Vandals, Goths, and Lombards, could
bring their Genealogies to Aeneas. The Spaniards to Hesperus, before the Goths
and Moors overran their land. The Saxons to Woden, before they mingled with
the Danes and Normans. Yea the Frenchmen and Turks rejoice at this day, to
bring themselves to the Thracians, and so the Germans to the children of
Gwyston: and it is possible they may do it, because they have not bin mingled
nor overrun with any other Nation. There are few Nations in the least
civilized, but are taken with this innocent study as well as the Brytains. The
Grecians honored the memory of Berosus with a Copper Statue, which they set up
for him H. Lloyd.
in Athens, for his pains in transmitting to posterity the Beginnings and
Pedegrees of Nations. Men are not to be blamed for delighting in this kind of
History, but rather for not making a right use of it, by imitating the virtues,
and shunning the Uices of their Ancestors.

This year the Danes chased Burchred out of his kingdom, who went to Rome, and
there died. The year 857. died Ethelwulph, Io. Castor. 857.
and left behind him his sons Athelbald king of Westsex, and Athelbright king
of Kent, and of the East Saxons.

* Of this Ethelwulph it is written, that he was so well learned and so devout,
that the Clerks of the Church of Winchester John. Cast. Sim. Dunel. Matthew.
Park. A Kings son and heir Bishop. Io. Cast.
did choose him in his youth to be their Bishop, which function he took upon
him, and was Bishop of Winchester for seven years before he was King. It is
reported also that he conquered the kingdom of Demetia or Southwales, and gave
the same with the kingdom of Southsex to Alfred his son; and that the said
Alfred should bring a thousand soldiers out of Wales, to his brother
Ethelbert's aid to Winchester, and put the Danes there to flight, having
destroyed a great number of them. Athelbald the son of Ethelwulph after the
death of his father kept his Mother-in-law for his Concubine, and afterward
married her in the City of Chester.

After Athelbald had Reigned eight years he dyed, and Athelbright his Brother
took the rule of his Kingdom. And that year the Danes spoiled Winchester, and
after a great fight were driven out of the Land: but returning to Thanet Fabian.
and remaining there that winter, spoiled by incursions all the sea shore. This
year also was the battle of Gweythen betwixt the Brytains and the English,
wherein was a great number slain on either side. The year 895. died Conan Nant
Niuer, a worthy Captain and noble Warrior. And the year 865.
following came Hungar and Hubba with a great army of Danes H. Hunt.
into England. In the year 867. died Athelbright, and Ethelred his brother
reigned in his stead. The Danes the year next 867.
ensuing spoiled York, and slew the two kings of Northumberland, H. Hunt.
Fabian. Ran. Cest.
Osbright and Elba, and afterward overran all the Country to Notingham,
spoiling and destroying all before them, and then returned to York, from thence
to East Angle, where they slew Edmond the King. The sixth year of Ethelred came
another Host of Danes through Westsex, and to Reding, with Basreck and Alding,
and fought five battles with Ethelred and Alfred his brother, in two whereof
the Danes were overcome at Henglefield and Estondowne, and in the three other
the English were overcome, at Reding, Basing and Mereton. The year 871. King
Ethelred died, and Alfred his brother reigned in his stead. 871.


* Alfred having taken upon him the kingdom and considering with himsef, what
a heavy burden it was, sought out the wisest men and the best learned he could
hear of, to be directed by them; These he worthily entertained, using their
advise as well in the public Government of the Commonwealth, as in his private
Studies and Affairs. He sent for two famous men for learning out of Wales, the
one named John De Erigena, surnamed also Scotus, born at Meneuia or S. David's,
and brought up in the College there, who Bale. Cent: 2. Cap. 24.
having for knowledge sake traveled to Athens, bestowed there many years in
the study of the Greek, Hebrew, and Chaldee tongues and the secret Mysteries of
Philosophy, and coming from thence to France, where being esteemed well by
Carolus Caluus, and Ludovicus Balbus, he translated the works of Dionysius
Ar^opagita, I. Castor.
De caelesti hierarchia, out of Greek into the Latin tongue; and at the last
being returned home to Wales, was sent for by this King Alfred, who began then
the founding of the University of Oxford, Polidor. lib. 5.
and was the first that professed learning, and read publicly in the said
University. The other was Asserius or Asser, of whom I shall Hol. pa. 218.
have occasion to speak hereafter. He would not suffer any to ^ear Office in
his Court, but such as were Learned, exhorting all men generally to embrace and
honor Learning and Learned men.

Alfred in the first year of his Reign fought two Battles with the Danes upon
the south side of Thames, and slew of them one King, and nine Earls. About
this year died Gwgan King of Caerdigan.

* This was that Noble Gwgan ap Mevric ap Dunwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht, King or
Prince of Caerdigan, who, as some Brytish Books have it, was by misfortune
drowned at this time.

At this time the Danes destroyed the Town of Dunbri^. ^on.
Alclyd, wan also London and Reding, and all the inland Country and Kingdom of
Mercia. And one King or Leader of them took the Country of Northumberland, who
with his people did much annoy the Picts. Likewise the year following three
Kings of the Danes went from Cambridge to Warham in Dorsetshire, and Alfred
would have given them battle, but the Danes desiring peace forsware England,
which they had never done before, and the same night their horsemen took their
journey toward Excester, and their footmen which went to Sea were all drowned
at Sandwich. When the Danes had thus abjured England, they bent their force
against Wales entered the I Will of Mon with a great army in the year of Christ
873. where Roderike gave them twice battle, once at a place 873
called Bangole, and the other time at a place called Menegid. Matthew: West.


* I find also that about this time Halden and Hungar two Captains of the Danes
arrived in Southwales, and overran the whole Si. Dunelm. Matthew. West.
country, destroying all before them with fire and sword, neither sparing
Churches nor religious houses; but within a while after they received their
deserved reward at the hands of the West Saxons, who meeting with them on the
coast of Devonshire, slew both Halden and Hungar, with 1200 of their men. Eneon
Bhoneddig.


At this time Eneon Bishop of Menevia or S. David's died, and Hubert was
installed in his place. And within two years after Dungarth King of Cornwall
was drowned by a mischance. In the year 876 the Englishmen entered Anglesey, 876
fought with the Welsh a sore bloody battle, and in the year following slew
Roderike King or Prince of Wales, and Gwyriad his Brother, or (as some say) his
son. This Roderike had by his Wife Engharad the daughter of Meyric the son
of Dyfnwal or Dunwal the son of Arthen ap Sitsylht several sons, as
Anarawd his eldest, to whom he gave Aberfraw with Northwales; Cadelh the
second, who had given him Dinevowr with Southwales, and took also by force
Mathraval and Powys land after the death of Mervyn the third son, to whom
their Father Rodri had given the same.

* Roderick the Great is esteemed by all writers to be the undoubted owner and
possessor of all Wales. Venedotia or Northwales descended unto him from his
mother Esylht, the daughter and sole heir of Conan Tindaethwy. Demetia or
Southwales (as some do affirm) descended to him by his wife the daughter and
heir of Meyric ap Dyfnwal ap Arthen ap Sitsylht king of Caerdigan: her brethren
(who are thought to be illegitimate) holding of her husband. Powys he had by
Nest, the Sister and Heir of Congen ap Cadelh king of Powis, his fathers
mother. These three Dominions he appointed under their meares and bounds, with
a Princely house in each of them; these he named Y tair Talaeth, and left them
unto three of his sons, Anarawd, Cadelh, and Mervyn, who were called Y tri
Twysoc Talaethioc, that is, The three Crowned Princes, because each of them did
wear upon his Bonet or Helmet a Coronet of Gold, being a broad lace or headband
indented upwards, set and wrought with precious stones, which in the Brytish or
Welsh speech is called Talaeth, and Nurses do to this day name that broad
headband wherewith a child's head is bound uppermost, other linen being under
it, Talaeth. Aberffraw was the Chief House of the Prince of Gwyneth, whose
Dominion was therefore called Talaeth Aberffraw: Dinevowr the principal house
of Dehevbarth, whereof that part is named Talaeth Dinevowr: and in like manner
Talaeth Mathraval, was so called Girald: Camb*
from the principal seat of Powys called Mathraval.

Giraldus Cambrensis, in his Book Entitled, Descriptio Cambria, is of opinion
that Mervyn was the eldest son of Roderike, to whom Venedotia was given, and
was the father of Anandhrec, who was the father of Meyric, that was the father
of Edwal, that was the father of ^ago, etc: and that Anarawd had Powys and died
without issue. But the common opinion of all other Writers is otherwise,
agreeable to what this Author affirms.

Roderic had also other sons, Rodrick, Meyric, Edwal or Tudwal, Gwyriad and
Gathelic, of whom more in the following History.

The Arms of Rodri the Great. G. a Cheveron between three Roses A. Or else
thus* Quarterly G. and Or. four Lions passant gardant counterchanged.

Roderic the Great is said to have corrected some of the old Brytish Laws, and
to have appointed new.

He ordained that his eldest son should have the Crown or Coronet of Aberffraw,
with the fifteen Cantreds thereunto belonging; that his Second should have the
Crown or Coronet of Dinevowr or Cardigan, with its fifteen Cantreds, extending
from the mouth of the river Dovi, to the mouth of Severne; and that his Third
should have the Crown or Coronet of Mathraval with the fifteen Cantreds of
Powis, from the mouth of the river Dee to the Bridge over Severne at Gloucester.

He ordained also that his eldest Son and his Successors, should continue the
payment of the ancient Tribute to the Crown of London, and that the other two,
their Heirs and Successors, should acknowledge his Sovereignety, and pay the
like tribute to him and his Successors, and that upon the invasion of
Strangers, they should send him aid, and that he should also be ready to
protect them, when there should be need.

Moreover he ordained that when any difference should arise between the Princes
of Aberffraw and Cardigan, the three Princes should meet at Bwlch y Pawl, and
after hearing of counsel on both sides, the Prince of Powis should be Umpire
between them.

And if the difference were between the Kings of Aberffraw and Powis, that they
should likewise all three meet at Dol rhianedd (perchance Morva rhianed on the
bank of the river Dee) where the King of Cardigan was to end the controversy.

And if there should be difference between the Kings of Powis and Cardigan, the
Meeting should be at Llys wen upon the river Wy, and the King of Aberffraw to
decide it.

Also he ordained that all Strongholds, Castles, and Citadels, should be
fortified and kept in repair; that the Churches and Chapels should be
re-edified and adorned, and that in all Ages the History of Brytain (being
faithfully Registered) should be kept therein. This I gathered out of a MS. of
Roger Lloyds of Pentro Aron, a Shropshire Gentleman, which he copied out of an
old Book of his Neighbors Thomas Powel of Park Esquire. Some of these Ordinances
are to be seen also in an old Chard of the Princes of Powis beginning,
Cadwaladrus ultimus Rex Britonum etc. now in the keeping of Sir Percy Herbert
Lord Powis; Doctor Powel cites the said MS. in his Latin History; It is
supposed to be written by Thomas Maelor.

In the beginning of the forementioned King Alfreds Reign, there were Brytains
that inhabited some parts of Scotland, as Alclud Castle (now called Dunbritton)
and the Country between the Town of S terling and the S ea. Constantius and
his Brother Hebertus were their Kings. Caeralclud the Royal Seat of the
Northern Brytains was destroyed by the Danes A. D. 870, at what time (according
to Hump. Lloyd) those Britains being by reason of the oppression of the Danes
forced to seek out new habitations came into Northwales. Florent. Wigorn.
Ethelward. Asser and other Historians aver the same.

In King Alfreds time it was thus recorded touching the West Saxon Kingdom, In
toto Regno Occidentali non erat qui potuit docere Grammaticam, ex consilio
Neoti Scholae publicae aperiuntur Oxonii, at Doctrina viguit apud Caerleon. Bp.
Robinson's MS.

Our skilful Bards say that Mervyn the Third son of Rodri mawr had a son
called Llewelyn, who had a daughter named Angharad that was married to Owen ap
Howel dda Prince of Dyvet. This Will. Llyn discovered in very ancient MS^.

Sir William Jones of Castle March in the Country of Carnarvon Knight and late
one of the Judges of the Kings Bench, descended paternally from Mervyn son of
Rodric the Great, He was the son of William Jones, the son of Griffith
Jones, the son of John ap Robert ap Llewelyn ap Ithel vachan ap Llewelyn ap
Griffith ap Davydd ap Llewelyn ap Tuder ap Iorwerth ap Cynwric ap Geuillin
Varchog ap Meirion Goch ap Tryffin ap Mervyn ap Rodri mawr.

His Arms A. a Cheveron B. between three Naggs heads erazed S. His eldest
son Griffith Jones Esquire. is now living and greatly respected in his Country.
Gr: Jones his eldest daughter and heir married Sir William Williams of Uaenol
Baronet, by whom she had Sir Griffith Williams Baronet now living. His second
Daughter is wife to Thomas Bulkeley Esquire. (second son to Thomas Lord Viscount
Bulkeley lately deceased) a worthy Gentleman. Sir William Jones his second son
Charles Jones was a Councellor at Law and dyed without Issue. Robert Jones Esquire.
his third son was a valiant Gentleman, a Colonel for his late Majesty King
Charles the First: He dyed in the time of the late Usurping Powers, leaving
only one son and one daughter: The son did not long survive him. From the
forementioned Triffin comes Gwehelyth Rhiw in Llyn.

Thomas Howell borne in Carmarthenshire D. D. and late Bishop of Bristol
descended from Tudwal the son of Rodri Mawr, He was both an elegant and a
powerful Preacher. James Howell Esquire. Historian to His Majesty K. Charles the
Second (a Person well known for his Dodonas Grove and other his works) being
his Brother comes from the same stock. Tudwall was also Ancestor to Llowarch ap
Bran one of the fifteen Tribes of Gwyneth.

Gwriad the son of Rodri had a son called Gwgan. o Wogan ap Gwriad ydd
heinyw gwyr y Nantmawr. o Gwddelic mab Rodri gwyr Penmonlys ydd heinyw.

Anaravvd The Eldest Son of RODERIKE the Great.
ANarawd the son of Roderick began his Reign over Wales in the year of Christ
877. In his time Rollo 877
with his Normans came to France, and conquered the Country of Neustria, which
(from the Normans is called Normandy to this day. At that time the Danes that
had fled to Excester, having broken the Truce, unto which they were sworn, were
so pursued by Alfred, that they were glad Matthew. West.
to give him Pledges for the performance of the Articles agreed upon between
him and them; but the year following they ^an all the land on the North side of
Thames, which they held, and after they passed the River to Chipenham in
Westsex, and the Englishmen fled before them, yet Alfred fought with a number
of them, slew their Prince, and wan their Standard, which they called Raven.
After that he overthrew them at Edendowne, where, after they had given him
Pledges, Matthew. West. Io. Cast.
their Captain Godrun, ali^s Gurmond received the Christian Faith, and then
reigned in East Angle. The year 878. died 878
Aedan the son of Melht, a Noble man of Wales: and the second Polychroni. Will.
Malm.
year following there was a great battle fought by the Danes, and the
Englishmen of Mercia, against the Welshmen near the River Conwy, where the
Welshmen had the victory; and this battle was called, The Revenge of Rodericks
death. Dial Rodri.
After that about the year 882. the Danes that lay at Fullenham 882.
by London, passed the Sea to France, and marching along the River Seyn,
spoiled the Country about Paris, and overthrew Si. Dunelm. H Hunt. Matthew. West.
the Frenchmen in battle; but they were afterward all slain and drowned by the
Brytains of Armorica. Then Alfred got London, and chased away the Danes that
besieged Rochester, but at the same time he lost a great number of ships, which
the Danes took and sunk at Sturmutham. In the year 889. Submon Cubin the
greatest Clerk in Scotland died. 889.
And the year following the Black Nation (for so the Brytish Book calls the
Danes and Normans came to Northwales, and did much hurt. Here I think it
convenient to let the Reader understand from whence such a wonderful number of
Danes and Normans came. The Kingdom of Denmark had under it, not only Denmark,
which is but a small country divided by the sea into Isles and half-Isles, as
that which adjoyneth to Saxon and Holstein
Holsake, and runs like an arm of the Sea, called Cymbrica Chersonesus, and
the Isle of Sealand and Funen, with a piece of the main land adjoining to
Swethland; but also Norway and the great country of Suetia or Swethland, which
reaches to Moscovia, and almost to the North Pole. This Country being scarce
known to the world at that time, poured out of it (like the Trojan horse)
diverse people, that at sundry times overran and spoiled all Europe with a great
part of Africa, like a sudden hideous storm, filling every Country whereunto
they came. From thence came the Goths, who overran Germany, France, Spain,
Afrike and Italy. From thence came the Vandals of no less worthiness. From
thence came the Lombards, the Alans, the Switzers, the Burgundians, the Danes,
and the Normans, who came from Norway and the sea shore of Eastland by Prussia,
from whence the Vandals came. He that is desirous to understand the mavelous
history of Swethenland, let him read the works of Olaus Gothus, and Joannes
Magnus. And from these Countries (as I declared before) came the people called
the Danes, and not from Denmark only. The year 890 there 890
came from these Countries 250 sails, which landed at Lymene in Kent, hard by
the great wood called Andreslege, and Matthew. West. li. 1. pa. 345.
built a Castle at Auldre or Apledor, as some books have it. The same time also
came Hasting with 80 sails to Thames mouth, and built a Castle at Middleton,
and swore to Alfred, that he would never annoy him or his Subjects more: but
shortly after he built a Castle at Beamfleete, and invaded the Country about
him. Wherefore Alfred came and overthrew his Castle, and took his Wife and two
Sons, which having first by his means bin Christened, he sent to their Father
again.

* Other Kingdoms and Countries of Europe were disquieted Matt. West. lib. 1.
p. 342.
with this persecution of the Danes as well as England. For of this Hasting it
is written, that l^ying siege to the City of Limogis in France, and despairing
of the speedy gaining of the same, he devised this trick to get it. He fained
himself dangerously sick, and sending to the Bishop and the Consul of the
city, desired them most instantly, he might be admitted to the Christian Faith,
and be Baptized before his death. The Bishop and the Consul (suspecting no
guile) were very glad not only to be delivered from the present distress, but
also to gain so great a person to the Christian Religion Whereupon a firm Peace
being made between both Nations, Hasting is Baptized, the Bishop and the Consul
being his Godfathers; this being performed, he was carried by his Soldiers to
his ships, in very weak case, as was outwardly pretended. About midnight he
caused himself, being completely armed, to be laid upon a Beer, commanding
also his soldiers to arm themselves, and to carry their weapons under their
upper garments, so that they might be ready when he should give them a sign.
The day following all things being in a readiness, he was carried solemnly by
his people with great clamor and counterfeit mourning, to be interred in the
chief Church of the City, where the Bishop and the Consul accompanied with all
the chief men of the city came to honor the Burial; but as soon as the Bishop
had made himself ready to bury the corpse, (most of the Townsmen being in the
Church) Hasting stepped up all armed with his sword drawn, and first killed the
Bishop and the Consul, and then fell with his armed Soldiers upon the naked
people, and destroyed them in a manner every one, putting all to the sword,
sparing neither sex, age, or infirmity. And when he had sacked the Town, he
sent messengers to Charles the French King for peace, which he obtained, and
(to keep him quiet) the city of Chartres also toward his charges.

About this time Euneth the son of Bledryd a Baron of Wales died. And the year
893. Anarawd King or Prince of 893
Northwales came with a great number of Englishmen, and making war against his
brother Cadelh spoiled the Countries of Caerdigan and Ystradgwy. In those days
the Danes besteged Excester, against whom, when Alfred went, they which were at
Auldre passed over to Essex, and built a Castle at Scobrith, from whence they
took their journey to Budington upon Seaverne. And when Alfred came to Excester
the Danes fled to sea, and spoiled the seacoasts of Wales. And they which were
in Budington hearing of the Kings coming fled back to their Castle in Essex.
Another company of them came to Leycester, where Alfred did bes^ege them, till
they were driven to eat the flesh of their Horses. Afterward the year 895 the
Danes that were in Leycester, with the rest 895
of them which were in Northumberland, passed by the North H. Hunt.
seas to Meresige, an Isle in Essex, and the year following they entered the
River Line with the Thames, and there built a Castle twenty miles from London;
and as they came out to spoil the country, they were overthrown, and having
lost four of their Princes, fled to the Castle. Then Alfred dividing the river
into three parts, the water was so low, that their ships could not return to
the sea, which when the Danes perceived, they left their wives and children in
Essex, and went spoiling Matt. West:
the Country to Quadbrydge upon Seaverne, and passing the river spoiled the
Countries of Brecknocke, Gwentland, and Gwentlhwg. Also this year a great
number of them went to France by the river Seyn, and another company of them
spoiled the coasts of Devonshire, where after a long conflict, they lost six
ships. The summer following Ireland was destroyed by strange worms having two
teeth, which consumed every thing that was green in the Land. These seem to be
Locusts, a plague unusual in these Countries, but often seen in Afrike, Italy,
and other hot Regions.

About the year 900 Igmond came from Ireland with a 900
great number of Soldiers to Anglesey, where the Welshmen gave him Battle at
Molerain.

* There be some Copies of this History, which affirm, that this battle,
between Igmond Captain of the Black Nations and the Brytains, wherein Mervyn
was slain, was fought at a place called Meilon, from whence it was called Maes
Rhos Meilon.

The same year dyed Alfred, which some call Alured, making ( v a vowell, which
should be a consonant. This Prince translated the ancient Laws of Dysnwal
Moelmut King of Brytain and the Laws of Marsia Queen of Brytain and wife to
Cyhelin, out of Brytish into English, and called it Marsian Laws, which was
afterward called Westsaxon Lex, and kept in a part of Mercia, and in all the
Countries on the South of Thames, for the other part of the Land had another
Law called Dane lex, and these remained till Edward the Confessors time, who of
these two Laws made one. Also this Alfred Io. Cast.
did divide the day into three Parts, by a Taper which burnt continually in his
Chapel, and endured just Twenty four hours. The first part of that time he
bestowed at his Book and in Prayer; the second in the Affairs of the
Commonwealth: and the third part to take his Rest and refresh himself: after
his death, a certain Clerk made his Epitaph, as follows. Asser Meneven.


Nobilitas innata tibi probitatis honorem
Armipotens Alfrede dedit, probitasque laborem,
Perpetuumque labor nomen, cui mixta dolori
Gaudia semper erant, spes semper mixta timori.
Si modo victor eras, ad crastina bella pauebas,
Si modo victus eras, ad crastina bella parabas,
Cui vestes sudore jugi, cui sica cruore
Tincta jugi, quantum sit onus regnare probarunt.
Non fuit immensi quisquam per climata mundi,
Cui tot in adversis vel respirare liceret:
Nec tamen aut ferro contritus ponere ferrum,
Aut gladio potuit vitae finisse labores.
I am post transactos regni vitaeque labores,
Christus ei fit vera quies, sceptrumque perenne.
After Alfred reigned Edward his son, against whom Adelwulph Llowarch ap
Heinyth dyed. Rytherch ap Heinyth was beheaded.
his brother made war, for flying to Northumberland he stirred the Danes
against him. He was chosen King as well by the Danes as the Angles, which at
that time were both become one people: and after he subdued the East Saxons,
and with a great army spoiled Mercia, he passed over Thames at Crickland, and
destroyed Brythend, and returned home with great spoil. At that time Evneth was
slain in Arwystli. King Edward also pursued his brother, and overran all the
land betwixt H. Hunt.
Ouse, and the Dike of S. Edmond, and returned back with all his army, saving
the Kentishmen, who tarried behind Matthew. West. I. Castor.
to spoil, against whom the Danes came, and fighting a sore battle, slew a
great number of them, and put the rest to flight. The Danes about the year 905.
entered into Ireland, and fighting 905
with the Irishmen slew Carmot King and Bishop of all Ireland, and the son of
Cukeman, a man both Godly and Religious, and Kyrnalt son of Murgan King of
Lagines. About a year after dyed Asser Archbishop of Wales.

* There were two of this name at the same time both Countrymen Bale, Cent. 2.
page 125. Giral. Camb.
and kinsmen; the one being the Uncle, was Archbishop of S. David's, of whom
mention is made in this place. The other Asser the Nephew was a man of
excellent Learning and Wisdom, and for that cause being Chancellor to his
Uncle, was sent for by King Alfred to teach his children; this wrote the Acts of
the same Alfred, and was afterward Bishop of Sherburn, of him mention is made
in the English Chronicles.

About this time Edward sent a great Army to Northumberland, which spoiled the
Country, and then returned home: nevertheless, the Danes followed them, and
destroyed a great part of Mercia. But within a while after, Edward gathered an
Army, and giving them Battle, overthrew them, and slew their Kings Alden and
Edelwulph, and a great number of their Nobles. This year died Edelred Duke of
Mercia, who Matt. West: page 354.
had been long sick; after him, Elfleda his Wife enjoyed the Country of Mercia,
saving the Cities of London and Oxford, which King Edward seized into his own
hands. The year 907 died Cadelh King or Prince of Southwales, second son 907
of Roderike the Great, leaving behind him three sons, Howel Dha (that is to
say Howel the Good who succeeded his Father in the Kingdom of Southwales,
Meyric and Clydaw^. About two years after King Edward built the Castle Matthew.
West.
of Hartford betwixt the Rivers Benefic, Minier, and Lige; and also the Borough
of Wytham in Essex, and lay at Wealdyne, where he subdued those Countries. The
year following, the Danes of Leycester and Hampton slew a great number of
Englishmen at Hochnorton, and in their return homeward spoiled all
Oxfordshire. The next year after that there came a great Navy from Tydwike with
Uther and Rahald, which passing by the Western Sea into Wale^ destroyed S.
David's and there was the Battle of Dinerth fought^, where Meyloc (the son of
Peredur Gam was slain. And afterward they entered Herefordshire, where they
were fought withal, and Rahald slain, and the rest compelled to forswear the
Kings Country. Then the King caused the south side of Seavern to be defended
with a great Army; yet did the Danes twice enter his land, once by the East at
Werd, another time at Portogan, but were both times overthrown by the English.
And then they departed to the I Will of Stepen, from whence they were driven by
hunger to South Wales, where they were beaten and constrained to depart into
Ireland. The year ensuing there was a great battle fought betwixt the
Kentishmen and the Danes at Holme, but who had the victory there is no
certainty. 913
In the year 913 Anarawd chief King of Wales dyed, leaving behind him two
Sons, Edwal Voel, or the Bald, who Reigned after him, and Elise; some say a
3d named Meyric.

After the death of Roderic the Great, the Northern Britains of Stratclwyd and
Cumberland, were (as Hector Boethius and Buchanan relate) much infested and
weakened with the daily incursions of Danes, Saxons and Scots; which made many
of them (all that would not submit their necks to the yoke) to quit their
Country, and seek out more quiet habitations. Under the Conduct of one Hobert
they came to Gwyneth in the beginning of Anarawd's Reign, who commiserating
their distressed condition gave them the Country from Chester to the River
Conwey to inhabit, if they could beat out the Saxons, who had lately possessed
themselves thereof. These Brytains having returned thanks to their Cosen
Anarawd as was meet, fell upon the Saxons, and, necessity giving edge to their
valor, soon drove them out thence, being yet scarce warm in their seats.
About three years after this A. D. 880 Edryd Wallthir King of the Saxons
(called by the English Historians Eadred Duke of Mercia) made great
preparations for the regaining of the said Country; But the Northern Brytains,
who had settled themselves there, having intelligence thereof, for the better
securing of their Cattle and goods, removed them over the river Conwey. In the
mean time P. Anarawd was not idle, but gathered together all the strength he
could make; His Army encamped near the Town of Conwey, at a place called
Cymryt, where He and his Men making gallant resistance against the assaults of
the Saxon power, at length after a bloody fight obtained a complete Victory.
This Battle was called Gwaeth Cymryt Conwey because it was fought in the
Towneship of Cymryt hard by Conwey, but Anarawd called it Dial Rodri, because
he had th^re revenged* the death of his Father Rodri. In this battle Tudwal the
son of Rodri Mawr received a hurt in the knee, which made him be called*
Tudwal gloff or the Lame ever after; his Brethren to reward his valor and
service gave him Uchellogoed Gwynedd; The Brytains pursuing their victory,
chased the Saxons quite out of Wales into Mercia, where having burn and
destroyed the Borders they returned home laden with rich spoils. And Anarawd
to express his thankfulness to God for this great Victory, gave Lands and
Possessions to the Church of Bangor, as the Records of that Sea do testify,
and likewise to the Collegiate Church of Clynnoc in Arvon, as we read in the
Extent of North Wales. After this the Northern Brytains came back from beyond
the river Conwey, and possessed again the Lands as^igned the ^ between Conwey
and Chester, which for a long time after they peaceably enjoyed. Some English
writers as Man. Wes^^^ etc. not considering (belike) that the Brytains had
lands in Loegria and Albania, after King Cadwaladers time, take those of the
North, Cumberland, and Stratclwyd for the Brytains of Wales. Asser Menev. who
lived A. D. 875. says that Halden the D^n^ marched into Northumberland, which
he subdued, having before conquered the Picts and Brytains of Stratclwyd in
Northumberland, Perrexit eamque subjugavit, nec non and Pictos and
Stratcludenses.

Of Collwyn ap Tagno one of the fifteen Tribes of Gwynedd* Collwyn ap Tagno
lived in the time of Prince Anarawd about the year of our Lord 877. He was
Lord of Ardudwy (now a part of Merionethshire) and of Evi^nyth (now one of the
Hundreds of Carnarvonshire) and also of part of Llyn. His posterity do at this
day possess most of the lands of those Countries. His Granchildren, Ass^r,
Meirion and Gwgan the sons of Merwydd ap Collwyn were grown up to men's estate
in the beginning of the Reign of Prince Griffith ^p Conan, and lived in Llyn,
when he first laid claim to the Principality of Wales* as is recorded in the
life of the said Prince. From whence i^ may be easily guessed what time he
lived. His dwelling is said to have been at Bronwens tower, afterward called
(from him) Caer Collwyn, now Harlech.

The Arms of Collwyn.
S. a Cheveron A. between three Flower de luces.
Ordovica tribus Collwyn Tagnonis in atro
Fert (inter flexum) tria candida li^ia florum,
Rege sub Anarado Vir magni nominis egit.
Families and Worthies descended from this Tribe.
John Vaughan of Trowsgoed in the County of Cardigan Esquire. is descended in a
paternall line from Collwyn; I am bound to remember this Gentleman not only for
his worth, as being an eminent Lawyer, and every way a most accomplished
Gentleman, but also for his singular civility to m^e, in encouraging my
studies, and lending me the ancient MS. book of Landaffe to transcribe. He was
one of the members of the long Parliament that did adhere to King CHARLES the
First, in the late troubles, which he has happily survived, and is now a
member and a worthy Patriot in this present Parliament holden at Westminster A.
D. 1662 under His Gracious Majesty K. CHARLES the Second.

His Pedigree.
John the son of Edward Vaughan, the son of Moris Vaughan, the son of
Rich* Vaughan, the son of Moris Vaughan, the son of Ievan Vaughan, the
son of Llewelyn Vaughan, the son of Adam Vaughan, the son of Meredith,
the son of Adam Vaughan of Trowsgoed, the son of Llewelyn Vaughan, the
son of Griffith, the son of Eneon by his Wife Angharad the daughter of
Iestyn ^p Gurgant Lord of Glamorgan, which Eneon was the son of Collwyn.

John Bodvel of Bodvel in the County of Carnarvon Esquire. (lately deceased)
derived himself from Madoc the second son of Ievan ap Eneon ap Griffith ap
Howel ap Meredyth ap Eneon ap Gwgan ap Merwydd ap Collwyn. He was the only
son of Sr John Bodvel Knight; In the late War he was a Colonel and
Governor of Carnarvon for King Charles the First, and was one of those Members
of the long Parliament that ^a^e at Oxford A. D. 1644. His only Daughter and
Heir is married to the son and Heir of John Lord Roberts of Truro Lord
Privy S^a^e* John Bodurda of Bodurda Esquire. Thomas Win of Bodvean Esquire. (servant
(both) to his late Majesty* Chapter 1. and also to Chapter 2. his Majesty that now
Reigns) and others are descended from the house of Bodvel.

Tho. Madryn of Madrin Esquire. the Family of the Owens of Plas du, from whence
John Owen the Epigrammatist was descended: Win of Penyberth, Win of
Pennardd etc. are also descended from Collwyn.

Our Bards tell us of former Worthies of this Tribe, as Sir Howel ap Griffith,
and his brother Eneon ap Griffith, of Ievan ap Eneon his son, of Howel ap
Madoc, of Gryffith ap John ap Gronwy a valiant Captain in the French Wars,
and others. Iollo Goch a famous Bard in the time of K. Edw. 3. Rich. 2. and
Hen. 4. writ Cowydds or Panegyricks to the said Sr Howel, and to Ievan ap Eneon
ap Griff:, his Nephew. Gr. Grug (who lived A. D. 1400) writ a Panegyric to
Eneon ap Griff. Evan Waed^a gives an account (in a Cowydd of his) of Ievan ap
Eneon and his four sons; Inco Brydydd (who lived A. D. 1480) writ a
Panegyricke to Howel ap Madoc. These Panegyricks are worthy to be preserved for
their elegancy, if not for the History they contain.

Gweledigaeth Iollo Goch, or his Cowydd moliant to Sir Howell ap Griffith.
A welai neb, a wela
In y nos a jawn a wna,
Pan fum (mwya poen a fu)
In buno anian benu,
Cynta dim a wela in wir
Caer fawrdeg accw ar fordir,
A Chastell gwych gorchestawl,
A gwyr ar fyrddau, a gwawl,
A glasfor wrth fur glwysfaen
Garw am groth twr grwn graen,
A cherdd chwibanogl, a chod,
Gwawr hoynus, a gwr hynod;
Rhianedd, nid rhai anwiw,
In gwau sidan glan gloiw liw,
A gwyr beilch in chware gar barth
Towlbwrdd a Seccyr vwch talbarth,
A gwr gwnllwyth Twrch trwyth trin
Nowswyllt in rhoi barn Jessin
Mewn gorflwch aur goreurynn,
Ai Law in fie llaw in llynn,
Ar y Stondardd hardd hirddu,
Ynhal Twr (da filwr fu)
A thri blodeun gwyn gwiw
Or un llun dail arianlliw,
Eres and oes henuriad,
Ar lawr Gwynedd (wleddfawr wlad)
Oes neb yr un syberwyd,
Breddwydio'n brydd yr ydwyd,
Y wall degrees a weli di
(Da dyddun) dowed iddi
Ar Gaer eglur, ar greiglost,
Ar garreg rudd ar gwr grofft,
Hon iw Criciaith (gwaith gwiw)
Hen adail, honno ydiw,
Ar gwr llwyd cadr paladrddellt
Yw Sir Howel mangddel mellt,
Ai wraig sy'r wregis euraid,
Howel lan, ryfel in rhaid,
Ai llaw forwynion ton teg
Oeddent bob in ddeuddeg
In gwau sidan glan gloywliw
Wrth haul belydr drwyr gwydr gwiw
Tau olwc ti a welyd
Ystondardd is hardd o hyd,
Pen sell Sir Howel yw hwn
Mine Beuno mae'n i benwn,
Tri fflowr die lis oris erw,
In y sabl; nid an syberw
Eingan mab Gruffydd rudd ron
Ymlaen am i elynion,
Ymygniaw gwna in y gwaed
Aniweirdref ton eyrdraed
Ysgythrwr cad atcas gaythrudd,
Esgid i droed esgid rudd,
Ysgythredd blaydd ysgythreing,
Ascwrn hen in angen ing,
Pan rodded rowsced rwysgainc
Y Ffrwyn ymhen brenin Ffrainc,
Barbwr fu fall Geraint ap Erbin one of K. Arthur's Knights.
mab Erbin,
A gwayw a chledd, tromwedd trin
A gollwng gynta gallai
Y gwaed dros draed, trist i rai,
aml
Anwyl fydd began will Einiort,
A mael i Bheirdd, ^ mawl i fort,
Cadw'r bobl mewn Cadair bybyr,
Cadw'r Castle, gwell na gwyr,
Cadw dwy lins, Ceidwad loywlamp
Cadw'r ddwy wlad, cadw'r gad, cadw'r gamp,
Cadw'r mordarw, cadw'r mordir
Cadw'r mordyray, cadw'r tai, cadwr tir
Cadw'r gwrser in cadw'r Garsiwn
Cadw'r tir in her a wna hwn
Cadw'r gwledydd oll cadw'r glewdwr,
A chadw'r gaer, iechid i'r gwr.
Jolo Goch ai Cant.

This Sir Howel ap Griffith (whom his Countrymen remember by the name of S.
Howel y Bhwyall, from his Poll-axe) lived in the time of King Edward the 3d.
and served under the black Prince at the battle of Poictiers, wherein John
King of France was taken prisoner: It is a tradition that goes current among
Sir Howells Countrymen, that it was He, that first took him, which might be
occasioned by some lines in the foregoing Cowydd of Iollo Goch's to him. And
History leaving it doubtful who took him, he might be the man as well as any
other; Paulus Aemilius, De Serres, and other French Historians say, there were
several challenged the honor of it; and that Denis Morbec a French man, but
then a Captain in the English Army, seeing the French King so distressed that
it was impossible for him to escape the hands of the English did only speak to
him, at some distance, and advise him to surrender himself; So that it is very
probable some other person took him, or (which is as much) forced him to yield
himself a Prisoner, and that being known to be the King, he was in civility
suffered to deliver himself into the hands of his own Countryman Denis; But
however it were, it is most certain Sir Howell behaved himself valiantly in
that Battle, and performed some signal service with his axe there, as may be
gathered from his reward, which was Great and Noble, for he had conferred on
him the honor of Knighthood, the Constableship of the ancient Castle of
Crickieth in Carnarvonshire, a new Coat of Arms, the farm of the Mills at
Chester for life, and other things of great value; Besides, he had allowed in
perpetual memory of his service a Mess of meat to be carried before his Axe
or Partisan for ever; Which mess after his death was carried down to be given
to the Poor for the good of his soul; the said Mess had eight Yeomen
attendants, found at the Kings charge, which were afterward called Yeomen of
the Crown, and had eight pence per diem of standing wages, and continued to
the beginning of Q. Elizabeth's Reign; Sergeant Roberts of Havod y ^wch near
Wrexham, who had been at first Yeoman of the Crown heard it as a tradition in
the Kings house, that the beginning of that Order of Yeomen of the Crown was
from thence; This he told his Brother in Law Robert Turbridge of Caeruallen
near Ruthin Esquire. who upon the other man's credit related it to Sir John Win
of Gwedir Knight and Baronet, from whose MS. History (remaining in the house of
Gwedir) this relation was taken.

The Arms of Sir Howell ap Griffith. S. Poll-Axe A. between three flower de
luces. A Cowydd moliant to Ievan ap Encon ap Griffyth.
Pwy sydd o rym passio r jaith
Pwyn dilid top hen dalaith
Penayth mawr i bap anwyl,
Parch gwlad cynheiliad cann hwyl,
Pwys dwy Ynys post henaur,
Pen gwlad ai pinagl aur,
Jevan in die ran ir aeth
Fab Einion fyw in bennaeth,
Hynod iw die henw da,
Had Gruffudd, hyd Gayr Offa,
Ysgwier gwych, oes gwr gwell,
A cheidwad mwy na Chadell,
Sirri mawr dros wyr a medd,
Troes i enw^ tros Wynedd,
Gwraidd daf ^^^ ag ir-a^dd dyfiad
Gallu in hill Gollwyn ai had,
Din irddewr mewn dawn urddas,
Dragwn ai sell drwy began sais,
Cym^r faner Yfionydd,
Cae mamr o few^ Cymru fydd,
Os in y tir y syn true
Ardydwy aeth ar die du
Coed Pascen drwy ne^ in jaith
Cru dilesg in cau'r dalaith,
Rhwydd a gwy^h y rhoi ged
Rhywogaeth LIrien reged
Brig bonedd bro Gwynedd gain,
Blodeuog o blaed Owain,
A cheidwad eyrwych ydwyd,
Ai segr oll ai swcwr wyd,
Ai daioni ym^ob din^^,
Ai grym urddedig, ai gras,
Ai tryssor Nei' r wttressen,
Ai pont urddeddig, ai pen;
Dewr a chadarn, drych ydwyd,
Dwyfol a chall, difa^ch wyd,
Cynheiliad ar dyfiad ton
Calonog air ddoniog ddy^ion,
Caer fawr rhag gwyn o foroedd,
Cost llai in i Cestill oedd,
Llys Fwg in llawes y ffordd,
Lletty in braff lled hen briffordd,
Cwrr hynod is llyn fro-dir,
Cell y gwin Celliwi^ ir,
Mae dayoni mwy dynion,
At hill y fam a^lwyd hon,
Llownwych frenhinlle hynod
Lletty'r gler llei tarrie'r glod,
Llewyrch y drych a drychwn
Lliw die frig, fell cerrig hwn
Cynheliad ych Tad ich Tu
Cann hannedd y cawn hynny
Trewaist aur tr^s die werin
Tynnu holl waed tunnell win
Trysor mawr i ragor wyd
Tros wledydd trosol ydwyd
Torr di gwy^ mewn tro^dog aur,
Tad arwyddion tid ryddaur,
Cadarnedd Gwynedd i gid
Tro r fei trwy wyr o fowyd
Tan ym wyd o enau mon
Ar gwyr ^chod iwr gwreichion
Barwn o wr in bro ni
By^ ai olyd fall Beli,
Drwy faynol tir Y fionydd
Tra fych a fynych a fydd,
Gwell rydraws gallu Rhodri
Na thr^an does o^h ran di
Sylfayn jaith sy o ^^aen neb
Sem daioni syn d'wyneb
Swyddog mewn gras Jwl Casar
Sai ith garn sy fyw ath gar
Jolo goch.

Ir un Gwr.
Jevan ddewr of^wn i ddawn
Fwya bonedd fab Eneawn
Fab Ryffyth wayw rudd wiwras
Fab Howel gledd bual glass
Gwyr yw a wnai gair ewybr
Garw i aith dawn beniaith dan wybr
Garw ir drail a giriaid ron
Goreu ir feistr ar Gaer ar von
Sydd Gynheliad nis gwada
Sic y Gaer dir ywr gwyr da
A fflowrdeli^ gl^^w ddewis gl^dd
A fflaid ag Enaid Gwynedd
A ffwys y gaer loew gaer lain
A ffais dew a ffost Owain
Costiog conglog diwg dai
Castle Crickiaith in costiai,
Mae'n Y fionydd ddedwydd dal
Castle ysydd ddau Cystal
Jevan awch darian wych Dwr
Yw'n eastell ni an Costiwr
Evan Eneon ywr mowrdon mau
Ai feibion dewrion Dyrau,
Howel Vaughan gwiwran gwr
D^ hydwyll ywr Deheudwr
Twry saner torf uniawn
Yw Madog ddi oriawg ddawn
Twr enwog mewn tair ynys
Parth yr haul y Porth yw Rhys,
Twr Dwnsiwn pan draethwn pwy
Goreu o Wynedd yw Gronwy
Llaw^nydd bob dydd i daw
Llyna Gastell llawn gostiaw
Lles ir beirdd llys a bar
Lle da i gyrchu llydd i garchar
Lle aberthog llu a bortha
Llawn yw o ddawn llynn o dda
Cof na chad rwystad rwystyr.
wastad ystyr
Castle a fae well o wyr
Cyffur ffawd caiff ar y ffydd
Cerdd iniawn.
Corff Einiawn Caer yfionydd
Cariad mawr Cyriad y medd
Ceir ynghanol cyrn Gwynedd
Dau well i bencerdd diwyd
I birth na chestyll y bid
Mwyn jawn ffrwyth nid meini
main ffriw
Maen yw adel Mur ydiw
Ag er y gwyr a fay gwell
Iawn gostiau Evan Gastell
Ab Einiawn ddawn ddi ylch
Ai Dyrau yw gau'n i gylch
In gaer dal in geyrw dilyth
In gydernyd ywn bid byth.
Evan Waed da ai Cant.

Ievan ap Eneon had four sons, Howel the eldest, to whom he gave the House
of Bronyvoel with the lands thereunto belonging; from this Howell, Owen Ellis
of Bronyvoel and Stymllyn, Lloyd of Gwen Eingan and others are descended. Madoc
the second, to whom he gave Berkin, from him are descended, Vaughan of Berkin,
the Family of Bodvel before mentioned, Vaughan of Talhenbont or Plas hen.
Richard Vaughan late Bishop of Bangor, after of Chester, and (last of all) of
London descended from Thomas the fifth son of Robert Vaughan of Talhenbont, ap
Griffith ap Howel ap Madoc ap Ievan ap Eneon, and so to Collwyn, as above. The
Whites of Anglesey are descended from John Win third son to the said Robert
Vaughan, who living in England was the first that changed his name from Win
to White, he was the Father of Richard White, the father of Rowland White, Sir
Rich: White Knight, and Robert White, as Lewis Dwn says A. D. 1608. Rees the
third had given him by his father Wheelog, from him the Lloyds of Wheelog etc.
Gronwy the fourth had Gwnbhryn, from him comes Win of Gwnfryn, etc.

A Cowydd or Panegyricke to Eneon ap Griffith, Brother to Sir Howell ap
Griffith, and Father to Ievan ap Eneon forementioned.
Y post hardd hapus dewrddoeth
Wy^o frig gwaed difreg coeth,
A gardd binagl gwraidd bonedd
Gyrr die vawl o grud i fedd
Einion dwg jawn un digoll
Vab Gryffydd ywch gwledydd oll
Oes gwr well ysgwier wyd
In geidwad well nag ydwyd
In die radd hynod roddiad
Ith roes ^^^^wy waith ystad
Gwyddost walch oreugost wisg
Gael arian in golerwisg
Wyr Howel gorff rheol gwych
Hill Fred ydd hael srau ydych
Clau wyd eurwalch clod Vrien
Call o jawn had Collwyn hen
O hwnn dwg hu enw digoll
Heb prinhau i arfau oll
Aeth dyro gwpl ith darian
A thri Flowerdelis ith rann
In gydwnion i gadu
Y sydd jawn mewn maes o ddu
Aeth y rhain dal ith rann di
O dad i dad yw dodi
Yngwynedd nid rhyfeddod
Oll ywch ben^ eraill ych bod
Rhwng bonedd a rhinweddau
Rhoed ytt happ yr hediad dau
Wrth goffhau die gampau di
Ath enwog waith ddaioni
Dewr a does benadur dawn
A di einig waed Einiawn
A glain nod hael galon nudd
Brau o faner bro Efion^dd
Ath annedd perffaith hynod
Yw Chwilog lys ychel glod
Nevadd wenn newydd anwyl
I bonn down bob hynod will
Cwrt her isllaw bro dir llyn
Yw in cynnal naw canyn
Llyna' r gaer llei llenwir gwin
Llys egored lles gwerin
Llei roed tad llaried tau
Waed dethol llei rwyd dithau
In rhannu fie ner bynod
Yma i gler aur am glod
A diwarth rhoi da wrth raid
A rhyw gynnal rhai gweiniaid
Ag yno rhowch gann a rhost
I bawb irber byburbost
Rhwydd fawr gun wyd rhoddvawrged
Rhowiawg walch Vrien rheged
Dinam yw mewn da enw mawr
Diflin walch wyd o flaenawr
A di ball enaid y bid
I tyvodd gras ytt hefyd
O bob ssyniant ai wrantur
Vwch pawb mewn gwych enw pur
Hwyr weled dewr ir wlad honn
Hael tyner ail ytt Einion
In wrol anian eryr
Ar die gas goes velwas gwyr
Ag yno in oen gwynn in waith
Anwylwch i wann eilwaith
Cyfiowna cun cefnog coeth
Cryfddewr wytt haw^ arosddoeth
Brenhinol bor iawn hynod
Brau at enw clau Bryttwn clod
Hawdd i cevaist huld cyfiawn
Arwydd stad urddas dawn
Ath roddion bennaeth rwyddwych
Ar bawb a ffoed, her i bych.
Gr. Grug ai Cant.

A Cowydd Moliant to Howell ap Madoc ap Ievan ap Eneon.
Y gwr ir a gwar arian,
Ar osgle aur ar was glan,
Mae rediad fall tyfiad her,
Ath arswyd mwy na theirsir,
Mae bonedd a byw ynod,
Mewn y fath mae'n iawn ifod
Howel eryr hael eirian
Hill Madoc oludog lan
Llin Jevan llew un asael
Llawn topp llin Llywelyn hael
Llin Ferwydd mewn cynnydd cu
Llin Gollwyn in llawn gallu
Aer drud o Rys ap Tewdur,
Ergyd pell ar y gwaed pur,
Ednyved fawr ged fur gwaith
Uychan tarrian y teiriaith,
Nid adwen wr di-dwn iach,
Pa du orau i bedeiriach,
Gwinwydd Yfionydd faenol
Gwres gwlad ai cheidwad jchol,
Trysor im wit tros wyr Mon
Drwy Lun gwaed reiol inion
Tra gwrol at wyr gorau*
Tyn ir allt trwy 'r tan ar iau,
Drwy fawr gariad y tad hael,
Treiaist hailioni'r trihael,
Nudd Rydderch nowddwr roddiad
Mor-da coel am eirda i cad;
Mawr ydoedd i ymwaredion,
Am wr sy well mwy iwr son,
Brawd Ivor llei bae'r dafarn
Brawd Cadwn gofynwn farn
Brawd dyrus in bwrw dewrion
Brawd ffwng lle bae raid a ffon
Cynheliad ar dyfiad wit
Cadar heb gnycciau ydwyt,
Cyff rowiog waredog wraidd
Cwmpas teyrnas tyhyrnaidd,
Cait randdwys Coed hirion ddewr
Cwnpassddadl walch campus ddewr
Cymro ir, ple caen wr well,
Cystal a nerth y Castle,
Aeth ofn dros eithafon draw
O hyd Yfionydd i Fanaw,
O did ddyn yt at deinioes
Brych wyn dewr breyach in die oes
A^on wydyr o Fon ydwyd
Arf ai n^rth i Ryfain wyd
Eryr balch ar wyr y bid
Y Cawn nerth Cy^ion wrthid,
Sardia feilch in sorod fan
Od oes gwg nid ysgogan,
Tynn didawl at wroliaeth,
Tan a dwr tanad aeth,
Gwr wyd a roddwyd i ras
Anwc aur am i guras,
Trysor mawr tros wyr a maeth,
Tes a gwr Twysogaeth
Llew Gwynedd anrhydeddir,
Llwyn o waed da ynllenwi'r tir
Llowydd gwledydd goludawc
Or dull y ceid Iarll y Cawc
Mae die glod in gorfod gwyr,
Mewn moliant mwy na milwyr,
Mab ydwyt in byw attiel
Man llei bych mine oll y bell,
Trawst euraid teiroes derwen,
Drwy eigion bid trig in ben.
Inco Brydydd ai cant.

Edvval Voel or the Bald, Son of ANARAWD.
AFter that Edwal Voel began his Dominion ober Northwales, Howel Dha being King
or Prince of Southwales and Powys land, a terrible Comet appeared in the
firmament. At which time, or the year following, Leicester was new built.

* I think that* the name of Leycester is here mistaken for Legecestria, Matthew.
West page 3541
that is Chester, called by the Romans, Legionum Cestria, which being destroyed
by the Danes was (about this time) by the procurement of Adelred Duke of
Mercia, and Elfled his wife, repaired and reedified, as Matthew. Westminster. writes,
and as the ancient Records of the City of Chester do testify. Besides that, I
find no mention of the reedifying of Leycester at this time, neither in the
Brytish Chronicle, nor yet in any ancient English writer.

The next summer after the men of Develyn destroyed the I Will of Mon or Anglesey.
And the year 917 Clydawc the 917.
son of Cadelh was slain by the hands of his brother Meyric, and about the
same time the Englishmen overthrew the Io. Cast.
Danes after a great fight at Tottenhall.

The year 919 Edelfled or Elfled Duchess of Mercia the Edelfled. Matthew. West.
page 357.
wife of Edelred Duke of Mercia and sister to King Edward dyed: She built the
boroughs of Strengat and Bruge, by the Forest of Morph, Anno Domini 913. The
next year after the building of that she built Tamworth and Stafford; and the
year after that, Edelburgh; and the Winter following, Cherenburgh and
Wadeburgh; then the next summer, Runcofe or Runcorne, as some think. After
that, she sent her whole Army t^ Wales, and fighting with the Welshmen won
Ran. Cest. Matthew. West. Hol. pa. 222. Gweythy Dinas No. wydh.
Brecknocke, took the Queen and 33 men. This was it, which is called in Welsh
Gweythy Dinas Newydh, that is to say, The battle of the new City. Also she
wan the town of Derby, with all that Country from the Danes: nevertheless she
lost there four of her chiefest Captains. Io. Cast.


* Jo: Castoreus reports this story in this manner. Huganus Lord of
Westwales, perceiving King Edward to be occupied in the Danish war, far
enough from him, gathered an Army of Brytains, and entered the Kings land.
Whereupon Elfled Lady of Mercia and sister to King Edward came to Wales with a
strong Army, fought with the Welshmen at Brecknock, and putting Huganus to
flight, took his Allys.
Wife and 34 men Captives, which she brought with her to Mercia. Huganus thus
discomfited, fled to Derby, and there being peaceably received by the
Countrymen with fifteen men of war, and two hundred Soldiers well appointed,
joined himself with the Kings adversaries the Danes, Elfled being hereof
certifyed by the men of Derby, pursued him with a great Army, and entered the
gates of the Town, where Huganus resisted her and slew four of her chief
Officers. But Gwyane Lord of the I Will of Elie her Steward set the gates on fire,
and furiously running upon the Brytains entered the Town. Then Huganus being
overmatched, and choosing rather to dye by the sword, then to yield himself
unto a Woman, was there slain. Thus out of Castorous.

The year ensuing Elfled wan Leycester, and subdued all the Danes that lay
there. The Yorkshire men also did her homage and service: she dyed at
Tamworth, after that she had worthily ruled Mercia eight years, and lies
buried at Gloucester by S. Peter's porch; upon her tomb this Epitaph H. Hunt.
was written.

O Elfleda potens, o terror virgo virorum,
O Elfleda potens, nomine digna viri.
Te quoque splendidior fecit natura puellam,
Te probitas fecit nomen habere viri.
Te mutare decet sed solum nomina sexus,
Tu Regina potens Rexque trophaea parans.
Iam nec Caesareos tantum mirere triumphos,
Caesare splendidior virgo, virago vale.
After the death of Elfled, Edward disinherited her daughter Matthew. West.
Alfwyen, and seized the land of Mercia to his own hands.

* The cause why Edward disinherited this young Lady his own Niece, whose
mother Elfled his sister had done so much for him, was (as Castoreus writes)
for that Alfwyen not making the King her Uncle (whom her Mother had appointed
guardian and overseer of her) privy to her doings, had promised and contracted
marriage with Raynald King of the Danes: whereupon King Edward, to prevent his
enemy, entered the land of Mercia, and seized the same to his own hands, and
carried also the said Lady with him into Westsex. The same Author also
reports, that about this time Leofred a Dane, and Gruffyth ap Madoc, brother
in law to the Prince of Westwales, came from Ireland with a great Army to
Snowdon, and minding to bring all Wales and the Marches thereof to their
subjection, overran and subdued all the Country to Chester, before King Edward
had notice of their arrival. Whereat being sore offended, and loath to trouble
his Subjects in that behalf, made a vow that he and his sons, with their own
people, would be revenged upon Leofred and Gruffyth, and thereupon came to
Chester,, and wan the City from them. Then he divided his Army into two
Battles, whereof He and his son Athelstan led the first, and Edmund and Edred
the second, and so following them with as much celerity as he could, he
overtook them at the forest of Walewod, now Sherwod, where Leofred and
Gruffyth set upon him fiercely, so that the King in the beginning was in some
distress, until Athelstan stepped in between his Father and Leofred, and
wounded the Dane in the arm, in such sort, that he being not able to hold his
spear, was soon taken, and committed to the custody of Athelstan. In the mean
time Edmund and Edred encountering with Gruffyth, slew him, and brought his head
to their Father. Then Athelstane caused Leofred to be beheaded, and so both
their heads being set up together on the top of the tower of Chester, Edward
and his sons returned home with Great triumph.

Then Edward after he had built Glademutham dyed at Ferandyne, whose son
named Alfred dyed also the same time at Oxford, and were buried both at
Winchester, Anno 924. After his death Adelstan his base son reigned King of
England, the worthiest Prince of Saxon blood that ever reigned. He overcame
Cudfryd the father of Reynald King of the Danes, at York. He gathered also the
second year of his Reign a great Army against Hawlaf King of Ireland, who Io.
Castor.
came with the whole power of the Scots and Danes against him, and gave him
battle at Brimestbury, where Adelstan got the victory, who sieve the said King
Hawlaf and the King of Scots, and five Kings of the Danes and Norman*, and
twelve Earls, Ryfel y Brynn.
so that he brought all the land of England and Scotland in subjection to him,
which none of his predecessors had ever attempted. The year 933. Owen the son
of Gruffyth was 933
slain by the men of Caerdigan. Then Adelstan entering Wales with a great Army
brought the Kings of the Country to subjection, Will. Malms. Hol. pa. 225. Io.
Cast. Matthew. West. Ran. Cest.
and received yearly of tribute 20 pound in gold, and 300 pound in silver, and
200 head of Cattle: Yet the Laws of Howel Dha appointed the King of Aberfraw
to pay yearly to the King of London no more then 66 pound for a tribute: and
that the Prince of Dinevowr and the Prince of Powys should pay a like sum, 66
pound yearly to the King of Aberfraw. To this Adelstan the Kings of Norway and
France sent great and rich gifts to purchase his friendship and good will. In
the year 936 died Euneth the son of Clydaw^, 936
and Meyric the son of Cadelh. At this time also Adelstan did remove the
Brytains that dwelt in Excester and thereabouts to Cornwall, and appointed the
river Cambia to be the Matt. West. Hol. page 226
uttermost Mere toward England, as he had before appointed the river Wy to be
the mere of England and Wales. In the year of Christ 939 the Noble Prince
Adelstan dyed, and was 939.
buried at Malmsbury, his brother Edmund borne in wedlock Reigned in his stead,
and in the first year of his Reign, took Io. Castor.
five Cities from the Danes, Leycester, Darby, Stafford, Lincoln, and
Notingham. Then Aulaf King of the Danes sent to Edmund to desire Peace and
Baptism, both which Edmund granted him, so the Danes, which then were called
Normans, received first the Christian Faith, Edmund being their Godfather, who
making peace with them returned to Westsex with much Honor. This year dyed
Abloic chief King of Ireland. The year following Cadelh the son of Arthvael a
Noble Brytain was imprisoned, and dyed by poison and Edwal Voel the son of
Anarawd and Elise his brother were s^aine in a battle they fought against the
Danes and Englishmen. This Edwal had six sons, Meyric, Jevaf or Jevan, Jago,
which is, James; Conan, Edwal Vachan, and Roderike. After his death, Howel Dha
his Cosen german ruled all Wales during his life. Elise also had issue, Conan
and a daughter named Trawst, which was mother to Conan ap Sitsylht, Gruffyth ap
Sitsylht, and Blethyn ap Convyn, the two last whereof were afterward Princes
of Wales.

Of Marchudd one of the Fifteen Tribes of Gwyneth.
Marchudd ap Conan ap Elvyw of Uwch dulas in Denbighland was Lord of Abergeley,
and had his Seat at Brynffanigl. Sir Tho: ap William's book says he lived A.
D. 84^, but others are of opinion he lived before that time, for as much as we
have it recorded in an old Welsh MS. that Inethan his Granchild and Lord also
of Abergeley dyed in the year 849. But Powell of Ednop in his verses of him
will have him to have lived after, in the time of Prince Edwal Voel A. D. 913.

Stren^us Uchdulae Marchudd bellator in orb
Sanguineo tumidi spolium praelustre Gigantis
Aequali pugna and justo certamine caesi
Fert caput avulsum, tantique insigne triumphi
Tortilis argenti nitidique Corona revincit,
Hoc genere Henricus Rex nomine septimus ortus,
Claruit Idwallo sub Calvo Rege Britanno.
His Arms.
G. a Sarazens head erazed, proper, wreathed Or and A, wreathed A and S, as
Gwylim says. Others give him other Coats, A. a Cheveron S. between three
Sarazens heads. or a Blackamore's head etc.

Families and Worthies descended from this Tribe.

Ednyved Uychan of Anglesey, was the son of Cynfric ap Iorwerth ap Gwgan ap
Idnerth ap Edryd ap Nathan ap Carwed ap Marchudd. He was Privy Councellor to
Prince Llewelyn ap Iorwerth, and to his son Prince David ap Llewelyn. He was
General of Prince Llewelyn's Army, when the Earl of Chester with an Army of
English invaded the Principality. Ednyved gave them battle, and after a bloody
fight, wherein on the English side were slain three Lords, many Commanders of
good note with a great number of common soldiers, obtained an absolute
Victory: For this service (among other rewards) his Lord and Master (the
Prince) gave him a new coat of Arms, viz. G. a Cheveron Ermine between three
Englishmens heads cooped, proper. Some say Ednyved's coat is, G. a cheveron S.
between three helmets A.

Sir Griffith Lloyd Knight, the son of Rees ap Griffith ap Ednyvet Vychan was
a valiant Gentleman but unfortunate, Magnae quidem sed calamitosae virtutis, as
L. Florus says of Sertorius. He was Knighted by K. Edward the First, when he
brought him the first news of his Queens safe delivery of a Son, at
Carnarvon Castle: the King was then at Ruthlan, at his Parliament held there;
This Sir Griffith afterward taking notice of the extreme Oppression and
Tyranny exercised by the English Officers, especially by Sir Roger Mortimer
Lord of Chirke and Justice of Northwales, toward his Countrymen the Welsh,
became so far discontented, that he brake out into open Rebellion, verifying
that saying of Solomon, Oppression makes a wise man mad. He treated with Sir
Edward Bruce (Brother to Robert then King of Scotland) who had conquered
Ireland, to bring or send over men to assist him in his design against the
English, but Bruses terms being conceived too unreasonable, the treaty came to
naught; however being desperate he gathered all the forces he could, and in an
instant, like a candle that gives a sudden blaze before it is out, overran all
Northwales and the Marches, taking in all the Castles and Holds, but to little
purpose, for soon after he was met with, his party discomfited and himself
taken prisoner: this was in the year of our Lord 1322.

Sir Griffith Lloyd's letter to Edward Bruise.
Cares Ceo mele dit Sir Gruffith ensi feust mempres il vut en Northwall e manda
sa breve a Sir Edward de Bruys en Ireland qui ad judges se fist Roi de mesme la
terre, e testes paroles.

NObili in Christo Conquestori Domino Edwardo Illustriss Regi Hiberniae, suus,
si placet, Griffinus Lloyd in Northwall: reverentiam debitam in Honor.

Audita nobis vestri in terrarum conquisitione* fama egregia in partibus
nostris, praecipue debelland: aemulos nostros and vestros, qui tam vos quam nos
ab haereditatibus vi injuste expellendo destruxerunt and nomen nostrum
memoriamque in terris delere conati fuerunt, ab initio supra modum applaudimus,
ut merito debemus, omnes unanimiter in partibus nostris, unde Vobis ex part
Wallensium Nobilium significo per praesentes, quod si ad Walliam cum hominibus
vestris dignemini venire, vel si vos in propria persona accedere illuc non
poteritis, aliquem Nobilem Albanen: Comitem, Baronem vel Militem cum paucis, si
plurimi nequeant adesse ad dictas parts nostras volueritis mandare. Parati
erimus omnes unanimiter dicom eo quod nomen vestrum celebre ubique publicetur
expugnat: si quid Saxonibus in Albania, per illustrem Regem fratrem vestrum
ultim: per Vos in Hibernia, per vos and nos in Wallia statum vestrum pristinum
per Brutum conquisitum recuperabimus ipsisque suppeditatis, confusis and
dispersis, Britannia juxta discretam vestre dominationis ordinationem inter
Britones and Albaneos imposterum divisa cohaereditabitur. Valeat Dominatio
vestra Regia per cuncta saecula.


Here follows Sir Edward Bruise his Answer to the said Letter from Sir
Griffith Lloyd and the Welsh.
La transcript de Cesto breve feust mande horse Derland a Monsieur Rogier de
Mortimer de Chirck Justice de Gales apres Sieur John de Gray e trovo est antre
lez remembrances le dit Sir Rogier de son temps. Et Sir Edward de Bruis manda
son responce de la breve auant ditr horse Dirland a Bardsey per un Thonno Dun
felon le Roi un marium de Scote in Cestes paroles.

OMNIBUS desiderantibus a servitute liberari salutem in eo.
Qui desiderant in se relevat: and liberat: ab angustiis, temporibus
opportunis, quia quilibet Christianus obligatur suo proximo in omni angustia
subvenire, and praecipue illis qui ex una radice originis sive parentelae and
patriae primitus processerunt, ideo compatientes vestrae servituti and
angustiae jam..... Anglicana molestia indigenti decrevimus (auxiliante
Altissimo) vestro gravamini occurrere, and innaturalem and barbaricam totis
viribus Anglicanam de vestris finibus expellere servitutem, ut sic sicut a
principio Albanicus and Britannicus populus expulsis hostibus in perpetuum fiet
unus. Et quia nullus inimicus faciliter relevatur libenter praecipimus, si
jugum Anglicanum in tantum vos deprimit, quantum nuper depresserat populum
Scotianum ut sic ex vestro concordi conamine et nostro superveniente (juvamine
disponente semper divino) possitis jura vestra et justitiam recuperare et
proprietatem..... hereditatem pacifice possidere. Veruntamen Dei cum omnia
serviunt in isto proposito filium invocamus quod non ex praesumptione et
ambitione injusti dominii talia attemptamus, sed ex mera compassione effusionis
innocentis vestri sanguinis et subjectionis intolerabilis et signant: ad hoc
quod vellemus inimicorum vestrorum et nostrorum vires reprimere, qui nec pacem
nec concordiam desiderant. Imo vestram et nostram finalem destructionem sicut a
principio ingressionis earum in Britanniam incessanter diebus ac noctibus
molientur, et quia nullo modo est nostre conscientie quemquam decipere nec
etiam decipi a quocunque, nostram intentionem et proposit: sine tergiversatione
aliqua declaramus quod libenter sciremus vestram voluntatem, si rationem nostri
laboris et conaminis intuitu relevationis vestre acceptare decrement: nobis
committere prosecutionem querele vestre et justitie nec non capitale dominium
vestri prout alius hactenus Princeps vester liberius habere consuevit: Ita quod
vos omnes et singuli cujuscunque extiteritis conditionis pristinis
haereditatibus, terris, libertatibus, possessionibus consuetis et omnibus
conditionibus ad vos expectantibus integre et finaliter gandeatis. Vestram
igitur voluntatem super hiis, et quibuscunque aliis in quibus vos consolari
poterimus, si videatur expediens caute et celeriter nobis remandetis. Valete
Domini in Domino.


Out of the English book of Records written at the request of John Salter
Justice of Northwales.

Sir Tuder Vaughan ap Grono descended from this Ednyvet, being the son of
Grono ap Tuder ap Grono ap Ednyvet Vaughan. He was, for Estate, Power, and
Interest, one of the chiefest men in Northwales in his time, as Lewis Morgannwc
has it in a MS. of his. It is set down in the aforecited book of the Records
of Northwales, how that he assumed to himself the Honor of Knighthood,
requiring all people to call and style him Sir Tuder ap Grono, as if even then
his mind had given him, that out of his loins hereafter should spring those
that should have power to confer that Honor; The King, viz Edward the third
upon notice hereof having sent for him and asked him, how he durst presume to
invade his Prerogative, by assuming the title of Knight without his authority,
received from him this answer, viz. that by a Law or Ordinance of King Arthur
he might assume that title, in regard he had those three qualifications, which
whoever had was by the said Law to be deemed a Knight; 1. He was a Gentleman.
2. He had a sufficient estate. 3. He was valiant and adventurous, saying this
withal, If my valor and hardiness be doubted of, Lo, here I throw down my
Glove, and am ready to fight with any man (whoever he be) for due proof
thereof. The King liking well his courage and resolution, was easily persuaded
to confirm to him the said Honor. From this Sir Tuder descended Worthies
indeed, as Henry the 7th King of England, with the Kings, Queens and Princes
come from him. Henry the 7th was the son of Edmund Earl of Richmond, who was
the son of Sir Owen Tuder, the son of Meredith, the son of this Sir
Tuder. Jasper second son to Sir Owen Tuder was created Earl of Pembroke by
his halfe-Brother King Henry the 6th, and was a Noble Hero of the Lancastrian
party. When King Henry the 6th was deprived both of his Kingdom and Life, and
Edward the 4th of the House of York settled in the Throne, he found means to
convey his Nephew Henry Earl of Richmond into France, out of King Edwards
reach, who had a jealous eye upon him, as being (in the right of his Mother)
next Heir to the Crown of the House of Lancaster. He returned into England
with his said Nephew, who (being King) created him Duke of Bedford, which
Honor he enjoyed about two years and then dyed. Richard Owen Theodor of
Penmonyth in Anglesey Esquire. is a Branch of the same Family.

A Marwnad or Elegy on the death of Sir Tuder Vaughan.
Clowais ddoe um clust ddeau
Canu corn cyveiliorn cau
O vair pann ywr gweddiorn
Pa beth yw y eyfryw gorn
Marw chwedl penn cenedl coeth
Tydur arf awchddur which ddoeth
Ni fyrnia ddim oi farnad
Fychan varchog mudlan mad
C^werw jawn yw chware orn
Gydcerdd rhwng cloch ag utgorn
Galargyrn melldeyrn Mon
Gogleissio beirdd gwag leission
Pa dwrw yw bwnn gwnn ganoch
Pa ymffust im clust mal cloch
Pa weiddi pwy a wyddiad
Yw hwnn a glown in gwlad
Ubain a llefain a llid
Am y gwr mwya a gerid
Cael y pwyll nis cela pwy
Calon doethion Tindaethwy
Llygrwyd Mon mynn llaw egryn
Llygrwyd oll lle gorau din
Llygrwyd Gymru gwedi gwart
Llithricced hoedl llwyth Ricart
Dwyn llew brynn byrdda^ dan llaw
Dadwreiddio i du drwyddaw
Dyrnod penn hyd ymenydd
Ar dlodion gwlad Fon fydd
Dygn um chwedl dwyn hoedl hardd
Ysgwaeth dwyn browdfaeth bridfardd
Wyr Ririd lwyr euraid lwyth
Flaidd difileindraidd flaendrwyth
Lliwiodd Wynedd llaw ddinag
Llas penn Mon wenn i mae (n) wag
Beth o daw heibtaw hebom
Ir traeth coch lynges droch drom
Pwy a ludd pwl i ddym
Llychlyn ai bwyill awchlym
Pwy a gawn pie Gwynedd
Pwy a ddyrchaif glaif ne gledd
Began farw fyngharw rhygl
Fyniant hill naf Brynn ffanygl
Ag aisawr oedd vawr i fraych
Yswain wayw lathfain lithfraych
Aesor gwlad fawr golud fie
Yswain brwy dur sy (n) i brydy
Ffelaig ysgythurddraig uthurddrud
A Fenn Mon rhag ffo na mud
Dillin Mon freheyron fro
Dalldai bwyll delli ebilldo
Gwyreing car pwyllig pell
Cartre r cost carw Tr^r castle
Gwae'r Deau er maddau medd
Gweddw jawn gwae ddwy Wynedd
Gwae'r jeirch mewn llenyrch maen llai
Gwaer ceirw ddwyn gwn ai curai
Gwae finae heb gy^anedd
Gweled bod mewn gwaelod bed
Anhudded oer jawn heddyw
O to ffrwd ar i ffryw
Nid oedd of dra chynefin
O riw welu gwedi gwin
Cnodach iddo wisgo in waisg
In ymwan frwydur ion ynwaisg
Helm gribog Ryddfaog fyth
A habrsiwn wr ewybrsyth
A llirig dromdew lew ladd
Dromlaes i fedry ymladd
Ni chollai gwr winllan gur
Dref i dad dra fie Dydur
Ni ffolid car amharawd
Odid od wtleid tlawd:
Nag ynganer yngwynedd
Na ddalier ych dan wych wedd
Na somer am a dderyw
Na lafurier ofer yw
Na chwardder am wych heirddion
Na hauer mwy ynhir Mon.
Jolo Goch ai Cant.

William Griffith Vaughan of Penrhyn in the County of Carnarvon Esquire. descended
from Ednyvet Vaughan. In the 18 year of the Reign of Henry the 6th, being
made an English Denison he had conferred on him the Chamberlainship of
North Wales the best office for profit and honor then in Wales: so Pet. Ellis
his MS. Sir William Griffith Knight (surnamed the Liberal) his son was
Chamberlain after him, who was also succeeded in that Office by his eldest
son another Sir William Griffith Knight. Richard Griffith of Llanvair (Major
for his late Majesty and now living) descended from this Family. The Right
Reverend Father in God George Griffith D. D. now Lord Bishop of St Asaph, The
Right worshipful John Griffith of Bloxham Esquire and one of the Justices of
North Wales, John Griffith of Llanvaethley Esquire. the Griffiths of Porthyraur and
Cichley and other Gentlemen of the name are descended from Edmond Griffith Esquire.
second son to Sir William Griffith the elder. William Griffith of Carnarvon
Esquire. was son to Sir William Griffith the younger William Llyn one of the most
ingenious of our Modern Bards has an elegant Poem or Cowydd to the said
William Griffith to beg pardon and readmission into Favor: Which those that
delight in this fruitless but innocent study will not take amiss to see
published.

Carnarfon hen gouion gwyn
Coron yr holl Gwncwerwyr
Gorau mann ywch gwarr Menai
Gwyr a their ag aur a thai
Beth yw mewn byth i mi
Na baidd fie wyneb iddi
Oni chaf er jawn na cham
Meistrolaeth y meistir Wiliam
Collir tir in wir a wnaf
A chwi a ellwch na chollaf
Ai gwir gwayw chwyrn gwr gwych hardd
Die vod in ddig wrth die Fardd
Os gwir llew ysgall llyoedd
Yma (r) will ar y may i r oedd
Wy Fardd hu ar furddas
In gefn grwm in gofyn gras
Mab Sir William ddinam ddoeth
Gryffudd bur awchddur w^hddoeth
Pob anoeth a does a ith du
Pobl attad pawb ai lettu
Pob car ddyn pob cerdd yna
Attad oll perchen tu da
Draw in dal die wr nid wife
Ni obeithiaf na bythwyf
Digus drwm yw die gas draw
gwaer din sy (n) gwyro danaw
Baych mawr val dwyn ebwych mam
Waith a gwyl oath ddig Wiliam
Ba riw faych mwy bar fod
Onid baych a wnaid o bechod
Claf ydyw clwyf a wadodd
Clwyfais eissie cael die vodd
Ymrw adwyth mawr ydwyd
Eli o mynni um wyd
Gwyddoch. fie nwyf am clwyfau
A chwi a wyr fie jachau
O llidiaist fie llew llwydwynn
Ysgar gas ysgwiair gwynn
Haeddwn fod draw heddiw n drwch
Od wy in haeddu dan heddwch
Dig o gwyn yw digio gwr
Di gwyn yw digio anwr
Salmon wyd gyvion digam
Sy ar ol dau Sir William
Byw in gymmwys heb hen gamaw
A bair i hill gwr byrhau
Anllywodraeth a lledrad
A lygra hill gwr ai had
Ni threissi neb gwnndeb gwir
Bwy oath dras byth a dreissir
Gwr mawr gorau am arian
Ag a rudd mwy na gwyr man
Os i Siesswn ail Siosswy
Os ar varr nid oes wr fwy
Os rhanny gwin os rhann gwr
Ni by dwyneb di anwr
Pa un a wnai (n) pennaeth
O'r Penrhyn mawr pe rhann maeth
Y llew does ai lleihau die wg
Ai and elwyf in dolwg
Pam oedd raid o blaid in benn
Dur gwnn i daro (r) gownen
Llew gwynn oll o egin wyd
Ag oen wife ag anafwyd
Gwalch chwyrn wit gloch aur an tawdd
Yderyn wife dyro nawdd
Llid sy flin medd Doethineb
Llid ni all wellhau i neb
Tra blwng yw nature y blaidd
A llew orig anlariaidd
Llew yw dystod llwyd distaw
Torr die lid taro die law
Meistres Marged luned lan
Ach dwg oll och dig allan
Priod William prydolwenn
Iarlles her o Wedir hen
Merch yw honn Sion gyfion gu
Honn a ddichon heddychu
Barna honn waed brenhinawl
Ar die swrdd euro die fawl
Dof ath gerdd wr difeth gall
Nid am aur na dim arall
And cymod da i vod hyd vedd
Am llaw ge^ych Iarll Gwynedd.
William Llun ai Cant.

The Williamses of Cochwillan and the Coetmors in the County of Carnarvon etc.
are descended from Ednyvet Vaughan. Sir Griffith Williams of Vaenol (the fourth
Baronet of the Name and Line) is descended from the Williamses of Cochwillan.
The most Reverend Father in God John Williams D. D. and Archbishop of York was
of this Family. He was a Person of great abilities, which were a means to raise
him to great Honors and Dignities: King James made him Dean of Westminster,
Bishop of Lincoln, and Lord Keeper of the Great Seal of England, and he was
advanced to the Archbishopric of York by King Charles the First. His places
and preferments brought him wealth, which enabled him to purchase Cochwillan,
which had been the house of his Ancestors, and also Penrhyn the seat of the
ancient and once flourishing family of the Griffiths, with other lands, which
came all (he dying Intestate) to Sir Griffith Williams of Penrhyn Baronet (now
living) his elder Brothers son and Heir. Lumley Williams, Williams of Wig,
John Williams of Meillionyth Esquire. are branches of the house of Cochwillan.

That famous Soldier (in his time) Sir Rees Ievanc, that is, the Young son
to Sir Rees Hen or the Elder of South Wales Knight was of this Tribe. So says
Evan ap Madoc ap Rees.

John Win of Melai in Denbighshire Esquire. is descended from this Tribe. William
Win Esquire. his Father was a Colonel of a Regiment of foot for his late Majesty
K. Charles the first under the Right Honorable Arthur Lord Capel;he was slain
at the siege of Wem in Shropshire A. D. 1643. He was a valiant and a wise
Gentleman, exceeding zealous, faithful and active for his Sovereigne: All his
family engaged in the same good cause, his Uncle Ellis Win, his Brothers
Robert, Owen, and Hugh, served under him as Commissioned Officers. This
Colonel Win was the son of John Win, the son of William Win of
Llanvair ap William Win ap John Win ap William ap Meredith ap David ap
Eneon Vachan ap Ievan ap Rees Win ap David Lloyd ap Y Penwyn ap Iorwerth ap
Tegwared ap Iddon ap Ithel ap Edryd ap Inethan ap Iapheth ap Carwedd ap
Marchudd. Sir Thomas Win Knight and Captain of a Company of foot in Holland
was of this family of the Wynnes. Jesus College in Oxford does acknowledge
this Sir Thomas a Benefactor, his Brother and Executor Doctor Morgan Win
having purchased Land with the money he had left by Will to pious uses and
settled the same upon the said College for the maintenance of one Fellow and
one Scholar.

Hovvel Dha Son to Cadell ap Rodri and Cousin German to EDWAL Voel.
THis Howel Dha King or Prince of Southwales and of Powys long before, after
the death of Edwal Voel his Cosen, took upon him the Government of all Wales
about the year of Christ 940. Notwithstanding 940
the sons of Edwal did somewhat murmur against him he was for his Godly
behavior, discreet and just Rule beloved of all men. This Howel constituted
and made Laws to be observed throughout his Dominions, which were in use in
Wales, till the Inhabitants received the laws of England which was in the time
of Edward the first, and in some places thereof long after. These Laws are at
this day to be seen in Latin and in Welsh.

* Howel Dha King of all Wales perceiving the Laws and customs of his Country
to have grown into great abuse, and disregard, summoned the Archbishop of
Menevia, with all the other Bishops and Chief of the Clergy to the number of
140 Prelates, and all the Barons and Nobles of Wales, with six men of the
Wisest and best reputed in every Commot to meet all together at his house
called Y Tuy gwyn ar Taf, that is, The White house upon the River Taf (in
Carmarthenshire:) Thither he came himself, and continued there with those his
Nobles, Prelates vnd Subjects all the Lent in Prayer and Fasting, craving the
direction and blessing of Gods holy spirit upon his endeavor to reform the
Laws and Customs of his Country, to the honor of God, and the good of his
people. About the end of Lent he chose out of that company twelve of the
wisest, gravest, and of greatest experience among them: to whom he added one
Clerk or Doctor of the Laws, named Blegored, a learned and perfect wise man.
These had in charge to examine the old Laws and Customs of Wales, and to
gather out of them such as were meet for the government of the Country: which
they did, retaining those that were wholesome and profitable, expounding those
that were doubtful and ambiguous, and abrogating those that were superfluous
and hurtful, and so ordained three sorts of Laws. The first, of the Ordering
of the 1.
Kings or Princes household, and his Court. The second, of the Affairs 2.
of the Country and Commonwealth. The third, of the special 3.
Customs belonging to particular places and persons. All these being read,
Proclaimed, and Allowed, he caused three several Books of them to be written,
one for his daily use to follow his Court, another to lie in his Palace at
Aberffraw, and the third at Dinevowr, that all the three Provinces of Wales
might have the use of the same when need required. And for the better
observation of these Laws, he caused the Archbishop of St David's to denounce
sentence of Excommunication against all such of his Subjects, as should refuse
to obey them. Within a while after Howel (because he would omit nothing that
might procure strength and Authority to his said Laws) went to Rome taking
along with him, the Archbishop of Mordef.
S. David's, the Bishops of Lambert
Bangor and S. Chebur.
Asaph, and thirteen other of the most Learned and Wisest Menev.
men in Wales, where the said Laws being recited before the Pope were by his
Authority confirmed: then having finished his devout Pilgrimage and emptied his
purse, he came home again with his Company.

1. By these Laws they might not morgage their lands but to such as were of the
same Family or kindred, De eadem parentela. 2. Every Tenant holding of any other
than of the Prince of Lord of the Fee, paid a fine pro defensione Regia, which
was called Arian ardhel, in Latin Advocarii. 3. No Legacy of Goods by Will was
good, otherwise than those which were given to the Church, to the Lord of the
Fee, or for payment of Debts 4. Every man might distraine as well for debts, as
for Rent of lands, any goods, or cattle, saving Horses, which were counted to
serve for a man's necessary defense, and were not distrainable without the
Prince his license. 5. Causes of Inheritance were not heard or determined but
from the ninth of November, til the ninth of February; or from the ninth of May
until the ninth of August. The rest of the year was counted a time of
Vacation, and so ordered as for sowing in the Spring, so for roaping in the
Harvest. 6. This also is to be observed, that all matters of Inheritance of
land were determined and adjudged by the King or Prince in person, or his
special Deputy (if he were sick or impotent) and that upon view of the same
land, calling unto him the Freeholders of that place, two Elders of his
Council, the Chief Justice attending always in the Court, the Ordinary Judge
of the Country where the land lay, and the Priest. The manner of their
proceeding was thus. The King or Prince sat in his Judicial seat higher than
the rest, with an Elder on his right hand, and another on his left, and the
Freeholders on both sides next unto them, which for this cause (as I think)
were called Uchelwyr. Before him directly a certain distance off and a little
lower sat his Chief Justice, having the Priest on his right hand, and the
ordinary Judge of that country on the left. The Court being set the Plaintiff
came in with his Advocate, Champion, and Rhingylh or Sergeant, and stood on the
right side: and last of all, the Witnesses of both Parties came, which stood
directly before the Chief Justice at the lower end of the Hall until they
were called up to testify their knowledge touching the matter in controversy.
The figure of this I thought good to set down here before you.

The KING. An Elder of the Council. An Elder of the Council. Uchelwyr or
Freeholders. Uchelwyr or Freeholders. The Priest. The chief Justice. The Judge
of the place. Rhingylh or Sergeant The Defendant The Plaintiff Rhingylli or
Sergeant Advocate Advocate Champion. Champion. The Witnesses.

After hearing the Books read, the depositions of the witnesses also, and full
pleading of the Cause in open Court, upon warning given by the Rhingylh, the
Chief Justice, the Priest, and the ordinary Judge, withdrew themselves for a
while to consult of the matter, and then Secundum allegata and probata, brought
their verdict, the Court sitting. Whereupon the King or Prince after
consultation had with the Elders or Seniors which sat by him, gave definitive
sentence; except the matter were so obscure and intricate, that right and truth
did not appear: in that case it was tried by the two Champions, who put an end
to it.

At this time the foresaid King Aulaf and Regnald entered the Land of Edmond,
who gathering his strength together followed them into Northumberland, where he
overcame them in plain Battle, and chased them out of the Land, he remained a
whole year in those Parts, to set things in order, and quiet the Country. And
because he could not by any means bring the Inhabitants of Cumberland to live
in any good order, he spoiled that Country, and committed it afterward to the
Government of Malcolme King of Scotland, upon condition, that he should send
him succors in all his wars both by Sea and Land.

* Some other write, that King Edmond being accompanied Matt. West. Hol. page
228.
with Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht (who was after Prince of Wales) entered Cumberland,
and taking the two sons of Dummail King of Buchan. lib. 6. fol. 53.
that Province put out their eyes, and then gave that Country to Malcolme to be
holden of him, upon this condition that he would keep the North part of the
Realm from incursion of enemies, which afterward was but slenderly performed.
This Malcolme was the son of Donald King of Scotland, and was the next King
after Constantine the third, being in number the 76.

In the year 942 died Hubert Bishop of S. David's* the 942
year following Marclois Bishop of Bangor, and Ussa the son of Lhavye died.
The year 944 the Englishmen entered Wales 944.
with a strong Army, and after they had spoiled Strad Clwyd, returned borne. At
which time Conan the son of Elise was Matt. West. Hol. page 222.
in danger of death by poison, and Everus Bishop of S. David's dyed. The year
after Edmund King of England was slain by Matt. West.
Treason, as some writers say, upon S. Augustines day, as he was at dinner.
Other say, that he espied an Outlaw fitting in the Hall, and as he drew him
from the Table the Outlaw slew the King with a knife.

* And some are of opinion, that as the King would have rescued Io. Cast.
a man of his from an Officer who had arrested him, the same Officer slew him,
not knowing that he was the King: he lies buried at Glastenbury.

After his death, Edred or Edfred his Brother was Crowned in his stead, who
making an expedition into Scotland and Northumberland subdued both the
Northumbers and Scots promising fealty and homage by Oath, which was not long
kept. In the year 948 died Howel Dha the Noble and 948.
worthy King of Wales, whose death was much bewailed by all men, for he was a
Prince that loved Peace and good Order, and that truly feared God. He left
behind him four sons, Owen, Run, Roderike, and Edwyn, betwixt whom and the
sons of Edwal, there ensued great Wars, for the chief Rule of Wales, as
shall appear in the History following.

The sons of Howel Dha, as some Writers do record it, were these, viz. Owen,
who did not live long after his Father, Eneon, Meredyth, Dyfnwal, Rodri, the
two last whereof, as is conceived, were slain in the Battle fought near
Llanrwst A. D. 952 by the sons of Edwal Voel. Run Lord of Cardigan and slain
before the death of his Father. Conan y Cwn who possessed Anglesey. Edwin, who
was also slain, as is supposed, in the forementioned battle. Owen ap Howel
Dha dyed about the same time.

There was a battle fought between Howel and Conan ap Edwal Voel for the I Will
of Anglesey, wherein Conan fell; Griffith his son renewing the War was
overcome. And Cyngar a potent man being driven out of the I Will Howel enjoyed
quiet possession thereof, and of the rest of Gwyneth.

I suppose Howel Dha was chosen to rule Wales during the minority of the sons
of his Uncle Anarawd, who at the death of their Father were very young and not
fit for Government: we have it in some copies of his Laws that in the year of
our Lord 914 (soon after the death of Anarawd) he summoned the Archbishops,
Bishops, the rest of the Clergy with the 914
Lords of Wales, and six of the most discreet Freeholders out of each Commot to
appear at his Court called y Tu gwyn ar Daf, to advise with him touching the
reformation of the British Laws; Being there met they compiled a new Body of
Law; in the Preface of the said Laws he is styled Brenhin Cymru oll, King of
all Wales. Northwales he held as Regent until his Cosen Edwal Voel the eldest
son of Anarawd came of Age to govern; In the year of our Lord 920 Howel Dha
went to Rome to have his Laws confirmed by the Pope; Lambert Archbishop of
Menevia, Mordaf Bishop of Bangor, Blegowryd Archdeacon of Landaffe, and 13 of
the best learned of his Clergy with a like number of the Nobility accompanied
him thither; the Pope confirmed his Laws, after they had been read before him,
and nothing found dissonant to Gods word therein. After his return from Rome,
as a faithful Steward he resigned the Kingdom of Gwyneth to his Cosen Edwal
Voel being then of age, together with the Sovereignty of all Wales.

About the year 924 we have mention of Ludwall Rex omnium Wallensium, who in
his submission to Athelstan is corruptly called Ludwal for Iudwal, which makes
me to conclude that in the year 924 Idwal had began his Reign. Idwal Voel and
Elisseu his brother being both slain by the English A. D. 940 Howel took upon
him again the rule of Wales.

Blegabridus Languaridus Britan: collegit Leges Howeli Doctor utriusque Juris,
Archidiaconus Landavensis. so Io. Baleus.

The Laws of Howel Dha translated into Latin and digested by Blangoridus begin
with the following Prologue.

D EI Providentia Howel Da filius Cadell Rex totius Cambriae videns suos
Wallenses insolenter legibus abuti, accivit de quolibet Cemut totius Regni sui
sex Laicos viros authoritate and scientia pollentes and omnes Ecclesiasticos
dignitate baculosos, ut Archiepiscopus vel Episcopus vel Abbas vel Prior de
Regno suo ad locum qui dicitur Ty gwyn super Taff in De^ed, quam Domum voluit
aedificari virgis albis in hospitium sibi ad venandum, quando ad parts
Demetiae veniret, and ideo vocabatur Ty gwyn. Rex autem and congregati morati
sunt ibidem per totam Quadragesimam orantes Altissimum per jejunium perfectum,
petendo gratiam ad bona facienda secundum Regis propositum. Et de congregatis
elegit Rex XII Laicos doctissimos and unum Clericum doctissimum qui vocabatur
Blangoridus ad instruendum sibi Leges and Usus, ut propinquius possent ad
veritatem and justitiam intendi. Et in Tres parts scribi praecepit, quarum
prima Lex Curiae suae cotidianae. 2da Lex Patriae. 3ia Usus utriusque. Tres
autem Libros legis praecepit fieri consimiles, unum ad Curiam suam cotidianam
sequend: semper, and alium ad Curiam de Dinevwr, and tertium ad Curiam de
Aberfraw, ut quaelibet de tribus partibus Cambri^ sc. Gwynet and Powis and
Deheubarth haberet in se auctoritatem legum ad opus paratam. Quorum Consilio
and diligenti examinatione leges antiquas partim appropriavit, partim
emendavit, partim ex toto delevit, alias de novo condidit. Provulgatis itaque
legibus quas observari decreverat auctoritatem suam eis impertivit firmiterque
and illibate eas teneri imperavit. Ipse vero and omnes qui cum eo erant
maledictionem Domini and suam and totius Walliae imprecati sunt ei qui eas in
Wallia deinceps non observando temeraret.

Of Caradoc Bhraichfras.
There were two famous men of this name, the first lived long before the other;
the British Triades say, he was King of Cornwall in King Arthurs time, He was
the son of Llyr Marini of the Tribe of Cunedda Wledig; Our books agree that
he was Lord of Ferlix, to wit, the Country between Wy and Seaverne: Tegayrvron
Daughter and Heir to King Pelinor was his Wife. His Arms are S. a Cheveron
between three spears heads A. Goared pointed upwards G. The other Caradoc
Bhraichfras was Earl of Hereford and son of Coeliog Myngrudd of the North of
Brytaine. He had issue a son called Lluddocca whose daughter Rhieingar was
mother to Tuder Trevor, the Tribe of the Marches: the said Tuder married Gladys
daughter to Howel Dha King of Wales who Reigned A. D. 940, which computation of
time inclines me to believe he was the same Caradoc that was styled King of
Northwales and slain A. D. 788. by the Saxons in revenge of K. Offa's death,
who had bin slain at Ruthlan two years before; this was he to whom Rodri
Molwynoc or rather Conan his son gave the Lands between Chester and Conwey to
inhabit. His Arms, Vert a Lion rampant parted per fesse Or and A. within a
bordure of the 3d. Who say this Caradoc was the son of Gwyn ap Collwyn ap
Ednowen, and father to Trahayrn King of Wales are much deceived.

Families descended from Caradoc Uraich^ras Pr. of Ferlix.

The Gameses of Brecknocke shire, the Vaughans of Tre'r twr in the same County,
Sir Roger Vaughan of Tre'r twr Knight was slain at the Battle of Again Court, He
was the son of Roger Hen of Bradwarden ap Walter Sais (husband to Florence
Daughter and Heir to Sir Edward Bradwarden Knight) ap Roger Vaughan ap Roger Vawr
of Llechryd ap Eneon.
Ievan ap Howel ap Seyssyllt Lord of Cantre Selyf ap Llewelyn ap Moreiddig
Warwyn Ld of Cantre Selyf (whose Coat is S. a Cheveron between three Childrens
heads couped at the sho^lders A. their Peruques Or, enwrapped about the neck
with as many snakes proper) ap Dryw a younger son of Maenyrch Ld of Brecknocke
lineally descended from the forementioned Caradoc. This Sir Roger had by his
Wife Gladys daughter of Sir David Gam Knight three sons, viz. 1. Watkin of
Bradwardin the eldest, father of Sir Thomas, father of Sir Richard of
Bradwardin, father of Walter, father of Thomas Vaughan of Penbre, from which
Family that worthy Gentleman Sir George Vaughan (lately deceased) Knight, and
Colonel for K. Charles the 1. was descended. The Second was Thomas Vaughan of
Hergest, who had two sons Watkin Vaughan of Hergest the eldest, father of
James, father of Charles Vaughan of Hergest. Sir William Vaughan Knight, a valiant
and an expert Commander under K. Charles the 1. was a branch of this family. He
was Knighted for his eminent service, and entrusted with the government of
several of His Majesty's Garrisons in the County of Salop. He was very active
and successful. In the year 1645 with about 600 Horse and Foot he raised the
siege of High Arcoll, beating off an Army of 3000 men. At the fatal battle of
Naseby he had the honor to be highly isntrumental in preserving his Majesty's
person, His Majesty in his retreat marching in the head of his Regiment. He
died in his attempt to restore his Majesty K. Chapter 2. 1649 at the siege of
Dublin, where he was unfortunatly sl^in to the great hinderance of the Kings
Cause. The 2d Roger Vaughan of Cleirwy, father of Roger Ddu, who had two sons
1. Roger Vaughan father of another Roger Vaughan of Cleirwy. 2. Thomas Vaughan
ap Roger Ddu father of Will. Vaughan of Court Newydd. The 3d son of the
foresaid Sir Roger was Sir Roger Vaughan of Tre'r twr Knight, who had two sons
Sir Thom. Vaughan of Tre'r twr Knight, and Roger Vaughan of Porthaml. Sir Thomas
had a son called Henry Vaughan of Tre'r twr the Father of Christopher Vaughan,
Watkin, William, James, Thomas Vaughan etc. Roger Vaughan of Porthaml had a son
called Watkin Vaughan, the father of Sir Will. Vaughan of Talgarth and Roger
Vaughan, which Roger had sons Watkin and John Vaughan. Sir Will. Vaughan of
Talgarth had a son called Sir Roger Vaughan Knight.

Also Sir William Lewis of Langors in Brecknock shire Baronet. Trevor Williams
of Langibi in Monmouthshire Baronet.

Lewis Wogan of Bol^ton in the County of Pembroke Esquire. the only son of
Abraham Wogan Esquire. (by his Wife Jane Daughter of Sir Lewis Mansell of Margan^
Baronet) the son of Maurice Wogan Esquire. the son of Sir John Wogan Knight.

John Wogan of Wiston Esquire. the son of Sir William Wogan Knight by Sibil
daughter of Sir Hugh Owen of Orielton Knight, the son of John, the son of
Richard Wogan Esquire. the son of Sir John Wogan Knight, the son of Sir John
Wogan Knight, the son of John Wogan Her Esquire. the son of Sir Henry Wogan
Knight by Margaret Daughter of Sir William Thomas of Raglan Knight (the Father
of Sir William Herbert the first Earl of Pembrok of the name) the son of Sir
John Wogan Knight, the son of Sir Matthew, the son of Sir Walter Knight,
the son of Sir Matthew Knight, the son of Sir Matthew Wogan Knight, the
son of Gwgan, (from whom they took their Surname) by his wife Cecily the
daughter and coheir of Sir Philip Gwys of Wiston in the County of Pembrok Knight;
which Gwgan was the eldest son of Blethyn, the eldest son of Maenyrch Lord of
Brecknocke by his wife Elen daughter to Tewdwr Mawr, and sister to Rees ap
Tewdwr Prince of Deheubarth or South Wales. Bernard Newmarch having discomfited
and slain in the field Blethyn ap Maenyrch seized on the Lordship of Brecon,
and forced his son and Heir Gwgan to be content with what share of it he was
pleased by way of composition to appoint him. He gave him the Lordships and
Mannours of Llanvihangel Talyllyn, part of Llanllyeni, and part of Cantref
Selyf with lodgings in the Castle of Brecknocke, where in regard he was the
rightful Lord of the Country there was such a strict eye kept over him, that
he was not permitted at any time to go abroad without two or more Norman
Knights in his company. W. Llyn says, the Arms of the Wogans are a field
Paliwise of 6. Or and B. on a Fesse G. 3 Cinque foiles A.

John Ieffreys of Tre'r Castle in the County of Brecon Esquire. and Merchant of
London, the son of Ieffrey, the son of Edward, the son of Ieffrey, the
son of Edward of Llywel, the son of Ieffrey ap Gwilim ap Ienkin of Slough
ap Madoc ap Rees ap Richard vaw^ ap David ap Rees of Aberllyf^i Esquire. ap Howel
ap Trahayrn Lord of Llangors ap Gwgan ap Blethyn ap Maenyrch etc.

There are many other worthy Families, in Southwales especially, descended from
this Caradoc, whose names all my enquiry and industry could not procure.

Of Sir David Gam Knight.
Sir David Gam was the son of Llewelyn ap Howel Vaughan of Brecknocke by Maud
the daughter of Ievan ap Rees ap Ivor of Eluel, the said Howel Vaughan was the
son of Howel ap Eneon Sais ap Rees ap Howel etc. he was surnamed Gam, because
he had but one ey; The Gameses derive their name and lineage from him; He was a
worthy Knight descended from the said Caradoc, whose Coat he gives: for his
Policy and Valor we may style him our British Hannibal. He was a great
stickler for the Duke of Lancaster, who was afterward King Henry the 4th, upon
which account it was, that Owen ap Griffith Vaughan (commonly called Owen
Glendor) was his mortal enemy: The said Owen having had his education at the
Innes of Court, got to be preferred to the service of King Richard the 2d,
whose Scutifer, as Walsingham says, he was; Owen being assured, that his King
and Master Richard was deposed and murdered, and withal provoked by several
affronts and wrongs done him by the Lord Gray of Ruthin his neighbor, whom
King Henry greatly countenanced against him, he took Arms; And looking upon
Henry as an Charters of O. Glend.
Usurper he caused himself to be proclaimed Prince of Wales; And though
himself were descended Paternally but from a younger Brother of the House of
Powis, yet (as ambition is ingenious) he finds out a way to lay claim to the
Principality, as descended (by a daughter) from Llewelyn ap Griffith the last
Prince of the British Race, He invaded the Lands, burnt and destroyed Hen:
Salesbury.
the Houses and Estates of all those that favored and adhered to King Henry.

Owen called a Parliament to meet at Machynlleth in Montgomery shire, whither
the Nobility and Gentry of Wales came, in obedience to his Summons, and among
them the said David Gam, but with an intention to murder Owen; the plot being
discovered, and he taken before he could put it in execution, was like to have
suffered had not intercession in his behalf been made by Owen's best friends,
and the greatest Upholders of his Cause, whom he could not either handsomely or
safely deny; Owen being thus prevailed upon pardoned him and let him go free,
only requiring of him, that he would for the future be more loyal and loving
to him, which he promised, but did not perform, for as soon as he came home to
his own Country, where he was a man of great interest, he did exceedingly annoy
and molest Owen's friends. When he lay in durance at Machynlleth for his
attempt against Owen's life, there was this Englyn made of him, viz.

Davydd Gam dryglam dreigl, ddi ymwan frwydr,
Fradwr Rissiart Bhrenin
Llwyr yrhoes Diawl (hawl hwyl fliu
Y fath ystad) i fys in the din.
Not long after Owen entered the Marches of Wales destroying all before him, he
burned then the house of Davyd Gam, and, as the report goes, called to him one
of David's Tenants, to whom he spoke thus mer^ily in verse,

O gweli di wr coch Came
In ymofyn y Girnigwen
Dywed ei bod hi tan y lan
A nod y glo ar ei phenn.
But David himself kept out of Owen's reach, living most commonly at Court,
till Owen's time was expired.

When King Henry the 5th went with an Army into France against the French,
David Gam brought in to his service a goodly company of stout soldiers and
Gentlemen, which upon all occasions showed their resolution and courage. News
being brought to the King that the French Army was advancing toward him and
very numerous, he sent Captain Gam to observe their motions and to bring him an
account of their number; He upon a diligent view perceiving them twice to
exceed the number of the English was not a whit daunted, but when the King
asked him how it was, what their number might be, made him this answer, An't
please you, my Liege, They are enough to be killed, enough to run away, and
enough to be taken Prisoners: The King was well pleased and much encouraged
with this resolute saying of his; Nor did his tongue discover more courage then
his hands, for in the heat of the Battle the Kings person being in danger he
charged the enemy with such eagerness that he forced them* to give ground, so
securing the King, though with the loss of much blood, and also of his own
life, for in that service Himself, Roger Vaughan his son in Law, and Walter
Lloyd of Brecknocke his Kinsman received their mortal wounds; when the King
was told they were past all hopes of recovery, he came unto them, and in
recompense of their good service Knighted them all Three in the field, where
they soon after dyed; Thus ended the Life but not the Fame of valiant Sir David
Gam.

His Coat is S. a Cheveron between three Iavelins heads A. Tho. Jones of
Cardigansh. Antiquar.
pointed upwards G.

An Elegy upon the death of Gladys the Noble Daughter of Sir David Gam,
Elegantly writ by Lewis Glyn-cothi.
Y seren o Evenni
At Duw ar Saint i troes hi
Gwladus lwyddianus ddinam
Oedd o gorff sir Davydd Gam
Bwriodd Duw dan bridd do ir
Braych i Wend a Brychandir
Nid llai mynn ^uw yngwlad went
Na theirmil in i therment
Galw ar Jesu tra fie fyw
Ag ar y grog a oryw
Arglwyddes o santes oedd
Or hen arglwyddi ir hanoedd
I mae meibion hirion hi
I roi gwleddau in arglwyddi
Marfia gynt gymraes gall
Ar ddwywaith a roe ddyall
Oi hill i by ynhal y bed
Naw ai henwau in frenhinedd
Gwladus a hi in gweled saint
Oedd ail honn i ddal henaint
O honn i cawn frenhinwaed
Ag Ieirll Gwent aurlliwio gwaed
Gwladus du ar Gymru gynt
Iarlles oedd er lles iddynt
Ar ol i rhoi ar elawr
Ir aeth leng or iaith i lawr
A heddyw mae (n) rhoddi medd
O fron honno frenhinedd
Ail Gwladus haul goleydent
Cymru accw ymro Gwent
Die huno a chyffroi
A wuaeth in oes in iaith ni
Ysgrin ar gyssegr o Went
Sy du arglwyddes dwy went
Pan teg peintiad y gadair
Pinaglys fell penn eglwys Vair
Maen beril naw mil in wyn
Mormor a mwy o ermin
Bed ir holl fonedd yw fo
Oll a growndwal Loeger ynto
Man (n) gorwedd mewn y gweryd
Draw in y bed drayan y bid
In seren i benn y bed
I rhoed i gadw anrhydedd
Maes glass fell cledd penn drasus
Ar llew lir ar lliw o lus
O gylch y twr in glych teg
Duw oedd of ar deyddeg
Engylion gwnion yw gylch
A Drig bob dri yw ogylch
Organau oll hyd frig nef
Ag arianllais gwyr unllef
Mil o dyrs amliw o dan
Mil ereill aml o arian
Mwy na mil o feydwyaid
Dan gwyr bob daunaw a gaid
In nessa man deunawssaint
In bwrw naw sens garbron saint
Main beril cylch sir William
Oedd fedd gwynn merch Davyd Gam
Dau a wnaeth ir Deau nawdd
Duw Jesu ai dewisawdd
Ag oi rhyw in benaig y rhawg
I dewisswn dywyssawg
ANOTHER On the Death of Morgan son of the said Sir David.
Y penn aeth ymhob bonedd
Sy (n) ^lan Faes Winllan ai fedd
Morgan garw difan Davydd
Gam ywr sant i Gymru sydd
Llann vaes oll ywr nef i wr
Lle mae eilwaith llew milwr
Lle rhoed tarian a maneg
Llan Dduw dan y llen ddu degrees
Gwlad Frychan am Forgan fydd
Ail i gawod will gewydd
Deigain niau dafnau dwr
Ar ryddiau ywr aweddwr
Deugain mlynedd i heddyw
Ir will beirdd arol i byw
Dwyfil achos mab Davydd
A dwy fwy in y Deau fydd
Edn Aberhodni obaith
Silin oedd i selio in iaith
In y Peutun un patent
Deutu wysg hyd at dwy Went
Braych a fie wrth groesdu (r) grog
Bar a chyngor Brycheiniog
Tu hugadarn teg ydoedd
Pwys i du ar un post oedd
Pwys gwlad Frychan in rhannu
Ar riw bost o wr i bu
Y tir weithian fa trethydd
Ar swrn o bilere sydd
Mae irgoed o frig Morgan
Mewn Yrhos in mynny i rhann
Aeth llawer o gydgeraint
O Einion Sais hen in saint
Bro wysg aeth in brysgoed
And gwyr a aned o goed
O un cyff jawn yw caffael
Deri a hwynt in dra hael
Of oedd wr of oedd eryr
Forgan aeth i frig in wyr
Cynhaval drwyr ardalaoedd
I Lowarch hen falarch oedd
I Lowarch i by lewod
A gwae wyr byw Lloeger oi bod
I Forgant hyd nant y Nordd
Ar Loeger maer ail gwelygordd
Plant Brychan a gydrannodd
Plant sydd i Forgant un fodd
Plant efrog oediog adail
O dref Iorc hefyd ywr ail
Morgan oedd darian i dir
A braych hendad Brychandir
Morgan oedd bumrhann ir bid
A llyfr i bob lle hefyd
Llewod Morgant blant un blaid
Garbron gwyr ywr Barwniaid
A llew henddoeth gwyr llanndduw
Ywr Barwn does garbron Duw.
Lewis Glynn Cothi ai cant.
Of Tuder Trevor, the Tribe of the Marches. His Arms, Per Bend sinister Ermine
and Ermines a Lion rampant Or.
Candida part una sursum sed nigra deorsum Ric. Powell.

Erminiis folgens Theodori parma Trevori,
Fert rapidum fulvumque sinistro vecte Leonem,
Mostonis haec arma, simul sunt nota Trevoris,
Innumerisque aliis, quos part^rit utraque Maelor,
Ille sub Howelo vixit cognomine Iusto,
Cujus nata illi Gladusia nobilis Uxor.
Tuder Trevor son in Law to Prince Howel Dda descended from Maxen Wledic or
Maximus (the son of Llewelyn Senator of Rome, and Brother to Coel Godebog
King of Britain) who descended lineally from King Belinus Magnus and was in
the right of his Wife King of Britain, and Emperor of Rome. Vortiger King of
Britain descended lineally from Maximus, was also Ancestour to Tuder Trevor,
which Tuder in the right of his Mother was Earl or Consul of Hereford and by
his Father Lord of both Maelors, Oswestree, y Drewen or Whitington, etc. His
posterity enjoyes a great part of the said Lordships to this day, though they
have sold away much of them. He had three sons 1. Lluddocca, who had given him
the Lordships of Oswestree and Whitington and a great part of the Maelors, 2
Dinghad (whose Coat is Ermin a Lion rampant S.) He had for his portion the
remaining part of the Maelors, which his posterity possess to this day by the
several names of Broughton, Ellis, Sonlley, Lewis, Trafford, Jones, Eyton,
Roberts, Ieffreys, etc. 3. Grono, who had the Earledom of Hereford, which by
his Daughter and Heir came to her son Adlystan Glodrydd.

Rees Sais (so called because he had had his education in England) great
Granchild to Luddocca, being son to Ednyvet ap Llowarch Gam ap Luddocca,
divided his Estate between his three sons, To Tuder the eldest he gave part
of the Lordship of Oswestree, the entire Lordship of Whittington and part of
the Maelors, to the 2d Elidur (whose Coat is Ermin a Lion rampant B* armed and
langued G.) he gave Eyton, which his posterity now enjoy by the name of Eyton;
Sutton, which his posterity the Suttons hold to this day; and Rwyton, which his
posterity the fDeccas held until of late years, that it was sold to Justice
Iefreys. To the 3d Iddon (whose Arms are A. a Cheveron between 3 boares heads
couped G. langued B. and tusked Or) he gave Dudleston and other parts of the
Lordship of Oswestree, which are yet possessed partly by his Heirs Male and
partly by his Heirs general. Tuder ap Rees Sais and all his posterity give
Tuder Trevors Coat; his eldest son Blethyn had the largest portion of his
estate; his 2d, Grono (whose Coat is V. two Boares passant in pale Bar Or) had
the Lordship of Whittington and Estwicke. The Lordship of Whittington came with
his sons daughter, who married Sir Warren Theneys to the Lords Fitzwarren,
from them by marriage to the Hangfords, and in like manner from them to
Bourchier Lord Fitzwarren, after and not long since it was purchased by one Mr
Albany whose daughter and heir is the now wife of Thomas Lloyd Esquire. Lord of
Whittington. Estwicke came by heirs general to Hanmer of the Fenns and Eyton
of Pentremadoc. His 3d Cyhelyn, from whom is descended Trevor of Trevor etc.
Blethyn ap Tuder ap Rees Sais left his estate to his son Owen, who by his
wife Eve daughter of Madoc ap Gwenwynwyn Lord of Powis Wenwynwyn had 1.
Ierwerth Hen. 2. Thomas the Ancestour of the Lloyds of Bryn and Horsmas in
Maelor. Ierw^rth Hen enjoyed the greatest part of his Fathers possessions, and
left it to his son Ierwerth Vaughan, who was married to Catharine daughter to
Griffith ap Llewelyn ap Iorwerth Drwyndwn Prince of Northwales, and he left his
estate to his son Iorwerth Voel, who had many children, as 1. Ednyvet Gam, who
had the greatest part of his possessions; 2. Madoc Lloyd, who had fair
possessions in Chirkland and Brueden heath, descended by Heirs general to Sr
John Owen of Cleneney Knight and others. 3d Griffith, who had his part in Maelor
Saesneg, which by Heirs general is divided among several Families of good
note. 4. Morgan Ancestor to the families of the Youngs of Brynyorkin and the
Croxtons in the Maelors, Ednyvet Gam had several sons, as David, Llewelyn,
Iorwerth Ddu, Meredyth, and other sons, who had their portions of his
Inheritance with the forenamed Brothers, and are Ancestors to several families
yet in being. David had his part in Chirkeland and in the Lordship of
Oswestree. Llewelyn had his part in the Maelors, which is at this day in the
possession of the Heir male of his line. Thomas Lloyd of Halghton Esquire.;
Ierwerth Ddu had a share of his Fathers estate, and is the Ancestor of Sir
Roger Moston of Moston Knight and Baronet, Colonel and Governor of Flint Castle
for K. Charles the I. Of John Moston Esquire. and Colonel Roger Moston his Uncles,
who were both faithful to the same good Cause, and also of Edwards of Chirke
Esquire. etc. Meredyth is the Ancestor of Pugh of Lloynt^dmon. David ap Ednyvet Gam
had his part in Chirke land and in the Lordship of Oswestree, which he left to
his son Edward, who dying 1440 left his estate among his sons, John Trevor
Hen. Richard Trevor, the Ancestor of the Trevors of Oswestrce. Ottowell, who
had only a daughter and heir. John Trevor Hen married Anne Daughter and Heir
of Sir Pierce Camber, by whom he had Robert Trevor of Plas teg whose Heirs male
have failed long since. Edward Trevor of Brynkynallt. Roger Trevor, who had a
fair estate at Pentre Cynwric. Richard Trevor of Trevalyn the Ancestor of Sir
Richard Trevor of Trevalyn. Sir John Trevor of Plas teg. Sir Thomas Trevor of
Enfield, late one of the Barons of the Exchequer, and Sir Sackvil Trevor, all
Four Brothers and Knights. Edward Trevor had sons, John Trevor, who had only
Daughters, John Trevor Goch of Wiggington, who had been a Captain at the siege
of Boloigne and married Elizabeth daughter of John Eyton of Ruabon Esquire. and
only child of Elizabeth daughter of Sir Roger Kynaston of Hordley; He had
Bryncynallt and all his Fathers inheritance, which he left to his son Edward
Trevor, a man of great esteem and power in his Country, who had two sons,
John Trevor Esquire. and Richard Trevor Dr of Law and Judge of the Admiralty, whose
posterity remains to this day. John Trevor had one only son Sir Edward Trevor
Knight one of his late Majesty's Privy Council in Ireland; which Sir Edward
had by his first Wife, John Trevor of Brynkynallt Esquire., Arthur Trevor, who has
been a Colonel for his late Majesty, and is now one of the Judges of
Southwales; by his second Wife he had Marcus Trevor, who has also been
Colonel upon the same good account, and is lately made Baron of Ros-Trevor,
Viscount of Dungannon in Ireland, and one of his Majesty K. Charles the 2d's
Privy Council in that Kingdom.

Sir Edward Trevor's Riddle.
Here lies by name the Eve.
Worlds Mother, by nature my Aunt, sister to my Mother. My Grandmother, mother
to my mother. My Great-Grand-mother, mother to my Grandmother. My Grandfathers
daughter and his mother; Which all may be, without the breach of Consanguinity.



Out of the Collections of Mr Francis Kynaston a Gentleman well skilled in the
Antiquities of Wales.

The Pedigree of Sir Arthur Moston Knight and Baronet.
Sir Roger Moston the son of Sir Thomas Moston Knight, the son of Sir Roger Knight,
the son of Sir Thomas Knight, the son of William Moston, the son of Thomas Moston
Esquire., who in the year 1539 took first the surname of Moston (the name of his
house) at the appointment of Rowland Lee Bishop of Goventry and Lichfield and
Lord President of the Marches of Wales, being then at Flint keeping Assizes:
Before he was commonly called Thomas ap Richard ap Howel ap Ievan Vaughan,
which Ievan Vaughan was the son of Ievan ap Adda ap Iorwerth Ddu ap Ednyvet Gam
and so to Tuder Trevor, as in the foregoing Pedigree.

The Pedigree of Cynwric Eyton of Eyton Esquire.
Cynwric the eldest son of Sir Gerard Eyton Knight, (the Father and Son both of
them adhered firmly to his late Majesty King Charles the I. in his troubles)
the son of Cynwric, the son of James, the son of Hugh, son of Owen Eyton,
son of William, son of John, Steward of Bromfield An. 18. Hen. 6., son of
James, son of Madoc, son of Ievan, son of Madoc ap Llewelyn ap Griffith ap
Cadwgan ap Milir Eyton of Eyton, son of Elidir ap Rees Sais forementioned.

Sir Robert Eyton of Dudleston Knight, was the son of James Eyton, son of
William, the son of James, the son of John Eyton younger Brother to Owen
Eyton forementioned.

There is another Family of the Eytons descended from Tingad the second son
of Tuder Trevor thus, Llewelyn ap Ednyvet ap Griffith ap Iorwerth ap Eneon Goch
ap Ievaf ap Llowarch ap Ievaf ap Niniau ap Cynwric ap Rhiwallon ap Tingad. The
said Llewelyn had two sons, of which more special notice is taken, 1. David
the eldest, to whom he gave his lands in Eyton, who was therefore called David
of Eyton, and 2. Morgan, to whom he gave his Lands in Sonlley, and was
therefore called Morgan of Sonlley, by which two names their posterity were
called ever after. Cynwric ap Rhiwallons Coat is, Ermin a Lion rampant S.
armed G.

The Families of the Lloyds of Berthlwyd in Montgomeryshire, of Isclawdd, of
Talwrn etc. are come also from this Tribe.

Ievaf and Iago the Sons of Edwal Voel.
AFter the death of Howel Dha, his Sons divided South Wales and Powys betwixt
them: And Jevaf and Jago the second and third son of Edwal Voel ruled
North Wales, their elder brother Meyric being not a man fit to rule, They
coming from the elder house would feign have had the chief Rule of all Wales,
but were denied it by the sons of Howel Dha: Thereupon Jago (or James and
Jevaf entered South Wales with a great power, Owen the son of Howel and his
brethren came against them and fought with them at the hills of Carno, where
Jago and Jevaf had the victory: And the year following Jago and Jevaf entered
twice into South Wales, spoiled Dyvet, and sieve Dwnwalhon the Lord thereof. And
within a while after died Roderike one of the sons of Howel Dha. 952.
In the year 952. the sons of Howel gathered their strength together against
Jevaf and Jago, and entering their land as far as the river Conwy, they fought
a cruel battle at a place called Gwrgustu, or Lhanrwst, as some think, where a
great number were slain on either side, as Anarawd the son of Gwyriad (or
Uriet the son of Roderike the Great, and Edwyn the son of Howel Dha: in
this battle the sons of Howel were overthrown by Jevaf and Jago, who pursued
them to Caerdigan, and destroyed their Country with fire and sword. About this
time Yarthyr the son of Mervyn was drowned: and the year following Congelach
King of Ireland was slain. But to return to Edred King of England. As soon as
he was returned to his own Land, Aulaf with a great Army landed in
Northumberland, and was received of the people with much gladness; but anon
after like fickle and unconstant men, they banished him the land, and took to
their King one Hircius the son of Haroald, whom likewise after three years
they expelled, and willingly submitted themselves to Edred, who after he had
ruled* the whole Land eight years died, and was buried at Winchester. After him
reigned Edwyn son of Edmund, in whose time nothing chanced worthy the remark,
but that he married another man's Wife, her Husband being yet alive. This man
after he had Governed the Realm four years died, leaving his Kingdom to his
Brother Edgar, who was Crowned King of England in his stead. In the year 958.
was a wonderful hot summer, 958.
when Gwgan the son of Gwyriad the son of Roderike died After that Heat,
there followed a great plague Idwal ap Rodri ap Howel Dda was slain, and also
the sons of Gwyn.
in March following. In those days Jago and Jevaf by force and strength ruled
all Wales as they thought good: and yet for all their power, Abloic King of
Ireland landed in Mon, and having burnt Holyhead spoiled the Country of Lhyn.
In the year 961. the sons of Edwyn the son of Colhoyn 961.
were slain, after they had destroyed all the country to Towyn Unwonus
Presbyter Britannus accersitur ab Abbate S: Albani ad vertendos Codices e
Britannico sermon in Latinum. Bal. Io. Cast. Hol. page 232.
About this time Meyric the son of Cadvan, Rytherch Bishop of S. David's, and
Cadwalhon ap Owen departed out of this transitory World. Not long after, the
country of Northwales was sore distressed and spoiled by the Army of Edgar King
of England.

* The cause of this War was the non payment of the Tribute that the King of
Aberffraw, by the Laws of Howel Dha was to pay to the King of London. In the
end there was a peace concluded: for King Edgar understanding what hurt the
Countries of England and Wales received daily, by reason of the great multitude
of Wolves that then abounded (especially in Wales) which destroyed much sheep
and otherwise did great harm, released the Tribute in money appointed by the
said Laws of Howel Dha, and 300, so Polychron. wolves destroyed by the Prince
of Wales.
bound the Prince of Northwales to pay him yearly certain Wolves for his
Tribute, and so to be released of that other Tribute in money, which the said
Prince performed, until he had left never a Wolf either in Wales or England.

In the year 966 Roderike the son of Edwal Voel was 966.
slain by the Irishmen, by whom Aberfraw was destroyed. The next year there
^ell a great debate betwixt the two sons of Edwal, Jago and Jevaf, which had
ruled jointly from the death of Howel Dha to that time; and shortly after Jago
having taken his brother Jevas by force, very cruelly kept him in Prison a long
time. About this time, Eneon the son of Owen Prince of Southwales wan and
seized to himself the land of Gwyr. And in the year 969 Mactus 969
the son of Haroald with an Army of Danes entered the I Will of Anglesey, and
spoiled Penmon. These Danes, were suffered by Edgar to inhabit quietly
throughout all England, till they were grown as strong as the English, then
they fell to such riotousnes and drinking, that much mischief ensued thereof:
whereupon Edgar made a law, that every man should drink by measure, and caused
a certain mark to be set in every Pot A Law against immoderate drinking.
how deep they should drink, and so by these means he somewhat stayed that
immoderate ingurgitation. Not long after that, Godfryd the son of Haroald did
subdue to himself the whole I Will of Anglesey, which he enjoyed not long. King
Edgar likewise in the year 972 did send a great Navy 972.
to Caerlheon upon Use, which shortly turned back, without doing any notable
act. The next year following, Howel Ran: Cest. Fabian.
the son of Jevaf raised a great power against his Uncle Jago for the
deliverance of his Father out of Prison, and overcoming his Uncle in Fight he
chased him out of the Land, and he took his eldest Uncle Meyric the son of
Edwal, and put out both his eyes, and kept him in Prison; where he died shortly
after, leaving behind him two sons, Edwal and Jonaval, from which Edwal came
afterward the most worthy Princes of Wales. Howel notwithstanding he had set
his Father at Liberty, yet took upon himself the sole rule of the Land for his
life time, his Father preferring a private Life before a Kingdom suffered him
to Reign. He had three Brethren, all men of great estimation, Meyric, Jeva^,
and Cadwalhon, whose Lives do follow.

The Sons of Ievaf, Howel, Cyswalhon, and Owen, who slew Cystennin ap Iago.
The Sons of Iago, Gabriel, Cystennin.

Iago ap Idwal having fled to K. Edgar prevailed so far with him, that He
brought an Army into Northwales to restore him to his right: He came as far
as Bangor, where he was honorably received by Howell, who at his request was
contented his Uncle Iago should have a share in the Government, as he had in
his father Ievafs time. Edgar then founded a new Church at Bangor on the South
side of the Cathedral, which he dedicated to the blessed Virgin Mary: He
confirmed the ancient liberties of that Sea, and bestowed Lands and gifts upon
it; Then with Howel and Iago in his company, he marched toward Chester, where
met him by appointment six Kings more, viz. Keneth King of the Scots, Malcolme
King of Cumberland, Macon King of Man, and Dyfnwal, Si^rethus, and Ithel three
British Kings; These eight Kings having don him homage entered with him into his
Barge, and rowed him, four of each side, from his Palace to the Church or the
Monastery of S. John the Baptist, and after Divine Service rowed him back
again to his Palace in great State. Out of an old book of Records Bishop Baily
showed me.

Nola Eltuti in veneratione apud Wallos, Cloch Elltut. Hanc Edgarus circa
collum equi suspendi fecit in expeditione contra terram Glamorg: ac per
visionem nocturnam reprehenditur, and restitui Ecclesiae statim curavit. post
dies novem Edgarus moritur. Polychron.

Morgan Hen called in his younger years Morgan Mawr dyed about this time being
a hundred years old, having lived fifty years after the death of his Wife Elen
Daughter of Roderic the Great, by whom he had one son called Owen. Morgan was
a Valiant and a victorious Prince well beloved of his Subjects. Owen the son
of Prince Howel Dda some years before the death of Morgan laid claim to
Ystradwy and Ewyas (called the two sleeves of Gwent Vwchcoed) being the right
of Morgan, and seized upon them to his own use, but the matter through the
mediation of the Clergy and Nobility being by both parties referred to the
decision of Edgar King of England, it was adjudged by the said King, that the
said Lands did of right belong to the said Morgan, and to the Diocese of
Landaffe, and that Owen ap Howel Dda had wrongfully possessed himself of the
said Lands. The Charter of the said Award was made before the Arch bishops,
Bishops, Abbots, Earls and Barons of England and Wales, and is kept at
Landaffe, as I have been informed by an old MS. called Y Cwtt^ cyvarwydd o
Vorgannwg. In the old book of Landaffe there is also somewhat to the same
purpose, but the mistake in both is that they make Howell Dda to be the
intr^der into the said lands, who had been dead twenty years before King Edgar
began his Reign.

The sons of Owen ap Howel Dha. 1. Meredith Prince of Powis. 2. Eneon Prince
of Dyvet. 3. Idwal. 4. Llowarch, who had his eyes put out A. D. 982. 5.
Cadwallon, Also 6 Grono, (who, as is conceived, begot Edwyn Lord of Yal upon
Elfleda Duchess of Mercia) is said to be his son.

Hovvel the Son of Ievaf ap Edwal Voel.
AFter that Howel the son of Jevaf had expelled his Uncle out of the Land, he
took the sole Rule of it. And at that time Dwnwalhon Prince of Stradclwyd took
his journey to Rome. Then died Edwalhon the son of Owen. Likewise Edgar King
of England 974.
passed out of this transitory life after that he had built many Monasteries.
After him Edward his son was King, who when he had Reigned four years was
traitorously slain through the malice of his stepmother, that her son Edred
or Edelred might enjoy the Kingdom; who after his brothers death was Crowned
King of the land. The year 976 976.
Eneon the son of Owen King of Southwales destroyed the land of Gwyr the
second time. The year ensuing Howel the son of Jevaf with a great Army both
of Welsh and English made war against such as assisted and maintained the
cause of his Uncle Jago, and spoiled the Countries of Lhyn and Kelynno^ Vawr:
shortly after Jago was taken by Howels men, and suffered to enjoy his Part of
the land peaceably. About the year 979 Edwal Vachan the son of Edwal Voel
was 979.
slain by his nephew Howel. At this time Custenyn Dhu, that is, Constantine
the Black, son to Jago (who then was prisoner) hired Godfryd the son of
Haroald with his Danes, against his Cosen; They both destroyed Anglesey and
Lhyn* Howel hereupon gathering his Army together, and setting upon them at a
place called Gwayth Hirbarth overthrew them, there Constantine was slain.
About this time, the Danes landed with VII ships at South-hampton, and spoiled
the Town.

* They overcame also and spoiled the whole Country of Devon and Cornwall,
burned the Town of Bodman, and the Cathedral Sim. Dunel. Hol. page 238. Io.
Vowel in Catal. episc. Exon.
Church of S. Petrokes, with the Bishops house. Whereupon the Bishops Sea was
removed from thence to S. Germans, where the same continued, until the
removing and uniting thereof unto Crediton.

About this time died S. Dunstan, who prophefied of much mischief and great
destruction of the Land to ensue by the Danes. The year 981 Godfryd the son
of Haroald gathered 981.
a great Army, and landed in Westwales, where spoiling all the land of Dyvet,
with the Church of S. David's, he fought the battle of Lhanwanoc. Likewise in
the year next ensuing, Duke Alfred with a great power of Englishmen spoiled
and destroyed Brecknock, and a great part of the lands of Owen Prince of
Southwales, against whom Eneon son of the said Owen, and Howel King of
Northwales came with all their power, and overthrew them in Battle, where the
greatest part of Alfreds Army was slain, and the rest put to flight. The year
following, the Gentlemen of Gwentsland rebelled against their Prince, and
cruelly slew Eneon the son of Owen who had come thither to appease them. This
Eneon was a worthy and Noble Gentleman, who did many notable acts in his
Fathers time, and left behind him two sons, Edwyn and Theodor or Tewdor Mawr,
from which last came the Kings or Princes of Southwales. In the year 984 984.
Howel the son of Jevaf King of Wales entered England with an Army, where he
was fought withal, and slain valiantly fighting. This Howel had no son, but
his Brethren reigned in his stead.

Some say Howel left a son four years old named Conan, who afterward being
of age was King of Gwyneth A. D. 999.

The Sons of Eneon ap Owen Prince of Dinevowr 1. Cadelh, 2. Edwyn Lord of Yal
(whose Mother is supposed to be Elfleda) 3. Owen, 4. Tuder, who was slain at
Llangwm Dinmael.

Cadvvalhon the Son of JEVAF ap Edwal Voel.
AFTER the death of Howel, his brother Cadwalhon second son of Ievaf took
upon him the government of Northwales: his first business was to make war
with his Cousin Ionaval son of Meyric ap Edwal Voel, and the right Heir, whom
he slew: but Edwal, Jonaval's youngest brother, escaped out of his hands. The
year following, Meredyth the son of Owen King or Prince of Southwales, with
all his power entered Northwales, and in fight slew Cadwalhon the son of
Ievaf, and Meyric his brother, and so subdued the land to himself. Herein a
man may see how God punished the wrong Iago and Ievaf, the sons of Edwal Voel,
had done to their eldest brother Meyric, who was first disinherited, and
afterward had his eyes put out by them, and one of his sons slain. First
Ievaf was imprisoned by Iago, then Iago with his son Constantine, by Howel
the son of Ievaf: and afterward the said Howel, with his brethren Cadwalhon
and Meyric, were slain and spoiled of all their lands.

Meredyth ap Owen slew Meyric first; And Cadwalhon advancing forwards he slew
after in another battle; Anglesey and the rest of Gwyneth were the purchase of
his Victories, which he plagued with insupportable Tribute.

Meredyth the Son of Owen ap Howel Dha.
THis Meredyth ap Owen, having slain Cadwalhon, obtained the rule and
government of Northwales. In the year 986 Godfryd the son of Haroald,
entered 986
the I Will of Anglesey the third time, took Lhywarch the son of Owen, and put
out his eyes, He took 2000 prisoners besides. Hereupon Meredyth the Prince,
with the rest, escaped and fled to Caerdigan. And there was a great murrain
also among the cattle throughout all Wales. Then the Danes again entered
England with diverse Armies, and at Westport and Witest overthrew the Lords of
England, Godan and Britchwould: so that the King was compelled to hire the
Danes with the payment of 10000 pounds to live quietly in the Land: and yet
within a while after, the king himself Dane gelt. Hol. page 239
broke the Peace, For he prepared a great navy to meet the Danes by sea, where
he was overcome, and lost all his ships, which were taken, with Alfricke Earl
of Mercia Captain of the same. After this the Danes spoiled York, with
Lyndsey, and went to Northumberland, where they were put to flight by Godwyn
and Fridgist. About the same time Aulaffe and Swayn, sailing up the Thames,
with 94. sails, besieged London, which was valiantly defended. Wherefore the
Danes left their ships, entered the land, and cruelly with fire and sword H.
Hunt.
destroyed all Kent, Sussex, Surrey, and Hampshire. Hereupon king Edelred sent
to them for peace, which he purchased with great sums of money and Uictuall;
so that they lay peaceably at Hampton that winter. Then Aulaffe upon
composition came to Edelred, who received him worthily, and did so entertain
him, that he promised to depart the land, and never to return, which Promise
he faithfully kept.

The year 987. died Ievaf the son of Edwal, who had 987
lived many years a private life. The same year also died Owen the son of
Howel Dha, Prince of Southwales. This Owen had three sons, Eneon, which died in
his Fathers time; Lhywarch, who lost both his eyes; and Meredyth who (as is
before declared) had won Northwales, and after his Fathers death took also to
his possession all Southwales, having no respect to his brother Eneon's sons,
viz. Edwyn and Theodor or Tewdor. About the same time the Danes sailed from
Hampton along the coast, spoiling Deuonsbire and Cornwall; and so at the last
landed in Southwales, and destroyed S. David's, Lhanbadarn, Lhanrystyd, and
Lhandydoch, (which were all places of Religion;) and did so much hurt in the
country besides, that to be rid of them, Meredyth was feign to agree with them,
and to give them a Penny for every man within his Land, which was called The
tribute of the black army.

At this time Elwmaen the son of Abloic King of Ireland was slain, and a great
number of people died for hunger. The year 989 Owen the son of Dyfnwal was
slain. Within a 989
year after Meredyth King of Wales destroyed the town of Radnor, at what time
his nephew Edwyn the son of Eneon, having to his aid Duke Adelf, and a great
army of English and Danes spoiled all the land of Meredyth in Southwales, as
Caerdigan, Dyvet, Gwyr, Kydweli, and S. David's: where Edwyn took Pledges of the
chief men of those Countries. In the mean time this Meredyth with his people
did spoil Glamorgan, so that no place was free from sword and fire: but at the
last Meredyth and Edwyn fell to an agreement, and became friends. Soon after
Cadwalhon the only son of Meredyth died. Meredyth being thus occupied, had
so much to do in Southwales, that Northwales lay open to the enemy: which when
the Danes perceived, they arrived in Anglesey, upon Ascension day, and
destroyed the whole I Will. Whereupon the Matthew. West. page, 383. Io. Castor.
Inhabitants of that Country received Edwal the son of Meyric the right heir
of Northwales, for their Prince, in the year 992, the Nobility delivering both
Him and his Brothers 992
out of Prison, where Meredyth had secured them as Pledges. These great
troubles being past, there followed within a year after such famine and
scarcity in Southwales, that many perished for want of food.

Edvval ap Meyric ap Edwal Voel and Meredyth ap Owen.
THis Edwal being in possession of Northwales studied to keep and defend his
people from wrongs. But Meredyth (the difference between him and his Nephew
Edwyn being composed) gathered together all his Power, intending to recover
Northwales again, And Edwal meeting him at Lhangwm, overthrew him there in
Battle; Where Theodor or Tewdor Mawr, Meredyth's Nephew, was slain, who left
behind him two sons, Rees and Rytherch, and a Daughter called Elen wife to
Blethyn ap Maenyrch Lord of Brecon. A little after this Swayn the son of
Haroald destroyed the I Will of Man: and entering Matthew. West.
Northwales slew Edwal the Prince thereof, who left behind him a son called
Jago.

In the year of Christ 998, the Danes came again to S. David's, 998
destroying all before them, and there they slew Morgeney or rather Urgeney
Bishop of that Sea. The same year also died Meredyth the son of Owen King or
Prince of Wales, leaving behind him one only Daughter called Angharad, which
was married to Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht, and, after his death, to Conuyn Hirdref,
or (as others think) to Conuyn ap Gwerystan; she had Children by both of them,
which was the cause of much War and Mischief in Wales, as shall hereafter
appear.

A. D. 1000 the Danes spoiled Northwales, and the year after dyed Mor ap Gwyn,
and Ivor Porthalarchi.

I am prone to believe, it was not Tewdwr Mawr but his brother Edwin that was
slain in the Battle forementioned, which also seems rather to have been
fought at Hengwm in Ardudwy in Merionethshire then at Llangwm; for there are to
this day certain Monuments of Victory to be seen, as heaps of stones,
Tomb-stones, and Columns, which they call ^arnoddi Hengwm.

Edwyn the son of Eneon, Meredyth's elder Brother, was the lawful Heir of
Southwales though dispossessed by Meredyth.

Aedan the son of BLEGORED.
THe death of both these Princes (for so much as Meredyth had no issue Male,
and Edwal had left behind him a Child under age, not able to take the charge of
a Commonwealth) did cause much trouble to ensue: for in Northwales several
did aspire to the Government, and sought the Rule of the Land, as Conan the
son of Howel, and Aedan the son of Blegored, who tried the matter in open
field, where Conan was slain in the year 1003
1003.

* I do not know, neither could I ever find, what Color or pretense of Title,
this Aedan ap Blegored had to the Principality of Northwales, nor yet of whom
he descended, or who came of him: whereas all the other Princes are notoriously
known, of what Families they descended, and who came of them. Neither yet do I
read of any Blegored, whose son he might be, except it be that Doctor of Law,
of whom mention is made in the Laws of Howel Dha, his Estate may be thought too
mean to challenge the Principality. He is reported to have Governed about XII
years. Of the Acts by him achieved, there is very little written, saving of
those two Battles, the one wherein he overcame Conan ap Howel, and the other
wherein he was overcome himself, and slain with his four sons, by Lhewelyn
ap Sitsylht.

In the year 1004, Gulfath and Ubiad Irish Lords, 1004
were taken by the Scots, and their eyes put out, which Scots did also destroy
the Country and Town of Dublyn. Likewise the Danes, who had destroyed again
Westwales went to England, spoiling and burning the Land all before them,
especially Somersetshire, Dorsetshire, and so through Hampshire and Sussex,
they came toward the River of Matt. West.
Thames without any Let or Stay, and so sailed along the River to the place,
where the River Mydwey enters the Thames, along which they came to Rochester,
where they overthrew the Kentishmen that gave them battle. Edelred King of
England was at this time in Cumberland the chief Den of the Danes, which land
he brought to his subjection: but in the mean while another army of Danes
fought again with the men of Somersetshire, and got the victory, and ruled the
country at their pleasure. Then Edelred hearing of the great worthiness of
Richard Duke of Normandy sent to him for his Daughter Emma in marriage,
thinking to have succor thereby: But God intending to punish the great sins
and enormities of the Saxons moved the King thereto, that as they being
instruments of Gods wrath, under color of friends and hired soldiers, had
traitorously slain the Brytaines, and driven them out of their own land, so
should the Normans by color of this affinity first enter the land as friends,
and bring succor against the Danes, and afterward come as foes, and be the
utter destruction of the Saxons and Angles: which was then foreseen and told
the King by an Anachoret, who inspired with the spirit of God, saw the plagues
which he had certainly appointed to fall upon the Saxons: but the King puffed
up with pride, and hope of this affinity, did privily write to all the English
Rulers through the realm, to kill the The Danes murdered. Matt. West. page,
39^.
Danes in one night, who then lived peaceably; this murder was cruelly
executed upon S. Brices day at night. But yet the Danes would not give over so
with loss. Therefore the year following, there came an army of them to
Devonshire, and overran the land with fire and sword, sparing nothing that had
life, that they might revenge the murder of their Cousens. They rased the
city of Excester, and slew Hugh the Norman, Matt. West. page 393. H. Hunt.
Sim. Dunel.
whom the Queen had appointed Governor there. Then Almarus Earl of Deuon
gathered a great army out of Hampshire, Wiltshire, and all the Country about,
and met the Danes: but he and his were put to flight, and the Danes pursued
them to Wilton, and destroyed it and Salisbury, and returned to their ships
with rich spoils and great triumph.

* Some are of another opinion, who affirm, that the said Hugh Io. Cast. Si.
Dunelm. Hol page 243. Io. Vowel.
the Norman enticed and procured the Danes to come and besiege the City of
Excester, which they burned, and used the people with great cruelty, until in
the end the said Almarus Earl of Deuon, and the Gentlemen of the country
submitted themselves, and so obtained peace.

And the year following, being 1004, Swayne a mighty 1004.
Prince of Denmark, to whom God predestined the Crown of England, came with
a great number of ships, laid slege to Norwich, and spoiled it, with whom
Wol^kettel Duke of the Hol. page 243.
Country made peace: yet the Danes, after they had rested a while, went to
Thetford, which they also spoiled, and returned to their ships with their prey,
and overthrew Duke Wolfkettel (who had gathered and prepared an army to fight
with them) and so sailed to their Country: And two years after returned
again with their companions, fire, sword and spoil, and landed at Sandwich,
which they burned, and made England Hol. page, 244.
quake as a reed in the wind, and thence sailed to Wight, where they wintered
till Christmas, and then entered Hampshire, and passed in diverse Bands through
the land to Reding, Wallingford and Colsey, devouring such victuals as they
found in the houses, and paying with sword and fire at their departing. And at
their return they met near Essington the army of the Io. Cast.
Westsaxons, which did nothing but trouble them with killing, and laded them
with spoil, and so passed by the Gates of Winchester, with much triumph to
Wight; and all this while was King Edelred at his Manor in Shropshire full of
cares and troubles. And then the Nobility of England bought peace of the Danes
for 30000 pound. In which time of Peace Edelred made an Order, that of every
300 Hides of land H. Hunt.
through the Realm, there should be a ship made and furnished, and of every 8
Hides, a Corselet and a Helmet. An Hide contains as much ground as a plough
may ear by the year. Besides these the King had a Naby from Normandy, which
being all together at Sandwich, was one of the greatest that ever was seen in
Brytain. But it happened so, that where Io, Cast. Matt. West.
the King had banished one Wilnot a Noble man of Sussex, he fell a roving upon
the Sea, and troubled all passages and Uictuallers. Then Brightrych brother to
the Traitor Edric 1008
Earl of Mercia, promised the King to bring before him Wilnot either alive or
dead, but it happened otherwise, for there fell such a tempest, that he was
driven of force to the shore, where many of his ships were lost, and the rest
Wilnot and his Company set on fire and burned. Then Brightrych, being abashed
at this unfortunate beginning, returned again along the Thames to London.

Shortly after there landed a Navy of Danes at Sandwich, Io, Cast.
and so passed by land to Canterbury, with a mind to destroy the City: but the
Citizens bought their peace for 30000 pound. And the Danes passed first through
Kent, Suffex, Hampshire, and Barkshire, where King Edelred with all the power
of England met them: notwithstanding being persuaded by the Traitor Edric, he
would not fight with them, so that they returning back by London (which City
defended it self manfully) went to their ships. But the year following they
landed again at Ipswich upon Ascension day, and there overcame and put to
flight Duke Wolfkettel, who fought with them. Then passing from thence to
Cambridge, they met the Kings sisters son with his Army, whom they slew, and
with him Duke Oswyn, with Edwyn and Wolfrike Earls, and after took their way
by Essex toward Thames, leaving 1010.
no part of cruelty unpractised by the way. And along the River Gwlfach and
Vbiad had their eyes put out. Hol. page 245. Io. Cast. Iarddur Monk of Enlli
dyed.
side they went to Oxford, which they had burned the year before, and so to the
three castles upon Ouze, Buckingham, Bedford and Huntingdon, and destroyed
Godmanchester, which was then a fair Town, and burned Northampton, and at
Christmas returned to their ships. The next year following when they had
spoiled all the land from Trent Southward, they laid siege to the City of
Canterbury, and won it by the treason of one Almarike (whom Alfege the
Archbishop had delibered 1011
from death) and left nothing behind them, but blood Io. Cast. Hol. page, 246.
Matt. Park. page 68.
and ashes, carrying the Archbishop with others to their ships, whom they
cruelly slew afterward. Within a while after, Swayn King of Denmark came along
the Humber to Gainsbourgh, to whom Vitred Duke of Northumberland with all his
people, and all Linsey with the Countries North of Watlingstreet became
subjects, and gave him hostages. Whereupon Swayn finding his enterprises
succesfull, committed his Navy to Cnute his son, and went himself to Oxford
and Winchester, which Cities with all the Countries about acknowledged him for
their King. Then he came to London, where King Edelred was, but the Citizens
defended the City so manfully and valiantly, that Swayn returned to
Wallingford, and so to Bath, and received homage of all Westsaxon, and
afterward coming to London, received the City to mercy, and was called King
throughout the Land. Then Edelred perceiving all things to go against him,
sled Hol. page 249. Io. Castor.
to Normandy, to his Wife and his two sons, Edward and Alfred, whom he had
sent thither before. And Swayne, Sim. Dunel,
after he had brought the whole land to his obedience, dyed suddenly, after
whose death, the Danes chose Cnute his son for their King; but the Englishmen
sent for Edelred home again. who coming with a great Army destroyed Lynsey,
Hol. page 248.
because that Province was become subject to Cnute; Which thing when Cnute
understood being at Ipswich, he cut off the hands and noses of all the Pledges
that he had, and returned to Denmark. About this time, Brian King of Ireland,
and Murcath his son, and other Kings of that land subject to him, did gather
a great Power against Sutric the son of Abloic King of Dyuelyn, and Mailmorda
King of Lagines; which Sutric hired a number of strangers, all armed men, and
rovers upon the seas to his succor, and gave Brian battle, where the said
Brian and his son were slain, and on the other side Mailmorda, and Broderike
Captain of the strangers. In the year 1013, Cnute came again from Denmark,
and 1013.
landed in Westsex, and spoiled all the Country. Then Edric Io. Cast.
with Edmund King Edelreds bastard son, gathered an Army, but yet they durst
not give him Battle. Then went Edmund to Vitred Duke of Northumberland, and
together they spoiled Staffordshire, Leycestershire, and Shropshire. Cnute
likewise, upon the other side, came down through Buckinghamshire,
Bedfordshire, Huntingdonshire, and so by Stafford passed toward York, to whom
Vitred came and yielded himself, yet he lost his life, whose possessions Cnute
gave to one Egricke, and made him Duke in his stead, whereupon Edmund went to
his Father, which lay sick at London. Then Cnute returned to his ships, and
sailed to the Thames mouth, and up the River toward London: but before he came
thither, Edelred was departed, after he had reigned with much trouble and
misery 37 years. After whose death, the Englishmen chose his base son Edmund,
surnamed Ironside for his strength and hardines in War, to be their King. This
Edmund went to Westsex, and brought all that Country to his subjection. Then
the Danes laid siege to London, and made a great trench about it, that no man
could escape out, and gave 1
Edmund battle (who came to raise the siege) at Proman by Gillingham, where
Edmund had the upper hand. The second 2
battle fought at Caerstan, wherein Edric, Almar and Io. Castor. Matthew. West.
page 498.
Algar behaved themselves traitorously against Edmund, where after a long fight
the night parted both the Armies. The third battle was at London, where Edmund
pursued the 3
Danes to their ships, and entered the City triumphantly, and two days after
they fought the fourth Battle at Brenford, 4
from whence Edmund bare the honor away: and went to gather a new Army, whiles
Cnute did besiege London by Water and Land, but it was manfully defended. Then
Edmund with his Army passed the Thames at Brenford, and entered into Kent, and
fought the fifth Battle, where the Danes fled as sheep before him, but he
stayed the pursuit by the wicked 5
counsel of the Lraitor Edric, whom he had received to mercy and made Steward
of the Land; this Battle was fought at Essedowne in Essex, with the whole power
of the Danes and Englishmen, there Edmund showed his prowes, and forsaking his
place, which was betwixt the Dragon and the Matthew. West. page, 399
Standard, he entered the Army of his enemies, breaking their thickest ranks,
and compelling the proudest of them to turn their backs. Which when Edric saw,
fearing the overthrow of the Danes, he cried aloud, Fledd Engle, Fledd Engle,
Edmund is Dead: and thereupon fled with his people, all the Army following him,
to the great slaughter of the English; there were slain there Edmund, Alfric,
Godwyn, and Ul^kettel, all Hol. page 255. Matthew. West. page, 399,
Dukes, and all the Chevalry of England. After which victory, Cnute entered
London, and was Crowned King of the Land. And Edmund having gathered his Army
together they met in Glocestershire, but both Armies fearing one the other were
loath to fight, so that they moved the Kings to make an end of this cruel
bloodshed by Combat, whereunto both Princes Hol. page 256. Matt. West. page.
400. Io. Castor.
agreed, and the place being appointed, fought together manfully, and they were
both of them found so Ualiant and Worthy men, as few the like. But Cnute
fearing the incomparable strength of Edmund moved him to accord, whereunto be
agreed: Thereupon Peace was concluded with much joy, that Edmund should Keigne
in Westsex, and Cnute in Mercia: and so they departed, Cnute to London, and
Edmund to Oxford, where he was traitorously murdered by a son Sim. Dunel.
Fabian. Matt. West. page 401.
of Edric with a sharp knife, as he was at the Privy. Edric being quickly
certifyed of the deed came to Cnute (with much joy) and greeted him as only
King of England, declaring how Edmund was slain at Oxford. To whom Cnute
replied, that for his good service be would reward him, as his deserts
required, Matt. West. page 402.
and set him above all the Nobles of England: Thereupon he caused his Head to
be cut off forthwith, and to be set upon a Pole, on the highest Lower in
London, and then he caused execution to be done upon all the other, that were
consenting to the murder. In the year 1015 Lhewelyn 1015
the son of Sitsylht raised a great power against Aedan, who had by
usurpation possessed himself of the rule of Northwales, and having slain him
with his four sons in battle (without any respect to Jago (or James) the
son of Edwal the right heir) he took upon himself, the name and authority
of King of Wales. This Lhewelyn was descended from the Kings of Wales by his
Mothers side, whose name was Prawst.
Trawst, Daughter to Elise, second son to Anarawd, the eldest son of
Roderike the Great: He had to wife Angharat, the only daughter of Meredyth
Prince of Southwales, and so by these means he claimed and enjoyed the right of
both Countries, as hereafter shall be declared.

Elystan Glodrydd Prince of Ferlix, or the Country between Wy and Severne, who
is reckoned the 4th Royal Tribe of Cambria, reigned about this time. Our
Writers style him also Earl of Hereford. Athelstan King of England was his
Godfather, and gave him his own name at his Baptism.

Edelstanus eum sacro de font levavit, R. Powel.

Infantique dedit proprium de nomine nomen.
He was the son of Cyhelyn ap Ivor ap Severus ap Cadwr Wenwyn, and so to Casnar
Wledig ap Gloyw Wl^d lydan (that is, with the large Dominions) the son of
Tenantius and Brother of Cynobelinus Kings of Britain, as Ievan Brechva, who
lived in the days of Henry the 6th has left upon record, which also an old
MS. in Parchment written about 200 years before his time witnesses concerning
the said Gloyw: But Rich. Powel of Ednop in Shropshire Esquire. a Gentleman well
seen in the Antiquities of Wales, and lineally descended from the said Elystan
says, Gloyw was the son of Arviragus, the son of Cynobelinus, and not the
son of the Emperor Claudius, as Ieffrey of Monmouth would have it. Our
Antiquities say, that the posterity of Casnar Wledig the son of Gloyw had
their habitations on both sides os Severne, as in Powis, Arustli, Ceri,
Cydewen, Radnorshire, being the Lands and Possessions of Blethyn ap Convyn,
Trahayrn ap Caradoc, Elystan Glodrydd, and of their Ancestors descended from
the said Casnar: So were also Gloucester, Worcester, Ewyas, Erging, and the rest
of Herefordshire with Gwerthrynion and Buellt, the Lands of Vortigern King of
Britain, whose Pedigree Gildas Albanius deriveth to the said Gloyw thus,
Guorthigern map Guorthineu map Guitaul map Guitolin map Glovi. Bonus, Paulus
and Mauron fuerunt tres filii Glovi, qui aedificavit Urbem magnam super ripam
fluminis Sabrinae, quae vocatur Britannico sermon Caer Glovi, Saxonice
Gloucester. But this Glovi cannot be the same with the former Gloyw, unless ^t
might so happen that some names have been left out in the Pedigree between
Vortigern and Glovi. Also we read in the same Author, that Embrisius (commonly
called Ambrosius Aurelianus) King and Monarch of Britain gave unto Pascen the
son of Vortigern upon his submission some part of his Fathers inheritance, to
wit, Buellt and Gwerthrynion, which (according to Nennius) he left to his son
Brincat father of Mempric father of Paul father of Eldoc father of Eldat father
of Merwydd father of Guevan father of Theudibir King of Buellt father of
Fermael King of Gwerthrynion, both which last named lived together as may be
gathered out of Ninnius and Samuel Beulan, about the year of our Lord 820. But
how the forementioned lands came to Elystan and his Ancestors a 100 years
after, I have not yet learned. His Mother was Rhieingar the daughter and heir
of Grono ap Tuder Trevor, of whom mention is made before p. 27, 28.

He quarters these Coats, A. 3 boares heads Cobazed S langued G. tusked Or.
And G. a lion rampant, regardant Or.

Some say Elystan married Gwenllian the daughter of Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dda,
by whom he had Cadwgan, the Ancestor of many worthy Families.

Families descended from Elystan Glodrydd.
The Pryces of Newtowne, Owens of Rhiwsaeson, the Lloyds, Williamses and others
in Mountgomeryshire, some Gentlemen in Shropshire, most of the Gentry of
Radnorshire, and very many in other parts of Southwales, whose names I have
not. Sir William Thomas of Aber in Carnarvonshire Knight, Granchild to Sir William
Thomas of Llangathan in Carmarthenshire Knight, descended from Elystan. Lewis Owen
of Penyarth in Merionethshire Esquire. a Learned, accomplished Gentleman comes also
from him, so Hugh ap John ap Hugh of Llanvendiged.

The Pedigree of the Prices of Newtowne.
Sir Matthew Price Baronet, son of Sir John Price Baronet, who was the son of
Edward the eldest son of John Price the eldest son of Matthew Goch the eldest
son of Thomas Price of Newtown, which Thomas was 2d son to Rees ap David Lloyd
(Esquire of the body to K. Edw. 4. and slain at Banbury) ap David ap Eneon ap
Howel ap Tuder ap Eneon Vychan ap Eneon or graig ap Ievaf ap Grono ap Ivor ap
Idnerth ap Cadwgan ap Elystan Glodrydd. John Price of Park Esquire. is descended
from Matthew 2d son to the foresaid John Price. Arthur Price of Vaenor was 2d
son to Matthew Goch; He married a Daughter of the Earl of Bath, and had by her
Edward Price and John Price of Llinwent. The said Edward married a daughter of
Dr Nic: Robinson Bp. of Bangor, by whom he had Arthur Price Esquire. whose daughter
and Heir by Mary daughter to Owen Vaughan of Llwydiarth Esquire. married George
Devereux Esquire. eldest son to Sir George Devereux of Sheldon in Warwickeshire Knight,
by whom she had Price D'evereux Esquire. and other Children. Oliver the 2d son of
the forenamed Thomas Price had Neuadd wen, from whom are descended the Bolvirs
of Llanyrvil. From Meredyth the eldest son of Rees ap David Lloyd comes Price
of Keri.

The Paternall Coat of the Prices of Newtowne and Vaenor. Quarterly 1. A. 3
boares heads cooped S. langued G. tusked Or, 2. G. a lion rampant regardant Or.
the 3d as the 2d, the 4th as the 1st.

Lhevvelyn ap Sitsyllt: and Angharad his wife the only Daughter of Meredyth.
AFter that Lhewelyn the son of Sitsylht had taken into his hands the
government of Wales, all things prospered: the earth brought forth double to
the time before passed, the people prospered in all their affairs, and
multiplied wonderfully, the cattle increased in great number, so that there
was neither beggar nor poor man from the South to the North sea, but every man
had plenty, every house a dweller, and every town inhabitants. Now in this
time Cnute married Emme sometimes wife to Edelred, and mother to Alfred and
Edward, and sent Edmund and Edward the sons of Edmund Ironside to Hungary to
be slain, but the King of Hungary cherished them as his own Ran. Cest. lib. 6.
cap. 18,
children. King Cnute also levied upon the land a great subsidy of 72000
pounds, besides 11000 pounds, which the Citizens of London paid. In the year
1019 Meyric the son 1019
of Arthpoel raised a great Army against Lhewelyn King or Prince of Wales, who
met him in the Field, manfully slew him, and discomfited his people. Also this
year Cnute with a great Navy sailed to Denmark, and made war against Ran.
Cest. ib.
the Vandals, who had a great Army in the field, which Cnute overthrew by the
prowes of Earl Godwyn, and the Englishmen, which made him love them the better
ever after.

In the year 1020, a certain Scot of low birth came to 1020
Southwales, who naming himself Run the son of Meredyth their late King, was
by the Nobility, which loved not Lhewelyn, exalted to the Regal Throne, and
taken for their King; which when Lhewelyn heard, he gathered his power in
Northwales, and advanced toward Run, who had gotten all the strength of
Southwales together at Abergwili, where with great pride he abode the coming of
Lhewelyn. But when both Armies were ready to join, Run full of brags and
crakes encouraged his people to fight, promising them the victory: yet he
himself (following the Proverb, which bids a man to set on his dog, and not
to run after him) set on his people to fight it to the uttermost, and withdrew
himself privily out of the way: whereas upon the contrary part, Lhewelyn, like
a bold and courageous Prince, came before his people, calling for the vile Scot
Run, that durst so belly a Princes blood; so both the Armies joined Battle with
much malice and hatred, the one party was not so courageous to defend the
quarrel of so worthy a Prince of their own blood, as the other was obstinate
in the cause of a stranger: in the end, after great slaughter upon either part,
the Northwales men remembering their old victories, and encouraged by the prowes
of their Prince, put their enemies to flight, and pursued Run so narrowly, that
all his Scottish shifts could not save his life, and so returned home with
great spoil and prey. Then Lhewelyn ruled all the land quietly, but the year
following be was slain by Howel and Meredyth the sons of Edwyn, leaving
behind him a son named Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn.

It is not recorded in History, of what Stock or Lineage Lhewelyn ap Sitsyllt
Paternally descended, nor have we in any of our Books his Coat of Arms, or the
Coat of his son Prince Griffith ap Llewelyn. The house and land of the said
Llewelyn and his son Griffith being at Ruthlan (which was a part of that
Country Anarawd gave to the Northern Britons of Cumbria in England, and
Stratclwyd in Scotland to inhabit) it is probable they might be descended from
one of those Noble strangers that seated themselves there; Possibly the
interest and Relations Sitsylt ( Llewelyns Father) had in Cumberland might
induce Edmund King of England to make use of his assistance, when he marched
with an Army against Dunmail King of Cumbria. Of Ednowen Bendew.

Ednowain Bendew Lord of Tegaingl, one of the 15 Tribes of Gwyneth, lived A. D.
1015 in the time of Prince Llewelyn ap Sitsyllt according to Mr Powel of
Ednop's verses, but in a book cited by Peter Ellis, wherein it is said he was
the Chiefest of the 15 Tribe^, we may find that he lived after, in the year
1079. His Arms, A. a Cheveron S. between three Boares heads Cooped.

Ednowen Bendew Capitonem voce Britanna Ric. Powel.

Innuit, Hic pat^ios vastantem funditus agros
Horrendum setis and acutis dentibus Aprum
Fortiter occidit, quare huic argenteo in agro
A^ra trium capita aprorum curvamine nigro:
Tota Bithelorum domus hac de stripe resurgit,
Ille Leolino vixit regnante Sisillo.
Rotpert ap Iorwerth ap Ririd of Coedymynydd, who was a man of great power, and
lived in the days of Edw. I. as appears by the Records of the Exchequer of
Chester, descended from him. Rotpert had a Brother called Madoc, that was
Bishop of Bangor, and is not mentioned in Bishop Godwins History of Bishops.
There is to be seen an Ode in praise of this Rotpert composed Io. Jones of
Flint.
by a Bard of those times. Ithel the son of Rotpert was a Learned man, and
Archdeacon of Tegaingl in the days of Edw. the 3d. The Bithels of Flintshire,
and other worthy Families (which may be known by their Arms) come from this
Tribe.

A. D. 1021 after the death of Llewelyn ap Seisyllt, Rytherch ap Iestyn King of
Glamorgan obtained of King Cnute the rule of Southwales, as Caradoc has it,
but the Book of Landaffe says, of all Wales, Totius Gwaliae excepta tantum
Insula Evoniae quam Jacob filius Idgwal per se tenebat: Riderch dico virum
pacificum and mansuetum omnibus totius Regni tam Clericis quam Laicis, Viduis
and Orphanis jura sua and haereditates divina lege and humana concedentem, and
maxim Ecclesiae Dei and gubernatoribus ejus, Episcopis videlicet, and omnibus
de inferioribus gradibus. In cujus tempore nulla desolatio in montibus nec in
plano, nisi tantum tribus villis per totam Gualiam in solitario etc.

Tho: Maelor (if he be the Author of the Card of the Pedigree of the Princes of
Powis) writes thus, Blethyn ap Convyn ap Llewelyn ap Griffith ap Seissyllt ap
Trahayrn ap Anarawd Prince of Powis, where he makes Trahayrn to be the Father
of Seissyllt, which is a gross mistake, there being herein never a true
descent save that Blethyu was the son of Convyn.

Iago the Son of Edwal ap Meyric ap Edwal Voel.
After the death of Lhewelyn, Jago or James the son of Edwal took upon him the
rule of Northwales as right Heir thereof. And Rytherch the son of Jestyn
governed Southwales by strong hand. Cnute King of England about this time made
a voyage to Ran. Cest. lib. 6.
Denmark and Swethen, against Ulf and Alaf, who had stirred up the Finlanders
against him, he had a cruel fight with them, lost a great number of his Army,
as well Englishmen as Danes; and after his return to England, he made his
journey to Rome in great pomp and glory, not because he Io. Cast.
thought by that journey to be cleansed from his sins, but that his ambitious
mind might have the praise and fame of the World, for his rich gifts and
Princely behavior, and what holiness be learned there, it appeared at his
return. For forthwith be entered Scotland with a great Army, against Malcolme
the Prince thereof, who desired Peace, and became his Subject, wi^h two other
Kings of the Orkneys, and Ewyst, Molbeath and Je^mare.

About the year 1031 the Irish-Scots entered Southwales, 1031
by the means of Howel and Meredyth, the sons of Two more, Vchtrid and Owen.
Edwyn ap Eneon ap Owen ap Howel Dha, who hired them against Rytherch ap
Jestyn, whom they discomfited and slew, and by that means attained unto the
government of Southwales, which they two ruled jointly, but yet with small
quietness, for the Rees. Griffith.
sons of Rytherch gathered a number of such as were their Fathers friends to
revenge his death, with whom Howel and Meredyth met at Hyarthwy, and after a
long dispute put them to f^ight. But the year following, Meredyth was slain
by the sons of Conan the son of Sitsylht, Brother to the worthy Prince
Lhewelyn, to revenge their Fathers death, whom Meredyth and his brother had
slain. The year next ensuing, certain Englishmen entered the land of Gwent,
with whom Caradoc the son of Rytherch ap Jestyn fought, and was by them slain.
Not long after died Cnute the most Powerful and famous H. Hunt. Io. Castor.
Matthew. West. Ran. Cest. li. 6 Alb. Crantz.
Prince in the West Parts of the World, as he that had under his Dominion, the
great Country of Swethen, from Germany to the North pole, with Norway and
Denmark, and all the Noble I Will of Brytaine. After him Haroald Harfote his son
begotten upon Alwyn the Daughter of Duke Alselyn, was Created King. For Hardi
Cnute his other son by Emma was then in Denmark. This Haroald in the first
year of his Reign banished Emma his stepmother out of the Realm.

In the year 1037 Gruffyth (the son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsyllt 1037
sometimes King of Wales,) raised a great number of people against Jago then
enjoying the Principality or Kingdom of Northwales, whom Jago likewise
provided for, as well as he could: but the greater part and the better
Soldiers were of Gruffyths side, for the love they bare to his Father, which
afterward well appeared: for after the Armies once met, Jago was soon
overthrown and slain. This Jago left behind him a son called Conan, by his
Wife Avandred Daughter ^o Gweir the son of Pylh.

A. D. 1022. One Joseph was made Bishop of Landaff, whose 1022
election was ratified by the aforesaid Prince Rytherch, who, as we have it in
the said book of Landaff, confirmed also the Lands and Churches belonging to
that Sea.

In the old British Text thus we read, Un mlynedd ar ddeg ar ugain a mil oedd
oed Crist pan laddawddyr Yscotiaid Rydderch ap Iestyn, a Iago vab Idwal a
gynhelis teyrnas Wynedd, a meibion Edwin, Howel a Meredydd agynhalasant deyrnas
y Deheu. Hence it may seem, Iago had but the Isle of Mon only in his
possession, until the death of Rytherch. About the year of Christ 1034
Morgynnith a Bishop dyed.

Gruffyth the Son of Lhewelyn ap Sitsylht and Angharat.
GRuffyth ap Lhewelyn, after he had slain Jago governed Northwales, and
worthily in all things, following his Fathers steps, who overcame both the
Danes and the English diverse times, and defended his Country and People
manfully all his Reign. In the first year of his Government he fought with
the English and Danes at Crosford upon Seaverne, and put them to flight, and
from thence he led his Army to Lhanpadarn vawr in Caerdigan shire, and
destroyed it utterly, and from thence passed all Southwales throughout, and
received the people to his subjection. For Howel ap Edwyn their King fled
before his face, and forsook the Land.

* This Howel procured Edwin the Brother of Leofrike Earl Hol. page 272.
of Chester or Mercia, to come with an Army of Englishmen and Danes to his aid
against Prince Gruffyth, who met his enemies in the field, and overcame them,
and slew the said Edwyn, but Howel escaped by flight. After which victory
Gruffyth made sundry Matt. West.
invasions into the Marches toward Hereford, and always returned with great
spoils.

When Gruffyth had brought all Wales under his Dominion, he returned to
Northwales again. The year ensuing, 1038 Herman Archbishop of Menevia or S.
David's died, a 1038.
man both learned and Godly. The year next following, Howel King of Southwales
gathered a great power of his friends and strangers, and entered the Land,
intending to recover it again. Wherefore Gruffyth like a worthy Prince, came
with all speed to succor his people, and meeting with Howel at Pencadair,
after he had encouraged his Soldiers, gave him Battle, and overthrew him, and
pursued him so narrowly, that he took Howels wife, whom he had brought to the
field to see the overthrow of Gruffyth, but it fell out otherwise, and Gruffyth
liked her so well that he kept her for his Concubine.

About this time, Haroald King of England dyed, and his brother Hardy cnute
Reigned in his stead, a Noble and a liberal Prince, who (as it is reported)
caused his Lables to be H. Hunt.
covered and furnished four times every day, for strangers and all comers, and
after he had Reigned two years, he dyed at Lambeth in the flower of his age.
After his death, the English Matt: West. Sim. Dunel.
sent for Alfred the eldest son of Edelred from Normandy, but that message
pleased not Earl Godwyn, who was the most potent man in the Land, because he
knew the young Prince to be Courageous and stout, and therefore one that would
not suffer him to rule the Land as he intended to do. Therefore he persuaded
the People that Alfred, who had come well accompanied with Normans, had
promised them the whole rule of the Land, thereupon they took all the Normans
and bound them, and afterward tithed them, putting every tenth man to death.
And yet they thought there were two many, wherefore they tithed them the second
time, and led Alfred from Gilford (where this cruelty was committed) to
Gillingham, and there put out his eyes, and removed him from thence to Ely
where he was pitifully murdered. Afterward they sent for Edward the younger
son, whom they received as King the year following, after that he had married
Godwyns daughter, He in the first year of his Reign banished Earl Swayne,
son to the said Earl Godwyn, who was received of the Earl of Flanders. In
the year 1041 Howel came again to South wales, and remained 1041
there a while: and shortly after a number of strangers landed in West wales
and spoiled the Country, against whom Howel The Battle of Pwll Deuach.
gathered a number of People, and fought with them, and drove them to their
ships with much losle.

At this time Conan the son of Jago (who had fled to Ireland to save his
life) with the power of Alfred or Auloedd King of Develyn, whose daughter
Ranulph or Ranull^ he had married, entered North wales, and by Treason had taken
Gruffyth the King, and carried him toward the ships: but when it was known,
the Country upon the sudden followed the Irishmen, and overtaking them rescued
their Prince, and pursued their enemies (with much slaughter) to their ships,
who returned straight with Conan to Ireland. The year following, Howel the
son of Owen Lord of Glamorgan dyed, being a man full of years. Then Howel ap
Edwyn called to his succor Danes and Englishmen, with all the power he could
make in South wales. Whereof Gruffyth being certified, gathered his power
together in North wales, and came on courageously to meet his enemies, (whom he
had twice before discomfited) and overcame them, and chased them, as far as
the spring of the river Towy, where after a long and dangerous battle Howel
was slain, and his Army discomfited, and so narrowly pursued, that few escaped
alive. After his death Rytherch and Rees the sons of Rytherch ap Jestyn
aspiring Hol. page 2^0. Matt. West.
again to the rule and government of South wales, which their father had once
got, gathered a great Army, as well of strangers, as out of Gwentland and
Glamorgan, and met with Gruffyth King of Wales^, who after his accustomed
manner loosing no time, but courageously animating his men with the remembrance
of their former fortune and Uictories under his Standard, joined Battle with
his enemies, whom he found disposed to abide, and to regaine the honor which
before they had lost: when they met, the fight was cruel and bloody, and
continued till night, which easily parted both Armies being weary with
fighting, And either fearing other returned to their Countries, to gather more
strength. This year Joseph Bishop of Teilo or Landaf dyed at Rome. The Land
being thus quieted, Gruffyth ruled all Wales without any trouble: till about
two years after, the Gentlemen of Ystrad Towy did by treason kill 140 of the
Princes best Soldiers, to revenge whose death King Gruffyth destroyed all
Dyvet and Ystrad Towy. It is also to be noted here, that such snow fell this
year, that it lay upon the earth from the Kalends af January, to the 14 of
March. About this time, Lothen and Hyrling landed at Sandwich with a great
number of Danes, and after they had spoiled the Town, they returned to their
ships, and sailed to Flanders, and sold their booties, and so sailed to their
Conntry. At this time also Earl Swayne returned to England, and came to his
Fathers house at Pevenese, and humbly besought his Father, and his Brethren
Haroald and Tosty, to procure him the Kings Favor. So Earl Beorned promised
to entreat the King for him, and went with Swayne to his ships, where he was
traitorously murdered, and his body left upon the shore, until his friends,
being certifyed of the same, fetched him away, and buried him at Winchester,
where his Uncle King Cnute had been buried before. Swayne having committed this
wicked fact, sailed again to Flanders, and continued there, till his father
made peace with the King, and brought him in favor again about a year after.

In the year 1050 Conan the son of Jago did gather 1050
an Army of his friends in Ireland, minding to recover his inheritance again,
and as he sailed toward Wales, there arose such a tempest, that it scattered
his Navy abroad, and drowned most of his ships, so that he was disappointed of
his purpose, and quite lost his labor. Shortly after, Robert Archbishop of
Canterbury accused Earl Godwyn and his sons, Swayne and Haroald of Treason,
and the Queen of Adultery, who because they refused to appear, being called
before the King, were banished the Land, and the Queen put away from the King,
whereupon Godwyn with Swayne fled to Flanders, and Haroald to Ireland.

* Eustace Earl of Bologne, the Father of Godfrey, having Will. Malms. Hol.
page 270. and 271.
married Goda King Edwards sister, the widow of Walter de Maunt, came to
England to his brother in Law, and as he was returning home again one of his
servants killed a man at Canterbury (or at Dover, as Matthew. Westminster. has it)
whereof grew great Matt, West. page 419.
inconveniency and slaughter on both sides: whereupon Eustace returning again,
made a grievous complaint to King Edward against the Kentishmen, whose part
Earl Godwyn took, because they were of his County. But Eustace by the
suggestion of Robert Archbishop of Canterbury (who hated Godwyn and his sons)
Matt. Park.
so incensed King Edward against him and the Kentishmen, that Godwyn and his
sons were sent for, to answer the matter before the King at Gloucester,
Whereupon Godwyn fearing the Kings displeasure (who could never brook him
sithence the death of his brother Alfred) gathered an Army out of Kent and the
Countries where his sons ruled, and so came toward Gloucester, reporting
abroad, that all this preparation was made to resist Gruffyth Prince of Wales,
who (as they affirmed) was ready with an army to invade the Marches. King
Edward being certifyed by the Welshmen, that there was no such thing in hand,
commanded Godwyn to send back his army, and to come in person to answer,
according to the order of law. Which when he refused to do, the King by the advice of Earl Leofrike appointed a Parliament and meeting at London, to take
order in these matters, Where the King came with a great army out of Mercia and
other western countries Then Godwyn remaining with his army in Southwerke, and
perceiving how that diverse of his friends disappointed him, and other daily
forsook him and went to the Kings part, despairing to be able to withst and the
Kings proceedings against him, conveyed himself away privily with his sons,
and fled out of the land. Whereupon King Edward proclaimed him and his sons
Outlaw^s, confiscated their goods, and gave their lands to other of his
nobility.

Then the King gave to Adonan the Earldome of Devonshire and Dorsetshire, and
to Algar son of Earl Leofrick the earldome of Haroald. Nevertheless Godwyn
and Swayne got men and ships in Flanders, and sailed to the I Will of Wight, which
they spoiled, as they also did Portland. At the same time Haroald coming from
Ireland, and wafting along the shore, spoiling the country as he went, at
length met with his father and brother, who being together burned Pevensey,
Romney Heath, Folkston, Dover, and Sandwich, and entering the Thames destroyed
Sheppey, and burned the Kings houses at Middltowne, and afterward sailed up
toward London, where by the way they met with the King, and so sailed with
him, and when they were even ready to fight, an accord was made by means of
Bishop Stigand, in such sort that the King restored them their lands and goods,
took home the Queen, and banished the Archbishop with all the Frenchmen,
which had put that suspicion in the Kings head.

* Mat. Westminster. writes, that about this time, to wit, An. 1053. 1053
Rees the brother of Gruffyth King of Wales was slain in a place called
Bulendune, whose head was presented to King Edward, the Matt* West. page. 420.
day before the Epiphany, the King being then at Gloucester.

A little after that, Oswald Earl of Northumberland, when he heard that his
son was slain in Scotland, whither he had sent him with Forces to Conquer
it, asked whether his deaths wound was in his breast or in his back; and they
saying, in his breast, he answered, I am right glad thereof, for I would not
wish me nor my son to dye otherwise* Then King Edward entered Scotland, and
overcame the King in Battle, and subdued the whole Land to himself. The year
following, Earl Godwyn dyed at the Kings table, choked with a piece of Bread,
whose Earldom Haroald his son had, and Algar Earl of Chester had the
Earldom of Haroald.

* About this time Makbeth King of Scotland caused a Noble Hector Boet. lib.
12. cap. 5.
man of his (named Bancho) to be cruelly murdered, whereupon Fleance the son
of the said Bancho escaping the hands of Makbeth, fled to Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn
Prince of Wales, where being Buchan. li. 7. page. 62.
joyfully received and entertained courteously, he grew into such favor with
the said Prince, that nothing was thought too good for him. But in process of
time Fleance forgetting the curtesy to him showed, Hol. page 247.
fell in love with the Princes daughter, and got her with child. Which thing
the Prince took in so ill part, that he in a rage caused Fleance to be killed,
holding his daughter in most *vile estate of servitude, for so suffering her
self to be defloured by a stranger. At length she was delivered of a son,
which was named Walter, who in few years proved a man of great courage and
valiancy, in whom from his childhood appeared a certain noblenes of mind,
ready to attempt any great enterprise. This Walter on a time fell out with one
of his companions, who in that heat of contention objected unto him, that he
was but a bastard, Which reproach so grieved Walter, that he fell upon the
other, and slew him; whereupon fearing the punishment of the law, he fled into
Scotland, where he fell into the company of those Englishmen which were come
thither with Queen Margaret the sister of Edgar Edeling, amongst whom he
showed himself so discreet and sober in all his demeanor, that he was highly
esteemed of all men: and so attaining to higher reputation and credit, was
afterward employed in the affairs of the Common wealth, and at length made
Lord Steward of Scotland, receiving the Kings revenues of the whole Realm.
From which office he and his posterity retained that surname of Steward ever
after. The most Noble Kings of Scotland of the Family of Stewards, besides many
other Dukes, Marquesses, Earls, and Barons of Great Fame and Renown,
descended from him.

Also at this time, Siward that worthy Earl of Northumberland, being brought
to the point of death with the bloody flux, be wailed his mischance, that he
had escaped in many a dangerous Battle, and now should dye such a filthy and
cowardly death, and calling his friends and his men about him, commanded them
to set him in his chair, to Arm him at all points, and to put his shield in
the left hand, and so he made an end of his worthy life. His Earldom, because
his Son was within years, was given to Tosty Godwyns son.

In the year 1054 Gruffyth the son of Rytherch ap Jestyn, 1054.
did gather a great number, as well strangers as others, against Gruffyth ap
Lhewelyn King or Prince of Wales, but commonly called King of Northwales: who
protracting no time, met him, fought with him, and slew him. Shortly after,
Algar Earl of Chester, being convicted of Treason against Mat. We^. page 421.
the King, fled to Gruffyth King or Prince of Wales, who gathered his power to
revenge the often wrongs, which he had received at the Englishmens hands, who
succored ever his enemies against him. Therefore he together with Hol. p. 272
and ^ 22. October.
Algar entered Herefordshire, and spoiled with fire and sword all the way to the
City, whither all the People had fled, and Matt. West. page 422. Io. Castor.
This Randulph was K. Edwards nephew, by his sister God a the Wife of Walter de
Maunt. Eo tempore religiosus vir Tr^merin Walonicus Antistes decessit. Sim.
Dunelm.
they boldly issued forth (Earl Randulph being their leader) and gave him
Battle, which Gruffyth wished for above any other thing, as He that had won
five set fields; and courageously receiving his enemies, fought with them.
Which fight was long and doubtful, till such time as Gruffyth encouraged his
people with the remembrance of the Prowess and worthy acts of the ancient
Brytains their Forefathers, saying that they were the same Enemies, whose backs
they had so oftentimes seen before: which doubled their strength and force, and
so they pressed forwards, that their foes were compelled to forsake the field
and trust to their feet, where their hands prevailed not, and thought to have
taken the Town for their defense: But Gruffyth and his men pursued them so
hard, that they entered in with them, and after a great slaughter returned home
with many worthy Prisoners, great triumph, and rich spoils, leaving nothing in
the Town, but blood and ashes, and the walls rased to the ground.

* There be some which affirm, that King Edward by evil Hol. page 276. Io.
Castor.
counsel (as it is thought) banished Algar the son of Earl Leofrike,
whereupon he gat him into Ireland, and there providing XVIII ships of rovers,
returned and joined himself with Gruffyth King or Prince of Wales, who both
together invaded the Ceuntry of Mercia, about Hereford, where Ranulph Earl of
that Country (who Matt. West. page. 423. St. Dunelm.
was son to King Edwards sister named Goda, by her first husband Walter de
Maunt) came against them with a great Army, and met them about two miles from
Hereford, where after a sore fight by the space of three hours, Ranulph and
his Army were discomfited, and about 500 of them slain, and the rest put to
flight, whom Gruffyth and Algar pursued to Hereford, and entering the Town, set
the Cathedral Church on fire, and slew the Bishop named Leogar,, with seven of
the Canons, spoiled and burned the Town miserably. Whereupon, King Edward
being advertised hereof, gathered an Army, and sent Haroald the son of Earl
Godwyn against them, who pursuing the enemies to Northwales, passed through
Stradclwyd to Snowdon: but Gruffyth and Algar being afraid to meet Haroald, got
them again to Southwales, whereof Haroald being advertised, left one part of
his Army in Northwales, to resist the enemies there, and returning with the
residue to Hereford, caused a great Trench to be cast round about the Town,
with a high Rampire strongly fortifying the Gates of the same. After this, by
means of a parle had with Gruffyth and Algar, at a place called Biligelhag, a
peace was concluded, whereupon Algar being pardoned by the King, and restored
again to his Earldom, returned home to Chester. About two years after, Algar
was accused again of treason, so that he was the second time exiled the Land,
and repaired to his old friend Gruffyth Io. Cast. Hol. page 277.
Prince of Northwales, by whom he was received joyfully, and restored again to
his Earldom by the aid of certain strangers, which came by chance from
Norway. Whereupon King Edward being sore offended with Gruffyth, sent Haroald
again with power to Northwales, to be revenged upon him, who coming to Ruthlan,
burned the Palace of Gruffyth, and his ships, and then returned back to the
King at Gloucester.

About this time, Edward the son of Edmund Ironfide, came to England with his
Wife and Children, Edgar Edeling (which signifies in the Brytish tongue, a
young Lord or Prince) and Margaret, which was afterward Queen of Scots, and
mother to Mawd, wife to Henry the first King of England. About two years after
came Roderike, son to Haroald King of Denmark, with a great Army to Wales,
Mat. West.
where being friendly received by King Gruffyth, and joining his power to
Gruffyths, entered England, and cruelly spoiled and burned a great part of the
land. But shortly after, Roderike was compelled to return to his ships, and to
sail to Denmark, and Gruffyth returned home with spoils.

This year, as Haroald Godwyns son would have sailed Mat. Park. Mat. West.
to Flanders, he was driven by force of a tempest to land in Poytiers, where he
was taken, and conveyed to William Bastard, Duke of Normandy, to whom Haroald
declared his journey thither, to be only to offer him service in the affairs
of England, and took a solemn oath, first to marry the Dukes daughter, and
after the death of Edward to reserve the Crown to the Dukes use. Then shortly
after receiving rich gifts, with much honor he returned to England. This year
dyed Owen the son of Gruffyth ap Rytherch, and Joseph Bishop of Menevia. Also
Haroald and his brother Tosty, by the procurement of Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap
Rytherch, Mat. West. page 427.
and others, gathered a great power, and entered Southwales, and subdued a great
part thereof, and wrought so with those that were about Gruffyth the King, that
as soon as he had gathered his people in Northwales, and took his journey to
meet with Haroald, he was cruelly and traitorously slain by his own men, and
his head brought to Haroald: who appointed and placed Meredyth the son of
Owen ap Edwyn, Prince and Ruler in Southwales, and then he and his Brother
Tosty returned home.

* Some do report, that Haroald, about the Rogation week by the Kings
commandment, went against the Welshmen, and taking the sea, sailed by Bristow,
round about the coast, compassing in a manner all Wales. His brother Tosty,
that was Earl of Northumberland, met him by appointment with an Host of
Horsemen, and so joining together, they destroyed the Country of Southwales, in
such sort, that the Welshmen were compelled to submit themselves to deliver
hostages, and engage to pay the ancient Tribute which before they had paid. The
people of that Country, because Groffyth their Prince fled at the coming of
Haroald, leaving them to be a prey to the enemy, hated him sore, and slew him
when he returned to them again, and sent his head to Haroald, which he sent to
the King. After whose death, King Edward granted the Principality of Northwales
to Simon of Durham calls them Blechgentus and Ritowala^us.
Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons of Convyn, brethren to Gruffyth by the Mothers
side, who did homage unto him for the same.

This Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn governed Wales 26.
34 years valiantly and Worthily, be never fought but he bare away the victory,
he was gentle to his Subjects, and cruel to his foes, loved of the one, and
feared of the other: liberal to strangers, costly in apparel, and Princely in
all his doings, and unworthy of that cruel death, that the ambitious desire of
Rule did provoke his unkind Subjects and unnatural Cousens, to prepare for so
Noble a Prince, and so gentle a Master as he was.

In the year of our Lord 1061 Prince Griffith ap Llewelyn was murdered, and
Joseph Bishop of Menevia dyed; but the English writers say, he was not slain
till A. D. 1064. I have an ancient Chronology, which says that there were from
Griffiths death to William the Conqueror's coming to England (which was A. D.
1066) five years, from the Conquest to the death of Blethyn ap Convyn 7 years,
and from Blethyns death to the battle in Mynydd Carno (where Trahayrn was
slain) six years. He left two sons Meredith and Ithel.

A. D. 1053 Griffini Regis Australium Walensium, Res nomine, propter frequentes
pra das quas egit, in loco qui Bulendun dicitur jussu Regis Edwardi occiditur.
Simeon Dunelmensis says that Leofegarius Harold's Chaplain succeeded
Ethelstan in the Sea of Hereford, and that in the very same year the XVI of
the Calends of July he was slain by Griffith King of Wales at a place called
Glastbyrig, with his Clergy, cum Clericis suis and Vicecomite Agelnotho and
multis aliis.

Our Author Caradoc Lancarvan: says that Joseph Bishop of Landaff dyed A. D.
1043, but Bishop Godwyn says it was three years after, 1046: he dyed in his
way to Rome in the 24 year of his Bishopric, as it is in the Book of Landaffe.

About the year 1051 Marbodus evanc a Priest of Wales was made Bishop of Redon
in little Britain. Bal.

Herewald who succeeded Joseph next in the Sea of Landaffe, was, as Bishop
Godwyn says, consecrated A. D. 1056 by Stigand Archbishop of Canterbury, but
the Book of Landaffe gives another name to the Arch Bishop that Consecrated
him, for it is thus recorded therein, Confirmata illius consecratio a summo
Archiepiscopo Cynisi and aliis Angliae plurimis Episcopis Canonice consummata
est. By ( Cynisi) must be understood either Eadsin then Arch Bishop of
Canterbury, or else Kinsius Archbishop of York, of whom Ingulfus Abbot of
Croyland writes that he dyed A. D. 1060. As touching the Synod Bishop Godwyn
says was held at London A. D. 1056, Chronicon Landav. says it was held A. D.
1059. The election of Herewald was confirmed by Prince Griffith ap Llewelyn, ab
invicto Rege Grifido Monarcha Britonum praepollente, as says the Book of
Landaffe, wherein we have also set down this following Charter.

Pater and filius and spiritus Sanctus tres in personis, unus in Deitare and
essentia, Creator and Gubernator totius Creaturae, visibilis and invisibilis,
and super omnia formavit hominem ad imaginem and ad similitudinem suam,
dividens singula prout vult, and cui omnia serviunt impraesentiarum quibusd^^^
tribuens Regna and Potestates, quibusdam modicas paupertates cum septiformi
dono sapientiae and intellectus, consilii and fortitudinis, scientiae and
pietatis and timoris inspiravit cor lapideum ingruente quadam infirmitate
corporis Grifudi Regis Britanniae, and (ut sic dicam) totius Gualiae de fine ad
finem and calefactum sancti spiritus fervore. Videns igitur Rex quod potestas
ejus sicut flos foeni and caro ut cinis conatus est pro transitoria substantia
conquirere Regnum floridum sine casura and coeleste gaudium sine maerore and
tristitia, semota omni penuria, semetipsum tribuens sub jugo Paenitentiae, and
penitens ^ecisse quae fecerat contra Divina praecepta promisit se emendaturum
jejunio and oratione and eleemosyna cum diversis metallis preciosis largitis ab
illo, Deo, egenis, Viduis and Orphanis, and non degenerans a praedecessorum
nobilitate, pietate and largitate, imo imitans and praecellens rigore and
fortitudine tum contra barbaros Anglos ex una part semper fugitivos visa facie
sua in acie belli, tum contra Hibernienses occidentales and semper fugaces, tum
contra indigenas solito more bellicosas, tunc contra Danaos marinos tum contra
insularum Orcadum habitatores, and semper versis dorsis in fugam, and firmato
faedere ad libitum suum pacificatos: clamavit omnia territoria Landaviae
Ecclesiae Petri Apostoli and sanctorum confessorum Dubricii, Teliavi, and
Oudocei de omni Parochia ejusdem ab hostio Taratir super ripam Gui usque ad
ripam Tywi
Tiugui, and insuper terras ejusdem Lan Teliau maur, videlicet and Pennalun cum
multis aliis Ecclesiis and telluribus suis omnibus, and cum illis in Breheniauc
pluribus, ut in cirografo demonstratur, quae habentur extra diocesim in
Episcopatu sc: Deuui, and cum toto privilegio ut melius fuit tempore
praedecessorum suorum quieta and tranquilla ab omni regali servitio nisi tantum
oratione cotidiana pro animabus Regum and Principum Britanniae, and firmata
missis manibus super quatuor Evangelia, and in manu Heruvaldi Episcopi
consolidata and coram omni populo suo in die Nativitatis Domini apud Ystumgwy*
and oblata vill^ Penrhos in manu Episcopi and omnibus praesulibus Landaviae in
perpetuo. De clericis testes sunt Herwaldus Episcopus, Mormarch, Merchbui,
Tutnerth, Canonici Landaviae. Benedictus lector. Jovanaul, Novis, Elinvi,
Einon, Judhail presbiteri, Tathui, Abraham Archidiaconus Guenti. De Laicis rex
Grifud, Margetud filius ejus. Caratauc filius Riguallaun, Byrguith, Judhail
filius Teudus, Eidnivet fuedlid. Berdicgwent, Caratauc filius Gulbrit, and cum
data communione omnibus incolis terrarum Ecclesiae per totum regnum suum in
campo and in silvis, in aqua and pascuis.

Of Edwin ap Grono.
Edwin ap Grono commonly called King of Tegaingl (which is now part of
Flintshire) was one of the 15 Tribes of Gwyneth. His Arms, A. a Cross
ingrailed flowery S. between 4 Cornish Crows proper.

Argento gerit Edwinus Tegenius atram
Florentemq, Crucem nodosam quatuor inter
Cornices, rostris pariter pedibusque cruentis,
Regis Griffini Leolini tempore vixit.
He lived in the time of Griffith ap Llewelyn A. D. 1041. He had a sonnne
called Owen, whose daughter Angharad was wife to Griffith ap Conan King of
Gwyneth. Many good Families in the Counties of Flint, Denbigh, and elsewhere
are descended from him. The Right Reverend Father in God D. William Roberts
Lord Bishop of Bangor (who was Consecrated A. D. 1637. and now living) derives
himself lineally from him.

Also he was Auncestor to that Famous Scholar and Lawyer Thomas Owen one of
the Judges of England, and Father to Sr. Roger Owen of Condover near Salop Knight.
Howel Gwyneth a valiant Gentleman, who sided with Owen Glendor against King
Henry the 4th, was of this Tribe: He was one that did for a long time very much
hurt and annoy the English that dwelt in his neighborhood; (as before him one
Owen ap Aldud had done, who kept by force of arms under his subjection all
Tegaingl about three years, until such time as he had obtained his pardon) but
at length he was taken by his enemies of the Town of Flint and beheaded by
them at a place called Moelygaer, and his Lands were given to one Saxton.

Blethyn ap CONVYN and RYWALHON his Brother, the son also of Convyn.
AFter the decease of King or Prince Gruffyth, Meredyth the son of Owen ap
Edwyn (which Edwyn, as some writers say, was the son of Howel Dha) did take
upon him the government of Southwales, and Blethyn and Rywalhon the sons of
Convyn, and halfebrethren to King Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn (as being also borne of
Angharat daughter to Meredyth King of Wales) did govern Northwales, Conan the
son of lago being all this time with his Father in Law in Ireland. About this
time it fortuned, that as Haroald served the King with drink at Windsor his
brother Tosty moved with envy, that his younger brother should be preferred
before him, pulled him by the Mat. West.
hair of the head, and overthrew him. Then departing thence, full of rancor
and malice, to Hereford, where Haroald had prepared great cheer for the King,
he s^ue all Haroalds servants, and cut off their Heads, Arms, Legs, Noses,
Feet, and Hands, and filled all the vessels of Wine, Mead, Beer, and Ale
therewith: and sent the King word, that he should want no powdered and s^wsed
meats when he came thither; as for other things, he might make provision
himself. For which heinous offense the King banished him the land for ever.

* Caradoc ap Gruffyth ap Rytherch was the first that procured Haroald to come
to Wales against Gruffyth ap Lhewelyn, h^ping by him to attain unto the
government of Southwales. But it fell out otherwise, for when Haroald
understood that he should not get that at the hands of Caradoc which he looked
for, which was a certain Lordship within Wales nigh unto Hereford, and knowing
also Caradoc to be a subtle and deceitful man, he compounded with Meredyth ap
Owen for that Lordship, and made


