THE PRESENT STATE OF Jamaica. WITH THE LIFE Of the Great Columbus The first
Discoverer:

To which is Added An Exact Account of Sir Hen. Morgan's Voyage to, and famous
Siege and taking of Panama from the Spaniards.

LONDON, Printed by Fr. Clark for Tho. Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry, 1683.

TO THE READER.
I Present thee here with a short view of Jamaica, an Island the most
flourishing of any this day in the West Indies; and tho it has been but a short
time in the Hands of the English, yet it has Augmented it self to that vast
strength, by reason of its great Trade and number of Inhabitants, that it is
not only capable to Defend it self against any Invasion that may be made upon
it: but if occasion be, to Offend the most Potent of its Neighbors; a proof of
which you will find in Sir Henry Morgans famous Voyage to Panama, many years
ago, the Island being then in its Infancy, yet was able to give the (Club) Law
to the proud Spaniards, the apprehensions of which strikes Terror into the
Inhabitants of those Parts to this day. You will find here an exact State of
the Government of the Church, the Laws, the Militia, and its Revenue, carefully
Collected from the Records of the Country, with an Account of its Soil,
Climate, Woods, Mountains, Winds, and the Diseases that the People are most
Incident to; the Commodities of the Country, Cattle, Fowls, Fish and other
Provisions; with an Historical Account of its being taken from the Spaniards.

Vale.
Books lately printed for and sold by Tho. Malthus, at the Sun in the Poultry.
BEntivolio and Urania in six Books, by Nathaniel Ingelo D. D. the fourth
Edi^ion, with large Amendments, wherein all ^he obscure Words throughout the
Book ^re interpreted in the Margin, which makes ^his much more Delightful to
read than the ^ormer Editions.

Mr. James Janewayes Legacy to his ^riends, containing twenty seven Famous
^nstances of Gods Providence, in and about ^ea-dangers and Deliverances, with
the Names of several that were Eye Witnesses ^o many of them.

Catastrophe Mundi, or Merlin Revived, in Discourse of Prophesies, and
Predictions, and their Remarkable Accomplishments with Mr. Lillies
Hieroglyphics Exactly Out, and Notes, and Observations thereon, as also
Collection of all the ancient reputed Pro^hecies that are extant, touching the
Grand evolutions like to happen in these latter ages.

Historical Memoirs of the Life and Death ^f that wise and valiant Prince,
Rupert, Prince Palatine of the Rhine, Duke of Cum^erland, etc. containing a
brief but impartial Account of his Great and Martial Achievements, during the
time of the Civil Wars, together with his several Engagements in the Wars
between his Majesty and the States General of the United Provinces.

An Historical Account of the Heroic Life and Magnanimous Actions of the most
Illustrious Protestant Prince, James Duke of Monmouth; containing an Account o^
his Birth, Education, Places and Titles with his Great and Martial Achievement^
in Flanders and Scotland, his Disgrace and Departure both from Court and
Kingdom^ with the most material Circumstances tha^ have occurred since his
Return.

Psalmorum Davidis, Paraphrasis Poetica^ Georgii Buchanani, Scots Argumentis ac
Melodiis explicata, atque Illustrata.

The Romish Mass Book faithfully translated into English; with Notes and
Observations thereupon, plainly demonstrating the Idolatry and Blasphemy
thereof* containing, 1. The Cautelae, or Caveats o^ the Mass, 2. The Canon of
the Mass. 3 The History of the Mass: Showing when how, and by whom it was
patched together; with a curious Copper Cut prefixed, representing the Priest a
saying Mass With unanswerable Arguments proving it no Service of God. Published
at this ^uncture to prevent the Designs of those that are endeavoring to
introduce Popery amongst us. Dedicated to the Right Reverend Father in God,
Henry Lord Bishop of London. Price bound One Shilling.

The Famous Voyages of the ever Renowned and Valiant Sir Francis Drake into the
West Indies: viz. His great Adventures for Gold and Siver, and the gaining
thereof; with a particular Account of the ^amous Battle of Nombre de Dios. A
large Account of that Voyage wherein he encompassed the World: His Voyage with
Captain Knollis, and others; their taking the Towns of St. Jago, Sancto
Domingo, Carthagena, etc. His last Voyage in which he died, being accompanied
with several valiant Commanders, and the manner of his Burial. To which is
added, an Account of his valourous Exploits in 1588. in the Spa^ish Invasion.
Price bound One Shilling.

A most Learned Treatise, entitled, Fundamental Law the true Security of
Sovereign Dignity, and the Peoples Liberty. By a Person of Honor. Octav. Price
one Shiling Six pence.

Vates Astrologicus: or, England's Astrological Prophet. Foretelling what is
likely to befall Great Britain and Ireland, particularly the great and famous
City of London as also France, Holland, Spain, Germany Poland, Italy, Sicily,
Apulia, Bohemia Turkey, and indeed all Europe, but more especially the Sea of
Rome, for twenty year^ together, beginning March 10. 1683. ending March 10.
1702. Likewise Astrologic^^ Judgments of the effects of that famous Tr^ple
Conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, being thrice repeated in that Regal Sign
Leo, the great Dignities of the Sun and Jupiter. Als^ some Remarks upon the
Eclipses, and mo^^ especially upon that great and famous vi^^ble Eclipse of the
Sun, July 2. 1684. Wit^ twenty years Predictions from some of the most eminent
mutual Aspects of the Planet^ and Eclipse of the Luminaries, and annu^
Revolutions of Sun. With man Hierogl^phicks, representing the future State an^
Changes of the World. By Richard Ki^by Student in Astrology. Price one Shillin^

The Women's Advocate, or Fifteen Re^ Comforts or Matrimony: being in requital
(...) the late Fifteen Sham-Comforts; with Satyr^cal Reflections on Whoring,
and the D^baucheries of this Age, Written by a Pe^ of Quality of the Female
Sex. The Secon^ ^dition. Price One Shilling.

THE PRESENT STATE OF Jamaica.
THE Island of Jamaica in America is Situated in about 182 North Latitude, in
the Sea called Mare Del Nort; it lies about 140 Leagues North of the Main
Continent of America, South from the great Island of Cuba about 15 Leagues, and
from Hispaniola West about 20 Leagues.

The Island is of an Oval Form, and lies due East and West, having a continued
Ridge of lofty Mountains running from one end to the other. By the Map and
Survey which Sir Thomas Lynch took, it is above 150 Miles long, and from 25 to
50 Miles broad, de plano, and contains four Millions and a half of Acres; it is
imagined, if this Island were divided into eight parts, one is Excellent
Pasturage, called by the Indians Savannas, 4/8 good Plantable Land, Barren or
unplantable.

In the Year 1675, when Sir Thomas Lynch left the Government, there was above
900000 Acres passed and Planted, and to Manure and Cultivate it about 30000 of
all sorts of People.

This Island is not generally so Fertile and proper for Sugar as Barbados has
been, the Soil being extremely differing; for in some parts it is a black fat
Earth, and in others stiff and Clayie, in others Sandy, and in some Reddish,
but by pareels; it is therefore the Settlements are distinct, Mountainous, and
Unplantable Land interposing betwixt them make them appear like so many several
Colonies, and has occasioned this Division of the Parishes, St. Thomas at the
East, St. Elizabeth at the West, St. John's and St. Thomas in the Vale. In the
Island, St. Georges, St. Mary's, and St. Anns, the North side: St. David's, St.
Andrews, Port Royal, St. Catharines, St. Dorothies, Clarendon and Vere on the
South side. The greatest Plains, and almost all the Savannas or Pasturage is on
the South side; they are all taken up and Stocked with Cattle; on the South
side likewise is Port Royal and all the best Ports and Roads, and most
considerable Plantations, this side being dry, plain, more agreeable, and much
quicker and safer Coast than the North, for that in the Spring is apt to
violent Gusts of Winds, and much more subject to Rains than the South, as the
East, and all Parts is that is Woody and Mountainous; nor has the North side
any safe Port, but Port Antonio, to the Wind-ward, which is subject to violent
and constant Rains, and the Land about it Morsey and Mountainous, so no
Settlements are near it. The other Lee-ward Parishes have Port St. Mary's, that
is Reasonably good and safe, but they have (especially in St. Mary's Parish)
abundance of Excellent Plantations of Coccoa, many Sugar-works, and Provision
Plantations that are supported and carried on by Hunting and gathering Pimento,
with which this Quarter abounds. Thus Plantations were begun, and the
Government settled in Sir Thomas Lynch his time, and now the Inhabitants find
the goodness of that Soil Liberally Recompense the want of Harbors and
Pasturage, and distance from the Chief Port and Seat of Government, for its
very Fertile Land covered with Excellent Timber; it is a little Hilly, but full
of fine Rivers, and all Conveniences for Plantations.

The Climate is as agreeable as any can be betwixt the Tropicks, the Air being
very serene and clear, even to a Proverb among the Spaniards: It Is subject to
Thunder and Lightning, as all Countries in that Latitude are; the Rains come
uncertainly, but most expected about November and May, they are generally
violent, continue an uncertain time, are unhealthy, and breed Musketoes, that
are the greatest Plague in the Island, but are troublesome only the Rainy
Seasons, and in most places where they have not good Houses, a free Air, clean
Yards, etc.

This Climate subjects no body inevitably to Diseases, here being no such thing
as Seasoning, which is common in Ireland and Virginia, etc. Sir Tho. Lynch at
St. Jago and thereabouts lost not one Person o^ his Family that consisted of
about Thirty all the time of his Government. But to many Persons the Heat is
unsupportable, because it is so constant, and its Reflections so violent,
otherwise it is not greate^ than our Summers in England. I^ is Excess in
Eating, Drinking, Exercising Debauchery, etc. that to new comers and full
Bodies often bring Fevers, Calentures, and such Diseases, that are infinitely
more Acut^ than those here, and Cured by other Methods. To Servants, poor
Laboring People, etc. the Dropsy i^ the most common of all other Diseases;
they and Debauched Person are the most subject to Belly-aches caused usually by
their Disorders want of convenient Lodging, Clothing, Exercise, Diet, but
sometime by ill chosen Seats when they Plan^ in low Valleys, and have no Air,
o^ by Rivers, and have too much moisture, or by Mountains or Morossos, and have
too much Rain, or by the Seaside and on Bays, where they are Sandy, want good
Water, and have the Reflection of the Sun too violent; for this Island differs
one part from another as much in the temper of the Climate, as nature of the
Soil: For the East Parts are Mountainous, Rainy, and generally Fertile and
unhealthful. The South Part dry, plain, very pleasant, abounding with Ports and
Pasturage. The West is between both, only that and the South want Rivers, which
the North side abounds with, and Rich Land, as likewise good Hunting and
gathering Pimento in the Mountains, and Fishing on the Seacoasts; and by what
the Spaniards have told us, and some little Discovery we have made, we think
diverse of the Mountains have Minerals.

The Winter Months here have only the Nights, Mornings and Evenings cooler, the
Days as hot as Summer, and about fifteen Hours long Winter and Summer.

The Winds blow not an hours variation commonly here as they do every where
betwixt the Tropicks, that is Easterly, which they call Breeses, near the
Island they rise not till about Nine in the Morning, and usually cease at about
six or seven at Night; they come in gently, and grow as the Sun rises, and in
the Evening comes in a kind of Westernly Wind, which we call Land-breese,
because it blows off the Land, and with it the Vessels go out of Port: And to
the West, that is, the Wind-ward, as the East is called Lee-ward. This Island
has never been troubled with those dreadful Hurricanes that so often Ruin and
Afflict the Charibe Islands, Portorico, Hispaniola, Cuba, and many parts of the
Main. Here is no great Ebb or Flood of the Sea, we have not Observed above a
foot difference, nor can any Pilot give any certain Account of the Currents of
these Seas, they are so various and uncertain, nor can any guess why the
Hurricanes and Earthquakes should never touch Jamaica, since they so often
Afflict all the Islands and Continent.

None of the Rivers of this Island are fair or Navigable, because the Country
is very Mountainous, and these Hills running through the Center of it East and
West, the Rivers rise in them, and disembogue North and South; so falling out
of these high Mountains are very Rappie, and because of the great Rains in
them, are subject to Inundations that carry great stone Rocks and Timber along
with the Torrent, so make their usual Course foul and unpassable for Boats, and
make and change the Bars. There are diverse dry Rivers which hinder the Boats
from entering into the Country, as particularly Minoa, that runs through
Clarendon, which at some time has not a drop of Water, and at other times as
much as the Thames at High Water.

The Mountains, whether Stony or Plantable, are generally covered with
Excellent Timber for all Uses, both for Curiosity, Building, and Dying
abundance of Fruit and Spice Trees: These Mountains are full of Hoggs, and
there is probability of Minerals, but no Trees or Fruit that resemble ours in
England.

There Is no Towns in this Island but on the South side, at the East by Port St.
Thomas, Port Morant, several Houses called Rapp-Houses, which serve for
Storehouses and Alehouses for the Neighborhood, and such Vessels as use that
Port, which are but few, because the Governor has not yet permitted Vessels to
Discharge there.

At St. David's is Yhallows Bay, about seven Leagues from Port St. Thomas, as
far from Port Royal, there is several Alehouses and Storehouses.

At Liguania, the inside of the Harbor, opposite to Port Royal about two
Leagues, is several Houses, some of them very handsome, and well Built, which
place in time is like to become a pretty Town.

Port Royal is Situate on the extreme Point of Land that makes the Harbor: It
runs about Twelve Miles from the Main off the Land Westernly. It has to the
South the Sea, to the North the Harbor, which is the largest, safest, and most
convenient in America. This Neck of Land is exceeding narrow, and nothing but a
loose Sand that has neither Grass, Stone, Water, nor Trees. But being so
Commodious for Ships, that they are Secure all Weathers, and can unload a Float
at the Merchants Key: It is the most Populous place for Trading in the Island,
and there only Ships enters and are dispatched. In the Spaniards time there was
no Houses, the Seamen of Cromwell's Fleet begun the Town, by Building
Storehouses, and called it Cogway, as we judge corruptly, from the Spanish
word La aguia. Col. Doyly caused it to be laid out as a Town, but not very
Regularly. In Sir Char. Littleton's time it was called Port Royal, from the
Excellency of the Harbor. It now contains above 1500 Houses, there is a House,
though none of the best, belonging to the King: And in the Earl of Carlile's
time a fine New Church, Built partly by Liberal Subscription of diverse
Gentlemen Inhabiting the Island, and partly by an Assessment laid upon the
Inhabitants of the Port.

Going from Port Royal to St. Jago de la Vega, People Land at Passage, where a
Fort was in Col. Doyly's time, and there is about Thirty Houses that are
Storehouses, Alehouses, and Horse-keepers, and Hackney Coaches; this being
the greatest Passage in the Island, it is two Leagues from Port Royal by Sea,
and six Miles from St. Jago by Land.

St. Jago de la Vega is Situated in a large Plain by a River that is called pro
de Cabre, as having a taste of that Metal, or coming out of those Mountains in
Liguania, where the Spaniards told us they found of it. This Town was almost
quite Deserted when Sir Tho. Lynch came to the Government, but in his time
about Forty Houses were Built, and Repaired about one Hundred more. The Grand
Court is holden Quart^rly in this Town, and a Fair was Erected in Sir Tho.
Lynch his time; it has one Spanish Church, and Gentlemen's Houses that made it
look well during the time the Governor Lived there, but since that time it is
much increased in Number of Beautiful Buildings and Inhabitants.

At Old Harbor, about seven Miles West from St. Jago, are about Thirty Houses
for the Uses and Accommodation of Vessels, and Storehouses for Planters Goods,
this being esteemed the best Harbor, excepting Port Royal, in the South side.
By the Spaniards it was more Frequented.

At Withy Wood, Twenty Miles to the West, is about forty or fifty Houses for
the Accommodation of Vessels, that Road being more frequented than any other on
the South side, there being good Land, many Settlements, and a Pleasant
Country all about it.

At the Extensive Point of Port Royal was Built a Round Tower by Cromwell's
Seamen in 1656, in 1657 and 1658 Col. Doyly laid the Foundation of a more
Regular one, which Sir Charles Littleton near Finished in 1664, and Sir Tho.
Modyford in his time, which was to the Year 1671, quite finished, and Mounted
in it about 36 Guns, Employing the Round Tower only as a Storehouse for
Ammunition. Besides this he Built a Breast-work of stone, that run from the
Harbor to the Sea about 200 Yards, this was to Defend the Town from any
surprise by Land, as the Castle was to Defend the Mouth of the Harbor. It was
Named by Sir Charles Littleton, Charles Fort, in Honor of His Majesty. In Sir
Tho. Lynch his time was Built a Fort, called James Fort, Built by Sir Thomas,
and the Voluntary Contribution of some Gentlemen: On the Island Point of the
Town, to flank the Ships at turning into the Harbor, and Batter them when at
Anchor in it, which the Castle cannot: He likewise made a slight Work for that
purpose at Prison Point, where six Guns were Mounted, and at Port Morant four
Guns, and a Breast-work raised to Defend the Port.

Another likewise at Old Harbor, which was done in Sir Tho. Lynch his time,
but many more were added in the time of the Earl of Carlisle.

The Commodities the Country produces are Excellent Sugars, Cocoa, Cotton,
Hides, Ginger, Tobacco, Tortoise shell, Indico, Primento, Fustick, Brazilletto,
Lignum Vitae, Granadilla, Ebony; besides some Gums, Achot Drugs, etc.

This Island abounds with Cattle, and the Islands of Spaniola, Portico, and
Cuba do the like; so does many Parts of the Main, the first Breed being brought
out of Europe; for before the Discovery, there was none of our Cattle, great or
small in the West Indies: In Jamaica they Multiplied so exceedingly, that when
the English took the Island, a Cow was not worth above a Piece of Eight, and a
Horse half as much. But the Army destroyed them so, that in the Year 1671, when
Sir Tho. Lynch came to the Government, a Cow was worth Twelve or Fourteen
pounds, but by the goodness of the Pasture, and the Cattle Sir Thomas Imported
from the Spaniards, they increased so, that in the Year 1675 they were worth
but four pounds per Head, one with another. Besides, here is plenty of good
sprightly Horses, some Mules and Asnegroes, abundance of Hogs, Goats, and
Sheep, whose Wool is hairy, the Flesh not generally so good as in England; they
breed often, but live not well, unless about Alligater Ponds. Rabbets live well
enough, but there is no Hare nor Deer in the Island.

In this Country is Hens, Turkeys, and Ducks, bred better, and are better
flesh than in England. Geese are but rare, there is abundance of Excellent Wild
Fowl, as Guiny Hens, Flemingoes, Teale, Ducks, Curlews, with great variety of
Pigeons, Turtles, Parrots, Maces, and other Birds, whose Flesh is good, and
Feathers finely colored.

There is store of Fish, both in the Sea and diverse Rivers, not much common to
England, but a King of Lobster, Craw-fish, Eels, Mullers, and Spanish Mackrael,
with abundance of all sorts of Admirable Fish proper to those Seas. Tortoise
are taken much on this Coast, but chiefly at the Island Cay Manos, 30 Leagues
to the West of this Island, whither the Vessels go May, June, and July to Load
of their Flesh that they Pickle in Bulk, and take them in that Season, when
they come on shore to lay their Eggs, which they do, and cover them with Sand
that hatches them, and then by instinct they crawl to the Sea, where they Live,
and feed on Weeds that grows in the bottom, or floats. In many Rivers and Ponds
of Jamaica there is vast Numbers of Crocodiles, or Allegators, that is an
Amphibious Creature, and breeds of an Egg, hatched by the Sun in the sand. A
Tortoise Egg is just like the Yolk of a Hen-Egg, of which she lays near a Peck
at a time; but the Allegator but a few, and are like a Turkeys; their Flesh is
not good, they are voracious, and live on Fowls and Beasts that they catch by
surprise, but seldom or never hurt any Man.

Here Is an Indian Coney, called Raccoones, that is good Meat, but of a
distastful shape, being something like an overgrown Rat: The Snakes in this
Island are not at all hurtful, but were eaten by the Indians as Regaloes, as
the Guanaes are by the Spaniards; it is but small, and of the shape of an
Allegator, the Flesh is sweet and tender: The most Offensive thing in this
Island are diverse sorts of Flies, called Merywings, from their Noise;
Mutquettoes, from their Littleness; Gallinippors, from their Biting; for all
sting and trouble People exceedingly: And in some parts of the North there is
little ugly Creatures, called by the English Gallivaches, whose bite is Mortal
to Dogs, Goats, etc.

There is in this Island none of the Fruit common to Europe but Oranges,
Lemons, and Limes (a Bastard Lemon) Citrons, Pomgranats, Grapes grow well
enough; here is a Wild sort the Spaniards made Red Wine of: The English have
but few Vines, and they require much time to Cultivate them, and are so
difficultly defended from the Parrots, and other Birds, and not Ripening
altogether. We think it impossible to make Wine without great quantities and
great Labor; for in the Country after every Season there is a Spring, so that
the Grapes and all Fruits shoot out after, it have therefore Blossoms, Young
Fruit, and Ripe all at the same time. Besides these Fruit in Jamaica, there is
abundance of Plantains, Bonanoes, Tamarinds, Cathus, Guavaes, Mummees, and
small Oysters that grow in Clusters on Mangroves by the Seaside, Sapolaes,
Supotilla, Aduecades, Star-Apples, Custard-Apples, and Prickle-Apples, Pears,
Pine-Apples, Prickle-Pears, Plumbs of diverse sorts.

The Common Bread that Ordinary Planters and Servants use, is Cassader, in its
stead Potatoes. But the Gentlemen make Bread of Flour that comes from England
and New York.

English Flowers would grow in this Island without Care and Charge, but they
have large and extraordinary Jessemine-Trees, and other Odoriferous Trees and
Plants.

Likewise there grows exceeding well all our Summer Herbs, so does Pease,
Beans, Cabbage; and Turnips, though not very well. But Carrots, Raddish, Onions
pretty well. By Art, Care, and Pains Gardinage would do better here than in the
South parts of Spain; for though our Rains are more violent, our Droughts are
not so frequent and long.

In this Island are abundance of Medicinal Herbs, Roots, and Plants. We have
Venillaes; here is China, Sarsaparilla, Gum Guaicum, Benjamin, etc.

The Common Drink of the Gentlemen is Madera Wine and Water; at the Sugar-works
they make Drink of Malasses, in other places of Cassader, which they call
Perinoe, and of Potatoes, called Mobbie; and likewise of Bonanoes. A Drink is
made of a Spirit, called Rum, Distilled from the Canes, they make great
quantities, which does Mischief, being very strong and unpleasant, yet drunk by
the Ordinary People excessivly, that causes Drunkenness, Disorder, Poverty,
Diseases.

The 11th. of October, 1492, Collumbus Discovered the Lucca's Islands,
Spaniola, and Cuba, and shortly after returned for Spain. In his second Voyage,
endeavoring to round Cuba, to know whether it was an Island or no, he
Discovered Jamaica the 14th. of May, 1494. and called it St. Jago, which Name
did not take, he staid but little on it at its Discovery; but in his Third
Voyage, in the Year 1503, the 23d. of June, he arrived there again,
Ship-wrackt, and in great Distress, his Vessels quite disabled, Provisions
spent, and Men sick and dis-heartened with their Misfortunes. At Veragua on the
Coast of the Main, the first Road he fell in with he did not like, but went
further West to a Port he called Sancta Gloria, and there run his ships on
ground and lashed them together, and Lodged on their Decks, the Indians being
Numerous, for at this time it was supposed there was above 60000 Families of
them on this Island. Collumbus lay about two Months in a most Miserable
Condition, the ungrateful Spaniards and Malicious Governor of St. Domingo
sending him no Relief, on purpose to make him Perish; and in this Fatal time
the Porra's, three Brothers of Sevil, Rebelled, which Collumbus's Brother
suppressed; so that in this Island was the first Civil War and Bloodshed
betwixt the Spaniards in America. In the time this great Unfortunate Man staid
thus Miserably, and ship-wrackt on the North side of Jamaica, it is suppose^
they began to settle a Design to Plant finding this Island very fertile, and
the Natives more civil and ingenious than any of the other Islanders. And at
this time began that Town, the old Maps call Metilla, that we think were about
Fig Tree on the North side, which was but by little advanced, then they
deserted it. Eight or ten Leagues further West, finding a better Bay they
called St. Anns, which Names is continued by us. And here they began to settle,
and in some years built a handsome ^arge Town named Sevil, that had some Sugar
Works, and good Plantations about it, and a very considerable Abbey in it; the
Abbots were always the Bishops Suffragan, and chief in all Ecclesiastical
affairs; there is some Pillars of this left, and a Portal of the Church, with
the Emperor Charles the Fifths Arms over it, and an Inscription that says;
Petrus Martyr Anuleria Abbas Vnius Insule, eadem hanc Bisigne consumptam
Letantio and quadrata Lapido a fundamentis extruxit. This being a most learned
Millener, that had served King Ferdinand as Confessor and Ambassador to Grand
Cape, and being of the Emperors Council for the Indies, of which he wrote the
Decades. It may be supposed Jamaica was then in great esteem. This Town
flourished till about the year 1590. then the Spaniards deserted, as they say,
because their Children could not live there. But we rather believe, because the
North side was Mountainous and unpleasant; and on the South were huge plain
Savannaes, which we suppose were Fields of Indian Corn and Cassader that were
proper for Cattle, of which the Spaniards now have great plenty. Besides, the
South had better Ports, was nearer, and had greater Commerce with the rich
Country o^ the Maine, then the North could have, which might reasonably enough
induce them to change Situations, and fix on that of the Jago de la Vega, or
St. James upon the Plain, where they were settled 70 years. Before the English
under General Venables, the 10th of May, 1655. took it, it had about 17 years
before been surpised by one Jackson, with a Fleet of English Privateers, who,
for a thousand Beeves quitted the Town, having no design but to Cruise. But
Crumwell sent his Army to seize Spaniola, or some place that was convenient for
a Collony and seat of War, he having mist St. Domingo they resolved to fix
here; nor were they like to be beaten out, for there was not many Native
Indians left, they being long before destroyed by the Spaniards; and of the
Spaniards there was not above 550 Men, 600 Women, and 1500 Slaves; there was no
Militia or Fortification. The Town had in it two Churches, four Chapels, about
1200 Houses of all sorts; the Streets Regular, but Houses low and like Barns:
all the Spaniards and their Wives and Children dwell in them, and had their
Servants and Slaves in the Country, to manage their Cattle, Sugar works, and
Cocoa Walks, and furnish them with Provisions, which they lazily and
luxuriously spent in the Town; the Trade they had was with Cartagena and
Portobella, and sometimes with Interlopers. There Merchandise was Hides, Cocoa,
Tallow, Sugar, Pimento, with which they bought what they needed. The discovery
of Nova Hispana and Perue unpeopled this Island, as it did Porterico, Spaniola
and Cuba, people being less safe and rich in them after the English and Dutch
Privateers began to infest these Indias; besides the Inhabitants of Jamaica
were discouraged by being Tennant or Vassals to a Proprietor; for about the
year 1560. as we guess, this Island was given to the Heirs of Collumbus, in
compensation for the perpetual Vice-Roy-ship and Admiralty of these Indies: so
they were called Dukes De la Vaga, now De Veragua, their eldest Son a Marquis,
one Dr. Fulano Ramizer was Governor for the Duke De Veragua, when the English
came in 1655. he was an old decrepid man: so retreated with the Priests, Women
and Children into the Island and Mountains, and left the Sergeant Major D'
Christovall de Alvares Sali, that was afterward Governor, to treat with the
General of the English Army, which was Col. Venables. Penn Commanded the Fleet,
but both and the whole Design was to be Governed by Commanders, which were the
two Generals Col. Searle Governor of Berbados, Col. Everard Governor of St.
Christophers, Col. Butler and Major Winslow that went with the Army, which
consisted of six Regiments Commanded by General Venables. Col. Fortescue that
after Haynes his Death was made Major General, Col. Anthony Butler, Col.
Holdup, and Col. Doyly, with two Troops one brought from England, and Commanded
by Captain Jones; the otheer raised at Barbados, Commanded by Capt. Carter;
these Landed with the Army and Regiment of Seamen, Commanded by Vice Admiral
Goodson.

The Fleet consisted of about 30 Sail of Men of War, and as many other Vessels
and Dutch Ships, which were seized at Barbados. At our Arrival the Spaniards
pretended to deliver the Island by Treaty, but the General soon found they only
by this Artifice endeavored to get time to secure the Women, Children and
Wealth in the Mountains: so about 20 days after the Armies Landing, the
General sent out Parties to pursue them; sometimes we took of these miserable
People; sometimes they surpised and killed of ours, strangling and starving
Soldiers: But the Stores of the Army being Landed, which were exceeding great
and convenient, the gross of the Fleet and two Generals, return for England; in
their way of the Havanna they met the Spanish Fleet, which they had easily
taken if they had known them. The Ships that staid was commanded by Admiral
Goodson, the Army by Major General Fortescue; the last in 1656. died, leaving
the Soldiers in a most miserable and perishing condition; many were dead, most
sick, their Stores spent, the Spanish Plantations, and their vast numbers of
Cattle all destroyed, or run wild, and the Fleet in no better condition. On
Fortescues Death, Col. Carter should have Commanded, but being sick he resigned
to Col. Doyly, and died quickly after. This lamentable Command Col. Doyly held
about a year. Then Major General Sedgwick came to Command, and brought some
Stores and Recruits of Men out of Ireland. But before he was well in this
Office he died; so did Sir William Aylesbury about 8 Months after he came over
with Sedgwick; and after his Death, was by the Commissioners made one of them;
for in the Intervals, the Armies was Commanded by the Commissioners, and the
chief power lodged in them, who succeeded, and appointed one another when any
Died or went away. On General Sedgwicks death, the Commands Reverts again on
Col. Doyly. In this time the condition of the Army, if it was possible, grew
yet more lamentable; those that were not sick were discontented and Mutinous,
ready to have run to the Spaniards, if they had known where to have found them,
which occasioned the Dispute between Major Throgmorton and the General: for the
Major was employed by the Officers of the Army to Petition the Commissioners
for our Pay; if an Army, for subsistence; to return, if no Army. Col. Doyly was
privy to this, but before the Commissioners denied it, which made Throgmorton
Impeach him; to make which good, he was secured, and Col. Doyly afterward;
when Goodson the chief Commissioner forms a trifling Charge against him; and in
defending himself, Throgmorton (a passionate young Gentleman; alleged the
Court Marshall had no power to Try him; whereupon he was thrust rudely out of
the Court, and the holding up his Hand to save his Head, when the Marshal
offered to strike him with the Hilt of his Sword, was on the Marshal Generals
Oath Judged a resisting of him: so the most unhappy, most ingenious and hansom
man that ever was on Jamaica, was shot to death, in which his Col. Barrington
had as great a hand as the General.

In 1657. Cromwell sent over Col. Richard Bryan to Command, with two Regiments
out of Scotland and Ireland; the one was his own, the other Col. Moors, both
the best men that ever came to Jamaica. During the time of his Government, came
Col. Stokes, the Governor of Mevis, as one of the Commissioners, with about
1700 People of all sorts, and they settle at Portmorant, where they began the
first Plantation and Civil Government. But almost all these Planters, with
General Stokes and General Bryan, die. In a short time Bryan was infinitely
lamented, being a wise man, and perfectly qualif^ed for the Command and Design:
so the Government again falls to Col. Doyly, that neither loved, encouraged,
nor understood Planting: In all this time the Fleet did nothing, only Goodson
had taken Santa Martha Rio de Hach, and some such pitiful places that relieved
the Sea men, but was no benefit to the Army, which now almost perished by
Diseases and want, tho they had diverse supplies from England, yet the
covetousness, and ill conduct of the Officers, hindered them from making the
best use of that, and the good Land that they were Masters of. But those that
survived, being the most industrious and spirited men, were now grown seasoned
and acquainted with the Indias, and thereby capable of doing more than the
great Army; and Cromwell having sent Capt. Mints in a Third Rate Frigate, Capt.
Heytub in a Fifth, and Capt. Heylin in a Sixth, Col. Doyly puts on Board them
300 Soldiers Commanded by Major Wilbraham, Capt. Thomas Morgan, and Capt.
Linch, these being got high enough to wind-ward, Landed and took Cumana;
afterward ranged down all that Coast, and Landed again at Puerto Cavalla
Babanta, where they took two Ships thence again for Corow, where they met with
about 30 or 40 Chests of the King's Money, so returned to Jamaica, with more
Plunder in Money, Plate and Jewels than ever was brought thither before by the
English.

In 1658. the Spaniards Landed 300 men at Chircras, on the North side, and
endeavored to Fortify and provide for a great Body that was to come from New
Spain, by way of St. Jago de Cuba: But the General having notice, sent a Party
that Razed the Fort, and killed and took almost all the Spaniards. Before this
time, all the Women and Children were gone to Cuba, and only the men and Slaves
remained under the Command of the Governor, who skult up and down the
Mountains, and lived so wretched a life, that most of his Negroes had deserted
him, and were come in to submit to the English General, under the conduct of
one Juan de Bola, an ingenious Slave, that had from Col. Doyly a Commission (as
'twas called) to settle with them at Caymanos by St. Jago, where he Governed
them, and was afterward killed by some of our Runaway Negroes.

In 1659. the Spaniards sent the long expected Body of men, that consisted of
about 1200. who Landed and fortified at Rio Nova, on the North side; as soon as
we had notice, the General himself went thither with about 600 choice men and
Volunteers that were embarked on the Grantham a Fifth Rate, and Blackmore a
Sixth Rate, and some other small Vessels, who Landed the General and his men in
the very Port; the next day they Attaqued and took the Fort, the most of the
Spaniards being killed and taken in it, which was the bravest and last Action
the English Army did on Jamaica, for after this the Spaniard sent no more
People or Supplies. But the Governor Don Christopher endeavored to get off
himself. The latter end of this year Col. Doyly sent to Cromwell 10 or 12
Colors as Marks and Trophies of this Victory. But the Messenger Col. Barry
found him Dead: so he never had one syllable of any thing that was grateful
from the vastest Expense and greatest Design that was ever made by the English.

In 1660. there was a Mutiny, for which Col. Tyson and Col. Boymond was shot to
Death.

In 1661. his Majesty sent Col. Doyly a Commission for Governor, with order to
Disband the Army; upon which he Erects a Civil Government, and People begin to
Plant, judging the Island would not be surrendered again to the Spaniard.

In 1662. came my Lord Windsor a Governor, and brought with him (...) Donative
of 20000 l. which the King was pleased to give the Army at their Disbanding. My
Lord presently after his Arrival, sent Capt. Mims in the Centurion, with some
Soldiers to take St. Jago de Cuba, which they performed with most Remarkable
Resolution and Success on their return. My Lord being very sick and uneasy,
embarques on the Bear for England.

Sir Charles Littleton in 1633. is Deputed Governor by my Lord Windsor; he
sent Capt. Mimms in the Centurion, with diverse Privateers and Land-men in the
Bay of Campeach, where he bravely enough took the Town, but no great Plunder,
neither there nor at St. Jago. In Sir Charles Littleton's time was Charles Fort
almost built, the Government formed, and the first Assembly called, and Laws
made; But he being sick, and having left all his Family, was likewise disposed
to return, and having the King's License for; as also an Order to Invest the
Council with the Power.

In the beginning of 1664. the Council chose Col. Thomas Linch their President,
and Sir Charles Littleton made him Commander in chief, which he exercised till
the Arrival of Sir Thomas Modyford.

Sir Tho. Modyford came in June, 1664. and a week before him Col. Edw. Morgan;
and now People began vigorously to apply themselves to Planting, Sir Thomas
understanding and encouraging it exceedingly. In the Griffin he sent his eldest
Son, the Major General, for his Lady: But the Frigate and he was both cast away
near the Gulf of Florida; so she came not till the year following. At the
beginning of his Government he endeavored a Peace with the Spaniards: But not
being able to effect it, he encourages the Privateers; and Capt. Henry Morgan
having signalized his courage by burning a Spanish Admiral that shut him and
Capt. Pennant, and other Privateers, up in the Bay of Maricaio; Sir Thomas made
use of him to Imbody the Privateers, which he effects in the year 1668. and Sir
Thomas makes him Admiral. And that joining with several French, by the
assistance of a Dutch man, Lands in the Bay, and came over the Mountains by
night into the Town of Porto Bello, which they surpised and resolutely took
the Castle that commanded the Town: and afterward that which commanded the
Harbor, then quitted both, having -- pieces of Eight for delivering the
Powder, and not Razing their Forts. With this Money he brought the Plague to
Jamaica that killed my Lady Modyford, and many People. And in the year
following Sir Thomas Modyford employed Major Beeston to draw the Privateers
together again, to serve under Admiral Morgan; which he effected, and they
joining with diverse French Vessels went for Panama, and bravely took the Fort
of Changra. But before they came to Panama, they found it set on fire by the
President, so returned to their Ships; but in beating up to Jamaica many
Vessels failed, so that Men most miserably perished on barren Islands and
Rocks. By this and such like Designs, many brave men were lost, and no real
advantage brought to the Island. And in the year 1670. the Treaty about the
West Indies was concluded at Madera, and Sir Thomas Modyford removed.

Sir Thomas Linch made his Majesty's Lieutenant, Governor and Commander in
Chief, and arrived at Jamaica, June 24. 1671. The same Month he sent Major
William Beeston to Cartagena in the Assistance Frigate to notify the Peace; and
the March following, he made Sir Thomas Modyford a Prisoner (aboard the Frigate)
and sent him for England for breaking the Peace with the Spaniards, contrary to
his Majesty's Express Orders. And five or six Months after Admiral Morgan, on
the same account, Sir Thomas Linch endeavored to procure a good
ununderstanding between the two Nations, according to the Treaty and his
Orders, and put to Death. One Jonson a Dutch man, which was the only Privateer
ever suffered for all the Murder, Rapine and Violence those dissolute People
have committed on the Spaniards. In his time the Portland took a Caper, and the
Thomas and Francis, His Majesty's Hired Ship, and a Privateer, took a Dutch
Ship of 544 Negroes, which were more beneficial to the Island than all the
Prizes ever brought to it. During the time of his Government, many Ships were
loaded with the Product of the Island; before, it never one. And in the end of
his Government, Land was risen to five times the value it was at in the
beginning. Col. Tassel and Mr. Rogers, at his command, run a Chain round the
Island. An exact Mapp and Survey was sent home by my Lord Vaughan: in his time
were abundance of Cattle Imported from Cuba, which brought down their Price
from 12 to 14 l. per Head, to 4 and 5 l. In his time Fairs and Markets were
Erected at St. Jago, Liguania, Port Royal, etc. Sir Thomas Linch remitted to
the Kings principal Secretary of State, a large and exact State of the
Government of Jamaica: of the Church, the Laws, the Militia, and Revenue, which
was in brief thus:

His Majesty is Sovereign Lord and Proprietor of this Island, in all Writs,
Commissions and Grants; He is styled, King of England, etc. and Lord of
Jamaica; the Governor Represents His Person, and is invested with his Power,
being enabled by his Commission under the Great Seal, and directed by his
Instruction how to Govern; and it is always during his Majesty's pleasure.

Here 12 Councillors are chosen by the Governor, and Constituted in all
Emergencies and Causes, like the King's Council here, the which they Resemble,
and the House of Lords, because they Sit with the Assembly; the Governor
cannot suspend them without giving Advice to the Principal Secretary of the
Cause. This Government by practice as well as order from His Majesty, is
Assimulated as near as possible to that in England, which renders it grateful
to the People, who believe they ought to enjoy their Property and Native Right,
where they are under the King's Dominion, so nothing be inflicted on them but
by the course of Law, nor taken from them but by Acts themselves have consented
to. Therefore they have by His Majesty's Order in Jamaica Assemblies that
consist of 32 Persons, chosen indifferently by the Freeholders of the 14
Parishes. In these Assemblies the Governor has a Negative Voice: he Calls,
Prorogues and Dissolves them at pleasure; the Governor, the Council, and the
Assembly are invested with the Legislative Power, and are Convened to make some
little Municipal Laws, proper to the usage of the Island, about Governing
Servants, Slaves, Officers, Highways, Church, Militia, but chiefly to raise
Money for the support of the Government. What Laws they make are to be sent
into England, and to be of force but for two years, unless the King consent;
then perpetual, unless Revoked as they were made.

There is but seven Churches in the Island, that is, one at St. David's,
Liguania, Port Royal, St. Jago, St. John's and Vere. The Governor seems to be
the King's Deputy, or Bishop of London's Suffragan, for he Presents and
Inducts; and the Parsons being admitted, every Parish is bound to allow 100 l.
per annum, at the least, Pot-Royal 200 l. St. Jago 130 l. by Act of the
Assembly made in Sir Thomas Linch his time, when only these Parishes
abovenamed were supplied.

The Governors Residence was at St. Jago, more within the Land, and easier for
People to apply themselves to him; he named or appointed all the Officers, only
such as the King made under the Great Seal of England, as the Secretary of the
Island, that makes all the public Dispatches, keeps the Office of Inrollment.
And the Marshal, who is the Executive Officer of Justice, in the nature of a
Sheriff, Usher of the Black-Rod, and Jailer, for the Administration of Justice,
and better Government of the Parishes. There is Sessions of the Justices
Quarterly held at Morant, Liguania, Port Royal, St. Jago, St. John Clarendon,
St. Elizabeth; every of these Precincts have a particular Custos Rotulorum
appointed, who with the Justices and other Officers Present, Reform, Examine
and punish all Crimes, Disorders and Misdemeanors that are within their
Cognizance by the Laws of England, or those of the Island. All Pleas of the
Crown and Civil Causes, are heard and Determined in the Grand Court that Sits
Quarterly at St. Jago, and thither Errors and Causes are brought from the
Inferior Courts, this being like the King's Bench, Court of Exchequer and
Assizes in England. In some extraordinary Cases the Governor Grants
Commissions of Oyer and Terminer. The Governor is Chancellor and Keeper of the
Great Seal of the Island; which the King sent by Sir Charles Littleton to my
Lord Windsor. It Is a Cross charged with four Pines, the Reverse his Majesty in
his Throne, an Indian kneeling and presenting him. All public Commissions and
Grants are sealed with this Seal. To every Planter the Governor Grants Thirty
Acres per Head, for which he gives his Warrant, then the Surveyor of the
Precinct within which it lies, runs it out, and returns it to the Clerk of the
Pattents, which draws the Grant; so it is held of the King in Common, and pays
for what Sir Thomas Modyford Granted 25 s. per 1000. for what Sir Thomas Linch
Granted a half penny per Acre.

By an Act of the Assembly an Office of Inrollment is Erected, and kept by the
Secretary, where the Pattent and all Deeds and private Writings are Recorded to
prevent Lawsuits and fraudulent Conveyances, and is in the nature of a
Registry. All Actions at Law between Neighbors, are tried in the Inferior
Courts, which are in the nature of Court Barons here. There Is one at Morant,
Liguania, Port Royal, St. John's, Clarendon, St. Elizabeth, and the North side;
each Court has its Judge, 12 Assistants, Clerk, Marshal; and any person may
plead his own Cause. They hold Pleas of any sum under 20 l. and of greater
sums, when they take a Justicias out of the Chancery, which the Governor
grants of course; and here all Appeals, with the assistance of some of the
Council that sit as the Probate of Wills, Licenses for Marriages, etc. are
dispatched in the Secretarys Office; and the Governor seems to be in the
nature of Judge of the Prerogative Court.

At Port Royal is established a Naval Office that takes care of the Entrys,
dispatches of Vessels, and the observance of their Acts of Navigation.

The Governor is Vice Admiral to his Royal Highness, and has a Commission to
Command all his Majesty's Ships that come to the Island; and likewise a large
Commission to Erect Courts of Admiralty, and exercise all those Maratime powers
his Royal Highness has; so there is at Port Royal a Judge-Admiral, with all the
needful Officers that proceed in the Court according to the forms of Admiralty
used here and in other parts.

The Militia is Commanded by the Governor, according to the power he Reigns
from His Majesty and the Laws of the Country, for there is a particular Act that
appoints the time of Mustering the Persons, the Arms, aad the Places of
Rendezvous. Here Is no Soldiers paid by the King; all the Officers are made by
the Governor. At St. Thomas and St. David's is one Regiment, another at St.
Andrews, Port Royal, St. Catherines, St. John's, Clarendon, St. Elizabeth, and
North side: and in every one of these Regiments is one Troop of Horse; the
Company and Troop that is at St. Jago wait on the General as his Guards on
Sundays to Church; and on any other occasion the Regiment at Port Royal keep
the Fort there by half a Company at a time. All the Militia here is much more
obedient, useful, better Disciplined and Armed than in England.

The Revenue of this Island consists in what is properly the Kings, as
Quit-Rents, Fines, Forfeitures, Escheats, Seizures that are Collected by His
Majesty's Officer, and accomptable to his Order, and a Revenue paid by the
Assembly by an Impost on Strong Liquors Imported, and a Tax for Licenses for
Alehouses; the Licenses are received by the Secretary, and the Impost by such
Collectors the Governor and Council name and appoint; these, and all that
receive any of the Kings or Public Money, give an account thereof to a
Treasurer, who Issues it out according to the Governors Order, of which he
gives him and the Council an account once every six Months, and keeps fair and
open Books to show the Assembly, or any that desire to inspect them, that every
body may see the Money not misapplied, or ill managed, that they may be
encouraged thereby to raise more when needful. In Sir Thomas Linch his time,
all the Kings and Countries Dues did not amount to 3000 l. per Annum, which was
not near sufficient to pay the Governor and Officers Sallarys, and maintain
the Forts, and defray other contingent Charges.

This was the manner of Government and State of the Island of Jamaica, when Sir
Thomas Linch was remanded thence in 1675.

Sir Henry Morgan's VOYAGE TO Panama, 1670.

LONDON, Printed for Thomas Malthus at the Sun in the Poultry, 1683.

Sir Henry Morgans Voyage to Panama, 1670.
At a Council held at St. Jago Delavega the 29th day of June, 1670. by
Adjournment; Present,
His Excellency Sir Tho. Modyford Baronet, Governor, Lieutenant General James
Modyford, Major General Thomas Modyford, Lieutenant Colonel Thomas Ballard,
Lieutenant Colonel John Cope, Lieutenant Colonel Richard Hope, Lieutenant
Colonel Robert Bindles, Lieutenant Colonel William Ivy, Major Thomas Fuller,
Major Anthony Collier.
WHereas it evidently appeared to this Board, by a Copy of a Commission sent
his Excellency by the Honorable William Berk, Governor of Quariza, that the
Queen Regent of Spain did by her Shadula, dated at Madrid the 20th of April
1669. Commanded her respective Governors in the Indies, to make open War
against the Subjects of our Sovereign Lord the King in these Parts; and also
that the Governor of St. Jago, of Cuba, has executed the same by granting
Commissions of War against us; and lately in a most Hostile manner Landed his
Men in three several places on the North side of this Island, marching as far
as he durst into the Country, burning all the Houses they came at, killing and
taking Prisoners all the Inhabitants they could meet with, and now lately they
appeared with three Ships on the South side of this Island at Michaels-hole,
within eight Leagues of our chief Harbor, and came near the Shore full of Men;
but finding the Inhabitants prepared for them, went out again; and the next day
Landed at Paratee-Bay, 18 Leagues to Lee-ward, and there burnt two Houses; and
that diverse of the rest of the Spanish Governors have also granted
Commissions, and are levying of Forces against us, and have, as we are credibly
informed, made St. Jago of Cuba their present Magazine and their Rendezvous,
where their present Forces are to unite and embody, for the speedy Invasion of
this Island; which intention, if it be suffered to ripen so far, as that the
Enemy be enabled to Land their Forces in this Island, we shall be enforced to
quit the present care of our Plantations, and attend on the Enemies motion,
whereby our said Plantation will run to ruin, our Cattle and other Stock run
wild, our Slaves take the Woods; and although by chance of War Conquers, put to
begin the World again, to our insupportable loss, and most infinite damage to
his Majesty's Service.

And whereas His Majesty has out of his most Princely foresight and great
care of us, directed in his last Article of Royal Instructions, which his
Excellency has been pleased on this extraordinary occasion to communicate to
this Board in these words:

As, forasmuch as there are many things incident to that Government there, for
which it is not easy for us to prescribe such Rules and Directions for you as
our service, and the benefit of that Island may require, instead of them you
are with the Advice of the Council, to take care therein as fully and
effectually as if you were instructed by us, of which extraordinary causes
giving us due information, you shall receive farther satisfaction from us as
our Service shall require; In discharge therefore of that great trust which is
by that Instruction put in us by His Majesty's Council of this Place, and in
this great and urgent, necessity, we humbly advise and pray your Excellency,
for the seasonable prevention of these impending Evils. It may Ordain, and be
it so Ordained by his Excellency, and His Majesty's Ciuncil now Assembled, and
by Authority of the same, That Commission be granted to Admiral Henry Morgan,
to be Admiral and Commander in Chief of all the Ships of War belonging to this
Harbor, and of all the Officers, Soldiers and Seamen belonging to the same,
requiring him with all possible speed to draw into one Fleet, and with them to
put to Sea for the security of the Coast of this Island, and of the Merchants
Ships, and other Vessels Trading to and about the same. And to Attain, Seiz and
Destroy all the Enemies Vessels that shall come within his reach; and also for
destroying the Stores, Magazines laid up for this War, and disposing such
Forces as are or may be brought together for prosecuting the same. That he have
power to Land in the Enemies Country as many of his Men as he shall judge
needful; and with them to March to such places as he shall be informed the said
Magazines or Forces are, and them accordingly take destroy, and dispose of; and
to do and perform all manner of Exploits which may tend to the preservation and
quiet of this Island, being His Majesty's chief Interest in the Indies. And
that for the better Government of the said Fleet, Officers, Soldiers and
Seamen, he have power to execute Marshal Law, according to the Article of War
already made, or which hereafter shall be made by his Excellency, the same
having been first published unto them. And it is further Ordained, in regard
there is no other pay for the encouragement of the said Fleet, That they shall
have all the Goods and Merchandises that shall be gotten in this Expedition, to
be divided amongst them, according to their usual Rules; and for their better
encouragement to engage in this so necessary a Service. It is further Ordained,
by the Authority aforesaid, That no person already belonging to the said Fleet
shall be molested for his Debts, but are hereby protected until furthe Order,
of which the Provost Marshal is to take notice of at his peril.

C. Atkinson, Cl. C.

Sir Thomas Modyford Baronet, Governor of His Majesty's Island of Jamaica,
Commander in Chief of all His Majesty's Forces within the said Island, and in
the Islands thereunto Adjacent, Vice Admiral to his Royal Highness James Duke
of York, in the American Seas.
To Admiral Henry Morgan Esquire; Greeting:
WHereas the Queen Regent of Spain, has by her Royal Shadula, dated at Madrid
the 20th of Apr. 1670. Commanded her respective Governors in the Indies, to
publish and make open Wars against our Sovereign Lord the King in these Parts.
And whereas the Col. Pedro Baijonaii billa uneba Captain General of the
Province of Paragnay, and Governor of the City of St. Jago de Cuba, and its
Province, has executed the same, and lately in a most Hostile and barbarous
manner landed his men on the North side of this Island, and entered a small way
into the Country, firing all the Houses they came at, killing or taking
Prisoners all the Inhabitants they could meet with; and whereas the rest of the
Governors in these Parts, have granted Commissions for executing the like
Hostility against us, and are diligently gathering Forces together to be sent
to St. Jago of Cuba, their General Rendezvous and place of Magazine; and from
thence as the most opportune place, to be transported for a through Invasion and
final Conquest (as they hope) of this Island, for prevention of which their
mischievous Intentions, in discharge of that great trust which His Gracious
Majesty has placed in me, I do by virtue of full Power and Authority in such
Cases from his most Excellent Majesty, and his Royal Highness James Duke of
York, His Majesty's Lord High Admiral, derived unto me, and out of the great
confidence I have in the good conduct, courage and fidelity of you the said
Henry Morgan, as also of your great Experience you have in Marshal Affairs,
both by Land and Sea, and by the advice and consent of His Majesty's Council,
constitute and appoint you the said Henry Morgan to be Admiral and Commander in
Chief of all the Ships, Barques and other Vessels now fitted, or hereafter
shall be fitted for the public Service and defense of this Island, and also of
the Officers, Soldiers and Seamen, which are or shall be put upon the same,
requiring you to use your best endeavors, to get with the Vessels into one
Body or Fleet, and cause them to be well Manned, fitted, armed and victualled,
and by the first opportunity, wind and weather, permitting to put to Sea for
the Guard and Defense of the Coast of this Island, and of all Vessels trading
to or about the same; and in order thereunto, to use your best endeavors to
surprise, take, sink, disperse and destroy all the Enemies Ships or Vessels,
which shall come within your view; and also for preventing the intended
Invasion against this place. You are hereby further Authorized and required, in
case you and yout Officers in your Judgment find it possible or feazable to
Land, and attain the said Town of St. Jago de Cuba, or any other place
belonging to the Enemies, where you shall be informed the Magazine and Stores
for this War are laid up or where any Rendezvous for their Forces to Imbody,
are appointed, and there to use your best endeavor for the Seizing the said
Stores, and to take, kill and disperse the said Forces. And all Officers,
Soldiers and Seamen, which are or shall be belonging to or Embarque upon the
said Vessels, are hereby strictly enjoined both by Sea and Land, to obey you as
their Admiral and Commander in Chief in all things as becomes them; and you
your self are to observe and follow all such Orders as you shall from time to
time receive from His most Excellent Majesty, his Royal Highness, or my self.

Given under my Hand and Seal of Arms this 22d of July, and in the 22d year of
our Soveragin Lord King Charles the Second, Anno Dom. 1670. By Command of his
Excellency Thomas Modyford.

Carry Helier, Regist. of the Admiralty.
Instructions for Admiral Henry Morgan Esquire; delivered him the 2d of July 1670.
together with his Commission.
1. YOU will with these Instructions receive my Commission, which you are
enjoined with all Expedition to publish and put in due Execution, according to
the full extent and import of the same, for the accomplishing whereof, you
shall have all the assistance this Island can give you.

2. You are to make known unto me what strength you can possible make, what
your want may be that on a due Calculation of both, we may supply you with all
possible speed.

3. You are to take notice and advise your Fleet and Soldiers that you are
upon the old pleasing Account of no purchase no pay, and therefore that all
which is got, shall be divided amongst them according to accustomed Rules.

4. In case you shall find it prudential, as by your Commission you are
directed to attain St. Jago of Cuba, and that God blessing you with Victory,
you are hereby directed, in case you do it without any considerable hazards, to
keep and make good the place and Country thereabout. until you have advised me
of our success, and received my farther Orders touching the same, lest your
sudden quitting, and their as sudden returning beget us new work, and put us on
new charges and hazards for the second defeating.

5. In order to this you are to proclaim mercy and enjoyment of Estates and
liberty of Customs to all the Spaniards, that will submit and give assurance of
his Loyalty to His Majesty, and Liberty to all the Slaves that will come in;
and to such as by any good service may deserve the same, you are to give notice
to their fugitive Masters Plantations to be divided amongst them as rewards for
the same, and make them sufficient Grants in Writing, both for their Liberties
and Estates, reserving to the Crown of England the fourth part of the produce
to be yearly paid for the yearly maintenance of such Forces as shall defend
these parts.

6. In case you find that course to take approveable effect, you are then as
much as will stand with the same to preserve the Houses, Sugar-works and Canes;
but if otherwise it appear to you, that in reason you cannot make good the
place for any long time, and that the Spaniards and Slaves are deaf to your
Proposals, you are then with all Expedition, to destroy or burn all
Habitations, and leave it as a Wilderness putting the Men-Slaves to the Sword,
and making the Women-slaves Prisoners to be brought hither, and sold for
account of your Fleet and Army, such of the men also that cannot speak Spanish.
Or any new Negro, you may preserve for the same account; or if any Ships
present, to carry them for New England or Virginia, you may send them all on
the same Account.

7. You are to enquire what usage our Prisoners have had, and what Quarter has
been given by the Enemy to such of ours as have fallen under their power, and
being well informed, you are to give the same, or rather as our custom is, to
exceed in Civility and Humanity, endeavoring by all means to make all sorts of
People sensible of your Moderation and good Nature, and your in a pritude and
loathness to spill the blood of man.

8. You have hereby power to execute Marshal Law, according to such Military
Laws as have been made by me, and the Laws made by Act of Parliament for the
Government of the Fleet, which I approve of as fitting for the Service; and
hereby Authorize you to put them in Execution against such as shall offend you,
having first published the said Laws unto them, that none may pretend ignorance.

9. If any Ship or Ships shall present, which have not any Commission, you are
hereby empowered to grant Commissions to them according to the form I have
used, taking security of 1000 l. Bond for the performance of the same.

10. What Ships in this Expedition you shall keep with you under your Command,
and them order and dispose for the best improvement of this Service, not
suffering the takers or pretenders to sell them until they come into their
Commission Port.

11. In regard many things may happen in this Action which cannot be by me
foreseen and provided for in these Instructions, therefore all such Matters
are left to your well known prudence and conduct, referring it to you that are
in the place, to do therein what shall be needful; thus wishing you good
success, and this Island happy thereby, I remain

St. Jag. Delav. 2 July 1670. Your faithful Friend and Servant, Tho. Modyford.
By his Excel. Command. Carry Helier Reg. of the Admiralty.


A true Account and Relation of this last Expedition against the Spaniard, by
virtue of a Commission given unto H. Morgan by his Excel Sir Tho. Modyford
Governor General of His Majesty's Island of Jamaica, with the advice and
approbation of His Majesty's Honorable Council fully Assembled; the
prosecution of which I humbly here present.
HIs Commission bearing date the 22 of July 1670. the tenor of which was to
fight with, take or destroy all the Ships that I should meet withal belonging
to the subject of his Catholic Majesty in the American Seas, as also to Land
on the Islan^ of Cuba, attempt the City of St. Jag^ upon the said Island, if
himself an^ the Commanders find it feazible an^ farther more to Land in any of
the Dominions of his said Catholiqu^ Majesty in America, and to attemp^ take or
surprise by force of Arms any of his said Catholic Majesty's Cities, Towns,
Forts, or Fortresses where he should by any intelligences be advised that they
were storing up or making Magazines of Arms, Ammunition, or Provisions, or
levying any men for the propagating or maintaining of this War against his
Majesty's Island of Jamaica.

1670. In order whereunto they sailed from Port Royal the 14th of August, with
11 Sail of Vessels, and 600 men, and having rounded the Island, we arrived at
the Isle of Ash, the place of Rendezvous the 2 of September following, from
whence we having no Advice of the course of the Enemy or their design, we
dispatched away Vice Admiral Collier the sixth of the same Month, with six Sail
of Vessels, and 350 men, to go for the Course of the Main to get Prisoners for
Intelligence for the better stearing our Course and managing our design, for
the most of his Majesty's Honor and Service, and the safety of Jamaica.

The last of September arrived to us at the Isle of Ash, Capt. John Morris, who
brought with him Imanuel Riveras Vessel of eight Guns, who burnt the Coast of
Jamaica, having taken him on the Coast of Cuba, and in her three original
Commissions, 2 of which they sent his Excellency; the 7th of October following
so violent a Storm happened in the Harbor that drove all the Fleet ashore
except the Admirals Vessel, then consisting of 11 Sail; all of which, except
three, were got off again and made serviceable.

In this Month arrived here three French Vessels, and conditioned to sail under
our Flag, and in November arrived seven sail more from Jamaica. Now being of
force enough to attempt St. Jago, we examined some of our own men, who had been
lately there Prisoners; and also those Spaniards that were taken in Imanuel
Rivers: One of our men in particular, Captain Richard Powell, Captain of the
Prize that was River's Ship, who had not been above 30 days from St. Jago,
declared that time of year being Winter, and being but one landing place, and
that strongly fortified, it was impossible for us to attempt that place without
the hazard of the whole Party, and the certain loss of the most, if not all our
Vessels, by foul weather; all the knowing Prisoners examined, affirming the
same, upon which we relinquished that Design.

The 20th of the same Month Vice Admiral Collier returned from the Main with
good quantities of provisions, and two of the Enemies Vessels, one of which
called the Galerdeene, was assistant to Riveras in the burning the Coast of
Jamaica, and in her were 38 Prisoners, who the 29th of the same Month were
examined, and what was said by two of the most sensiblest of them redue'd into
English is as follows:

Nov. the 29. 1670.
The Deposition of Marcus de Cuba, Spaniard, Master Pilot of the Galerdeene
Prize, born at the Grand Canaries, aged 47 years or thereabouts, being
disposes says,

That he did see the People at Carthagena Listed and all in Arms offensive
against the English. And farther says, that several Spanish Ships have had and
now have Commissions from the president of Panama, named (Don Juan Perez de
Gusman) and that they have taken several Englishmen, and that the last
Spaniard have by the said President great encouragement against the Island of
Jamaica, and the more by reason of a Fleet fitted out of old Spain for those
parts, under the Command and Conduct of one (Don Alonso) and further says not.

Sworn the day and year above written Coram. Henry Morgan, and the rest of the
Officers of the Fleet.

Nov. 29. 1670.
The Deposition, of Lucas Peroz a Seaman, born at Palma, aged 31 years or
thereabouts, being disposes says,

That he did see the People at Carthagena, some of them in Arms, others Listing
of themselves; and two Ships ready fitted against Jamaica, one with 18, and the
other with 12 Guns; and also that the President of Panama has granted several
Commissions against the English, by virtue of which, several English Ships has
been taken, and further says not.

Sworn the day and year above written Coram. H. Morgan and the rest of the
Officers of the Fleet.

Upon December the 22d Commanded all the Captains on board me being 37 in
number, and demanded their advice what place was fittest to attain for His
Majesty's Honor, and preservation of Jamaica; and to put the greater curb to
the Insolences of the Enemy; in answer to which they all unanimously agreed on
Panama, as by their resolutions under their hand in these words appears.

On Board the Satisfaction Frigate, Dec. 2. 1670. Honored Sir,
WE having seriously considered of what place may prove advantageous for the
safety of the English, and more especially for the security of his Majestys
Island of Jamaica, to prevent the Invasion of the Spaniards, it being referred
by the rest of the Commanders in the Fleet in General to us whose Names are
here under written, to pitchupon a places at we thought might be most feazible
and just to take for the good of Jamaica, and Honor of our Nation; do all of
us conclude it stands most for the good of Jamaica, and safety of us all to
take Panama, the President thereof having granted several Commissions against
the English, to the great anoyance of Jamaica and our Merchant Men, as by the
Oaths of two Spaniards, have been made most evidently appear.

This is the Judgment and Resolution of Lieutenant Col. Joseph Bradley, Richard
Norman, Thomas Harrison, Robert Delander, John Harmonson, John Galoone, John
Pyne, Dego Moleene, Vice Admiral Ed. Collier, Lawrence Prince John Morris,
Thomas Rogers, Cha. Swan, Hen. Wills, Richard Ludbury, Clement Simmons.


To Henry Morgan Esquire; Admiral and Commander in Chief of His Majesty's Fleet
belonging to the Island of Jamaica, for this present Expedition.
TO the which the Admiral consented, and having called the Captains again on
Board to consult of the manner of carrying on that attempt, and whereby to find
Prisoners to be guides for Panama, it was voted that Providence being the Kings
Ancient propriety, and most of the people there being sent from Panama, that no
place could be more fit.

December the 8th we sailed, and the 14th arrived at Providence by 8 of the
Clock in the morning, and by two in the Afternoon were possessed of the great
Island without resistance; the 15th, sent a Summons to the Governor to deliver
the little Island, who willingly submitted to that he might have good Quarters,
and Transportation to any part of the Main, which was granted and duly
performed; but four of his Soldiers took up Arms with us, and became our
Guides; and by them understanding the Castle of Changra blocked our way, the
Admiral called a Council of all the chief Captains, where it was determined to
attain the Castle of Changra; and forthwith there was dispatched 470 men in 3
Ships, under the Command of Lieutenant Gol. Joseph Bradly, with 3 Captains and
4 Lieutenants, and upon the 27th were safely landed within four Miles of the
Castle by twelve of the Clock, and by two had made their approach one of the
other, and by three into Trenches where they continued fighting till eight the
next Morning, and then had returned re infecta; if in playing of their
Grenades, they had not by good fortune set a Guard-house on fire that stood
upon the Walls, which caused a breach, where our men courageously stormed, and
the Enemy as bravely defended it to the last Man, refusing Quarters, which cost
them the lives of 360 men, and of our side was lost 30 outright, one Capt. and
one Lieutenant, and 76 wounded, whereof the brave Bradly was one, with two
Lieutenants, who died within ten days after their wounds, to the grief of
himself and all in general.

Jan. 2. the Adm. arrived with the whole Fleet, and understood that the Enemy
lay with Forces to endeavor the taking of the Castle, whereupon he gave order
for the Fleet to follow him into the Harbor, but had the ill fortune to be cast
away the Ship that he was in, and four more, but saved the men; the rest being
come in fell to preparing to go up the River, where they understood the Enemy
had entrenched themselves, and had six several retreating Breast-works upon the
River.

Whereupon the Adm. gave order that 7 Sail of lesser Vessels should be rigged
to go up the River, and filled them with Men and great Guns; and left to Guard
the Castle and the Ships 300 men, under the Command of Captain Richard Norman.
Monday the 9th we began our march 1400 men in the said 7 Vessels, and 36 Boats
and Cannons.

Upon the 12th Instant we got to the first Entrenchment, where the Enemy had
lately quitted it, and set all on Fire, as they did all the rest, without
striking a stroke for it, and there was forced to leave our Ships and Boats
with 200 men to Guard them under the Gommand of Captain Robert Delander, and
betook our selves to the wild Woods, where was no path for 24 Miles, but what
we cut. The 14th we arrived within two Miles of Venta Cruce, which was the
Landing place, where was a very narrow and dangerous passage, where the Enemy
thought to put a stop to our further proceeding, but were presently routed by
the forlorn, Commanded by Captain Thomas Regers; the rest of our men never
firing shot, and without any loss, saving three men slightly wounded; but the
Enemies loss we could never learn. January the 15th we arrived at Venta Cruce,
which is a very fine Village, and the place where they Land and Embarque all
the Goods that comes and goes to Panama, where we though we might be relieved,
having marched three days without Victuals, but found it as the rest, all on
Fire, and they fled.

The 16th we began our March, the Enemy constantly galling us with Ambuscades
and small Parties, and we still beating of them for a League together, although
they had all the advantage that could be of us, the way being so narrow that we
could but march 4 a breast, and such a deep hollow, that the Enemy lay over our
heads; about noon that day we got to the Savanes safe, with the loss of three
men killed outright, and six or seven wounded; and of the Enemy 20 killed, and
one Captain, besides many wounded, we marched three Miles further, and then
took up our Quarters to refresh our men, and thanked them for that days
service. The 17th we began our March forward, but had no opposition, and about
nine of the Clock in the Morning, saw that desired place the South Seas, and
likewise a good parcel of Cattle and horses, whereupon the G. commanded a
general have to be made, and our men killed Horses and Beef enough to serve
them all; about four of the Clock in the afternoon, our men having refreshed
themselves, we marched again, and about five the same day we came in sight of
the Enemy; where he lay in Batalia with 2100 Foot and 600 Horse, but finding
the day far spent; we thought it not fit to engage, but took up our Quarters
within three Miles of them, where we lay very quiet, not being so much as once
alarmed. The next morning being the 18. betimes in the morning, the Genesis gave
order to draw our men in Batalia, and it was accordingly performed, and they
were drawn in the form of a Tertia; the Vant Guard was led by Lieutenant Col.
Lawrence Prince, and Major John Morris, they being in number 300 men, the body
containing 600; the Right wing was led by the Genesis and the left by Col. Ed.
Collier, the rear-ward of the 300 was Commanded by Col. Bledry Morgan; after
having viewed our men, and a little encouraged them, the G. commanded the
Officers every man should repair to his Charge, the Enemy being drawn at such
advantage, they still kept their Station; although often provoked, yet would
not stir from their Ground, which we presently perceived, and gave order that
our men should wheel their bodies to the left, and endeavor to gain a Hill
that was hard by, which, if gained, we should have forced the Enemy to fight to
their disadvantage, by reason he could not bring out of his great body more men
to fight at a time, than we could out of our small body, and likewise that we
should have the advantage both of Wind and Sun. The Officers putting this
Command in execution, and the Hill, and a dry Gut accordingly gained, the Enemy
was forced to fight upon, their long March having not room to wheel his Battle,
by reason of a Bogg that was drawn behind on purpose (as he thought) to entrap
us, but we taking another ground, in the end proved a snare to himself,
whereupon one Francisco Detarro, gave the Charge with his Horse upon the Vant
Guard, and so furiously that he came upon the full speed, we having no Pikes,
gave order that they should double their Ranks to the Right, and close their
Files to the Right and Left inward to their close order, but his career could
not be stopped till he lost his life in the front Rank of our Vant-Guard, upon
which the Horse wheel off to the Right, and their Foot advanced to try their
Fortunes, but it proved like their fellows, for we being ready with the main
Battle to receive them, gave them such a warm welcome, and pursued so close that
every one thought it best to retreat, but they were so closely plied by our
left Wing, who could not come to Engage at first, by reason of the Hill, that
the Enemies retreat came to plain running. Although they did work such a
Stratagem that has been seldom or never heard of, that is when the Foot
Engaged in the Flank, he attempted to drive two Droves of Cattle of 1500 apiece
into the Right and Left Angles of the Rear, but all came to one effect, and
helped nothing for their flight to the City, where they had 200 fresh men, and
two Forts, one with six Brass Guns, the other with eight, and the Streets
Barricadoed, and great Guns in every Street, which in all amounted to 32 brass
Guns, but instead of fighting he commanded the City to be fired, and his chief
Forts to be blown up, the which was in such have that he blew up forty of his
Soldiers in it, we followed into the Town, where, in the Marketplace they
made some resistance, and fired some great Guns, killed us four men, and
wounded five. At three of the Clock in the afternoon we had quiet possession of
the City although on fire, with no more loss on our side in this days work
than five men killed, and ten wounded. And of the Enemy about 400 where we were
all forced to put the fire out of the Enemies Houses; but it was in vain, for
by 12 at night it was all consumed that might be called the City; but of the
Subburbs, there was saved 2 Churches, and about 300 Houses; thus was consumed
that famous and ancient City Panama, which is the greatest Mart for Silver and
Gold in the whole World, for it receives all the Goods into it that comes from
old Spain in the King's great Fleet, and likewise delivers to the Fleet all the
Silver and Gold that comes from the Mines of Peru and Potazi. Here in this City
we stayed 28 days, making daily Incursions upon the Enemy by Land for 20 Miles
round about, without having so much as one Gun shot at us in anger, although we
took in this time near 3000 Prisoners of all sorts, and kept likewise Barques
in the South Seas, crusing and fetching of Prisoners that had fled to the
Islands with their Goods and Families.

Feb. 14. we began our March toward our Ships, with all our Prisoners; and the
next day came to Venta Cruce about 2 in the afternoon, which is from Panama
five English Leagues, where we stayed refreshing our selves till the 24th. the
26th we came to Changra, where the Plunder was divided amongst the Soldiers
and Seamen, which amounted to about 30000 l. The sixth of March we fired the
Castle, spiked the Guns, and began our Voyage for Jamaica, where some are
arrived, and the rest daily expected. The reason that there was no more Wealth,
was because they had two Months notice of us, and had Embarked most of their
Treasure into Ships, and sent them to Lima in Peru; one Ship was laden with
Gold, Silver and precious Stones, that contained 700 Tuns, and one of 300 Tuns.

Jan. 31. 1671. By Command John Peeke Secretary.

At a Council held at St. Jago the 31 of May 1671.
Present, His Excellency Sir Tho. Modyford Baronet, Governor, Lieutenant Col.
John Cope, Lieutenant Col. Robert Brindlos, Lieutenant Col. William Ivy, Major
Cha. Whitfield, Major Antho. Collier, Capt. Henry Molesworth,


Admiral Henry Morgan gave the Governor and Council a Relation of a Voyage to
Panama, who gave him many thanks for the Execution of his late Commission, and
approved very well of his acting.

This is a true Copy of the Record, Cha. Atkinson, C. C.
The Deposition of John Peeke Gentleman, aged 30. years or thereabouts, taken
before the Right Honorable Sir Thomas Linch Knight, Governor of Jamaica, this
3d day of April 1682.
The Deponent says that he was Secretary to Admiral Henry Morgan all the
Panama Voyage, and that he wrote all his Letters, and saw those that were sent
to the said Admiral from Sir Thomas Modyford, or any other person in Jamaica,
that he was present when the two Spaniards, Marcus de Cuba, and Lucas Perez
were sworn on board the Satisfaction, and that upon their deposition, it was
resolved by the Commanders that they would attain Panama, and that Sir Thomas
Modyford had knowledge of the Design by a Ship that was sent on purpose, and
that Col. Bledry Morgn Came to the fleet in a Sloop that departed from Jamaica,
ten days after the arrival of the said Ship, and that Sr. Thomas Mudyford in
his Letter which he sent by the Sloop gave no Countermand at all. And this
deponent further says, that this is a true Copy of the Journal which was
delivered to the Council the 13 of May, for which they gave him thanks and
ordered it should be recorded. And this deponent further remembers that the
Sloop which came to them and brought Sr. Thomas Mudyfords letter, in answer to
these which were sent upon the advice they gave of their resolutions for
Panama, arrived three days before we marched for the City, and further, this
Deponent says not.

Sworn Coram this 3 day of April, 1672. John Peeke Tho. Lynch.


A short account of the Life of Christopher Collumb or Collumbus the first
Doscoverer of Jamaica.
COllumbus was born at Cugnero, or (as some say) at Nervi, in the Territory of
Genoa; he was a Mariner from a Child, and traded into Syria, and other parts of
the East. After this he became a Master in making Sea Carts, and went to
Portugal to Learn their Navigations on the Coast of Africa.

The Spaniards who Envy the Honor of the Discovery of the New World to a
stranger, Report that a certain Caravel sailing in the Ocean by a strong East
Wind, long continuing was carried to a Land unknow, which was not expres'd in
the Mapps and Cards, it was much Longer in Returning than in Going; and
arriving, had none left alive but the Pilot, and three or four Mariners, the
Rest being Dead of Famine and other Extremeties, of which also the Remnant
perished in fews days, leaving to Collumbus (then the Pilots Host) their
papers, and some grounds of this Discovery; the time place, Country and name of
the man, is Uncertain; some Esteem this pilot an Andaluzian, and that he traded
at Madera when this befell; some a Biscaine, and that his traffic was in
England and France; and some a Portugal, that traded at the Mina; some say he
arrived in Portugal, others at Madera, or at one of the Azores; all agree that
he Died in the house of Christopher Collumbus, it is most Likely at Madera.
This Relation as it has no witness to prove it, the whole company being dead,
nor any good circumstances, so the most look on it to be a fable and Spanish
trick, envying a foraigner and Italian that Glory to be the first Finder of the
Indies, and the most Juditious and sincere of the Spaniards themselves esteem
but a tale, as appears by the Testimony of Gorsalo Fernando De Omedo in his
Summary, and more fully in his General History of the Indies they show, and and
so does he which then Lived in the Court of Spain; Peter Martyr another Cause
that moved Collumbus to this Discovery and not that Pilots paper or Reports;
for he being a Mariner used to Sea from his youth; and sailing from Cales to
Portugal, observed that at certain seasons of the year the winds used to blow
from the West, which continued in that Manner a long time together, and
believing that they came from some Coast beyond the Sea; he busied his mind so
much therewith, that he Resolved to make some trial and proof thereof. When he
was now forty years old he propounded his purpose to the Senate of Genoa;
undertaking if they would lend him Ships he would find a way by the West, unto
the Island of Spices, but they Rejected his proposals as Idle fancies.

Columbus frustrate of his hopes at Genoa, yet leaves not his Resolution but
goes to Portugal; and Communicates this Matter with Alphonsus King of
Portugal, but finding no Entertainment to his suit, he sends his Brother
Bartholomew Collumbus to King Henry the seventh of England to solicit him in
the Matter, while, himself passed into Spain to Implore the Aid of the
Castillian herein.

Bartholomew in his Voyage to England, unfortunately fell into the hands of
Pirates, which Robbed him and his company, and forced him to sustain himself
with making of Sea Cards; and having gotten somewhat about him, presents a Map
of the World to King Henry; with his Brothers offer of Discovery, which the
King Gladly accepted and sent for him into England. But he had speed of his
suit before in Spain, and by that King and Queen was employed according to his
Request, for coming from Lisbon to Pallos di Moguer; and then conferring with
Martin Alonso Pinzon, an expert Pilot, and Friar Jo. Perez a good Cosmographer;
he was Counseled to aquaint these with his project; the Duke De Medina Sidonia
and of Medina Celi, which yielding him not Credit, the Friar Counseled him to
go to Court, and wrote in his Behalf to Friar Fernandi Di Telavera the Queens
Confessor.

Christopher Collumbus came to the Court of Castile, Anno 1486. and found cold
welcome to his suit at the hands of the King and Queen busied with Hot Wars in
Granada; whence they expelled the Moors; and thus remained he in Contempt as a
Man meanly Clothed, without other patron then a poor Friar, save that Alonso
Di quintalignia gave him his Diet, who also at the last procured him Audience
of the Bishop of Toledo; by whose Mediation he was brought before the King and
Queen; who gave him favorable Countenace and promised to Dispatch him when
they had ended the wars of Granada, which also they performed. Thus Collumbus
is set forth with three Caravals at the Kings charges, who, because his
treasure was then spent in the Wars, Borow'd 16000 Ducats of Lavis De Sanct
Angelo; and on Friday the 3 of August, in the year of our Lord 1492 in a Ship
called the Gallega, accompanied with the Pinta and Ninna; in which the Pinzors
Brethren went as pilots, with the Number of 120 persons or thereabouts, set
sail for Gomera; one of the Canary Islands; and having there Refreshed himself
followed his Discovery; after many Days he Incountered with an Herby Sea which
looked like a green Field, so thick that he could scarce see the water, which
not a little amazed the Spaniards and had caused their Return, had not the
sight of some Birds promised them Land not far of. He taught the Spaniards to
observe the Sun and Pole in their Navigation, which till this voyage they had
not used nor known.

But the Spaniard after three and thirty days sailing, Desperate of success,
Mutined and threatened to cast Collumbus into the Sea; disdaining much that a
stranger a Genois had so Abused them: but he pacified their Enraged fury with
Mild Speeches and Gentle promise. On the eleventh day of October one Rodrigo De
Triana espied and cried, Land, Land, the best Music that might be, Especially
to Columbus; who to satisfy the Spaniards Importunity had promised the day
before, that if no Land appeared in 3 Days he would Return. One the Night
before had Descried fire, which Kindled in him some hope of great Reward at the
Kings Hand when he Returned into Spain; But being herein frustate he Burned
into such a flame as that it consumed Both Humanity and Christianity in him,
and in the Agony of Indignation made him Leave his Country and Faith, and
Revolt to the Moors, But Collumbus, how can I but Remember, but Love, but
Admire, sweetly may those Bones Rest; Sometimes the pillars of that Temple
where so Divine a spirit Resided, which neither want of former Example nor
public Discouragements of Domestique and foreign states, not private
Insultation of proud Spaniards, nor length of time, which generally Devoureth
the best Resolutions, nor the unequal plains of Huge unknown Seas, nor Grassy
Fields in Neptunes Lap, nor Inportunate Whispering, Murmuring, threatening of
enraged companions could daunt. O name Collon, worthy to be named to the Worlds
end; which to the Worlds end have conducted Collonies; or may I call thee
Collumbo, for thy Dove-like simplicity and patience; the true Collonna or
Pillar whereon the knowledge of the new World is founded; the true Christopher,
which with more then Giant-like force and Fortitude, have Carried Christ his
name and Religion through unknown Seas, to unknown Lands, which we hope and
pray that it may be more Refined than Popish Superstition, and Spanish pride
will yet suffer. Now let the Ancients no Longer Mention Neptune, Minos,
Erithras or Danaus; to all which Diverse authors Diversely Ascribe the Invention
of Navigation Missians, Tirrians, Trojans vail your bonnets, strike your
Top-sail to this Indian Admiral, that deserves the Top-sail indeed, by
aspiring to the top that sailing could Aim at in Discovering another World; Let
Spaniard, French, England and Dutch Resound thy name, or his name rather, whose
name who can tell, Psalm. 30.4. that would acquaint thee and the World by the
news of a new World.

But lest we drown our selves in this Sea of Ecstasy and Admiration, let us go
on shore with Collumbus, in this new discovered Island, and first methinks I
see the Spaniards yesterday in Mutiny, now as far Distracted in Contrary
passions, some gazing with greedy eyes on the Desired Land, some with tears of
Joy not able to see that which the Joy of seeing made them not to see. Others
Embracing and almost adoreing Collumbus, who brought them to that sight, some
also with secret Repining, Envying that glory to a stranger, but biting in
their biting Envy, and making show of Glee and Gladness; all new awaked out of
a long trance into which that stepmother Ocean with Danger, Death, Dread,
Despair had Dejected them; Revived now by the sight of their Mother Earth; from
whom in unknown Arms they had been so long weaned and detained. On then they
go, and felling a tree, make Cross thereof, which they there Erected, and took
Possession of that new World in the name of the Catholic King; this was done
on the 11 of October, Anno. 1492 In the Island Guana hani, one of the Lucai,
which Collumbus named San Saluatore; from whence he sailed to Baracoe a Haven
on the North side of the Island Cuba; when he went on Land and asked of the
Inhabitants for Cipango (Japan) they understanding him of Cibao (where are the
Richest Mines of Hispaniola) signed him that it was in Haiti (so was the Island
then Called) and some of them went with him thither.

Some think Collumbus did run on ground on purpose that he might Leave some
behind him.
What Wordly Joy is not Mixed with some Disaster after their Admiral here
spliteth on a Rock, but the men are saved by the help of the other Ships. This
fell out in the North part of Panicola (so named by them) where they had sight
of Inhabitants, who seeing these strangers Ran all away into the Mountains; one
woman the Spaniards took, whom they used Kindly, and gave her Meat, Drink and
Clothes and so let her go, she declaring to her people the Liberality of
these new comers, easily persuaded them to come in troops to their shiping
thinking the Spaniards to be some Divine Nation sent thither from Heaven: They
had before taken them for the Caribbes, which are Certain Canibals; which use
Inhumane Huntings for Humane Game, to take men for to eat them; Children
likewise which they gelded to make them more fat; and then to devour them; the
women they did not eat, but used them for Procreation, and if they were old,
for other Services. The Islanders had no other Defense against them but the
Woody Hills, and swiftest Heels; to which they betook them at the Spaniards
arrival, thinking them (as it is said) to be Canniballs, and such have they
since proved in effect, not leaving of three Millions of people, which here
they found so many hundreds, and that long-since the Divil had forewarned them
of this by Oracle, that a bearded Nation should spoil their Images, and spill
the blood of their Children, which was all verified, as may be seen by any that
has been Conversant in such Tracts as Treats of those parts.

Collumbus obtained leave of Guacanarillus the Cacick or King, to build a fort
in which he Left 38 Spaniards, and taking with him 6 Indians, Returned to
Spain, where he was highly welcomed by the King and Queen. Some Controversy
fell out between Collumbus and one of the Pinzons, Masters of one of the
Caravels, about leaving those men behind; but Collumbus sent a Letter to Reduce
him to peace by the Indians, who held the Letter in a most Religious Regard
thinking it had some Spirit or Deity, by which they could understand one
another being absent.

The Pope (then a Spaniard) Alexander the 6 hearing of this, divided the World
by his Bull betwixt the Portugal and Spaniards, bearing date the 4 of May 1493.
Drawing a Line one hundred Leagues beyond the Island of Azores and Cape verde;
this Alexander giving (more then great Alexander could conquer) the East to the
one and West to the other. The Bull soon after turned into a Unicorn, his 2
horns grew into one by the uniting of these two Nations.

Collumbus Graced with the title of Admiral, and Enriched with the tenths of
the Spanish Gains in the Indies, is sent a second time with his Brother
Barthol. who was made Deputy of Hispaniola; they had fifteen hundred men; the
first Island he Espied in his Second Navigation he called Desteada, or Desired,
because he had longed to see Land, arriving in Hispaniola, he found the Indians
had Murdered these 38 Spaniards which he had left there, and lay the blame on
the Spanish Insolences. He now built and peopled the town of Isabella, which
was their chief place of Residence and Government, which in the year one
thousand four hundred ninety eight, was Removed to the City of San. Domingo;
they built also the fort of S. Thomas. But both in the one and the other, the
Spaniards Died of famine through the Indians wilfulness, who unwilling to have
such Neighbors, would not plant their Maze and Jucca, and so starved both
themselves and their Guests. As for the Pox the Spaniards in this Voyage got it
of the Indian women, and brought them into Spain, and they after paid the
Indians in Recompense with a Disease as deadly and Infectious to them which
consumed thousands, and was never known before amongst them: That is the small
Pox, the other were Improperly named of the French; or of Naples, seeing that
in these wars of Naples, which the Spaniards Maintained against the French;
some carried this Disease with them out of Spain and communicated the same both
to the French and Neapollitans, having been usual and easily Curable in the
Indies. Another disease also assaulted them of a little kind of flies, called
Niguas, which would eat into and Breed in the flesh, and made many lose their
toes.

Collumbus at this time Discovered Cuba and Jamaica, with the Neighbor Isles,
Returning to Spaniola, he found his Brother and the Spaniards in Dissension and
separation, and punishing the Authors of sedition, Returned home. In the year
of our Lord 1492 he made his third Voyage and then touched on the Continent,
Discovered Cubagua paria and Cumana.

But Roldanus Ximenius raising a Rebellion and accusing the Collumbi to the
King, effected that Bovadilla was sent Governor into Spaniola, who sent the two
Brethren Bound as Prisoners to Spain; Base ingratitude; for the brave attempt
of the worthys, the King freeth them and Employed Christopher a fourth Voyage,
Anno 1502. in which Ovandus the Governor forbid Collumbus, the first finder,
to Land on Hispaniola.

He then discovered Guanaxa, Higvera, Fondura, Veragua, Vraba, and learned news
of the South Sea. He stayed at Jamaica to Repair his fleet, where some of his
men were sick, and then they which were sound in Body were more then sick,
froward and tumultuous in Behavior, and many left him; upon this occasion the
Islanders also forsook him, and brought in no victualing; herewith Collumbus
neither able to abide nor depart, was driven to his shifts, no less admirable
for subtilty then Resolution; he told the Islanders, that if they did not bring
him in provision the Divine anger would consume them; a sign thereof they
should see in the Darkened face of the Moon 2 Days after, at that time he knew
the Moon would be Eclipsed, which the simple Islanders seeing, with fear and
Grief, humbled themselves to him, and offered themselves ready to all kind and
dutyful offices.

At last returning into Spain he there died, Anno 1506. his body was buried at
Sevil in the Temple of the Carthusians. This was the end (if ever there can be
an end) of Collumbus. Pinzenus, one of Collumbus his Companions, by his Example
invited, made new Discoveries: Vespatius, and Cabbet, and many other every day
making new Searches and Plantations, till the World at last is come to the
knowledge of this new World almost wholly.

FINIS.

