THE POSITION OF JOHN PRESTON, Doctor in DIVINITY, SOMETIMES MR OF EMANUEL
COLLEGE IN CAMBRIDGE, And Preacher at Lincoln's Inn; Concerning the
Irresistibleness of CONVERTING GRACE.

LONDON, Printed by J. G. for Nath: Webb, and Will: Grantham at the sign of
the Bear in S. Paul's Churchyard near the little North Door. 1654.

An exact Catalogue of all the works of Dr. John Preston, sometime Master of
Emanuel Col. in CAMBRIDGE.
1st. Vol. in 4o.
I. THe New Covenant, in 14. Sermons, on Genesis 17. 1, 2. unto which is added
four Sermons on Eccles. 1. 2. 11, 12.

II. The Saints daily Exercise; Or, A Treatise of Prayer, on 1 These. 5. 17.

III. Five Sermons preached before K. James. 1. The Pillar and Ground of Truth,
on 1 Timothy 3. 15. 2. The New Life. 1 John 5. 12. 3. A Sensible Demonstration of
the Deity, on Isa. 64. 4. 4. Exact walking, on Ephesians. 5. 15. 5. Samuels Support
of sorrowful Sinners, on 1 Samuel 12. 20. 21. 22.

IV. The Breast Plate of Faith and Love, eighteen Sermon. on three several
Texts, viz. Rev. 1. 17. 1 These. 1. 3. Gal. 5. 6.

2. Vol. in 4o.
V. Four godly and learned Treatises. 1. A Remedy against Covetousness, on
Col. 3. 5. 2. An Elegant description of spiritual Death and Life, on John 5.
25. 3. The Doctrine of Self-denial, on Luke 9. 23. 4. Of the Sacrament of the
Lords Supper, on 1 John 5. 14.

VI. Sins Overthrow, a Treatise of Mortification, on Col. 3. 5.

A livelesse Life; or, Man's spiritual Death in Sin, on Ephesians. 2. 1, 2, 3. with
a Sermon on Genesis 22. 45.

3d. Vol. in 4o.
VII. The Saints Qualification; or, a Treatise 1. Of Humiliation, ten Sermons,
the first nine on Romans 1. 18. the tenth preached before the Commons House of
Parliament, on Numb. 25. 10, 11. 2. Of Sanctification, nine Sermon. on 2 Corin.
5. 17. 3. The Cup of Blessing, in three Sermon. on 1 Cor. 10. 16.

VIII. The Doctrine of the Saints infirmities, 2 Chrch. 30. 18, 19, 20.

IX. Remains, in three Treatises. 1. Judas's Repentance, on Mat. 27. 3, 4. 5.
2. The Saints Spiritual Strength, on Ephesians. 3. 16. 3. Paul's Conversion, on Acts
9. 6.

X The fullness of Christ for us, a Sermon, before K. James, on John 1. 16.

4th. Vol. in 4o.
XI. Life eternal, a Treatise of the knowledge of the Divine Essence and
Attributes, in eighteen Sermons, the four first on Heb. 11. 6. the fifth on
Isaiah 46. 9. the other thirteen on Exodus 3. 13, 14, 15.

XII. 1. The Golden Scepter, on 2 Chronicles. 7. 14. 2. The Churches Marriage, on
Ephesians. 5. 32. 3. The Churches Carriage, on Ephesians. 5. 22, 23, 24.

XIII. Of the Divine Love of Christ, five Sermons on 1 Cor. 16. 22.

XIV. The Christians Freedom, on Romans 6. 14.

The Deformed form of a formal Profession, on 2 Timothy 3. 5.

The Saints Submission in 12o.

Prayers in 24o.

The Position of Dr. Preston, Master of Emanuel College in Cambridge,
Concerning the Irresistibleness of Converting Grace.
IT is often professed by Arminius, that he attributes as much unto Grace as
ever any other, that there is nothing said by others concerning the efficacy of
Grace, which is not also affirmed by himself; yea, that he acknowledges
whatsoever that be thought or imagined for the opening and setting forth of the
power of Grace, and that therefore he is mis-reported by those that render him
injurious to the grace of God, and one that attributes too much to free will.
You will find in Augustine, that Pelagius professes as much concerning
himself. And yet in the mean time, This is true, that, if Arminius his opinion
stand good, all this Efficacy of Grace, which he so much magnifies and
amplifies in words, depends on the will of man, in regard that by virtue of its
native liberty, it may receive or reject this grace, use it or not use it,
render it effectual or vain. Neither can it be otherwise, unless we abolish
the liberty of the Will, and destroy those properties, which are inseparable
from the Nature of it.

Lest that any should suspect that I fasten upon him an opinion, which is not
his, let his words be read, which may be found in a Treatise entitled Decl.
sent. Arm. page 181. and they are these, Grace (says Arm.) is so described in
Scripture, as that it may be resisted, received in vain, that man may hinder
his assent unto it, deny to cooperate with it, and therefore an irresistible
power, and working, is not to be attributed unto Grace. Now, if Arminius in
these words do not pull down what he seemed to build in the former, let others
judge.

I know the Arminians cavil about the word Irresistible, used by Calvin, and
other of our Divines, and cry out, That by this opinion of ours, men are turned
into stocks, acting not at all in the work of Conversion, but, as stones, are
acted and moved by another; yea, that men do not believe, but God in man
repents and believes.

But you shall easily see how falsely these things are charged upon us, and how
truly we say that Arminius derogates more from the grace of God, than the
Jesuits; If you will give me leave faithfully to set down their opinions, and
briefly to compare them together: For in these four things shall my Discourse
consist. First, I will repeat the Opinion of our Adversaries. 2. I will explain
our own Opinion. 3. I will add Reasons for the confirmation of our Opinion. 4.
I will answer the Objections, at least, one or two of the chief of them,
whereby our opinion is opposed.

As to the first, Some Jesuits affirm, That Sufficient grace, as to means is
given to all, even to Reprobates; but Effectual grace, which shall certainly
and infallibly attain its end, is given only to the Elect. If we ask wherein
they place the efficacy of this Grace; they answer, Not in a physical
determination of the Will, but in a moral persuasion, and that not of any
kind, but congruous (as they call it) that is a persuasion offered with such
circumstances of Place, Person, and Time, as to which, God (who from
everlasting knows all the inclinations of the Will) foresees the will shall
certainly and infallibly yield unto. They distinguish therefore between
Sufficient and Effectual grace, that is, those whom God has chosen unto life,
by virtue of that absolute Decree he intends to offer unto them, not only
sufficient persuasion, but at a fit time, when he knows that the person so
called, will undoubtedly obey the call of God: but those whom he has not
chosen, to them also he offers persuasion sufficient, but not at a time so fit,
and when he certainly foresees that they will not obey the divine calling.

From whence we gather, that this is the opinion of the Jesuits.

1. That effectual vocation does follow, and not precede the decree of
election, and consequently, that the decree is absolute, not conditional.

2. That the same and equal grace is not granted to the converted and
unconverted; but that which is given to the elect is always more effectual,
although not in respect of it felfe, yet in respect of the suitableness, which
it has unto the will of the man to be converted.

3. That all to be converted, shall be certainly and infallibly converted, and
that only by the power of Converting Grace; but others certainly also, and
infallibly, shall not be converted, not only because they will not, but in
regard of the defect of congruity in the grace offered. Which Grace, although
as to the substance of it (as they say) is sufficient, so that by the help of
it men might be converted (if they would) yet as to the circumstances it is not
sufficient, because it is not offered at a suitable time. For thus Suarez:
Moral persuasion, though abundant, is not sufficient. A physical or real
determination is too much, for it takes away liberty, but the whole efficacy
of grace consists in a Certainty, Congruity, or Convenience.

But the Arminians, although they seem to assert, that the beginning,
progress, and perfection of every good work, is to be attributed unto Grace,
so that no man (without preventing, accompanying, and following Grace) is able
to think, will, or act any thing that is good: yet when they plead, that all
this is done after a manner resistible, so as to leave it in the power of the
Will, to use or not to use that grace unto conversion. It is apparent, that
they do only in pretense, and not heartily and really attribute these things
unto grace. This will easily appear by a distinct opening of the opinion of
the Arminians.

1. First they grant, That the Understanding is irresistibly illuminated by
Divine Grace.

2. That the Affections also are excited and renewed by the same Grace
irresistibly.

3. That the Will is also so stirred up by assisting Grace, that it is now
disintangled, whereas before it was encumbered; now freed, whereas it was before
bound; now awakened, whereas before it was asleep. But that the Will is
renewed, and by a real operation inclined unto good, by God; or that any
quality, or habit of holiness is infused into the Will, by virtue of which it
is inclined more to good works than to evil, the Arminians utterly deny.
Because, that if any of this were granted, the natural liberty of the Will (as
they suppose) were destroyed; unto which liberty they hold it essential that
the Will be free to act, or not to act, when all things required unto its
acting are in being. Let their very words be seen, The Confer* at Hague, page
298. Into the Mind (say they) is infused a habit of knowledge, into the
Affections holiness is infused, as Hope, or Fear, etc. But such an infusion
cannot be made into the Will, because of its nature, freedom to will good or
evil. Hence (as they say) First there is a moral persuasion stirred up in the
Understanding, but by the help of Preventing Grace: Secondly, To this
persuasion the Will may assent, but by the help of Concomitant Grace: And
thirdly, This assent may be produced into act, but by virtue of Subsequent
Grace. But to all this they diligently annex this caution, although the Will
can do none of these things without the help of Grace, yet it is in the power
of the Will to resist this Grace, to put it by, to neglect it or cast it away,
if it please. Neither can it be otherwise, if the natural properties of the
Will be preserved. Thus is the state of the question explained by Ioannes
Arnoldus, against Bogerman, p. 263. allowing all those which God uses in
working our conversion; yet conversion it self does so far remain in our
power, that we may not be converted.

This opinion being asserted, the Arminians are constrained to defend these
Positions more false than those of the Jesuits.

1. They defend a conditional Decree grounded on the praescience of Faith, for
if the Will, supposing all the actions of God toward it, may convert or not,
believe or not; it is necessary that God first foresee who will believe, and
who not, before he can choose some to life, and appoint others to wrath. But
the Jesuits hold the Decree to be absolute, and Faith to be an effect or fruit
following thereupon.

2. The Jesuits grant that more grace, as to the manner of dispensing it, is
bestowed upon those who are converted, than upon those who are not. The
Arminians contrariwise, that more grace (as to the manner) is often conferred
upon the unconverted than the converted.

3. Hence also the Arminians do ordinarily cast the principle of Conversion in
part, upon the will of man (whatsoever they profess in words to the contrary)
whereas the Jesuits attribute it wholly to the good pleasure and will of God.

4. Hence also the Arminians hold, That converting and quickening Grace is not
peculiar to converted and chosen Ones, but to be common also unto others. But
the Jesuits confess, That congruous or suitable vocation (in which they place
the efficacy of Grace) is peculiar unto the Elect.

5. The Jesuits judge, That all those, whom the Holy Ghost intended to
convert, are certainly and infallibly converted. The Arminians utterly deny
it; whence they are commonly bold to say, That the Holy Ghost may be resisted,
even then when it works upon a man with intention of his conversion.

These things being premised, I will now briefly lay down what our opinion is:
But that our judgment may be thoroughly understood; we must know that the
conversion of a man is perfected in these four degrees:

1. God infuseth into the whole Soul, and so into the Will, a habit or quality
of holiness, renewing it, and making it, of evil good, of unwilling willing;
by which means, that which belongs to the nature of the Will, is preserved
entire, but that which was corrupt is rectified.

2. From this quality so infused, presently there arise in the Will, certain
imperfect inclinations, preventing the notice of reason, like unto those which
the Schoolmen call the very first Motions of the heart: For by these the will
does not completely, and effectually will that which is good, but is only
initially, and incompleatly inclined to those good works which please God,
from whence such acts may be called, not so much willings, as wishings and
wouldings.

3. Those inclinations are presented as an object to the understanding, which
weighs them, debates them, takes counsel about them; and at length, when it
has by its ultimate, and conclusive dictates, confirmed them, propounds them
to the will as to be chosen.

4. After those initiall inclinations, arising from infused Grace, have passed
the censure of the understanding, and are allowed by the preceding judgment
thereof; then at length does the Will put forth a complete and effectual
willingness, from which conversion immediately does follow, or rather that
very willing is the conversion of a man unto God. In these four things is the
conversion of man accomplished:

1. Here first the reception of the habit of Grace infused is indeed
irresistible, but neither free nor voluntary, for the Will is merely passive in
the receiving, and therefore exercises not its freedom.

2. Secondly, The inclination arising or flowing from Grace is irresistible,
for it proceeds from the Will, formed and endued with Grace, not in a moral,
but physical way: that is, not in a way of persuasion, but real operation:
But it is voluntary, for it is produced by the Will in an active way; yet it is
not free, because one of the requisites to freedom, which is the foregoing
judgment of the understanding, is yet wanting.

3. Thirdly, The judgment of the understanding, concerning this initial and
imperfect Inclination, is irresistible, For the understanding being enlightened
by Divine Grace, does irresistibly and infallibly approve this Inclination, and
it is so far free as the Understanding is capable of freedom.

4. Fourthly, When the Understanding has put forth its last and conclusive
dictate, then the Will (as I said) puts forth a complete and executive willing,
which is actual Conversion unto God: And this Willing is both irresistible and
free, and so Conversion it self is both free and irresistible. 1. It is
irreresistible, because it necessarily follows the real Inclination of the
Will preceding, and the last dictate of the Understanding approving and
confirming it. It is also most properly free, for it has those things which
are required unto liberty, seeing the Will therein is not passive, but active.
2. It is not brought forth, but in the way of moral persuasion, that is, not
without the preceding judgment of the understanding, weighing on each part
what is best to be done; for every active and complete Willing, which has had
such a deliberation and determination of the Understanding, concerning an
object offered, going before it, must be called truly and properly free. And
for that definition of freedom whereby that is said to be free, which
supposing all things requisite to action, may either act or not; t is a
definition settled only in the brains of the Jesuits; and neither has
foundation among the Fathers, nor the ancient Philosophers, nor yet among the
more ancient Schoolmen, whom yet Suarez endeadeavours to wrest to the
maintenance of his opinion.

So have you our opinion; according to which, a man is converted irresistibly,
and yet freely, which that you may yet more fully understand, these Axioms
follow from it, which are contrary to those of the Jesuits and Arminians.

1. We do not say, that Free Will, or the faculty of the Will, as to spiritual
things, is half alive and half dead, as the Arminians would have it, Confer.
Hag. p. 300. or that it is like the power of moving in one who is bound in
fetters; or as the faculty of seeing in one who is shut up in a dark place, as
the Papists say: But we hold, That the faculty of the Will, as it respects a
truly spiritual good, is wholly extinct, as the power of life in a dead man of
motion in a slain man, of sight in him whose eyes are put out.

2. They also defend, That the Will is only stirred up by moral or assisting
Grace, knocking at the door of it, and admonishing it, not that it is changed
by habitual Grace, healing and renewing it: For these are their words, There
is no reason why moral Grace, that is morally persuading, may not make a
natural man spiritual. But we suppose, that the will is quickened and renewed
by the infusion of habitual Grace, that is of a new quality imprinted on the
Will, which is as an inward principle enlivening and changing the Will, from
whence all good inclinations and operations do proceed.

3. They hold, That the Will is otherwise concerned in Conversion, than in an
active way, We maintain, that the Will in the first act of Conversion is partly
passive, and partly active, that is, first Passive, then Active, and so it
works together with God, not partly by a natural ability, and partly by a
supernatural strength, received from grace, passing by, but by virtue of a
power wholly supernatural, which is conferred by infused and quickening grace,
according to that of Augustine, To will, is of our selves, but to will well,
both partly and wholly, is of grace.

4. The Arminians think, That the quickening grace of the Spirit, and
whatsoever else on Gods part is required to the conversion of a man, is
communicated as well to the Reprobate, as to the Elect, and that with intention
of their salvation, otherwise God should deal deceitfully and hypocritically
with them when he offers the Word unto them. Let their own words be read, Coll.
Hag. p. 308. But we hold, That the quickening grace of God, which is fit for the
healing and renewing of the Will, is peculiar to the Elect, and is imparted to
them by virtue of the divine Decree, to the end they might be saved: But it is
denied to others, and that our God has not determined to save them

5. They say, That the Will stirred up by quickening grace, may act or not act,
turn to God or not; but otherwise it were not free: for they hold liberty to
stand in this, That granting all things required, or all the actings of God,
the Will may act or not, whence is that of Corvinus against Tilenus, page 337.
Grace does not so furnish the Will with strength, but that it always remains
in the power of the Will to use it or not use it. We, on the contrary, say,
That the Will cannot resist or withstand the real motion proceeding from
Grace, nor the divine persuasion offered to it by an enlightened understanding,
but does necessarily follow the guidance of God, according to that of S.
Augustine, Free Will cannot resist God in the work of salvation.

6. They say, That the Will excited by Grace does properly work together with
God, is a coordinate joynt-cause, a partial Concomitant-cause, and has such
an influence into the effect, that if it be withheld, the effect in no wise can
follow. We, on the contrary, say, That the Will, indeed, does cooperate, but
as a cause every way subordinate and wholly subject to the dominion of God as
the principal agent, insomuch that it cannot properly be called a co-worker;
but rather it acts as it is acted, move as it is moved, and being first turned
into God, it turns it self unto God.

7. They deferd, That God cannot convert us in an irresistible way, unless w
ebe turned into stocks and blocks, and so being driven with a continual
motion, we act nothing, but God all in us. On the other side, we say, that
stocks and stones have no power to act, being acted; but that men are free
Agents, and therefore have a power by virtue of which they act, being acted by
God, and therefore may be said truly to act, and turn themselves; for the will
being changed from evil unto good, and of unwilling made willing, has in it
self an inward principle of willing well; from whence the dominion of its own
act, whereby it turns unto God, may properly be given unto it; for although
the grace of God is the principle by which, yet the will of man is the
principle which works all. In like manner, although God be the first and
total efficient cause of conversion, yet the Will is the next efficient cause,
and total also in the kind of second causes; therefore, as the effects are
wont to be attributed unto second and created causes, although they act by
virtue of the first cause, so conversion is most properly to be attributed unto
the Will, although it act wholly in the strength of God and converting Grace.

8. Lastly, They deny, That the unresistibleness of divine Grace, and the
liberty of man's Will, can stand together. But we say, That Conversion is
irresistible, and yet free. But we distinguish concerning the irresistibleness
of Grace.

1. There is one kind of Irresistibleness, whereby regenerating Grace infused
from God, is received by the Will; and this irresistibleness of reception, we
confess, cannot stand with liberty

2. There is another kind, whereby the inclination putting on to spiritual good
does flow from, after a physical or real manner, from the Will fashioned by
Grace: and this motion (we say) comes from the Will irresistibly and
voluntarily, but not freely.

3. There is an Irresistibleness, whereby the Will assents unto this Physical
motion proceeding from Grace, as also to the persuasion of the Understanding,
approving of it, and that necessarily or certainly: And this kind of
Irresistibleness, we say, may very well stand with Liberty, because it
comprehends in it self those two things in which Liberty stands.

1. That the Will in putting forth this last act of willing, is active, and not
passive.

2. Because the moral persuasion, or judgment of the Understanding, thinking
that the conversion propounded, that is, either the taking or refusing the
object offered, is in the power of man, has gone before. For we hold, That
whatsoever is done in the act of Conversion, either by a mere Reception, or by
a physical (or powerful) Determination, is not free. But that every willing
is only so far free as it is produced in an active way, and flows from a
reasonable persuasion; and that upon this ground, that reason lies indifferent
to things opposite, that is, Reason only is the root and foundation of all
Liberty; from whence it follows, that every act of the Will, into which Reason
has its influence, is most free.

You see now what our opinon is, which we have been the longer in opening,
because the explication of it is its chief confirmation, and the confutation
of the contrary. Besides, it is a very difficult thing to express what the
Arminians hold in this dispute, because they cover and wrap up their opinion in
so doubtful and specious words.

There yet remain the Arguments, by which our opinion is so to be confirmed,
which I shall be brief in: Two things are to be proved:

1. That qualityes or habits may be infused into the Will, which they deny,
because they suppose, that such an infusion does utterly destroy and take away
the nature and liberty of the Will.

2. That this habitual and quickening Grace, being thus infused, we are
converted by God in a certain way, and by us irresistible.

Arg. I That there is such an infusion of Grace renewing and healing the Will,
inclining and determining it to one of the two opposites in the act of
Conversion, appears by this, That all Divines hold, that there is in the Will
an habitual aversion from God, and an habitual turning to sensible and
carnal things: But this habitual corruption of nature cannot be healed by the
sole help of Grace, merely exciting: For, as corporal, so spiritual diseases
are not cured, but by contraries; and therefore habitual corruption cannot be
changed but by an habitual quality, imprinted on the Will. Prosp. therefore
says right, The inward sense is not opened to do spiritual things, until
the foundation of Faith, and fervor of Love is planted in the Heart.

2. Unless it be granted, That such an habitual Grace is infused into the
Will, by which it is inclined to good after a physical manner; there will be
found no formal principle in man, from whence good acts may be produced: for
as in corporal things no man fees, unless he first have eyes; nor hears,
unless he has ears: so in spiritual things, no man sees unless God has
first given him eyes to see; nor hears, unless he has given him ears to
hear. By the same reason no man can turn himself to God, unless he have a
new Heart; that is, a new Will to turn and love God: For what means that
Scripture, An evil Tree brings forth evil Fruit, a good Tree brings forth
good Fruit? But that we should thereby understand, that the Will must first be
made good, before it can perform any spiritual work, which must necessarily
be done, not by exciting or persuading Grace, but by Grace healing and
regenerating.

3. Let it be supposed, that the Will deformed by habitual corruption, could,
by the mere help of exciting Grace, be raised to the putting forth of
spiritual acts: Yet would this be contrary to that sweetness of Divine
Providence, which is acknowledged by all Divines. For God should not sweetly
put forward the Will so disposed, but in a forced way hurry it on to its work,
which its own inclination is yet averse from. It is therefore more meet, to
place in the Will a certain habitual Propension unto spiritual good, which
it may perform, not by virtue of exciting grace, but from the infusion of
habitual grace.

4. It is confessed by all, that the Will unrenewed has no principle in it
truly spiritual; and yet they will not deny, that this act of turning unto
God, is truly spiritual and supernatural, but how the Will, only excited by
motioning Grace, and not changed by Grace regenerating, should be placed in the
rank of supernatural agents, I understand not.

5. I will ask what is that which makes a man truly holy and Godly, not simply
acts good and godly; for (as the Philosopher says) Acts do not denominate the
subject to be such: it must therefore be some habit, by virtue of which a man
is called godly and holy: But that habit is not placed in the irrational part
of the soul, for that is not properly capable of Virtue or Vice, but only by
Participation: to wit, so far as the rational part of the soul redounds
upon it. But if it must be placed in the rational part, it must not be in the
understanding; for no man is good or evil, only because he understands good
and evil things (as Aquinas very well observes) but therefore is one called a
good or evil man, because he wills those things which are good and evil. It
remains therefore, that the habit of holiness cannot be placed any where but
in the will, as being the subject most properly capable, both of habitual
holiness, as also of habitual corruption and rebellion, which is contrary
thereunto.

6. If the Will be indifferent in it self, and equally inclined unto either
part; whence is that facility and promptitude in working? for as by evil
actions the Will contracts a stain whereby it is habitually disposed unto
evil; so by good actions the soul is touched with a better tincture, whereby
it is habitually inclined unto good, and that setting aside the operation of
moving and exciting Grace.

7. All Divines of better note acknowledge, That charity, or the love of God,
is not a mere act, but a permanent habit; but that habit has no place in the
understanding, because it is an affection; nor in the sensitive appetite, which
cannot be raised to spiritual love. It remains therefore, that it be
peculiar to the Will, and so the Will to be most properly capable of habits,
and of habitual Grace.

8. Lastly, How absurd is it to grant the whole man to be dead in sin, so
that it can no way reach unto any good truly spiritual: and yet to defend,
that the Will, which is the very leader of the soul, the driver of all
faculties, the Lady and Queen of humane acts, and that principle, which
impaireth spiritual good or evil, unto all actions which men perform. How
absurd (I say) is it, to hold that this faculty was neither spiritual before
the Fall, nor carnal after the Fall, but to be utterly void, both of the
corruption brought in by the first fault, and of spiritual gifts infused in
the regeneration of man.

It were easy to overwhelme this Opinion with more absurdities; but these
shall suffice. By all these things it is apparent enough, that a new quality or
habit of grace is infused into, or impressed upon the Will, which is earnestly
denied by the Arminians, as has been before proved by their own words.

But who so yet doubts whether this be their Opinion, let him read the Hague
Conference, page 298. of Bertius Translation; where they do industriously and
purposely defend, that in spiritual death, spiritual gifts are not separated
from the will of man, neither were implanted in it before that death in the
state of Innocence, because if by these kind of gifts the will were inclined
unto either part, the liberty of it were taken away, which (they say) consists
in this, That it can equally bend it self to either part, when all requisites
unto action are afforded.

It remains now briefly to be proved, that God, whether immediately or
mediately, both by infused grace and moral persuasion, turns sinners unto
himself after an irresistible manner. But this caution is to be premised, that
by the word Irresistibly we do not understand any force offered to the Will,
which is repugnant to its nature, but only an insuperable efficacy of Divine
Grace, which inclines the Will sweetly and agreeably to its own nature, but so
certainly and necessarily (we understand that Necessity, which even now we
called Certainty) that it cannot be put off by the Will.

1. The truth of this Opinion is manifest from hence, That every where in
Scripture the conversion and regeneration of a sinner is attributed to God
alone, and to his good will and pleasure; but every, even the least
cooperation is taken away from man himself. Romans 9. It is not of him that
wills, nor of him that runs, but of God that shows mercy. He has mercy
on whom he will have mercy, and whom he will he hardens: which could not be
truly said, if a man at his own freedom and pleasure, allowing all the
actions of God requisite to conversion, might receive the quickening grace of
God in vain, and make it void (as Arminius speaks.) And let it be observed
from these words, That this man's repenting, and that man's hardening, is not
only attributed to God alone, but the will and endeavors of man, is utterly
excluded from having any part in this business. It is not (says the Apostle)
of him that wills, nor of him that runs, etc. As the wheel does not run
well, that it may be round; but because it is first round: so a man does not
therefore will or run that God might have mercy on him, and regenerate him by
the quickening grace of the spirit: but because God first has mercy, therefore
he wills and runs in the way of righteousness.

2. The second reason is taken from the infallible connection of the Effect,
with the Cause; that is, of Conversion, with converting and quickening Grace:
For if this quickening Grace always attain its effect, neither is offered to
any, but those in whom it is effectual, to the healing and regenerating of
their soul: we must necessarily attribute unto it a certain, prevalent and
irresistible working. But it appears by many places of Scripture, that this
grace does always attain its end in those to whom it is communicated. John 6.
37. Whatsoever my Father gives me comes unto me. Jer. 31. 23. Turn thou me
and I shall be turned. From whence it is gathered, That into whomsoever grace,
fit for the conversion of a man, is infused, that man is certainly and
infallibly converted; otherwise a man could not thus address to God. Turn me;
that is, do what thou art wont to do by the help of thy Spirit, and the
infusion of thy Grace, and I shall be converted, for perhaps the will, in whose
power it is to receive or reject grace, may make it void. The same is evident
from John 6. 45. Whosoever has heard and learned of the Father comes unto me;
that is, whosoever has so heard and been taught of God, that he has also
received and drunk in the quickening Grace of the Spirit, he has certainly come
unto me. Whence it appears, That Grace fit for the conversion of a man is
never frustrated, but it attaines its effect after an insuperable manner, so
that it can never be put off by the will of man: Which is further confirmed
from the nature of Grace, and that powerful manner, whereby God infuseth it
into the heart of man: For if Grace be the effect of infinite power (as it is)
and that man be regenerated by the same power wherewith Christ was raised from
the dead; then God in the implanting of it in the will of man, puts forth that
almighty power, which no created faculty is able to withstand or resist.

3. This Argument may also be added, The grace of God is so the efficient cause
of Conversion, that it admits no joined and coordinate cause, although it has
a subordinate cause; to wit, the will of man adjoined to it: But if the Will,
when it is excited by assisting grace (as they call it) can resist it, then it
may also assist it; if it may withstand it, then it may also join endeavor
with it, to produce the same effect; if it can make it void, it may also make
it effectual, and so may be a cause coordinate with the grace of God, in
bringing forth the first act of its conversion. But that God does convert or
regenerate men by his own and only work, excluding all coordinate causes, is
so clear, that it need not be proved; for it is frequently found in Scripture,
The Lord converteth, the Lord gives repentance; that God circumciseth, and
takes away the stony heart, and gives a heart of flesh.

Lastly, That God does regenerate, and by his own power raise from the death
of sin.

I let pass the force of the similitude, as no man can contribute any thing to
his own generation or resurrection; so neither to his spiritual regeneration
or resurrection. God (I say) does all these things; but they could not be
attributed to him alone, if he had any cause so cooperating with him, as that
if it refused, no such effect could follow.

I add, that of the Schoolmen is most true, That God is the cause of the
whole Being; that is, although God be not the efficient cause of sin (which
is not a being, but rather a defect of what should be in a faculty or act) but
rather a* deficient will * but of every good work (of which kind our first
conversision is a chief one) if it be most full of Being, or if it be a whole
Being, as it is, of such a whole work; I say, it is necessary that God should
be the cause; for God alone is the cause of the whole Being wheresoever it is
found: Yea, all Divines acknowledge, that so far as Sin it self is a
Being, God is the cause of it: Wherefore, although the Will be the secondary
and subordinate efficient cause of conversion; from whence it is that the
Scriptures do exhort us to turn our selves, and circumcise our hearts, and so
forth. Yet, as a coordinate cause, it no way can resist the quickening grace of
God, and receive it in vain (as Arminius speaks.) I add, although God would
admit of a Partner in this work, yet the will, which is wholly depraved and
dead in sin, can no more cooperate with exciting and moving grace, than a
carcass prepared and disposed by rubbing can revive it self, and put forth
vital acts. But, that I may conclude this reason, Let it be supposed, that the
Will may work together with the grace of God, or not according to its liberty:
yet, if this opinion stand, how much more than is meet will be arrogated unto
man, and derogated from the glory of God? Man may well boast that his will
contributed so much to regeneration, that if he had* not willed, it had never
been produced. For as he, who being admonished by another, gives an alms, does
attribute the work more to himself, than to him that persuaded him, or stirred
him up to it; so he, whose will being only moved or admonished by assisting
grace, turns it self unto God; does more, or, at least, equally ascribes his
conversion to himself than to Divine Grace, which had never produced that
effect, unless he himself had consented unto it, and made its persuasions
effectual, whereas it was in his power to have rendered them frustrate.

The fourth reason is taken from hence, That the Decree of Election (by which
God determined with himself to save some persons selected from the common
Mass) is absolute, and therefore does necessarily and in^^^libly attain its
effect, That the Decree of Election is absolute, so that the Lord looked upon
nothing foreseen in the persons chosen, but absolutely decreed to work in them
all conditions required to salvation, is so clearel^ manifest from many places
of Scripture, that it scarce needs any proof; for if we choose not God, but he
us, Ioh. 15. if we are chosen that we might be holy, not holy that we might be
chosen: If he chose Jacob rather than Esau, when both were of like and equal
condition. Romans 9. If effectual vocation and justifying faith are the fruits
and effects of predestination, not the foregoing conditions. Romans 8. Lastly, If
Gods mere good pleasure be the only reason of the Decree [He has mercy on
whom he will, and hardens whom he will.] It necessarily follows, that God
has absolutely decreed to save some: and to that purpose to bestow upon them
Grace, Faith, and Holiness. Granting these things, it appears, that God
converts all the Elect after a manner, by them irresistible on this manner,
Because if they could resist that Grace, which is fit to convert them, being
also given to this end, that they might be converted; then this absolute and
peremptory Decree of God might be disappointed by the creature, which must not
be imagined: Neither is there ground that they should now object, that by the
same reason those whom God has rejected, do sin irresistibly. For we deny
that there is the same reason of both: for although Faith be the effect of
predestination, yet infidelity is not the proper effect of Reprobation. Whereas
Faith requires a cause of it self efficient, which has a true and proper
influence into its effect. But there is no efficient cause required to
unbelief: but deficient (because it follows upon the mere defect and absence
of that cause by which Faith should be wrought.) As to the illumination of the
air; there is required the Sun or some other efficient cause, having influence
into that effect; but the absence of the Sun is enough to cause darkness. In
like manner, although the sins of Reprobates do infallibly follow from the
determinate counsel of God, who has decreed their event; yet Conversion and
Faith do follow the absolute Decree of God after a much different manner;
sins do follow infallibly indeed, but only by a necessity of consequence;
that is, God not at all causing or effecting, but only permitting: but Faith
and good Works follow by a necessity of the consequent, as of which God must
most properly be called the Author, according to all Divines: For no man ever
said that men did believe, were segenerate, and turned to God; did good works
(God only permitting, but causing and working. But if this be granted to us
(as needs it must) that Faith and Conversion do follow the absolute decree of
God by a necessity of the consequent; that is, a necessity causing and
co-working: I see not how it can be denied, that it is wrought in us after an
irresistble manner. For when any Agent so works upon the patient, that it
necessarily overcomes it, it is properly said to work irresistibly. In like
manner God, if he so convert a sinner, that he is necessarily Converted, by a
necessity of the consequent then he converts it irresistibly, that is after
such a manner, as the patient must needs yield; from whence I wonder, that those
who deny election, to depend on foreseen faith, do yet defend that conversion
is wrought after a resistible manner, and so as it may be frustrated.

Let this be the fist and last reason. If conversion be wrought after that
resistible manner, as is described by them who follow Arminius, then Divine
election cannot be certain according to their principles, because it depends
on the mutable will of man, which as it is described by Arminius, I dare say,
could not be foreseen by God himself; for let it be supposed (which they lay)
as the foundation of that praevision that God does perfectly foresee all the
ways whereby the will may be turned aside, or inclined unto good: Let it also
be supposed that God fore-knowes all objects, or circumstances, which may any
way be offered or proposed to the will. Lastly, let it also be supposed, that
God does perfectly know how every object or circumstance is fit to move the
will, and drive it this way, or that way, by persuasion. Yet if this be the
condition of the will, that allowing any objects, yea further, allowing any
fitness in these objects or circumstances, to incline the will this way, or
that way; it may yet, by virtue of its intrinsecall liberty act, or not act, I
see not how God can foresee what the will certainly and infallibly will do,
that is, whether it will turn to God or not. Not that God, by reason of any
impotency is not able to search out what the will shall endeavor, but because
the thing it self is not knowable. For there cannot be greater certainty in
the knowledge than in the object, from whence I thus reason. If it be certain
that the will shall assent unto grace offered, then it is falsely said, that the
Will supposing all the actions of God that are requisite, may turn it self,
or not? On the other side, if it be uncertain, whether the will shall resist
this grace, or not, then that foreknowledge which God has of it, cannot be
certain, for that which is to be known is the measure of knowledge, and
therefore it is a contradiction to say, that the knowledge is true, and yet
there is more certainty in the knowledge than in the thing known. As it
implies a contradiction to say, that the thing measured is greater or less
then the measure, and yet to be equal to it; I add, although it be true, that
God knows all the ways, according to which, the will may be well or ill
inclined. Yet if the will be altogether undetermined, admitting nothing to
determine it, neither within it self, nor without it, whether created, or
uncreated, as they defend, implies a contradiction, that any certain way,
whereby it should fall out that the will should be ordered or disordered, can
be determined by God himself. Out of all these things it is gathered, that if
converting grace move the will after a manner, that may be resisted by it, God
cannot infallibly foreknow, who shall believe, and who not; and consequently,
all election should be utterly taken away. Therefore it remains,

That converting grace is both imparted by God, and received by us, after a
manner Irresistible.

FINIS.

