FOUR Sermons Preached in OXFORD. I. The Christians Excellency, upon Mat. 5.
47. II. Truth begets Enmity, upon Gal. 4. 16. III. A Nations happiness in a
good King Eccles. 10. 17. IV. The praise of Charity, upon Heb. 13. 16.


By JOHN PRICE Master in Arts, and Minister of Hollowell Parish in the said
famous University.

Printed in Oxford, 1661.

TO THE Right Reverend Father In God, HENRY Lord Bishop of CHICHESTER.
My Lord,
IT Was not your greatness, but your goodness, that induced me to cast these
mean Sermons at your honors seet; as I desire never to look upon a Great man,
but either to pity him, or pray for him, so never upon a good man, but to
imitate him: Of your extraordinary goodness and humility, I have had ample
experience; Among many other precious jewels which your Miter is embellished
with, I am sure it does not want that; I give your Honor many thanks for
those many favors and civilities, you have been pleased to confer upon my
unworthy self, and as a token thereof, I have made bold to present you with
this mean work, hoping you will be pleased to vouchsafe it Protection under
your wings. Though it may serve for little else, yet I hope it will serve to
testify my gratitude; you were pleased to initiate me into the Church, and I
present you with my first fruits: Though cunning Bezaliels and Aholiabs may
carve and pollish the Temple yet I am glad that I can but lay one little stone;
Though men of brighter souls bring their gold, and jewels to it, yet I hope
God will accept of my young Pigeous and Turtle-doves. I may say with St Peter,
silver and gold have I none, but what I have I give you. My Lord I wish you all
happiness, both Internal, External, and Eternal, and I am

Your humbly devoted Servant JOHN PRICE.

To the READER.
Courteous Reader,
BEing summoned to Preach a St. Mary's the seventh of July, and being
unexpectedly put by; when I first set upon the Printing of these Sermons, I
thought my self engaged in honor so to do, at least wise to communicate that
days preparations. But afterwords I was informed, that the Person that Preached
had warning of it a month before, and I conceive there is no great injury done
me, however having employed the Printer, I could not very well strike sail. I
confess though my imperfestions were always too too legible, yet they were
never in Print before, I never in this kind offered any incivility to men's
eyes, there are some things in the first Sermen which some peradventure may
take offense at, but I would have such know, that I was never wedded to any
interest, or faction; I have lost by all Governements, but never got any thing
by any; and truth (if from any) may be expected from such a one. I think men
have little reason to be angry with me, in that I have told not some only but
all men of their faults, and that impartially. I hope thou art of so much
candor, humanity and piety, as being no Angel thy self, thou will (if thou
chance to look over these unworthy lines), over look the failings of him, that
is

Thine in Christ Jesus JOHN PRICE.

Matthew 5. 47. And if ye salute your Brethren only, what do ye more then
others, do not even the Publicans so?
THE Pharisees they were the flower, the soul, and as it were, the eyes of the
Jewish Nation: they were Masters in Israel; Art thou a Master in Israel and
know not these things? S. Paul Acts 26. calls them (...) the most exquisite
and exact sect: The Jewish Doctors tell us they have their name from
separation, as being accounted men of purer doctrines, and more austere
conversations then the generality of the Jews: They were by their profession
(...) interpreters of the Law, Luke 7. 45. of these there were two sorts, some
that thought the Law sufficient without tradition, and these were called
Karaim: others that thought it no great commendation to do what they were bidd
unless they did superarrogate; and these were termed Chasidim holy above the
Law, much like our overdoing Papists, these they would not frame themselves to
the Law, but they would by their fair Glosses and Comments, make it frame it
self to them, do homage to their lusts, and truckle under their passions: They
would have it to have such a relish as they fabled the mannah to have hadd: a
relish suitable to every ones palate; be any thing that any one fancied; among
many other good Texts which they had corrupted with bad Comments, that was one
in Leviticus the 19. and the 18. Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self, to
which they added, hate thine enemy; which our Savior points at, verse. 43. Ye
have heard that it has been said, thou shall love thy Neighbor and hate thy
enemy. Christ being the Law giver and therefore the best Commentator upon his
own Law, he vindicates it from the spurious unauthentick glosses of the
Pharisees, he separates the gold from the dross, the wheat from the chafe: he
shows his Disciples not only the letter, but the life, the spirit of the Law,
in this exhortation verse 44. Let the Pharisees say what they will, I say unto
you, love your enemies, Bless them that Curse you, Do good to them that hate
you, and pray for them that despightfully use you; This exhortation he presses
by a twofold reason; 1. If they do so, they shall be like their father, which
makes the Sun to shine upon the good and bad. 2. If they do not so, they
should, only be like the Publicans, Do no more then they do, If ye love them
which love you what reward have ye, and if ye salute your brethren only what
do ye more then others, do not even the Publicans so.

These words they are spoken interrogatively, and are more piercing and
patheticall then downright truths, (...) if ye salute, it signifies to salute
with a kiss, which was a custom among the Jews, and is now among us, it is a
general term comprehends in it all other civilities, as the rational soul
does the sensitive and vegetative, as running includes going. Your Brethren
only -- that is your friends and kinsfolks, your relations, persons that you
are particularly obliged to, for the Jews acknowledged such only as brethren;
hence it is that in old books it is translated (...) amicos your friends: If
ye salute your friends only -- You my Disciples, you that are the salt of the
Earth, You that are the light of the World, You that have me always in the
midst of you: You that have the continual droppings of the word of the
Kingdom: You that are enlightened and warmed in a signal manner, with the most
piercing and distinguishing irradiations of the sun of righteousness: You
that have the happiness of hearing those, even those heavenly discourses that
came from the breast of the Father: You that have taken upon you the most
exquisite and exact profession of christianity: You that have so many golden
oportunities of benefitting your selves and others: You that in comparison of
heathens and Pagans, should be as Angels: What do you more then others? --
More (...): Beza tells us it is as much as (...) Quid amplius facitis, what do
you above others, Junius and Tremelius render it Quid eximium facitis; what
excellent, admirable, extraordinary thing do ye: these lections do not vary
much, the sense seems almost the same in all. Then others: These words are not
expressed in the original, but they are necessarily understood (...) being a
respective term, for when a man does more then others, they do less then
he, his doing some thing tells them they do nothing. Then others: What
others? More then the covetous griping, hypocritical, vainglorious,
selfe-admiring Pharisees, or the odious, scandalous, openly profane, and most
wicked Publicans, which were accounted the scumme and dross of the people, and
hated by the Jews because they were the instruments of the Romans cruelty; as
much as many formerly hated our excise men and sequestratours; these even these
can love men for their own ends, or rather love themselves in those men. These
can salute their Brethren; their friends, but it is them only and not others.
But as for you that either are my Disciples already, or would be; you that are,
or would be Christians, you must not only love your friends, but also your
very enemies, as having somewhat of God upon them and being made after his own
image as well as you. If ye do the one you only show your selves grateful and
escape blame: but if ye do the other ye deserve praise: that is of nature this
of grace; that they do as men and this you are to do as Christians: that is
but ordinary, but this excellent and extraordinary, if ye salute your Brethren
only, what do you more then others do not even the Publicans do so? This is
the true genuine sense of the words according to Chrysostom, Musculus,
Tostatus, Maldonate, Erasmus, Beza, Diodate and others compared together, they
afford us these two plain truths, first, That Christians should be civil and
courteous not only to their friends and kindsmen, persons that they are
obliged unto; but even to strangers, nay even to their very enemies, If ye
salute your Brethren only.

2. That the Disciples of Christ should do somewhat extraordinary, somewhat
more then others, more then Heathens, more then worldings, what do you more
then others? 1. Of the former, which is this, that Christians should be civil
and courteous not only to their friends, relations, and acquaintance, but also
to strangers, yea even to their very enemies: In the prosecution ofit, I shall
use this Method first give you some Scriptures. 2. Some Reasons 3. Apply. 1.
That Christians should extend their civility and courtesy not only to friends
and relations but even to strangers and enemies; is clear from these
Scriptures: that we are to salute our Brethren do to do good to them that do
good to us: to greet one another with a kiss of charity: to love the Brother
hood; all men will easily grant: St. Paul's Epistles are full, of such
salutations and demonstrations, of civilities and courtesiies: But some think
it a hard saying, that their courtesies and civilities should reach even unto
strangers and enemies, the Scripture is no less express in this then the
other, Deuteronomy. 10. 19. Love thou therefore the strangers for ye were strangers in
the Land of Egypt: not only your Brethren, your Friends, your allies, those
that your are obliged by the Laws of gratitude to love upon particular
accounts; but also strangers such as are lovely only for Gods sake upon the
general account of Christianity: It is the Apostles exhortation that we should
do good to all men. But especially such as are of the household of faith, and
if to all, then surely to strangers and enemies which is also meant by that
Scripture: Thou shall love thy Neighbor as thy self; That is, any one that may
be an object of pity and mercy, Heb. 13. 24. Salute all them that have the
rule over you, and all the Saints; that is, respect, honor your rulers; be
courteous not only to some, but even to all the Saints whether they be poor,
or rich, whether related to you, or not related to you: Honor them not upon
carnal but spiritual accounts; Not because of any particular relation to you,
but because of that general relation that ye all stand in as to Christ your
head, in the 1 of Peter. 2. and the 17. Honor all men that is be civil
courteous to all men according to their respective dignities qualities and
stations, whether they be supperiours equals, or inferiors whether friends, or
strangers, or enemies pregnant above all is that Text in Matthew. 5. 44. But I
say unto you love your enemies bless them that curse you, do good to them
that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you: This
Text contains in it the very essence of charity all the perfection here,
acquirable upon earth, it comprehends all the acts of it: for if we are to love
our enemies to bless them that curse us to do them good, to pray for them, we
cannot deny them salutations and civilities which are but expressive and
significative of that heavenly grace of charity. In that the greater includes
the less, so much may suffice for the I. thing, neither is this without reason
for

1. As Tostatus tells us salutations and external civilities extended to all
are signs and expresses of charity in the heart; and not only so, but of the
best and most diffusive in that that charity is best which like the Sun strives
to do good to the whole World at once: when we love our friends only and such
as love us, that is not so much to be termed charity as self love: external
acts of humanity and courtesy are lively demonstrations of internal charity:
they are none of the worst paraphrases upon a charitable well disposed spirit,
when we see the good fruits of civility and courtesy we may very rationally
conclude that the Tree of charity is alive and full of sap, such good fruits
would not be without a good Tree, by their fruits we may know the Trees of of
charity. It Is true these are not infallible demonstrations, such as we term
those of the Mathematics, it is not impossible for a fawning Hypocrite Judas
like to betray us with a kiss: but we must be content with them till we can
get better. It being Gods prerogative royal to be (...) the searcher of the
heart, and the tryer of the reins, he only made it and he only knows it being
made.

Neither can we rationally think that that man will love us, bless us, do us
good, pray for us nay venture his own body for the salvation of our souls that
will not as much as bestow upon us a cheap costless external act of civility.
It is not likely that that man should run that is so lame, that he can hardly
move, or go. Charity bids hope the best, provided we do not see the worst:
good looks and good words tell us of a good heart; which never wanted some kind
of expression, and surely were many men's hearts truly charitable their looks
and their words would be so also, a man may very well suspect where he hears
bad words and sees bad looks and actions, that surely there are bad hearts, or
else his charity is too fond and merciful, and he seems to me to supererrogate
to be over charitable; just as his Majesty King Charles the I. was over
merciful, so that if we would not forfeit our charity't is requisite, we have
somewhat to show for it; that we make some outward demonstrations, that may
Preach to us it is there, it is not dead: there is some of the holy fire of
charity though under the embers: and sometimes it breaks out either into the
look the tongue, or some other way.

2. Christians should be courteous, not only to their friends, but to
strangers yea to their very enemies: because in so Doing they become like God:
they declare and testify to the World, that they are the Sons of their Father
which is in Heaven, that Christians should be the Sons of God; and declare and
testify to the World, that they are is unquestionable, it being the flower of
our happiness, both to be and to be looked upon as the Sons of God: those are
the best Christians that are likest God; that is to be looked upon as
straightest that comes nearest to the rule, he is most of a Son which is likest
the Father. A Son should be nothing else but as it were the picture of the
Father: the one is the Architype, and the other the Ectype. The one is as the
seal, the other is as the Wax: a Christian cannot be like God, as to equality;
but he may and must resemble him, as to some faint and imperfect adumbrations,
the voice of the Echo is but weak, but yet it has something of the sound in
it. That we are like God and testify that we are his Sons by being respective
and courteous not only to friends but to strangers and enemies is as
unquestionable. This is that which Erasmus has upon the place: This it that
which a greater than Erasmus even Christ Jesus tells us verse 45. Love your
enemies, besse them that curse you, that you may be the Children of you Father
which is in Heaven: for he makes his Sun to rise on the evil and the good, and
sends rain on the just and unjust, as if he should have said thus your Father
which is in Heaven, is good not only to the good; but to the bad: all men have
the light and warmth off the Sun; and if you would be, or be thought to be like
him the the Sons of so good a Father you most do so to, your lives, prayers,
discourses, outward civilities must be extended to all, though you my Disciples
are so, yet testify to the World, in this respect you are so to. And as for you
that are not my Disciples; If ye have any desire to be; if you would both
really be and be accounted Christians, what I say to them I say to you, love
your enemies, pray for them that despightfully use you that ye may be the
Children of your Father which is in Heaven.

3. Christians should do somewhat more then Pharisees Publicans Heathens, the
ordinary uncultivated mass of men, and therefore they should be civil and
courteous not only to their friends and kindred but even to strangers and
enemies, a Christian if he have any respect either to his Father, or to his
redeemer, or profession should be taller then others by the head and shoulders
in piety, he should be a great exemplar, a copy to other men: they should
esteem themselves to do well, or ill, as they are either nearest to, or
furthest off him: Pharisees and Publicanes, can salute their Brethren, but
Christians, must salute strangers nay even their very enemies, in case they do
not a man may put our Saviors interrogatory to them, if ye salute your
Brethren only what do ye more then others do not even the Publicanes so? It
is a great shame for you, If you do not more then they, but, because I am to
speak more of this, in my other Doctrine, I shall wave it here, and only make
a word of use.

The use that I shall make of it briefly is this it may be for the just reproof
of all those that are so fare from being civil and courteous to strangers and
enemies, and such as have injurd them: that they are not so to their Brethren,
or indifferent persons such as never did them any injury. These they know not
their duties, either as to God, or man; they know not how to demean themselves
either as men, or Gentlemen, or Christian men: they seem to have written a bill
of divorce both to civility and Christianity, they are strangers not only to
Christianity but even to Morality. They are worse if we consider either the
precious opportunities offered them; or the light received; then Pharisees
Publicans, or even Heathens: they are so far from honoring all men that they
will honor no man, they speak evils of dignities, they are unsatified with the
present powers: thoug it be written with the Sun beam (as it appears by their
miraculous restoration) that they are of God, they contemn our Ministry: Like
so many Swine they trample upon the Pearls of our Doctrine, they despise our
Persons, instead of honoring us for our works sake: they never look at us
unless it be to laugh at us, or scorn us; and we are as ignorant of a reason
as they: unless it be upon the account of our Doctrines: we may say with
heavenly Paul they therefore look upon us as their enemies because we tell them
the truth. You (very unjustly, and we know not why, make us the objects of your
scorn and contempt: And we you more justly and with a great deal more reason
the objects of our pity and prayers, we love you and you hate us; we bless you
and you curse us; we pray for for you and you dispightfully use us; and among
many others, we put up that of our Savior, Father forgive them for they know
not what they do: you that hate our counsels, will none of our reproofs, scoff
at us, laugh at us, may chance at the dreadful day of judgment to weep and
hear that of God, in Prove. the 1. 26. I will also laugh at your calamity and
mock now your fear is, because you hated knowledge and would none of my
Counsels, deliv'red you by my faithful and impartial servants. We could as men
subject to like passions as you are, laugh at, scorn you, as much as you do
us; but this we must not do, because we are not only men, but men of God. If
we do to you as ye do to us what do we more than others? In doing as you
do, we are only you equals, but in forgiving you, and praying for you, we are
your superiors. And is it possible? Are we so odious, that we dare not look
men in the face? Why, what is the matter? Are we more wicked than others? It
may be so, we are ready to say with holy David, pardon our iniquities for they
are great. With St. Paul, we are the chiefest of sinners. It is of the Lords
mercies that we are not consumed, and because his compassions fail not. However
thus much we can say for our selves, (with a safe conscience and a great deal
of truth. And I would you could have said so too) we never were the men, that
swore we would destroy our Country, that contrived a traiterous, seditious,
antiscriptural engine, like Catilines conspiracy, for the same purpose. Our
heads never plotted our Sovereigns ruin, our hands were never washed in the
blood Royal; we never had the mark of Cain in our foreheads, we never
obliterated the Holy sign of the Cross with the sign of the scaffold. Nay,
we were so far from this, that for the prevention of it, some of us lost our
estates, others our liberties, others our very lives, and some all three; and
could they have done more, I believe they were so loyal, they would have done
it. And when we heard of our Sovereigns unparrallell'd never enough to be
lamented death, (which God knows we could not hinder, or else we would have
done it) out of a Christian-like Sympathy, we did seem not only to sigh, weep,
sweat, bleed, but even dye with him. You glory in your shame, and were it
lawful to glory in any thing, we would glory in this, that we are accounted
worthy to suffer (as we hope) for Christ's name sake. And now laugh on, and
enjoy your own follies, -- Egregiam vero laudem and spolia ampla refertis. So
much may suffice for the first Doctrine, I proceed to the second which is this,
that the Disciples of Christ, Christians, should do somewhat extraordinary,
somewhat more than others, more than Pharisees, Heathens, Publicanes, or any
that say they are Christians, whereas their actions tell us they are rather
Heathens. In the prosecution I shall use this Method, first prove it by
Scripture, secondly by reason, thirdly make use.

1. That Christians should excel, do more than others, do somewhat
extraordinary. It is clear from these Scriptures, Mat. 5. 20. I say unto you,
that except you righteousness exceed the righteousness of the Scribes and
Pharisees, ye shall in no wife enter into the Kingdom of Heaven. Me thinks I
hear the Jews tell me, what exceed the Scribes and Pharisees, is it possible?
Surely if any do go to Heaven, the Scribe must be the one, and the Pharisee
the other? No such matter, covetous men, gripers, oppressors, Hypocrites, mere
outsides, painted tombs, never go to Heaven, during such; However God in his
goodness dispose of them afterward. Such were these Scribes and Pharisees,
which we Christians must exceed, or else we shall never enter into the Kingdom
of Heaven. Amos 3. 2. You only have I known of all the families of the earth,
therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities. You the Children of
Israel, which I brought out of the Land of Egypt, out of the house of bondage,
into a Land flowing with Milk and Honey; You whom I have known by my
judgments, which should have taught you righteousness; you whom I have known
by my signal favors and mercies; you whom I have known by my faithful
Prophets, rising up early, and fitting up late; you whom I have known by my
soul saving, soul searching ordinances; I knew you so well, and so much, that I
seemed to know no other Nation, unless it were to punish it; I thought and
expected, ungrateful Israelites, that you should have known the Rock of your
salvation, I did much for you, and I expected that proportionably you should
have done much for me; but in that you did so little, and would not know me, I
will make you know and that to your sorrow, that you only have I known of all
the familes of the earth therefore I will punish you for all your iniquities, I
will punish you temporally, though you do repent, I will punish you eternally
if you do not repent. By how much your mercies and advantages have been
greater than those of other Nations, by so much the greater shall your
punishments be. There is an excellent place in Luke 12. 47, 48. And that
servant which knew his Lords will, and prepared not himself, neither did
according to his will, shall be beaten with many stripes. But he that knew it
not and committed things worthy of stripes, shall be beaten with few stripes.
For unto whom much is given, of him much shall be required; and to whom men
have committed much, of him they will ask the more. In this Text we have a
Lord and two servants, the Lord is the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords, the
two servants, they are not Angels but men, for their quality, the one was
knowing, and the other not knowing, the one knew his Masters will, the other
did not; they both committed things worthy of stripes, but the one was more
excusable than the other, the one had many stripes, but the other few; and why
both being faulty, were they not equally punished? Because they were not
equally faulty, the one knew his Masters will, the other knew it not, and
therefore not so blameable. Of these just proceedings, we have an account given
in the subsequent reason, for unto whom much is given, of him much shall be
required, Phil. 1. 27. Only let your conversation be as becomes the Gospel.
St. Paul writes to Christians, to men that had embraced the Gospel, and he
requires a Gospel-like conversation; And what kind of one is that? A
conversation full of simplicity, holiness, peace unity, charity; not a
Pharisaical, not a Heathen, but a Christian-like, becoming conversation, such
a one as becomes both the Profession and Professors; only let your
conversation be such as becomes the Gospel. So much may suffice for the proof
of it by Scripture, 2. Neither is this without reason, That Christians should
do somewhat excellent and more than others, for

1. They received, God has given them more than others, and therefore they
should give him more than others, do more than others, Luke 12. 47, 48. Unto
whom much is given of them much shall be required. it is but just and equal,
that our returns should be proportionable to our receipts; Christians they
have God for their Father, Christ for their Redeemer, the Holy Ghost for their
comforter and teacher, they are under the continual droppings of the Sanctuary;
they hear the shrill silver Trumpets of the Temple, they are always instructed
by good precepts, good examples, good Sermons, good lives, tutord by Gods Word,
works, judgments, mercies, providence, nay even their very afflictions; The
whole creation serves them, and surely they are blameworthy, if they do not
in a more eminent manner, serve the creator. Souls in some respect are like
bodies, some bodies are drawn in bright and orient colors, as if nature had
made use of a Sun beam for her pensil; others are drawn in more dusky,
coale-like colors; The brightest colors have aliquid umbrae, and the darkest
aliquid lucis. If we look into the excellencies of the Soul, those (...) those
internal colors of the soul we may see the same; God has given some, more
glittering souls, bespangled with light from the Sun of righteousness, souls
embroydred with all perfections here acquirable: He has been pleased to give
others more sad and dark colored Spirits; as the brightest souls have somewhat
of a cloud, to teach them humility so the darkest have somewhat of a beam, to
keep them from discouragement, and that others may not insult over them. Those
that have the brightest souls, God expects they should shine like Stars in the
Firmament; Let your light so shine that men seeing your good works, may glorify
your Father which is in Heaven. God has opened the Scholars mouth, therefore
he exspects his lips should show forth his praises. The rich man is Gods Lord
treasurer, he is the hand of God, and he expects it should be always opened to
the necessities of the poor and needy; he should be like the mercies of God,
beneficial to the whole World at once God may accept of Turtle Doves, and young
Pigeons from the poor, but he expects that the rich should bring their Plate,
Gold, and Jewels to the Temple. God expects that Bezaliels and Aholiabs that
are cunning to work in Gold, should not only build, or lay common stones, but
carve and polish the Tempe, Eunapius calls a mean Scholar, (...) a drop of
Helicon, and surely if a mean Scholar be a drop of Helicon, a good Scholar is
all Helicon, or rather an Ocean of learning: And if so, God requires an Ocean
of service from him; an Ocean of service is but propottionable to an Ocean of
learning. Though the whole World besides, be but, as the dry heath, and barren
Wilderness, yet the Chuch is the Eden of the World, the Paradise of God; and
in Paradise (if any where) God may look for Trees bearing fruit, pleasant to
the taste. Christians should be men of better lives, than uncultitated
Barbarous Asiaticks, Affricans, Americans.

2. The second argument is drawn from the nature of perfection, Christians
should be perfect, if so, thy must do somewhat more than others, for he that
is more perfect in his profession than another, does a great deal more than he
in it, be ye therefore perfect, as your Father which is in Heaven is perfect.
And can a man be as perfect as his Father which is in Heaven? No, there is a
twofold perfection, a perfection of of equallity, and a perfection of
similitude; we cannot be like our Father as to the former, but we may as to the
latter, We have only somewhat like God in us, as to every grace, (...) though
it be not many times so legible. And he that would attain to this perfection,
must do (...) somewhat extraordinary, somewhat above and more than others. That
man that would have the World believe that he is one of the best Musicians in
it, his compositions must be more sweet, rare, and harmonious than other men's,
his judgment must be more solidd and piercing, his hand must be more
commanding, he must be all ear, and a man, would say what ever other men's souls
were, yet his was nothing but harmony. He that would be accounted a rare
Painter, must draw better pictures, than thousands of ordinary Painters can; he
must so draw a man, that it would be a hard matter to tell, whether it were the
man himself, or his picture, (if any one should come into the room, (if he did
not know the man very well) yet presently salutes, his picture, as deeming it
to be the very man himself; if he cannot do so, he disgraces his profession, he
does not do it to the life. He that either really is, or would be accounted
one of the best Orators in the universe, says thus to his words, Go, smite
spirits, wound souls, captivate affections, command hearts, be victorious,
make sure of passions, he steeres a congregation with an expression, he never
is looked upon, but either with an eye of envy, or admiration, or both, and he
that eyes his auditors, gathers by their looks and deportments, that their
bodies, nay, their very souls have nothing else to do for that time, but like
servants and willing prisoners, to wait upon and attend his speeches: And, it
is the great unhappiness of the universe; that it has not one ear, and that
chained to his soul ravishing, soul enthralling discourses. And if it should
happen not to be so, it is not because Rhetoric wants (...) somewhat to
persuade, but because the Orator wants Rhetoric: surely if a man had had the
happiness to have heard golden Mouthed, sweet tongued Cicero, though he had
never seen him, he need not ask who it was, Cicero would have spoken it had
been Cicero, though he had spoken not a word about that thing. Aristotle was
accounted the best Philosopher in the world in his time, because he did more
than all others, and wrote better, hence is that deserved commendation of M.
Hooker, that he had discovered almost more of natures Mysteries, in the whole
body of Philosophy, then the whole series of ages since, has in any particular
member thereof. The Christian that would be perfect, must do more then
Pharisees, Publicans, Heathens, Ordinary Christians: He is more Eagle-eyed in
spiritualls then others his judgment is more solid and searching, his thoughts
are more orderly and harmonious, his affections are more spiritual and
Christ-like, his whole conversation is more becoming the Gospel, than
thousands of other men's: his whole life is nothing else but a continued Sermon:
He is full of Faith, patience, humility, heavenlymindednesse, contentedness,
mortification of sin, moderation of passion, and he knows very well how to
rule his tongue, which is no small matter; And were the Bible and all graces
lost, (which God forbid) we might find them all in him, though not in their
perfect degrees, yet as to all their parts, not only inchoated but above half
finished: If a Prince should offer him his Scepter, he would refuse it, as
judging that nothing but heaven could make his condition better; If he owes a
man any thing, though he be five hundred mile off, yet out of Conscience he
paies him, and dares do no otherwise: If any one affronts him, he forgives him
long before he asks forgiveness, and though he did never ask, yet he would
do so: He never looks into the world, but to look upon it with an eye of
pity, and to weep over it, as our Savior did over Jerusalem, O Jerusalem,
Jerusalem, had thou but known even in this thy day, those things that
concern thine everlasting peace: O sinful Universe, O sinful Universe, had
thou known in this thy day, the things that concern thy peace: He never
travels into it, but to teach it civility, morality, Christianity; His sober
life tells the Drunkard that he must be drunk no more, His pious, cautious
abhorrence of oaths, tells the swearer, that he must swear no more; His
heavenly, world contemning carriage, tells the coveteous griping worldling,
that he is not for this, but for a better world; When you see him walk, you
think he walks here, no, he walks in the streets of the new Jerusalem: His
busy thoughts and meditations, are upon his eternal rest, God the chiefest
good, the blessed company of angels, and the spirits of just men glorified;
The eyes of his soul, are fixed upon the beauties of the third heaven, the
pearly gates of the palace of God; He desires to do every action of
importance, so, as that he needs not be ashamed, or afraid to be found in it at
the dreadful day of judgment; He would be such a one in his life, as he would
be in his death; and such a one in his death, as he would be found, when he
stands before Christ's Tribunal; He lives (...), as one ashamed that he should
carry a body, the hinderer of his happiness about him; And if it were not for
Gods glory, and the good of his brethren, he would not care much, how soon he
were rid of it; And were he as much master of the great, as he is of the little
World, he would tread upon the Globe all at once, and make it a step to heaven;
When he rises, he thinks that will be his last day, and when he goes to bed,
that that will be his last night, therefore having but one precious and
invaluable jewel, and that is his immortal soul, he cabinets it in the
Heaven of Heavens, as finding no place upon earth fit for it: And can there be
any place in this world fit for a soul, to take a nights lodging in? that is
better than ten thousand Worlds, What shall it profit a man to gain the whole
World, and loose his own soul? or what shall a man give in exchange, the whole
World, nay ten thousand worlds, weighed in the balance, they are all found too
light. So much may suffice for the second thing, the Reasons, I proceed in the
third place to make use.

1. This may be for the just reproof of all the Christian world at once, all
Christian Kings, Archbishops, Bishops, Nobles, Gentlemen, Divines, Physicians,
Lawyers, Soldiers, Tradesmen, all men in all places, that do not act
proportionably to those peerless means of grace received, to those golden
talents, that God has entrusted them with. A man may very well put our
Saviors interrogatory to any of them, What do you more then others? And more
particularly.

1. What do you Christian Kings more than others? Most is the pity, to the
great disgrace of Christianity, and grief of all good men, You embroyle the
Christian world in blood, and unnecessary wars, only for the accomplishment
of your own ambitious, unwarrantable, antiscripturall designs, great Grotius
might have saved himself a labor of writing De jure Belli and Pacis, for you
and your Court parasites can make any war lawful, provided it be for your
own ends, if that ye be likely to get the better. But because either you do
not, or will not know what ye should do, I will tell you, Be Wise O ye Kings,
and be instructed O ye judges of the earth, serve the Lord with fear, and
rejoice with trembling. You should (...), spend your hatred some other way, and
join hearts and hands against those sworn enemies of God and all goodness,
the Turk, and the Pope, that are ready to overrunn all Christendom, the one
with his Tyrannical sword, the other with his Tyrannical word, this would be
a happy Synchristianismus (...), an act worthy of all the Christian Kings in
Christendom, were this but once done, how soon would the seven hills be made
plain? nor should thy triple Idol, O Antichristian Rome, resist the
Christian swords; As you are above others in Place, so, you should be above
others in grace; As you are the best of men for greatness, so, you should be
the best of men for goodness; As you have no superiors in degree, so, neither
should you in virtue; Consider you are the Fathers of Christendom, therefore
you should provide for its welfare; you are the shepherds of Christendom,
therefore you should feed it; You are the Physicians of Christendom, therefore
you should heal it. And now I am speaking of the actions of Kings, pray what
does His Majesty of England? He does to the admiration of all his friends, and
envy of all his enemies. There are three or four potent Sects in England, just
a drawing one upon the other, and He, partly by his piety, partly by his
policy, partly by his promises, sweetens them all, and keeps them from drawing,
and long may he do so. But what did he do? Among many other good acts, he
made an Act of Oblivion, which may be termed the Cement and glue of this
Kingdom; It were to be wished, that as he made an Act of Oblivion for his
enemies, so, he would make an Act of Remembrance for his friends: Though it be
the height of Christianity to forgive our enemies, yet it cannot be denied, but
that it is somewhat of Christianity to remember our friends. I chanced to
overheare many poor sufferers say they were un-univers'd, un-commonwealth'd,
they seemed to have no part to act upon the stage of England: durst I say any
thing, I would say, that they are hated and slighted by most men, hated by
their enemies, because they are not of their pernicious, Popish principles; and
slighted by many of those that should be their friends, because they are some
few of them richer then they as it is natural with rich men, (unless they
have more than ordinary supplies of grace, to forget God, themselves, and their
brethren.) Me thinks those few sufferers that the King has been pleased to
look upon, thy are just like men, that have newly escaped drowning, they are so
taken with their landing, that they will not as much as cast a planke into the
Sea, for the landing of their Brethren, that are struggling with the boisterous
swelling Seas.

2. What do you Noble men above others? As there are many of you, truly noble,
virtuous, honorable, so there are many of you that are the stain of your
Families, the shame of your Ancestors, and the disgrace of Christianity, you
are as far above others in wickedness, as you are in blood and degree; I
would have all the Noble men in Europe consider, that whether they have respect
either to the Nobility of their bloods, or the Nobility of their souls, or to
their apparency to the eyes of all, or those signal advantages they have above
others, it highly concerns them to do somewhat more than others. Methinks
when you are in an Eclipse, you are like the Sun, all the eyes of the World are
upon you; Uzziah-like you have your leprosies written in your foreheads, he
that runs may read. Genesis 6. 9. These are the Generations of Noah, Noah was a
just man and walked with God, what was the flower of Noah's Nobility, S. Ambrose
tells us, He was a just man and walked with God; He was perfect in his
Generations. One Gentleman that is so, by piety and virtue, either by the word
or sword, or both, is better then two by birth or blood, Et genus and proavos,
and quae non fecimus ipsi,
Vix ea nostra voco. --
But he is the most complete Gentleman, that has all these perfections, a
constellation of excellencies. He that braggs of his Nobility does all one, as
if a stammerer (with much a do, should say), that his great Grandfather was a
good Orator; Sir, my great Grandfather, was an expert, most accomplished
person, a good speaker, a good Captain, but for my self, I do nothing, but
wear good clothes, lie, drink, swear, from one end of the year to the other;
And I have a thousand parasites tell me I do very well, and they do for their
own ends even Deify me. Methinks I hear the slighted Arts and Sciences
complaining thus against you, alas, said Logic, I am the door of all Arts and
Sciences, and will ye not as much as look into the door (If ye go no further?)
I can make you not only men, but rational men; I can teach you how to weild an
argument, how to out wit others, and will ye not make use of me? Just as
close-fisted Logic had done, in comes open handed honey tongued Rhetoric (and
if any of the Arts and Sciences, would speak any thing to the purpose, you may
be sure, she would, speaking being her peculiar excellency:) And what said
she, My Lords, will you be pleased out of your singular goodness, to hear a
poor maid speak, I can teach you not only to speak; as ordinary men do, but
to speak well; I can teach you how to speak in Parliament, and to speak so, as
that ye shall be the admiration of all your auditors; And there was never any
one in the Parliament, that said any thing well, but by my assistance.
Rhetoric had not spoke much, (though indeed it was much in a little) but in
comes Soul tuning Music, and thus she said, I am that science, that Kings and
Princes have been ambitious of, and do all my sweet voyc'd Lutes and Violls,
hang upon the walls, untouched? are they like the children of Isreal's harpes
upon the willowes, are they pleased to make use of me in their public
service, and will you not make use of me in your private chambers? Am I a
Science for God, and yet not for men? Are your fingers made for nothing else,
but bowls and cupps? Methinks Lutes and Violls might become them a great deal
better. Among the rest, hear what Mathematics said, I can teach you how to
make stately buildings, after the Italian Mode, pleasant well contrived walks,
refreshing Gardens, useful, serviceable Ships; and if ye will be so
ungentile, as to slight all my other Sisters, yet methinks you should not
slight me, for I am that Science, that am peculiar to Noble men; and if you
reject me, you do not reject one but a great many.

The Arts and Sciences, having had but poor entertainment, and answers not so
pleasing, as they expected, they chose Rhetoric for their speaker, they prayed
her to speak two or three words for them altogether, which she with much
boldness, and somewhat of anger did. My Lords we had (as it is natural with
Maids to have) some thoughts of our own beauties, either we are not beautiful,
or you want eyes; as it may be, we are not so beautiful as many take us to be,
so it may be, you want eyes; There are beauties visible only to an
intellectual eye, neither are deaf men to say there is no Music, because
they cannot hear it is sweet and most delicious closes. Just as the Maids had
done, in comes the Mistress, Divinity, the Queen of Sciences; The first word
she said, was, Thus says the Lord, I come from that God, before whose
dreadful Tribunal ye must all stand, though never so Noble; O consider that
you carry precious, immortal souls about you, that are better worth than a
world, lay up treasures in heaven for them, believe in Jesus, grow in grace,
prepare for your latter ends, act the good stewards; O do not twist your
damnation in golden threads, O for Gods sake, Christ's sake, your own souls sake,
hear what I say, and if you do not so, and do accordingly, you will be
damned to all eternity.

3. What do you Soldiers more then others? I tell you what you did before, you
ruled us with a rod of Iron, every one of your swords was turned Scepter, and
every one of you Tyrant. You behaved your selves like an army of Turks and
Saracens, rather then like a Christian civilized army, you scared us into a
forced compliance, all were afraid of you, and you were afraid of all: What
ever you did before, I tell you what you should do now, do violence to no
man, but be content with your wages; do not only fight under your commanders
banners, but also under the banner of Christ? fight the good fight, that ye may
receive a Crown of Glory. So much of the sword men, I now come to the Word-men.

1. What do you Divines more then others? You are of two sorts. 1. They of the
Episcopacy. 2. They of the Presbytery. 1. You of the Episcopacy, I will tell
you what ye did do, you did so well, to the admiration and envy of all your
neighbors, that many whose doings were not so good, would needs undo you;
Eminency is the object of envy, many envied not so much (as they said) your
Greatness, as your goodness. Now I have told you what ye did do, I will tell
you what ye should do; though I know many of you, are as humble and meek men,
as any upon the face of the earth, yet some of you would do very well, to get
more humility and courtesy, Among many other virtues which ye have No jewel
better becoming the Miter, of a miraculously restored Bishop, than humility.
When some denied that their was any motion, the Philosopher walked, I would
have you now so to walk, as that you should tell the incredulous universe, that
gray headed Episcopacy is the best of Church Governments.

2. You of the Presbytery, what do you more than others. Before I say any
thing of you, I will distinguish, Presbyters are of two sorts, some moderate
and sober, and studious of their Countries peace and good; others more rigid
and turbulent; for the first, I think some of them, may be good subjects,
whatever the latter be. Presbyters may be considered to ways, either in
subordination, or in contradistinction to Bishops, either as they are
subservient to them, or as they would stand on their own bottom; if ye be
taken the first way, as being men of parts and eminencies, ye may be
instrumental for Gods glory and your Countries good, provided ye do not
Preach sedition and rebellion, in an uncouth, improper palliating dialect. But
if ye be considered the second way, ye are sworn enemies, both to God, your
King, and your Country; ye are the incendiaries of the World, the firebands of
Christendom, and though I have a great deal of charity for your persons yet I
have none at all for your opinions, and damnable factions. And now I have
distinguished of you, I tell you what you did more than others, you with your
auxiliary forces in iniquity, the Independents, Anabaptists, Quakers, and the
rest of the filth and scum of the World, you levied armies against your
Sovereign, which is a Popish practice, an arrow drawn out of Bellarmines
Quiver, you unstar'd the firmament of the Church, you untreed the Paradise of
God, the Silver Trumpets of the Temple, could not be heard, for the noise of
drums and Trumpets. You laid the gravestone upon mercy, truth and peace; you
Preached the Funeral Sermon of all goodness, loyalty, piety, civillity, and
Christianity; and because it is the excellency of a Preacher to live according
to his Doctrine, you lived accordingly: you made a traiterous, seditious,
bloody Covenant, 'twas neither a Covenant of good works, nor a Covenant of
grace; and therefore it was a spurious, meretricious, antiscriptural one. They
talk of burning it, but a man can never sufficiently burn it, unless he
could go to hell-mouth and cast it there, saying, here Beelzebub take thy
soul damning nation embroyling engine; thine, even thine in vention, for none
but Beelzebub could make such a one; we are all now resolved to be good
subjects. Nero like, you played upon your instruments of joy, whilst our Rome
was on fire, and who fired it? Not the Christians, but the Heathens, the
Publicanes, did not even the Publicans so? And what said thousands, that had
their houses on fire? O! fling them all into those flames which they themselves
have made.

-- Nec enim lex justior ulla,
Quam necis artifices, art perire sua.


But what said another, of a more lambe-like, and Christian-like temper, stay I
have found out a better way, save their bodies and souls, but burn all their
opinions, especially the Covenant, it being like original sin, all sins, a
Legion of transgressions. And it would be a happy turn to burn a bundle of
factions, to keep precious and immortal souls from burning in Hell, to all
eternity. And O that you would, at length, come and fling all your conjuring
books, that raised so many Spirits of division, into the fire; you can neither
dispute for them, nor Preach for them, nor live for them: Not dispute for them,
unless ye banish your reason, not Preach for them, unless you abjure the
Scriptures, not live for them, unless any one of you, would strive to outlive
the worst fiend in Hell. O you that never drew sword, or turned tongue, but for
your own interests, shall I tell you where it lies, Had you but eyes to see it,
it lies in being subordinate to Bishops. Alas! can the miserable cabines of
Presbytery, think to escape, when the great Sovereign of Episcopacy, is under
water? The Independent had like to have swallowed you both, and me thinks this
should make you agree: Now I have spoken to you asunder, give me leave to speak
to you both together; It is a great shame for men of peace, for men of your
cloth, to trouble the World with Ceremonious disputes; It would be far more
Christian like for you, on both sides, to deny yourselves; and they that would
ever agree, must abate somewhat on both sides: Give me leave to tell you of a
strange sight, what is that? I saw the goodly Ship, Religion, (and it was the
best Ship that ever I saw, it being manned, not with Turks, or Heathens, but
Christians, and not a few but all the Christians in the World; and it highly
concerns us to pray, for the safe landing of it, in that all our souls are in
it.) this Ship sayld between two Rocks, the one was as it were Scylla, the
other Charybdis, the one was formallity and customarinesse on the one hand, the
other was ataxy and confusion on the other. For you Episcopal men I would have
you to beware, of for mallity and superstition; and you Presbyters, of ataxy
and confusion. Whilst the Ship sails directly between these two Rocks, there
is no fear of Shipwreck: -- Inter utrumqne tene, medio tutitssima curres -- God
is a Spirit, and will be worshipped in Spirit and in truth; But this most be
done decently and in order. And as there is the deformity of vice, so there is
the beauty of holiness. Some of you say, that we have no grace; Some of us say,
that ye have no grace; and were I either able, or worthy to say any thing, I
would say, that neither of us have as much grace as we should have; or else we
would not be so uncharitable and censorious. One says I am of Paul, a second I
am of Cephas, a third I am of Apollo, one says I am an Episcopal man, another
says I am a Presbyterian, the third I am an Iudependent, and I would we could
all say, I am of Christ.

2. You Physicians, what do you more than others? I heard them say, that you
could murder men when you pleased, and never be called in question; That the
Physician of the soul had no great reason to be angry with the Physician of the
body, the one made work for the other, the one killed them, and the other
buried them; It may, be said of many of you that you are like those Physicians
of no value, that would have given Physic to our distempered state, Multitudo
medicorum rempublicam interfecit. Many Physicians have killed the patient, and
he has more reason to be afraid of you, than his disease. You know that
dilemma of Pliny, either a disease is incurable, or curable, if in curable, why
do you attempt to cure it? If curable, let nature work it out: 'twas Platos
opinion, that it was a bad Commonwealth where there were many Physicians. But
by his leave, we must dissent from him. We know how to distinguish between the
good use, and the abuse of a calling, we will honor the Physician for our
healths sake, God has created Medicines out of the simples of the earth, and
he that is wise, will make use of them.

3. What do you lawyers above others? you Are many of you, the plague and
shame of a Nation; the Locusts of a Kingdom, you Seal up the Fountains of
Justice, you turn judgment into gall, and the fruits of righteousness into
hemlock, instead of deciding controversies you make them like the Seidge of
Troy, of ten years standing; and where as you say you are peace makers, you are
the greatest peace breakers and troublers of our Israel. You make your selves
questions, like Hydras heads, the taking away of one, is the setting on of
another; you draw black lines, because ye make use of a silver Plummet. No
wonder ye cannot see clearly, if your eyes be bloudshot. You are like the
Polonian Ictus, that knew not how to resist so many men in complete armor,
(the Coin of the Country was so stamped.) Good lawyers are styled the oracles
of the City, the rulers of the Law, a good ruler should see, that he have skill
to rule, that his parchment be spread abroad before him, that his eye be upon
the rule, the rule of the Law, he must have nothing in his hand, but his
Plummet, his hand must be steady, not shaking, he must be nimble handed to draw
lines speedily.

2. What do you Women, you Ladies more than others? Having spoken to most of
the considerable men in the World, give me leave to speak a word or two, to the
Women; first the Man, and then the Woman. It was Solomon's question, can a Man
find a virtuous Woman? If he had lived in our days, he would have had as much
a do, to find one, as ever he had. This question does not imply an
impossibility, but only the difficulty and rareness of it, that it is a hard
and rare thing to find a virtuous Woman, for in Prove. 31. 29. Solomon tells us
of many Daughters that have done virtuously, and of one that excelled all the
rest and pray what did she do? Surely she had a Bible always in her hand, no
she opened her mouth with wisdom, in her tongue was the Law of kindness, she
looked well to the ways of her household, she did not eat the bread of
idleness: O! how many Women with us, eat the bread of idleness, it would
pusle a Cherubin to know what they do, besides eating, drinking, sleeping, and
dressing themselves, from one end of the year to the other. I know that there
are some few that do virtuously, this is not spoken to them. Now I have told
you what many of you do do, I will tell you what ye should do, those that
have families should provide for them, but all should read, hear, pray,
Meditate, Act. 16. 14. It was Lydias commendation, she was one that feared and
worshipped God; As there is the beauty of the body, so there is the beauty of
the soul; though the one be great, yet the other is far greater. Me thinks
you that have such beautiful bodies, should strive to get beautiful souls, a
deformed soul in a beautiful body is just like a Toad in a golden Cabinet. That
of Solomon is good Scripture, Prove. 31. 30. Favor is deceitful, beauty is
vain, but a Woman that fearth the Lord shall be praised. No beauty to the
beauty of holiness, no Jewels to those precious and in estimable Jewels, the
graces of the Spirit, no Pearl to the Pearl of price. I have endeavored, to
say somewhat to you all asunder, now be pleased to hear what God says to you
all together, me thinks I hear God speaking thus to England, O England what
do thou more than others? Surely I have done somewhat more for thee, than any
other Nation, and I expect that thou should do somewhat more for me; I have
freed thy tender neck, from the galling yoke of thy insulting. Tyrannizing
enemies; I have sheathed that tayterous sword, that was wont to be sheathed in
the bowels of thy Princes: Of an Egypt, of black Schisms and Haeresies, I
have once more made thee a Goshen, a Land of light, I have crowned thee with
the mercies of my right hand, and of my left, with the choicest, richest, and
most distinguishing mercies in all my Cabinet. I have brought thee from the
Nadir of misery, to the very Zenith of happiness: though in my Justice for thy
sins and Rebellions, I took away a good King from thee, yet in my mercy I gave
thee another as good. And it is a great question whether thou were more
miserable, in the loss of the one, or are now happy in the miraculous
restitution of the other. I expect (...) somewhat extraordinary. Shall God do
so much for us, and shall we do nothing for him? What shall we do? Let us act
suitably and proportionably to those precious means, advantages, and
opportunities God has entrusted us with; Let us be of one mind, of one heart,
of one Spirit; Let us love as Brethren, pray and preach for the peace of
Jerusalem, pray that God would give us a Spirit of uniformity and meekness.
For the divisions of Reuben there were great thoughts of heart. Alas! who lays
the divisions of our Reuben to heart? Do we not rather widen the breaches,
wound our very wounds, and vex our very vexations? We are, by Gods goodness,
better in condition, but very few of us in life and manners. It Is the glued
bow that does execution, that instrument that is best glued, makes the best
harmony; surely were we more cemented, and glued together; we would make more
heave^ly Music in the ears of God and good men. Divisibile est corruptibile,
a Kingdom divided against it self, cannot stand, and surely if we be so
divided, we may expect that we cannot stand. We have all been tried
sufficiently in the furnace of afflictions, and God expects that now, at
length, we should come forth like pure Gold; he has done a great many things
for us, and let us do one thing for him, what is that? Only let us fear the
Lord, and serve him in truth, and consider what great things he has done for
us, and not do wickedly, left we be consumed, both we and our King.

Galatians 4. 16. Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the
truth.
DIfferent have been the entertainments, not only of humane, but divine truth
with different men: some have embraced it for a season, others for ever: and it
is not impossible even for a Herod for a time to hear a John Baptist gladly.
Such was the Laodicean temper of these Apostate Galatians to whom our Blessed
Apostle directs this Epistle: They had once high and reverent thoughts of his
Ministry, and they seem to acknowledge, and embrace those heavenly truths
delivered by him; they received him as an Angel of God even as Christ Jesus
verse. 14. But soon after as the learned Estius observes by reason of the crafty
and subtle insinuations of false teachers, they change their note, they desert
the truth; their thoughts of him before were not so high and honorable as they
are now mean and low: they that before looked upon him as their happiness, now
look look upon him as their enemy, S. Paul wonders at their sudden change and
defection, and knowing no reason of it in himself, he enquires of them, he
reproves their ingratitude, and expostulates with them in the words of my text,
Am I therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth.

Am I? I the Apostle of Christ, your teacher, your spiritual guide, one that
watches over you for the good of your souls: your enemy, you that professed
your selves to be happy in my ministry; you that thought nothing too good for
me; you that loved me so dearly that if it had been possible, you would have
pulled out your own eyes and have given them me, am I become your enemy?
because I tell you the truth, because I preach the Gospel to you, all the
truths of Christ, more especially that fundamental truth that we are not
justified by the Law, (as you think, and your false teachers suggest) but by
faith in Christ. I would be loath to be accounted your enemy upon any account,
but most of all upon the account of truth; you should honor me for the truth,
esteem me for my works sake, not hate me, look upon me as your enemy, am I
therefore become your enemy because I tell you the truth: this is the true
genuine sense of the words, according to Chrysostom, Estius, Calvin, Diodate,
Perkins, and some others compared together, there is no difficulty in them,
therefore this may suffice for exposition of them, they contain in them two
things,

1. The Gallatians envy, and hatred conceived against S. Paul, am I become your
enemy? 2. The ground of it, it was upon the score of truth, because I tell you
the truth.
The words without torturing and wracking, afford these two plain truths.

1. That many men look upon them as their enemies that tell them the truth. Am
I become your enemy? 2. That the Preachers of the Word should be truth-tellers,
Because I tell you the truth. First of the first is this.
That many men look upon those as their enemies which tell them the truth. In
the prosecution of it, I shall use this method.

1. Prove it by Scripture. 2. Give you some Reasons and Arguments for it. 3.
Make use.
But before I come to my proposed method, I think it necessary for my more
orderly proceeding, to give you some distinctions of truth, and those that
oppose it and the assertors of it. Truth may be considered too ways either
(...) or (...) either in it self and as it is nothing else but a conformity
between the object and the intellect, or else it may be considered by way of
accident as it thwarts men's lusts and corruptions, if we consider it the first
way: It is not odious but there is a friendly amity between the understanding,
and it: The eye is delighted with color; the ear with Harmony, and the
understanding the eye of the Soul is no less delighted with truth it being
it is natural genuine proper object in this sense Saint Austine affirms truth
to be dear to the intellect: but if we consider it the second way as it creates
a disturbance in the Commonwealth of men's lusts so it is odious to them, the
Sun in its self is an amiable and lovely object, and Solomon teils us that it
is a pleasant thing for the eye to behold the Sun; but they that have fore eyes
cannot endure to look upon it: truth is a glorius ray from the Sun of
righteousness: It is in it self precious, and lovely, yet men of corrupt minds
and irregular affections do not love it, yea they cannot bear the clearer and
more piercing irradiations of it, this I take to be meaning of Calvin upon the
place: Veritas odiosa est malitia and pravitate eorum qui eam non sustinent
audire. Truths are either humane, or Divine Philosophical, or Theological,
Philosophical such as are cognoscible by the light of nature, such as are found
out by experience, and humane disquisition such as we meet with in Ethics,
Physics, Mathematics, and Methaphysicks, Theological, or Divine truths such
as are revealed from above; such as stream from the clearer Fontains of the
Scripture: of the entertainments of Philosophical, or humane truths I do not
here enquire, truths are either general, or particular general such as are
proposed in an universal way without application to the conscience, or
reflection upon such men, or such and such lusts; as this vice is to be hated,
particular such as reflect upon particular men, and particular lusts such as
sting the conscience as pride coveteousnosse, drunkness are to be hated.
General gliding, tansient, irreflexive unconcerning truths may peradventure
gain tolerable acceptance be looked upon with a more propitious aspect when a
particular severer conscience smiting truth may be brow beaten, suspected, de
graded to a mere probability nay it may be flatly opposed, contradicted in down
right terms. Men are either good, or bad, unregenerate, or regenerate:
unregenerate such as are in the gall of bitterness, such as wallow like Swine
in the Mire of their corruptions, such as are merely as they were born:
regenerate, such as are born again, such as cleave to Gods commaudements, such
ss stear their thoughts, word, and actions according to the dictates of Gods
Word and Spirit; unregenerate men naturally hate Gods truths; and this hatred
it does not terminate in the truth it self; but it is extended to the Person
that delivers it: as if he were the Author of it and not that God that sent
him; but with the regenerate truths find more courteous and Christian like
entertainments: they know whose truths they are and therefore they respect, and
reverence them for his sake, and if they do at any time look upon them
superciliously, it is in that and so far forth as they are unregenerate and not
regenerate: as to their unsanctified not to their sanctified part. This
distinction as to the sense and substance of it I find in Proverbes the 9. 8.
Reprove not a scorner least he hate thee rebuke a wise man and he will love
thee. Men are according to Solomon either divided into scorners, or wisemen: by
scorners we are to understand wicked men: by wisemen such as are wise to
salvation, as for scorners, if we reprove them they will hate us, but wisemen
being rebuked they will love us. Though Herod cut of John Baptists head,
because of Herodius yet Anathan may tell a David, thou art the man and he will
not be much offended. The sum of all is this that unregenerate men look upon
those as their Enemies, that tell them Divine truth not proposed in general,
but particularly applied to their consciences, they hate the truth not barely
considered in it is self, but as it thwarts their sins, their unmortified
affections, and this hatred it rebounds as it were from the truth to the
Person. This being premised I proceed to the proposed Method. 1. That many men
look upon those as their Enemies, that tell them the truth is clear from these
Scriptures, Asts 7. 54. When they heard these things they were cut to the heart
and the gnashed on him with their teeth. Would you know what things those were,
you may read verse the 52. They had persecuted the Prophets they themselves had
betrayed and murdered the holy one: When they heard these things they were cut
to the heart, and gnashed on him with their teeth and immediately they stoned
him. 1 Kings 18. 17. Art thou he that troubles Israel? the great sin that
Ahab and his people were guilty of was the Worshipping of Baal, Eliah rebukes
them sharply for this sin? hereupon they look upon him as an Enemy incendiary
and entertain him with this discourteous salutation, art thou he that
troubles Israel? pregnant is that place: in the 1 of Kings 22. 18. there is
yet one Prophet Michaiah, the Son of Imlah; but I hate him for he does not
Prophecy good concerning me, but evil: In those words there are two things
considerable.

1. Ahabs hatred of Michaiah, but I hate him.

2. The ground of it in the latter part for he Prophesies no good concerning
me, so that his hatred was upon the account of his Proyhesy, remarkable is
that Text Amos. 5. 10. They hate him that rebukes in the gate and they abhor
him that speaks uprightly: that is they hate their faithful, zealous,
courageous sin rebuking Magistrates that kept their course of judicature by the
gates; they connot endure their upright conscientious soul wounding Prophets;
this is that which Christ tells his Disciples of you shall be hated of all men
for my names sake, Luke 21. 17. That is for my truths sake that is they shall
hate your Persons; hate your Doctrines, hate your good lives, you shall be the
objects of all men's hatred and that for me, and my truth neither is this
without reason why bad men should hate them that tell them the truth.

1. They are altogether unlike them therefore they hate them as similitude
according to the Philosopher is the cause of love, so dissimilitude is the
cause of hatred: as we naturally love those that are like us, so we naturally
hate those that are unlike us. The Wiseman tells us that the righteous man is
more excellent then his neighbor, more excellent in his judgment; more
excellent in his thoughts: more excellent in his affections; more excellent in
his principles, more excellent in his whole conversation, his judgment is more
clear and discerning: his thoughts are more profitable; his affections are more
heavenly, his principles are more Orthodox; and his whole conversation is more
regular and conformable to the Divine will. The virtues of the good man bid
battle to the vices of the wicked; his whole life is nothing else but an use of
reproof; the straightness of the one upbraids the crockednesse of the other;
the one is the subject of the Prince of peace the other Prince of the air, the
one is of his Father from Heaven, the other is of his Father from Hell: as our
Savior says of the Jews, John. 8. 44. Ye are of our Father the Devil and
his works, you will do; he was a murderer from the beginning and abode not in
the truth because there is no truth in him no wonder then that the Devils
Children cannot endure truth nor the Preachers of it.

2. We look upon those as our Enemies that tell us the truth, because they
Preach against our interests: cross our designs; meet with our corruptions
and lusts, fire us out of our sins; Interest is the great Diana we all
Worship; Interest is the Sun that Persian like we all adore. Interest is the
compass by which the generality of men steer, it is no wonder then if they
hate those that touch them to the quick: contradict their concerning,
profitable; pleasing interests, if golden mouthed Chrysostom Preach against the
emperresse Eudoxia, endeavor to reclaim her from Arrianisme, she will be sure
to banish him; if courageous, bold spirited Luther out of zeal to Gods truth,
Preach against the Popes Indulgences he will let loose his roaring bulls
against him: he will write to all the Neighboring Princes, that they shall
neither receive him nor his Doctrine, or if they do they should send him to
him, that he might punish him for that capital offense of asserting the truth.
If Demetrius the silver smith perceive that his craft is in danger to be set at
naught, he will accuse St. Paul of troubling all Asia, speaking against great
Diana: why because we know that by this craft we have our wealth? if good John
Baptist tell Herod it is unlawful for him, to have Herodias he will cut of
his head. If Stephen tell the Jews that they were the murderers of Christ,
they will murder him; if truth telling Michaiah tell Ahab, that he shall fall
at Ramoth Gilead he will cast him in to the Prison, and give him the bread of
affliction, the good soul piercing Divine tells men they must repent, believe,
deny themselves, take up their Cross and follow Christ, shake hands with
honors profits, pleasures all if need require for the enjoyment of Christ, who
is all in all: he tells the sensual drunkard that he must no more un man
himself and vomit up his own shame; he tells the Profane swearer that he must
no more tear in pieces the glorious name of his Maker: he tells the coveteous
Achan that he must no more deify the Creature; he tells the proud man that
cannot be content with any thing else; but a crown, or a mitre that humility is
the way to Heaven: that that ear of Corn, that is fullest ways most downward;
that God resists, the proud and geveth grace to the humble: he tells the
revengfull Person, of that of our Savior Father forgive them for they know not
what they do: he tells the mere moral man, which thinks himself to be good
enough for Heaven already, that except his righteousness exceed the
righteousness of the Scribes and Pharisees, he shall in no wise enter into it;
he tells the disputing Socinian that their is a Sun, though he be blind and
cannot see it, that reason must be laid down at the feet of Religion: that it
is but commendable for it to close it is eye that faith may aim the better; he
tells the naturalist that says out of nothing, nothing can be made, that out
of nothing all things were made: Divinity is not to be mesured by the
principles of natural Philosophy; but it is own: he tells the Heaven de riding,
Atheist that he must and dye and come to judgment; but he would neither dye
nor come to judgment: he tells all men of their sins and lusts, and therefore
they cannot endure him: 2 Pet. 3. 3, 4. The Apostle says they were scoffers,
men walking after their own lusts that deny the day of judgment and Saviors
promise of his coming: 2 Timoth. 3. They resist the truth, men of corrupt minds
and therefore they resists the truth so much for the reasons they use it I
shall make of is briefly this.

Fathers and Brethren you may see in the clear glass of my Text, what you are
to expect; even to be hated of all men for Christ's sake: he that would
discharge his calling faithfully, must expect to be the object of most men's
hat'red: the Ministry me thinks is like the cloud that guided the Israelites,
that had a bright side and a dark side, most men look upon the bright; but few
on the dark side, most men consider the encouragement; but few the
discouragements of the Ministry, they undertake the Burden before they
consider the weight of it, or the weakness of their own shoulders: hence it is
that many have as shamefully quitted the Ministry as they have in
considerately undertaken it; but how ever this may be for our comfort, and
encouragement that all the Prophets all the Apostles yea Christ himself was
hated upon this account: can the Servant expect to fare better then the Master,
it is his honor that he can be like him though it be in suffering to write
after him though in letters of Blood.

2. That the Preachers of the word should be truth tellers in the prosecution
of it I shall use this method 1. Give you some Scripture. 2. Some reasons. 3.
Show you what truth the man of God should tell. 4. I shall tell some truths
which I take to be very suitable to and necessary for this auditory. 5. Make
use.

That the Preachers of the Gospel should be truth tellers is clear from these
Scripture, Romans 9. 1. I say the truth in Christ Jesus Ily not my conscienee
also bearing me witness in the Holy Ghost, St. Paul's practice should be ours
what he says, we should say, Prove. 22. 20. Have I not written to thee
excellent things in counsels, and knowledge that I might make thee know the
certainty of the words of truth, that thou may answer the words of truth to
them that send to thee. 2. things observeable from this Text. 1. That the words
of truth are the words of certainty. 2. That when we are asked we should
answer them with these words, Eccl. 12. 10. The Preacher sought to find out
accuptable words, upright words, even words of truth, Solomon in the precedent
verse, tells us of a wise Preacher let us observe what he did, he will teach us
how to make our Sermons, the wise Preacher did not vent out any unpremeditated,
undigested extemporary flashes; but he sought to find out, and what did he seek
to find out not unseasonable unsuitable things, things that come like rain in
Harvest, or snow in Summer; but (...) seasonable suitable apposite acceptable
things, and I pray what were those not the Chimoeraes of his own brain, not the
dictates of a private spirit, not totering hovering probabilities, not
shameful, falsehoods; but words of truth, Malach. 2. 6. We read their what Law
was in Levyes mouth, the Law of truth was in his mouth and iniquity was not
found in his lips: this is that for which Christ came into the World: and would
you know the reason of it; take briefly these two.

1. The good Divine is in Gods stead he personates God; interprets his mind as
an Fmbassadour does the Princes that sent him, he is not only the mouth of the
people to God, but the mouth of God to the people, and how ill does a ly
become the mouth of that God, that is truth it self: so ill does it become the
mouth of the Divine that should speak nothing, but what God would speak, if he
did speak himsalf. 2 Corinthians. 5. 20. Now therefore we are Ambassadors for
Christ as though God did beseeeh you by us, we pray you in Christ's stead, be
reconciled to God, the Minister may be termed Gods speaker. And if he speaks
any untruth, he speaks for himself not his Master, Oh! therefore with what
reverence and serious preparation should we come to speak. It is reported of
the incomparable Bucolcer that he was so much Master of the heavenly art of
Preaching that he could put his Auditors in to what passion he pleased, as
that excellent Musician Timotheus did Alexander; but many of you put your
Auditors into no other passion, but that which shows them to be rational: me
thinks the serious consideration of the greatness of Gods Majesty, the
greatness of the assembly the greatness of the work should enduce, us to come
prepared according to the preparations of the sanctuary.

2. The Minister received nothing but truth, therefore he should deliver
nothing but truth: The Minister the faithful witness should deliver nothing
but what he received, for if he do he deliver's his own not God's, that the
Minister should deliver nothing but what he receive's, is unquestionable, 1
Cor. 11. 23. For I received of the Lord that which I also deliver unto you,
(...) I have received from the Lord there is his commission, had I not received
it, I would not have delivered it, you might have rationally suspended your
beliefs, and looked upon it as my own not my Masters: that the Ministers
received nothing but truth is as unquestionable, for what he received he
received from God, which is the God of truth and cannot ly; the Scriptures they
are all truth, he received nothing but Scripture and therefore nothing but
truth. For Popish traditions we look upon them as the Commandments and
Doctrines of men, and not of God: the Church may not make new principles of
Religion; but only declare, illustrate and interpret the old, though it may
constitute circumstantials, yet not substantials; she may prescribe ordinances
as touching the time place and order of Gods worship, but not as touching the
essentials of the Worship it self. As the Church at Jerusalem decreed that the
Church of the Gentiles should abstain from blood and things strangled, Acts.
15. I proceed in the 3. place to tell you what truths the Man of God should
tell. 1. Divine Scripture truths, not Philosophical, but Theological truths,
such as make the Man of God wise unto salvation: moral or natural truths may
make a man wise, but not wise unto salvation; nature may tell us, that there is
a God, but it cannot tell us how this God should be Worshiped, nature may tell
us there is a Sovereign happiness: but it cannot tell us what this happiness
is; hence it was that the Philosophers concluded there was some white; though
none of them could hit it, or come near it. Nature may tell us there is a way
we should walk in, though it cannot tell us, how we should walk in it, we
cannot see the Sun, but by the Sun; we know nothing savingly of God but by God,
we know nothing of the Sun of righteousness, but by those comfortable beams
that are darted from him; as is the cause, such will the effect be, merely
natural causes cannot produce supernatural effects; a man may as well expect
Grapes from Thorns, or Figgs from Thistles, if the man of God fire a
rebellious stiffenecked sinner out of his beloved sin, surely it must be with
a coal fetched from the Altar; if he wound a soul, surely it must be with an
arrow fetched from the quivers of the Scriptures, an arrow taken out of
Aristotle's quiver may smite an ear; but it will never smite a conscience, it is
not a Text of Aristotle, but a Text of Scripture, that shows a man the grizly
horrid Shape of a sin, the amiable lovely countenance of a grace, the
strictness of Gods Stern-brow'd Justice, the dreadfulnesse of the ever
approaching day of Judgment: a quotation out of Aristotle will never make a
man go to his study and weep for his sins, resolve to turn a new leaf, prepare
for his later end, cause a man to be enamourd on, and with the beauties of the
Empyrean heaven, the fruition of God the chiefest good, the blessed company of
Angels and the Spirits of just men made perfect. Though we may look upon
gray headed Aristotle, as an oracle in the Schools, yet not in the Pulpit; that
self-same Aristotle which in the Schools, we look upon as the glory of
Philosophy, the miracle of nature, in the Pulpit we look upon him only as a
mere purblind Owl-eyed Heathen. As he himself confessed men to be in the
contemplation of Divine things. There is not the meanest Scholar in Christ's
School which which knows not how to confute him, the natural man discerns
not the things of God, (...); The Natural man is incapable of the things of
God, it is so in the original, Beza tells us that it is a Metaphor taken, a
Minoribus vasis, from lesser vessels, that cannot contain things bigger then
themselves, as if the Apostle should have said, the narrow brim'd vessel of
man's brain cannot comprehend the great things of God: why because they are
spiritually discerned, he has no eye suitable to a spiritual object, and would
you have a man see without eyes? This is the advantage the Christian has of
the Heathen, the Heathen has but one bad eye, but the Christian has two good
ones. The Heathen has only the eye of a depraved corrupted reason, but the
Christian has not only the eye of reason, and that corrected and sanctified,
but also the eye of faith; No wonder then that he is better sighted then he.
Excellent is that place in Canticles the first and thee leventh, we will make
thee borders of Gold with studds of Silver: by the borders of Gold according to
Aquinas, we are to understand the Scriptures and their spiritual meaning; by
the studds of Silver the art and Method of the Preacher: A Preacher must be
sure to see that his Sermon has borders of Gold, though it has not studds of
Silver: but it is most commendable when it has both; not borders of Gold
without studs of Silver, or studs of Silver without borders of Gold, but
borders of Gold with studs of Silver: we will make thee borders of Gold with
studds of Silver. The foundation of a Sermon should be laid in the Scriptures,
whatever the superstucture be: Preaching is nothing else but an opening of the
Scriptures, a conferring and comparing them together, and surely they which do
not use Scriptures are Praters not Preachers.

2. Plain and clear Truths; the more simple and immixed a Truth is, the better
it is, the Word of God, it is the aliment of the of the soul, you know the more
the simple aliment is, the more nutritive it is. The word of God is compared to
pure Gold, and you know the mixtures of brass, or tin do but derogate and
take a way from the excellency of it. Precious stones shine with their, native
luster and beauty, the Word of God is like a Topaz the more you pollish and
smoth it the rougher it will be. That Sermon is best which is like an unpainted
glass window, paint does but hinder the Transmissio^ of the light, the
immoderate paintings of humane Learning do but Eclipse the beams of Truth,
which would be more visible in and of themselves. The soft and silken
effeminacies of Capua did but enervate and emasculate the victorious armies of
the daring Iron-sided Hanibal. The more glittering Scabbard of humane learning,
does but blunt the edge of the sword of the Spirit.

Admirable is that of Saint Paul in the 1. to the Corinths the 2. and the 1.
and the 2. And I Brethren when I came to you came not with excellency of
speech, or wisdom, declaring unto you the Testimony of God, for I determined
to know nothing among you, save Jesus Christ and him Crucified. Saint Paul
spoke this at the royal exchaing of all learning, it is in effect as much as if
he should have said thus I confess my cadencies are not so sweet and smothe, my
language is not so polite, my style is not so flourishing, my lines are not so
strong, as those of theirs are that are puffed up with word wisdom, which by
this means endeavor to bring into contempt the plainness and simplicity of the
Gospel. I don't approve my Doctrines to you by tropes of Rhetoric,
Syllogismes, of Logic, axioms of Philosophy: I profess no science among you;
but the science of the Cross, would it be suitable to discourse of Gods
emptying himself in swelling terms, of Christ's abasing himself in a lofty style
to discourse sweetly of Vinegar and Gall, to beset Christ's Crown of Thorns
with a Crown of flowers? No I leave that to vain glorious self seeking
Preachers, those that Preach themselves not Christ Crucified, but for my self
my Doctrine is from above, it needs not such Egyptian reeds and weak props. A
Sermon should be as clear as Crystal, a man should see into the very bottom
ofit: It should not be an Egypt a Land of darkness: but a Goshen a Land of
light. A Preacher is a light surely not in a dark Lanthern: but in a
Kandlestick. A Preacher is a Teacher which implies that he should teach
something which may be understood, he that cannot make others understand a
thing, he may give us leave to suspect that he does not understand it himself.
Such muddy streams tell us of a cloudy muddy intellect, such a man sees men
like the man in the Gospel, men walk like Trees: he has only some Embrio,
faint, languishing conceptions of a thing: something he would say, but (you
must pardon him) he knows not how to express himself.

3. Dogmatical positive Truths not aerie controversies, not hovering
Probabilites, things that may, or may not be, but things that the soul may
build on: Controversies are sitter for the Schools then the Pulpit: Many a man
like the Bishop of Alexandria, in stead of Preaching down a haeresy has
Preached it up, and in stead of making the Funeral Sermon of a Haeresy, he has
raisd it from the dead: all arts and sciences if we believe them, have their
Prima principia, primas veritates, and why should not Divinity the Queen of
Sciences have hers. It should not be in Divinity as it is for the most part in
Philosophy, where the soul like Noah's Dove can find no thing to fix on.
Lactantius tells us that Philosophy is nothing else but opinion. And Austine in
his book de Civit. Dei, tells us that Philosophi sunt potins opinantes quam
scientes: Though Philosophy be nothing else but a heap of disputables, a crow'd
of it may bees, yet Divinity should not be so. Whether all things be made of
Atoms, or Aristotle's principles, it is not much material; never soul was saved,
or damned for these opinions. A great wit may find a way as probable as either:
But whether the soul be immortal, or no, whether there will be a day of
judgment, or not, it highly concerns us to be sure of those things: for if
there be no judgment men may live as they list, but if there be, they must
live as they should. States men for the prevention of divisions have somewhat
in Government indubitable and so should Church men; if one Preach up universal
redemption, and another Preach it down, who shall the sequacious pendulous
people believe, me thinks having an unerring rule to square by, we should agree
in fundamentals at least wise, if not in circumstantials.

4. Necessary useful Truths, not Toys, Trifles, barren and unprofitable
Notions, subtle speculations. It should be the great care of a Divine to
Preach those things that may make most for the edification of his Auditory, he
should show them their damnable deplorable estate by Nature, the True means of
their recovery by Christ, Preach about Faith, Repentance, Charity, Love,
Humility, Heavenly mindedness, Contentedness, Heaven, Hell, Death, Judgment
to come, fully instruct them in the Lords Prayer and ten Commandments. It Is not
impossible for a man to come here often and scarce hear a word of any of
these. This I speak not to disparage those that do well, but because I would
have some do better. I could wish that the fundamentalls of Religion were more
Preached. Proud men think it inconsistent with the greatness of their parts and
sublimity of their wits to iusist upon these, they are much like Angelus
Politianus that would not vouchsafe to read the Scriptures (because as he
thought) they did not contain elegancies suitable to his florid style and
Genius.

They think these things belong to men of weaker and slenderer parts: they will
exercise themselves in more refined and curious speculations: they will
Marshall the Angels and know what God did before he made the World. who looks
upon the Sunn but in an Eclipse, who takes cognizance of the Moon but when
Traveling? a blazing Comet is more looked upon then all the regular stars in
heaven: the Kings dwarf has more eyes upon him then all the proper personable
men that the King has. If a man Preach a solid substantial piece, upon some
ordinary useful point in Divinity, we take no great notice of it, but if some
haeretick in Divinity, preach a piece made up of mere staggering drunken
probabilities; present us with some spurious misshapen Brat of his own
intellect, which he can prove to be legitimate neither by Scripture nor reason,
this is cried up for a man of rare parts, elevated, advanced intellectualls. So
apt are we Athenian like to admire, nay even to adore Toys and Novelties.

5. Ancient Apostolic truths, I do not mean here, antiquity of a later
standing, such as the Papists pretend to, but Original prime antiquity. Old
truths like old goverments are best, Innovations in Church and State being
equally dangerous. Those truths are most Authentic that are as old as Christ
and his Apostles. An old truth like an old musical Instrument sounds best in
the ear of all good men.

Tertullian tells us Verum quod prius, Adulterinum quod posterius, It is good
coin that is first stamped, and afterward that which is counterfeit. The
Husbandman first sowed good seed, and then the envious man sowed tares. This
was the unanimous cry of the Council of Calcedon (...) let Ancient things
prevail. Blessed be God which has in mercy restored our ancient government
both in Church and State.

6. Particular applied truths. Generalia non pungunt, general Truths never
pierce a soul, or wound a Conscience. General truths like the Papists
general faith, never save a soul. It is not a loaf whole that nourishes,
but cut and eaten. Spices are never more fragrant then when they are broken.
Nathan tells David (which I think little thought of it,) thou art the Man. S.
Peter does not mince the matter, but tells the Jews plainly and piercingly,
that they had murdered Christ: And what was the effect of this soul searching
soul peircing preaching? when they heard these things they were pricked at the
heart, and there were three thousands of them converted (...), it was with them
at if rapier points had been stuck in their spirits: S. Paul might have
entertained that Tyrant Faelix with some plausible discourse of the wonderful
birth, life, and death of Christ, but he takes another course with him, he
reasons of righteousness, temperance, and judgment to come, and this made him
tremble: He opposed righteousness to his briberies: Temperance to his
adulteries, and judgment to come, to his outrageous insolences.

7. Peaceable truths. Ministers are the servants of the God of Peace,
Ambassadors of the Gospel of Peace, they what ever other men are, should be
men of Peace: they should be like the Cherubins of the Arc, look upon one
another with propitious Aspects: the good Divine should not only pray but
Preach for the Peace of Jerusalem: Rogamus non Pugnamus, Auguste was wont to be
the language of the Church formerly, it has no weapons but those of prayers
and tears.

Popish was the practice of the Covenanters, that brought us hither a punie
upstart Mushrome yesterday Religion upon the point of asword, and truly had
their swords been no keener then their arguments I think they might have been
soon blunted.

4. I proceed in the fourth place, to tell you some truths which I think to be
suitable to, and convenient for this Auditory. 1. That Arts and Sciences should
be subservient and ancillatorie to Divinity; that the Hagar of Humanity should
not outbrave the Sarah of Divinity, it must not justle it out and take up the
best rooms in a Sermon: how then comes it to pass that many of your Sermons
are stuffed with all Arts and Sciences but Divinity? How comes it to pass that
instead of making the Spouse borders of Gold with studds of silver, a great
many of you make her borders of brass with studds of Tinn and pewter? Are they
not like Onesilaus his head, that instead of brains was full of hony-combes!
When the Persian King sent Antalcidas the Lacedimonian Captain a Garland of
flowers perfumed with spices and odours, he tells him Rosarum fragrantiam
adulteratione perdidisti, so may I say to many of you, Concioneis majestatem
adulteratione perdidistis. With admirable fitness did the learned K. James
compare such Sermons to the red and blew flowers that pester the corn, which
were more noisome to the crop then beautiful to the spectators eye.

Shrouded eminencies are most amiable, and it was not the least excellency of
Moses his face, that it did shine, and he knew not of it: there are many
precious simples in an electuarie though we cannot see them when it is made.
The honey suckles may be in the milk though we do not see them. That Sermon may
have most sound Learning that to an unjudicious ear seems to have least. Me
thinks I hear poor souls complaining against you thus, we come here for the
bread of life, but ye give us the husks of your own brains, you give us light
bread that our soul loatheth, We come for the waters of life drawn from the
fountain opened; and you give us the corrupted waters of your own Intellects:
We would feign hear a man speak as the Oracles of God, but many of you speak
as obscurely as the Oracles of Delphos; We come for the clusters of Canaan, and
you give us the grapes of Sodom. We would hear something of the living God,
but you take up all your time in speaking of the Gods of the Heathens: We
would feign see the comfortable sparklings of the white stone of assurance; but
you tell us of the Philosophers stone: We would feign hear some patheticall
soul ravishing discourse of the Empyrean heaven, but ye give us some empty
unedifying discourses of a Heaven or two below: we faint and languish for the
heavenly Canaan, but you bring us only to the wilderness, and there loose us and
your selves too: And what do you think God will say to a vainglorious
selfe-seeking Preacher? Give an account of thy misemployed parts, and talents,
why did thou robb me of my glory: and make thy self the end of all thy
actions? why did thou rob my Scriptures of their all sufficiency? Why did
thou robb my people of their spiritual food? I gave thee a soul that was
ruddier then the rubies, and more polisht then Saphirs, thou wast larger then
others by the head and shoulders in parts, thou might have converted whole
Counties: But thou did employ them only to the maintenance of Heresies, to
the disgracing of my truths. Behold here the souls that thou have poisoned with
thy Heresies, behold here is the soul, that thou have starved with thy
curiosities: These, even these I require at thy hands: O how will he be
astonished and confounded! And he that formerly spoke so many words in vain,
will not have a word to speak for himself. Now me thinks I hear some of you
murmuring against me, saying what do I mean to disgrace learning in one of
the most flourishing Academies in all Europe: Me thinks I hear my Mother
University speaking thus (...) and thou my Son, what speak against me with the
tongue I gave thee? what wound me with my own arrows? To this I answer, I know
we cannot declare the wonderful works of God without Physics, his Attributes
without Metaphysics, the Dimensions of the Arc without Mathematics, we
cannot interpret a Text without Grammar, analize it without Logic, press it
upon the affections without Rhetorique: I do not cry down the use, but the
abuse of learning in a Sermon; singular is the use of it in a Sermon; if it be
purged, made subservient, used moderately without affectation, and modestly
without ostentation; I am no enemy to humane, but a friend to divine learning,
I am not against Aristotle, but I am for the Bible, I value a Science above a
world, but a grace above ten thousand.

2. That the labourer is worthy of his hire, that they which Preach the
Gospel, should live by the Gospel, this is Scripture and cannot be denied.
How then comes it to pass, that there are many that Preach the Gospel and
cannot live by it? Because some get all, and some none at all: Parity is the
mother of confusion, and as there is an imparity in merits and parts, so would
I have to be in their encouragements. As the Fathers of the Church are worthy
of double honor, so also of double portions: But notwithstanding I think it
but equal and most consonant to Scripture, that every Preaching Minister
should have as much as may serve to secure his Sacred calling and person from
poverty and contempt, it is not fit that they which break the bread of life to
others, should want bread for their own mouths: And surely they may well gives
the dros of temporalls, if we give them the gold of spiritualls. I am as glad
as any to see stars of the first magnitude shining in the Hemispheare of the
Church, but I would not have them be like the star wormwood in the
Revelations, of malign aspects and influences: I am as glad as any, to see
stately Cedars in the Lebanon of the Church, trees of Knowledge in the Paradise
of God: But I would not have them extend their branches so far, as to hinder
the growth of other trees, that peradventure may bring forth good fruit, though
not in such abundance and plenty, as we acknowledge, and with a great deal of
reason acknowledge they do: That the Fathers of the Church are provided for, it
is well, but it would be better if not only the Fathers, but the Sons of the
Church were provided for also: it fares well with the body when all its parts
are nourished, though not equally, yet proportionably, according to their
several exigencies and capacities. And I think it does not fare ill with the
body of the Church, when it is so too.

4. That the Preachers of the word should take heed to their Ministry, preach
the word, be instant in Season and out of Season, reprove, rebuke, exhort.
Hence is our Saviors triple pasce, feed my sheep, feed my flock, feed my
lambs, feed them by thy praying, feed them by thy Preaching, feed them by thy
living; in the first of Timothy the 3. and the 2. We read there that a Bishop
should be blameless, patient, apt to teach, and if so, why then surely an
ordinary Minister. It is not the least of good Bishop Jewels commendations,
that he died in the pulpit; you know what was famous Bishop Ushers motto, Woe
is me if I Preach not the Gospel: Me thinks this place should make a rare
unfrequent Preacher tremble at the recital of it: some there are that are like
Saul, when they come to the high places, they make an end of Prophesying;
Consider you are the silver trumpets of Sion, you are lift up higher, not that
ye may not sound at all, but sound the shriller and louder* you are like Bells
hung up in the top of the steeple that ye may be heard the further, the more
God has done for you, the more ye ought to do for him, one word from you
being men of eminency and authority will do more good then a thousand from us,
and surely you cannot be better employed. This was the rock you had like to
have been split upon before, and will ye not avoid it now; we had a great many
Preaching Bishops before, and blessed be God we are like to have no fewer now:
This I say not because I am desirous ye should dash upon the rocks, but
because I would have ye sail far enough from them.

4. That moderation on all hands, is a sovereign salve to heal, in all
probability the breaches of this uncemented Nation, though moderation in
Essentialls be pernicious, yet in things adiaphorous it is but peaceable and
Christian like; Moderation is the silken string that runs through the pearl
chain of graces: In things of a middle nature the golden mean is best: I am
apt to suspect that men which Iehu like, drive so furiously, have no other
spurs but their own interests: it was a good saying of one, unity in things
necessary, moderation in things indifferent, and charity in all? this was the
opinion of Calvin in the same controversy, Ego in Controversia Anglicana
moderationem semper tenui cujus me non paenituit; Suitable to this is that of
our Apostle, Let your moderation be known unto all men. I have often wondered
that men of the same Nation, men of the same Religion, as to the maine, that
aim at the same happiness, should quarrel so much about circumstances. They
are but circumstances and why are you of the Episcopacy so eager for them: they
are but circumstances, and why are you of the Presbytery so eager against them:
A man would think that a lawful decent, useful, Ceremony, should be no sooner
imposed then observed, and it would be so, did not men love their own private
passions and interests, more then either peace or truth: Ceremonies are the
sense and hedge of Religion, though they do not oblige directly yet they do
by consequence, and as they are commanded by superiors: for then they cease to
be things indifferent, and we are not to look upon them as bare ceremonies, but
the commands of Superiors, which we are not to dispute but to obey, not to do
so were to question our superiors wisdom in imposing, and power in executing,
Romans 13. 5. we are commanded to be subject for conscience sake: therefore
Ceremonies oblige the conscience, it is natural with men when they feel
themselves unhappy to conclude themselves unwise: Surely we have been unhappy
in all these times of our distractions and we may very rationally conclude our
selves to have been unwise.

5. it is the great happiness of this Nation to be governed Monarchically both
in Church and State: this might soon be proved, but must I be forced to prove
this, to a Nation that has been so long worried with Tyrants and Traitors,
that made so long surrows in our backs: If you have not yet learnt to know your
happiness, you are very ungrateful, and it is pity you should ever have been
so happy. Me thinks your bleeding wounds not yet fully closed might
sufficiently Preach the seasonablenesse of a plaster, want of mercy teaches us
the worth of mercy, the want of King and Bishops all this while, me thinks at
length should teach us the worth of them: would you know the reason of all our
miseries, it was because there was no King, nor Bishop in our Israel, and if
that be the reason of all our miseries surely by the rule of contraries the
other is the reason of all our happiness, that we have both, King and Bishop
in our Israel, Eccles. 10. 17. Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the Son
of nobles; and surely if ever Land was blessed in a King, ours is, and we may
say as the Queen of Sheba, said of Solomon, because the Lord loved Israel he
made him King over them, because the Lord loved us therefore he made him King
over us. great also is the happiness that we receive from the learned and
religious Fathers of the Church, it is a question whether a state be more happy
in a King, or a Church in a Bishop, Monarchy being the best of Governments in
both: Oh how sweetly do these conspire to make a Nation happy, and how do they
mutually assist and under prop each other: and would you know the original of
Episcopacy St. Jerome tells us it is as old as that Text of Holy Scripture, I am
of Paul, I am of Cephas, I am of Apollo, for when divisions crept into the
Church of Corinth, the Apostles for the taking away those that were present,
and the prevention of such for the future, constituted Episcopacy: Sound was
that of the learned King, no King, no Bishop, no Bishop, no King, he that
strikes at the Mitre does with the same blow strike at the Crown, and wants
nothing but power to trample upon both: lutes wound up to an equal pitch, if
you touch one you touch the other, he that touches a Bishop touches a King,
and he that touches the King, touches the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords.
Oh! that we could at length know our own happiness and put up no more bramble
Governments: we have had sad experience how weak and sharp they are, let us no
more despise the Vine and Fig Tree, though the Brambles and Thorns do
pretend to bear Grapes and Figgs, that they may rule over the Trees.

And now what remains but that we turn the Doctrine into practice, and all
become truth tellers, Oh! tell the truth in Christ Jesus, and lie not, your
consciences bearing you witness in the Holy Ghost: Oh! tell not empty
speculations palliated falsehoods, mere propabilities, Amphibious uncertainties
groundless novelties, Preach Divine evident, useful, positive, sin smiting,
peace preserving truths, be not afraid of men but of God: Strive not to please
them but him, let not any wordly advantage what ever, cause you to bury the
gold of Ophir, let not the Majesty of Gods truths stoop to the vices and
humors of men, tell even a David, thou art the man, cry aloud, lift up your
voices like Trumpets, and tell the house of Judah of there sins, be not ashamed
of the Gospel of God, for it is the power of God unto salvation, think of your
honorable calling consider you are the Ambassadors of the God of truth, you
are in his stead and therefore you should tell the truth, and he will uphold
you in it, the Lord your God is with you, his wisdom to direct you, his power
to protect you, his strength to support you, his goodness to maintain you, his
bounty to reward you; buy the truth and sell it not, and when the chief
Shepherd shall appear, you shall receive, a Crown of glory that fades not
away and hear that soul ravishing sentence well done good and faithful servant
enter into thy Masters joy.

Eccles. 10. 17. Blessed art thou O Land when thy King is tho Son of Nobles.
WIse Solomon tells us that a word in season is like apples of gold in pictures
of Silver, what can be more seasonable, or grateful to a Nation so long
miserable then a discourse of happiness, of the way not only to make it happy,
but also to continue its happiness? The Preacher tells us in the words of my
Text, blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the Son of nobles. In the 16.
verse of this Capter, we read of the misery of that Nation, that has a
childish Prince one that has not an head fit for a diadem, nor shoulders able
to sustain the weight of Government; and as he tells us of the misery so also
of the happiness of a Nation, when it is blessed, not with a Tyrannizing
upstart of the meanest of the people, but with one of the blood Royal, not with
a Thistle, but with a Cedar, blessed art thou O Land when thy King is the Son
of nobles; that is, happy art thou Oh Nation, when thy King is not of mean,
base, but of high noble extraction, whose nobility, and virtues may command
reverence and bespeak him fit for a Crown. In the words we have. 1. A
Governor; or King happy art thou Oh Land when thy King. 2. His Character he
his no bramble, but the Son of Nobles, happy art thou Oh Land when thy King is
the Son of nobles. 3. The product, or result of both, happiness, happy art
thou Oh Land when thy King is the Son of nobles, the main hing upon which my
discourse shall turn shall be this.

That it is the great happiness of a Nation, to be governed Monarchichally. It
is the happiness of a Nation to be Governed by a good King especially one that
is of noble extraction, of the blood Royal. In the prosecution of it I shall
use this Method. 1. Prove it by Scripture. 2. Give you some reasons and
arguments for it. 3. Show you that it the happiness of our Nation in
particular. 4. Make use of all.

1. That itis the happiness of a Nation, to be governed by a good King,
especially one of Noble extraction is clear from these Scriptures, 2 Chronicles. ^.
11. Because the Lord haloved his people, he has made thee King over them*
Solomon was a good King, one of the blood Royal, descended from a King, it was
the happiness of the Israelites, to have such a one; and it is said expressly,
because the Lord loved them, he gave them Solomon. That which is a token of
Gods love and favor, cannot but bespeak a Nation happy. 1 Kings 10. 8, 9.
Happy are thy men happy are thy servants which stand, continually before thee,
because God loved Israel, therefore has he made thee King, to do Justice and
Judgment. In the 8. verse. The Queen of Sheba proclaims the happiness of
Solomon's subjects, under the pious and prudent Government, of so good a King,
she looks upon it as a special argument of Gods favor that he had given them,
one, that would do Justice and Judgment: Proverb. 28. 2. For the
transgressions of a Land, many are the Princes thereof, but by a man of
understanding and knowledge, the estate thereof shall be prolonged. In the
former part of this verse, we have the misery of a Nation groaning under the
oppression of many Princes, or Tyrants, and in the later part the happiness of
it under one lawful prudent Prince, which is styled here to be a man of
understanding and knowledge, which prolongeth the Estate of a Land and makes it
long lived, and durable. 1 Timothy 2. 1, 2. I exhort therefore that prayers be
made for all men, for Kings and all that are in authority, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life under them. In the 1. verse. We are exhorted to pray
for Kings, and such as are in authority, in the 2. verse: We have the reason
that we may taste of the pleasant fruits of their Government, that we may lead a
quiet and peaceable life under them, this is the happiness that we enjoy under
Kings and Governors, and therefore we are to pray for them, Romans 13. 4. The
Apostle tells us that a Magistrate is the Minister of God for good, a King the
supreme Magistrate he is Gods Minister for the good of a Nation. So much may
suffice for the 1. Thing, the proof of it by Scripture, I proceed to the 2. The
reason, and arguments of it.

1. Monarchy, or Kingly Government, is a Government of Gods own ordination, and
not only so but approbation also, and therefore a Nation cannot but be happy in
it; surely if a Nation be happy in any kind of Government, it must be in a
Government of Gods own designation, and appointment, God being most wise, and
most good, and therefore knows what Government is best for a Nation, and most
tending to its happiness. Now that Monarchy is a Government of Gods own
ordination, and approbation, it is very evident, Prove. 8. 15. By me Kings
Reign, and Princes decree Justice. By me, that is by my authority, and
appointment, by my special grace, and goodness, 1 Chronicles. 29. 1. Solomon my Son
whom alone God has chosen, Solomon was a King, of Gods Election, and God says
of David, with my holy Oil have I anointed my Servant David. The King is the
Lords anointed; The Apostle Paul says the powers that be, be of God, that
is, of his appointment, his institution, 1 Samuel 10. 24. See ye him whom, the
Lord has chosen, that Kings are Iure Divino, of Gods appointment is
unquestionable, and as Monarchy is of Gods institution so approbation, this is
a consectary of the other, Kingly Government being ordained by God, he cannot
but approve of it, for God does approve of those things he does himself.

2. Monarchy, or Kingly Government is the best of Governments, and therefore it
cannot but be the happiness of a Nation to be so governed: It is the happiness
of a Nation to be governed with the best Government, surely if any Government
can promise happiness, it must be the best, in vain do we expect it from any
other, if the best cannot do it. That Kingly Government is the best will
easily be evinced, that Government is the best which most resembles that
Government which is absolutely the best to wit; that of the King of Kings, the
Lord of Lords. That picture is the best which comes nearest to one of Vandikes
Michael Angelos, or some exquisite artist, the Moon we look upon as the best of
lights, except the Sun, because it resembles it most, that Orator is best that
comes nearest Cicero, the best of Orators, that Moralist, is best which is most
like Seneca, the most reputed Moralist; that Philosoper is most excellent, that
resembles Aristotle most, whom by way of eminency we call the Philosopher.
That Government is the best in the World which has the most legible Characters
and similitudes of the Government of the World. That Monarchy has so is
apparent; what is a King but the lively emblem and image of the King of Kings:
The one is the Archetype, the other the ectype, the one is as the Seal the
other as the Wax. What Is the whole World but Gods Kingdom, the World is
governed by a wise, just, merciful God, and a Kingdom is governed by a wise,
just, and merciful King. God punishes the wicked, spares the good, so does the
King, the King is as it were a God on Earth, I have said ye are Gods, there is
so near a relation between God and the King, that a Man cannot injure the one
without offering an injury to the other, he that touches the Lords anointed
does as it were touch God, he that strikes at the King, does at the same blow,
to his power strike at God himself.

3. Monarchy is the most ancient and universal Government, and therefore
likeliest to render a Nation happy. As ancient Apostolic truths make the
Church, so ancient Governments make the State happy, innovations being equally
dangerous in both. As old truths are most wholesome for the Church, so old
Governments are most wholesome for the State. That Monarchy is the most ancient
Government in the World is indisputable, it being as old as Adam whom God
constituted Monarch of the World, as we read in Genesis, of the antiquity of
this Government humane writings sufciently tell us, and as it is the most
ancient, so it is the most universally received Government, almost all the
Nations in the World, either have been, or are governed by it. Surely had not
they found the happiness of it above other Goverments, they would not have so
long acquiesced in it. That which the General practice of the World the
unanimous consent of all Nations tell us to be true, we cannot rationally doubt
of.

4. My fourth argument is drawn from those appellations that the Philosopher
gives a good King, he styles him a Father, a Physician, a Shepherd, all these
terms bespeak a happiness a blessing to the Commonwealth. Augustus was termed
pater patriae the Father of his Country, and Homer calls Agamemnon (...), the
like was said of Moses. Now if a good King be a Father sure it is to be careful
over his Children, if a Physician it is to heal them, if a Shepherd it is to
feed them, and surely that Nation cannot but be happy, that has a Father to
provide for it, a Physician to heal it and a Shepherd to feed it.

5. My fifth argument is drawn a Minori ad majus, from the lesser to the
greater, if it be requisite, that in a single house, in a family for the
happiness thereof there should be a Governor a ruler a Master of it, how much
more in the great family of the Commonwealth. If it be requisite for the
welfare thereof that there should be a chief Magistrate in the City, how much
more in a Kingdom, the affairs of the one being far more urgent and important,
then those of the other, a City may better subsist without, a Major, an
University without a Vicechancellour, then a Kingdom without a King. A
Kingdom without a King is like a body without a soul, a good King is as were
the soul of the body of the Commonwealth.

6. Let us listen to the voice of instructing nature, let us look into the
Universe, and there we shall find nothing but Kingdoms and Kings. Nature it
self prompts us to Monarchy; Oh what beauty and order is, there in the
Commonwealth of bees? Oh how obsequiously do all the rest follow the Master
beee? Oh how do they mourn at his Funeral, and when he is dead constitute
another, is not the Sun King of Luminaries, Prince of Planets, do not the
Cranes follow their leader? Is not the Whale King of Fishes? The Eagle King of
birds: Is not the Lion King of beasts? Shall these irrational creatures
acquiesce in Monarchy as most suitable to their nature and condition, and shall
not we? shall we be worse then Bruits, shall they have more knowledge then we?
go to the Ant, thou sluggard, says Solomon, as the Ant may teach us prudence
and providence, so these may teach us loyalty, and as it is requisite to the
happiness of a Nation, that it have a King, or that he b^ the Son of Nobles,
one of Noble extraction, one of the blood Royal: this is the only way to
prevent divisions, and to secure the peace of a Nation. When it is otherwise,
every new Governor may be the cause of a new war. In Government it is
requisite that there should be some standard, somewhat indubitable,
unquestionable; besides a Person of Noble extraction is more, apt to command
obedience, more likely to win upon the hearts of the people. They look upon
such, as men designed for Government, as men born to rule; There is somewhat of
Sovereignty and Majesty enstamped upon them, people abhor to be ruled either
by inferiors, or equals, for the meanest of the people, their brows were never
made for Diadems, neither have they those endowments and qualilifications,
which may be speak them fit for Empires. They were born to Obey, not to
command. So much may suffice for the second thing. I proceed in the third place
to show you that it is the happiness of our Nation in particular. For the
demonstration of this, let us compare our former Estate under no King, with our
present Estate under a King; let us look upon the miseries of the one, and the
felicities of the other, and doubtless it will appear, that it is our
happiness to be ruled by a good Prince; contraries do illustrate one another,
the ruder blasts of Winter make us more in love, with the beauties of Summer.
No Music more pleasing to the ear, then when the sweetness of a concord takes
away the harshnesse of a discord. A Man that is upon the Land, and has escaped
Shipwreck may look with pleasure upon the swelling, heaven-threatning seas. In
the 2. of judges we read of the destruction, of the whole tribe of Benjamin,
and many calamities that had befallen the Israelites; would you know the reason
of this, the Holy Ghost tells us verse 25. In those days there was no King in
Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes. If any one should
ask me what was the occasion of all our misenies and distractions in England,
it was the loss of our gracious and merciful Sovereign, in those days there
was no King in our Israel, every man did that which was right in his own eyes,
that deep-dyed hainious scarlet, sin, was not the least cause of all our
miseries, that blow that stuck him, made three Nations reele like a drunken
man; it was not he only that dyed, but our happiness also dyed with him. Our
miseries like the waves of the Sea, or like Ioh's sad messengers came crowding
in upon us, they did as it were strive which should be for most, they may be
reduced to these principally.

1. War, or want of Peace, War is one of Gods scourges with which he whips
a Nation for rebellion and treason, it was but just with God to punish us with
a War, because we knew not how to value the blessings of Peace: Jessurun-like
we waxed fat and kicked with the heel, we forgot to fear God and to honor our
King: that sword which being pampered with Peace we wantonly drew, God would
not sheath till he had beat us with It, and sheathed it in our Bowels. How
destructive War is to a Nation, I need not tell you; we have too too long
tasted of the bitter fruits of it, ever since that constrained departure of his
Majesty from his Palace, the devouring sword has been among us, till the happy
restitution of our now Reigning Sovereign. How did our own merciless fellow
subjects, like the Tyrants of Athens, or like so many Wolves, or Tigers, worry
us? That usurped Dominion, which they unlawfully got by the sword, they as
unlawfully maintained by the sword! O what sums did they extort from us, that
they might consume it upon their lusts? O what armies did their appaled guilty
consciences levy? O how did they scarre us into a constrained obedience? Though
our bodies were subject to them, yet our hearts and souls only to our lawful
Prince.

2. As we wanted Peace, so also truth; instead of ancient Apostolic truths we
had only divided novelties, figments, Chimeras, the dreams and fancies of
deluded men's brains, who would own nothing for truth but what made for their
own interests. Instead of Preaching loyalty they Preached rebellion, instead of
Preaching unity they Preached Schism and Heresy. The Church mourned, the Woman
was fled into the Wilderness, Religion put on black, our pious and learned
teachers were driven into corners, the blind led the blind, our Stars of the
first magnitude were overclouded, there were no stately Cedars left in the
Lebanon of the Church; few or no Trees that bare pleasant fruit were standing
in the Paradise of God. Those Divines that were most eminent for piety and
learning were silenced, their adversaries works were the works of darkness,
therefore they hated the light and the dispencers of it. The seers themselves
were blind, the people perished because there was no vision; England was turned
Amsterdam, any one that had lost his Religion might have found it here; every
family had a certain Religion, peculiar to it self. The Universities were
discountenanced, the Church revenues converted to private men's uses; They that
had no reverence for the Crown, had less for the Mitre; 'Twas no wonder that
they that would have no King, would have no Bishop England that was the Goshen
of the World, a Land of light, was now turned into an Egypt, a Land of
darkness; It was such darkness as we afterward felt in those swarms of
Heresies and blasphemous opinions that were among us.

3. The want of Laws and the due administration of Justice. As it is one of
the great happinesses of a Nation, to have good Laws, and to have them
executed, so it is the great misery of a Nation, either to be without Laws, or
without the execution of them: this was our misery, the Fountains of Justice
were Sealed, the Streams were damned up, those Servants that ruled over us, they
turned judgment into gall, and the fruits of righteousness into hemlock; they
trampled upon all the Fundamental Laws of the Land, they raced the very
Foundations of Government, they knew no Laws but their lusts, and what
ambition prompted them to: The voice of Justice could not be heard, for the
beating of Drums and sounding of Trumpets; the prerogative of the King, the
privileges of Parliament, the just rights and liberties of the people were
violated and trodden upon, it was death as much as to name any of these: a man
could call nothing his own, neither was there any certainty of any thing; We
were nothing else but a sacrifice to their ambition and cruelty. For the
iniquities of our Nation many were our Princes, we that would not submit to the
Government of one pious merciful King before, were afterward compelled to
submit to the Tyranny of thirty, or forty merciless ones; these, these were
the miseries, these were the heavy burdens we sighed and groaned under, when we
had no King in this our Israel. Now we have seen the black, let us now see the
white; we have heard the harsher and more grating, let us now hear the sweeter
and more ear-pleasing notes: Let us view those blessings that we enjoy now God
has bin pleased to give us a King in this our Israel. As the setting of our
first, Sun, King Charles the I. the mirror of Kings and glory of Martyrs, was
one of the greatest causes of our miseries and darknesses, ever since; so the
rising of King Charles the II. is under God, the greatest cause of our light,
warmth and comfort. This Sun like the Sun of Righteousness, did arise with
healing under his wings, Parallel and answerable to all our fore mentioned
wounds. In King Charles the II. we have a salve,

1. We have peace; our wound was war, now oursalve is peace. What can be more
acceptable to a Nation so long worried with wars than peace? Peace it is the
glue that cements and sodders a divided distracted Nation, It is a choice
mercy, a token of Gods love and favor; Surely if war be a great judgment,
then by the rule of contraries, peace cannot but be a great mercy: Peace is the
Mother of plenty, the nourisher of arts and ingenuity, it is hard to tell
whether a Nation be more miserable by war, or happy by Peace, whether the one
does it more harm, or the other good: Now our insulting Tyrannizing, lawless
armies are disbanded, that were wont to destroy not defend us, and blessed by
God we can sit in Peace and quietness under our own Vines and Fig Tree, and
there is none to make us afraid.

2. As we have Peace, so we have also truth; Peace and truth do well together,
it is our happiness that we have both; now our eyes behold our teachers, such
as have the tongue of the learned, and know how to speak a word in due season,
such as can divide the word of truth aright, pastors that can feed us with
knowledge: Now the Stars of the Church are fixed, the Trees of Paradise take
root, Universities are in couraged, the Churches revenues are restored,
Religion, learning, and what soever is praise worthy flourish; The word is
Preached, the Sacraments are administered in a reverent decent manner, all
things are done decently and in order, The face of all things both in Church
and State is more amiable and lovely.

3. As there is respect had to Divine, so also to humane Laws; we are now
governed by the ancient, fundamental Laws of our Realm, these are the
compasses that we steer by, these are the standing rules of the Nation; Justice
now runs down like a mighty stream, and waters all our Land; the cries of the
Fatherless and Widow are heard, courts are open, grievances are redressed, the
Kings prerogative, the Privileges of Parliament, the liberties of the subject
are all preserved inviolate. These are the happinesses we enjoy under the wings
of a gracious Prince, and surely happy is the people that is in such a case. If
we reflect upon our former and present condtion, we cannot but conclude that it
is our great happiness to be ruled by a good King, especially one that is the
Son of Nobles. I hope now our miseries have taught us that Religion to our God,
and loyalty to our King cannot be parted without our sin and infelicity. I
proceed in the last place to make use, it may be for reproof and exhortation.

1. It may be for the just reproof of all Anti-Monarchians, all haters of
Kingly Government, pernicious were the practices of those that did endeavor to
pull up Monarchy by the roots, to destroy both root and branch; O how did some
men tire themselves and us with ridiculous, fruitless, unheard of Governments!
Great is the folly also of those men, that write against Monarchy, which is so
legible, not only in the book of the Bible, but also in the book of the
Creation, and which has been sufficiently approved of by the unanimous consent
of the most knowing, and most civilized Nations of the World. Whether Monarchy
be the best of Governments, or no, some have questioned; experience has taught
us that it is best for us, the genius of the people being more inclinable to
Monarchy than any other Government. 2. For exhortation.

1. Is it the happiness of a Nation to be governed by a good King, and such a
one as is the Son of Nobles? O then let us be thankful, that God has made us
happy in a good King, and one that is the Son of Nobles; As I can compare the
bloody un-Christian murder of King Charles the I. to nothing more fitly than
to the murder of the Holy Jesus: so I can compare our restitution by Charles
the II. to nothing more fifthly than our restitution by Christ. Next to the
deliverance by Christ and the Preaching of the Gospel, this was one of the
greatest deliverances this Nation ever enjoyed: And next to that mercy, scarce
any mercy comparable to this. God sent him as a Shepherd to feed us, as a
Father to provide for us, as a Physician to heal us. When the Roman Empire was
torn in pieces by the divisions of Caesar and Pompey, Augustus restored it:
Our gracious Sovereign Augustus-like, did cement these divided, shattered,
bruised Kingdoms. We may say of him as the Queen of Sheba said of Solomon,
because the Lord loved Israel, he made thee King to execute judgment and
Justice: Because the Lord loved our Israel he made him King. Never was their
any mercy more seasonably and opportunely bestowed, and shall we not be
thankful for it? As is the mercy, so should our thankfulness be. This is a
great mercy, and God requires great thankfulness.

2. Is it our happiness to be governed by a good King, the Son of Nobles? O
then let us know our happiness, and learn loyalty; O beloved, fear God and
honor the King. Be subject to the higher powers, in that they are the
Ministers of God for your good. Fear God and the King, and meddle not with
those that are given to change, you have heard that your happiness is in
Kingly Government, and will ye turn your backs upon your own happiness? All
things pant after happiness, and will ye not do so too? O erect no more idols
of your own making, put up no more Phaetous in the Chariot of Government. O do
not choose Pilots that know not how to steer, put up no more bramble
Governments. Sit down under the Vine and Fig Tree, God has spoken peace to
you, and do not you turn again to folly. When men feel themselves miserable,
they are apt to conclude themselves foolish; when they want happiness, they
are apt to think that they want wit. Surely we were unhappy in the times of our
distractions, and we may conclude our selves unwitty. O that our former follies
would teach us for the future more moderation among our selves, more Religion
to God, and more loyalty to our King. Behold now we are made whole, let us sin
no more, least a worse thing come unto us.

HEB. 13. 16. But to do good and to communicate forget not, for with such
sacrifices God is well pleased.
THat God has been pleased to vouchsafe me the golden opportunity of doing
some good, and communicating some soul saving truth, I look upon it as my
happiness, and desire to be thankful. To do good in any way, is excellent;
but to do good in the best way, to save a soul, is most excellent. And could
I at this time, but be an instrument of saving one soul, I should think my
time and pains well bestowed. Of the occasion of our assembling upon this day,
and in this place, I suppose few of you are ignorant, it is but just and
equal, that they that have remembered us out of charity, should be remembered by
us out of Piety; though it be not debitum legis, yet it is debitum hon^statis;
though we cannot be compelled to perform it, yet if we would be such as we
ought to be before God, we cannot neglect it. Excellency where ever we meet
with it, is to be honored. They that are excellent are to be honored for
their excellency. There is a threefold excellency, an excellency of mind, body,
fortune. Of mind, as knowledge: of Body as old age: of Fortune as Riches.
According to this triple excellency, three sorts of men are to be honored,
Learned men, Aged men, and benefactors. Learned men, so Ezekiel commended
Daniel for his Wisdom, art thou wiser then Daniel? Aged men, Prove. 16. 31. The
hoary head is a crown of glory, if it be found in the way of Righteousness.
Benefactors, in that they are called Fathers in Scripture. Now Fathers are to
be honored, Job. 39. 10. Says Job, I was a Father to the Poor, Benefactours
are to be honored, because of the good they have done, either in Church or
State: Though we do not with the Papists, adore, yet we may honor our
Benefactors: honor is but testimonium excellentiae, a testimony of some
excellency. We may testify the excellencies of our benefactours, that others
may be in the like manner excellent. We may make an honorable mention of
their charity, that others may be spurred on to charity. But I shall not speak
so much of the dead, as to the living; I shall not speak so much of the dead
benefactors, as I shall speak to those that are living, to persuade them to be
Benefactors. The maine of my business shall be this, to persuade men to do
good, and to distribute, that with such sacrifices God may be pleased. In the
10. verse of this Chapter, we read of an altar, We have an altar, this altar is
the Lord Jesus Christ, upon which all the believers sacrifices are offered. The
sacrifices of a Christian are many, there are two, not of the least
concernment, mentioned in this chapter; the first is a sacrifice of praise and
thanksgiving, verse 15. By him therefore let us offer the sacrifice of praise.
2. of Alms and compassion, in the words of my Text, But to do good, and to
communicate forget not, for with such sacrifices God is well pleased. We are
not only to mind our duty toward God, but also toward men; we are not only to
mind our Neighbors soul, but also his body; we are not only to offer up the
sacrifices of praise and thanksgiving, but also of alms and compassion. Though
we are to mind the one, yet we may not forget the other. To do good and to
communicate forget not (...) Beneficentiae and communionis ne obliviscemini.
The conceptions of expositors upon these words are differing, some affirm them
to be different, some to be the same; Calvin affirms that (...) communio, is
larger than (...) beneficentia, and that it denotes any thing whereby a man may
help his brother; of the same opinion is a learned man of our own Nation, he
distinguishes them thus, Beneficence says he is of the heart, communication
of the hand, the one is as the Sun, the other as the light proceeding from the
Sun. But Cornelius a Lapide affirms them to be the same, Beneficentia and
communio idem sunt. Bishop Hall writing upon that text, 1 Timothy 3. 16. To do
good, to be rich in good works, to distribute, to communicate, affirms that
this heap of words, shows only the vehement intention of his desire of good
works, and the indispensable necessity of the performance of them. The like may
be said here, I shall look upon them as either coincident, or very little
differing. In the words we have 1. An act, To do good and to distribute. 2. A
caution, least we should be unmindfull of an act of such importance, Forget
not. 3. The enforcing Reason, For with such Sacrifices God is well pleased.

To do good, not to think only of doing good, but really and truly to do
good. Charitable intentions do neither cloth the naked nor feed the hungry. To
do good, publicly or privately, either to Ecclesiastical or Civil uses; to
Ecclesiastical, as the endowing of Churches or Colleges; Civil as the
relieving of the Poor, redeeming of the captive; To do good, whether to thy
Brothers soul or body, or both. Forget not -- have it always in thine eyes,
mind it, remember it, For with such Sacrifices God is well pleased. Such
sacrifices, not the Blood of Bulls and Goats, legal Sacrifices, but the
Sacrifices of an humble, thankful, merciful heart. With such Sacrifices God
is well pleased (...) The Popish writers translate this word promeretur, God is
merited, which Calvine and Beza not without a cause do condemn; God is
pacified, appeased, he looks upon us with a smiling countenance, a gracious
aspect. I shall strain the sum and substance of the words into this one
proposition, That we are to do good, to lay out, to distribute those blessings
which God has bestowed upon us, both for public and private uses to, Gods
glory and the comfort of our brethren. In the prosecution I shall use this
method, 1. prove it by scripture. 2. give you some reasons and arguments for
it. 3. show you to whom we are to do good. 4. when we are to do good. 5. how
we are to do good. 6. show you some public uses. 7 make use of all.

1. That we are to do good, to distribute, to lay out our riches for Gods
glory, and the support of our brethren, is clear from these Scriptures, Deuteronomy.
15. 7. If there be any among you, a poor man and one of thy brethren, within
thy gates, thou shall not harden thy heart, and shut thy hand against him; but
thou shall open thy hand wide unto him, and lend him in that he wants. This
Text is very full, here is a strict precept against close fistednesse; our
hearts are to be soft, and our hands wide open to the relief of the poor.
Further, verse 11. I command thee saying, thou shall open thine hand wide unto
thy brother, to the poor and to the needy in the land. I do not leave it to
thy choice, as a thing that thou may or may not do, but I enjoyne thee; I
that am thy maker, I that gave thee all, I command thee to do it. No less
full is that place Matthew. 5. 22. Give to him that asks, from him that would
borrow turn thou not away. As God gave thee, so do thou give to others, and
turn not away from him, least God turn away from thee. Prove. 3. 9. We read
there of honoring God with our substance, Honor God with thy substance, that
is, do not lay it out upon thy lusts, upon vanities, but do some good with it,
honor God with it. Mat. 6. 2. When thou do thine alms do not sound a
Trumpet. This Text shows us that we are to do alms, and when we have done
so, not to boast of it. Luke 12. 33. Sell that ye have and give alms, provide
your selves bags which wax not old, Lay up treasures in Heaven. Give alms,
make the poor your baggs. So the Apostle, do good to all, but especially to
such as are of the household of faith. For charity must be extended to all, but
especially to such as deserve it most, such as are brethren in Christ. I shall
give one other Text, which is instar omnium, 1 Timothy 6. 18. Charge them that are
rich in this World, that they do good, that they be rich in good works, ready
to distribute, willing to communicate. This multiplication of expressions
denotes the earnestness of the Apostle, and it is ushered in with charge them.
That is do not tell them slightly, or only barely acquaint them with it, but
charge them to do it. Neither is this without reason, for

1. We are Gods stewards, and therefore we should do good and distribute. That
we are Gods stewards, is clear from that Text, Give an account of thy
stewardship: Now a stewards work it is dispensation, stewards are to be
faithful, in that they are entrusted with, and to disburse it to those good
ends and uses, for which the giver bestowed it upon them, they are not to lay
it out upon lusts and superfluities, but to do good with it, and in so doing,
they do not disappoint the giver of his end, in conferring it upon them; But
they answer those gracious ends of the giver. God has given us our talents,
that we may trade with them, Luke 19. 13. trade till I come. Now this trading
it is by improving our talents, and laying them out upon the hungry, naked,
sick; as is clear from Mat. 25. 35. I was hungry and ye gave me bread, I was
naked and ye clothed me: The talents that God has given us to trade with,
according to Bonaventure, are five, which he tells thus Naturae, fortunae,
potentiae, scientiae, gratiae, The talent of Nature, Wealth, Power, Knowledge,
Grace. By nature, he understands all the faculties of our souls; by Wealth,
riches, possessions; by Power, offices and places of authority; by knowledge,
all arts and sciences; by Grace, all the gifts of the spirit, supernatural
habits, as faith, hope, and the rest: Had he but added one other, and that is
that precious jewel time, he had given us a perfect inventory of all the goods
that the steward is to be accountable for. As our gifts must be well employed,
and our graces well improved, so our goods must be well bestowed. We should
beloved, be like so many fountains, still bubling forth the streams of our
charity, to the refreshing of our necessitous, indigent, thirsty, brethren; We
should like the Sun, be of public influences, dart forth the beams of our
liberality, to the warming of those that are cold and comfortless: A rich man,
like a rich mine, should enrich all those that are poor, he should Nilus like,
be beneficial to the whole country that he dwells in, the streams of his
liberality should have as many sluices to run through, as there are objects for
them to run on; Every one in misery should be an object of his mercy.
Diffusivenesse is the best character of the best things, the more communicative
and diffusive any good is, the more good it is. Sight the best and noblest of
the senses reaches furthest. Gold the best and noblest of Mettalls is most
extensive. As they are the best of things, that are most diffusive, so are they
the best of Christians that are most open handed. We are not Lords or
treasurers, but stewards; not Lords to do what please with those things that
God has given us, nor treasurers to keep them and hoard them up for our own
use; But we are stewards to disburse them for the use of our brethren.

2. As we are to be faithful to God, so we are are to be just to men; and upon
this account we are to do good. If we do not do good, we are not just; we
do not render every one his own, that which is superfluous and not necessary,
that is the poor man's, and not to give it him is to defraud him of his right,
that that is his due. Prove. 30. 8. Give me neither poverty nor riches, but feed
me with food co^venient for me. That which is suitable to our calling, and
convenient for us, that is our own, but whatsoever is redundant and above that
is the poors, Matt. 6. 12. Give us this day our daily bread, not quails,
dainties, delicaties, excrescencies, superfluities, such things as may
administer fuel to the flame, but bread, that is, whatsoever is necessary for
our support, and subsistence. (...) not those things that I would have, but
those things that are convenient for me. As the Apostle speaks, having food and
raiment let us there with be content whatsoever is above food and raiment, that
is the poor man's portion, that which we consume upon our lusts, that which we
prodigally cast away upon sumptuous banquets, fruitless visits, idle
recreations, glittering apparel, useless pompous attendants, is the poor man's,
and should be laid out upon him; according to that of our Savior, he that has
two coats, let him give to him that has none. That is, he that has more than
he wants, should give to him that is in want. He that does not do so, is in
some sense sacrilegious, as St. Cyprian de Eleemosynis, Sacrilegium est rem
pauperum non dare pauperibus, It Is a kind of a Sacrilege not to give the poor
man that that is the poor man's. So that if we would be either faithful to God,
or just to men; we cannot but do good and distribute.

3. We are all Brethren, and therefore we should do good one to another. There
is nothing so unnatural as dissension among Brethren, nature and grace oblige
Brethren to do good one to another; Where may we look for courtesies, if not
between Brethren? The very word it self carries an argument in it, Psalm. 133.
1. Behold how good and pleasant a thing it is, for Brethren to dwell together
in unity. That Brethren are to do good to, and Symphathise with one ano there,
no rational man will once question, That we are all Brethren is as
unquestionable. We are Brethren as God is our Father, both by Creation and
adoption; as Christ is our Brother* there is a Spiritual Brotherhood in
Christ, he himself being the elder Brother, 1 Pet. 2. 17. Love the
Brotherhood, if there be a Brotherhood there are Brethren that constitute it;
for a Brotherhood consists of Brethren, so in Peter; Love as Brethren. If
thy Brother thirst; give him drink, if he be naked cloth him, though it be
hard for flesh and blood to love an enemy, yet me thinks we should love our
Brethren, as Abraham said to Lot, let there be no strife betwixt us, for we are
Brethren.

4. If we have regard to the preservation of humane Society, we cannot but do
good one to another. Such is our condition in this life, that there is a
necessity of mutual reciprocal courtesies, humane Society is like
archbuildings, unless one stone hold up another, the whole fabric falls; in a
hop-yard the poles sustain the hops, and they as it were sensible of the
courtesy, adorn the poles, the walls bear up the roof, and the roof keeps them
from wet. Thus it is among friends, non omnia possumus omnes, God has bestowed
all eminencies upon no man; several men have several eminencies, that they may
prove the more advantageous and helpful one to another; the Wise man directs
the valiant, and the valiant defends the Wise; the rich man supplies the want
of the poor, and the poor takes away from his superfluity; the rich man is
overloaded, and the poor man eases him; and me thinks he does him a great
courtesy to bear some part of the burden, that hinders him from climbing up to
Heaven. The head of the counselor directs the hand of the Soldier, Ulysses
was as good a man as Ajax. The Physician gives the Divine Physic for his body,
and the Divine gives him Physic for his soul. Many strings though of a
different sise, if they be well tuned, make good Music. If any one could live
of himself, he might have some color of living to himself, but in that none
can live of himself, why should he live to himself?

5. We are to do good and to distribute, for with such sacrifices God is well
pleased, Arretius upon this place, frames the argument thus, Those things that
will appease and pacify an angry God, we are to do. But to do good and to
distribute will pacify God. and therefore we are to do good and to distribute.
What should we do sooner than that which will pacify God, render him
propitious to us, cause him to lift up the light of his countenance upon us?
Nothing should please us more, than that which pleases God. So much may suffice
for the rationallity and reasonableness of the thing. Methinkes now I perceive
some charitable dispositions in you and some of you look as if you would pity
an object of charity, least therefore ye should want objects to exercise your
charity on, give me leave to present you with some, and in the 3. place show
you to whom we are to do good, to all men in misery, and unable to relieve
themselves.

Misery is the true, genuine, proper object of mercy, and in that not only our
friends but even our enemies may be in misery, not only our friends but enemies
are objects of mercy; we are to do good to prisoners, strangers, orphans,
widows, poor distressed Gentlemen; and not only to such, but even to our
enemies according to that of the Apostle, Do good to all men. Not only to
those that do you good, for this is merchandise not charity; but even to your
enemies. Mat. 5. 44. Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do good to
them that hate you, pray for them that despightfully use you and persecute you.
Now if we are to love our enemies, I know not who we should hate, a publican
may love one that loves him, but it is a child of God only that can love an
enemy. These are the true genuine acts of mercy, to give meat to the hungry,
drink to the thirsty, clothes to the naked, to redeem the Captive, to
entertain strangers, to visit the sick, to bury the dead; Such persons as these
are in need, and we cannot but relieve them: and as they must be in misery, so
they must be unable to relieve themselves. We must look to this, least we
foment idleness, and in stead of relieving dying bodies, we relieve dying
lusts. It was the Apostles rule, that he that would not work should not eat,
provided he be one that can work: neither may we make such excuses as these to
stop the current of charity, that men are wicked and therefore we may not
relieve them, for though every sinner, as a sinner, is to be hated, yet every
man as a man, is to be beloved; And we are to love them, not as they made
themselves, but as God made them. And now Christian, if among all these thou
can not find an object fit for thy charity, go to some Hospital, and there
thou will be sure to meet with one, if thy heart be not all adamant. Let other
men's miseries teach thee to know and see thy own happiness, when thou see a
blind man, bless God for thy sight, when thou see a lame man, bless God for
thy limbs, when a deaf man, bless God for thy hearing; It might have been thy
own case, who made thee to differ from another? Being come hither, do not only
pity him with thy heart, but relieve him with thy hand, show me the goodness
of thy heart by the wideness of thy hand. But as we are to know to whom we are
to do good, so we are to know in the Fourth place, when we are to do good.

Every thing is beautiful in its season, though good things are acceptable at
any time, yet they are most acceptable in their time. In answer to this
question, We are to do good Principally in our life time, but rather then not
at all, when we are a dying: What the Apostle speaks I may say here, Behold
now is the accepted time, now is the time to believe, now is the time to
repent, now is the time to so the seeds of charity, that thou may reap the
harvest of glory. It will not be long ere the silver cord be loosed, and the
golden bowl broken; ere thy rarely composed tabernacle of clay be dissolved,
and the dust return to the earth as it was, and the spirit to God that gave
it. A little while yet, and then thy weeping friends will be busy about thy
bed, providing thee a winding sheet, nay it will not be long before God himself
say to thee, Give an account of thy stewardship, give an account of thy gifts,
of thy graces, of thy goods, of thy time, of all those precious jewels that I
entrusted thee with. O how much therefore does it concern thee to do somewhat
whilst it is day, before the night comes, wherein thou can not work, to do
some good now whilst thou have so many golden opportunities of doing of good
daily and hourly presented unto thee: O ye rich men, which should be as so
many golden conduit-pipes to conveigh the streams of your Masters bounty, to
necessitous indigent creatures, do good now in your life time, let us thank
you, not your deathbeds for your charity; do not give away your goods because
ye know not how to keep them. It was the good man's praise, dispersit, dedit, he
himself gave his goods, he himself not another for him. But as we are to know
to whom, and when, so also in the 5. place. How we are to do good, Est modus in
dando.

1. Prudently, wisely, discreetly. Christian prudence, it is the souls pilot,
it is the directresse of all graces, it is the spiritual falt that seasons all
our performances. He that gives aright, looks why, to whom, when, to what end
he gives, There is a pregnant excellent place to this purpose in Esa. 32. 8.
Where it is said, The liberal man devises liberal things; that is, he
studies, he consults, he meditates how he may best place his courtesies, he
seeks out for a fit man to prefer him, and that with as much eagerness, as
many a man seeks preferment. It were to be wished that preferments would rather
seek men, then they seek preferments, such a man was famous Bishop Andrews, he
would sish out for a dedeserving man, on purpose to prefer him, and seldom
or ever gave preferments to such as hunted after them. Many men they have
nothing left them, but misery and modesty, and they had rather dye then ask,
such men are to he sought after, enquired after, and when we give them any
thing, we should do it so, as not to make them ashamed.

2. Secretly, our Right hand should not know what our left hand does. When we
do our Alms, we should not with the hypocrites, blow a Trumpet, as Seaeca
speaks, narret qui beneficium accepit, non qui dedit. Let the receiver talk of
the benefit, not the giver. Vain glory it sullieth the oriency of the most
beautiful action, It is a moth that will eat out the reward of the best
performance, It is as good not to do a thing at all, as to do it only to be
talked of. Mat. 6. 1. Take heed that ye do not your alms before men to be
seen of them, otherwise ye have no reward. That action that is done only to
be seen, God will not see it to reward it.

3. We should do good voluntarily, benefits should not come from us like
dropps of blood, but they should drop from us like honey from the honey comb,
without squeezing or wringing; God does not love constrained services:
Whatsoever is acceptable to him, it must be (...) a pure free will offering. He
is (...) the searcher of the heart, and the tryer of the reins, and he does
not so much look to the hand as to the heart of the giver. Hence it was that
the poor Widows mite was so acceptable, she did not only cast her mite, but her
heart also into the treasury.

4. Cheerfully, cheerfulness it puts a luster upon an action, and makes it
amiable in the eyes of God and men, God loves a cheerful giver, one that is
as willing to give as a poor man is to ask, Gods will should be done on earth
as it is in Heaven, the Angels are said to have wings, because of their
alacrity and cheerfulness, the obeying of Gods commands. The cheerfulness of
our countenances, should denote the willingness of our hearts.

5. Affably, with a great deal of affability and humanity; it is not good to
insult over men in misery, if we will not relieve them, yet we should not abuse
them; the softness of our tongues should denote the softness of our hearts.
We are not only to give good things, but also good words; ill is the custom
of those that give men good things and bad words, it is to be feared that they
give out of some sinister end, and not out of a fellowfeeling of their
Brethrens miseries; it is to be feared that where their words are so hard,
their hearts are hard and unrelenting. An act of mercy should be done
mercifully.

6. Quickly, speedly; his dat qui cito dat, he gives twice that gives quickly.
We should be as ready to relieve our poor, weak, sick. Brethren, as they are
to ask relief. Many a man is so long in giving his alms, that the poor man
dies before it comes. But such slow motions tell us that charity is almost, if
not quite dead. Questionless if we were ready to dye for hunger our selves, we
would make more haste to the cupboard. Prove. 3. 28. Say not to thy Neighbor,
go, and come again to morrow, when thou have it by thee.

7. We must do good out of a right principle, and to a right end; Actio bona
vel mala est ex circumstantiis, circumstances denominate an action either good
or bad, and of circumstances the end has not the lest stroke in the
denomination of an action. Our good actions must flow from a principle of
faith, and be directed to Gods glory, as their ultimate end; this is the grand
end of all, this is that mark at which we ought to aim in all our thoughts,
words and actions, this is that for which man the Epitome of the World, and the
Master piece of Gods creation was made. That action is to no end that is not to
a right end. A thing is not presently good that is good in it self, unless it
be also well done, a thing may be good materially, and yet bad formally; a
Heathen may do a good action, and yet not do it well, then we give aright,
when we give in obedience to Gods command, and that we may testify our
thankfulness. So much may suffice for the fifth thing, the manner how we are
to do it. I proceed in the 6. place to show you some of those public uses
for which we are to, lay out our riches, some of those public ways of doing
good.

These public uses they are either civil, or Ecclesiastical; Civil, when a
man lays out his estate for the good of the commonwealth. Ecclesiastical, when
a man lays out his estate for the good of the Church, both these ways of
expressing our charity are very commendable, and have deservedly rendered many
famous. Aurelius commends Vespasian for a brave Prince, because at his own
charge he repaired the Capitol, the Temple of peace, and the monument of
Claudius, it is for Augustus his honor, that he found Rome all brick, but left
it all Marble. Trajan deservedly has the honor of Dions pen because he did
(...) many necessary works for the good of the Commonwealth. Magnificeuce is
one of the fairest flowers in a Princes Garland, one of the richest Jewels in
his Crown. Princes formerly were reputed good or bad, according to those
public edifices that they had built. As good actions to the Commonwealth prove
a man's love to it, so do good actions to the Church argue a man's love to
Religion; and they are no less to be commended that have laid out their
estates for the good of Churches and Colleges. David did not think it became
him to dwell in an house of Cedars, when the Ark of the Covenant of the Lord
remained under curtains, he had a good mind to build God an house. And it was
not the lest of Solomon's praises that he did so, that he was a builder of the
Temple. Gods Children are not transformers of Churches into Barnes and Stables,
but they are described to be such as shall build up the old waste places, such
as raise up the foundation of many generations. When the Jews would commend
the Centurion to our Savior. they represent him under this notion, he was one
that loved their Nation, and built them a Synagogue. He had done them an
eminent courtesy, and therefore he was worthy to receive one. No less are they
to be honored that have been Benefactours to Colleges and Schools of
learning. 2 King. 6. 1. When the Sons of the Prophets went to fetch beams for
the enlarging of their dwellings, Elisha went along with them. Eminent was the
charity of the ancients this way, they did show us that the Tree of faith was a
live by the fruits of their good works. The two famous beauties of our Nation.
Oxford and Cambridge had many rich lovers, that presented them with large
gifts; If we may believe Bucero as large as any in the whole World. King Henry
the VIII. and Cardinal Woolsey were Founders of that royal and ample
foundation of Christ's Church in Oxford. Baliol King of the Scots was Founder of
Baliol. Sr. William Peter augmented Exceter College. Sr. Thomas White Alderman
of London augmented and restored St. John's. Mr. Wadham was Founder of Wadham.
University College had or its Founder Munificent Alfred King of the Saxons;
and for its Benefactours William of Durham, Sr. Simon Benet and diverse others.
The Jewel that is illustrated by the Sun colors the Sun beams. The earth
receives moisture from the akie, and repayee it back again in waters, it is
but just and equal that we should give their memories the honor due unto
them, that gave us so much* Why should not Moecenas have an Horace to tell of
his liberality. Though he that gives should say nothing, yet he that receives
sold say some thing; though the name of the wicked do rot, yet the name of a
Benefactour like a Box of precious ointment, smells sweet, in the nostrils of
all good men. The names of our noble and wise Benefactours, should not be
mentioned with out due respect, and liberal Testimonies of their Excellencies.
It is but just that their names should live, that made so many to live. O what
great cause have we to be thankful to God for such men, and to endeavor to
write after those fair copies which they have drawn us. I proceed in the
seventh place to make use.

1. This may be for the just reproof of all unjust Stewards, all straight
handed Divese's, those that do not discharge their trusts, that do not
disburse their goods to those good ends and uses for which they were bestowed
upon them, whether public or private. Oh! how many unprofitable Vacias are
there in the world that are good for nothing, but seem to be buried whilst
they are alive? how many are there of whom it may be said as they said of
degenerated Alexander, that how was (...) the burden of the earth? how many
are there that are like Cypressetrees, (...), stately and high but fruitless?
But such Trees they are not for Paradise, they are fit only to be hewn down,
and cast into the fire. How many are there in the World that Cleopatra like
spend whole Kingdoms upon their lusts? Whose God is their belly, whose end is
destruction. They spend so much on their own bellies, that they can spare
nothing for the bellies of the poor; it will be a sad thing when God shall say
to such men, you were my stewards, why did ye not cloth the naked, give meat
to the hungry, drink to the thirsty? Go ye cursed into everlasting fire,
prepared for the Devil and his Angels, for I was an hungered and ye gave me no
meat, I was thirsty and ye gave me no drink, naked and ye did not cloth me,
sick and ye did not visit me. Nay, how many sacrilegious Persons are there in
the World, that are so far from building Churches and colleges, that they
would pull them down? They are like the King of Scicily, that to enlarge his
Palace pulled down a Temple. Oh how many are there that to enlarge their own
houses, can be content to pull down the house of God? We have had too sad
experience of this in our own Nation, those two wide-mouthed Cormorants,
pretended piety, and liberty had almost swallowed up Church and State; It was
of the Lords mercies that we were not consumed, and because his compassions
fail not. I think this Nation has been one of the most Sacrilegious Nations
under the cope of Heaven, and I am verily persuaded that that deep dyed
Crimson, Heaven deriding sin of Sacrilege was one of the greatest causes of
this Nations miseries. But now that Justice which seemed to sleep all this
while, has at length over taken the Authors and Achans of our miseries, by
this time some of them know, what it is to kill Kings and rob Churches, and may
all men that propose to themselves no better ends; have no better ends; and for
those that are unexecuted, though I ca^ wish no great good to their bodies, yet
in charity I wish much good to their souls; I wish that God may be more
merciful to their souls, than they have been to other men's bodies, and that
those that thirsted so much after blood, would at length thirst after the blood
of Jesus.

2. Are we to do good, to lay out those blessings that God has bee^ pleased to
bestow upon us, for public and private uses? O then let me here in the more
especial presence of God and his Holy Angels, beseech and entreat you to do
good, to lay out your gifts, graces, and goods for Gods glory and the benefit
of your Brethren, look upon your selves as born not so much for your selves as
for Gods glory and the good of others, look upon your selves as lent only to
your selves, and wholly given to others; O you that are rich in this World, and
have so many golden opportunities of doing good, endeavor to be rich in good
works; as God has made you great, so endeavor to be good, and to do good:
though greatness and goodness seldom meet together yet they are not
incompatible, inconsistent, it is not impossible for the same man to be great,
good and just. O cloth the naked, give meat to the hungry, drink to the
thirsty, entertain the stranger, redeem the Captive, visit the sick; consider
that ye are not Lords to do what ye please with what ye have, nor treasurers
to hoard up, but ye are stewards, ye are the hands of God to disburse, and woe
be unto you, if ye not do so Consider that when ye come trembing and shivering
before Christ's dreadful Tribunal, it will not be asked you how great ye were,
but how good ye were; It will not be for your comfort that ye had an abundance,
but that ye were abundant in well disposing of that ye had. O ye that are
Magistrates do good and distribute Justice, vindicate the right of the
Fatherless and the Widow, see that Gods purer. Worship be maintained, that
Justice be executed, that the peace be kept; O let noti the sword of Justice
lie rusty in the scabbard, but draw it against all Sabbath Breakers, contemners
of Church discipline, blasphemers, swearers, drunkards scandalous irregular
livers; know that God stands in the assembly of the Gods. And you O my Fathers
and Brethren of the Ministry, if the slenderness of your fortunes will not
permit you to do good to your Brethrens bodies, yet do good to their souls;
There is a charity to the soul as well as to the body, and it is as much, nay,
more charity to relieve a fainting languishing soul, than to relieve a fainting
languishing body. O bind up the broken, strengthen the weak, comfort the
comfortless, visit the sick; do good by your Preaching, do good by your
writing, do good by your living, do not only talk of God, but walk with
God, do not only Preach in the Pulpit, but out of the Pulpit, do not only
Preach Sermons, but live Sermons, the whole life of a good Divine should be
nothing else but a Sermon he should be an Angel in comparison of other men,
taller than others by the head and shoulders in piety, O consider that you are
Suns and if ye be in an Eclipse, the whole World will take notice of you;
people are apter to take notice of one vice in a Minister, more than of a
hundred virtues. A copy should be fair, a line straight, and he that is to
teach others to walk, should be no cripple himself. How unbeseeming a thing is
it for a Minister that Preaches humility, to be proud? For a man that
discourses whole years of Heaven to be earthy? O my Brethren, do not cloister
your excellencies, hide your Tallents in a Napkin, do not like dark Lanthornes
shine only to your selves, but let your light so shine, that men secing your
good works, may glorify your Father which is in Heaven. O ye that are Tutours,
do good to your pupils, be not unfaithful to God and men; and for your
encouragement consider, that when ye do good to a pupil, ye do good to a
whole Nation, nay peradventure to the whole world. Who knows but such a one
may prove an Ursine, an Usher, an Andrews, a Cedar in learning and piety? O
that all men in all places, of all callings would make it their business to
do good and distribute some way or other. Titus Vespasian counted that day
lost in which he had done good to no one, O Amici, Amici diem perdidi, my
friends, my friends I have lost a day; O let not us Christians be, ashamed to
learn some what of Heathens. it is our excellency to come near God, to be the
Children of our Father which is in Heaven; We cannot come near to God in any
thing more than in doing good. For the inciting of you, I shall present you
with these Motives.

1. Consider that charity is the very life, the soul and as it were the essence
of Religion. True Religion does not consist so much, in contemplation and
speculation, as in practice and action; it is not so much the work of the head
and the tongue, as of the heart and the hand. Me thinks now a days Religion is
dwindled into frothy, airy, love quenching disputations. We are all head, no
heart, we are like Children sick of the rickets, our heads are swollen bigger
than our whole bodies, we are so far from works of charity, that we cannot
afford one another Charitable words; but I would have such Bountefeaus, such
fire brands of the Church to know that no man's private humor is valueable with
the Churches peace, though he did shine in it, as a Star of the first
magnitude; Whoever gets by such disputes, I am sure the Church loses. Me
thinks the Divines of England are like so many unnatural Sons, like so many
Neroes ripping up the bowels of their own Mother the Church. It had bin better
that many of them had never been, than that they had been so seditious. 'tWere
well if they would bestow some of those precious hours that they spend in
scribbling one against another, in binding up the broken, comforting the
comfortless visiting the sick, according to that in Jam. I. 17. This is pure
Religion and undefiled before God to visit the Fatherless and the Widows in
their affliction.

2. Consider that good works are the best evidences of a good faith, of a true
saving justifying faith. When I see the fruits of good works, I cannot but
conclude that the Tree of faith is alive. When our Savior had cured the man
with the withered hand, he bids him (to testify that it was whole) stretch it
forth, stretch forth thy hand. O my beloved if ye would show me that the
sinews of your faith are not shrunk, that the hands of your charity are not
withered, stretch the^ forth. Excellent is that of the Apostle, show me thy
faith by thy works. Not by thy words, but by thy works, a workelesse faith, is
a worthless faith. Though it be faith alone that justifies, yet it is not an
alone, solitary, unaccompanied faith, though it be the fore finger alone that
points in the hand, yet it is not alone when it points. Faith in the soul, is
like a Queen attended with a Royal train of other graces, as maidens of
honor. Me thinks I hear faith Rachel like, crying out, give me Children, or
else I dye. O how lovely a sight it is to see the Vine of faith laden with the
clusters of good works!

3. Consider that whatsoever ye do to any of Christ's poor members, he looks
upon it as done to himself. And me thinks this motive should be of great force
with you; me thinks (...) should strive who should first do Christ a good
turn. When a man gives an (...), he should not so much look at the member of
Christ, as at Christ in the member* and though he does not give him any thin^
for his own, yet he should give him somewhat for Christ's sake. Suppose
Christian, thou saw Christ himself that spilt his precious blood for thee,
coming to thy doors and asking a bit of bread, could thou have the heart, or
the face to deny him? Surely thou would not be so rocky hearted, it is all
one, and if thou doubtest of this, believe Christ himself that says so, Matthew.
25. 40. In as much as ye have done it to the lest of these my Brethren, ye have
done it unto me. Christ gave us all and me thinks we should by way of gratitude
give him somewhat again.

4. Consider that that which is given to the poor is a mea^s to sanctify that
which we have. He that gives God any thing, he is wont to repay him in greater
abundance. The Sydonian Woman's Oil that was poured into empty vessels, never
ceased running: If we would have our Oil always to run, we must pour it into
empty vessels. The Widows Oil consumed not, as long as she fed the Prophet.
Eccles. 11. 1. Cast thy bread upon the Waters, and thou fhalt find it after
many days. That bread is not cast away that is cast upon the Waters, Psol. 41.
1. Blessed is he that considers the poor. blessed in his estate, blessed in
his Children, blessed here, blessed hereafter.

5. Consider that whatever ye give the poor on earth God will give it you in
Heaven, nay ten thousand times more according to that, give and it shall be
given unto you. Though I do not say here with the Papists, that good works are
meritorious of Heaven, yet this I say, that God is pleased to bestow Heaven
upon those that do good works, those that testify their faith by their works.
That a piece of Leather is current, it is not from the value that is in the
thing it self, but from the value that the Prince puts upon it as St.
Augustine, Deus non coronat merita tua, sed dona sua. God crowns not any merit
in thee, but his own gifts. We do not go to Heaven because we do good works,
but because God has promised to give us Heaven if we do good works; according
to those places, lay up for your selves treasures in Heaven, a good foundation
for the time to come. And happy is the man that lays out treusures on earth,
that he may receive treasures in Heaven. Happy is the man that treads upon his
riches, and makes them a ladder to climb up thither, happy is the man that
exchangeth his gold for that street of the new Jerusalem, that is of pure gold.
Happy is the man that by giving to the poor, can turn his Pactolus his River of
gold, into those Rivers of pleasures which are at Gods right hand for evermore.
O lend God somewhat in this World, and he will surely pay you in the World to
come; O give the poor your bread here, and God will give you the bread of life
hereafter: and you shall hear that sweet sentence, come ye blessed of my
Father, inherit the Kingdom prepared for you from the foundation of the
World; for I was an hungry and ye gave me bread, thirsty, and ye gave me drink,
naked and ye clothed me; To which Kingdom, God of his infinite goodness,
bring us all, and lead us through the Kingdom of grace into the Kingdom of
glory for his Son Jesus Christ's sake.

FINIS.
ERRATA.
P. 15. l. 10, your. 2d Sermon. p. 5. l. 3. the meaning. l. 6. divine:
philosophical. l. 7. philosophical. Such. l. 29. be brow-beaten. p. 7. l. 25.
their fathers had. p. 8. l. 25. courts. p. 9. l. 9. similitude. p. 10. l. 1. of
the Prince of the air. l. 4. your father. p 13. l. 1. denied - our Saviors.
l. 4. the truth. So much. l. 5. the use I shall make of it, is. p. 16. l. 24.
received. p. 17. l. 4. Minister. p. 24. l. 18 these p. 29. l. 22. Concionis. p.
31. l. 21. here the souls. p. 33. l. 12. give us. 3d Sermon. p. 3. l. 2. Lord
loved. p. 10. l 4. King, so that. p. 11. l. ult. struck. p 12. l. 6. foremost.
4th Sermon. p 2. l. 28. beneficentiae and communionis. p. 19. l. 4. in the
obeying.


