Angliae Speculum Morale;

THE Moral State OF ENGLAND, WITH The several Aspects it bears TO VIRTUE and
VICE. With the LIFE of THEODATVS, And Three Novels, Viz. The LAND-MARINERS,
FRIENDSHIP SUBLIMED, The FRIENDLY RIVALS.


(...)!
Oh vere Phrygiae, neque enim Phryges!
LONDON, Printed for Henry Herringman, and are to be sold at the Blew Anchor in
the lower Walk of the New Exchange, 1670.

TO THE READER.
IT may be thought that these ensueing Characters are meant for reflections upon
particular persons: but I here assure the World that I only strike at general
practices. I do no more then what my self would willingly receive from any
hand; and I shall always write his name with the first, in the Roll of my
friends, who tells me wherein I have transgressed: for they are most happy
who are most innocent; now since humanity is naturally prone to ill, it ought
to be our care to avoid and hate it, and the way to do so, is first to know it.
I think he who striveth to wound his Brother's existimation, at the same time
stabbeth his own; for thus he brandeth himself with the infamous name of a
malicious person, and is avoided by all as noxious to civil Converse. Most ages
have brought forth those public spirits, those friends to their Country, who
have dissected Vice, and showed it in it is ugliest colors: of most note
amongst the Ancients were Juvenal, Persius, Horace; and almost every Age and
every Nation since have been happy in such, and doubtless they wrought a
greater Reformation with them down right blows then (...) Pyth^^^ras, Socrates,
Plato, Aristotle, Theophrastus; nay, then that professed Master of Ethics
Zeno, or any of the numerous Schools of Moralists have, with their most
persuasive reasons. Vice from the least of familiarity slippeth into an habit,
and in the end infatuateth; and how it has insinuated it self into the
affections of the English, nay, how it is incorporate with their Natures, their
daily actions show. The Nations obstinacy I fear is a sad presage of it is fate:
for it turns not from its wonted courses, though the will of Heaven has been
spoken in Plague, and War; nay, though it has given its commandment (like the
Levitical Law) in a dreadful Fire. And we know that God hardened Pharaoh's
heart before he drowned him, and his host in the red sea. In this juncture of
time it resembles Crispinus in the account which Juvenal gives of him in these
words; Ecce iterum Crispinus, and est mihi saepe vocandus
Ad parts, monstrum nulla virtute redemptum
A vitijs, Aeger, solaque libidine fortis.


If I can by these Lines oblige my Countrymen to better courses, I shall
attain my end; if I cannot, I have done my duty as a freeborn Subject, who
ought to be sollicitous for his Countries good. The experienced may see farther
then the tender Rays of my young Eyes will reach; for I pretend to set down
nothing here but what is obvious to the weakest sight.

MAN.
THe transactions of this World are the most unpleasant speculations that ever
entertained my mind. All affairs do resemble the great Machines of Heaven and
Earth, in their motion and volubility, but not in their regularity; for the Sun
rises from the East, at noon visits the South, and makes the West his Bed;
the Moon swerveth not from her appointed limits, observes her times of Change,
and influenceth the Sea; that also keeps its hours of flux and reflux; and
generally the whole offspring of Nature moves as at first, but only Man, who
was designed Master of the whole, though he partaketh of the Heavenly soul,
lives in opposinon to all Laws and Sanctions of God, and (...), runs a
course contrary to all Order; and in his Actions, if not in his Heart, says,
Tush, there is no all-seeing Providence, no God. It Is true, the whole progeny of
Adam is obnoxious to his original guilt: but Baptism is the Lavre of
Regeneration; we have innate affections, and propensities to do evil, since our
Mothers convers with the serpent; But Grace is in the World, which will resine
our natures. Doubtless no evil is in us, but the cure is in our own power: no
poisonous Herb (as Naturalists observe) sprouteth out, but in the same field
its Antidote is placed. It Is a prodigy that Men since they know they have a
rational soul which is to measure out Eternity, and after, according to the
habits and inclinations it served most here, is to receive a Crown, or a
Scorpion, should follow the dictates of Sense, wholly deposing Reason from her
Empire over the passions, and be as Kings, (though partaking of all the
inconveniences of Humanity) for one hour, to be afterward most miserable for
Myriads of Myriads of ages, which like a Circle will never have an end. Did not
Heaven oftener stretch out a staff then a rod, apply Gileads Balm, then pursue
revenge: the World had many Centuries of years since been past the frontiers
where now it stands, and immersed in the very center of the Valley of Tears and
Death.

From Adam through the wide Organs of the depraved species, the sad effects of
his fate are derived to all; but yet these Miseries by the mercy of Heaven
being salved; every heady appetite which we caress, and embrace, is the Serpent
which betrayeth our souls anew into that infinity of inconveniences which
attends the eating of forbidden fruit. These unhappy, and often repeated
actions, have created parallel habits in us, which have changed the whole Mass
of our Nature, and have set us in a diametrical opposition to all that is
called good: to prove this, if we examine the intrigues, and daily occurrences
in the World, we shall find nothing, if applied to the Divine Rule,
conformable, nothing if laid in the balance of the Sanctuary, of just weight;
every rational Being, like the ambitious Angels, has perverted the intent of
its creation; none but sensitive and vegetative Creatures pursue the primitive
end of their institutions.

There is no Medium betwixt good and evil.
They admit of no mixture, or mutual commerce.
Whoever is not good, is its contrary; if a good Action be leavened with the
least Vice, it is overcome by its powers, and degenerateth into bad: the least
Sin stamps Ignominy on the fairest Virtue; the Scripture says, He who breaks
but one Commandment, though he have inviolably observed all the rest, is guilty
of the breach of the whole Table.

If thus then; alas, what should we be if all our actions were put to the Test!
how few do oblige without the hope of a threefold return? who loves without a
sensual, or avaritious end? who will serve their King and Country without the
hope of Reward from him, or applause from her? in fine, we undertake nothing
but we consider our selves first; and if we cannot work our own interests, we
will let the other fall, though of the most public nature. We obey no Parent
but the Flesh; we hugg no Brother but a son of Belial; we know no Friend but
the unrighteous Mammon: but oh deceived Man! thy blind Parent will lead thee,
as blind, into an ocean of Maladies, and Miseries, thy Brother to a Dungeon, or
a Gibbet, and thy Friend will hinder thee from ever beholding the Heavenly
mansions. Oh! where must distressed Virtue plant her feet, if thus incroach'd
upon? where must she be found if her Antagonist thus in Triumph exalt her
crowned head? sure like Astraea, no where but above the Stars. To conclude
with the corollarie of the whole, every action of Man is impertinent; he
draws no Line to its true Center; he levelleth all his designs at a false
end, and wandreth in those broad paths which conduct to the gates of
Destruction.

The Nobleman.
HE who is advanced to Title and Fortune, and is become an head of the people,
either by his own merits or the achievements of his Ancestors, ought to be
exemplary in virtue. Being set by Heaven on such a conspicuous place on purpose
to guide the people into the paths of love, and obedience to their God, and
King; and to show them the ill effects of contrary performances: like Candles
put at night in Pharos Towers, which at once give the Matiners a view of their
fruitful E. gypt, and lead them off those many and dangerous shelves of the
Nile.

No Nation ever boasted a braver, a more gallant, a more virtuous Nobility then
England; who have raised eternal Monuments in foreign parts to their Country
and themselves, witness their adventures in the Holy wars, their conquest of
France and Ireland, their many attempts upon the valourous Scott, before the
happy union of the Crowns; of late times in the West Indies, before we got
footing there, on the Continent, our exploits in Spain, and Portugal will
speak; at Sea in the Spanish invasion; and several other remarkable Encounters
there and elsewhere. But yet, though they have gained Honor and a deathless
Fame, why should it descend to an Adulterate and Sophisticate posterity? why
should they inherit their Glories who do not their Virtues? who can boast only
of the empty name of a descent from Noble and gallant Loins? it is not fit that
Tissue and Arras which have adorned Palaces should hang on the Clay-walls of a
Cottage, because the Dust of the one would Eclipse the Beauty of the other; no
more is it so, that they who are fallen from the Glories of virtuous Fathers,
should bear those Escutcheons which they transmitted to them fair and white,
least they cloud them with that black ignominy which results from vicious
practices; Honor, as well as Friendship requiring Virtue for a Basis.

I wish this discourse could not seem to appertain and be directed to the now
English Nobless so much as it does: (with the pardon of some few, to whose
conduct and generous integrity, England must own much of her present happiness,
and owe much of her future.) but this being no private concern, but one of so
public a Nature, that every freeborn Subject seems to have a share in their
carriage, they being the Pillars of the Government, as they are Counselors of
the King; I must take notice of it. It Is now by the great ones thought putid
pedantery, to be skilled in Arts or Arms; they leave the practice of those to
the plodding Students, of these, to the soldier who sights for pay; so putting
at once their Nations Glories, and its fortunes into unexperienced and
mercenary hands. They in their lives imitate the softness they tried in their
Cradles: they are pierced with a Northern blast, blown down with the sound of a
Trumpet; nor did ever any Action of theirs speak them valiant, but the beating
a Lacquey who dares not resist, or the kicking a poor Tradesman down the stairs
whom they had undone before. These sure are virtues exceeding all those for
which story gives their Ancestors a Fame. Religion is a thing they explode
conversation, it merits not their thoughts, yet they build Groves to the Gods
of this world in high places, and build Altars, and with a more then heathenish
superstition pay sacrifice to the weakest of Creatures. Sure these are greater
Idolatries then the son's of Nebat, though he made Israel to sin. Luxury has
obtained above all; they eat, drink, and play, but think not to morrow they
must die. Thus their manners are not only become effeminate, but their bodies
and their strengths are decayed. Their Fathers fed upon those corroborating
meats the Island did afford, (which certainly, if ever any was, is a most
fortunate one) and they sympathizing with them, gave them the most natural
force; but these not content with what in such abundance it offered, have
suffered our Nation to be invaded with foreign softnesses, and to be cat up
with what it self was intended for food, for nothing, it is sure, consumes our
bodies more then these; and our Estates must suffer if we entertain a commerce
for what turns to no profit, but ends in a loathsome excrement; then to
consummate this happiness, a French Cook must prepare the viands; most of their
other Menials being of that Nation; (who are the most nasty naturally, and the
most false of all the Europeans,) terming their own Contrymen not agreeable
or adroit enough; thus they suffer their poor Natives to starve, whilst they
seed a people whom God has placed in a Clime which gives them even a
superfluous maintenance: Fornication is no sin with them, and Adultery is the
least; they not considering in every such Act, that they invade their
neighbors freehold: These customs accompanied them home who were sent out so
young that they could remarque nothing but the vices of a Country, and sure it
were a consideration worthy of the Parliament, to enact, that either (with the
Lacedemonian State) they should not travail at all, or not till they are come
to some maturity. Is it not fine, that when the Nation calls for their heads
or hands, they should be employing the one, in beholding the the imaginary
beauties of an eye, and the other, in the worse Offices of a mean, and
loathsome, yet commanding Leachery; where will these follies end? doubtless no
where but in their ruins who foment them; will it not by these practices come
to pass, that nothing shall be more despicable in the eyes and mouths of the
People then the Nobility? those who were their Countries greatest Glory, and
delight, will in time become its greatest ignominy and hate; there is no return
to lost Glories; the descent to Hell is easy, but the coming back impossible;
the unhappy Angels, (though they wrought their fates by Nobler means, by
ambitioning higher honors) must now wear out eternity in everlasting Chains and
Darkness.

The Courtier.
AS his Obligations are greater to his Prince; and his advantages more
immediate from him, so ought his affections to be more fixed to, and centred in
his concerns, and his services to be of greater volume then those of others;
for though the Great Monarch of Heven and Earth will be praised by us his mean
subjects here, yet the Angels whom he honors with a nearer converse, with
more close approaches to his radiant Majesty, give him more magnifying praises,
more elevated Halleluiahs. He who truly intends to make a Court the Scene of
his life, ought above all to practice sincerity, and to value his faith; for
the addresses of the people to their Sovereign of all kinds being conveyed
through him as a conduct, it should be his care that they arrive at the Royal
Ear without addition or diminution; lest he wrong them in their affairs, and so
alienate their affections from him to whom they are due, and purchase to
himself in the end shame, if not death. He ought to appear in a garb not above
his place, for so he may procure envy to himself, nor below the dignity of his
Master, lest he wrong him; He ought to use all means to advance him in the
affections of the people, to indear his interest to them, to exercise an
obliging mien to all; but especially to foreigners under what Character soever
they remain here, to show himself in all splendour due to the Office he holds,
to them, that he may create a Reverence in them for the Author of it. He must
be seen in the intrigues and interests of transmarine states, and know their
benign and malevolent Aspects one to the other; to be ready upon all
emergencies to meet the maladies of the body politic by his Head or Arm; to
espouse its fortune only, and to do his devoir to it by freely sacrificing his
life, and posterity, and by returning without regret, his goods to that service
from whence he received them; imitating in that his Master who though he has
large incomes from the people, yet restores them by expending them upon all
exigencies for their good, as the Sun draws off exhalations and vapors from
the Earth, but sends them into her Lap again in gentle and fruitful showrs,
which assist her nature, and make her bring forth in larger proportions.

But it is wonderful to see how far men are from what they really ought to be,
his moral parts seem to be subject to the same vicissitudes with the state he
fears; for now you shall behold him like the lazy Leviathan, taking his sport
in the deepest Abysses of pleasure, preying upon those smaller Fish whose
strength cannot resist his power: he is drowsy and backwards to the advantages
of his Prince, but always vigilant for his own; he runs in ways excentrique
to all Virtue, and knows no Friend or Divinity but Venus, Bacchus, and his
Mammon; his motion is perpetually in bowing and cringing, but he is as constant
in directing his Eye to the pole of his interests, as the magnetic Needle is
to the North; he is that true Chemist who extracts by the calcining fire of his
feigned-ardent affections, gold out of the bleeding estates of unhappy
delinquents, and of those whom the Law adjudgeth to punishment, and sometimes
of innocent offenders, and pretended Criminals; But though these may be the
principles of some, yet there are many whose integrity, and fidelity to their
Prince renders them worthy of those advantages they enjoy: yet their carriage
cannot excuse others. There is an impertinent thing called a young Courtier,
whom I shall draw as near the life as I can.

His discourse is that which profaneth the ears of the Good, and the wise, and
proves troublesome even to the most impertinent; his remarques are of the most
inconsiderable encounters of the day, in which himself is always a principal
Actor; either how many Women by his false vows he has overcome; or where he
has made the greatest debauches in Burgundy or Campaigne, at Jero's,
Shattelin's, or Lafroons; or if his happy invention does supply him with a
distorted Rebus, or an ugly dismembered Anagram, an unnatural Antithesis, a
forced quibble, or an uncivil repartie that bites ones reputation, (which all
are the dry scabs of a corrupted wit,) he must be admired for being Master of a
greater ingenuity than Ben Johnson; He is sure to have three or four verses of
Love and Honor ready out of the latest Play, and the last new Song in his
pocket, which he has coppied in false English. It Is fit his dress should be
gay, because Embroideries are for the Palaces of Kings; but it is not fit that
many poor families, to supply his extravagancies, should want bread: it is
miserable to think that a thousand curses should attend his steps and not one
good wish should be sent up for him: but why should prayers be offered for him
who never prays? who contemns Religion as a vile thing? who never names God
but in his Oaths or Burlesque.

The Gentleman
IN the frame of the State, is like the Tuscan Pillar in Architecture, which
though it be not so Polite as the other Orders, nor can boast a well
proportioned neatness, like the Ionick, nor an handsomely adorned head, like
the Corinthian Column, yet it is in building the foundation of all their
Beauties; so though he be inferior in Title, yet in Power and interest he is
equal if not superior to the Nobleman; for in all Records we find the House of
Commons to have been very considerable in the Government, though the Lords make
a Court of Judicature; it is his Duty to serve his Country by his Presence
there, to preserve her Peace, and to defend her Privileges and Immunities; to
be hospitable to his indigent neighbors, to receive the stranger and
way-faring-man with Cheerfulness and Civility: In fine, to open his Napkin to
all, and not to employ it in wrapping up his Talent. But alas! is it not
miserable, that Vanity like Romes Eagles at the Meridian of her power, should
carry Conquest on her Wings to all places where she is pleased to flee? who of
the wisest? nay, what Diviner (if any such there be) could have foreseen, that
vice should have found out the once Sacred Groves, the quiet and innocent
recesses of a Country? the Gentleman now has changed the Plow and Cart, which
did feed his Grandsire, and a brave Train of stout attendants in his great
Hall, whose Labor well deserved their Hire, for a Gilded Coach, and a numerous
Train of debauched and insignisicant Lacqueys, and now by an unhappy Thrift
has converted his long Table well covered, and well filled, into a little
round one, which holds one Dish and three People, and has turned his great
Hall into a little Parlour: He once in a year arriveth at London with his Lady,
a rich or handsome Daughter, or a Neice, with whom they fail not daily to visit
the Theater, giving to her the accomplishments of the Town, who ought rather to
be seen in the mysteries of a Country life. If her fortune be great, it is
unfortunately ship-wrack'd upon some Lord; who after the enjoyment of her
revenue, loathes her person; He places his Son perhaps at the Inns of Court, who
knows he is to heir an Estate, and thinks it but washing the Ethiops, to
injure his Brain with the sturdy Notions, and knotty Maxims of the Law: he
therefore girdeth himself for other accomplishments, allotting the morning to
dance or fence, at noon he dineth, in the afternoon he sees a Play, and to
recreate his languishing spirits, he locketh up the day with fat vaporous Ale
at Hercules's Pillars and makes there his non ultra till 12 a clock! After two
year, when he returns to his Father and should give him the Harvest of the
seed, which in such proportion he has sown, he has not Wit nor Law enough to
keep his own Courts. The Gentleman commonly visits the Town at the expense of
the poor Labourer's sweat, whom he has now wracked to the utmost farthing; he
lives splendidly here for some months, he drinks at all hours, he fitteth
at the head of the Table, and for his honor disburseth for the reckning; if
well heated, he may, happily, be invited to sport with the frail Dye, and there
he is certainly saluted with a high or low Fullam; or some other convenient
instrument of execution; if his Genius leads not that way, he goes to visit
a Lady of Quality, an acquaintance of his Friends, who for that occasion is
well dressed in her borrowed weeds, and has Lodgings in some modish place, as
the Piazza, South-hampton buildings, or Suffolk street; but is such a Creature,
as will be at the beck of any Coachman, rather than he fallow; if he converse
with her, he is either clapped, or pays for his familiarity, with Silver,
Gold, Watch or Ring, whatever moveable he has about him, and when he is laid
to sleep, his Landabrides and his dear friend divide the spoil: when his whole
Cargo is spent, then he either abscondeth, or without rigging, or ballast,
sneaketh privately in a Stage-coach to his house in the Country, (his own
being seized) and by the next Term is presented with an Execution, from his
Tailor, or Landlord, and perhaps too from his Apothecary. These surely are
great mistakes, and mighty impertinencies, and much dissonant from the nature
of that Province with which Heaven has endowed him. To conclude, if the
Gentleman's fortunes Sympathize so much with the Peasants, that if the one
fails, the other falls, much more must the States with his, who is her
chief cornerstone.

The Gallant or Hector
IS he who makes Vice his business; who recreates himself with dangerous
follies; who feeds upon his greatest enjoyments with Heaven's sword of
justice hanging over his head by a very slender hair of Mercy. It is his chief
principle to espouse none, longer then it indulgeth his unhappy designs. He
apprehends Religion to be a thing dressed up in various Rites and Ceremonies,
only to terrify the ignorant vulgar into obedience; grant there be a God,
says he; does he require greater performances of us than our Nature will bear?
does he give us affections to indulge, and must not we gratify them? in making
the true use of the Creature, we adore the Creator; we praise the Cause by
doing Honor to the Effect; but he who thus argues, considers not that all
these Blessings are given with a limitation, lest we might be so wholly intent
in serving nature, that we might be forgetful of the Author of it; nor
remembers he that nothing is created perfect; that Adam was authorized by his
Maker to Treat his sense with any Tree of Paradise, but one; he comes to Town
innocent enough, but by often conversing with Pitch, he at last retains it
upon his Hands and Clothes; he is, for the most part a younger Brother, who
has spent what his Father left him to subsist by; or a Reformed soldier, who
having lived in the War, must when that Harvest is ended, perish in the
Autumn, if he use nor some pious fraud which will give him meat; in order to
live, he procure an interest in the Groom-Porters, or an Ordinary, and makes
these the Scenes of his future achievements: it is then his care to have
intelligence of young Gentlemen of fortunes, who arrive at Town, that being
known, he intrudeth into their company, and gains an interest, by obliging
them by loosing some small sum at first, as Fishers bait the waters over
night, with hopes of a large return for these charges in the morning; and thus
takes a severer use then the Jews do of those out of their own pale, if any of
them do not play, (which is very seldom seen;) he procures him a Mistress, who
certainly clappeth him, then he shareth with the Surgeon, who makes his
Cure more dilatory, and at the same time fluxes his body and his purse. And
now, upon the reputation of this good Office, his friend advances, (pretending
his servant out of the way) to borrow a trifling sum of 20 or 30 Guineys,
which if asked for by the Creditor after the forbearance of 6 or 7 months, he
is answered D' Dam-me Sir, you disoblige your friend, and you injure mine and
your own honor; but when at last he finds knowledge grows on him, he
takes a small occasion to quarrel with him, and so the League of Friendship is
broken; Foresight and Conduct he throws behind him; he is the firstborn of
fortune; this hour he is fraught with Gold, as if the grand Elixir were his
own: to morrow you shall meet him poorer then a Poet; then he is forced to take
sanctuary in the good nature of his Tailor or Shoemaker, who (though Jews
enough) will yet give him Credit perhaps for a Guiney, because after a good
hand he pays well; with this he marches to the Ordinary, in hopes to make
that two, he loses it, and at twelve in the night, in great despair he goes
homewards, in his way meets with and quarrels the Watch, has his head
broken, and is laid in the Counter to repent till day; now if his Reputation
ebbeth so, that he can have nothing upon Trust; and his fortune so bad, that
his benefactress in the City (who is commonly a Merchants wise) cannot help
him, because her Husband has the Key of the Cashbox; he then posteth to the
place of Execution, throws at all upon the Table, if his Cast be good he
sweepeth it, if bad, he owes them all; and if he be a very poor Rascal, his
loving Creditors remit him the sum, and kick him down the stairs. Upon these
disadvantages, do men play that have fortunes: themselves may easily be ruined,
(nay, it is forty to one if they are not,) but the others being already upon
the ground, can fall no lower; he often, when he is idle, makes his entry
gratis at the 5th Act of a Play; and there either picketh up a loving Female
whom he makes drunk, and then abuses 2 or 3 Bullies, who drown their cares
and sing the Sun down and up with impious Catches; Oaths are so frequent with
him, that he can as well not move his Eyes, as leave them; they are Complements
to his period, and they make them rounder: thus does he murder his precious
and immortal soul, which at last he expireth either from a bed of loathsome
diseases and rottenness, or from a disgraceful Gibbet with common Malefactors.

The Virtuoso
DId rise Gloriously, like light out of the Chaos, and dazzled the Eyes of the
astonished world, triumphing with a Masculine Gallantry over the impracticable
Notions of the Ancients; but now he seems not to pursue his advantage with
his primitive vigor, which has diminished his Fame a little; for whoever
treads the paths of Virtue, ought always to be in a forward motion, and by
equal degrees, as he advances in the way, to double his pace till he comes to
the Goal. The Great Chancellor Bacon was the Columbus, who led us to this
unknown America of new Philsophy, since him Cartesius and Gassendus have made
the greatest discoveries in her Continent, to whom we shall with all
willingness yield the Bays, if we consider the advantages we now enjoy from
their labor; for all Precepts, all Notions are given us from above to regulate
and direct our Actions; and the best of speculations are buried in oblivion, if
they do not produce their due effects; now it is most certain, that most, or
all of the principles of the Paripatetic Philosophy were mere Entia Rationis,
in intellectu tantum, which now give place to Entia realia, to true and
beneficial Experiments; doubtless it was the attempt of a most Heroic Virtue,
to storm the whole Circle of ancient Learning, so much reverenced by Men,
though for (...) other cause then its Antiquity and the persuasions they had
their Fathers esteemed it, as (...) old times they honored aged Oaks, because
they thought some God had kept his residence under their shades. It is
admirable how a body made up of (...) many jarring and disagreeing Elements (I
mean opposite opinions) should have obtained so much, and gained so mighty at
Ascendant over the affections of men of parts enough refined, that they should
pronounce him an Heretic, who should dare to contradict the meanest of its
Members; bearing it up against experience which ought to be out general
Mistress.

The English Literati have presented the World with Effects of Industry and
Ingenuity most worthy of their causes; they have improved the Art of Grinding
Glasses, which is a great advantage to Astronomy and Sea-affairs; by the study
of Micrography, and the Anatomy of insects, they have displaied a new Page of
the Book of Nature; they have by more exact scrutiny into humane bodies,
discovered the circulation and the source of many diseases, and have lately
obliged us with an experiment of the transfusion of the blood of one Animal
into another, which is never enough to be gratefully admired, though it has
the ill fortune to be little esteemed of now, but in ensuing ages, it will
certainly be crowned with its due applause; for it is always seen that great
Actions are denied their Bay's in that age in which they are born, because Envy
and prejudicate Malice, (the offsprings of the old Serpent) detract from them.
The Hypothesis of Water, and Air, (the advance of the latter being -- in the
Air-pump, a Noble mechanic invention) are very rational, and the inspection
into the Nature of Vegetables, has much advantaged Man in the support his body
will receive from them. Their progress in all Physical Learning has generally
been great; but upon Chemistry particularly they have spent much Labor, and
Oil. And here I must declare, that though I honor all the ingenious and
industrious, I cannot be reconciled to those who are in pursuit of that great
Magistery of Nature (as they call it) the Philosophers stone; it is wonderful
that they should consume so considerable a portion of their lives in the search
of that which they know not really to be in the Created substances: or if it
should exist, which has so mean an end as the bringing Gold into the World,
which is the efficient cause of all strises, and evils; whose converse the good
avoid, because it commonly turns even the souls of its votaries into its own
Hypostasis: how cruelly do they macerate themselves who search for this! how
they foment those scourges of our lives, Hope, and Fear! each minute brings
with it a promise of success which expiteth in Fumc; and at last when they are
just upon the Frontiers of bliss, and think the next minute to embrace their
wished for Elixit, they find in their Arm only a Caput mortuum, a Terra
Damnata, in which they have buried perhaps their whole fortunes, and the
greatest number of their most hopeful years, and all which at last arises from
the expense, is summed up in two, or three moral Corollaries; and they end
their days with this Prayer in their mouths, O si praeteritos reparet mihi
Jupiter annes.

Now, to return to the Virtuoso; when I consider what small returns of civility
we make to these ingenious persons who have obliged us so much, I can find our
coldness to have no other cause then what themselves do give, they so readily
admitting all persons into their Society, who will pay the Duties of the house,
though they know not the terms of Philosophy, make the multitude, who never see
the bottom of an affair, judge of all from their weakness; they commonly
entertain the company of a Coffee-house, with some refuse notions gleaned from
the ingenious, which they pronounce as Magisterially as if they had been
secretary's to Nature, and discourse as confidently of the harmony of her
parts, as a Country Musician plays who never learned his Gam-ut. From the
impertinencies of these pretenders, this Royal Corporation suffers, when it
ought rather to be encouraged, and caressed by all the Great and Learned for
all the great advantages it promises in the future; for it is most true, that
whosoever is a good Philosopher is a good man; because no one looks into the
recesses of Nature, who is not induced to extol the Author of it, and so
gratefully makes his return for the immense favors in serving and honoring
him who conferred them. Thus out of a Physical knowledge, a Moral one starts
and we see Science and Virtue have the same Basis. It is certain, Learning has
no Enemies but the Envious, and Ignorant, and even from these evils she reapeth
good; for from the detraction of the former, she raises repute, since nothing
but Virtue is the subject of Envy, and from the inveterateness of the latter,
she has a benefit too; since the praises of the unwise are reproaches, and
whosoever delights in them, wrappeth himself in the better half of his
Fools-coat; and E converso his reproaches must be praises.

The Divine
Has the powers of cursing, and absolving upon Earth; and therefore ought to
be reverenced as Gods immediate instrument. Now, though his injuries be many
from the disaffected, yet under these great pressures he ought with the Palm,
to lift up his head highest; and to exalt his voice like a Trumpet to maintain
war against all the Champions of Vice; every one bends his bow to the head,
and aims at the white of the Clergy's innocence, accusing them for covetous,
and loos-livers, not considering how many amongst them are neither: but grant
they were so, we ought, as men, to pardon them their errors; and as the
servants of Heaven we ought to reverence them: should we be struck so surely
from above for every little sin, as we do one another, our whole species had
before this time been utterly destroyed, and had left the World to be possessed
by sensitive beings; but I fear the great concern of these pretenders will
only prove that which takes not its source from a due principle, but a
sensual end; the desire of possessing the Churches revenues; if so, oh how
impious is their design! surely they that serve at the Altar ought to live by
it; if they who serve Earthly Kings, ought to live gloriously according to the
dignity of their Lords; then a fortiori, they ought to be in all things above
the rest, who attend upon the Monarch of Heaven, and Earth: but there is one
thing which would in all likelihood recover the Church, and that is, if the
Nobility and Gentry of the Nation could be persuaded to enter into Orders; by
their Alliance, and Interest, they might bulwark themselves against those who
would break in upon them, through the mightiest fastnesses of their Virtue: no
one can be too good to attend at the Altar: David was King and Priest, and so
were all his successors in Israel; and it was imputed to the Jews for sin, that
they chose their Priests out of the meanest of the people; for their persons
being held in contempt by those who were their equals before; their Office
comes to be so too, and the best parts also suffer when clouded with poverty.

Raro in tenui facundia panno. It is true, that Heaven lately showed its
displeasure to our Church, and seated Foreigners in its fattest Sees; yet it
was said to them, as to the Israelites when they went to possess Canaan, I send
you up to possess the Land of the Anakim, not for your own Righteousness, (for
you are a stiff-necked people) but to scourge the Nations which enjoy it. But
now we may plainly see how great the concern of Heaven is for the Church, since
the Ecclesiastical and politic Government are so united, that they both fall,
and both rise together; Many now shoot at her foundations, but I hope she is
built upon Zion which cannot be moved. The points of Toleration and
Comprehension have been so thoroughly discussed, that here I need but mention
their names, only I must say, I should be very unwilling to see either of them
obtain in this Kingdom. Now the Churchmen ought rather Magna vivere then Magna
loqui, and to show by their own practices, that the Precepts which they give
may be easily obeyed. The fat Bulls of Basan have prevailed now; but the
Almighty has only crowned them with success, to make them fall nobler
Sacrifices to his wrath.

The Physician
IS to the body what the Divine is to the soul, though he does not administer
his province with a parallel integrity; since his Knowledge is increased,
Diseases are so too; and our bodies by his applications are become less robust,
and vigorous; for by relying on them, our natural heat and radical humors are
impaired, which were our supports; and not seldom, the very remedy of one
Malady is the cause of another; but not only from this natural cause, but a
more inhumane one, resulteth as great an evil; for to swell his own profit, he
often prolongeth the Agonies, the Miseries of his poor Patient, making himself
seem to him a greater distemper then that he is already travailed with. From
those dry bones, which none who pass by, can think could live, he will extract
a lively and sparkling Essence to himself, and he will draw sweetness from the
most putrified Carcass, his Recipe whose barbarous Character fully speaks
his -- manners) produces two Pieces to himself; then if you should recover,
(which is more the effect of Providence then his Care,) the Apothecary, or
Surgeon gives with a cruel Bill, the lately cicatrized wound, a new gash;
he visits you as long as the pulse of your Purse beats high; but when he
finds it to decline, then, he says, you grow so well that you need not his
Art; or your disease is so desperate, that it cannot assist you; his thoughts
of God are not so as they ought to be; for by his so frequently viewing the
works of Nature, he is apt to misapply and attribute too much to second Causes.
He adoreth that great principle of Nature, Self-preservation, but neglects
that as great one of Christianity, to preserve his Brother; nay rather like a
Cannibal, he preyeth upon him: though I very much honor this profession, yet I
must not the abuses of it; though it be very necessary, yet the neglects, and
the ill ends of the professors of it, render it often dangerous: for it is most
certain, that they not seldom by their Clothes do transfer the disease of
one, to the other; and it is as sure that many suffer by their applying
Medicines to diseases, which plain Care, or Nature would work off. If his Fees
were more moderate, the Patient would receive a greater advantage, and himself
no detriment; for now, by the excess of them, the sick person cannot see him
above once in a day, and there being so many critical minutes in a disease, it
is impossible he should prescribe for them in his absence. Thus also the
inferior sort of the Nation will enjoy a benefit; for many who are lost for
want of advice, are able to give a Crown, who cannot afford a Guinny: it is in
fine, a profession, which employeth the industry and study of its Professors,
and charge them with the greatest duties and care, and therefore ought to be
most countenanced if it impose not too much upon the World.

The Lawyer.
FRom Adam to the Flood, the Law of Nature only reigned; but, when
wickednesses increased upon the surface of the earth, God laid his commands
against Murder and Blood, and afterward as the age degenerated Laws
increased, and became an Asylum to the Good, and a terror to the Bad. Since the
concord of brethren is rare, because every man prefers his own interest, Law
is appointed for the preservation of the world; therefore, the approaches to
it, ought to be easy, for if a Sanctuary be locked, of what advantage is it to
that miserable man who flies to its protection: the Law which God gave to his
peculiar people, which he often called stiff-neck'd and perverse, was comprised
within the narrow compass of two Tables; and this he thought enough to bridle
their greatest exorbitancies; the Twelve Tables, nay the Roman or Civil Law it
self governed a Nation the most Great, most Glorious, and most Adventrous in
the World; which without the impertinent, and indigested glosses of Bartolus
and Baldus, and others, is of very little volume; But we of this Nation are now
exposed by what should be our refuge; devoured by what should be our guard; the
Rules of our Law growing into so monstrous a body, that like the famed Dragon,
they devour daily a considerable Member of the Virgin justice. Every Term
brings forth a collection of new Reports; and every Judgment sows the seed
of a new strife; betwixt the Pleaders and the Attorneys, the Prize which the
parties contend for is shared; the latter of which, is a generation of men so
Magisterial where they live, and so oppressing, and withal, so numerous, that
at last, with the too much injured Client, they will devour the Lawyer too: who
certainly has the same ground to prefer a Bill in Parliament against them,
for invading his province, as the Physician had against the Apothecary; how
unhappy are since we under the wings of a pretended justice all enormities are
committed! She now like a rich Heiress is bought and sold, and that which
should oppose deceit, is it self now become the greatest, so that Photinus's
principle in Lucan seems to be the Lawyer's.

Jus, and fas multos faciunt Ptolemae nocentes. The poor Countryman when with
his Hat in his hand, he has entreated his Counselor to let him buy his
misery, is after two or three years attendance, and the charge of witnesses and
journeys, dismissed with the loss of his cause, (so that it may be said, the
Law, like Rome in her grandeur, suis ipsa viribus ruit,) and after a seeming
trouble is told, that his own mistaken instructions were the ruin of his
affair. But those who have long been tossed in these troublesome waters find
that the safest way to an Haven is to Fee his Antagonist's Counsel, as well as
his own; the conveyances which we make now are scarce contained in many skins
of Parchment; and often for the mistake of one word, the whole fabrique is
ruined, though it be evidently contrary to the intent of the Conveyer. Though
these days are more adorned with Gold; yet those nearer the Norman Conquest,
and before it, more resembled the Golden ones. For then; a few Rhithmes
composed by an honest well meaning Bard, served to pass away the greatest
possessions: the hearts of men were sure more honest, and their designs more
honorable, when it was enough to write.

I give this Land from me, and mine,
To thee, and thine: --
Witness
Meg, Maud, and Margery,
And my young Son Harry.
And to show this is in sooth,
I bite this green wax with my Tooth.
The ways to prevent suits were to appoint a Register in every County, where
the Estates of every Lord and Freeholder should be entered, that so the
Purchaser may understand for what he trafsiqueth.

It would also prove much more easy for all, if the Parliament would enact
that a sum should be difaulked from the ordinary Fees of the Lawyer, and that
no cause should depend in any Court above a time which they should praefix;
this would very much remedy the dilatoriness of their Processes: It rouseth my
spleen to see men so infatuated, and so prone to gratify revenge, that they
will ruin themselves to advance people, many of whom are so great strangers to
fence, if diverted from the paths they run in, that if one desires to be
resolved of the reason of a judgment or decree, they tell you it is according
to their Books; by which, doubtless, they are frequently very much imposed on.
They receive the placita of their Sages with greater reverence then the
Ancients did their Oracles, which they thought were inspired from Heaven; and
attribute a greater infalibility to them then those of the Roman persuasion in
Ecclesiastic affairs to the Pope; forgetting that as humane, they may err in
their opinions; setting them up above experience, from which Osbourne said
truly, King Charles received better Precepts then his Father from Buchanan. In
fine, we may know them to be the soul of dissension, and rapine; because like
the issue of the Dragon's teeth sown by Cadmus, they begin to bite and embroile
the Nation as soon as they tread her Stage.

The Poet
VErse to the brave, is like the Trumpet to the Warrior: it animates them to
greater exploits. Ode Pindarique inscribed the resurrection.
Mr. Cowley declares its great use in the following Stanza.

Not winds to Voyagers at Sea,
Not showers to Earth more necessary be,
(Heavens vital seed cast on the womb of earth
To give the fruitful year a birth)
Then Verse to Virtue, which can do
The Midwis's office, and the Nurses too;
It feeds it strongly, and it clothes it gay,
And when it dies, with comely pride
Embalmes it, and erects a Pyramid.
That never will decay
Till Heaven it self shall melt away,
And naught behind it stay.
It is reported of Alexander, that in all his expeditions he made Homer his
companion; and I verily suppose the Panegyricks of those dead Heroes inspired
him with the briskest thoughts of emulation. Poetry has been Reverenced in all
ages since the very first dawn of knowledge; which respect has certainly had
its source from the Oracles delivering of their answers, and the ancient
Philosophers setting forth their opinions in Meeter. The high sentiments which
the Latins entertain for it, appear by their giving the Professors of it the
honorable Title of Vates. The Bards and Chroniclers in the Isles of Britain
and Ireland have been in former times even adored for the Ballads in which they
extolled the Deeds of their forefathers; and since the ages have been refined,
doubtless, England has produced those, who in this way have equaled most of
the Ancients: and exceeded all the Moderns. Chaucer rose like the morning Starr
of Wit, out of those black mists of ignorance; since him, Spencer may
deservedly challenge the Crown; for though he may seem blameable in not
observing decorum in some places enough, and in too much, in the whole,
countenancing Knighterrantry; yet the easy similitudes, the natural
Pourtraicts, the so refined and sublimated fancies with which he has so
bestudded every Canto of his subject will easily reach him the Guerdon; and
though foam may object to him that his Language is harsh and antiquated; yet
his design was noble; to show us that our language was expressive enough of our
own sentiments; and to upbraid those who have indenizon'd such numbers of
foreign words; since in this way so many have excelled, that we can give the
Crown to no one, but the rest must be manifestly injured: yet they must pardon
me if I tell them that they seem to have degenerated by turning their styles to
light and insignificant Sonnets, and scurrilous Burlesque, and offensive
doggrel; which last way of Drollery has so much obtained now, that they doubt
not to abuse all serious things in it; nay even to make the lofty expressions
of the Prince of Poets to seem ridiculous. They have not only done this but
some have turned that which used to charm our thoughtful heads, and to
persuade our distempered spirits into gentle slumbers, by easy and natural
softness, into a rough Mystery and Art; they strive to bring wit, which is of
so unknown a Nature, that like the wind no one knows whence it is, under
logical Notions; arguing syllogistically and troubling the world with Volumes
of what is impertinent to it; that they may advance their own names, so turning
our delight into trouble. It Is a pity that men of these abilities should not
ennoble some of those great subjects which our Nation yields: but should
spend their time in praising an Eye, or Feature, which they may see exceeded at
any Country Wake. By this it is more evident that we have deviated from those
paths which did lead our Ancestors to fame, and are become so effeminate, that
like Sardanapalus, we spin amongst the Women, who by their Artifices have so
wholly gained us, that we speak or think of nothing else; as commonly through
our whole Malady those objects detain our thoughts most, which affected them at
the beginning of it, and were its causes, since the stage which used to
represent general vices is come to reflect on particulars; it self, whilst it
injureth the reputation of any one, becomes the greatest vice. Momus is not
allowed to speak of all at all times. Since all men are naturally prone to ill,
whoever is not purged himself, cannot accuse another.

By these ways no Reformation is wrought, but great animosities arise. They who
have faculties this way, ought to employ them in supporting the Pyramids of
ancient virtue, or building new ones to it. Since the Sword defends the Pen, it
ought to adorn the sword; since the Laurels of the brave and valorous do defend
the Muses from the Thunder of their Eenemies, and make them enjoy, in all
tranquillity, the shady Groves, and refreshing Rills of their Parnassus; they
ought in grateful lays to transmit the achievements of so great Benefactors
to all posterity.

Vivitur ingenio Caetera mortis erunt. Woman,
THough Man was made Lord over all beings, and his Empire stretched it self
over the whole Globe, though his Imperial redence was in a place which
administered all things to his pleasure, and seemed to be the abridgement and
quintessence of the Universe; yet he thought his enjoyments imperfect, till he
had an help correspondent to his affections, and a fit object for those
faculties with which he was endowed. For this cause therefore, woman was
Created out of himself, who seems to have been his best part; and like that
small essence which Chemists extract out of a large, and massive Substance:
therefore Man having by his converse with the causes of all things gathered
knowledge, is sensible of what they of this Sex are capable; and fearing lest
they should Rival him in his Government, imposes on them, by persuading them
that their faculties are not receptive of Arts, and rough Virtues; and by this
stratagem consineth them by the administration of a narrow Province, bounded by
the walls of their Court, and Garden, whilst he is exercised in the Nobler
affairs of the Court and Schools, when it is clear that their inclinations are
better then his, and their resolutions greater: for it is observed, they are
generally more Virtuous and Devout then we; and when they do deviate to Vice,
they are more hardened and persevering in it; the great actions in which they
have born a part, speaks the excellency of their Natures. The Amazons (if we
believe story) have excelled in War. To Sappho we owe the invention of the
sweetest kind of Verse in Lirique Poetry. Lucretia by her resolution has raised
her self a deathless Monument. And Judith in Sacred Writ is remembered with
great Glory. All these examples sh^^ the greatness of their parts; which while
they do not employ, but are content to forgo all the pleasures with which
knowledge would present them; they seem to have made a Salique Law to bind
themselves. Did they but consider what an ascendant they have over the souls of
men, and that though they were the source of all our miseries, we should still
adore them: as also those great advantages outdull, and phlegmatique
constitutions own from the purifying flames of Love: they would exert their
powers, and launch out of those dark Regions of ignorance in which they sleep,
into the bright and Sunny Countries of Knowledge. I offer this, not (...)
encourage them to rebel against Man, whom God has made the^ head; but to
advise them to serve the World under some other Noble Character, and not only
to devote themselves to the uses (...) Generation. In no Country so many of
this fair Sex, as in England exceed in Beauty and Wit. The first of which, the
Temperateness of our Climate does much advance, which is in so just a
proportion betwixt heat and cold, that it injoyeth the benefits of both, and
feels the inconveniences of neither. If we go toward the South, we find the
People still a degree more swarthy; if toward the North, more brawny and
gross; built to receive the rude assaults the winds breed there, though of a
complexion generally clear enough; that they are ingenuous above those of other
Countries is evident from their prudent management of Oeconomical affairs, for
on them with us they all rely; which is a great Trust, since the welfare of
the State depends upon the health of its Members; the reason of this is, the so
frequent and familiar converse they are allowed with men within the bounds of
Modesty, which, no people, the French excepted, admits of to such a degree. And
certainly in their so great strictness to this Sex, the Italians (those grand
Masters of Pollticks) do very much err. For besides the injustice they act in
depriving them of that liberty which God, and Nature allows them; it is
impossible they should ever become more virtuous by being consigned to the
melancholy of a Cloister which to deceive the idle hours, must indulge and
administer loose thoughts, which with God are equivalent with (...); when, it
they conversed in the world, they might improve themselves in Knowledge; and
the diversions they would receive from the company of others, would keep them
from thinking ill so frequently; and Modesty from acting it. And it is most
sure, that if ever they can free themselves from those superstitious Fetters of
mistaken Devotion; the Flames which have been so long smothered, will burst out
with such an impetuosity, and violence, that they will devour all inclinations
to Modesty and Virtue, and will never be extinguished in the deepest Abysses of
carnal enjoyments.

The Maid
IS Natures Richest Cabinet locked; who yet ardently desires to display those
Glories she contains, and thinks she has not the perfect enjoyment of
them, if not communicated; when she has attained to the use of her Organs of
Speech, the first word she utters after Dad, and Mam, is Husband; who from
that time reigns in her thoughts so much that she makes it her chief end to
captivate him; but if her Sta^^ have so little care of her as to let her pass
her younger years single rather than to hang longer on the Tree, the too ripe
fruit will fall to any man. She, like an expert General, chooses rather to use
stratagem in storming a Fort, then wholly to rely upon her strength, be it
never so great; for I never saw that Woman, how fair soever, that was not
guilty of those innocent frauds of a patch, or wash, hoping from them for
greater accessions of Beauty. In her discourse she commonly traduces the rest
of her Sex, and tacitly gives a rise to applaud her self, which, (though she
deserves not) you must do with the greatest of your powers; for in the state
of Love, as well as in the civil one, he is the best Politician who can best
dissemble. You cannot imagine what near approaches you make to her affections
by these ways, and how really she is taken with you, though you describe her by
all the impossibilities of Poetry: when she might soon be undeceived; would she
with an impartial Eye consult her Glasses. But yet this Humor, ingraffed in
her Nature (which certainly proceeds from the want of a true use of her
reason,) if it seems to increase with her age; for even those whom many years
have seen Virgins, are more vain then the younger ones; and are not to be
convinced, but that the same luster inhabiteth their eyes, which resided in
them 30 years before. Hence it is that you see them so sollicitous to sill up
those furrows which time has plowed, and to supply the places of those Teeth
which years have ruined, with sorreign ones, and to burnish those eyes which
Sixty Suns have dimmed. Her discourse is replenished with the Histories of
those she might have had; what proper men she refused, and upon what account
she slighted them; and in the conclusion, she will torment your ears with a
doleful Sonnet, or heart-melting direful address, composed by some of her
crossarm'd Lovers, who flourished in Poetry above half a Century before Ben
Johnson. She now, (like the old worn Sinner when his powers have left him,)
voweth practical Chastity, though her thoughts often transgress, and run into a
speculative obscenity. She commonly is at enmity with her elder Brothers wife,
who seems to grudge her her Annuity; but now she serves for no other use but
to caress those Babies to whom she is a great Aunt; and to give her young
Neices instruction; for their behavior when they are wooed. To mention all her
impertinence, were a labor as endless as her own discourse, and altogether as
troublesome; I shall therefore Land you upon a new Scene, and present her to
your view in the state of Matrimony.

The Wife.
SInce the impertinencies of the Maid always continue, and grow up in the
Wife, if she be not guided by a natural prudence, he who paints one of them
gives you the full draught of the other: I think it therefore not extrinsique
to my Province to lay down some rules for the choice of a Wife; in which great
circumspection ought to be used, since by this Union a man either builds his
happiness, or misery during life. If my Friend prove false, I can strike a
League with another; if my Servant be unfaithful, I can change him; but though
my Wife prove so, she must remain mine. Matrimony is a Gordian Knot, which no
Alexander can cut. He who intends to enter a double state ought not to choose a
Woman only for her Pedigree; if other circumstances are wanting, especially
Virtue, his Election is lame; for what was it at first that ennobled her Line
but that? and if that Pillar fail, her Escucheon must needs fall. If her
Relations are poor, nothing can fall more unhappily to him, for she will still
draw them to be warmed at his fire: Like the Courtier who is not satisfied to
beek himself only in the Sunshine of his Sovereign's favor, but will also
bring his Kindred within the warmth of his rays; so that whosoever matches
here, espouseth not one, but a whole Family. When the Head of the house falls,
his dependants by consequence partake of his fortune, and they certainly must
be very numerous; the Setting-sun casts the longest shadow. Her pride also will
make the blood of her Children run high, which will be their great unhappiness,
when they must submit to the universal allay of poverty. What can be more
despicable than a Title without the support of an Estate? a man's honor bids
him soar to high things, his want forces him to the meanest actions: he is,
like a bird upon the wing, to mount whilst a leaden Plummet tied to his Leg
keeps him down.

2. Let not Beauty alone allure any man without internal, or external
endowments: She who can boast nothing but good outward features, is like an
house adorned without with various Pillars, and Pillasters of several Orders,
exquisite Cornices, and neat Carvings; but within naked, and without either
Orchard, Garden, or Wood: this may treat your eye a while, but it neither
administers to the delight of your mind, nor the necessities of your body. She
will be a Magnet to draw as well the noble Steel to your house as the ignobler
Iron; most comers inquire for you, but be assured their visit is to my Lady. No
Woman's virtue in the World (if young) can be so strong a Fort to her, but it
may be rendered to the perpetual showers of flattery, and complement, which
play upon it. If she yield to a noble conqueror, you have the honor to march
out with your horns in your pocket and flying colors, but never hope to be
re-instated in the place you had in her breast.

3. Let not Riches alone draw any man; for thus he enslaves himself, first to
the Gold, and then to the imperious humor of one he hates; who still plagues
him with repeating that accession his fortunes received by her, though she
commonly has the chief hand in spending it: whoever then stands thus, must
confess himself to be a slave, though bound with a golden Chain, and that the
fettered Captive in the deepest Dungeon is more free than he, because however
his body is secured, he reserves the Empire of his mind to himself alone.

Aim not too much at an Heiress, for her defects are notable, and many, Nature
commonly sending her into the world rude and unfinished, because she sees
Fortune standing ready at her Entry, to polish and adorn her with her gifts; in
which the Justice of Heaven in the distribution of blessings to men is evident,
since all Graces never meet in one Creature, but every one has something
different which renders it agreeable to the rest: But if your stars seem to
direct you this way, you must not, (nor truly can you) address to her in the
usual way; for would it not be very gross to assure one who is crooked, lame,
thin-faced, il-eyed, that she is fair, beautiful and alluring, but you must
bid fair for her to those who menage her (yet within compass, if you would be a
saver by your Merchandise, for she is commonly a most extravagant spender) and
then you are sure to succeed, especially if she be in the hands of a mercenary
Father-in-law.

4. Nor a let a quick Wit, a good assurance, a good mien, nor the additions of
singing, playing, dancing be motives to affection, for they enhance not her
value more, but rather make her higher. Whoever has one, or all of these, and
wants Virtue, is like a body well shaped, yet without an arm, a leg, or eye.
But since we may not hope to find all these accidents centred in one Subject,
more than all Arts and Sciences in one Brain: Virtue is to be chosen naked,
before all the other gaily dressed and embroidered. This fair creature is a
portion of her sell; it is she who fastens a blessing to all her Husbands
undertakings; it is she who though she brings not Riches, yet gathers them; it is
she who presents him with fair and chaste Children to adorn his Table, and
support his age; it is she who gives her King loyal Subjects, and her Country
good and just Patriots; it is she who in her Beloved's absence shuts her gates
to all foreigners, and at his return recreates, and caresses him with chaste
embraces, and heals him with balmy kisses; it is she who by her prudence sills
his Granaries within, whilst he supplies her from without; it is she who feeds
the Poor, and clothes the Naked; it is she who loves his friends, and hates not,
but prays the conversion of his enemies; it is her breast which receives his
cares, and her lips give him words of joy

Let no one choose one deformed (if he can avoid it) for it is observed the
mind is always of the same shape. A good Inn has very seldom a bad
Sign-post. Nature never impresses an ill mark upon her good pieces. This
Antiquity knew, when it said, Cave sis ex eo quam Natura sigillaverit. Lose not
any other material circumstance in one, for another that is fairer; for the
first thing a man neglects in his Wife is her beauty. If it be thought
convenient let her be past the Smallpox, for then one sees the worst of her.
Let her be well-shaped, for the neatest built Ship sails best. Above all let
her be of the same faith with her Husband; for how can they concur in the
menageing of their affairs, who disagree in the way of worshipping their God? If
to virtue Heaven will add externa bona, outward goods, be thankful: if it does
not, be not too sollicitous to obtain them.

The Widow,
EIther hoping for better fortune, if her Husband has been bad, or if good,
desiring to repeat those pleasures he has been author of to her, is always
ready to hold out her hand for new manacles. The Arts by which she menageth her
designs are these: she gives out her sums to be very great, her demeasns
large, and her years few, well knowing that no man of fortunes will come on
unless upon one of these accounts. The same of these draws perhaps a Lord to
her, who protests by her eyes, an Oath with him most sacred, that he loves and
honors her above all the world, that she alone disposes his fate, that it is
in her breast to pronounce him the happiest, or most miserable of men; he
extols a Complexion which her washes gave, and swears he adores her eye as
radiant, which perhaps is bloodshot; He tells her it sends forth darts, which
like to the Pelian Spear, have the power of killing, but like it too, it ought
to exercise that of reviving: How long! how long (Madam says he) is it your
pleasure I shall continue in these torments! I were happy might I fall a victim
to your graces, for the glory of the action would sweeten the agonies, and
convulsions of my death! But oh! let me not live only to yield my heart a prey
to keen and tormenting Vultures! But when by these false ways he has drawn
the weak Creature to an assent, and finding the baggs not to be of that Volume
which he expected, his love vanishes, and he leaves her in those real Ecstasies
which before he feigned.

This amor is succeeded perhaps by that of the powdered Gallant, who professes
and vows to the same degree, if not higher; He says all that Oroondates could
to Statira, or Celadon to Astrea, or Zanger to the Hungarian Queen,
superadding, that if the World were his own, he should not have the confidence
to ask her to be Empress of it, since it would be so far below her merit: but
when he also like a valiant Chevalier has gained the Castle, and finding the
Outworks not worth the holding, he marches off with whole vollies of Oaths,
cursing his hard fortunes.

Now after these Ambassadors of Love, and many more of the same Mould have had
their Audiences of Congee, she grows more subtle, and so less credulous, and
now undeceived, she finds her Eyes have not half that luster which her Gold
has, and that that, not she has been their Diana. Being then thus deluded,
she grows desperate, and is resolved to embrace the first who offers himself;
Now he, (perhaps a younger brother) who before went no farther than the
Drawing Room, or Antichamber, is admitted into her Cabinet, and is a jewel she
is sure no body will envy her, and therefore proceeds more freely; and it is a
very pleasant Scene to behold their carriage. He resolves thus with himself.

By Heavens I Will tell her boldly it is she:
Why should she shamed or angry be,
To be beloved of me?
Mr. Cowley. His way is compendious, he tells her he cannot say much, but
Damhim he loves her, and if she loves him, why should they not make a match
of it. And by this brisk address, (which is certainly more manly and becoming
than the other) he carries the Prize, and makes as good use of it. Thus the
Widow imitates that Fisherman, who having baited his hook well, angles all day
in hopes of a Salmon, but at last he catches a Trout, which though it may not
satisfy his avarice so well, yet it does his appetite.

The Life of Theodatus.
I Shall not much illustrate my Subject in laying before you the large Table of
Theodatus's Ancestors; Let it suffice to acquaint you that he was well
descended; nor will I give you the time of his Birth, or any long relations of
his Country (you may fancy him a Citizen of Vtopia, or Nova-Atlantis,) since
the only design of this Essay is to present in his person the Idea of an
exactly accomplished Gentleman. I shall therefore trace him through every Stage
of his Life, and begin at his first years, when he laid the foundation of his
future glories.

Know then, that at the accustomed years he was sent to School, and there
proceeded in the same method with the rest of his Country, till he had attained
to a good knowledge in the Latin and Greek Tongues; from whence about the
fourteenth year of his age he was removed to the University, where he with a
great deal of pleasure, and no less serious industry addressed himself to the
Muses; well knowing, that their favors, as well as those of other Mistresses,
were not to be obtained but by many and hard services. According to the Custom
of the place he began his studies in Philosophy, he soon knew the most knotty
maxims, and unriddled the greatest Sophismes, and Subtleties of Logic; he had
considered, and laid up all the precepts of the Moralists, he was acquainted
with all the principles of Physics, and had comprehended all those notions of
the Metaphysician, which he could adjust to the Rule of Right Reason. When he
had thoroughly considered the natures of all these, he found that they were sine
Idea's, that they commended the ingenuity of the ancient Schools and Porch;
that perhaps they might frame his head to discourse or argue plausibles, but
that they were too speculative to be useful to him in the necessities and
emergencies of life: therefore he left off to intend those studies as he was
wont, (yet he did not wholly lay them aside) and applied himself to History,
and the most useful parts of Mathematics, as Geometry, and those two main
Pillars of History, Chronology and Geography; he knew that from these noble
Records he might gain useful Rules of living, and not such as the Ethics of
the Philosophers give upon trust, but such as have been confirmed by many great
examples; that he might here see the several ends of Virtue and Vice, the
encouragements of the one, and the infamy of the other; he might here read the
praises of heroic and just Cato's, and view the Monuments built to their
Memories; and here behold the misfortunes and fates of ambitious Caesar's and
Pompey's, the Panegyricks of chaste and virtuous Lucretia's, and the infamy of
lacivious and wanton Julia's; here the redoubted actions of those mighty souls
who have fought in their Countries defense, and fallen victims in securing its
Altars and Gods will make him emulous, and raise him to affect equal attempts,
whilst the ill success of those who have invaded the rights of others, makes
him to detest their practices; here he might see that truth would exert her
self, and that those who have suffered unjustly would be revenged: In fine he
might see Virtue crowned, and Vice punished. Now what greater argument or
motive can there be than this, to embrace the one, and abhor the other?

From Mathematics he learnt that all bodies had longitude, latitude, and
profundity, that the two first qualities were obvious to every eye, but the
latter was only to be seen by search, which he applied himself to, and would
never be satisfied till he had learnt to value every thing as it really was,
and not as what it seemed to be; he, like other men, was not contented with a
Problem which showed him such a thing was, but looked for Theoremes, which
told him how, and why: In sine, he found such demonstrations in this Learning,
that he could never be satisfied till he had the same in every thing, which he
gained by examining its privatest recesses, and corners; so by this means he
became so acquainted with the constitution of all things, that only Nature her
self could be more so. Having remained here till about the 18th year of his
age, where his amiable mien and generous carriage had gained him the applause
of all: he passes to the Colleges of the Law to acquaint himself with the
sanctions and constitutions of his own Nation; being satisfied that no man
could serve the Body Politic under any Character unless he fully understood
its humors and complexions. He sixed himself closely to these studies, (though
he did not neglect the healthful exercises of his body) and about the 22th year
of his age he attained to a full knowledge of them. At this time he left his
Native Country, and passed into those foreign parts which were most famed for
Civility, Arts and Arms; and here he did not, as the youth of his time, pass
cursorily through a Country, and gaze only upon its Steeples, and fine Houses,
but like the Wise and Eloquent Ulysses.

(...), Hom. Odyss. ^. He of each Country had the Cities seen,
And understood the Manners of her Men.
He made useful remarques upon their Laws and Customs, he inquired to what
studies they were most addicted, how they were provided and situated for War
and Peace, how they stood affected to their Neighbors; he searched into their
Military Discipline, their way of Training and Exercising their Soldiery, and
their Arts of fortifying Towns, Citadels, and Castles; he got an acquaintance
with the chief Statesmen, and the learned in all Professions in all Countries
through which he travailed, and if he could, he made himself known to their
several Princes, and when he thought fit, he settled a Correspondence with most
of these; he made himself Master of all those Languages which his Country
affected; he marked the humors of every Coast, and observed their way of
Complement, and Address, their method in business, and their proceedings in
Justice; there was nothing which could adorn his mind that he passed. Thus
fraught with all manner of knowledge about his 25th year he returned, and
received with their admiration, the love of all his Countrymen.

He never enterprized any thing in which that excellent prudence did not show
it self, which had taught him to consult well, to deliberate maturely, to judge
and determine rightly, to conduct and execute resolutely. He knew this virtue
was the square and rule of all affairs, and the only guide to living well: He
used to say, she was with reason enthroned above all the other Virtues, and
that the Scepter which she swayed as their Empress did of right belong to her:
for without her government Justice her self might be misapplyed, and become
dangerous to her Clients; Fortitude would be no more then a brutish Valor,
and the strong man would kill and slay without the consideration of a good
Cause, and Temperance might degenerate into a superstitious forbearance of all
sustenance, and necessary support, and so make the practiser of it accessory to
his own ruin, by her we know what, to choose as good, and convenient for life,
and what to reject as superfluous and hurtful to it; by her we have the
pleasure to be assured that we have not failed in the right using of the means,
however our business may succeed ill. He would never judge of any thing by its
success, since he saw the best men unfortunate, and the worst rewarded: He
would never trust too much to any worldly power, since Fortune or Fate (use the
words as you please) did maintain an Empire so sovereign and arbitrary over the
best laid Counsels, and most cautiously contrived designs; and since her
inconstancy is such, that that man whom she has raised to such a height this
day that he seems her Darling, to morrow she makes him so miserable, that he
may seem to be her sport and scorn. It is she who sports her self with our most
sage contrivances, and laughs in the face of the most serious-looking
Councellor, and tells him his hopes are vain: It is she who tells the Chemist
after the labor of many years he shall never gain his Elixir, and breaks his
Crucible before his face, even in that moment when he thought her greatest
Artillery could not batter his designs: It she who advances an Achitophel or
Machiavel to honor, to affront Virtue. In fine, she is an Ocean without
limits, and will suffer none to be put to her but by Prudence, whose Character
take in the words of Charron the Parisian, Toutesfois elle est de tell poids,
and necessite, qu'elle seule peut beaucoup: and sans elle tout le rest n'est
rien; non seulement les richesses, les moyens, la force. Vis consilii expers
mole ruit sua. Men's una sapiens plurium vicit manus. Et multa, quae natura
impedita sunt consilio expediuntur, etc. Charron en Live. III. Dela sagesse.

He took not his Religion from his Father, or Country, (as most do) nor sucked
it in with the milk of his Mother, but examined all Faiths thoroughly, and chose
that which he thought most consonant to reason, and which gave the greatest
Honors to the Divinity. He never sordidly gave his assent to any Opinion out of
fear, or for any other consideration but Truth. He would not say a Piece was
good because it was Titian's, or Tintarett's, unless he found something in it
which convinced his judgment of its worth. In conversation he was always
courteous and affable, not imposing his opinion upon any Magisterially or
Dogmatically; but if it admitted of any dispute he calmly discoursed it, and
was glad to be informed of truth from any mouth. When he saw any one not of
equal experience with him he was pleased to inform him, and side with him
against those rougher natures who would play upon him, and hope to raise the
repute of their own parts upon his simplicity. He was far from the pedantry of
those who vaunt their knowledge and relate their Voyages in all Company: He was
not one who would make himself known at first, nor told them all he knew
presently. He was long in making a friendship, but when it was once ratified,
no body was more true than he, and he would be always sure to make Virtue its
Basis. Nothing he detested more than their humor who boast of their Vices, who
tell when they are drunk, or when at a Bawdy House, and said, since Nature
commanded those offices to be done in the dark, it is impudence above
comparison to vaunt of them in public. No one was juster than he both to
himself, and to his Neighbor. He said, that the rise of all justice is from
the subduing of a man's appetite, and unless he had made his reason
Plenipotentiary over it to bring it to due obedience, he could not without
blushing rebuke any man for his crime.

His constancy of Temper was great; he received all outward things with an even
indifferency; his soul was never elevated by the caresses of prosperity above
its genuine temper, nor dejected by the frowns of adversity below it. His
valor (which is properly the strength of the soul, as fortitude is of the
body) gave him an assurance to meet all difficulties (however great) with a
generous and severe gallantry, and made him always ready to atchieve those
things which others would have fled from. This Virtue is of proof against all
accidents; it arms a man cap-a-pee against all, even the roughest assaults.
Munimentum imbecilitatis humanae inexpugnable: quod qui circumdedit sibi,
securus in hac vitae obsidione perdurat. Senec. This Virtue (as some fancy) is
not only confined to the Military Profession; for however that may be more
pompous and gaudie, yet it is not so genuine and perfect. For I pray tell me,
is not he of a greater courage who can with patience receive the sharpest
accosts of a Chronical disease, who can open his breast, and uncover his head
to the fiercest darts of misery without repining, only because his inward light
tells him he ought not to spurn against the will of Heaven; then he who is led
into an Army perhaps by a desire of revenge, or of prey, and is forced to
sight, because if he does not, there are so many to witness his cowardice. This
(if it be a Virtue) is common to all, to the King and Peasant, nay even to
beasts too, and has not the least principle or tincture of truly Moral
Philosophical valor. The other is not an inconsiderate rashness, but before it
enterpriseth any thing, it considers the reasonableness and justice of it; it
runs not suddenly into danger, but only defends it self, and when it does
assault, it is upon a good and just account; nor yet does it despise any, even
the smallest danger, but hinders it, (if it can) from growing greater. It
also holds it self obliged to defend the injured and oppressed, and in their
service will sacrifice it self freely. He always said they much to blame, who
gave way to the humor of an impudent vaunting Thraso, who by an insolent
deportment, and sierce countenance, or high expression thinks to acquire the
name of valiant and brave, and to be the Cock of all them with whom he
converses; for by yielding to him one gives him to believe he really is that,
which a brisk carriage would assure him he is not; for he resembles a fierce
and swelled billow which comes rolling down amain, as if it would overwhelm
the rock which stands in its way, but by its firmness it is broken, and
submissively glideth away at its feet.

As his Prudence, his Justice, his Valor were great; so also was his
Temperance. He was afraid to drink too deep of pleasure lest he might surfeit
and vitiate his Palate. He said he was most pleased when Heaven allayed his
joys with some sorrows, and that it would be the greatest affliction to have
none. He knew those who eat greedily might be satiate, but not satisfied, and
knew it was the curbing of his appetite which kept it at once in obedience and
in health. He always avoided extravagancie in apparel, and said the man should
adorn that, not that him. He used severely to declare against drinking, and
said that a Drunkard suffered many ways; for besides his laying himself open
to the rogueries, and over-reachings of those with whom he conversed, every man
that he met might discover his nature by the face, as when one sees a Bush he
knows wine is there; He could not be reconciled to those who by wine thought to
advance their natural fancies, and enrich their sentiments: He said in the heat
of it a man might say extraordinary things, but yet he might have said those
when he was sober better if his modesty would have given him leave, but in that
condition one vents all, even the most extravagancies. It most certainly ruins
all a man's parts as well as his body; for however he may have some fancies
remain which may make him acceptable in ordinary converse, yet the main is
gone: as when Palace is burnt, there may here and there perhaps remain a piece
of a gilded roof, or an embroidered Canopy, they may serve to show what
Glories have been there, but they will neither defend the unfortunate owner
from Rain or Snow. He said, every man, when he was allured by any pleasure,
ought to consider not how far he desired to enjoy it, but how far he ought; and
that he was sure it was a greater and more transcendent pleasure to subdue an
inordinate affection then to gratify it, that it took off the boylings of our
fevourish blood, and rendered us more capable of more solid joys in those calm
and temperate Regions of eternal bliss, when our souls are divested of their
grosser vehicles. He was always more solicitous for his Countries good than
his own, and always preferred that to his own advantage. He always looked
upon the King as his head; between which and the members there ought to be a
good correspondence, because one cannot subsist without the other. He was not
of the mind of those Courtiers who serve their Prince only for reward, but he
thought it reward enough to serve him. His counsels were always wholesome, and
healing, and he always was against invading any man's right: He advised that
his Country might be always prepared, and ready to take up arms; for he said,
that either hindered an Invasion or a Surprise; nay, he said they ought to make
peace with swords in their hands, for so they might command good terms. He not
only by these ways gained the affections of his King (but what is seldom seen)
of the Court also. He never censured nor judged any man's actions unless upon
very good grounds; for he knew he ought not to do it unless he was free from
all those vices he accused him of; and he was sure that every one sets himself
to examine the actions of such a man, and makes every his least fault of
greater bulk than really it is; for if Ishmael's hand was up against every man,
it was but just that every man's hand should be up against him. He was not of
those who extolled their own actions above justice, and think all fancy,
ingenuity and judgment to be confined to them, or their relations; for he knew
they raised the expectations of all for greater things than they could
perform; but he gave Virtue her due applause where ever he found her, and was
so far from traducing, or detracting from any man, that he sought to hide his
faults, and conceal his infirmities: He knew the world too well either to
confide in it, or love it: if he had any thing that we call a blessing
conferred upon him he took it en passant, and valued it but as a little
convenience which might support him in his way to Jerusalem above. He never
affected Honor or Preserment, which he said were Mounts which indeed yielded a
fair prospect, whilst the rays of the Kings favor played about them; but if
they did shine once another way, a man would certainly break his neck down. He
never did any thing for applause, which he said no wise man would be delighted
with, since it rose from the people who are Judges of nothing that is generous,
or brave. When he grew aged, he could do that which few or none of his time
could; he could take a prospect backward of his whole Life with a great deal of
delight; he saw no vices in it which could render it hilly, or black, but all
fair Lawns, spruce Meadows, and gentle Rivulets. It was his desire to have no
costly Marble over his body but only a plain Stone with this Inscription.
Theodatus from Earth to Heaven's removed.
Who loved fair Virtue, and of her was loved.
He said the greatest Emperor ought to have no longer an Epitaph, because if
his Virtue would not build him a Monument which might transmit his name to
posterity, he ought to desire to be forgotten. Thus then he surrendered his fair
Soul when he was full of fame and years, after he had long been the Joy of the
Virtuous, the Delight of the Court, and the Oracle of the State.

Three Novels.
THe last Summer three or four Gentlemen of good quality went some few days
journey out of the populous City of London to recreate themselves, and to
breath the air of the Country, and by the exercises of it, to dispel those
gross humors which had gathered in their bodies arising from a full diet, and
an unactive life: They passed a few days very pleasantly in hunting, hawking,
fishing; and because the night should have its pleasure too, they resolved that
every one in order should entertain the rest with a Novel, and they agreed (as
being the most equal way) that fortune should point out him who should begin
the course: the Lot fell to Cassander, and he, after he had with much modesty
excused himself, and told the Company that he was sensible how unfit he was to
administer such a Province, bespake them thus.

The Land-Mariners.
IT is not long since in a considerable City of France the Inhabitants did
celebrate a great Festival with much jubilee, and mirth; and that the approach
of the night might not give an end to it, after the solemnities of the
Bon-fires, and Fireworks, some of the Youth (Sons to the chief Burgesses) in
order to the prosecution of their design resorted to a Tavern, and there that
they might be farther from the ears of the people, they made choice of an
higher room; here the Bowls were crowned with wine, their conceits with wit,
and the night with all manner of jollity, but half of it was not spent when the
brisker spirits of their wine began to mutiny in their heads, and to wage war
against their reasons, so that at last the floods of it which they had powered
in made them fancy themselves to be upon real ones at sea, and their Chamber to
be a Ship cruelly tossed upon them, and their reeling and falling made them
suppose themselves in a great deal of danger, so that they thought the only way
to the Haven of security, was to disburthen their Vessel of all its Cargo, that
it might with more agility play upon and comply with the billows before the
Storm; they now begun to throw their Tables out of the Window, with their
Stools and Doors, and all the House-hold-stuff; with these they had almost
brained some of those who passed by; they immediately repair to the Magistrate,
and acquaint him with the Riot, and desire his assistance to suppress it; he
gives his Warrant to his Sergeant to search for, and apprehend them; he
accompanied with other Officers finds, and seizes them: at his entrance some
of the Company, (who had it is possible read the Poets when they were at
School) with a great deal of joy imagine him (because he carried a great stick)
to be Neptune, and those with him his Tritons come to their succor; one of
them therefore, who had all night had the head of the Table, and to whom the
rest of the Board seemed to pay some reverence, stood up with the help of his
Chair, and with a great deal of submission addressed himself to him in these
words: Great Neptune! at this the Sergeant seemed much incensed, (as being a
man not much understanding humor) and grew very brief with him, and would in
that instant have carried him away, because he called him out of his name; but
one who it seems was a wittier brother than the rest, desired Mr. Sergeant to
forbear a while, because he thought there might be something of conceit in this
encounter, so that he gave him liberty, and he proceeded. Great Divinity of the
Seas! thou art come most opportunely to the relief of the most miserable and
distressed of all those whom the large Canopy of Heaven does cover! for ever
since we entered the Borders of thy Empire, we have been tossed with cross and
impetuous Winds, (meaning the Weights of the Town who played upon Cornets and
Haut-bois) which have so enraged thy subjects the waves against us, that they
have sometimes mounted us above the greatest heights of Tenarif, and again have
thrown us so low, that we might have plucked Coral, or have snatched thy Thetis
from thy arms! In this condition we have been forced to cast overboard our
richest Lading, and to send those pearls into those abysses again, from whence
with so much hazard they have been taken; we have wandered through unknown and
perilous Regions without a Pilot or a Rudder (meaning the door which before
they had plucked off the hinges) and without having touched upon any Land but
Shelves or Sand-beds, and without the guidance of that Cynosure which shines
out bright to the rest of the happy Countries of thy Empire! (meaning the
Candle which before was extinguished) This makes us implore the mighty aid of
thy arm and Trident, -- and here he had almost saluted Mr. Sergeants feet, but
by help being recovered, he says -- and even now methinks the whole Ocean is
but one great Whirlepool, and all the Earth like our Vessel in it -- (with that
one of the Company disembogueth) Behold, says he, Great King, the Terrors of
those Eddies! (with this another discharges) behold again those continued
Alps, and Appennines of waves! Then by chance looking out of the Window he
espies the Multitude, (who always upon such an occasion enter consultation)
gathered about the doors; then says he -- Behold with terror (Oh my Companions
in misery) those scaly Citizens attending the motions of their Great King
standing with open mouth to receive us! -- all of them even from the Prince
Leviathan to the Peasant Crab! at these words the Orator's tongue as well as
feet failed him, and he lay prostrate, and speechless; another attempted to
proceed, but he was found soon in the same predicament, so that now the
Sergeant who in his nature was no great Judge or admirer of wit posted them
(because it was too late to carry them before the chief Officer) to the Cage
which usually stands near the Market-cross: when they arrived there, they
thanked the great Divinity because he had heard their prayers, and brought them
to a safe Harbor. He left them there like Vlysses's Companions under the Charms
of the Witch Circe, discharging their stomachs as if they had been really
sea-sick. You may imagine that in this condition, sleep (without saying
Prayers, or using any formal Ceremonies) soon crowned their Temples, and bound
them fast till the Sun through the wide slits and crannies of their Chamber
played upon their eyelids, and most of the Infantery of the Town, at the
Window of their Antichamber, advised them that it was time to wake. Some of
them had not yet recovered their reason, and those in whom it dawned by the
illness of their lodging, and the over-charge of nature, were not able to hold
up their aching heads. In a little time most of them recovered, and guessed by
the place where they were, (retaining some notion of it) at the nature of their
offense; most of them were struck with a deep remorse for the crime, and all of
them were deeply touched with the infamy of it; they therefore unanimously
petitioned the Magistrate for enlargement, and withal submitted to what
punishment he thought good to inflict upon them. Upon this they were released,
and carried before him, where after he had given them a full account of their
riot, with all the aggravating circumstances he might, and told them the ill
consequences of this example, because their qualities kept them from the usual
punishment of this vice, he thought good to command the last night's Orator to
give the others in a set Harangue the inconveniences of Drinking, which he did
after some recollection, (as near as I can remember my Author's terms) in these
words.

When we cloud our Reason, and envelope it in mists, what do we but turn our
selves into those brute animals from which (as Heaven's great Characteristick)
it distinguishes us? Into what horrors of darkness do we throw our selves,
when we extinguish that light which should conduct us through the many
intricate Passages and Maeanders of this world! How unhappy are we since we
make that which by a moderate use would give us a glad countenance, by an
excess make us sad! I suppose most of you before this time, Gentlemen, are
sensible of the effects of our last night's voyage; and truly, whoever is a
lover of this vice can be compared to nothing more fitly than a seafaring man,
who daily exposes himself and his fortunes to the rage of the billows and
winds, whose condition is often so desperate, that he despairs of a Port unless
the hand of Providence steereth him to it: so he lays his fortunes, his
secrets prostrate at the feet of any Rogue, and puts himself into his mercy;
which dangers, if he escape, it is by the care of Providence, and the conduct
of his kinder stars. If we gravely reflect upon this action, how many things
shall we find we have to blush for! and how many lives we have endangered
besides our own! How many days must we pass in penance for these few hours
pleasure! Think whatever extravagancies we have committed we must dearly answer
them, a man cannot plead he was not himself, since he labored under a
voluntary madness. What sad remembrances does this Morning bring to us? and
what would we not give to expiate our crime? Alexander that Great Conqueror
being once overcome with these spirits, killed his dearest friend Clytus, and
when he understood it, would needs have sacrificed himself to his Manes. This
one vice opens to us a deluge of others; it prepares us to kill a King, or burn
a City; to murder a Brother, or betray a Friend. But yet we see men contending
with a strict vigor and earnestness, as if they were to gain an Olympic Prize,
to conquer one another at this weapon, whilst he who carries the Palm is
obliged to converse with those whom he has transformed into Beasts, and at
last is forced to submit himself to its powers. Seneca gives you the effects of
Wine in the person of Mark Anthony, of whom he speaks thus. M. Antonium,
Magnum virum, and ingeni^ nobilis, quae alia res perdidit, and in externos
mores, and vitia non Romana rapuit quam Ebrietas, nec minor vino Cleopatrae
amor? Haec illum res hostem Rei-publicae, haec hostibus suis imparem reddidit,
haec crudelem fecit, cum capita Principum civitatis coeanti referrentur, cum
inter apparatissimas epulas luxusque regales, ora ac manus proscriptorum
recognosceret, cum vino gravis sitiret tamen sanguinem, etc. Ep. Lxxxiii. Add
to this, that it infeebleth the nerves, looseneth the limbs, infects the
breath, vitiateth the complexion, and renders the whole body, as well as mind,
useless to ones Country, or Friend. I hope now your own experience, and my
arguments (whatever they may be) have made you sensible enough of your crime,
and will persuade you to applaud the care of providence, which has brought you
to an haven where reason, or your Palinurus, was drowned; and I hope you will
never again attempt such a voyage, though gales never so fair, or seas never so
calm invite you.

NOVEL II. Friendship sublimed.
By Lot Theogenes was to entertain them the second night, who, after paying
some civilities to Cassander's Relation, began thus;
IF some of those beauteous Towns which crown the fertile Banks of the Loire
exceed Tours in elegancy of structure, none of them come near it for
commodiousness, and pleasantness of situation: ( Tourin, the Country about it
being called by way of excellence, Le Jardin die France) The sweetness of the
air, and the other conveniences of the place oft-times have brought people
thither to enjoy them; and amongst many others a Gentleman of that Country, of
a noble Family, and ample fortunes, was resolved with his Wife and Family to
reside there for a Summer-season. He had been blessed with a fair and ingenious
Offspring; but above the rest his eldest Daughter, who was named Charlotte, was
fair and chaste, and as well for the beauties of body, as mind, had scarce an
equal, but no superior over all France: She had not continued here long before
her eyes produced their usual effects, and captivated all men in the place, and
brought them to be either admirers, or lovers; and what is more, the women (who
commonly like men of a Profession, envy and decry one another) became
Proselytes to her Virtues, and owned, that not only themselves, but all whom
they had seen were much inferior to her; and if she had not Adorers from all
parts of the Nation, it was not because her Graces could not charm them, but
because her fame had not yet reached them.

This new Flame which invaded the Town, spurred on the Youth to little
Gallantries, and Gentilesses more than before, and made them more earnest in
their Tiltings, and Justs; and more splendid too, each striving to go beyond
the other, as well in his Horses, his Habits, and Caparisons, as in the
dextrous and graceful menage of his Weapon: and every man endeavored the best
he could to make himself (according to the then modish term) the least unworthy
of her; and whoever could but gain a smile, or a glance from her, won a Prize
of greater value to him than the wealth of Peru, or Mexico.

Of all those who with so much earnestness courted her favors, no one had it
or deserved it more than young Du Perrot, who removed from Paris thither some
months before, for the sake of the air: he was a man well-born, and of good
fortunes, and one who it is possible would not have been discouraged by her
Parents, if he had by them addressed himself to her. But though he looking
through the glass of modesty could not see himself so well regarded as he was,
and wanted that assurance which he justly might have had; yet he did not fail
to show himself to her upon all occasions, in the best equipage he could,
either at the running at the Ring, and those kind of sports armed en Cavalier,
or upon the Mall, or at the Balls, where he constantly had the honor to dance
with her; which Exercises he performed with an extraordinary mien; he embraced
all opportunities of discourse with her, and, in fine, he used all means by
which he might endear himself to her: so that at last, she, though young, being
not altogether insensible of love, and knowing that though she was so universal
a Conqueror, she might, when closely besieged, yield to a noble Assailant upon
good terms without dishonor; began to cherish, and foment, and indeed to be
pleased with her growing flame; and now she gave him liberty freely to
entertain her publicly upon every occasion, and had pretty well learnt the
language of the eyes, (for in love they speak much) so that now the fame of
their affections was spread through the Town, which begot her Lover a great
many Rivals: he notwithstanding these public favors, in private had hitherto
kept his distance; (though the truth is, those kindnesses which he received
from her, which proceeded from the wants of that cunning, and counterfeit
reservedness of those, who bred at Courts, would have made men of less prudence
and caution, to have more hastened their address) but now he was no longer able
to dally with those flames which he so long had stood so near, and which now
had scorched him so severely: he therefore resolves one day to go to her
father's house, pretending a visit to him, but with an intention to open
himself to her; when he arrived there, he found according to his desires, both
him and her Mother from home, and being advised that she was alone in the
Garden, he enters it, where after having received her pardon, which he asked
for invading her privacy, and which she easily granted, to one for whom she had
so great an esteem, she entertained him thus, perhaps to divert that discourse
which she apprehended he would begin, Monsieur Du Perrot (said she) just as you
appeared at the end of this Walk, I was putting away the hours with Cassandra,
and I was just in that part of it where Statira dealt so cruelly with the brave
Oroondates when he first discovered his love to her, and I was accusing her
very much both of ingratitude, and incivility. Madam (replied he) this argues a
great deal of compassion in your nature, to pity the past afflictions of those
whom many Centuries of years have seen dead; and this may make him who has the
honor to wear your chains, hope a good return to his passion from so high
agenerosity of mind: Certainly (continued she) no body, without great injury to
themselves, can with severity repulse a man, who, like Oroondates, comes
encircled with all the advantages of Birth, of Fortunes, of Education, whose
head was crowned with all the honors, and wreaths of Peace, and whose Shield
Fortune had hung thick with all the favors of war; It is sure Madam (returned
he) that she was to blame, when she exercised so great a severity toward him;
but yet it was not only upon the account of his birth, and achievements, that
he deserved her love; for if those must only weigh, no one but an Oroondates
can ever pretend to a Mistresses affection: but her fault lay in not receiving
his so great passion, his so true affection with an equal one; nor by saying
this, do I disallow but Oroondates was as great an example of heroic
gallantry, as the world ever produced; but yet I must say, if other men are not
so famed as he, it is not because they want his parts or Courage, but because
those opportunities which he had, are not offered them to exert them. There is
no one who loves (answered she) who can want a subject for his Gallantry; for
he will range the world for adventures, by which he may render himself
acceptable to her whom he adores. * Madam, (pressing her hand, and kissing it)
if Love will require such services, no body shall go farther than Du Perrot to
perform them, if his fair Charlotte command him; Sir (retorted she) pulling
away her hand with much indignation, I never understood that love was an effect
of friendship before; if I admitted you to some familiarity upon the account of
the latter, I did not expect it could have produced the former; but since you
so grossly misconstrue my actions, know that Charlotte has no thoughts which
may not be arraigned before the strictest Tribunal of Virtue, and appear chaste
even though Lucretia her self sat Judge there. Having said this, she turned
into another walk which led to a Grotta, where she continued most part of the
day, leaving him in the highest agonies which slighted love (the greatest of
misfortunes) could produce. He stood long unmoved in very great disorders, till
at last recovering his reason a little, and, considering where he was, he found
it unsafe for his affairs, either to pursue her, or to stay longer in that
place, where he might soon be discovered by her Father or Mother, who used to
pass the Evening there. He therefore retired to his Lodging, where he spent the
night in very great inquietudes. In the Morning De La Hire (one for whom he had
entertained a very great affection, and whose accomplishments did indeed
deserve it) according to his custom enters his Chamber, where he found him in
an humor contrary to that he expected; for whereas before unasked he was wont
to relate to him the adventures of the preceding day, he could now scarce
procure one answer to a great many questions; he then began to accuse him, and
tell him, that by this reservedness he would at once both lose his friendship,
and assistance: he told him on the contrary, that if he would be free, nothing
should be too hard for him to undertake to accommodate him; that his fortune
and his blood should weigh little with him, if at their expense he might
procure his advantages: he conjured him by all their sacred oaths, their
mutual vows and protestations, after he had long thus pressed him, and found
that the true source of his distemper was a Mistress, he thought to have driven
it away by raillerie, telling him, he imagined that he had known better things
than to desire to be teather'd in one place of the Common, when he might have
the liberty of the whole, that he would soon be weary of his one dish, though a
Bisque or an Oglio, if he fed of it every day. But he found these not at all
specifique, and that his pallat now so much out of temper disgusted all things
which it desired before; he now perceived his Friend languishing, and pining,
and to his great grief, almost grown out of his knowledge in 24 hours; so that
he saw he was now to apply himself seriously to his affairs, and to labor his
recovery by the best means he could; but before he undertook any thing, he
consulted Du Perrot, and desired his instructions how he might serve him; he
found him loath to give Charlotte any farther trouble; but upon consideration it
was found, an application to her was requisite. De La Hire resolves to wait
upon her to know her resolution. It was not difficult for him to find an
opportunity, for that very Afternoon upon a visit he made to her Father, with
other Company, he took the occasion to divert her, where after a little
discourse he told her, that that affection which his Friend had entertained for
her he was sure was as true as ever any was, and as pure as the flames which
ascend from Altars to those Heavens which behold and revenge all injustice, and
will see that it shall have those returns, and be crowned with that success
which it merits: did you but see in him, Madam (continued he) the effects of
your own severity, what a Skeleton he is as well in mind as body; how meagre
and withered he is, who before was one of Natures choicest Pieces; and how
dejected and mean that soul is now, which before breathed nothing but generous
and mighty things, you would (if any pity inhabit your breast) weep, and weep
so incessantly, that your tears should never end till you became like him: Ah
Madam (proceeded he) if your love may not, let your generosity at least save a
great Soul for whom all France will be beholden to you. Thus he laid open to
her the height of his merit, omitting nothing that his friendship could
dictate, or his own virtues could challenge. He found her words wary, and
containing a whole resignation of her self to her Fathers will, which was only
to lock or open her breast alone. Though these answers spoke indifferency, and
seemed cold, yet any body might perceive a flame through them; and that by them
she only hinted to Du Perrot what way to proceed. De La Hire pretty well
pleased with this, hastens to his friends Lodging to unload himself, where he
found him very disconsolate, and wholly given up to thoughts: at his entrance
he wore the most cheerful looks he could put on, which a little encouraged his
Friend too; and then at once he satisfied his expectations and doubts, with the
best construction that her words would bear, and gave him so much comfort, that
in a little time he began to recover his former condition, and at last he grew
very well by the applications of his best Physician, Hope. In which state we
will leave him, and turn our Pen to another more comical, but no less
adventrous Amor.

NOVEL III. The Friendly Rivals.
AT this time a Germain and a Fleming were in the same Pension in the Town, and
had struck a great Ligue of Friendship; the victorious darts of the God of
Love, pointed with rays taken from Charlotte's eyes, pierced at once the
hearts of both of them (so united were their fates) even through those mighty
ramparts of Fat which did defend them. They now refined, by these new kindled
flames altered their customs and dress; they greased not their Clothes so
much, and appeared oftener in clean Linen: but though they became more gay, yet
there was a kind of tawdriness in their Habits, which distinguished them from
the rest of Mankind; for they would wear their Laces with deeper, their Swords
longer, their Points bigger than the Mode; they would daub their heads with a
whole pot of Jasmine at once, and then show a pound of powder above it; and in
fine, they would do every thing in excess, because they loved so; a day did not
pass in which they walked not by her window three or four times, and when she
took the air, her shadow did not more surely attend her than they; they were
sure to gain an acquaintance with all those over the Town, who kept the doors
of the Ballets, and then would behold their Goddess from the foot of the room:
this she observed at last, and seeing them Fellows so despicable, she thought
without injury to her reputation, that she might make her advantage of the
humor, and improve it to very good sport: In order to this, wheresoever she
met them, she failed not to give some mark of her affection, either by
unvailing, or a nod, or smile, which they both received with mighty ecstasies,
and each took to himself; for the German was sure she could never affect so
ugly a fellow as the Fleming, and he on the other side thought that such a
rough-cast piece of Nature as the German could never gain her; so that they,
though Rivals, continued very good friends, and would never part, for they
carried one another about for foyls. Thus they were both extremely pleased, but
grew now very impatient to have some nearer proofs of that affection which they
were both already assured of: they could not imagine how they should introduce
themselves, for though their follies had made them known enough to the
Daughter, they were altogether strangers to the Father; (for indeed they were
fellows so inconsiderable, that no body of degree took notice of them) yet one
of them at last discovered that a Maid who served in their Pension, was
acquainted with Cleorin, Charlotte's Woman, one who had all the cunning and
subtleties of her sex, and therefore the fittest in the world to cajole these
fellows; and she was the fitter too, because she had heard something from her
Mistress of their humor: They won by some small gift this Wench to their
party, and ordered her to see if she could persuade her to meet two Gentlemen
at a Tavern that afternoon, who though unknown to her, yet had something to
discover which might turn to her advantage: You may think this had been an
uncouth proposition to her if the Messenger, who was privy to the whole design,
had not discovered it to her; she then gave her promise, being assured of
booty, and at the hour of three she failed not to meet at the place appointed,
and there she met the two Lovers who had expected her a while with some
impatience. When they begun to open the affair to her, she seemed to wonder
with what confidence they could propose to her to betray her Lady, she told
them, offering to go away, that she expected an entertainment answering their
message, something which might have been her advantage; but now on the
contrary, they offered that which would not only ruin her fortune, but her
reputation, which she valued much more: for all this, a little time being
passed, and some few promises on their side made, she seemed to incline to
them, and at last was wholly won. They then proceeded to discover themselves,
but still one obstructed the other in his story: she demanded how it was
possible she could serve them both? for her Lady had but one heart, and since
that could not be divided, it could belong but to one of them: they, both
assured of success, agreed of one answer, assuring her, that whenever
Charlotte should declare for one, the other in that moment would desist. This
seemed very satisfactory to all; they only now desired to know the time and
place, when and where they might attend Charlotte's decisive sentence. She said
she could not answer to that, till she knew her orders in it; she therefore at
present begged their pardon, and assured them, that before the night of the
next day she would send to their Consident at their Lodging her Ladies
resolution. At her departing each gave her five Pistols; but the German slips
out after her, (which the other saw, and was much pleased with it, thinking he
might spare his pains since she was surely his) and desires her in particular
to represent his affection to her Lady, and to give her that Letter, and if she
could, to procure an answer to it; and withal he presented her a Diamond Ring,
which she willingly accepted, and promised her endeavors: The Fleming at his
return seemed to chide him, and told him, he feared he had done him ill
offices, and then running out, gave her a Letter, and desired the same, giving
her five Pistols more, and then gained the same promises. But now you must
imagine them something impatient till the arrival of the wished for hour; but
though this time they could not see her, yet she remained a constant object to
their minds. they employed the rest of the day, according to the custom of
Romantic Heroes, of whom they had read in Poetry, and composed many Sonnets
and quaint Anagrams (as most agreeable to their capacities) which after the
discovery of the Amor, made very good sport about the Town: but I shall omit
to set them down here, because their numbers are so Gothic and Barbarous, that
they were more fit to be sung to a Trumpet than a Lute. But now the time and
the Letter at once arrived, directed to both, which contained these words,

AS soon as the Moon appears come to the back door of the Garden, opening to
the River, which shall be unlocked to receive you, and there when her affection
will force her to declare her self, you may behold the blushes of

CHARLOTTE.


You need not doubt but they observed their time to a moment; for they had been
walking by the river near the place an hour or two before, and just as their
fortunate Planet began to shine out, they made their entrance there with as
much joy as if it had been Paradise, and expected as great felicities as it
could afford. The German (though it was disputed, because they believed the
presence of their Mistress) by the Privileges of his Nation, as the Subject of
an Emperor, took the door; but he had not walked many paces till he found
himself in a pit above the middle, and a ring of iron close clasped about him
with a lock, which he could by no means open, and held him so fast, that he
could not move any part downwards. He implored the assistance of his Companion,
who refused it him, and said he would not slight that opportunity which his
good Angel had presented him to make him known without a Rival to his Mistress,
and so left his poor friend in great distress. But he had not gone six paces
forward before he retracted his former unkindness, and made it yield to
generosity, and resolved to rescue him; but in his return within two yards of
the same place, to his great grief, he found himself in the same predicament.
Then it was that they employed the whole force of their eloquence in abusing
one-another; and because they were not near enough to strike, they battered
themselves with the weapons which the foil afforded, till they had spent all
the gravel near them. Their rage now with their artillery ceased, and they
thought it much better to unite their forces against those who had deceived
them, than to contend betwixt themselves. When they were in these thoughts,
Charlotte and her Maid of a sudden issued out of a neighboring Grove, clad
like good spirits (though they proved not so to them) all in white, with white
rods in their hands, going round them, and waving them above their heads, but
seeming to take no notice of them, and sung

We must make these Walks and Groves
Free from the dreggs of mortal Loves,
And clear them from th'unclean abodes
Of croaking froggs, and creeping toads;
For Oberon the Fairie King
Fair Mab his Queen will hither bring,
And they must dance, and we must sing,
And they must, etc.
Then they stood still and cried,
Come! O come without delay,
Ye Goat Prancers of the Groves,
Leave your Embraces, leave your Loves,
And cleanse the mighty Monarchs way.
Then entered two Servants of the house dressed like Satyrs, with two great
Buckets of water for a lustration, and emptied upon each of their heads; with
that they both cried and begged they would release them, which Charlotte and
her Maid by laughing almost discover themselves; with that the Satyrs seemed
angry, and said.

Bold Mortals, how durst you be here,
When Oberon was to appear,
To pry into the unknown Rites
Of Fairie Ladies and their Knights,
And search into the hidden sport
Of the happy Fairy Court?
Stay till the King himself does come.
With this a company of Boys dressed like Fairies come in dancing, and caper
round them singing, and pinching them severely; the Germain much surprised and
affrighted, desired to know which was the King, who when he was showed to him,
told him that he served a mighty Emperor, and one who would revenge the
injuries of his Subjects when they could not enjoy the Privileges of the Law
of Nations, which suffered all strangers, guilty of no offense to come and go
freely: To whom the King said,

Thy Master, fool, does but command,
Compared to mine, an inch of Land:
My spacious Empire is the Air,
And the loved Breast of Mab the fair.
With that they contracted their Circle, and only run about him, and pinched,
till he almost awakned the house with his cries, which made them all run away,
and leave the unfortunate Lovers as they found them, where they continued till
the Sun bid the World Good Morrow, entertaining themselves with the strangeness
of the Adventure, and the many circumstances of their misfortune. At this time
the Gardner enters the Garden, and seeing two men in this posture, growing half
out of the earth, started back; and it is possible if he had been read in the
Poets, he might have thought that Cadmus had killed another Dragon, and had
made choice of that place to sow the teeth in: but he having no such
sentiments, presently runs in and gives the alarm to the house, so that it
came to the Master's ears, who going to the place, would have apprehended them
for Thieves, till his Daughter acquainted him with the whole Adventure, which
pleased them all as much as it displeased the unhappy Lovers, who were so
abused with it (for it was soon spread) that they were forced to remove to some
more obscure place of France.

The next night after a little recapitulating, Theogenes proceeded thus. During
the time of Du Perrots recovery, his friend did him all the best offices he
could, and by his importunity he brought her to consent to an admittance of his
visit, which he paid with much joy, but also with much submission to her for
that boldness which had wrought her displeasure. She received him well, and
excused her former severity, which, she said, proceeded from surprise, and
assured him for the future of as much favor as might be consistent with the
duty she was to pay her Father. He now renewed his discontinued visits, and
daily meetings, hoping by his assiduous services to work a good end. In this
state their love was, when a thing which altered the whole affair fell out. De
La Hire, who had all this while labored his friends quiet, was now unhappily
concerned to do somewhat for his own; for by often treating to advance Du
Perrots, loves, he found flames kindied in his own breast by the same eyes: Nor
was Charlotte, though she carried it more secretly, less charmed with his
graces than he with hers. This accident wrought his great discontent, and had
almost carried him to that distemper out of which he had brought his friend,
who also observed it with much grief, and still solicited him, though with no
success, to know its cause. His thoughts were, should I go to work mine own
interest with her whom I adore, I should at once prove false to her, and
treacherous to my friend; and should I acquaint him, his generosity perhaps
would give more than mine could receive; I will therefore repair to some
solitary place, and there amongst the Crags and and horrors of the thickest
Groves will sigh away my life, and prove my self faithful to Charlotte, and
true to Du Perrot. This said, he makes out of the Town, and took the way which
led to a neighboring Wood. His friend and Mistress observing this from their
window, resolved to pursue him, and see if they could learn any thing. He had
no sooner entered the place at one side, but Du Perrot unseen was got in at
another, and Charlotte and her Maid (who was her Confident) at another; and
seated themselves under an hedge, by the advantage of which they could hear,
and see him; and be undiscovered. As Soon as he was sat, he took up his lute,
which his boy brought thither before, and striking the strings, sung these
words, which answered to the Notes.

Tell me! oh tell me all ye Groves
Within whose sacred breasts do lie
The plaints and sighs of faithful Loves,
Was ever one more grieved than I?
Love over me a Conquest makes,
(Whose powers you know none can withstand)
Friendship again those Conquests shakes
And ruins with a mightier hand.
Love does make the assault again,
So that of a cruel war
My breast must be the unhappy Scene,
Whilst no side is a conqueror.
Therefore you powers who rule on high,
Direct me so that I may prove
Happy once more, and fate defy,
And true to friendship, and to love.
Let not Charlotte's victorious eyes
the just Du-Perrot's friendship wrong;
Nor let his charms make me despise
Those graces which from hers arise,
Which Bards so often in deathless notes have sung.
At the end of this song his friends appear, which accident surprised him the
more, because he feared they had overheard him. But Du-Perrot comes up to him
with a clear and assured countenance, and said, fear not my faithfullest
friend, to make me miserable, if you may at the same time render your self
happy; give Charlotte your love, so Du-Perrot may have your friendship. To you
who have so long possessed the best part of me I resign the last, but the
noblest, my soul, for by Charlotte I live. But yet think it not mean in me so
easily to part with a life which with so much solicitude has hitherto been
preserved, and in a time when I should most of all desire to prolong it, since
Charlotte is pleased to bless me with her affections: for it is but just that I
should sacrifice my self to my preserver, and I am sure Heaven thinks the
virtues of De La Hire only fit to be joined with those of Charlotte. He here
takes both their hands, and said, go now happy Pair, go and enjoy the blessings
of Cities, and of Courts! and leave here your at once unhappy and unfortunate
Du-Perrot to the quiet and solitude of these Woods, that here expiring he may
pay his vows, and offer his prayers and sacrifice for your eternal happiness!
He here offered to join their hands, but they both went back, and De La Hire
addressed himself thus; Wrong not your friend Du-Perrot in thinking he fears
more than you to die; or that, whilst he lives, you can overcome him in
friendship or generosity, though in all other things he yields to you. Assure
your self that you wrong her whom we both adore in believing she would receive
him who could so dishonourably survive his friend. I love a glorious fall as
well as you! and what could render my Funerals more illustrious than that at my
Grave Charlotte should say here lies the FAITHFULLEST OF LOVERS, and that
Du-Perrot should weep out, here lies the TRUEST OF FRIENDS. Go, and be happy
then together! and enjoy your many blessings in some happy place, to which your
stars shall point you; and if ever you think or speak of De La Hire, give him
no other Character than that of a Faithful Lover, and a true Friend. Here was a
profound silence till the fair Charlotte broak it in these words; Much is due
from me (generous friends) to both your loves, and from each of you to the
other's friendship; but since it is not in my power to crown the same merits
with the same rewards, I must desire not to be pressed to a declaration of my
affections, but that both of you will accept my friendship, and give me yours,
which will afford more solid and scraphique joys than love, which grows less
if it does not determine with enjoyment. To this, after some civilities, they
all consented, and then begun a friendship which nothing but death could ever
break.

And now perhaps some will ask to what end is all this from the beginning said?
to what does it conduce? He who demands this, must know, that it was
enterprised to show Virtue and Vice in their true colors. He must also know,
that the Author did not undertake this in hopes to be crowned with the Crown of
Fame, but rather with that that was given by the Romans to a good Citizen, who
did then sacrifice his fortunes, and what he does now, his reputation to
deliver his fellow-Citizens out of any imminent danger. But if any should now
severely say, it is an impertinence, and should blame the design for the error
of its menager; he must know that impertinences are to be driven out by
impertinences, (as fire out of a burnt finger is by fire) that he who is guilty
of them, seeing their inconveniences in another person, may in himself avoid
them.

FINIS.
Emendanda.
PAge 20. l. 13. for fears r. serves. p. 21. l. 6 perpetually r. perpetual.
p. 35. l. 15. for make that for two, r. make it two. p. 36. l. 2. r. is so bad.
p. 37. l. 4. r. or 2, or 3. p. 52. l. 7. leave out now, and has. p. 59. l. 4.
after the word strife a Parenthesis in. p. 60. and l. 13. is to come in which
was misplaced by the mistake of the Press. p. 61. l. 1. for his r. the. l. 2.
for his r. their. p. 64. l. 10. for soul r. sons. p. 73. l. 5. for redence r.
residence p. 74. l. 7. for by r. to. p. 76. l. 2. leave out should. p. 77. l.
10. r. of the winds. p. 82. l. 6. leave out if it (...) 1. l. 3. for higher r.
lighter. p. 93. l. 3. for quam r. (...) ^0. l. 15. leave out him. p. 115. l.
13. for severe r. ^^cure. p. 117. l. 21. insert were. p. 142. l. 10. for where
r. when. ead. l. leave out or. p. 148. l. 19. r. who are bred. p. 152. l. 13.
insert ( said he) p. 161. l. 11. leave out with. p. 173. r. G^ats^ot-prancers.
ead. page l. penult. leave out which. p. 183. l. 12. r. fertunate, pro
unfortunate. The Reader is desired to excuse the mistake of the Printer, in
putting the The Moral State, etc. over the Life of Theodatus, and the Novels.
He is also desired to excuse the false pointings, and some other litteral
errors.


