A New merry Dialogue between John and Bessee The two lusty brave Lovers of
the Country.
Or, a courageous way of VVooing.
The Young man very willing was to marry,
The Maid was loath a longer time to tarry,
But when this couple were agreed
They married were with all the speed,
Then list and I will plainly tell
How every thing in order fell.
The tune is, sweet George I love thee,




I Am a Batchelour bold and brave,
sweet Besse now I come to thee,
Thy love is the thing that I do crave,
which makes me thus for to woo thee:
My heart is inflamed with Cupids hot fire,
One drop of thy mercy to cool I desire,
If thou will but grant unto what I require,
I vow no harm to do thee.
Ever since the first time that I did thee see,
fair Besse now I come to thee,
My heart and affection was linked to thee,
which makes me thus for to woo thee:
And now I am come for to tell thee my mind,
As true loves strong fettered chains does me bind,
If thou unto me wilt be courteous and kind,
I vow no harm for to do thee.
I Will buy thee silk Ribbons, i will buy the gold Rings
sweet Besse now I come to thee,
Black-bag and silk Apron and other rare things,
see now how I do woo thee:
New gown and new petticoat, new hose and shoes,
A new beaver Hat the best that I can choose,
Prethre Love do not my proffers refuse,
all this good will I do thee.
Thou shall have thy servants on thee to att^^^
sweet Besse now I come to thee,
My purse and my person thy life shall defend,
my suit is still for to woo thee,
My goods and my substance my house and my land,
My mind and my sense and my heart and my hand,
Thou shall every hour have at thy command.
all this good I will do to thee,
Thou shall have varieties what thou will wish,
sweet Besse now I come to thee,
Served in at thy Table of Flesh and of Fish,
my suit is still for to woo theer
Thou shall have larks, chickens hens capon or coney,
And any fine fare that can be bought for money
If thou wilt be my True-love, my Joy and my Honey,
all this I will do for thee.
More over a faithful promise I make,
sweet Besse now I come to thee,
Whilst breath's in my body i will not thee forsake,
as suro as now I do woo thee:
Then prithee fair Besse ease me of my pain,
And do not repay my true love with disdain,
But as I have loved thee so love me again,
and I Will be faithful unto thee.

The second Part,
to the same tune


KInd John I protest thou art welcome to me,
since thou art come for to woo me;
Ten thousand to one but we two shall agree,
now thou come lovingly to me,
Thy love and thy labor is not lost in vain,
For thus in few words I will tell thee here plain,
If thou come at midnight i will thee entertain,
I know no harm thou wilt do me.
I have kept my maidenhead twenty long year,
before you come to woo me,
And many a brave gallant that loved me dear.
made suite often unto me:
But I for my own part could love never a man,
Let them use the chiefest of skill that they can,
Until the time came that I met with my John,
I know no harm thou wilt do me.
You promis^d me gold and you promised me fee,
when you came first for to woo me,
Because that I your true Lover should be,
these knacks you proffered unto me:
You promised me scarffs and you promised mr rings,
Silk gown and silk apron and many brave things,
The which to my presence much comfort it brings,
I know much good you will do me.
Gay garments are good sir of which I except,
now you so lovingly woo me,
Your Silver is better I do it respect,
both those are welcome unto me,
But your proper person exceeds all the rest,
For you are the creature that I do love best
I had rather have you then have gold in my chest,
for I know no harm you^l do me.
To bind up the bargain and finish the strife,
seeing you came hither to woo me,
I prithee come quickly and make me thy wife,
I know no harm you will do me,
And when we art married thou shall have thy will
To clip and to kiss and to use thine own will,
I am thine own true love and so will be still,
now I come merrily to thee.

This lusty young couple being jointly agreed,
when he came for to woo her,
To Church then they went and were married with speed,
then he bravely came to her:
Together they went as True lovers should,
He gave her gay garments and rings of rich Gold,
And when they their tales had so pleasantly told,
he did no harm unto her.
L, P.

London Printed for William Gilbertson Gil^-^pur-street


