Hadadrimmon, Sive Threnodia Anglicana ob Regicidium, A SERMON ON DAVID'S
HUMILIATION For Cutting off the ROYAL ROBE, AND DETESTATION of Cutting off the
ROYAL HEAD Of the LORDS ANOINTED.

Preached Jan. 30, 1660.

Being a Solemn Fast for the Horrid Murder of KING CHARLES I. Of Glorious
Memory, At WESTBVRY, in the County of WILTS.

By JOHN PARADISE Preacher of the Word there.

London, Printed by J. H. for Nathanael Webb at the Sign of the Kings Head in
St. Paul's Churchyard. 1661.

TO THE Right Reverend Father in God, HUMPHREY, By the Providence of God, LORD
BISHOP of SARVM.
Right Reverend Father in God,
MEmorable, if not Miraculous, is the Story concerning the Dumb Son of Croesus,
how that seeing an Assassine about to kill his Father, though he never spoke
before, yet then cried out, (...): So our Political Father, Cor, Sol, and Anima
Regni, the Heart, Sun and Soul of the Kingdom, being translated from us, in a
Fiery Chariot, Who can but cry out with Elisha, My Father, My Father, the
Chariot of Israel, and the Horsemen thereof?

Should Subjects neglect to sing the Obsequies of their Murdered King, the Walls
of the Royal Palace would be monuments of their shame; even as the Stones would
have supplied the defect of the Childrens Hosanna's to the Son of God; and the
dust of the ground where the bloody Tragedy was acted, would testify against
them, as the dust of the Apostles Feet against the unbelieving Jews. Seeing
Rebels have been so industrious in forming Cyclopical Weapons, in anvelling out
Diabolical Machinations against Monarchy, and have published so many bitter
Invectives and Satirical Libels against the Sacred Persons of Kings, to enchant
and intoxicate the English Nation, and to seduce us from our Allegiance, God
forbid that we should omit the Confection of Antidotes, and Counter-medicines
against this Poison.

Wherefore I have attempted to vindicate the Royal Prerogative of King^
wherewith they are invested by a Divine Charter, and which is a Jewel fixed in
their Crowns by the King of Kings, to wit, Their exemption from the violence
of Subjects; and likewise (though indeed the Acts and Monuments of our Royal
Martyr deserve rather to be registered by the Golden Pen of some Able
Martyrologer, another Fox) to commemorate that Fatal Blow, which caused an
Earthquake of Desolation in England, and as it were unhinged the Earth from
its Center. The Lord grant, that it may now produce an heart-quake of
Lamentation, and prove d Lymbeck to distill our hearts into tears, to extract
the Quintessence of our spirits, and to sublimate our Affections, and Faculties
into the height of Sorrow.

Now my Lord, the Beams of your Favor accented and enamelled with manifold
Amplifications, have so influent ^^ally shined on me, that they cannot but work
indelible Impressions of Gratitude in my heart, unless it were petrefied, and
most strenuous endeavors after testification thereof.

Wherefore I present unto your Lordship this ensuing Book of Lamentations, as a
Pepper-corn by way of acknowledgment of my great Obligations unto you: Humbly
imploring your candid Acceptance and Patronage of this unpolished piece, in
imitation of the Divine Majesty, who accepted of Badgers Skins, Goats hair, a
Cup of cold water, and the Widows Mite, as well as more magnificent Oblations.
As I am conscious of many Imperfections, which your judicious eye will discern
herein, so I am confident of your Indulgence.

I have endeavored more to manifest the Affection of my heart, then the
Affectation of Art. Sackcloath and Ashes is a fitter Garb for Mourners, then
Gorgeous Attire. Who can be eloquent on such a doleful Theme, as the Murder of
a Christian, Protestant King, which like Opium is enough to stupifie the the
Faculties of all that study on it? and at the Tidings whereof, (as David wished
for Absalom: O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom: Would God I had died for
thee, O Absalom, my Son, my Son) Your Lordship with many more English Hero's,
could (I believe) have cried out, O my King Charles, my King, my King Charles:
Would God I had died for thee, O Charles, my King, my King.

I think it Honor enough, to be vouchsafed, to bring but one Pin to the
decking of Christ's Spouse, while others adorn her with more costly Jewels, and
rich Medals, said a Reverend Bishop: So I account my self superabundantly
honored, if this Threnodia may be accepted by my Dread Sovereign, through your
Lordships Intercession, as the smallest Testimony of my Cordial Lamentation,
for the barbarous Decollation of his Royal Father, though but like the casting
a Branch of Rosemary into a Grave, while others erect more Glorious Tombs and
Statues; and as a pledge of my great exultation, for his own Happy Restoration
and Coronation.

My Lord, it is my Intention, to write an Eucharistical, not a Panegyrical
Epistle; because I know, that Flattery, as it is abhorred by my self, so it
would be nauseated by your Modesty. However, without contracting any such guilt
or censure, I may record it for your perpetual Renown, That while so many have
proved Erratick Stars, sometimes Prograde, sometimes Retrograde, never
Stationary; you have been a fixed Star in the Firmament of the Church of
England: And while others have courted their Sovereign, with Parasitical
Friendship, for saking him in Adversity, as Rats and Mice do a Barn, when the
Corn is spent, your Soul has cleaved (like Jonathan, Ittai, Barzillai and
Zadok, to distressed David) to an afflicted Prince; that you have reverenced
the Setting Sun of Marty^ed Majesty, King Charles the First, and the clouded
Sun of exiled Majesty, King Charles the Second.

I have read concerning Agrippa, that being imprisoned for wishing the Empire
unto Caius, he was afterward gratified by Caius with a Chain of Gold, as heavy
as that of Iron, wherewith he was loaded in Prison: So, that your Lordship, who
have magnanimously endured the Malignant Influences of Blazing Comets, during
the dismal Eclipse of the Proper Light, may as a Blessing unto the Church of
God. long sit under the vivifical and salutiferous Beams of our Royal Sun, now
Triumphant in his Noonday Glory, is the Prayer of,

Your Lordships most Humble Servant, JOHN PARADISE.

Errata.
Page 2. Line 37. read. Renowned. p. 3. l. 18. r. Engedi. p. 3. l. 14. r.
Absaloms. p. ^. l. 29. r. ingenuous. p. 6. l. 3. r. connivence. p. 6. l. 13. r.
worn. p. 8. l. 22 r. Blood of Charles, ib. l. ult. r. Isaac. p. 12. l. 32. r.
edge of your humiliation. p. 15. l. 33. r. Martial. p. 20 l. 31. r. There can
be no Adulterer without an Adulteress. p. 23. l. 21. dele of after Glory.

THRENODIA Anglicana ob Regicidium, OR THE LAMENTATION Of Loyal Subjects, for
the DECOLLATION of their Royal Sovereign.
2 Samuel 24.5, 6. And it came to pass afterward, David's heart smote him,
because he cut off Saul's Skirt.

And he said unto his men, The Lord forbid, that I should do this thing unto my
Master the Lords Anointed, to stretch forth my hand against him, seeing he is
the Anointed of the Lord.


JUlius Caesar being brutishly murdered, in the Senate house, Marcus Antonius
brought forth his bloody Coat to the people of Rome, saying, behold the bloody
Coat of your Emperor; who at the sight hereof so Condoled his death, that
they fell into a furious rage against the murderers: so King Charles the first
being inhumanely murdered at the Gate of his Palace, I am this day to revive
the memory, and Represent the barbarousnesse of this doleful Tragedy, and as it
were, to hang forth his bloody Robes before your eyes; that all your hearts may
be stirred up to Godly humiliation, for this horrid murder of our sacred
Sovereign, the breath of our Nostrils, the Anointed of the Lord: and therein
the beheading of three Kingdoms. For the Wish of Nero (which was, That all the
Citizens of Rome had but one Neck, that so he might kill them all at one blow)
was fulfilled to, and executed by our English Neroes; who at once severed the
Royal Head of King Charles from his own Body natural, and our body Politic;
leaving England, Scotland and Ireland in a bleeding, dying condition, on that
fatal birthday of Englands misery Jan. 30. 1648. This dreadful doomsday (if,
I may so call it) among all the days, since the creation, next to that,
wherein Christ was crucified (were it not vain to curse a day irrevocably past,
Genesis 1.3, 4, 5, 31. Job 3.3, to 10.
and sinful to curse a day that God has made,) does chiefly deserve to have
such Anathema's thundered out against it, as Job pronounced upon the day of his
Nativity. We may affix such a motto unto it, as David unto the day of Abners
murder, Know ye not that a Prince and a great man is fallen this day in our
Israel? 2 Samuel 3.38.
Wherefore Pious and Christian is our turning it into an Anniversary Fast, that
the Nation by solemn and sorrowful lamentation, may discharge it self from the
guilt, and avert the punishment of this Royal blood, which was shed in the
midst of it. That I may contribute something thereunto, I have chosen this Text
to be the foundation of my ensuing discourse, which being so suitabe to the
season and occasion, may challenge the honor, that Solomon gives to a word
fitly spoken, Prove. 25.11.
namely, to be like Apples of Gold, in pictures of silver. These Golden Apples
require little paring by explication; my chief work will be in the doctrinal,
and Applicatory parts, to cut and quarter them forth unto you, for your
edification in Loyalty.

The words are Historical, being a part of the Chronicle, and Narrative of the
persecution of David by Saul, the sum, whereof is briefly this; Heroical David
having out of zeal for the weal of his country, through his Wisdom prowess, and
the blessing of God crowning his enterprises with success, performed many
glorious exploits, particularly that famous victory over Goliath the great giant
of Gath, Who defied the armies of Israel, and of the living God; with many more
honorable achievements against the Philistines, was Admired and Renouned
among the people, Inthroned in their affections, and applauded with Superlative
acclamations; yea, (through the indiscretion of the vulgar, 1 Samuel 18.7.
) above the King himself. Saul has slain his Thousands, and David his ten
thousands.

Saul seeing his own glory thus extenuated and eclipsed, while David's shined
forth so brightly, envieth Davida praise, fear^ch his person, is jealous of his
fidelity; least by reason of his popularity he should carry on some ambitious
design for his own accession to the Kingdom; and therefore pursues after his
life (knowing that, mortui non mordent) thereby to prevent the peoples revolt,
and David's heading them. So dangerous is honor, that it often proves the snare
and ruin of the persons dignified therewith.

Though this act of Saul may seem a necessary piece of state policy to a
Machivilian eye, yet certainly to the eye of a Christian, it will appear a
gross violation of Piety; For David had given many demonstrations of his
unfeigned loyalty, but never any ground of suspicion of intended Rebellion, by
abusing his interest in the affections of the Israelites. The imitation of
David's integrity by our late popular Absoloms would have been Englands
happinesses as their deviation from his footsteps, was our misery.

The persecuted, having escaped, many ambushes laid for his life, at length
finds his perseoutor, at a great advantage, in a Cave at Engedy: but spares
his life, cutting off only the Skirt of his garment.

Thus having taken a survey of the Suburbs of the Text, I am now arrived at the
words themselves: which contain,

First, David's Cordial contrition for cutting off the Royal Robe of King Saul,
ver. 5. where consider, 1. The great degree of his sorrow. His heart smote him.
2. The slight nature of the Act (considered materially) for which he mourned,
It was his cutting off the Robe, not the Head of Saul.


Secondly, David's Loyal Detestation of outting off the Royal head of the Lords
Anointed, manifested in a succinct, and excellent Oration, ver. 6. wherein may
be considered.

First, The occasion thereof; which was twofold.

I. The fit opportunity he had to slay Saul, being in a Cave. II. The great
Importunity, wherewith his Soldiers persuaded him thereunto.
Secondly The Orator, He (i. e. David) said unto his men.

1. David a Subject. 2. David a General of an Army. 3. The Auditors, he said
unto his men, i. e. his Soldiers. 4. The Oration it self: which may be
Analyzed into 4. parts.
I. A vehement detestation. The Lord forbid. II. The Act detested, That I
should do this thing, to stretch forth my hand against my Master. III. The
person detesting this Act, that I (i. e. David) should do this thing. IIII. The
reasons of his Detestation; which are deduced from Saul's Relation.
First, To himself -- My Master.

Secondly, To God -- the Lords Anointed.

1. I shall begin with David's Cordial Contrition, for cutting off the Royal
Robe of Saul; And from the greatness of his sorrow, and the slightness of the
Act, which was the ground thereof, compared together, Observe.
Observe, That the least disloyal action, the smallest injury, and slightest
indignity, committed against, and offered unto a King, ought, by Godly sorrow,
and true Repentance, greatly to be lamented. David's heart smote him, because
his hand smote Saul's garment.

Though David being himself surprised, with his sudden, and unexpected
surprisal of Saul, in such a place of advantage, did (through incogitancy, and
inadvertency, not thinking there had been any evil in spoiling the garment,
seeing he spared the life of Saul: And likewise out of zeal for the vindication
of his innocence) adventure on an Act unbeseeming the Majesty of a King, and
the Duty of a Subject: yet as soon as he recollected his thoughts, and
considered, that not only the persons, but the Robes of Princes, (which are the
Ensigns and Badges of authority) ought to remain untouched; and found his
action criminal, and himself culpable, his heart smote him.

As Ephraims repentance is set forth by his smiting on the thigh. Jer. 31.19.
Luke 18.13. Mat. 26.57. Act. 2.37.
The Publicans, by smiting on the Breast. Peter's, by weeping bitterly. The
sorrow of the converted Jews for their crucifying Christ, by being pricked at
the heart. So David's Remorse for wounding the robe of his Sovereign is
expressed, by his Hearts smiting him. Compunction of spirit for the least
disloyal actions should always follow the commission of them.

A Loyal subject being overcome by a violent temptation may be induced to Act
some things Derogatory to his Kings Honor, and his own Loyalty; yet when by
deliberate reflection thereon, he discerns his crime; he will expiate the
guilt by true repentance. Even as water, though it be hot, whilst set over the
fire, yet when removed from thence, returns to its pristine coldness; and as
an he^^ie Body violently detained from its center, Remoto prohib^nte, naturally
and immediately descends thereunto.

Loyalty may be sullied, but cannot be obliterated, smothered for a time, but
never totally exstinguished. It may be wounded, but cannot be Killed; fall
asleep, but will awake again, and like the Sun breaking forth out of a Cloud,
appears in its brightness and glory-David being conscious of his clemency
toward the life of Saul, might have excused his cruelty toward his garment:
but so pure and Christalline was his Loyalty, that he seems to forget his
imparallel compensation of good for evil; and wholly Dwells on this Punctillio.
Thus S. Austine in his confessions says, that he was troubled in conscience
for stealing Apples in his youth.

Moderation in disloyal actions, is no sufficient Apology for them. Had David
urged this plea, he might have rather justified himself, for doing no more;
then accused himself, for acting so little. He might have expected to have been
Commended, rather then Condemned; saying, Saul has no reason to be offended
with me for cutting off his garment, but much reason to reward me for not
cutting off his Head.

Should a Thief finding a Thousand pounds in Gold, in a travelers purse, take
away only six pence, leaving all the rest untouched; yea, and afterward be
troubled in his mind for those six pence; it would argue eminent honesty. This
is the nearest Emblem and resemblance of David's Heroical innocence; which yet
did surmount this instance: The Law allows no Accessaries in the case of
treason; all are principals. The Law of God adjudgeth them guilty, whose hands
were only inch-deep; as well as those, whose hands were Elbow-deep in the blood
of King Charles. Men viewing their failings in the Cracked glass of
self-love, and through the false Spectacles of self-justifying pride, account
little Sins, no sins, and great sins little sins. David was of a more ingenious
and impartial Spirit; choosing rather to aggravate, then extenuate, to
magnify then to mince the violation of his Allegiance.

A Thief if he leave money enough in the traveller; purse to carry him to his
journies end, thinks himself to deserve praise, rather then dispraise: but an
honest man's conscience will smite him, should he wrong a man in the smallest
matter, though he did it ignorantly.

David knew that Disloyalty is of an incroaching nature; that little sins are
gradual approaches toward greater: that if he could have dispensed with
wounding the Royal Robe, he might at length have adventured to wound the Royal
heart of his Sovereign. Though Treason appear but as a spark of fire at first;
yet if not quenched with the tears of repentance, it will soon flams forth
into open Rebell^^s; and spread over the whole body Politic as the Gangren
creeps from joint to joint, over the whole body natural.

Should indulgence, connivance, and Impunity be afforded, to an indignity
(though never so diminutive) against a King, it would animate and imbolden men
to Act superlative enormisies. Petty-larceny is a preparative to felony; it is
felony in its infancy. He that can without remorse smite a King with the sword
of his tongue, will, when opportunity serves, smite him with a sword of steel.

As small brush-wood is first laid on the fire to kindle the great Blocks
afterward laid upon it; and as the lesser wedges make way for greater, so
little sins are but shooing-horns to draw on greater; and Dwarf-like crimes,
but stirrups and footstoolls, whereby to mount up on Gigantick ones. Garments
when the Hems are wore off will soon unravel.

Despising of Kings will grow to Deposing of them, and contemning of them, to
condemning of them, if not checked betimes, either by the Magistrates sword, or
the Offenders own conscience: even as the Cockatrices egg will grow to a
Serpent, if not crashed in the Shell. For contempt of a Prince, is Regicide in
the Bud, in the shell; and actual Regicide is but Contempt full-blown and
hatched. Wherefore laudable was David's relenting for so small an injury offered
to his Prince. But let me correct my self; why do I speak of small injuries
offered to Kings, when the slightest indignities in themselves, yet when
committed against such sacred persons, become heinous, flagitious and
inexpiable.

The transcendent and incomprehensible greatness of God, causes the least
offense against his infinite Majesty to be of an infinite guilt; so that
dignity, which the supreme Jehovah, has conferred on his deputed and
subordinate Deittes, does cause the most inconsiderable offenses against them,
to swel up into high Treason.

There can be no little sin; because there is no little God to sin against: So
there can be no Diminutive Treason; because the object thereof is the sacred,
and honorable Person of a King. An Act receives its specification,
Denomination, and aggravation from the nature of its Object.

Use. This Doctrine does conclude, a forti^ri for our lamentation this day, for
that fatal and mortal blow that was given to our Royal Sovereign. If the
wounding of King Saul's Robe, the smiting of his skirt, cast David into such
pangs of sorrow: much more should the cutting off King Charles his head; the
(...) of his heart, cause England to mourn ^n Sackclotheand Ashes. How should
the memory of this murder bedew English checkes, with tears, fill our hearts
with sorrow, and over-shadow us with mourning? as the Departing Sun does the
night with Darkness; and the Declining Sun the Winter with Cold and Frost. In
Ramah there was a voice heard, weeping, and mourning, and great lamentation:
Rachel weeping for her Children, and would not be comforted; because they were
not. Mat. 2.18.
And all by reason of the cruel infaticide acted by Herod. So in England was
there a voice heard, weeping, and Mourning and great Lamentation: Subjects
weeping for their King, and would not be comforted, because he was not, and all
by reason of the bloody Regicide, committed by cruel Herod's.

We find in sacred History that subjects have bewailed all disasters bef illing
their Kings, especially their violent death. 2 Chronicles. 35.4, 5.
All Judah and Jerusalem mourned for Josiah: And all the singing men, and
singing women, spoke of Josiah, in their lamentations unto this day, and made
them an ordinance in Israel. Zac. 12.10. compared with. Acts. 2.36, 37.
Yea so great was their sorrow, that the holy Ghost accounts it a fit pattern
and resemblance of that grief which should possess the hearts of the converted
Jews, for their crucifying the Lord of glory. They shall mourn over him whom
they have pierced, as a Father mourns for his only Son. And in that day there
shall be mourning, as the mourning of Hadadrimmon in the valley of Megiddon,
which was the place where Josiah was slain. If the Israsites thus lamented the
death of Josiah, 2 Chronicles. 35.22.
notwithstanding he was slain in battle, by enemies in open hostility against
him; which might have mitigated their grief: How inexcusable would the neglect
of a sorrowful resentment of murder of our English Josiah be; seeing he was not
slain in the heat of War (which would have excused a tanto, though not a toto)
but butchered in cold Blood, in time of peace by his own Subjects, or at least
those that ought to have been such. It was the saying of our Martyred Sovereign
himself, That it is more honorable for a King to be invaded and almost
destroyed by Foreigners then to be despised at home. Psalm. 55.12, 13, 14.
Had it been an enemy I could have borne: But it was thou O Man, my friend, and
mine acquaintance. The Dagger of Brutus peirced Caesar's heart, more then any of
the rest, which he intimated to him in his last words, (...). And Scipio was
wont to say, that he had rather Hannibal should ear his Heart with salt, then
Lelius his friend offer him the least unkindnesse. How did David weep over the
Hearse of Abner, being perfidiously murdered by Joab. He commanded the people
to rent their clothes, 2 Samuel 3.31.32, 33, 35.
and gird them with sackcloth, and mourn before Abner. And King David himself
followed the Bier, and lift up his voice and wept at the grave of Abner,
saying, Died Abner as a fool Dies; and all the people wept again over him. And
David would not taste bread, or ought else, till the Sun was down, whereby all
Israel understood that day, that it was not of the King to slay Abner the Son
of Ner.

Did David a King so much lament the murder of Abner his subject? How much more
should we Subjects lament the murder of our Sovereign, that all the world may
know, that it was not of us to slay Charles King of England.

That funeral oration and mournful Elegy, which David pronounced for the death
of Saul, with a little variation, will serve for our occasion. 2 Sa. 1.17. to
the end


England laments with this lamentation over King Charles the first, ver. 17.
The beauty of England is slain upon thy high places: how is the mighty fallen!
ver. 19? Tell it not in Gath, publish it not in Askelon: least the daughters of
the Philistines rejoice; least the daughters of the uncircumcised triumph, ver.
20. How was the crown, yea blood of the mighty vilely cast away; the blood
Charles of as if he had not been the Anointed of the Lord, ver. 21.

Ye daughters of England weep for Charles who clothed you with Scarlet, with
other delights; who put on ornaments of Gold upon your apparel, ver. 24. O
Charles thou wast slain at the Gate of thy Palace! ver. 25. we are distressed
for thee, Oh King Charles, very pleasant have thou been unto us: thy love to us
was wonderful, passing the love of Women, ver. 26.

How did the mighty Prince fall and the Royal Crown perish!

That the horrid nature of this cruel Regicide may be more fully represented
unto you, as an argument for humiliation. Consider, First, the Act it self.
Secondly, the manner of its commission. Thirdly, The Object thereof. Fourthly,
the Authors. Fifthly, The effects and consequents.

1. Consider the nature of the act it self: It was not only contempt,
imprisonment, but murder.

The Superlative love of Abraham unto God was amplified, in that he was willing
not only to chastise, Disinherit, or banish his Son Isaac; but also to kill
him, by cutting his throat, ripping open his bowels, and burning his quarters
on the Alta^: so it is, on the contrary the high aggravation of the high
Treason, for which we mourn this day, that it was not terminated in some small
affronts; but proceeded to the effusion of the Royal blood of his Sacred
Majesty.

2. Murder Purposed, though not perpetrated is of an infinite guilt. Sin
conceived in the heart is damnable, though it never come to the birth, or be
brought forth. Was it not a cursed and Diabolical design in Faux, and the rest
of the Gunpouder-Traytors, at one blow, to blow up King Prince and Nobles;
notwithstanding it proved Abortive? how villainous then were those bloody
consultations and resolutions, which came to Maturity, and ripened unto the
execution of the Lords Anointed!

3. It was a voluminous, and bigbellied sin; a sin in folio, which contains a
great litter of other sins, in the belly of it. Ingratitude envy, malice,
covetousness, ambition, rebellion, perjury, Treason, blasphemy were the bitter
ingredients, whereof this confection of porson was compounded.

4. It was a sin that admitted of no reparation. An imprisoned Prince might
have been set at liberty, a dethroned Prince inthroned again; but a murdered
Prince cannot be revived.

Secondly, Consider the manner how the Death of our Royal Sovereign was
effected. It was no casual or, involuntary act, no chance-medly, nor
manslaughter: but wilful murder. How studiously and Deliberately was it
acted! with what Impudence and malice, with what boasting and triumph, with
what impenitency and Remorslesnesse, and with what a fixed resolution against
all admonitions, and supplications was it committed! Murders of Kings in former
ages being done privately, were modestly acted in comparison of this.

It was the aggravation, as of Absaloms incest, 2 Sa. 16.22.
that he spread a tent on the house top, and went into his Fathers Concubines
in the sight of all Israel. So of our King-slayers treason, that they built a
Scaffold before the Royal Palace, and adventured on the Decollation of the
father of the Nation, in the face of the Sun, before thousands of spectators in
the most populous City of London.

Thirdly, Consider the object of this cruelty, or the subject whereon it was
acted. Not a private person, but a King, whose person is sacred, by the Law of
God, of Nature, and of Nations: yea not only a King, but a Christian, a
Protestant King. Jesus Christ and his Apostles acknowledged subjection unto,
and the primitive Christians prayed for heathen Em^^rors. The Jews were
commanded to seek the peace of the King of Babylon, to whom they were captives.
Mordicai discovered the treason plotted against the life of Ahasuerus, by his
two Chamberlaines. Esth. 3.21, 22, 23.
If the lives of Pagan Emperors, and bloedy Butchers of the Church, were
precious in the eyes of the primitive Christians; then certainly the murder of
a Gracious King, and Nursing Father ought to be unfainedly lamented by all that
name the name of Jesus Christ.

As the Husbandmen slew not only the servants, Math. 21.
but the Son of the Lord of the vineyard; and the Jews not only the Apostles
and Prophets, but also the father of the Prophets, Jesus Christ himself; So our
English Cannibals drank not only the blood of the Nobles and Peers of the
Realm, the Divines and Ministers of the Church, but also the Royal blood of
their sacted Sovereign.

4. The Authors and Actors of this cruel Massacre, and bloody Tragedy were
subjects, sworn subjects, that had taken the oaths of Allegiance, and
Supremacy, Professed Christians, yea, Protestants.

It had been enough for Foreigners, Heathens, Popish Inquisitors, Recusants,
Jesuits A Ravilliack, a Faux, to have attempted such a devilish wickedness:
But for persons obliged by the laws of Nature, of Nations, of Humanity, and
Christianity, by their own Oaths, Protestations, Covenants to defend the
authority, and life of their Sovereign, yet unnaturally, inhumanely,
barbarously, impiously, perfidiously, to take away his life; What a volume of
wickedness was it?

5. Consider the Malignant influences and effects hereof, in reference to the
Royal Family, England, our Neighbor Nations, and Religion.

First, The Death-day of our present dread Sovereignes Royal Father, was the
birthday of Woe and misery, to himself, and all the Royal Family: Even as
when the Root is dug out of the Earth all the branches wither. So barbarous
a butchery, of so glorious a Father, could not but work excessive sorrow in all
their royal breasts, by reason of natural Sympathy, and filial-affection. How
were they exiled from the inheritance of their Father, their native soil, and
the embraces of their loving subjects, to wander about, like David in the
Wilderness! Quis talia fando temperet a lachrimis!

Secondly, Englands happiness being embarked, and bound up in the life of its
King, (as Jacobs in the life of his Son Joseph) it was shipwrackt together with
him. The Eclipse of our Royal Sun benighted. the Kingdom with all its glories,
as Phineas his wife named her child Ichabod, saying the glory is departed front
Israel; because the Ark of God was taken: So might we have wrote Ichabod on all
our enjoyments, saying the glory is departed from England, because the Anointed
of the Lord was taken from us; which like the opening of floodgates caused a
Deluge, and inundation of calamities to flow upon Church and State.

Thirdly, What an evil example did this English Regicide yield to neighbor
Nations, to encourage them to rise up and cut the throats of their Princes: yoa
the memory of such a villainy is enough to infect posterity, and to poison the
generations to come with King-killing principles. Sins, the more contagious
they are, the more heinous, as the Plague is the worst of all diseases, because
most infectious. Thus Memucan aggravateth the disobedience of Queen Vasthi to
her husband; because she had done wrong, not only to the Kings Person, but also
to all the Princes and people of the Provinces of King Ahasuerus, Esth. 1.16,
17, 18.
by giving an evil example unto all the Ladies and Women of Media and Persia,
to despise and disobey their husbands.

Fourthly, What scandal has been brought unto the Protestant Religion, as if
the principles thereof did justify the murder of kings. It has groaned and
traveled in pain until now, under that reproach which has been cast upon it,
by reason of that pre onded zeal for God, which was made use of to color,
cloak, mask, and disguise the murder of the King: who therefore might have
said as Henry the 7th Emperor of Germany did, when he was poisoned in the
Eucharist, and felt the operation thereof, Calix vitae, Calix mortis, the cup
of life is made the cup of death to me.

Absaloms Rebellion against his Father, 2 Samuel 15.7, 10. 1 Kin. 21.
under pretense of a vow to be paid at Hebron. Jezebles proclaiming a fast, for
the more plausible murder of Naboth. And Jehu's extirpation of Ahabs posterity,
his competitors for the Kingdom, and Baals priests their Abettors, pretendedly
out of zeal for God; but intentionally for his own establishment on the Throne,
seem to be the original and Prototype from whence those blasphemous and
Hypocritical transactions, in order to the murder of K. Charles were
transcribed: for this likewise was hatched under the warm wings, and swadled
up in the mantle of abused Religion, yea, never did a child more resemble his
Father, then the actions of English Absalom's, Jehu's, Jezebels, do the actions
of those Jewish hypocrites. They answer one another, as face answers face in
a glass. Uladislaus King of Hungary, having agreed on a cessation of Ar^e;
with the Turks, did notwithstanding, upon an advantageous opportunity, assault
them: The Turks perceiving the battle to go against them, cried out, O Jesus,
Jesus! will thou permit such perjured persons to call themselves Christians?
Whereupon the battle turned, and the Christians were vanquished. Likewise an
Indian rejected Christiani y, and vilified Heaven, because he heard the
Spaniards did go the her; whose cruelty rendered both their persons and
Religion abhorred.

What offense do even Turks, and Infidels take at the abominable practices of
professed Christians, and how great a wound is given to religion hereby! As the
sight of Asahels Dead body stopped the march of Joabs soldiers: so the gross
failings of professors of Religion, cause some to stagger at, and others to
retreat back from the prfe ssion it self.

Wherefore take up weeping, and wailing, ye inhabitants of England, for that
the holy and reverent name of God, pure and undefiled Religion has been so
much blasphemed, abused, and prostituted to, and made a Stalking-horse for the
vile lusts and bloody designs of ambitious men; especially in that God-
dishonouring, Gospel-disgracing, Religion-reproaching sin of regicide, that was
committed amongst us. I have read a dreadful story, concerning a company of
Stage Players, whilst some of them were personating and acting the part of the
Devil, the real Devil came in amongst them, and drove them all away. If the
Devil disdaineth to be brought upon the stage in a mockery, much more does the
Jealous God.

There are two obstructions, which, if not removed, may possibly abate the edge
of your sorrow, for the murder of King Charles; to wit, the long distance of
time since which it was committed, And your persuasion of your innocence and
freedom from the guilt thereof.

For the first, The old Age of this murder should be so far from antiquating
the sense thereof, or blunting the edge of your humility, that it should rather
accelerate and increase it; for, the time past is enough, yea too much, for the
nation to have retained the guilt of that Royal blood: Now it is high time to
awake out of sleep, and by a National repentance, to testify an abhorrence of
the Treason; least that judgment, which has been hitherto suspended should
now be executed. God may reprieve, when he does not pardon a Nation:
forbearance is no acquirtance. The Lord avenged the slaughter of the Gibeonites
by Saul many years after the commission thereof, 2 Samuel 21.1, 2. 2 Chronicles. 35.25.
even in the Reign of David, with three years famine on Israel. Those words,
They spoke of Josiah in their lamentations unto this day, do denote the
continuation of their sorrow for him a long time after his death.

Secondly, notwithstanding, this sin was contrived and actually committed but
by few, and detested by the majority of the Nation: yet I fear mosst of the
people of England have contracted the guilt thereof, upon these two grounds.

1. Because they did not rise up as one man, with an unanimous resolution to
rescue their captived Sovereign out of the hands of those roaring Lions, and
destroying Bears, which devoured him: even as all Israel did to rescue their
beloved Jonathan, who cried out, shall Jonathan Die? God forbid, as the Lord
lives, there shall not one hair of his head fall to the ground. This should
have been Englands voice, resolution, and endeavor in behalf of their King,
Causae non impedientes are numbered by Philosophers among moral efficient
causes. Qui non prohibet, quod potest, jubet.

2. For defect of sufficient humiliation. General insensiblenesse renders a sin
national, as well as common practice. I doubt Eng. sorrow has not been
proportionable to the degree of Englands sin. Sins that have been buried a long
time in the grave of oblivion, may revive in their punishment. It was a pious
desire of a Reverend Divine, that a National fast might be solemnly observed
for the innocent blood of Holy Martyrs shed in Queen Maryes Reign.

Achan only took of the accursed thing, and yet it is said, Josh. 7. ve. 6. and
11.
all Israel sinned, and committed a trespass before the Lord, And all Israel
suffered for the sin of Achan. Beloved the murder of King Charles may be an
Achan in England, to bring down the curse of God upon it; unless we acquit our
selves by serious humiliation from the guilt thereof.

All the righteous blood shed upon the earth, from the blood of Righteous Abel,
unto the blood of Zacharias the son of Barachias, slain between the Temple and
the Altar, is charged by Christ on the Pharisees. If the blood of Abel might
justly be imputed to a people, that never had finger in it, 4000. years after
it was shed; Much more may that innocent Royal blood which was shed, but 12
years since, be a Moth and a Canker to England; unless we offer up the
Sacrifice of a broken and contrite heart unto the Lord. Wherefore, let us hang
our harps upon the Willowes, and mourn when we remember King Charles the first,
as the Israelites sat down by the rivers of Babylon, Psa. 137.1, 2.
and wept when they remembered Zion. Let us breath out our sorrow in the words
of the Prophet Jeremiahs Lamentations for the captivity of Zedechiah, The
breath of our nostrels, the anointed of the Lord was taken in their pits, Lam.
4.20.
of whom we said, under the shadow of his wings we shall live and flourish.

Naturalists relate that the hard Adamant it self, being bathed in the blood of
a Goat, will be softened and dissolved: So were your hearts of a Rock-like,
Flint-like, Adamantine nature, yet methinks being bathed in the blood of a
King, they should be dissolved into tears of Godly sorrow.

O cursed Ax! that at one blow cut off the head of three Kingdoms, and left
them as Dead carcasses. O Glorious Prince! with what Kisses of dissimulation
did English Judasses betray thee! How was thy sacred person, in imitation of
our blessed Savior, (who was crowned with Thorns, spit on, scourged, buffeted,
reviled) exposed to scorn and ignomy! How were thy Nobles and Peers who were
wont to attend thy royal Person, Exchanged for Jaylors, thy Palace for a
prison, thy Throne for a scaffold and a Block! Did not the adversaries of King
Charles cry out, Execution, Execution, as the Jews against Christ, Crucify
him, Crucify him; Finally his royal head was cut off with a cruel Ax; as the
blessed heart of Christ was pierced with a cruel Spear.

Was not this the most monstrous and barbarous act, the most bloody tragedy of
all tragedies, that ever were acted, since the crucifying of the Son of God,
for a company of abjects not only to abuse, vilify their Sovereign with the
opprobrious names of malefactor, Traitor, and the like; but also to arraigne,
condemn and execute him. Had they touched only his royal robes, it had been a
violation of their duty, but they divested themselves of christianity, Loyalty,
yea Humanity it self, and cut off his royal head. Hear O Heavens, give Ear O
Earth, gather blackness and be astonished! for a great evil has been
committed amongst us. O Sun in thy race throughout the whole world, even the
most barbarous corners thereof, did thou ever take notice of a more inhumane
murder?

O that we had some Jeremiah with Eyes as water, and an head as a fountain of
tears, to lament the death, and sing the obsequies of our Mattyred King, yea
to write a book of lamentations for him, as he did for the captivity of King
Zedechiah.

Again, from Davide humiliation for, and intention in smiting Saul's Robe,
compared together: Observe, That a good intention does not justify an evil,
Observe.
and disloyal action.

David's design was to procure a testimony of his innocence; that Saul
beholding the skirt of his robe in David's hand, might be fully convinced, that
David had no design against his life: then which he could never have proposed a
better end to himself, next to the glory of God, and salvation of his soul; and
yet being conscious of ataxy in his action, his heart smites him for it. An Act
for the matter and substance thereof Lawful, may for Defect of a right
modification, and a good end, be but splendidum peccatum: but it is impossible
that an act materially evil, should be rectified by the best end aimed at
therein. A garment of good cloth may be marred in the making: but a good
garment can never be made of bad cloth.

The prevention of evil, does not justify the commission of evil, in order
thereunto. Lots desire to prevent Sodomy, did not authorize him to permit
Adultery, by prostituting his daughters to the lust of the Sodomites. Herod was
not to be excused, when he rushed on the Rock of murder in beheading John the
Baptist, at the request of his Dancing minion, to avoid the sands of perjury.
Math. 14.10.
Neither does the attainment of the greatest good, change the nature of an evil
action. The preservation of Lots posterity did not excuse his Daughters incest;
nor the procurement of the blessing, Rebekahs treachery, and Jacobs lying. The
Lord smote Uzzah that he died, for touching the Ark; though out of an in ention
to keep it from falling, when the Oxen stumbled. 1 Chro. 13.9.10. Joh. 16.2.
Phil. 3.
Christ tells his Disciples, that the time should come, that some should think,
they did God good service in killing them. Paul during his Pharisaism
persecuted the Church of God, out of zeal. Men may give their bodies to be
burned, and yet die not as Martyrs, but as malefactors. An Heretic may seal
his heresy with his Blood; as Servetus at Geneva. I Doubt not but many
Mahumetans would Die, rather then renounce their religion. The glory of
Martyrdom requires a just and righteous cause to be suffered for, as well as a
good intent in them that suffer. Martial law excuses not a Captain exceeding
his commission; notwithstanding he did it out of a good intention, and with
good success. Subjects should not be injurious to their Prince, either for the
sake of Religion, or civil Liberty. David's intention smiting Saul's Skirt, was
Honorable, yet the Act it self is Condemned by himself.

I come now to the Second part of the Text.

David's Loyal detestation of cutting off the Royal head of the Lords Anointed,
manifested in his excellent Oration. Part. II.


1. The Occasion whereof, first presents it self to our consideration, which
was twofold; First, the fit Opportunity; Secondly, The great Importunity he
had to slay Saul: from whence note these two fundamental principles of loyalty.

1. That the fittest opportunity, wherein to offer violence to a Prince, is to
be rejected.

2. That the greatest importunity thereunto, is to be resisted.

First, Obs. 1.
That the fittest opportunity, wherein to offer violence to a King is to be
rejected. Opportunity is the Touchstone of Loyalty.

David might have effected the death of Saul with the greatest certainty, and
with the greatest security.

1. 1 Samuel 24.4
With the greatest certainty. David and his men had so encompassed Saul in the
Cave, that his men cried out unto him, behold the day, of which the Lord said
unto thee, I will deliver thine enemy into thine hand, that thou may do to
him, as shall seem good unto thee. Saul being asleep in the Trench, Abishai
said unto David, 1 Samuel 26.8.
let me smite him, I pray thee with the spear, even to the Earth at once, and I
will not smite him the second time. David finding Saul in the Cave, might have
smote off his Head, as well as the Skirt of his Robe; and turned the Cave into
his Grave. And finding him asleep in the Trench, he might have took away,
instead of the Cruise of water from his Bolster, so much blood from his Heart,
and made it his last sleep; courting him with that Complement, wherewith a
Captain once courted his Soldier, whom he found asleep on the watch, when he
thrust his Sword into his bowels, saying, Dead I found thee, and dead I leave
thee. But this was the Crown and Glory of David's loyalty, that he was
Opportunity-proof. As the Salamander remains unscorched in the Fire; and as a
man in a Pesthouse escapes the infection of the Plague, so David preserves
his loyal breast untainted with these temptations; instead of improving
opportunityes, for the acting of murder, he converts them into Trophyes of his
fidelity; had David abstained from an attempt on Saul's life, only while the
Success was Dubious, it would have been an argument of his Policy; But to
forbear it, when he had such an opportune season, at one blow, to make this
Royal Lion, that was so rampant, not only couchant, but also a Dead Carcass,
was a Monument of his Loyalty.

2. With the greatest security. Had David been the Object of the Peoples Envy,
a desire of self-preservation was enough, to restrain him from the Murder of
Saul, lest the Noise of such a Fact should have given an Alarm to the People,
to rise up as one man, to avenge the blood of their King, and like Lions robbed
of their Whelps, to tear him into pieces as a destroyer of their Country. But
David was so far from the danger of being exposed to the rage and fury of the
Israelites, that he was even their Idol: Insomuch, that Saul being slain, he
might have expected their Acclamations, rather than Exclamations; their
Congratulations for his Safety, rather than their condoling of Saul's death.

Peruse the History, and it will appear, what great interest he had in the
Affections, and what great applause from the mouths of the Children of Israel,
1 Samuel 18.5. He behaved himself so wisely, that he was accepted of all the
people, and of Saul's Servants. And v. 6, 7. With Tabrets and with Harps they
sang, Saul has slain his thousands, and David his ten thousands. How willingly
did the men of Judah anoint him King after Saul's death, 2 Samuel 3.4.

Deservedly was David thus esteemed of his Contrymen: For never did any
gallant Romans, not Regulus or Cato themselves merit better of their Country,
than David of his.

Now how different was Loyal David from the mind of his Son Absalom? The Son by
fair Speeches and courteous behavior stole away the hearts of the Israelites,
and then employed them in rebellion, 2 Samuel 15.2. to 7. But the Father not only
abstained from all subtle Insinuations and horrid Calumniations of Saul's Person
and Government; but when his Deserts (like the Sun) drew all eyes and
affections unto him, yet disdained to pervert his, popular interest and favor
to any rebellious Design.

This Self-denial condemns our English Absaloms, who by Machivilian
dissimulation, and slandering the Footsteps of the Lords Anointed, sought to
render his Person odious, and his Restoration impossible; themselves amiable,
and their Usurped Power impregnable.

Likewise it admonishes all Persons of Renown and Interest in their Country,
to employ themselves in extinguishing, rather than fomenting that Turbulency
which is a Chronical disease in the Vulgar.

Now David's abhorrence of Revenge, when he might so certainly and so securely
have dispatched his Enemy, sets such an Emphasis on his Loyalty, 1 Samuel 24.17,
18, 19.
that it struck Saul himself into an admiration and adoration of it.

It is nothing for a Beggar, who has not sufficient for necessity, to abstain
from supersluity; but to fit at a Rulers Table, swimming with all manner of
Dainties, and to put a Knife to the throat, to be temperate with Timothy, among
luxurious Asians, enhaunceth the worth of Tempetance.

As it was the Glory of Joseph that he rejected a fair opportunity and great
importunity to commit adultery, Genesis 39.7, 8, 9. As it was the Honor of Joseph
afterward, in Pharoah's Court, of Obadiah, in Ahabs, of Daniel, in
Nebuchadnezzars, of Nehemiah, when Cup Bearer to Artaxerxes, of Lot in Sodom,
and of the Saints in Nero's House, a monster of men, Phil. 4.22. that they
retained their Piety, notwithstanding the manifold Temptations and
opportunities unto sin wherewith they were assaulted; so like a Diamond in a
Ring, it sets a great price on David's Loyalty, that at the Cave he did not
violate it.

Not to seek an opportunity for revenge, is honorable; but to reject it, when
offered, is double honor. Many are not disloyal, because they cannot, rather
then because they would not. As Tully says of the Catalinarians, aliis
Facultas defuit, aliis Occasio, voluntas profecto nemini. As the Tap to the
Vessel, and the Spark to dry Tinder, as the fire to benumbed fingers, and
Aquavitae to a fainting person, such is a fit opportunity to a disloyal heart.

Many who have been good Subjects, have proved bad Emperors; and many who have
been tolerable Cardinals, when advanced to the Papal Chair, have proved
Luxurious Sodomites, Egyptian Magicians, devouring Abaddons, and Incurable
Babylonians; so difficult is it to withstand the Force of an inviting
opportunity unto sin.

Wherefore Job, Chapter 31. V. 1. made a Covenant with his eyes, that he would not
look upon a woman, lest he should lust after her. And Solomon admonishes us,
not to look on the Wine, when it is red, when it gives its color in the Cup,
and moves it self aright; lest by the pleasant color, we should be allured to
an excessive use thereof, Prove. 23.31. But Virtues, how much the more
difficult, are so much the more honorable.

It was an Impeachment of Jacobs Fraternal affection to Esau, that he took the
opportunity of his hunger, to buy him out of the Prerogatives of Primogeniture,
Genesis 25.31, 33.

Though in other cales, David was easily overcome by Temptations (the sight of
a naked Bathshoha provoked him to violate his Chastity; and the unkindness of
Nabal, to meditate revenge and Murder) yet so great an Influence had the sacred
Office of a King on his heart, that the sight of Saul in a Cave, could not
wound his Loyalty. As the skill of a Pilot is tried in a storm, and the valor
of a Soldier in a Battle; so an opportunity of sin is the proof of virtue. It
is frequent with men to exclaim, against a Fact, before they are in a capacity
to commit it, and yet afterward to become notoriously guilty of that, against
which they exclaimed.

With what indignation did Hazael answer the Prophet Elisha, telling him that
he should rip up women with Child, and dash out the Brains of Children, 2 Kings
8.13. But what is thy Servant a Dog, that I should do this great thing? But
when he became King of Syria, the Prophecy of Elisha was fulfilled;
Magistratus indicat virum.

The greatest Importunity to offer violence to a King, is to be resisted.
Observe. 2.


David's Soldiers did importunately solicit him to slay Saul, 1 Samuel 24.4, 10.
Some bade me kill thee. 2 Samuel 26.8. Abisha^ said, now let me smite him, I pray
thee, with the spear unto the earth; These words do virtually include such like
Expostulations as these;

O David, Thou have for a long time been hunted as a Partridge in the
Mountains; we thy steadfast Friends, even in advensity, have hazarded our Lives
and dearest blood for thy defense: Wherefore embrace this opportunity, and
make it the death of Saul, and our own Miseries; betray as not by thy vain
scruples, and foolish lenity, into the hands of an implacable, and deceitful
Adversary.

What strong Obligations had David's Soldiers laid on him to gratiste their
request, by the denial whereof he might fear, left they should revolt from him,
and upbraid him, with preferring his enemies before his Friends; as Joab did,
when he mourned for the death of Absalom, 2 Samuel 19.5, 6. Thou have shamed this
day the faces of all thy servants, which have saved thy life, and the lives of
thy Wives and Concubines, in that thou love thine enemies, and hate thy
frituds: For thou have declared this day, that thou regardest neither Prinors
nor fervants; for I perceive, that if Absalom had lived, and all we had died
this day, it would have pleased thee well. Besides, what plausible Reasons for,
and what seeming necessity of the death of Saul, might have been suggested to
David? But he looking more to present duty, than future danger, chose rather to
hazard all his concernments, then to condescend to a sinful act, though cloaked
with such specious pretenses, as might have drowned the harsh sound of Murder.
Importunity is no Apology for Impiety: Were this Rule observed, it would save
many Thieves and Traitors from the Gallows. How frequently do malefactors at
the time of execution complain against their evil Companions, who seduced them?

Adams Plea, The woman gave me, and I did eat, Genesis 3.12. Nor Eves, The Serpent
beguiled me, and I did eat, Genesis 3.13. were not accepted by God, for their
tasting the Forbidden Fruit.

Moses would not acquit Aaron from the guilt of Idolatry, when he made the
Golden Calf, though he pleaded the importunity of the people, Exodus 32.22. Thou
know this people is set on mischief, and they said unto me make us gods.
Samuel urges on Saul his sin, in sparing Agag, and the best of the spoil,
until he confessed, I have sinned, I have transgressed, because I feared the
people, and obeyed their voice, 1 Samuel 15.24. An evil action is to be fathered
on the Actor, and not to be translated to the Tempter. Temptations resisted,
are the Tempters sins, and not ours; but if embraced, they become our sins as
well as the Tempters. The fire of temptation would do no hurt, without the dry
Tinder of our own lusts; For, where there is no wood, the fire goes out, Prove.
26.20. But as Coals are to burning Coals, so is a vitiated nature to corrupt
suggestions. Solicitations have no constraining or compulsive power over the
will, but only an enticing and alluring virtue; they cannot infuse any vicious
quality into the mind, but only stir up that Lust which is in it already; they
work not in a physical, but in a moral way. There can be no Adulteress without
an Adulterer. Were there not a formative virtue in the womb of the corrupt
heart, giving life unto sinful injections, they would prove abortive births;
though an Enticer may be said to be the Father begetting, yet the corrupt heart
is the mother conceiving and bringing forth the Bastard-brood of sin.

Should a man rob or stab you, and plead that he was tempted to it, would you
be satisfied with such an excuse? Importunity, is no cloak for disloyalty;
forasmuch as the counter-perswasions of God in his Word from it are greater
than men's solicitations unto it: Now (as Peter and John answered the Jewish
Rulers) Whether is it right in the sight of God, to hearken unto men more than
unto God, judge ye. The violent Clamours of the Jews against Christ, Acts 4.19.
Crucify him, Crucify him, did not acquit Pilate from the guilt of his blood;
but according to their imprecation of judgment on, and execration of
themselves, it has been on the heads of them and their children, this 1600
years. The Petitioners which were suborned against King Charles, like Jezabels
false Witnesses against Naboth, did not discharge the Actors of that Fatal
Tragedy, from the guilt of his Royal Blood.

All the plausible Remonstances, specious pretenses, and sophistical Pleas,
which our late Juglers raised, to delude the injudicious Vulgar, vanish before
this evident testimony, deduced from David's Loyalty, notwithstanding the
disloyal clamours of his Soldiers; even as Dagon fell down before the Ark, and
as the Mists and Vapors in the Air are chased away by the glorious beams of
the arising Sun.

Now possibly some who have rased out all Principles of Religion and Reason out
of their minds, may arraign David for a person of an abject and ignoble spirit,
and condemn him for Folly and pusillanimity, because he made not Ambition and
self-advancement his Card and Compass, whereby to steer his course; but
neglected so fair an opportunity to acquire a Kingdom. This Enditement will
appear to be no Billa vera, but a Forgery; and David's Loyalty to be no
Impeachment either of his Prudence or Magnanimity, if we review the precedent
History, wherein are recorded most undoubted proofs of both. Let that Subjects
Valor be accounted Diabolical fury, and his wisdom diabolical Subtilty, that
clasheth and interfereth with his Allegiance, and is inverted against his
Sovereign. Thus much in reference to the Occasion of David's Oration.

2. Now follows the Orator: He, i. e. David, said unto his men; 1. David a
Subject. 2. David a Captain of Soldiers.


1. David a Subject: From whence note,

That Subjects ought not to be contented with personal Loyalty, Observe.
but should endeavor to Loyalize others.

As Light, so Loyalty, is not to be hid under a Bushel. Mat. 5.15.
Loyalty is of a diffusive nature, it will not be engrossed and monopolized, it
will not be put into a Napkin, or locked up in private breasts.

David would not imprison, his Loyalty in his own breast, but causes it-to
flame forth in a Loyal Oration, that it might kindle the like Sacred fire in
the breasts of others.

Piety toward God, and Loyalty toward our King, should be of a like nature. It
is the property of Grace to be commuicative. John 1.
Andrew having found the Messiah, calls Simon, and Philip, Nathanael. Moses
could even wish his Name were blotted out of the Book of Life, and Paul
himself, accursed from Christ, for the sake of the Israelites. So Loyalty is of
a spreading and assimilating nature; like fire, that converts the Fuel into its
own substance; like Leaven that leaveneth the whole Lump; and like the
Philosophers stone, that turns what it touches into Gold.

With what Marks of Infamy do such deserve to be branded, who have run counter
hereunto, not only by personal disloyalty, but also by indefatigable industry
to poison others with Principles of Sedition. The Holy Ghost stigmatizeth
those, who incited the Jews to rebel against the King of Babylon, with the
Names of Diviners, Enchanters and Sorcerers. Jer. 29.9.
O, that all who have endeavored to propagate Treason in England, by seditious
Pamphlets, would deal with their Libels as the Sorcerers did with their
conjuring Books; Acts 19.19.
they brought them together, and burned them before all men, and counted the
Price, and found it fifty thousand Pieces of silver.

2. 1 Samuel 22.2.
Consider David in a military capacity, as Captain of Soldiers. 400 people
gathered themselves to him, and he became Captain over them. Generals of Armies
should persuade their Soldiers not only to be valiant against their Enemies,
but also faithful to their King. The great dignity conferred on them, the great
trust reposed in them, their Authority over, and Interest in their Soldiers,
do all require this duty from them. Besides, Soldiers are usually very
respectful to the Persons, obsequious to the Commands, observant of the
directions, and apt to imitate the Examples of their Leaders.

It was said of Naaman the Syrian, 2 Kin. 5.1.
that he was a great man, and honorable, but a Leper. To praise a man with a
but, is but to dispraise him.

It is a wound and dishonor never to be wiped off from the Names of some
Generals, that they were Famous and Valiant Warriors, but they inverted their
Arms against their Sovereigns A Commendation with this Discretive, but, is a
diminutive Commendation.

It gives an Accent to the Renown of Joab, 2. Sam. 12.
that he would not build up his own Glory, out of the Ruins of his Kings.
After he had almost taken Rabbah, he sent Mesengers to David, saying Gome and
encamp against it, lest I take the City, and it be called by my Name.

The memory of our late Military Officers will stink in the Nostrils of all
Loyal Subjects, because they debauched the minds of their Soldiers with
seditious Principles, instigated them unto Rebellion, and by subtle
Insinuations inthroned themselves in their Affections, in order to the
dethroning of their Sovereign. But let it be recorded for the perpetual Renown
of our Famous and Heroical English General, that he trod in the Footsteps of
David, that he took up the Cudgels against our rampant Enemies, who were so
drunk with Success, that they defied all Antagonists, as Goliath did David; and
that he employed his Arms for effecting the happy Restoration of our Dread
Sovereign, King Charles the Second, to his Throne and Kingdom. Wherefore let
his Name be precious unto the English, as the Names of Gideon, Barak, Samson,
Jepthah, and the rest of those Worthies of Israel, were unto that Nation, for
being Instruments of their deliverance out of the hands of Midianites,
Moabites, Ammonites and Philistines. Unto this Magnanimous Hero's tutelar
Sword, next unto His Royal Majesty's tutelar Scepter, (the principal
efficiency, and the Glory of, being reserved for, and ascribed unto the Great
God) England is indebted for all its Happiness.

3. The Third Member observed in the dissection of this Verse is David's
Auditors: He said to his men, i. e. Soldiers, being a p^ck of hungry and
bankrupt persons. 1 Samuel 22.2
Every one that was in distress, in debt, and discontented, gathered themselves
to him. These men's wants might provoke them to offer violence to Saul, that
they might be enriched with his Spoils, and have his Kingdom for a Prey.
Therefore David darteth forth this Loyal Oration, (that as cold water cast into
a Pot, stays the boiling thereof) it might allay the violent Aestuations of
their Passions.

Soldiers of all men, have most need of Loyal Instruction, that it may be an
Antidote against the Poison of the Temptations arising from a military
Employment. All is fish that comes to net with Swordmen, they are apt to put
no difference between the Princes Robes and the Peasants Russet; they are so
accustomed to Instruments and Acts of Cruelty, that immanity becomes natural
to, and habituated in them. Inter Arma silent Leges. The sounding Trumpet, the
roaring Cannon, and the rattling Spear, (like the noise of the Egyptian
Cataracts, which (as it is reported) makes the adjacent inhabitants almost
deaf) hinders the voice of the Law from being heard; and the Sword will be
made use of, for the decision of Controversies, 1 Kings 3.24, 25.
as it was by Solomon in another manner. As Fire in the Chimney is necessary
and profitable, but on the Housetop dangerous and pernicious; so though a
Militia be sometimes necessary for the defense of a Nation, and the offense of
its Enemies; yet if the military insolence of the Soldiers be not allayed by
godly and Loyal Instruction, it will be poison in stead of Physic to the Body
Politic. If the hearts of Soldiers be not seasoned with Loyalty, they will
grow so insolent, and be so Pinnacle high in Pride, that they will endewour to
turn their Belts into Robes, their Head-pieces into Crowns, and advance their
swords above the Scepter of their Sovereign, as England has found by sad
Experience.

Wherefore John the Baptist catechiseth the Soldiers that came unto him, Luke
3.14.
after this manner; Do violence to no man, accuse no man falsely, and be content
with your wages. And David in the Text, teaches his Soldiers to cause their
Swords to do Homage to Saul's Scepter, (as the Sheaves of Joseph's Brethren made
Obeisance to his) in a Lecture of Loyalty; which leads me to the Fourth
Particular.

4. The Oration it self, wherein is expressed;

1. A Vehement Detestation: The Lord forbid. This Expression denotes the
greatest Abhorrence of an Act. When the Ten Patriarchs would manifest their
Indignation against stealing Joseph's Silver Cup, Genesis 44.7.
they say, The Lord forbid that thy Servants should do this thing.

The Israelites protesting against the death of their beloved Jonathan, 1 Samuel
14.45. Romans 9.14.6. Romans 2.
cry out, Shall Jonathan die, who has wrought so great salvation in Israel?
God forbid. Is there unrighteousness with God? God forbid. Shall we continue in
sin that Grace may abound? God forbid. Paul's detestation of Blasphemy, and
David's of the murder of his King, are set forth by like expressions, to show
the affinity between these two sins.

There ought to be not only a reluctance against, an averseness from, a
forbearance of, and a resolution against injuriousness to the Sacred persons of
Princes, but also a fixed resolution joined with the greatest Antipathy against
it, an Abolition of disloyal, and an introduction of Loyal Principles, to
denominate Subjects eminently Loyal.

Many, who have Rebellious hearts, yet stretch forth no Rebellious hands, but
it is for want of a temptation, rather than of an inclination thereunto.

Methinks I hear the hearts and tongues of all faithful Subjects, ecchoing
forth a reply to all Suggestors of Treason, in such a Dialect as Balaam did to
Balak, desiring him to curse Israel, If Balak would give me his house-full of
Gold and silver, I cannot go beyond the Command of the Lord, to do this thing;
and as Hazael to Elisha, Is thy Servant a Dog, that he should do this great
thing? I cannot consent unto the Effusion of Royal Blood, unless I should
renounce Religion, Reason and Humanity it self, and Nebuchadnezzar-like, be
transformed into some Bruit Beast, some Tiger, Wolf, Bear or Lion: Yea, unless
I could exchange my humane, for a Diabolical Nature; because it is such a
barbarous and prodigious wickedness, which shall be demonstrated under the next
Head.

2. The Act Detested, which is expressed with an Emphasis, in these words, that
I should do this thing, i. e. this Horrid, this abominable thing, to stretch
forth my hand against the Lords Anointed. 2 Kin. 8.13.
It sounds as high as the like Expression of Hazael; -- That I should do this
great thing, i. e. this Inhumane Villainy, to rip up women with child, and to
dash out the Brains of Children. Stretching forth the hand against a Person, is
an usual Periphrasis of murder in Scripture-Dialect. David schooling the
Amalekite, for slaying Saul, says, How wast thou not afraid to stretch forth
thy hand against the Lords Anointed? 2 Samuel 1.14.


That the Murder of a King may appear in its bloody colors, consider it under
the Notion, 1. Of Homicide. 2. Of Regicide. Which is capable of a triple
Aggravation; being, 1. Paricide. 2. Sacricide. 3. Deicide.


1. Of Homicide. I take not this Word in a Juridical and Forensical sense, as
it is distinguished from Wilful Murder; but, as in its genuine signification,
it imports the Murder of a man, as a reasonable Creature, and abstracted from
any extrinsecal denomination, arising from superadded Honor.

This Scarlet and Crimson sin being died in Blood, was one of the first Crimes
against which God enacted a penal Law, and for which he allotted a Capital
punishment. Genesis 9.6. Pro. 28.13. Psalm. 35.23.
He that sheddeth man's Blood, by man shall his blood be shed; for in the Image
of God made he man. He that sheddeth the Blood of any Person, hastes to the
Grave, let no man hinder him. Bloody and deceitful men shall not live out half
their days.

Murder is so contrary to the Light of Nature, and so destructive to Humane
Society, that the Barbarians seeing a Viper on Paul's hand, said, no doubt, this
man is a Murderer, whom, though he has escaped the Sea, yet divine vengeance
will not suffer him to live. Acts 28.4.
It were easin to recite many Dreadful Examples of Gods judgments inflicted on
Murderers.

How often have Murders concealed for many years, been at length even
miraculously revealed?

Murderers have sometimes been struck dead by the immediate hand of God from
Heaven; and sometimes been their own executioners, by hanging, stabbing, or
drowning themselves. And as God rained fire and brimstone (Hell out of Heaven)
on Sodom and Gomorrah, so has he often caused some sparks of Hellfire to fly
into the Consciences of Murderers, and tormented them in a kind of Hell upon
Earth, with a continual sense of Blood-guiltiness. Blood lies heavy on the
Stomach, but more heavy on the Conscience.

2. If Homicide be such a capital Crime, much more is Regicide. If that like
Cain. shall be avenged seven fold, this like Lamech, shall be avenged seventy
and seven fold. Nothing but the blood, of Zebah and Zalmunna would pacify
Gideon, because they slew his brethren, Judges 8.18.19. 2 Kin. 9.31.
though they only resembled the Sons of a King. Judgment has always pursued
King-killers. Had Zimri peace who slew his Master?

The bowels of the Earth became the Habitation of Korah and his Accomplices, Number.
19. 2 Sa. 20.22.
for conspiring against Moses, King in Jesurun. The Head of Rebellious Sheba
became a just Sacrifice to pacify the fury of Joab.

The Life of a King is equivalent to the Lives of ten thousand Subjects. The
King said, 2 Samuel 18.2, 3.
I will surely go forth with you my self: But the people answered, thou shall
not go forth; for if we flee away, they will not care for us, neither if half
of us die, will they care for us; but thou art worth ten thousand of us;
therefore now it is better that thou succor us out of the City.

Sacred History is full of the Noble Examples of Loyal Subjects, who have been
even prodigal of their Lives for the sake of their Sovereign.

What Volunteers were the People of Israel, in jeoparding their Lives for the
sake of David, in Absaloms, and Sheba's Rebellions? You may find a Catalogue of
such Heroes in 2 Samuel 23. 2 Samuel 20.2.
Amongst whom, Abishai deserves an eminent Character for his Loyalty: When
Ishbi-benob thought to have slain David, he enters into a Combat with him,
though a Giant, a second Goliath, and slew him. Yea, how ready was he to
adventure his Life, 2 Sa. 21.17.
that he might wound the heart of Shime^, because he wounded the good name of
his Sovereign. The Life of David was so precious in the eyes of all his
Subjects, that they swear unto him, saying, 2 Samuel 16.9.
Thou shall no more go forth with us to battle, lest thou quench the light of
Israel. 2 Sa. 21.17.


How sharply does David rebuke Abner, for Life-guarding Saul no better. As the
Lord lives, ye are worthy to dye, 1 Samuel 26.15, 16.
because you have not kept your Master, the Lords Anointed. He that is not with
me, is against me, says Christ: So he that defends not a Prince, destroys
him. Christ alleges the duty of Subjects, to defend their Sovereign, as a
Principle ingrafted in the hearts of all men. If my Kingdom were of this world,
then would my Subjects fight for me, John 18.36.
that I should not be delivered into the hands of the Jews. Christianity
engages us to lay down our lives for the sake of Christ: So Loyalty obliges
us to adventure them for the safety of our King. Wherefore how do such
degenerate from the nature, not only of Christians, but also of men, who are so
impious, and so impudent, as to attempt the Destruction of Kings; for the
Preservation of whose Persons, they ought to sacrifice their own Blood. That
the Murder of a King may appear to be a detestable impiety, consider it;

1. As Paricide. Kings are styled Nursing Fathers, and Queens Nursing Mothers.
The same Compellation David used to Saul: Isa. 49.23. 1 Sa. 24.11.
My Father, see the skirt of thy Robe in my hand

Not only Natural, Oeconomical and Ecclesiastical Fathers, but also Political
Fathers are included in the Fifth Commandment.

If Fratricide caused Cain to be a Vagabond and a Fugitive on the Earth, and
Absalom to be banished out of Jerusalem, how great guilt is contracted, and how
great punishment deserved by Paricide?

This is such an unnatural Act, that the Ancient Romans would enact no Law
against it; because they thought none would be so barbarous, as to commit it.
It is a complicated sin, for hereby a man destroys him that begat him, that
loved and educated him, etc.

So that to kill a King, who is Pater Patriae, is by Analogy, as if a man
should cut the throat of his Father that begat him, and rip up the bowels of
his Mother that conceived him. What became of Traiterous Absalom, who sought
the Life and Kingdom of his Natural, and Political Father? Was he not
deservedly hanged between the boughs of an Oak? Were not Joabs darts fit
Chyrurgical Instruments, by a just kind of Phlebotomy, to let out his unnatural
blood?

2. Regicide is Sacricide. As it is Sacrilege to profane holy and consecrated
things, so it is Sacricide to murder the Anointed and Sacred Persons of Kings.

3. Regicide is (with reverence be it spoken) Deicide; a kind of God-Murder.
Methinks, now I hear some Melancholy illiterate Sectarian, exclaiming against
me, as the High Priest against Christ. Mat. 26.65.
This man has spoken Blasphemy; for God is not like man, that he should be
subject unto death.

That I may vindicate my Assertion from this heinous Charge; know, that it is
to be understood, not Properly, but Analogically. It is spoken (...), and must
be interpreted (...).

God forbid that I should assert any possibility of Mutation in the Divine
Essence, which is altogether impassible. Our Righteousness cannot profit him,
nor our Sins hurt him. Job. 22.2, 3. Job. 35.6, 7, 8.
It was the Heresy of the Anthropomorphites, that they ascribed unto God
humane Members, and an Organical Body; because the Scripture attributes Eyes,
Ears, Hands, and Bowels unto him; thus they transformed the incorruptible God
into an Image made like unto corruptible man. Romans 1.23.
Whereas such Speeches do only denote, that whatsoever Perfection accreweth
unto the body, by the use of such Members, is in an eminent and infinite degree
found in Gods thus Eyes and Ears denote Gods Omniscience, Hands his
Omnipotence; Bowels his infinite Mercy and Compassion. Now without bordering on
this Heresy, the Murdering of supreme Magstrates may be called God-murder,
though not actually and preperly, yet interpretatively: The Lord accounts it as
such.

The Jews, though they murdered only the Body of Christ, yet shed the Blood of
God: Acts 20.28.
because there is a (...) a Communication of Properties, arising from the
hypostatical Union between the Divine and Humane Natures of Christ, whereby
whatsoever does agree to one Nature, may be spoken of the whole Person.

Christ accounts the Persecution of his Members, Acts 9.4. Heb. 6.6. Mat.
25.45. Luke 10.16.
to be a Persecution of himself; by reason of the Mystical Union between them.

In like manner, God appropriates the Murder and Contempt of Magistrates unto
himself; because they receive their Commissions from him, stand in his stead,
represent his Person, are called by his Name, and are his Deputies and
Vicegerents. Ephesians. 4.30. Isa. 63.10. Isa. 43.24. Amos 2.13. Ezekiel. 6.9. Ezekiel.
16.43. 1 Samuel 8.7.


As the Lord is said to be grieved, vexed, wearied, and made to serve, pressed
as a Cart with sheaves, and broken, and fretted with men's Iniquities and
Transgressions; so to be rejected and despised, in the rejection and contempt
of Magistrates. Says the Lord to Samuel, they have not rejected thee, but they
have rejected me, that I should not reign over them.

Affronts offered to Ambassadors redound to the dishonor of the King that sent
them. David furiously revenged the abuse of his Ambassadors, when the Ammonites
shaved off their Beards, 2 Samuel 10.
and cut off their garments in the middle. Kings are the extraordinary
Ambassadors, which the great Jehovah has sent into the world; he will plead
their cause, and avenge their quarrels against all rebellious Subjects.
Wherefore let all men refrain from offering violence to Kings, lest (as
Gamaliel spoke in another case) they be found to fight against God. And let us
lament this day, Acts 5.39.
the horrid, monstrous, barbarous, inhumane, abominable and detestable Murder
of King Charles the First, because it was repugnant and contrary to Humanity,
as it was Homicide; to Nature, as Paricide; to Loyalty, as Regicide; to Piety,
as Deicide: because it was at once the Murder of a man, a King, a Father, a
God: Ps. 82.6.
I have said ye are gods, i. e. gods in Office, though not in Essence.

3. Consider the Person detesting this Act; God forbid that I, (i. e. David)
should do this thing. And David's heart smote him. V. 5.
There are many Circumstances relating to the Person of David, that do very
much amplisie his Loyalty.

1. He was Injured. 2. Anointed.
1. Injured David mourns for cutting off the skirt, and abhors cutting off
the Head of Saul: From whence note;

That Injuries received by Subjects from their Sovereign, Observe.
are not to be accounted a sufficient Charter, to absolve and discharge them
from their Allegiance; nor a sufficient Patent, to authorize and commissionate
them, to exercise revenge, rebellion and violence against him; but ought to be
swallowed down and passed by, with a meek and patient spirit: Or thus;

Subjects oppressed by their King, by reason of his false and groundless
suspicions concerning them, ought to be the more solicitous to clear up their
innocence and vindicate their Loyalty.

1. David deserved as well of his King and Country, as ever any Roman Generals
riding in triumph through the streets of Rome, with Captives bound to their
Chariot wheels, did of theirs. 2. He received not only an inadequate and
insufficient reward, but no reward; yea, he was not only non-rewarded, but
evilly entreated. Saul sought after his Life. 3. Yet his carriage is so meek
and Heroical, that it scarce admits of an Hyperbole or Parallel. For never was
a Subjects Integrity more groundlesly suspected, his Morits more unsutably
rewarded, his Injuries more wrongfully received, and yet his behavior more
gallantly Loyal, than David's. He revenged the Injures received from Saul, by
studying, to approve himself innocent, by redoubled courage against the
Philistines. As Paul says, where sin did abound, Grace did much more abound;
so David's Loyalty did exceed Saul's tyranny. Saul would have smote David to the
wall with a Javelin, though he could not; but David, though he could have smote
Saul to the Cave with a Sword, yet would not.
As the Oak is more strongly rooted by the winds, and the fire burns most
fiercely in winter, by reason of the Antiperistasis of cold; so David's
undeserved Persecution was rather like Oil, to increase, than water to
extinguish that Loyal Fire, that was in his breast.

David's design in cutting off Saul's skirt, was no other, than (as Goliahs sword
was laid up behind the Ephod, to be a Monument of David's victory over him) to
obtain a Trophy and Monument of his Loyalty. 1 Samuel 24.9, 10.
Wherefore hear thou men's words, saying, behold David seeks thy hurt?
Behold, this day thine eyes have seen, how that the Lord had delivered thee
into my hands in the Cave, and I said, I will not stretch forth my hand against
my Lord, for he is the Lords Anointed: Moreover he said, yea, see the skirt of
thy Robe in my hand: For in that I cut off the skirt of thy Robe, and did not
kill thee, know thou, and see, that there is neither evil nor transgression in
my hands; and I have not sinned against thee, yet thou huntest my soul to take
it.

If you consider David's consequent contrition of spirit, for but the shadow of
disloyalty, in smiting Saul's garment, and his vehement antipathy against
destroying his Life, it will appear, that God has stamped such inviolable
authority on all Kings, as well the evil, as the good, that they are exempted
from the Lashes of their Subjects, and the Offices of both, to be had in equal
respect, though the virtues of the one sort, be to be preferred before the
vices of the other.

1. Protection is not the ground of Subjection. That speech, salus populi,
suprema lex, does not detract from the Supremacy of Kings, nor justify the
contumacy of Subjects: but the genuine sense thereof is this, that the safety
of the people should be the scope of Legislators; whose Laws should conduce
thereunto.

2. A Simili: If a Master exercise too much rigor toward his Servants, shall
they therefore cast off the yoke of Subjection? The Apostle Peter exhortech
otherwise. Be subject to your Masters, 1 Pet. 2.18.
not only to the good, and to the gentle, but to the froward.

If a Father provoke his children to wrath, and give them immoderate and
undeserved Correction, shall they therefore break the Bond of Filial
Subjection, disown his Paternal Jurisdiction, and Absalom-like rise up in
Rebellion against him? God forbid. In like manner, a Political Fathers
violation of his trust, is no ground for Subjects violation of their duty.

3. There is a general good attained by the Government of the worst Princes,
which does overbalance all their Personal Failings.

Zedekiah, an evil King, is called by Jeremiah, the Breath of the Israelites
Nostrils. Lam. 4.20.


Without Government, men would be like wild beasts in the wilderness, and like
Fishes in the Sea, the stronger devouring the weaker. Praestat sub male
Principe esse, quam sub nullo, Corn. Tac. Lib. 1. Hist.

Wherefore to endeavor the redress of Irregularities, and male-administrations
of Government, by dismounting or destroying the Governor, is a Remedy worse
then the Disease: it is to cure a distemper in the Head by cutting it off.

4. The Providence of God is often judicially exercised in setting evil Kings
over a Nation, as a punishment of the sins thereof. Isa. 3.4. Compared with Ec.
10.16. Hos. 13.11.
God threatens woe to a Land, by giving Children to be their Princes, and Babes
to rule over them, i. e. Foolish and Froward Governors.

I gave them a King in mine anger. These words do not argue, Gods displeasure
against Monarchy; for he gave Israel, David and Solomon, and other Kings, not
in Anger, but in Love and Mercy. 1 Kin. 10.9
Because the Lord loved Israel, therefore made he thee King, says the Queen of
Sheba to Solomon. But the scope of them, is to show, that for the sins of the
Israelites, the Lord set over them Saul, a fierce man, that handled them in
such a rigorous manner, as is expressed in 1 Samuel 8.10. to 18.

Persons groaning under Oppression, and revenging themselves on their Rulers,
and not looking to the Judicial Providence of God, are like Dogs that snarle at
the stone, but look not to the hand that threw it.

5. God has reserved Kings for his own Tribunal, and not exposed them to the
tumultuous rage of the Common people. Against thee, Ps. 51.4.
and thee only have I sinned, and done evil, in thy sight. David had sinned
against Uriah, by depriving him of his wife and life; but because he was above
the jurisdiction of his Subjects; and his offense came under the Cognizance of
God alone, therefore he says, against thee only have I sinned.

The Lord shall smite him, 1 Sa. 24.12.
or his day shall come, mine hand shall not be upon him.

6. The unanimous Suffrage of Holy Patriarchs, Prophets Apostles, Primitive
Christians, and of Jesus Christ himself, may be produced against Subjects
Rebellion against their King, under pretense of Tyranny.

Abraham prays for Abimelech King of Gerar. Jacob blesses Pharaoh King of
Egypt, Genesis 20.17.
notwithstanding they were both Heathens.

Jeremiah and Daniel assert the Authority of Nebuchadnezzar, an Idolater, a
Tyrant, and a destroyer and depopulator of Countries. Thou, Dan. 2.37.
O King, art a King of Kings; for the God of Heaven has given thee a Kingdom.
Those Nations that will not serve, Jer. 27.6, 8, 9.
and put their necks under the yoke of the King of Babylon, shall be punished
with the Sword, and with Famine, and with Pestilence, until they be consumed.
Therefore hearken not to your Diviners, nor to your Dreamers, nor to your
Enchanters, nor to your Sorcerers, which say unto you, ye shall not serve the
King of Babylon.

The holy Apostles Peter and Paul command Subjection to heathen Emperors: Romans
13.1, 2, 3. 1 Pet. 2.13, 17.
For it was about 300 years after Christ, and consequently a long time after
the death of the Apostles, before any Magistrates became Christians.

The Primitive Christians were wont to pray for Pagan Princes, Exoptantes ipsis
vitam prolixam, imperium securum, domum tutam, exercitus fortes, Senatum
fidelem, populum probum, and orbem quietum, Tertul. Apologet. Cap. 30.

Eminent was the example of Mephibosheths Loyal deportment toward David,
notwithstanding he (...) unjustly sequestered half his estate. The King said, 2 Samuel 19.29, 30.
why speak thou any more of thy matters? I have said, thou and Ziba divide
the Land. And Mephibosheth says, yea, let him take all, forasmuch as my Lord
the King is come again to his House in peace.

Our Savior Jesus Christ commands the payment of Tribute unto Caesar. Give
unto Caesar, the things that are Caesar's. Mat. 22.21.
And acknowledges, that Pilate, an unjust Judge, had his Commission from
Heaven. Thou could have no power against me, John 19.11.
unless it were given thee of God.

The barbarous Jews themselves, who crucified the Lord of Life, being asked by
Pilate, whether they would have their King to be crucified, answered, we have
no King but Caesar; intimating, that if they had believed, that Christ was
their King, no violence should have been offered unto him.

Rehoboam threatened Tyranny unto Israel, saying, my little finger shall be
thicker than my Fathers Loins; my Father chastised you with whips, but I will
chastise you with Scorpions; yet the Revolt of the ten Tribes from him, is
called Rebellion, 2 Chronicles. 13.4, 5, 7.
and the Promoters thereof Sons of Belial. Ahab and Jezebel were as great
Oppressors, and as bloody Persecutors of the Prophets, as ever held Scepter;
yet God threatens to punish Jehn for destroying them and their Posterity. Hos.
1.4.
I will avenge the blood of Jezreel on the House of Jehu, and will cause the
Kingdom to cease from the House of Israel. Though the defection of the ten
Tribes from the House of David, was the punishment of Solomon's Idolatry, and
the destruction of Ahab and Iezebel, 1 Kin. 11.11
the Judgment of God on them, for their Cruelty to Naboth: Yet this did no more
excuse the Treason of the ten Tribes and Jehu, 1 Kings 21.19, 21.
who out of rebellions minds, executed these Judgments, than Gods
predetermination of the death of Christ, did justify Judas betraying him, or
the Jews crucifying him.

So then we conclude, that in case of private and personal, or public and
National Injuries received from a King, Subjects ought to lay aside all Malice,
Guile, Envy, Evil Speakings, 1 Pet. 2.1.
and all weapons of War, and Instruments of death. Jesus says to one of his
Disciples, resisting the Officers of the Chief Priests and Elders of the Jews,
that were sent to apprehend him; Put up thy sword into its place, for all they
that take the sword, shall perish with the sword. Mat. 26.52.
Preces and Lachrima were the only Arms that the Primitive Christians used,
when they were oppressed and persecuted. Humiliation, Ref^^^^ion and
Supplication unto God, who judges among the gods, and in whose hands are the
hearts of Kings, Prove. 21.1.
who turns them as Rivers of water, are better Expedients for the removal of
Pressures from a Nation, than Rebellion. Samuel having in the precedent verses
foretold to the Israelites the rigorous carriage of their King toward them, 1 Samuel 8.18.
he says, ye shall cry out in that day, because of your King, but the Lord
will not hear you: he does not say, ye shall rise up and depose your King, but
ye shall cry unto the Lord for Relief.

A provoked Prince ought to be pacified by Submission, not irritated by
Revenge, which is not lawful against a Private Person, much less against the
Head of a Nation: For a Subject lying under groundless suspicions, to infer
from thence, that it is better to be suspected for something, than nothing, is
the Devils Logic; and to exercise Rebellion correspondent to such a Principle,
is a diabolical Fact.

Men's submissive deportment, and sedulous endeavors, to remove even the
causless Jealousies of their Prince, is the most probable means to stir up the
Embers of Ingenuity in his heart. A Flint will break upon a Featherbed. No
heart can be so Adamantine, as to withstand the force of an Argument drawn from
doing good for evil. This, like a Sunbeam melted the spirit of Saul himself.
Saul said, is this thy voice, my Son David? and he lift up his voice and wept:
1 Samuel 24.16, 17, 18, 19.
And said to David, thou art more righteous than I; for thou have rewarded me
good, whereas I have rewarded thee evil; and thou have showed this day, that
thou have dealt well with me; forasmuch as when the Lord delivered me into thy
hands, thou killedst me not: For if a man find his enemy, will he let him go
free? 1 Sa. 26.21.
Again, I have sinned, return my Son David, for I will no more do thee harm,
because my soul was precious in thine eyes: Behold, I have played the fool, and
erred exceedingly. Herein the words of Solomon are verified. By long for
bearing a Prince is best persuaded. Prove. 25.15.
But a revengeful retaliation of Injuries, will exasperate the Spirits of
Princes, who being Cedars in Lebanon, will disdain to receive affronts from
Thistles in Lebanon. Wherefore that Admonition in Eccles. 10.4. is not only
most pious and Christian, but also most prudential. If the spirit of a Ruler
rise up against thee, leave not thy place, ( i. e. flee not away in rage and
passion) for yielding pacifieth great offenses. Now this Prerogative of
Princes, to wit, their exemption from the violence of their Subjects, should be
a golden Bridle to restrain them from all actions exorbitant and excentrical
from Justice and equity, and a golden spur to quicken them to such Heroical
actions, for the public good, that may argue them to be of Noble and
Prince-like spirits, as well as of Noble and Princely Blood and Dignity.

But blessed be the Lord, who has set over England, not a Scratching Bramble,
but a Royal Olive, whose Fatness and Sweetness does rejoice and exhilerate our
hearts: A Prince, that is, (as it was said of Titus the Roman Emperor) Deliciae
generis humani, the delight of mankind, in whom Clemency, Wisdom, and all other
Royal endowments and Princely virtues are concentricated.

Upon this account, I had almost resolved to omit the prosecution of this
Point, as useless to a People living under such a Gracious Sovereign: But
considering, that the best managed Governments have been from the beginning,
and will be to the end of the world, obnoxious to some Imperfections, that
there will be always some detracting Absaloms, who will calumniate and exclaim
against the most righteous Rulers, that the prohibition of Rebellion against
Tyrannical Governors does a fortiori conclude for Englands Subjection to our
present Gracious Sovereign, and lastly, that this Crown-Jewel has been much
blemished and sullied of late, I was, for these Reasons, unwilling to leave it
altogether unpolished.

2. Consider David as Anointed. Then Samuel took an horn of Oil, and anointed
him in the midst of his Brethren. 1. 1 Sa. 16.13.
To a Prophetical. 2. To a Kingly Office.

1. To a Prophetical Office. That Clause, the Spirit of the Lord came upon him
from that day forward, 1 Samuel 16.13. denotes the Gift of Prophecy, as
appears, by comparing it with 1 Samuel 19.20, 23. Where the like Expression is
used, to set forth the Gift of Prophecy in Saul and his Messengers, when they
sought David at Naioth in Ramah. David's Psalms were endited by a Prophetical
Spirit: And he is expressly called a Prophet. It was usual, Acts 2.30.
for Prophets as well as Priests to be consecrated unto their Office by
Anointing. The Lord says unto Elias, 1 Kings 19.16.
Elisha the Son of Shaphat, shall thou anoint to be Prophet in thy room. Now
forasmuch as David a Prophet says, God forbid that I should stretch forth my
hand against my Master; Observe, 1. That Ecclesiastical persons are not
privileged nor exempted from Subjection to the Civil Magistrate. 2. That such,
of all men, should be chiefly solicitous to maintain Loyalty in themselves, and
to propagate it in others.


1. That Ecclesiastical Persons are not privileged nor exempted from
Subjection to the Civil Magistrate.

Let every soul be subject to the higher Power. Romans 13.1.
Every soul is emphatically put for every man, as Exodus 1.5. All the souls that
came out of Jacobs Loins, were seventy souls, i. e. seventy persons. Is not the
Command general? Let every soul, whether rich or poor, Noble or Ignoble,
Patritian or Plebeian, Political or Ecclesiastical, be subject to the higher
Powers. Non distinguendum est, ubi Scriptura non distinguit.

We sind no place of Scripture that does except the Pope and his Cardinals out
of this general Precept, except they disclaim humane nature, and avouch
themselves to be Angels, Cherubims or Seraphims, as a Popish Postiller, out of
Exodus 30.31. has done, where it is said of the holy Oil; Upon man's flesh it
shall not be poured, thou shall anoint Aaron and his Sons; from hence he
ridiculously infers, that Priests are Angels, not having humane flesh.

Aaron the High Priest acknowledged the Jurisdiction of Moses over him, when he
was reproved for making the Golden Calf. Aaron said, Ex. 32.22.
Let not the Anger of my Lord wax hot.

King Solomon deposed Abiathar from the Priesthood, for conspiring with
Adonijah. 1 Kings 2.26, 35.


What Antipodes do the Popes tread hereunto, in presuming to depose Kings. The
Kings of Judah exercised their Authority in spiritualibus, as well as in
temporalibus.

Asa, Hezekiah, Jehosaphat, Josiah, reformed Religion, destroyed the high
places, 2 Chronicles. 17. 2 Kings 18. 1 Chronicles. 13.1, 2, 3. 2 Chr. 29.4. 2 Chronicles. 29.
and Monuments of Idolatry, and convocated Synods. So Christian Emperors,
Constantine, Theodosius, and others have convented General Councils. Hezekiah
laid injunctions on the Priests and Levites to perform their duties.

Paul being arraigned before Festus, Felix and Agrippa, pleads not an
exemption from the Jurisdiction of their Courts, by virtue of his Apostolical
Office.

His free and voluntary Appeal to Caesar, argues, his acknowledgment of
subjection to earthly Rulers. Jesus Christ paid tribute for himself and Peter,
that he might not encourage the Jews to deny it, nor the Romans to defy the
Gospel, as destructive to Magistracy. Mat. 17.27.
That Expression, then are the Children free, does show the Prerogative of
Christ, as he was the Eternal Son of God, but not the exemption of Gods adopted
Children from secular Powers: For then Laymen also (many of them being the
children of God) must be exempted as well as the Clergy.

The Reservation of the Lands of the Egyptian Priests from sale, does show,
the Munificence of their King, in that he assigned to them a portion at his own
Table; but their superiority above, or coordination unto Civil Magistrates,
cannot in any wise be concluded from thence.

Though some munificent Princes, out of their Indulgenoe, have granted large
immunities unto the Church, yet let us do, as Christ in the case of Divorce,
reduce Magistracy to its Original and Primitive Institution, and we shall find,
that from the beginning it had Jurisdiction over the Clergy as well as the
Laity.

How is the Arrogance of the Pope of Rome, that man of sin, and Son of
perdition, to be condemned, for that he exalts himself (...), above all that
is called god, or August, i. e. above Kings and Emperots. The Papists hold, 2
These. 24.
that the Ecclesiastical State is as much more excellent, than the Civil, as
the Sun than the Moon; and that as the Moon borrows its Light from the Sun,
so the Emperors receive their power from the Pope, who employeth the Jesuits
his slaughter-slaves, to murder those Princes, that deny his Supremacy, or
affront his Greatness; Witness the Murder of Henry the 4th. King of France, by
Ravilliack, and the Gunpowder-plot contrived by Garnet the Jesuit, and others,
his Accomplices, for the destruction of King James. The Popes Affronts unto,
Excommunications of, Encroachments on, and imperious Domination over Princes,
are so notorious, that I need not recite Examples thereof. Sed exorto Evangelii
jubare sagaciores, ut spero, Princepes ad nutum Romani Orbilii non solvent
subligaoula.

History affords manifold Instances of the Arrogance of Popes, how they have
trampled on the Necks of Kings, kicked off their Crowns, and crowned them with
their Feet, forced them to hold their Stirrups, and to dance attendance at
their gates, excommunicated, deposed them, Mat. 4.
and (in imitation of the Devil) disposed of their Kingdoms, absolved their
Subjects from obedience, and chained their Ambassadors, like Dogs under their
Tables. How do they herein deviate from the Example of Saint Peter, whose
Successors they pretend to be: and of the holy Prophet David, who calls King
Saul his Master?

That Ministers of all men, Observe. 2.
should chiefly be solicitous to maintain Loyalty in themselves, and to
propagate it in others.

David a Prophet, preaches a Sermon of Loyalty to his Soldiers. Ministers
have great opportunity to expelseditious, and instill loyal Principles into the
hearts of their Auditors. The Reverence that people bear unto their holy
Function, will facilitate the entertainment of their Instructions.

The benevolence of Christian Princes to the Church, in protecting the Ministry
from the fury of grossly profane, and giddy Fanatic people (to whom it is an
eyesore) in supplying the Church with maintenance, in order to the carrying on
the Worship of God, in providing Universities and Colleges, to be Seminaries
of Learning, in backing the Laws of God with their secular Authority, does lay
strong Obligations on Ministers, to make their Churches Schools, as of Piety
toward God, so of Loyalty toward their King.

What horrid ingratitude would Ministers be guilty of, by proving firebrarnds
of Sedition, Trumpeters of Rebellion, and by making their Sermons an Alarm unto
war? It would be, to rip up the bowels of their Nursing Fathers, and to cut off
the Breasts of their Nursing Mothers.

Furthermore, as Simeon and Levi made the Name of their Father Jacob to stink,
Genesis 34.30. Number. 13.32
by their perfidious Murder of the Shechemites, as the Spies brought an evil
report on the Land of Canaan, and as Judas delivered his Master unto the
Scoffs of his enemies, so disloyalty in Ecclesiastical persons, scandalizeth
Religion. The sins of Elies Sons caused the Sacrifices of the Lord to be
abhorred. 1 Samuel 2.17.


The Prophet David's Adultery with Bathsheba, and Murder of Uriah, Romans 2.17. to
25.
gave great occasion to the enemies of God to blaspheme.

For Ministers to prostitute their Sacred Function unto Ambition and Rebellion,
is a great provocation unto Magistrates, to root them out of their Kingdoms,
yea, to put them to death, as Saul did Ahimelech, and the Priests of the Lord,
of whom he slew fourscore and five persons, upon Doegs false and malicious
information, that they conspired with David. 1 Sa. 22.18.


Let Sermons be Exclamations against sins, not against Kings, against the
Prince of the power of the Air, not against the Princes of the earth.

The Lord teach the Clergy of England, not only (...), but also (...), that
they may neither procure the accusation of disloyalty to themselves, nor derive
any scandal unto Religion.

Let no man be lifted up with pride, by reason of the dignity of his Office.
Judas cast Devils out of others, Luke 22.3.
but could not keep the Devil out of himself. Then Satan entered into Judas, and
so (as Luther says) there was one Devil in another.

As water cleanses other things, and then is crst into the sink, as many who
labored in building Noah's Ark, were drowned in the Flood, so a Minister may
teach others, and yet be himself a castaway, without true Piety, which is
inconsistent with disloyalty. The Scripture has linked them both together: My
Son, fear thou God and the King. It was the honor of Zadok and Abiathar, Prove.
24.
that they turned not aside unto Absalom, but faithfully cleaved unto David,
their rightful Sovereign.

2. David was anointed to the Office of a King. The Lord said unto Samuel, how
long will thou mourn for Saul, 1 Samuel 16.1.
seeing I have rejected him from reigning over Israel. Fill thine Horn with
Oil, and go, I will send thee to Jesse the Bethlehemite; for I have provided me
a King among his Sons.

1. David by virtue of this Unction had a plausible Argument, to have justified
the Murder of Saul, being rejected by God, and himself elected in his room, and
to have represented such an act, as the execution of Justice, as Jehu did the
destruction of Ahabt posterity. But David abhorred this obvious plece of
Policy, 2 Kin. 10.10
because it would have been a breach of Piety: Forasmuch as Comminations are no
Commissions. Genesis 4.15.
Whosoever shall slay (accursed) Cain, vengeince shall be taken on him seven
fold: So the blood of rejected Saul would have brought down vengeance on the
head of David, if he had shed it.

The crucifying of Christ was an Act of Glorious Mercy in God, but of barbarous
Cruelty in the Jews.

Joseph tells his Brethren, that it was not they, but God, that sent him into
Egypt, and yet they were guilty of the most unbrotherly act, next to actual
Fratricide, that ever was committed. Genesis 45.8.
One, and the same action may be righteous, as it proceeds from the first
cause, and unrighteous in respect of the Second.

Gods bidding Shimei to curse David, 2 Samuel 12.11, 12.
and permission of Absalom to ravish his Fathers Concubines, were acts of
Justice in God, but acts of Treason and Incest in Shimel and Absalom.

Wherefore let such be accounted Instruments of the Devil, and Chapter 16.10.
who dare offer violence to Kings, under pretense of being Instruments to
execute divine Justice.

2. David by virtue of his Unction, might have produced a specious Title unto
the Kingdom of Israel, if he had been of an ambitious spirit; but he knew that
he was anointed only to the reversion of the Kingdom; and that as a last Will
and Testament is of no force, until the death of the Testator: So his Unction
was of no force until the death of Saul. A Loyal Subject will wave obvious
Pleas for his Right unto a Kingdom.

3. David being anointed to the reversion of the Kingdom by the death of Saul,
might have took Livery and Seisin of it: But as Moses cast the Kingdom of
Egypt, with all the Honors and Treasures thereof, at his heels; choosing rather
to suffer affliction with the people of God, than to enjoy the pleasures of sin
for a season; Heb. 11.
So David preserred the prolongation of his undeserved persecution, before the
unjust acceleration of the day of his Inauguration unto the Office of a King;
he esteemed a Turfe in the wilderness, with a clear Conscience, a better seat,
than a Throne in a Palace, with a Conscience laden with Royal Blood-guiltiness;
he accounted it a greater honor, to be a Loyal Subject, than an unlawful King.

Crowns, Scepters and Kingdoms, are cogent Temptations. Caesar said, If Justice
may be broken in any case, it is regnandi causa. Mat. 21.38.
The Husbandmen cry out, This is the Heir, come let us kill him, and the
Inheritance will be ours. But David abhorred to swim unto a Throne through the
Blood of his Master, having taken the resolution of Ferdinand the first,
Emperor of Germany: Fiat Justitia, and pereat mundus. Let Right be done, and
come what will of it.

The gain of a Kingdom will not countervail the loss of a good Conscience. What
will it profit a man to gain the whole world, and lose his own Soul? Or what
will be given in exchange for the Soul? There is a (...) in the words; What
will it profit? i. e. What an hard bargain will it be? What infinite Damage and
Detriment shall a man sustain thereby? For put the whole world into one
balance, and the Soul into another, and this little spark of Divinity will
outweigh the whole Globe of the Earth, the vast Fabric of the Creation.

It is far better to be upbraided, as Balaam was by Balak, The Lord has kept
thee back from Honor, Number. 24.11
than to be told at the day of Judgment, That Honor has kept us back from the
Lord, from Heaven and everlasting Happiness.

A Crown is not worth the taking up, on sordid, much less, on sinful terms. It
is enough for a bloody Phocas to slay his Master Mauritius, that he might
obtain the Succession in the Empire: For Pagan Emperors and Antichristian Popes
to poison one another (as Hildebrand poisoned 7 Popes, to get into the Papal
Chair) for their own advancement. Godly David valued his Conscience, and the
glory of God at a greater price, than to wound them, for any temporal
Emolument: Even as Jonathan did before him; who being Heir apparent to the
Kingdom of Israel, and knowing that David was appointed to set him besides the
Throne, as appears by his Fathers Information: 1 Sa. 20.30, 31.
Thou have chosen the Son of Jesse to thy own Confusion; for as long as he
lives, thou shall not be established, nor thy Kingdom: And by his own
Confession, 1 Samuel 23.17. Yet would not conspire with Saul against David's Life;
but contracteth close friendship with him, loves him as his own Soul, gives
him intelligence of his Fathers designs, pleads his cause, vindicateth his
Innocence, proclaims his Merits, and saves his life, 1 Sa. 20.33.
by the hazard of his own, and by the loss of his Kingdom. O bravely acted
Noble Jonathan! How does thy Heroical Self-denial condemn all those, who lay
wait for blood, and lurk privily for the Innocent without a cause, and swallow
them up alive as the grave, and whole as those that go down into the pir, that
they may find all precious substance, and fill their Houses with Treasure?
Especially, Pr. 1.11, 12, 13.
those bloody and ambitious men, who cut off the head of their Sovereign, for
the sake of his Royal Crown upon it, even as a man breaks a Branch from a
Tree, for the sake of the Fruit, which grows thereon.

Oh the cursed Idolatry of Jeroboam, who to establish his own Throne, set up
another for the Devil, by erecting Calves at Dan and Bethel! Oh the barbarous
cruelty of Herod, and of Pharaoh, Mat. 2. Exodus 1.
who for their own Security, massacred so many innocent Infants, that knew not
their right hand from their left! Oh England! How barren have thou been of
Self-denying Jonathans and David's, these late years! And how have thou exceeded
Africa, in the ingendring of Monsters! Monsters, like unto Ahab and Jezebel,
who for an Acre or two of ground, shed the Blood of Naboth. 1 Kings 21.
And like unto Judas, who for Thirty Pieces of Silver, sold our Saviors Body,
and his own Soul. Yea, such Monsters, whose Actions would almost make us
believe, that they had compacted with the Devil, for the Kingdoms of the world,
upon those terms, which he proposed to Jesus Christ. And whose Rage, Mat. 4.
Ambition and Cruelty did speak aloud, that to gain a Kingdom, they regarded
not, though the Streets did run with Blood, in stead of the Conduits with Wine
at the Coronation.

4. The Fourth General Head observed in the Analysis of David's Oration,
contains the Reasons of his detestation of cutting off the Royal Head of King
Saul; which are drawn from Saul's Relation.

1. To himself: My Master. This word denotes that chief power which men have
over their Servants.

Observe, Observe.
That Kings are invested with Supreme Power and Sovereign Authority over their
Subjects.

They are called gods, to show their pre-eminence over their Subjects, who
ought to account of them as pleni-potentiary Ambassadots of the Supreme
Jehovah. 1 Pet. 2.13.
Submit your selves to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake, whether unto
the King, as Suprems. Where the word of a King is, Eccles. 8.4.
there is power: and who may say unto him, what do thou? This power of Kings
is both Legislative and Executive.

1. Legislative or Nomothetical, The Laws of Kings oblige the Consciences of
Subjects. Romans 13.5.
Ye must be subject, not only for wrath, but for Conscience Sake. And be ye
subject to every Ordinance of man for the Lords sake. 1 Pet. 2.13.


2. Executive. As Swords are worn both for Ornament and defense: So the
execution of Laws is both the privilege and the duty of Princes. Good Laws not
duly executed, are to no more purpose than a rusty Sword, that cannot be drawn
out of the Scabbard.

Now this Legislative and executive Authority of Kings extends not only to
Civil Matters, as the decision of Controversies arising between man and man,
and criminal, as the punishment of Malefactors, even with Capital punishment;
but also to Ecclesiastical Affairs. Thus the Regal Authority of David, Asa,
Jehosaphat; Hezekiah and Josiah was exerted in the extirpation of Idolatry,
establishment of the true Worship of God, compulsion of the Priests and People
to discharge their mutual duties; and in the Convocation of Synods, with other
Acts of Jurisdiction.

A King without Supreme Power, is but magni nominis umbra, and his Office, but
a Titular dignity, but the Feathers of Authority.

The Usurpation of a Tyrant, who assumeth unto himself power, without a Title,
is fatal to a Kingdom. And the Government of a King, who has a Title without
power, to defend it, is fatal to himself.

As Might without Right, is Tyranny, so Right without Might, is Pageantry, but
the Picture of a King.

A King manacled and fettered (if I may so speak) cannot protect himself, much
less his Subjects.

His Person will be exposed to violence, his Government to contempt, and the
Execution of Laws, the Nerves and Ligaments of a Realm obstructed: His Throne
would be invaded by every insolent Rebel, and himself deposed by every Popular
Traitor: For as a Scabbard without a Sword, and a Gun charged with Powder,
without a Bullet, which may give a great Report, but will do no Execution: Such
is Royal dignity, without Sovereign Authority.

Shall a Paterfamilias claim a despotical power over his Family? and shall the
great Pater patriae have his Regal Power clipped and abridged? God forbid. With
whom can Power be more safely entrusted, than with a just and prudent Prince?
Surely not with the Common People, where it will prove as dangerous, as a knife
in a Child's, and a Sword in a mad man's hand, which will be used only to do
mischief.

Our late Distractions have sufficiently taught us, that Democratical
Government is a Solecisme in Polity: and that Democracy and Anarchy are
equipollent terms. Wherefore we conclude, that a King ought to be acknowledged
Supreme in all his Dominions, according to the Apostle, and our oaths of
Allegiance, etc. And all that have taken the Oaths of Supremacy and Allegiance,
must subscribe to this Doctrine, or else contract the guilt of Perjury.

The Texts of Scripture alleged against this Truth, are grossly perverted; we
may say with Solomon, that as the wringing of the Nose brings forth blood, so
the wresting of Scripture brings forth bloody Tenants. The Lord says unto
Jeremiah, Jer. 1.10.
I have set thee over Nations and Kingdoms, to root out, and to pluck down, and
to destroy. These words are to be understood of the denunciation of Gods
Judgments by the mouth of Jeremiah, against wicked Nations. Kings shall bow
down to thee with their Faces toward the earth, and lick up the dust of thy
Feet: Isa. 49.23.
These Metaphorical Expressions do not signify the subordination of Civil
Power unto Ecclesiastical; but only that Princes shall submit unto the Laws of
God, and account it their honor to be Patrons of Religion, and Nursing Fathers
and Nursing Mothers unto the Church.

The two-edged sword in the hands of the Saints, Psalm. 139.9.
to bind Kings in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron, is to be understood,
not of a Weapon of War, or Instrument of violence, but of the sword of the
Spirit, which is, the Word of God; which is said to be quick and powerful, Heb.
4.12.
sharper than any two-edged sword: It is a Spiritual, not a Martial, a
Theological, not a Polemical sword, that is given to the Church, to bind Kings
in Chains, and Nobles in Fetters of Iron, What, by corporal Imprisonment? God
forbid, but by awakening their Consciences, and convincing them, of the evil,
guilt and danger of sin; which in Scripture is set forth by spiritual
Captivity. Isa. 61.1.
The Spirit of the Lord is upon me, because he has anointed me, to proclaim
Liberty to the Captives, and the opening of the Prison doors to them that are
bound, that is, to file asunder the Fetters, and to knock off the Chains of the
guilt of sins from the Conscience; by the promulgation of Gospel Grace, and
pardoning Mercy.

2. The Second Reason of David's detestation against stretching forth his hand
against Saul, is taken from Saul's Relation to God, the Lords Anointed: Which is
ingeminated in the Text. Ingeminations do augment the force and signification
of expressions: In blessing I will bless thee, Genesis 22.17.
and in multiplying I will multiply thee, that is, I will certainly and greatly
bless and multiply thee. As David by the frequent Iteration of Absaloms name, 2
Sa. 18.33.
O my Son Absalom, my Son, my Son Absalom; would God I had died for thee, O
Absalom, my Son, my Son, did signify his great sorrow for his death: So by his
duplication of these words, the Lords Anointed, he does show the great and
awful reverence due to Saul, by reason of his Relation unto God. This
expression, the Lords Anointed, may be considered in a threefold respect: 1. As
it is a Title of Honor. 2. As it signifies Gods Qualification of Saul for
this Office. 3. As it imports the Divine Original and Institution of his Office.


1. As it is a Title of Honor. It is an Epithere which is given to Jesus
Christ himself. Psalm 2.
Christ is a word, that signifies Anointed. David does not exclaim against
Saul, as a Tyrant, a Persecutor, as a devouring Lion, and a destroying Bear
(though he received as much Injury from him, as ever any Subject did from a
Prince) but makes mention of him in a very reverent and honorable manner.

He was so far from wounding Sanls heart with the Sword of violence, that he
would not wound his good Name with the Sword of his Tongue: From whence note;

That the Language of Subjects, of, and to their Sovereign, Observe.
ought not to savor of Contempt and Insolency, but of honor and reverence
toward his Person and Office.

Thou shall not revile the gods, nor curse the Ruler of thy people. Ex. 22.28.


The August Names of Kings ought not to be besooted with the opprobrions and
ignominious Titles of Traitors, Tyrants and Usurpers. Is it sit to say to a
King, thou art wicked, or to Princes, Job 34.18.
ye are ungodly?

Take heed of painting such in the shape of the Devil, who wear the Livery of
God: I have said ye are gods. Psalm 82. Isa. 49. Ezekiel. 34.23. Psalm. 78.71, 72.
Romans 13. Ps. 82.6. Jude v. 8. 2 Sa. 21.17. Lam. 4.20.


With what honorable Titles has the Holy Ghost adorned Rulers? They are
called Fathers, yea, and Nursing Fathers, and Nursing Mothers to a Nation;
Pastors and Shepherds. (...), Sons of the most High, Dignities, the Light of
Israel, or the Lamp or Candle of Israel. As the Sun is to the world, so is a
King to his Kingdom, even the Fountain of Light and Life? The Breath of our
Nostrils. And here in my Text, the Lords Anointed.

The Lord has purposely dignified. Princes with these Names, betokening
Majesty and Pre-eminence, as with so many orient Pearls and shining Diamonds
and Jewels, to beget a reverence in us toward them, and to guard them from the
virulent and insolent Tongues of cursing Shimei's. Wherefore, take heed that ye
slander not the Footsteps of the Lords Anointed, nor reproach the Father of
your Nation: For the eye that mocketh his Father, and despises to obey his
Mother, the Ravens of the Valleys shall pick it out, and the young Eagles shall
eat it. Beware of reviling those sacred persons, on whom God has accumulated
so many Titles of Honor.

Yea the Lord foreseeing how many Malicious Doegs and blasphemous Rabshekahs,
Kings would meet withal, Exodus 21.6. Ex. 22.28. Psalm. 82.1. Ps. 138.1. 2 These.
2.4.
has baptized them with his own most Reverent and Glorious Name. The Lord
stands in the Congregation of the Mighty, he judges among the gods. Before
the gods will I sing praise unto thee. This venerable Appellation given to
Magistrates, should teach the Cynical Quaker, and the morose Anabaptist, with
all other ejusdem farinae, not to scruple at expressions of reverence, (such as
His Majesty; Dread Sovereign, and the like) toward them; and instruct them in
better Manners, Breeding and Civility, than to court the Lords Vicegerents and
Deputies with such blunt and rustical Language, as if they were their Equals or
Inferiors. Piety is no enemy to Civility, not Christianity to Humanity:
Religion does not forbid good Manners.

The Apostle Paul accounted it nothing unbeseeming his Apostolical Office, to
use some Courtship in his Apologetical Oration before King Agrippa.

Murder may be committed by the Tongue, as well as by the Hand. As the Seventh
Commandment does forbid not only the gross act of Adultery, but also, 1.
Heart-adultery, as unclean Thoughts. 2. Eye-adultery, as wanton Glances. 3.
Ear-adulterie, as hearkening to obscene discourse. 4. Hand-adultery, wanton
Dalliances. 5. Lip-adultery, as unholy Kisses. 6. Tongue-adultery, Lascivious
speech, and uttering Ribaldry.


So the Sixth Commandment, Thou shall not kill, does extend not only to the
actual embruing the hands in the blood of men, but also, 1. Mat. 5.22. 1 John.
3.15.
To Heart-murder, rash anger, envy, hatred, and all inordinate passions and
degrees of Murder. Wherefore, says Solomon, curse not the King in thy thought;
for a Bird of the Air shall carry the voice, Eccl. 10.20.
and that which has wings, shall tell the Matter. 2. Mat. 5.22.
To Tongue-murder. But I say unto you, that whosoever shall say unto his
Brother ( Racha, i. e. shall thou him, says Chrysostom, shall call him silly
shallow Fellow, that wants Brains, says Irenaeus) shall be in danger of the
Council; and whosoever shall say, Thou Fool, shall be in danger of Hell-sire.
So that scornful and reproachful Speeches of, or unto a King, do amount to a
kind of Murder of him.


There are three things of King Saul's, which David seems to account Sacred. His
Life, His Good Name, and His Robes. We read of some that despised Saul, 1 Sa.
10.27.
and brought him no Presents; but they are called Sons of Belial for it.

How inexcusable are those, whose teeth are as spears and arrows, and their
tongues as sharp swords, to wound the Reputation of Princes.

The Apostle Jude ranketh those among the Black Heretics of the last days,
who despise Dominion, and speak evil of Dignities, or blaspheme Glories, as the
Greek words (...) signify; and condemns them by the example of Michael the
Archangel, who when contending with the Devil, he disputed about the Body of
Moses, durst not bring against him a railing accusation, but said, The Lord
rebuke thee. If an Angel of Heaven would not rail at the Devil of Hell, then
surely such are a kind of devils incarnate, who rail at Angels: For so Kings
are called in Scripture. As an Angel of God, so is my Lord the King. 2 Sa.
14.17.


How was our Dread Sovereign King Charles the first, reviled by his
Adversaries? They said unto him, as Shimei to David, 2 Samuel 16.7.
Come out thou bloody man, thou man of Belial.

As the Papists clothed that Holy Martyr John Husse with a coat full of
painted Devils, when they bro ght him to the Stake, that he might appear odious
in the eye; of the Spectators, so was our Royal Martyr represented in monstrous
shapes, that his death might neither be prevented not lamented. O Blessed King!
How was thy Good name wounded with the poisoned daggers of enemy tongues, set
on fire in Hell? even as Queen Elizabeth's was by Jesuits, who called her an
English Wolf and Lioness, far surpassing in cruelty, all the Athaliahs,
Maachas, Jezebels and Herodiasses that ever were: Os durum! And David's by
Shimei, whom Abishai calls a dead Dog, for reproaching the Lords Anointed.
And again, Shall not Shimei be put to death, because he cursed the Lords
Anointed? David himself deeply resented the grievous curse, 2 Samuel 16.9. 2 Sa.
19.21.
wherewith this Benjamite of Bahurim cursed him. Though out of Policy David
reprieved him, during his own Reign, because his Kingly Authority, being like a
broken Bone newly set, and like a man newly recovered from a desperate fit of
Sickness, he durst not shed Blood, though in a way of Justice, lest the noise
thereof should have caused a second Revolt of the people; and so broke the B^ne
again in the same place, and brought a Relapse into the former distempers which
would have been doubly dangerous: yet he retained the memory of this Offense
unto his dying Day, and in his Last Will and Testament, gave a strict Charge
unto his Son Solomon, not to hold Shimei guiltless, but to bring down his hoary
head to the Grave with Blood.

Famous was the example of old Quintus Fabius, who, 1 Kings 2.
his Son being Consul, laid aside the Robes of his Paternal Dignity; and in
stead of demanding Reverence from him as his Son, yielded reverence to him, as
a Roman Consul. Though a Son being a Magistrate, is not thereby divested of his
Filial Relation, nor privileged from Subjection to his Father, a private man,
in all domestical and personal transactions between them; yet in all public
and Political Actions, the Prerogative of Honor is due from the Father, a
private person, to the Son, a Magistrate.

Solomon indeed rose up to meet his Mother Bathsheba, bowed unto her, 1 Kings 2.
and caused her to sit down on his Right hand, but not on his Throne, that he
reserved for himself. Oeconomical Relations must give place to Political.
Honor and Reverence being due (...) Kings, it ought to be manifested by
suitable Expressions and Gestures.

Fear God, 1 Pet. 2.17. Romans 13.7.
honor the King. Render unto every one their dues, Fear, to whom Fear, Honor
to whom Honor belongs. The Apostle says, render, not give honor, to show,
that it is an indispensible, not an arbitrary act, a matter of necessity, not
of gratuity; of duty, not of Courtesy. The Vulgar, Tremellius and Beza render
(...), reddite, non date; which signifies, debitum quoddam inexcusabile
Subditis impositum esse, as Marlorat. observes; and praestationem horum
officiorum ad Justitiam, negationem ad injustitiam pertinere, Pareus in locum.

2. This Title, The Lords Anointed, does signify Gods furnishing and
qualifying of Saul, with all Gifts and Endowments, requisite for the discharge
of his Office. As Soon as Saul was anointed, he was turned into another man, and
God gave him another heart. 1 Sa. 10.6, 9.


The most fragrant and odoriferous Spices, Myrrh, Cynamon, Calamus and Cassia,
were the Ingredients whereof the Anointing Oil was compounded, Ex. 30.23.
to show the composition of the sweetest Gifts and Graces in him, on whom it
was poured. When the Lord calls persons unto an Office, he will furnish them
with Gifts suitable hereunto. When Elisha was called from the Plow, to be a
Prophet, a double portion of the Spirit of Elias rested on him. When the
Apostles were called from their Fishing-nets, to be Fishers of men, Acts 2.
the Holy Ghost descends upon them. When God took David from following the Ewes
great with young, to feed Jacob his people, 1 Sa. 16.13. Ps. 78. ult. 2 Sa.
14.17.
and Israel his inheritance, and turned his shepherds Crook into a Royal
Scepter, he caused also his Spirit to descend upon him, and gave him
skilfulness to wield his Scopter, and made him wise as an Angel of God, to
descern between good and evil. And God gave Solomon wisdom and understanding
exceeding much, 1 Kin. 4.19.
and largeness of heart, as the sand of the Sea shore.

3. This title, the Lords Anomted, signifies the divine designation and
consecration of Saul unto his Office: for Unction with holy oil was an usual
ceremony at the instalment of Prophets, Priests and Kings, as of David,
Solomon, Jehu; In allusion whereunto Jesus Christ, in respect of Gods
designation of him unto the Mediatorial Office, is said to be anointed, Isa.
61.1.

The Office of a King is Divine, and his person sacred. Observe.


1. By the Divine Office of Kings, I understand, that the Royal function has
its Original and Institution from God, that it is not only lawful, but sacred;
not only allowed, but ordained. The Delegation of God, not the Election and
Donation of the people, is the foundation of Regal authority. Civil Polity is
established by a Divine sanction. Kings reign, not only by the Permission, but
also by the Commission of God.

2. By the sacred nature of the persons of Kings. I understand their separation
from the common condition of other men, and their designation unto a peculiar
office; as Aaron and his sons, and the vessels of the Sanctuary, with all the
utensils of the Temple, were set apart from a common, and consecrated unto an
holy use. What an horrid abomination would it have been in the Jews, to have
filled the Golden vessels of the Sanctuary with dirt? and what a vile sin was
it in Ahaz to cut them in pieces: So what an heinous contempt of God is it, to
destroy the sacred lives, or reproach the sacred names of Kings, seeing they
are the Lords Anointed? This was the reason that caused David to detest the
murder of Saul, to dissuade Abishai from it, 2 Samuel 1.14, 15, 16. 2 Samuel 1.7,
8, 9.
and to execute the Amalekite for it, notwithstanding he slew him at his own
request, after he was mortally wounded, out of compassion toward him to put an
end to his anguish and misery.

As the Lord avenged the abuse of his Anointed Mediator; Psalm. 2. 1 King. 13.4.
2 King. 2.23, 24. Numb. 19. Dan. 5.3, 4, 5 Psalm. 72.7, 8. Dan. 2.21, 37.
Of his Anointed Prophets; Of his Anointed Priests; Of the anointed Vessels of
his Sanctuary: So will he certainly avenge all injuries offered unto his
Anointed Kings on the heads of all Traitors.

Now the Divine Original of the Office of Kings is written with a Sunbeam
throughout the Scripture; Promotion comes not from the East nor from the West,
God is Judge. But Rom 13.1, 3, 3, 4. is instur omnium, where the Divine
institution of Magistracy is no less then seven times asserted in six verses;
Twice in the first, Let every soul be subject unto the higher powers, for there
is no power but of God. The Powers that be are ordained of God. Again, v. 2.
Whosoever resists the power, resists the Ordinance of God, and shall
receive to themselves damnation. Thrice more in v. 4, 6. The Magistrate is
called the Minister of God; And v. 5. we are enjoined to be subject, not for
wrath, but for conscience sake. Obedience to the Magistrates authority for
conscience sake, does suppose it to be bottomed and founded on a divine grant,
for otherwise it could not oblige the conscience. The Apostle inculcated this
doctrine on the Romans, because there were some turbulent spirits among them,
who insisted so much on their Christian liberty, that they thought subjection
to secular powers inconsistent therewith. But these Anti-magistratical
Libertines are in this Chapter fully confuted, and the Authority of Heathen
Emperors (under whom the Romans, to whom Saint Paul wrote this Epistle, then
lived) is clearly evinced, to be an emanation from the Almighty God, who is,
(...).

Excellently does Saint Augustine speak to this purpose; De Civ. Dei, li. 5. c.
21.
That God who gave the regiment of a Commonwealth to Caius Caesar, a mild and
gentle Prince, gave it also to Marius a bloody Consul. He that gave it to
Augustus a mirror of humanity, gave it unto Nero a monster of cruelty. He that
gave it unto Vespatian, gave it unto Domitiar. He that gave it unto Constantine
a Religious defender of Christianity, gave it also unto Julian an Author of
Apostasy.

Jesus Christ the essential wisdom of the Father, Pro. 8.15, 16.
is represented to speak under the name of Wisdom. And what does he speak? Why
this, By me Kings reign, and Princes decree justice. By me Princes rule, even
Nobles, and all the Judges of the earth. By me, i.e. by my Approbation, by my
Commission, by my Protection, and by my Direction and benediction Kings reign.

God was displeased with Israel for asking a King, Object. 1. Sol.
1 Samuel 8.7.

The Lords displeasure against Israel for their request, did not arise from his
improbation of Monarchical Government, but from Isreal's contempt of
Theocratical Government; for from the time of Moses, until the days of
Samuel, they lived under a Theocrasie. God did exert his power in an
extraordinary and miraculous manner, in raising up Judges to deliver them out
of the hands of their enemies; but they being grown weak in faith, and weary of
this immediate dependence on God, and trusting too much on an arm of flesh, cry
out for a King: wherewith God is indeed displeased, because of their audacious
presumption in limiting and prescribing unto him, because of the itch and pride
of their hearts in desiring to be conformed unto other Nations; and because of
their despising of God himself, ^ Sam. 8.7.
that he should not reign over them: but not by reason of any distaste against
the Office of a King, which he afterward blessed for the protection of his
people Israel.

Though the Office of Saul, Object. 2.
it being immediately by God himself conferred on him, was Divine, and his
person therefore sacred: yet Kings now, wanting this immediate election, cannot
claim the like Prerogatives.

The Texts before quoted do sufficiently confute this Objection, Sol.
to wit Matthew. 22.21. Dan. 2.37. Prove. 8.15, 16. Romans 13.1, 2. However I shall
add these three things. 1. That many Kings of Israel (whose persons were no
less sacred then the others) were neither extraordinarily elected nor
consecrated, but took possession of the Kingdom, by hereditary succession. For
all Kings were not anointed, but only those in whom the Royal line began, or
was broken: Only the first of a Family was anointed, except in the case of
dissension, where was required a renewed unction. 2. Cyrus an Heathen King is
called the Lords anointed, Isa. 45.1. Thus says the Lord to his Anointed, to
Cyrus. 3. As the Office of Ministers is sacred, notwithstanding they want that
immediate Call, which the Prophets and Apostles had, so likewise is the Office
of Kings, notwithstanding they want such an immediately divine inauguration, as
Saul and David had.


The Donatists, Libertines, Object. 3.
Anabaptists and Millenaries have laid the Ax to the very root of civil
Magistracy; holding, that though God allotted Kings and Rulers unto the Jews,
while the Church was in its infancy, minority and nonage, yet now such servile
subjection does not beseem that perfection and liberty, which the Gospel has
introduced. John 8.32. Gal. 5.1.
You shall know the truth, and the truth shall make you free. Stand fast in the
liberty wherewith Christ has made you free.

Whereunto shall I liken this generation? Sol.
They are like unto water in a Pot, which boyleth over much, runs into the
fire, which being quenched therewith, the remainder of the water boyleth not at
all: So these affecting greater wisdom, perfection, and liberty then is meet,
became very fools, and bondslaves to their lusts. Those texts, Joh. 8.32. Gal.
5.1. speak of the freedom of Christians from the reign of sin, power of the
Law, and dominion of the devil, and the yoke of Jewish ceremonies; not of
exemption from obedience to the civil Magistrate. Christian liberty and civil
subjection are not inconsistent, Psalm. 2.
but sweetly meet and kiss each other. The Psalmist speaking of the times of
the Gospel, does not exhort Kings to pull off their Crowns, and to lay down
their Scepters, but only to manage their Government in the fear of God, and to
do homage unto Christ, v. 11, 12.

Magistracy is as necessary for the preservation of humane society, as Air,
^ater, or any of the four elements for the sustentation of our natural lives.

And as the Gospel does not abolish civil Government, so neither does it
translate it from men, and devolve it on Jesus Christ. It was the stumbling
block of the Jews, that they expected a temporal Kingdom, by the coming of the
Messiah, a manumission out of their bondage to the Romans, and a restoration
of the Kingdom of Israel unto that primitive glory and splendor wherein it
flourished under David and Solomon.

Let not that Government be affixed to Christ, which he himself disclaims: John
18.36.
My Kingdom is not of this world, that is, not an earthly Kingdom, nor the
Administrations thereof conversant about external affairs, neither civil nor
criminal. Not Civil, for when a man desired him to divide an inheritance
between him and his brother, he sharply rebukes him, saying, Man, who made me a
Judge or divider between you? Luke 12.14.
Neither would he intermeddle in criminal matters, but refused to pronounce
sentence on the woman taken in Adultery, John 8.11.

The Apostle reprehendeth the Divisions of the Church of Corinth; Every one of
you says, I am for Paul, 2 Cor. 1.12.
I am for Apollo, I am for C^phas, and I am of Christ: These last sort are
blamed, because out of an irregular zeal to advance the honor of Christ, they
decried his Ministers. In like manner may the State-divisions of England be
reprehended; One says, I am for a Commonwealth, another, I am for a Committee
of Safety, another, I am for a Protector, and a fourth sort, I am for Christ.

All these deserve sharp reproof, even the Fifth Monarchy assertors also,
notwithstanding they cry out for Christ; because by reason of their rash zeal,
or rather wild sire, they take an inordinate course to advance Christ, namely,
by footing out the civil Magistrate, who is a Minister of God for our good.
Romans 13.4.
How was this desperately, bloodily, yea blasphemously, but, blessed be God,
successelesly attempted in England, by persons that would have entitled Jesus
Christ to their murders; as if he that did shed his own blood for our sakes,
delighted in shedding our blood. These, under a pretense of fighting for King
Jesus did indeed fight for King Beelzebub.

The light of Nature confuteth this Antimagistratical opinion. As there is no
Nation so barbarous, as to acknowledge no God, so neither as to acknowledge no
Magistrate. Many irrational creatures seem by a natural instinct to have the
shadow of Government amongst them: There is a Master Be Had Adam continued in
innocence, superiority and inferiority among mankind would have continued with
him. Yea there seems to be an order among the very Angels themselves; for we
read of an Archangel, Jude v. 9.

FINIS.

