A Case of Conscience propounded to a great Bishop in Ireland, Vizt. Whether
after Divorce, the innocent Party may not lawfully Marry. With the Bishop's
Answer to the QUESTION: AND A Reply to the Bishops Answer. And also some
Quaeries, Whether the Silencing of Godly Ministers be not near of kin to the
killing of the two Prophets, Revelation the 11. chap:

By George Pressicke of Dublin.

He that justifies the Wicked, and he that condemns the Just, even they both
are an abomination to the Lord.

Proverbs 17.15. Printed for the Author in March, 1661.

To the Reader.
Christian friends,
YOu may understand by what follows that I propounded a Case of Conscience to
a great Bishop in Ireland, by way of petition; but had a very slight Answer:
whereupon I went to my Chamber, and writ to him a large Letter, wherein I did
hint to him that I had not written and printed three Books against Anabaptists
and Quakers to be put off with such an Answer as he had given me; and (...)
urge him from that Text 1 Peter 3.15. that I did conceive he was bound in
conscience and duty to God, to answer to the Question, which I desired might be
in writing: which after he had read, he gave order I should come to his house
and he would answer it; which I d^d, and drew up the substance of my Petition
and Letter into certain Questions and Arguments; which hereafter followe^h,
together wi^h hi^ Answer, and my Reply to h^s Answer. And seeing I could have
no further satisfaction, I thought good to put all in Print to public view,
that he understanding Reader may consider and judge, That if I should take
another Wife (as I do intend for any thing I yet know to h^nder me) whether
there be not sufficient ground of Scr^pture for me so to do, besides the
example and practice of other Churches, Reasons and Arguments showed to prove
the lawfullnesse thereof. And if one or more be otherwise minded, I may say as
Peter and John said in another case, Acts 4.19. Whether it is right in the
light of God, to hearken unto you, more than unto God, judge ye* so I say,
whether should I be concluded by one or some few Men's opinions, contrary to the
Word of God and the pr^ctice of Pro^estant Churches, and so be liable to
continual temptations all my life long, or take that liberty which the Word of
God and former Pro^estant Churche^ has allowed, that I may escape Satan's
snares, and have a remedy against my own Corruption, Judge ye. Thus I leave
^ll to your charitable constructions, and am according to that measure I have
received,

A lover of the Truth George Pressicke.

A Case of Conscience propounded etc. vizt. whether a Man whose wife has
forsaken him seven years and five months without any just cause, and will not
be reconciled; and he having satisfied the Law so far that by his Majesty's
Reference to two Bishops in London) he has a Divorce under the Bishops hands,
whether he may not lawfully Marry.
Mr. Pressicke to the Bishop.
Right reverend Father in God,
I Have according to my weak ability drawn up the chief Heads of my petition
and Letter into a more orderly Form than before, that your Lordship may with
less trouble con^^der of it, and God Almighty direct you therein.

And first, If the Law of God say, 1 Cor. 7.15. If the unbelieving will depart,
let him depart a brother or a sister is not under Bondage in such cases: but if
in such a Case the innocent party have not liberty to marry, he must needs be
in bondage still.

2. If the Law of the Land allow, that if a Husband or Wife forsake one another
seven years, and be not heard off, the innocent party may marry; then why may
not I much more have l^berty to marry, whose Wife has forsaken me seven years
and five months: for what more benefit have I of her, than if I did not he^r
whethe^ she were de^d or l^ving* yea more, I have a D^vorce under two Bishops
Hands by a reference from his Majesty: and though it be not in Form according
to the Canon Law, (for that had been many years silenced) but having his
Majesty's Royal Assent, (from whom the Canon Law receives it is vigo^ and
strength) does supply that defect, as if it had been done by the Canon Law.

3. If both the Law of God, as 1 Cor. 7.15. and secondly if the Law of the Land
(according to the practice of the Church of England as above) the benefit of
which cannot in equity be denied me, there being no Law as your Lordship said
to compel a wife to perform the duty of a wife. and thirdly (which is more) I
having a B^ll of D^vorce. And fou^thly the example and practice of the Church
in Germany in the like case, who allowed Galeatius to marry because his wife
refused to co-habit with him, as mine has refused to co-habit with me, then
why should I be h^ndered of my lawful liberty more than others.

4. If there be no Law to compel a wife to her duty, as your Lordship said
there is not, and if there be a Law to restrain the husband from his lawful
l^berty, which the Word of God allows him, and according to the practice of
other Churches as above: then whether is that Law that restrains him (if any
such Law there be) whether is it a just Law according to the wo^d of God, or
whether is it not rather against the word of God; and is not that Law (if there
be any such) a setting of their thresholds against Gods thresholds, and their
Posts by Gods Posts; Ezekiel. 43.8. compared with Isa. 29.13. their fear toward
me is taught by the precepts of men. For such a law would destroy an Ordinance
of God, that is, Marriage and P^ocre^tion, and one end for which man was
c^eated, that is, That the wife should be in subjection to her hu^band, as the
Church is to Christ. Ephesians. 5.24. But if this l^berty be denied him, then must
the husband be in subjection to h^s w^fes humor, though she be a who^e o^ an
Infidel and of never so perverse a spirit, he must be kept in bondage, and
laid open to all temptations, if not a necessity of sinning. 1 Cor. 7.4.5.

If it be objected that nothing but whoredom can divorce as some have
ignorantly said. 5. To that I say that though there are other lawful causes of
divorce besides whoredom; yet except the Bishops made that divorce between me
and my wife, upon the account of my wifes being a whore in Scripture-sence, as
I writ to them before they made that divorce, the Bishops must needs fall under
the breach of that Scripture, Math. 19.6. Those whom God has joined together,
let no man put asunder. for there can be no divorce from bed and board, (as
some call it) but it is absolutely against that Text: Except it be with consent
for a time, (1 Cor. 7.5.) to give themselves unto prayer; and come together
again, lest Satan tempt them for their incontinencie. But this divorce between
me and my wife is not of this nature, and therefore contrary to the word of
God; except it be upon the account of her whoredom in Scripture-sence: for
neither the consent of the Parties, nor the consent of the Bishops can make
that lawful, which the word of God says is unlawful, Mat. 19.6. Those whom
God has joined together, let no man put asunder.

6. Now that she is a whore in Scripture-sence I prove is thus, Judges 19.2.
the text says, The Levits wife played the whore against her husband, and
departed from him four full months. but my wife has departed from me seven
years and five months; if the Levits wife had actually played the who^e, she
should by the Law have been stoned to death; Levit. 20.10. neither had it been
lawful for him to have taken her again, Levit. 21.7. and 1 Cor. 6.16. He that
is joined to an harlot is one flesh. therefore it is conceived that the Levites
wife departing from him without his consent, it is in Scripture-sense
whoredom; for she ought to have been in subject on to her husband, as the
Church is to Christ. Ephesians. 5.24. This truth is further confirmed by comparing
this with Prove. 2.17^ where a harlot is descr^bed to be one that forsakes her
husband, and forgets the covenant of her God: some Margents say, she
forgets the promise of the marriage covenant; Ier: 3.3. compared with the 20
verse, Thou had a Whores forehead, as a wife treacherously departs from
her husband: these three Texts prove sufficiently that a wife forsaking her
husband is a whore in Scripture-sence.

So that from the union that is between Christ and his Church, Ephesians. 5.32. we
may gather that as forsaking the Lord is called harlotry, Isa. 1.4. compared
with the 20, 21. They have forsaken the Lord, how is the faithful City become
an harlot. even so a wife forsaking her husband is in Scripture-sence
whoredom: and God threatens to punish both with one and the same punishment,
Ezekiel 16.38. I will judge thee as women that break wedlock and shed blood are
judged. and breaking wedlock and shedding blood are both the sins of her that
was my wife.

To conclude as Christ himself said, Therefore whatsoever ye would that men
should do to you, do ye even so to them. I beseech you consider it as if it
were your case, what you would have others do unto you; and trouble not your
self to answer, but grant me a Lycense to marry, which if you do, yet it can
be no President to others to follow, for no man's condition does parallel mine.

First, in regard of my wifes obstinacy these seven years and five months,
notwithstanding all lawful means that has been used to ^eclaime her, and in
that respect she is wo^se then most who^es are; for few whores do altogether
deny their husbands, though they company with other men as with their husbands.

Secondly, in her endeavoring to murder me, by stabbing at me with a knife,
and cutting me in the face.

Thirdly, I have suffered twenty five days imprisonment by Charles Fleetwood,
for taking hold of my wife, and desiring to talk with her but one quarter of
an hour, to know if she could show any reason why she dealt so with me: besides
she procured my imprisonment in London for 1700 pound, when I owed not one
penny.

Fourthly, I have a Bill of divorce by virtue of his Majesty's reference to two
Bishops, and under the two Bishops hands: all which considered, granting me a
Lycense to marry can be no president for others to follow.

Novem: 12 th. 1661. Your Lordships most humble and unworthy servant George
Pressicke.

The Bishop's Answer.
Mr. Pressicke;
I Have perused your Paper and I am still of the same judgment I was; they who
expound Scriptu^e acco^ding to the^r own private fancies do often change, but
they who expound it in the same sense which was delivered to the Catholic
Church with the Scripture, can hardly vary from themselves.

To the first objection I acknowledge the words of Saint Paul, 1 Cor. 7.15. If
the unbelieving depart, let him depart; a brother or a sister is not ^n bondage
in such cases. But there is a difference b^tween the marriage of Infidels and
the marrige of Christians* the marriage of Infidels being only a civil Contract
and may be d^ssolved by consent, the marriage of Christians is moreover a ^^gne
of the Mystical union between Christ and his Church, and therefore
indissolvable.

secondly, You plead the law of the Land which alowes a woman to marry after
her husband has been seven years absent: but you mistake the Law, for if the
hu^band be known to ^e living, seventeen years absence w^ll not make it lawful
for the wife to marry again; take an instance Mr. Mole was absent above twenty
years in the inquisition, for his religion, yet his wife did not, she could not
marry again. The reason of your mistake is this that if a man be not heard off
in seven years, the Law presumes that he is dead, and death dissolves the bond
of marriage; yet if it appear that the fo^mer husband was not dead, he ought to
be restored to his wife notwithstanding her second marriage.

thirdly, You prove nothing but presume that since you have the law of God and
the law of the Land for you, the precepts of Men cannot comptroll the law of
God, but you err every way, for you have neither the law of God for you nor
the law of the Lan^, but both the law of God and the law of the Land are
ex^resly against you: he^ saint Mark chap. 10. verse 11. Whosoever shall put
away his wife and marry another, commits adultery against her. the words are
general and admit no evasion: hear saint Luke chap. 16. v. 18. W^osoever
pu^teth away his wife and marrye^h another, commits adul^ery; aed whosoever
marryeth her that is put away commits adultery. ^here is no restrict^on nor
exception, indeed saint Matthew seems to have an exception Mat. 5.32.
Whosoever shall put away his wife saving for the cause of fornication, causes
her to commit adultery; and whosoever shall marry her that is divorced,
commi^teth adultery. and Mat. 19.9. Whosoever shall put away his wife except it
be for fornication, and shall marry another, commits adultery: which two
places have both the same sense. The exception, if it be an exception, and not
rather a pure negation, extends it self only to the divorce, not at all to
the second marriage: he that ^utteth away his wife without the cause of
fornication, makes her commit adultery: but if he put her away for
fornication, she is the culpable cause of her own adultery, not he that puts
her away justly: but having put her away, whether he may lawfully marry again
without sin, saint Matthew says nothing, but saint Mark and saint Luke speak
expressly that he cannot: yet even this place of saint Matthew (howsoever
understood) speaks directly against your second marriage, for you do not so
much as pretend that your wife has committed adultery* and therefore by the
undoubted consent of the three Evangelists you cannot marry again.

To this of the three Evangelists, add likewise the testimony of St. Paul,
Romans 7.2, 3. The woman which has an husband is bound by the law to her husband
so long as he lives, but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the Law of
her husband. So then if while her husband lives she be married to another, she
shall be called an Adulteress. St. Paul knew no way to dissolve marriage but
by death: the same he says, 1 Cor: 7:39. The wife is bound by the Law as long
as her husband lives but if her husband be dead, she is at liberty to be
married to whom she will. and if we weigh the force of St Paul's argument
exactly, we shall find it to be this, That as the bond of the Law could no way
be dissolved whiles the Law lived, that is, was not abrogated, notwithstanding
any prevarication interceding; so the bond of marriage is indissolvable so long
as life lasts, notwithstanding any interceding fornication. To conclude this
point, he that marries her that is divorced or put away either justly for
fornication, or unjustly without fornication, commits adultery: for if it
was justly for fornication; then she was the nocent person, and could not marry
aga^n; and if it was unjustly without fornication, then the divorce was void,
and she still continued wife to her former husband: howsoever it was, whether
justly or unjustly, it can be no adultery, except the bond of the former
marriage were d^ssolved.

Another place we have to the same purpose, 1 Cor: 7.10, 21. Unto the married I
command, yet not I, but the Lord, let not the wife depart from her husband; but
if she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband; and
let not the husband put away his wife. Either St Paul speaks of such a woman
who had no just cause of separation, or of one who had: but he cannot be
understood to speak of one who had no just cause of separation, for then he
would not, he could not have said, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled
at her choice, but let her be reconsiled and return to her husband. St Paul
did not, could not permit any unjust Di^o^ces, contrary to the express Word of
God. It is plain therefore that he speaks of one who had just cause to depart;
and yet St Paul commands in the name of the Lord, that such an innocent
person should remain unmarried.

To these plain testiminies of holy Scripture, we may join the evidence of
right reason. If married persons could so easily unmarry themselves by the
consent of both parties, and much more by the ^^nister practices of one party?
what a Door would this open to perjuries and subordinations, to the slanders
and deflamations of innocent persons, whilst men pursued their own lusts under
the clo^ke of justice? what division and what ruin would this bring upon
families? what a curse would it be to poor children, who (many times without
their own faults) must loose one of their natural parents, and get a
step-Father or a Stepmother in their place?

This Conclusion (Mr. Pressicke) is evidenced to us by the wo^d of God, by the
light of natural reason, that marriage ought to be kept sacred and
undissolvable. It has been long observed as a National sin of this people,
to have been over easy dissolvers of true marriages, upon slanderous, or
pretended Prae-contracts wanting all ground but lust and perjury: and therefore
I do give you the same Counsel which I take God to witness I would take my
self if I were in the same condition. Seek once more to be reconciled to your
wife, and forget not to pray God to change her heart: if you cannot prevail,
then follow St Paul's command or rather God's command by St Paul, to remain
unmarried. You complain of this as a grievous burden, but you consider not
that many holy Saints and Servants of God have lived much longer under the same
Cross that you have done, and altogethe^ without their own faults. Some have
had their Spouses imprisoned for 30 or 40 years together for conscience sake,
as I told you formerly of Mr. Mole: some again have had their husbands made
slaves by the Turks, and detained from them as long as they lived: some have
been smitten with an incurable disease (presently after Marriage) inconsistent
with the duties of the marriage bed: what must they do in these cases and many
more of the same nature? Presently marry again, God forbid! This is a better
remedy, that is, by fervent and frequent prayer to beg the guifte of
continency of God: if we prevail not, it is because we pray amiss. If it be not
a cross which we have pulled upon our selves, but which God himself has
imposed upon us we have his promise, that he will hear u^, and help us: let who
will whisper to you other thoughts, Mr. Pressicke this is your remedy.

In your fifth Paragraph you run into one or two errors more, that every
ord^nary divorce is forbidden as a breach of Gods command: What God has joined
together, let no man put asunder, Mat: 19.6. and that there is no other cause
of divorce but fornication.

For first, that Text ( Mat: 19.6.) is understood properly of dissolving the
bond of marriage, (as you would have it) for eve^, and not of lesser
separations made out of prudence or piety for a time.

Secondly, there are other causes of divorces, besides fo^nication, as when one
married person shall seek to poison or make away the other, or to starve them,
it is very lawful to separate them out of prudence to prevent murder. Judge
whether this be not your case or no? and when the one person is continually
enticing the other to Heresy or blaspheming; or soliciting him or her to sin
against God: in such cases also such a temperary Divorce is lawful, as no man
that understands himself will deny.

In the 6 and 7 paragraph, you endeavor to prove your wife a whore in
Scripture-sence, because she is departed from you, but you mistake every way.
For first, in all p^obab^lity the Levites wife did more then depart from him;
and though a Levite might not marry a known whore, yet being married, he might
pardon, conceal, or connive at her lewd courses. But this is nothing to the
purpose, for this adultery or whoredom for which a man may put away his wife,
is not the spiritual whoredom, that is, Idolatry; nor civil whoredom, that
is, desertion of her husband: but carnal whoredom, whereby the bond of
Marriage is dissolved, and the innocent party acquitted for the future from all
Con^ugall duties. But to imagine that she who only deserts her husband, and she
who takes another into his bed, are both alike guilty of the breach of
wedlock, and both to be punished with the same punishment, as you say in the 7
paragraph, is ridiculous.

In the conclusion of your discourse you plead for liberty to marry, and urge 4
reasons for your self, which if they were all true, signify nothing, as to
that purpose for which you urge them. Suppose she have been so long absent;
suppose she cut you in the face; suppose she were an occasion that you were
imprisoned 25 days; suppose you have a Divorce under two Bishops hands, upon a
reference from his Majesty; yet there is a great difference between a
temporary divorce, and a perpetual dissolution of marriage. What you plead for
your self I have seen, what your wife has to plead for her self I do not
know; but if every thing be as your self say, I cannot give way to your second
marriage, whiles your old wife lives, without contradicting the Commands of our
Savior delivered by three Evangelists, and one Apostle: and therefore I must
commend you to your proper remedy, that is, prayer, hoping that you will never
think more of wedding, whilst your old wife lives, but bear your Cross with
patience which Christ has laid upon you.

November 16 th. 1661.
Mr. Pressicke's Reply to the Bishop's Answer.
Right reverend Father in God,
I Beseech you once more to hear me with patience, what I have further to say:
I have received your Lordships Answer to my paper, and I do humbly conceive it
will admit of some Except^ons as follows,

In the first place, you say (and that truly) that they who expound Scripture
according to their own private fancies, do often change: but they (say you) who
expound it in the same sense which was deliverd to the Catholic Church, with
the Scriptures, can hardly vary from themselves.

To this I humbly reply, that you do not declare who you mean by the Catholic
Church that we should seek the sense of Scripture from: whether the Church of
Rome, or the Protestant Church, jointly or severally, or who else we must take
for the Church: and therefore I will deliver my opinion which I think is not a
private fancy. By Catholic Church I understand all the true Beleivers that
has been from the beginning of the world, is now, and shall be to the end of
the world, of which Catholic Church I am one: and to this Church the
Scriptures was given, and none can understand the sense and mind of God in the
Scriptures, but such as God does reveal it unto by his spirit, 1 Cor: 1.9. As
it is written, eye has not seen nor ear heard, neither has it e^tred into the
heart of man, the things which God has prepared for them that love him. But he
has revealed them to us by his spirit: and we h^ve not received the spirit of
the world, but the spirit which is of God, that we might know (observe the
words) that we might know the things that are freely given to us of God. But
the naturallman receive^h not the things of the spirit of God, for they are
foolishnes unto him: neither can he know them, because they are spiritu^lly
discerned. and Mat: 10.27. No man knows the Father, save the Son, and ^e to
whom the Son will reveal him. I do with all my heart and soul reverence
learning, because I find the want of learning in my self: and we are debtors
to those that have translated the Scriptures into our Mother Tongue: yet such
as have natural learning, and understand the original Tongues may be in a
natural estate, and in that respect the Apostle says, they cannot know the
things of the spirit of God, for they are foolishnes unto him; because they
must be spiritually discerned. But I say he is a good Scholar that has learned
his Lesson of Christ: and it matters not who is the scholar so that Christ be
the Schoolmaster: I have never read that Christ does speak to his Children or
Scholars only in Hebrew, Greek, or Lattine, but he has and does declare his
mind and will to them in English, and other Languages as well as in the
original Tongues. I hope th^s is no expounding of Scripture according to
private fancy: for it is plain Scripture, if the Scripture be right translated:
if it be not, the fault is not mine.

To the first objection you own the words of St. Paul, 1 Cor: 7.15. If the
unbeliever depart, let him dep^rt: a brother or a sister is not in bondage in
such Cases: and you say there is a great difference between the marriage of
Infidells, and the marriage of Christians: the marriage of Infidells being only
a civil contract, and may be dissolved by consent: the marriage of Christians
is a sign of the mystical union between Christ and his Church, and therefore
(you say) undissolvable.

To this I reply by plain Scripture, and agree with you that the marriage of
Infidells is dissolvable, if but the one party be an Infidel, and refuse to
co-habit with the husband or wife, as 1 Cor: 7.15. and at verses 12, 13. If a
husband have an unbelieving wife, or a wife an unbelieving husband: if the
unbeliever be pleased to dwell with the believer, the believer ought not to put
the unbeliever away. and though my wife be an unbeliever, and is departed, yet
I have waited 6 years, etc. for her returning, before I got a Bill of divorce:
and the Text says* if the unbeliever depart, a brother or a siter is not in
bondage in such cases: and you have granted that the marriage of Infidells is
dissolvable by consent, and she gave her consent to the divorce: therefore by
your own words the bone of marriage is dissolved between her and me: for this
is my case, my wife is an Infidel or unbeliever, and has departed from me
above 7 years and 5 months: I did not put her away, but she put her self away,
and by her departing she put me away from her as. Mark 10.12. But St Paul
says, If she depart, let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her
hu^band. 1 Cor: 7.11. the reason is because she is the nocent party, therefore
she must remain unmarried or be reconciled: but St. Paul does not say let him
remain unmarried, o^ let him wait 7 years, as I have done, or 17 years to see
whether she will be reconciled to her husband or not; but he saiah expressly,
ver: 15. if she depart, he is not in bondage in such cases: this is plain
Scripture. But what greater outward bondage can there be (if he have need of a
w^fe) than to be restrained from marriage, or in what sense can any man take
that Scripture, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases. I humbly
conceive that to say as you do in another place, that he is freed from all
conjugall duties toward her, it is neither the meaning of the Text, nor is the
plaster broad enough for the soar: for if she desert him, and will not come
at him, nor suffer him to come where she is, what conjugall duties is he like
to perform toward her? it is impossible: therefore the text must have another
meaning, which I conceive must be this; she breaking the bond and covenant of
marriage, and will not be reconciled in so many years, she being an Infidel
and giving her consent to that divorce, it does dissolve the marriage, as your
self said before, and sets me free to marry as St. Paul says, a brother or a
sister is not in bondage in such cases: if you say she is not an infidel, she
has been baptized and is a Christian, I say no, she is no Christian that
walks in practice as my wife has done. Indeed I must say that so long as
persons do outwardly hold and embrace the Christian faith, in Charity we are
bound to esteem them Christians, until they manifest something to the contrary
in their conversations: but when they break their faith and covenant, and all
both humane and christian bonds, as my wife has done, and will not be
admonished neither by Ministers no^ christian friends, but all Scripture and
counsel has been rejected by her, and she wittingly and maliciously acting
against the light of her own conscience, it is no breach of charity to esteem
such an one an Infidel or unbeliever while they so walk: for such an one
cannot be said to be a believer in any other sense then the Devil is said to
believe and tremble: for if she did believe in any other sense, she durst not
act so contrary to the rule of Scripture in breaking faith and covenant with
God and her husband; she cannot be said to be a christian, for believers were
first called christians at Antioch: they were first believers, and then called
christians: but some Ministers have said she is worse then an infidel, for
Infidells act ignorantly, and she acts against knowledge.

I grant also that the marriage of Christians is a sign of the mystical union
between Christ and his Church; but that such a marriage is undissolvable, I
think by what you have said it does not appear: for to the third Objection
you g^rnt that a wife may be divorced for fornication, and I think I shall by
Scripture make it appear, that being divorced for fornication, the innocent
party may lawfully marry. To prove th^s, the best way to expound Scripture is
to compare Scripture with Scripture: now Mark 10.11. it is said, Whosoever
shall put away his wife, and marry another, commiteth adultery against her. and
Luke Whosoever puts away his wife, and marries another, commiteth adultery:
and whosoever marrie^h her that is put away from her husband, commits
adultery. these Texts you say admit of no evasion, exception; nor restriction:
but compare them with Mat: 19.3. and they w^ll yield another sense. The
Pharisees came unto Christ tempting him, and saying unto him, is it lawful for
a man to put away his wife for every cause. Christ's answer seems to include, as
if he should say no, it is not lawful for a man to put away h^s wife for every
cause: for if you do, both he that puts her away for every eause, and marries
another, and he that marries her that is put away for every cause, both of
them commits adultery: this I conceive to be the true meaning of both these
Texts, the putting away for every cause, and marrying another is to commit
adultery: and Moses (says he) verses 8, and 9. Because of ^he hardness of
your hearts, suffered you to put away your wives for every cause: but I say
unto you, that whosoever shall put away his wife except it be for fornication,
and marry another, commits adultery. but without all peradventure, these
Texts thus compared together, holds forth to us, that if the divorce be for
fornication, and not for every cause, if he marry another, he does not commit
adultery: for likewise Mat: 5.32. whosoever shall put away his wife except for
the cause of fornication, causes her to commit adultery: If he put her away
for every cause, but if she be put away for fornication, she is the cause of
her own adultery, and he is no adulterer if he marry another, is included in
these words, except for fornication, in all the three Evangelists: for there
cannot be a contradiction between one of them and another, speaking all by one
spirit: therefore one Text must be compared with another to find out the true
sense, and I think it is very clear as above, being thus explained by Mat: 19:3.

I conceive it very clear that being put away for fornication, and not for
every cause, the innocent party may lawfully marry without sin: and I do humbly
conceive that it was upon this account that the old Lord Primate Docter Usher
and Docter Martin did separate Mr. Richard Lingart and his w^fe after they had
2 or 3 children, and presently after while the old wife was living he married
the Organists widow of St. Patrick's, and was after Archdeacon of Mead: all
this I can make good.

And I humbly conceive from Mark 10.12. compared with the 1 Cor: 7.15. that it
is as clear that a wife putting away her husband, and departing from him, and
will not be reconciled, the husband may as lawfully marry, as if he had put her
away for fornication, and ought not to be kept in bondage. Mark 10.12. If a
wom^n put away her husband and be married to another, she commits adultery:
but the Evangelist does not say that if he marry another, after she is departed
and has put him away, that he commits adultery, and St. Paul says
ab^olutely that he is not in bondage in such cases: the reason I conceive is
because the wife ought to be in subjection to her husband and not he in
subject^on to her: and therefore the putting him away, and will not be
reconciled does alter the case so as to set the husband free: a brother or a
sister is not in bondage in such cases. For God knowing man's weakness, and
requiring that man should be holy in body and mind, and God knowing Satan's
sleights and continual temptations, seeking whom he may devour, it cannot in
reason be imagiened that God would have a man left in such a fo^lorne condition
without a Remedy, through the perverseness of a whore or unbeliever: it does
not stand with the bounty and goodness of God to man: it is also against
natural reason, and contrary to Scripture, ( Ephesians: 5.24.) that says, As the
Church is in subjection to Christ, so let the Wives be to their own Husbands in
every thing: but if in such cases the Husband be not set free to marry, then
must some Husbands be in subjection and bondage to the humors of whores, and
some to infidells and unbelievers: and she that was my wife is both in
Scripture-sence, and I think sins in Scripture-sence are of the deepest dye:
add also to this that I have a b^ll of Divorce, which all considered together,
I see not but for all that is yet said against it, I may lawfully marry.

You say, and that truly, I have not hitherto so much as pretended that my wife
has committed actual adultery.

I reply, the reason why I have not, is want of proof: for it is a hard matter
to prove one a whore though she were never so guilty, but there is as strong
presumptions to persuade she is so as possible may be: As first, before she
left me, when I told her she did not respect me as a wife ought to do a
husband, she said that she looked upon me but as she did upon other men, and no
otherwise: which is suspicion enough, to put no difference between her husband
and other men. Secondly, it has been taken notice of by several that told me,
that when she was not employed in her calling as Midwife, she did frequent the
company of those that were reputed for who^edome, the vilest persons in the
City; and they would sit and drink Sack, and jeare her husband. 3ly. She
has been observed to go in evenings to places suspected for uncleanesse, and
those that did observe it teld me. Fourthly, it is reported by many in this
City that about the beginning of June last, when she was carried in a
Horse-litter into the County of Armagh (where she still remains for any thing I
know) she had a French disease upon her: these things added to the former
reasons and arguments of Scripture, I think what I plead for cannot in reason
be denied me; but it is just and equal in the sight of God and Man that I
should have a Lycense to marry.

To return to the second Objection, the law of the Land (you say) I mistake:
for if the husband be known to be living, if it were seventeeen years, the wife
may not marry; and you instance Mr. Mole was absent 20 years in the Inquisition.

Reply, I say that in equity the benefit of the Law of the land should be
allowed me, for what difference is there between being absent 7 years, and not
heard off: and to be absent 7 years, if there be no law (as your Lordship said)
to require the Delinquent party to her duty, or what benefit has the one
innocent party of their husband or wife more than the other: therefore there is
as much equity the one should have liberty as the other. As for Mr. Mole his
condition and this we speak of, are much different; for Mr. Mole would have
come home if he might, and she that was my wife might have come home, and was
much sought to for to come, and she would not; therein the case alters. And
Galleatius being in the same condition that I am, as to the absence of his
wife, yet not altogether in the same manner, for he left his wife, and my wife
left me, and I have a Divorce and he had none, yet the Divines in Germany
allowed him to marry another: and therefore I still affirm (till better
reasons be showed to the contrary) that both the Law of God, and the example of
the Church in Germany, and the practice of Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin toward Mr.
Lingart here in Ireland, are all for me that I may lawfully marry: and if there
be no law to require a w^fe to perform the duty of a wife, nor to punish her
for her disobedience, I see not how there can be any Law [in equity] against
me, to hinde^ me from marriage.

To come again to the 3 Object^on: you bring Rom: 7.2, and 3. verses. The woman
which has a husband, is bound by the Law to her husband as long as he lives;
but if the husband be dead, she is loosed from the law of her husband: so then,
if while her husband lives, she be married to another, she shall be called an
adulteress. and 1 Cor: 7.39. The wife is bound by the Law as long as the
husband lives.

Reply, I humbly conceive [under favour] this Argument will not hold out we^ght
in the balance of the Sanctuary: for if she were put away justly for
fornication, then the marriage is dissolved, as I showed before out of the 3
Evangelists, that which I think will carry it though you say marriage cannot
be dissolved. Well, she being justly put away for fornication, he that marries
her commits uncleanness with her, because she was an Ha^lot: What know ye
not, that he that is joined to an hurlot is one body, for two says he shall be
o^e flesh: [1 Cor: 6.15, 16.] and shall I take the members of Christ and make
them the members of an Harlot, God forbid! If she were put away unjustly for
every cause, as it seems then they used to make private divorces without
Lycense from either Magistrate or Minister; and herein though she were innocent
as to the cause of divorce, yet she was blameworthy and guilty of sin, in not
appealing to the Governors of the Church or Commonwealth, or to both for
justice, and they ought to have relieved her, and required the husband to
performs duty of a husband to her, and not have suffered the Land (by such
unlawful separation) to be polluted: and her neglect of this, and submitting
her self to an unlawful private Divorce, makes her and him that marries her,
both guilty of uncleanness.

But this is not my condition, it is far different from such proceedings: for
I have to my hazard both of life and l^berty used all possible means to reclaim
her since she left me, but to no purpose, and I have been restrained of my
liberty for 25 days together, for contending against such private separations:
and I have appealed both to Magistrates and Ministers, when the times and
persons were so corrupt that I could not have justice, until the Lord brought
home his Majesty, to whom I made my plaint and case known, who upon the reading
of my petition gave His Royal Assent that two Bishops should order the matter
according to justice: and they considering her long absence, and that the man
has no power over his own body but the woman, and that she had broke the bond
of wedlock in departing so long, and defrauding her husband of due
benevolence, which by the bond of marriage she was engaged to, 1 Cor: 3.3.4.5.
and that at that present before them she refused to be reconciled; whereupon
the two Bishops gave me a bill of Divorce according to 1 Cor: 7.15. If the
unbeliever will depart let her depart, a brother or a sister is not in bondage
in such cases: and Mark 10.12. If a woman shall put away her husband, and be
married to another, she commits adultery: which does imply, as the Text
above does, that he is not in bondage: so that if he upon that account marry
another, he does not commit adultery, because she denies the duty of a wife:
and God did ordain that man should not live alone, but should have a help meet
for him: and therefore if a wife that should be a help to him, to keep his
vessel in holiness and honor to God, if she break her Covenant with God and
with her husband, shall I be kept in bondage after all this, and the Scriptures
say in such cases a man is not in bondage. I pray you is it not contrary both
to the Law of God and man, and natural reason that I should suffer for my
wives trangression; if she commit murder, must I be hanged for her murder: or
if she commit adultery, must I do penance all my life after, to live out of a
married condition for her adultery or separating her self from me, though I
have never so much need of a wife; this were a sad penance indeed for her
whoredom. But perhaps you will say she is not a whore, I say she is in
Scripture-sence, if she be not otherwise; and Scripture-sence is the best
sense, and best proof to prove a whore by: for it is very well known that
according to the Laws of Men, it is a very hard task to prove a woman to be a
whore: but I have showed you enough before to persuade reasonable men that she
is no less. I hope the Scriptures shall not be streched like Cloth upon
tenter-hookes to keep men in such cases still in bondage: God is more gracious
than men, to b^nd such heavy burdens, and lay them upon men's shoulders, which
themselves will not touch with one of their fingers.

You say further from the 1 Cor: 7.10, 11. that St Paul cannot be understood to
speak of one who had no just cause of separation; for then he could not have
said, Let her remain unmarried, or be reconciled to her husband.

Reply. I humbly conceive these words will bear another construction, mo^e
agreeable to other Scriptures: for you speak of just cause of separation, for
which she should remain unmarried, or be reconciled; but do not tell us what
that just cause might be: if you mean her Husbands fornication or adultery,
then the Scripture tells us plainly in the 3 Evangelists explained by Mat:
19.3. that upon a lawful divorce, she needed not to remain unmarried: for
being divorced for her Husbands fornication, she might marry; because she could
not (upon that account) return again and be reconciled to him, but in so doing
she should sin, by making the members of Christ the members of an Harlot: 1
Cor: 6.15, and 16. therefore it must be some inferior cause of separation, as
some rash or unadvised act, for which she might depart for a time, and remain
unmarried until her husbands rage or anger were past, and they reconciled
again. And I do humbly conceive, that where a Text will bear a double
construction, it is most agreeable to the m^nd and will of God to expound it in
that sense, that in observing thereof pesons may be preserved as much as may be
from temptations to sin* rather than to expound it in such a sense as by
observing thereof persons shall be laid open to most horrid temptations to sin:
and I do verily believe that the late Lord Primate and Dr. Martin did separate
Mr. Lingart and his wife upon this account; which Mr. Lingart about 3 or 4
months after married another wife, while the first was living; which if it had
not been lawful to have been done, I presume those precious servants of Jesus
Christ Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin would not have suffered it to have been done.

In the next place you say it is evidenced by right reason that if persons
could so easily unmarry themselves, what a door it would open to perjuries,
subordinations, and slaundees of innocent persons, etc.

Reply. This is as if Children should not have bread because sometimes Dogs
snatch it from them. Shall the Children of God be debarred ^he^r lawful
l^berty for fear the Children of Beliall should draw false Conclusions from
sound Principles: or shall innocents be punished with transgressors for
company. If my case were weighed in the balance of right reason, I could not
be denied my desire: how have I pursued all lawful means that could be
invented and procured (Doctors of Divinity, and Ministers, and Christian
friends) to persuade my wife to own me as a Husband, and she would not, nor
show any reason but her own will: and I have showed your Lordship (in my other
paper) four several reasons, that if I have a License to marry, yet no wicked
person can make my condition a president for them to follow.

I grant as you say it is evidenced by the Word of God and the light of
natural reason, that Marriage ought to be kept sacred and undissolvable; it
ought so: but if one party break the Bond, it is against the Word of God and
the light of natural reason, that the innocent party should be punished all
his life long for the Nocents transgre^sion. What you say of Mr. Mole or others
comes not near my case: for as I said before they would have come home, if they
might; and my wife might have come if she would, and has been as much solicited
to come as might be, and this was Galleatius case, his wife would not come at
him, for which the Divines in Germany suffered him to marry while the first
wife was living.

To my fourth Objection you are silent, which was to this effect that seeing it
does appear for any thing that is yet said against it that according to the
Word of God, that he whose wife commite^ adultery, and he whose wife departs
from him and denies the duty of a wife, as mine has done th^s 7 years and 5
months, may lawfully marry: and I have showed you that Dr. Usher and Dr. Martin
did allow it, and the Church in Germany and New- England has allowed marriage
in such cases: then I say if there be no law to compel a wife (deserting her
husband) to her duty, nor to punish her for her disobedience, and if there be
any law of men to restrain the Husband in such a case from marriage, then
whether is that Law that restrains him a just law, according to the Word of
God? or whether is it not rather against the Word of God, and the practice of
other Churches: and a binding of men's Consciences to insupportable burdens?
and whether is not such a Law (if any such there be) a setting of their
thresholds against God's thresholds, and their posts by his posts Ezekiel: 43.8.
compared with Isa: 29.13. Their fear toward me is taught by the precepts of
men. Indeed I know not of any such L^w, my study has been more in Divinity,
neither did I ever know where to get a Book of Canons to acquaint my self
with that Law: but it seems strange to me if amongst all the Canons there be
none to punish a Husband or wife that refuses to perform the duty of a
Husband or wife.

To my 5 Argument, you say I run into one or two errors more, viz: That every
ordinary Divorce is forbidden as a breach of Gods command, What God has joined
together, let not man put asunder: Mat: 19.6. and that I say there is no other
^ause of Divorce but only fornication.

Reply. This heavy charge of one or two errors, I shall easily wipe off; for I
do not say there is no other cause of Divorce but fornication; for I said in my
other paper, and I say in this, that an unbelieving wife departing from her
Husband, and denying the duty of a wife, and will not be reconsiled to her
husband, it is cause of divorce as well as fornication, if the Scripture may be
believed before private fancy. 1 Cor: 7.3, 4, 5, 11, 15. If the unbeliever
depart, a brother or a sister is not in bondage in such cases. Nay I think it
is no false Exposia^on to say further, that whether she be a believer or
unbeliever, if she depart, and persist in it, and will not be reconciled, it is
cause of divorce; otherwise the Apostle would have said a brother or a sister
is not in bondage in such a case, in the singular number, in case of the
unbelievers deparring: but he says A brother or a sister is not in bondage in
such cases; speaking of more cases than one: which may well be understood not
only of an unbelie^ers departing, but in the like case of a believers
departing, if she continue obstinate and unreconcilable, a brother or a sister
is not in bondage in such cases.

Further you say that Text Mat: 19:6. is understood properly of dissolving the
bond of marriage for ever, (as you say I would have it) and not of lesser
separations made out of prudence or piety for a time. I said before and I say
still that except the Bishops made that Divorce between me and my wife, upon
the account of my wifes being a whore in Scripture-sence, o^ else upon account
of her departing and not performing the duty of a wife, one or both, as I writ
to them of the lawfulnes of such a Divorce, and of the Germane Divines allowing
the like to Galeatius, before they made th^s Divorce: I showed these reasons
why I desired it, or else to have my wife to l^ve with me, which she before
them did refuse. I say exce^t they made this Divorce upon this account, which
you say d^ssolves marriage for ever, the Bishops must needs fall under the
breach of that precept, Those whom God has joy^ed together, let no^ man put
asunder: for this divorce cannot be unde^^tood (as you^ Lo^dship speaks) of
lesser separations for a time, but of a perpetual Divorce: for the Bishops
bound us in five hundred pound Bonds apeece, that we should not own one the
other, not one the others estate; and b^d us to take leave of one another as if
one of us were going to the grave: therefore it cannot be understood of a
lesser Divorce for a time, but of a perpetual dissolution of marriage for
ever, or else the Bishops stand guilty of the breach of that precept, Mat: 19*
6. Thus, both according to the Word of God, and the Laws of men, I mean the
Bishops and His Majesty's Royal assent, the bond of marriage is dissolved;
what hinders then but I may have License to marry: and whereas I say there can
be no divorce from bed and board (as some call it) except it be with consent
for a time, and come together again, least Satan tempt them to incontine^cy. 1
Cor: 7.5. but it is absolutely against this and that precept Mat: 19.6. and 1
Cor: 7.3, 4, 5. I beseech you let not this be condemned for an error which is
justified by Scripture. For your distinctions of temporary Divorces and lesser
seperations and divorces of prudence and piety, I find no such distinctions of
Divorces in Scripture; and I dare not pin my faith upon any man's opinion
without Scripture-proofe: I pray you bear with my plainness, for I have read
in an ancient Author, that one Layman bringing Scripture to prove his
assertion, was to be preferred before a whole Counsel that decreed things
without warrant from Scripture: and I read of no such Divorces in Scripture,
except it be for every cause, Mat: 19.3. and that Christ himself condemns as
unlawful. And if any married persons should be so desperately wicked as to
endeavor to kill, or poison or entice to Heresy or Blasphemy, or the like,
the Magestrates by Law may take order and secure the innocent party, without
making Divorces not warrantable by Scripture, and which oftentimes proves a
bane to the innocent party, and binds him to more bondage then the Nocent.

To the 6 and 7 Arguments where I prove my wife to be a whore in
Scripture-sence, you say I mistake: for it is probable the Levites wife did
more then depart, and though a Levite might not marry a known whore; yet being
married, he might pardon, or conceal, or connive at her lewd courses.

Reply. I conceive it not so much as probable that she did any more than depart
without his consent, that was enough: for the Seripture mentions not that she
did any more, for which she was called a whore: for if she had been an actual
whore she should by the Law have been stoned to death, Levit: 20.10. neither
had it been lawful for him to have taken her again, Levit: 21.7. and I say he
could not pardon nor connive at her lewd courses so as to take her again: 1
Cor: 6.13, 15, 16. The body is not for fornication, but for the Lord. What,
know ye not that your bodies are the members of Christ? shall I then take the
members of Christ and make them the members of an harlot, God forbid! What,
know ye not that he that is joined to an harlot is one body, for two (says he)
shall be called one flesh. These Scriptures shows plainly, that if a believers
wife plays the Harlot, he ought not, nor cannot (without grievous sin) join
himself to her again: for in so doing he dishonours Christ and makes his
members the members of an Harlot. Now if such an innocent party have not
liberty to marry, then is he (for his wifes sin) in perpetual bondage all
his life after, except he will join with his wife again, and so make the
members of Christ the members of an Harlot: but as for my w^fe, if I would, she
would not own me as a Husband: I desire it may be better con^^dered of for to
say, that neither for civil whoredom [as you call a wifes deserting her
Husband] nor carnal whoredom does free the husband no further then from
conjugall duties, is such a distinct on as I am assured is not suitable to
Scripture, Grace, and Believers privileges: those that thus deal with men, do
as much as in them lies to provoke them to incontinency: but as I said before
Dr. Usher and Dr Martin dealt not so with Mr. Lingart, for without doubt if
either the wife desert her Husband, or play the harlot, for they are both one
in Scripture-sence, the innocent party may lawfully marry rather than burn;
and those that hinder such, must answer for their sins, if they transgress;
and all men have not the gift of continency.

Then you that to imagine that she who deserts her Husband, and she who takes
another into his bed, are both alike guilty of the breach of wedlock, and both
to be punished with the same punishment, as you charge me to say, it is you say
ridiculous.

Reply. My Lo^d, if you look back upon my paper again, you will find it is your
mistake and not mine: for I do not name carnal whoredom, of a woman's taking
another into her Husbands bed; but this I said, that spiritual whoredom,
forsak^ng the Lord, and that which you call civil whoredom, a wife deserting
her Husband, God threatens to punish both with one and the same punishment,
Ezekiel: 16.38. and if this be ridiculous to speak in Scripture language, I know
not how to please men; but the Apostle has taught me, that if I yet seek to
please men, I should not be the servant of Christ: Galat: 1.10. But now being
put to it I will say something to the Charge: I do conce^ve that Blasphemy and
spiritual whoredom [which is forsaking the Lord] being sins committed
immediately against God, are as great sins, if not greater then those sins
committed against men, suppose it to be carnal whoredom or other: and if so
that spiritual who^edome be as great a sin as carnal who^edome, and a wife
deserting her Husband to be punished with the same punishment, that spiritual
whoredom is to be punished with; then a wife deserting her Husband ought to be
punished with the same punishment that carnal whoredom is punished with, be
it Divorce, or what else, except you will make carnal whoredom a greater sin
then spiritual whoredom, and I think this is not rediculous: for a w^fe
departing, and w^ll not be reconciled, it is a breach of wedlock, because the
Husband has not power over his own body, but the wife: and she ought to render
him due benevolence: yea, it is such a sin as God will punish with the same
punishment as he does spiritual whoredom, Ezekiel: 16.38. I will judge thee as
women that break wedlock, and shed blood, are judged.

You grant that the marriage of Christians is a sign of the mystical union
between Christ and his Church: then I say from this union ( Ephesians: 5.32.) we
may draw this Conclusion, that a wife forsaking her Husband, and will not be
reconciled, it is in Scripture-sence Harlotry or whoredom, as forsaking the
Lord is called spiritual whoredom: Isa: 1.4. compared with the 21. They have
forsaken the Lord, How is the faithful City become an Harlot. so a wife
forsaking her husband, and forgetting the Covenant of her God, or promise of
Marriage, Prove: 2.17. is there called a Harlot: and Ierem: 3.3. compared with
20. Thou had a whores forehead, thou refusedst to return, as a wife
treacher^usly departs from her Husband. Now thus to depart (as mine has done
this 7 years and 5 months) is a breach of wedlock, Cor: 7.3, 4, 5. for she
ought to be in subjection to her Husband as the Church is to Christ, Ephesians:
5.24. by the mystical union that is between Christ and his Church, which
marriage is a sign of: but here I shall forbear to proceed any further, for I
think I have made it clear enough to any indifferent man that may read it, both
by Scripture and sound Arguments, that I ought to be set free and have Lycense
to marry, which I hope your Lordship will gr^nt me; otherwise I shall humbly
beg your Lo^dships Rejo^nde^, to know what further reasons can be alleged
against me, I remain

Novem: 27 1661. your Lordship^ most humble and unworthy servant George
Pressicke.


Having proceeded thus far, and sent him my Reply, about a week or ten days
after I went to him, to know if I should expect any further satisfaction to the
Question, but received none: for with a frowning countenance he said. What do
you think that you have received the Spirit to expound the Scripture more than
other men? Do you think you have a Cloven-head upon yours? (what he meant by
Cloven-head, I leave others to judge:) I do protest (says he) the Paper I have
given you already, is my Judgment; which I will live and dye in. But how
unlikely that Paper is to satisfy a scrupulous Conscience, let them that read
it, and the Reply to it, judge. As for me I cannot live by an implicit faith;
for I am like the Bereans, Acts 17.11. One that can believe nothing (though
delivered by an Apostle) without searching the Scriptures daily whether those
things be so: and if I be mistaken I would be thankful to any, that in the
spirit of meekness would by Scripture-arguments and reason show me my mistake,
for as yet it is not done: and there are both Bishops and Ministers of very
eminent Gifts and learning, of the same Judgment with me in this point, that
it is lawful for me to marry.

Suppose the Church of Rome, and some few Protestants are of opinion that
divorced persons may not marry; I do conceive I am not bound to submit to their
Judgment, because I find both the Word of God, and the practice of Protestant
Churches has allowed the innocent party to marry: and as Peter and John said
Acts 4.19. Whether it be right in the sight of God, to hearken unto them more
than unto God, judge ye.

To what I have said, I shall add this, I have been credibly informed that
about the beg^nning of the Rebellion in Ireland, L^evtenant Coll: Hewson sued
out a Divorce before Archdeacon Buckley in Dublin, and after he was divorced,
while the first wife was living, the Archdeacon himself did join the said
Liev: Collonell and another woman together in marriage: and was this lawful
then, and is it not lawful now: and was it thought lawful by the late
Reverend Lord Primate Dr. Usher (whom all Europe reverenced for piety and
learning) and Dr. Martin to separate Mr. Lingart and his wife, and presently
after Mr. Lingart married another while the first wife was living, and is it
not lawful for me now, being divorced by His Majesty's Royal Assent: and was
it thought lawful by the Protestant Church in Germany to suffer Gaelleatiu to
marry another, because his wife would not live with him, though he had no
Divorce; and is it not lawful for me now to marry that has a Divorce, and my
w^fe has forsaken me 7 years and 5 months. What an Iron-age is this that we
live in? I could instance some such like passages as these above, that has
been allowed of in England; but I forbear, I think here is enough to satisfy
reasonable men that reads it.

Thus much I thought I was bound in Conscience to declare to the world, to
clear my self from scandal, before I would take another w^fe, to prove the
lawfullnes thereof as you see I have done both by Scripture, and reason, and
the practice of Protestant Churches, lest any through ignorance should say, I
pract^ce that my self I condemn in others; because I have set forth in a
Book, the practice of Anabaptists in Germany, who had many wives at once: but
I have had none almost this eight years, but only the name of one until I got
a Divorce. And those that can procure Zanty's Book, and read him upon Divo^ce
both for Adultery and Desertion, may be further informed of the innocent
parties liberty to marry in such cases: and I may justly say I have had the
advice of twenty Bishops, Doctors and Ministers, and none but this Bishop spoke
against it, but all concluded that it was lawful for me to marry.

George Pressicke.

Certain Quaeries touching the silencing of Godly Ministers, etc.
John 3.3. Verily, verliy, I say uneo thee, except a man be borne again he
cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.


I Observe from this Text, first, that no man living and dying in that natural
condition in which he is bo^n, except he dye in Infancy, for to such there may
be by the free grace of God, a secret imputation of the merits and
righteousness of Jesus Christ, imputed unto them for salvation: but those that
live to years, and are capable to understand when they are taught, except they
be regenerated and borne again, they cannot see the Kingdom of God: that is,
they cannot enter into the Kingdom of God.

Secondly, I observe out of John 10. and Romans 10. that the ordinary means
that God has ordained to work faith and conversion in such as shall be saved,
is the Ministry of the Word; that is the Word of God preached. To: 10.14, 15.
How shall they hear without a preacher; and how shall they preach except they
be sent. that is such as God sends, and furnishes with Gifts rightly to
divide the word, and to bring out of Gods treasure things new and old, and to
give every one their portions in due season: that is, comfort to whom comfort
belongs, to edify and build them up in their most holy faith: and reproof and
reprehension to whom it belongs, to tell Israel his trangressions, and the
house of Jacob their sins, that at the day of Judgment when the Books of
men's Consciences shall be opened, their condemnation may appear to be just;
that they were instructed in the truth which they rejected and dehorted from:
and were reproved for their sinful ways, they walked into their own
destruction. Such faithful Pastors may say as Isaiah, Isa: 8.18. Behold here
an I and the children that thou have given me: or that thou have made me
isntrumental by my Ministry to them in the work of their Conversion: when
idle Drones, and dumme Dogs, and covetous Cormorants that seek the fleece mo^e
than the flock, and to please men more than God, which run before they are
sent, for filthy-Lucres-sake, these will have nothing to say for themselves,
but wish the Mountains and Rocks to fall upon them, and cover them, from the
face of him that sits upon the Throne, etc.

Thirdly, I have observed with grief of heart, and I humbly desire it may be
seriously considered off by all whom it does or may concern, that many godly
and faithful Ministers, such as no man can deny but they have been
isntrumental by their Ministry to the conversion of many souls, but they are
now silenced, and not suffered to preach, for refusing subscription to that
which they say is part of it the Ordinances of men, and not agree^ng with the
Ordinances of God, and they are forbidden to plow with an Ox and an Ass
together: and they say it is very rare, if ever there were any soul converted
by the reading of that Form of Prayer only; but they can make it appear that
many hundreds have been converted by the preaching of the Word only, which they
are hindered from the exercising of their gifts in; though many of them would
be glad they might be suffered to preach in Places that are vacant, though they
had nothing for their pains: and they say that Preaching being an Ordinance of
Divine institution: and those things they refuse to subscribe (they say) is but
part of Divine and part of Humane institution: and therefore they think they
have not equal dealing that they are silenced from preaching for not reading
such a Form of Common Prayer, etc. and so many preferred as has been, that
many of them could scarce ever preach, but read only: and they desire it may be
considered of, whether the profit that comes by the latter will countervail the
damage of prohibiting the former from preaching in these sinful gloomy days,
and places of ignorance; and which might be the most probable and powerful
means the most to advance Gods glory, and to convince sinners and turn them
from their sins: is it because they cannot see with other men's eyes, that they
may not be allowed to worship God in his own instituted Ordinances, without
subscribing to the Ordinances of Men? as to read Apo^ripha instead of
Canonical Scripture, of which Apocrypha they say some part of it, seems to be
untrue; as to instance one place, Tobit 12 chap: appointed to be read for the
first Lesson at evening Prayer the fourth of October. In the 5 chap: and 4
verse, Tobias went to seek a man to go with him to Media, and he found Raphaell
(says that verse) that was an Angel: and verse the 12. he calls himself
Azarias the son of Ananias the great, and of thy Brethren, says he to Tobit:
and verse the 13. Tobit says, he knew his father Ananias, when they went
together to Jerusalem to worship: and chap: 12. verse 15. He calls himself
again Raphaell, one of the seven Angels which presents the prayers of the
saints. Now this is contrary to the Doctrine of the Church of England, and all
our Protestant Churches, that Angels should present the Saints Prayers, and so
become their Mediator or Inte^cessor; we leave that to Papists, for we own no
Mediator or Intercessor between God and Man, but the Man Christ Jesus, Thus you
see he calls himself Azarias the son of Ananias, and of Tobit's Brethren; and
in another place he calls himself Raphaell one of the seven Angels. Now they
say, that the imposing of this and such like, instead of Canonical Scripture,
makes them that they cannot subscribe; for God is not worshipped with Men's
hands, nor with men's tongues, except it be in a way of his own institution: He
will be sanctified in all that draw near un^o him. I could say much more, but I
forbear, for a word to the wi^e is suff^c^ent.

For my own particular, I conceive a Litturgy in the Church is very useful,
that ignorant persons that cannot pray, may by often reading and hearing it
read, learn to pray in a form of Prayer: yet I think it should be such as
both the Prayers and Lessons to be read, should be suitable to Canonical
Scripture; and not such as is mentioned before: and so composed for matter and
manner, as other parts of Gods worship be not hindered.

But from what has been said, this Question may arise, vizt.

Whether the silencing of Godly Ministers be not very near of k^n to the
killing of the two Witnesses? spoken of Revelation 11. chapter, and 3 and 7
verses.

For with submission to better Judgments, it is humbly conceived, that by the
two Witnesses is signified, all the faithful Preachers and Professors of the
Truth which in all Ages have opposed Popery, and all other Heresies. They are
called Witnesses, because they bear witness to the Truth, and they are said to
be but two, because two is the least number in bearing witness, In the mouth of
two or three Wit^esses, shall every word stand. And this Prophecy did foretell,
that popery and Herefy should so generally prevail, that few in comparison of
the adverse party should oppose them. These Witnesses are said to prophecy in
sackcloth, signifying the mournful condition they should be in, by the
prevailing power of their adversaries, that they should lead a sorrowful life
in this wo^ld, they spend not their time in Iollity, nor worldly Pomp, and
bravery: and verse the 4* they are compared to two Olive trees; for by the
preaching of Gods Word the oil of the Spirit is dropped into tender penitent
hearts: and they are compared to two Candlesticks, that as the Candlestick
bears the Candle to give light to others, so faithful Preachers holds forth
the light of Gods Wo^d in time of greatest darkness. And whereas it is said that
these two Witnesses were killed by their adversaries, we must take notice that
there are several sorts of killing, besides the killing with the sword: there
is a killing with the tongue as well as with the Hand, calling Men,
Schismatic, Obstinate, Turbulent, and Pestilent persons, which cannot be
proved that they are such: and St. John tell us, 1 John 3.15. That. Whosoever
hates his brother is a murderer, and ye know that no murderer has eternal
life abiding in him, and verse 14. He that loves ^ot his brother, abides in
death. and says our Savior, He that says to his brother, thou fool, shall be
in danger of Hell fire. But if there were love amongst Brethren, there would be
more bearing and forbearing of for infirmities, and scruples of Conscience, for
which they dare not subscribe, etc.

A second Quaerie my be ^his, vizt.

Whether the making of the Image of the Beast that had the wound of a sword,
and did live. Revel: 13.14. be not meant of the erecting of an external Form
of Ecclesiastical Government, like some Government that had been before: and
what Government this making (...) Image of the Beast is, I desire to know: For
the beast himsel^^ ^s said in the 6 verse, to blaspheme God, and his
Tabernacle; that is his Church and People: and in the 7 verse, He is said to
make war with the Saints, and overcome them; that is, with the temporal
sword, though they overcome him with the spiritual sword, and it is said in
the 8 ve^se, that the power of the Beast should be so great, that all that
dwell upon the Earth should worship him. that is, by submitting to his Edicts
and Government, even all under his jurisdiction or Domin^on, whose Names are
not written in the Book of Life. It is said after, that such as would not
submit to his Government, must neither buy no^ sell, they must not enjoy those
privileges that others do that do submit.

Some say that by the Beast mentioned in the first verse of this Chapter) that
rise out of the Sea, which had 7 Heads and ten Horns is meant the Roman
Empire: and by the second beast, that rise out of the Earth, that had two Horns
like the Lamb, but spoke like the Dragon: (verse the 11.) is meant, the Pope
in his height. Again others think that by both these Beasts, is meant the
Pope; whose one and the same Person is described under a double resemblance of
two Beasts: for Antichrist alone is a double Head; in respect of his Civil
power, he is the first beast; and in respect of his Spiritual or
Ecclesiastical power he is the second beast. Or if you will, He is the first
beast in regard of the wound he received by the Goths, Vandalls, and Hunnes:
and he is the second Beast, as he was exalted in his height, when his deadly
wound was healed, and ^he Goths, etc. destroyed, and the Pope rise to have
great possessions of Cities and Lands: for he exercised all the power of the
first Beast. Take it in what sense you will. For by his two Horns is meant
both Civil and Ecclesiastical power; for by the sword which the Pope does
exercise, he commands obedience to his Ecclesiastical Decrees as verse 16.17.
He caused all both small and great, rich and poor, bond and free to receive a
Mark in their right hand, or in their forehead. And that no man might buy or
sell, save he that had the Mark, or the Name of the beast, or the number of
his Name. Now by the Mark of the beast in the forehead, or right hand some
think is meant to profess and practice the Laws, Religion, and Decrees that
are commanded; and those that will not submit thereunto, must not buy nor sell.
Now this second Beast exercising all the power of the first beast, and
commanding an Image of the B^ast to be made, which Image must be something that
does resemble, (...) like unto the beast: and if the Mark in the forehead or
right hand, signify the profession and practice of the Laws, Religion and
Decrees of the Beast: then what is meant by the Image of the beast, that they
must not buy nor sell that have not the Beasts mark? and whether it have no
relation to the silencing of Preachers, that do not subscribe their Canonicoll
obedience, I desire to be resolved, and would be much engaged to those that
would take the pains to do it.

For, certain it is, many pecious souls are at a stand, and know not what way
to turn themselves, to see so many eminent Persons, which they dare not think
but there is something of God in both Parties, and yet they are at such a
distance in their practice and affections, and that for a small Punctilio, or
as the Holy Ghost says, They make a man an offender for a word; or for
omission of some small matters, which they that urge them, will not say that
either salvation or damnation does depend upon the doing, or not doing of them:
and yet for omission thereof, their mouths shall be stopped from preaching; and
in some sense salvation or damnation depends upon preaching. Rom: 10.14. How
shall they believe in him, of whom they have not heard: and how shall they hear
without a Preacher, etc. For preaching is the outward ordinary means that God
has ordained to work Conversion in such as he will save: for where Vision
fails, the people perish: and by the ^^^ching of the Word also, those that
are not reformed, their ^ondemnation will appear to be just. And those that do
not preach, and those that hinders others from preaching, see what the
Scripture says, Ezekiel: 33.6. If any man be taken away in his iniquity, for want
of warning, his blood will God require at the Watchmens hands: both he that
should, and does not preach, and he that hinders others from preaching. Let no
man say, I take upon me to teach, for what I do is but (as the Apostle says,)
2 Pet: 3.2. To stir up your pure minds by way of remembrance, though ye know
these things: for I heartily desire peace and unity, and that all men would
remember and practice St. Paul's exhortation, Colos: 3.13. To forbear one
another, and to forgive one another: and if any man have a quarrel against
any, even as Christ forgave you, so also do ye. Or else; how (...) any man pray
the Lords Prayer? a Heathen may say it, but no man can pray it, but such as are
willing to pass by their Brethrens failings and infirmities: For if ye forgive
not men their trespasses, neither will your Heavenly Father forgive your
trespasses. And these Men (we speak of) say, that if they trespass against
Men in denying to subscribe Canonical obdience, it is, fearing they should
trespass against God if they should do it, because they cannot do it of faith,
and whatsoever is not of faith, is sin: and whether it be right in your sight,
to obey Men rather than God, judge ye.

A third Quaerie may be this, vizt.

Whether the silencing of Godly Ministers, have not some relation to the
causing of the daily Sacrifice to cease, that has been offered up daily to
God: and how do men think God will take it, Whose voice once shook the Earth;
Heb: 12.26, 27. but now he has promised saying, Yet once mose, I shake not the
Earth only, but also Heaven: and this word, yet once more, signifies the
removing of those things that are shaken, as of things that are made, [which
some think the things that are made, are to be understood of all Humane
Inventions in Divine Worship,] that the things that are not made, may remain:
that is, those things that are of Divine Institution, shall remain: Men, nor
Devils, nor all the Powers of Darkness shall not be able to prevail against
that which is of Divine Institution, when all Humane Inventions, in point of
Divine Worship, shall be removed, according to this Promise.

If any should think or say, that I make my self too busy to propound such
Questions, give me leave to answer such, That I do but propound my Question to
men: and yet I find Jeremiah in the 12 chap: in such an evil time as this,
when God had warned the Prophet, chap: 7. verse 16. and chap 11. verse 14. That
he should not pray for that people for their good, for he would not hear him
for them; yet even then did Jeremiah (chap: 12. verse 1.) propound a question
to God: Wherefore does the way of the wicked prosper? wherefore are all they
happy that deal treacherously? meaning that they were happy as to their outward
estate in the world. For (says he) thou have planted them, and they have taken
root, and grow: thou art near their mouth, and far from their reins. Then God
answers Jeremiah, ver: 6. Even thy brethren, and the house of thy Father, they
have dealt treacherously with thee; they have called a multitude after thee:
and verse 10. Many Pastors have destroyed my Vineyard, they have trodden down
my portion under foot: they have made my pleasant portion a desolate
wilderness: and being desolate it mou^^^th to me. and verses 13, 14. They have
sown wheat, but shall reap thorns: For thus says the Lord against all mine
evil neighbors, that touch mine Inheritance, which I have caused my people
Israel to inherit, Behold I will pluck them out of their Land, and no marvel
if God pluck them out, when they had pluct God's people out first: for he that
touches them, touches, the Apple of his eye. I am loath to trouble the Reader
with too much, until I see how this will be accepted: and now all those that
love our Lord Jesus Christ in sincerity, I commend you to God, and to the word
of his Grace, which is able to build you up, and to give you an inheritance
among them that are sanctified.

By George Pressicke.

FINIS.

