THE PRESENTMENT AND ARTICLES Proposed by the GRAND JURY of the COUNTY of YORK:
And the Declaration of the Nobility, Grand Jury and Gentry of the said COUNTY:
At the Assizes assembled in August, 1642.

With His MAJESTY'S Answer thereunto.

YORK: Printed by ROBERT BARKER, Printer to the Kings most Excellent Majesty:
And by the Assigns of JOHN BILL, 1642.

The Presentment of the Grand Jurie now assembled at the Assizes at York,
August 1642.
Humbly shows,
THAT having taken into consideration your Majesty's gracious expressions to
us, and our whole Country, in your speech of the fourth of this instant August,
whereby you were pleased to declare your desire to afford us your assistance
for the necessary defense of this County, in these time of imminent danger, in
such manner, as we for our defense should propose, And to find some way to fix
a mark of favor and estimation upon us; We having taken the same into our
thoughts, have unanimously concluded upon the Propositions hereto annexed,
which we presume, humbly to present to your Royal consideration.

And forasmuch as we find that the sum of eight thousand six hundred and
forty pounds two shillings and six pence, is necessary for our present defense;
we most humbly beseech your Majesty, out of your Princely Wisdom, to direct
some such course, whereby the same may be speedily provided. And for that (in
respect of your Majesty's speedy departure out of these parts) such immergent
occasions may happen, as will admit of no delay: We likewise beseech your
Majesty, That the same supplies, and all Warrants and Commissions, mentioned in
our Propositions to be necessary for this service, may be issued out with all
convenient expedition.

1. It is held fit, That upon the four and twentieth of this instant, there be
an exact Muster of all the Horse of the Trained Bands at York, at the Manor,
by ten of the Clock in the Morning; and that the Defaulters be severely
proceeded against: And to this purpose, A Commission is to issue out instantly
to the Officers, and Warrants to be directed to the Chief Constables to summon
accordingly: And it is to be inserted into the Warrant, That this meeting is to
be for the Defense, Peace and Quiet of the County. 2. It is likewise resolved,
That the Persons charged with the Trained Horse, shall be desired to maintain
their Men and Horse, for one Month, from the four and Twentieth of this
instant. 3. That His Majesty may be humbly desired to appoint Sir Thomas
Glemham Lieutenant Colonel, Henry Wait and Captain Minne, to attend the
Service of this County. 4. That a Commission of Oyer and Terminer, and Jail
Delivery be settled at York, to be directed to all the Commissioners of Array,
and Sir William Dalton, Sir William Belt, Sir William Wentworth, and Sir Thomas
Harrison, to be of the Quorum, with the rest of the Quorum in the Commission of
Array. 5. That such a Power be given to the Earl of Cumberland, as His Majesty
shall hold fit, for His Honor and our Security: And, That the Earl of
Cumberland may continue his Troop here, to attend Him, during such time as it
shall be necessary to employ them here. 6. That His Majesty would be pleased to
leave here so many field Pieces, as His occasions can spare, with necessary
provisions and Cannoneers: And that such Ammunition be restored to the County,
as has been taken out of the Magazine for His Majesty's use, as also the Arms
of the Trained Bands of the County, which were lately brought to York. 7. That
His Majesty may be humbly moved to give the Wardships of such Gentlemen's Sons
and others, as shall dye in His Service, or in Defense of the County. 8. That
the Earl of Cumberland shall receive the Magazine of the County, for the
Sheriff, as he may be charged with it. 9. That His Majesty may be pleased upon
the setting up of His Royal standard, to dispense with the appearance of such
Persons of this County, as either assist His Majesty in His Wars, or contribute
to the Defense of this County.
The Declaration of the Nobility, the Grand Jurie and Gentry of the County of
York, at the Assizes Assembled in August, 1642.
WE the Inhabitants of the County of York, conceiving it necessary to show the
Reasons of our Resolutions, for the putting our Selves and Country into a
Posture of Defense under His Majesty's gracious protection do declare, That,

Our sufferings in the late Billited Soldiery, and in the late Public
charges, might give us good reason to expect better, then to have heavier
Burdens imposed upon us.

The Town of Hull (the chief Port of our Trading) under Garrison, to the
destruction of our Traffic, His Majesty dispossessed of His Magazine there,
many hostile Acts committed, even to the effusion of Blood; And to add to our
miseries, the Head forced from the body by Tumults, and many Members of both
Houses (Persons of real Fortunes and known integrity) have withdrawn
themselves, conceiving many things to be done against the Freedom of
Parliaments, and all subject to contrary Commands, tending to Arbitrary
Government, and Destructive to Monarchy.

In redress whereof, we have humbly expressed our grievances to both Houses of
Parliament, by Messengers of quality, one whereof is Imprisoned.

This being our condition, we are forced to resort to His Majesty for such
natural ways as conduce to the preservation of our Selves, Wives, and
Fortunes.

Our thoughts tend no further, then to the Defense of the true Protestant
Religion in opposition to Popery and Schismatic Innovations, our known Laws,
His Majesty's Rights and due Prerogatives, against all unlawful Vores and
Ordinances, though under color of Religion, or any other pretense (how
specious soever) the Just Privileges of Parliaments; the Rights, Privileges,
and Properties of the Subject. And this we declare to all the World, being
confident of His Majesty's gracious Protection of us in these our Just and
necessary Resolutions.

His Majesty's Answer to the presentment and Articles, proposed by the Grand
Jury, and the Declaration of the Nobility, the Grand Jury and Gentry of the
County of York, at the Assizes Assembled in August, 1642.
HIs Majesty very well approves of the first and second Articles, and has
already given Order for the third and fourth Articles as is desired.

The Earl of Cumberlands Commission is already granted, as is desired; And as
for the Troop, His Majesty is content it should stay here, as is desired, but
expects, That the rest of those Troops be hastened to His Majesty with all
expedition; and that this which stays, should countenance and protect His
Magazine going from hence: And in case in His absence, any more Munition come
from Holland, That they, together with the Trained Bands, should secure it to
the edge of Yorkshire, toward Notingham.

His Majesty has so few field pieces, That His Majesty cannot promise that He
will lend them any; But has given Order to His Officers of the Artillery, to
restore so much of the Munition of the County, as He has made use of.

His Majesty does willingly promise, freely to give the Wardships of all their
Sons, who shall be killed in His Majesty's Service, or in the Defense of the
County.

His Majesty fully consents to the eighth and ninth.

His Majesty withal, declares Himself to receive great satisfaction, from the
Affection, Courage, and Loyalty of this County, and does promise them, That
since they are resolved upon so strong, and so evident Inducements, to take
care of His Majesty's and their own preservation, and neither to desert Him,
nor themselves; That He will be as careful of their safety, as they can be,
and will either protect them (which by Gods Grace He doubts not) or Perish with
them.

FINIS.

