Die Mercurij 29. Junij, 1642.
IT is this day Ordered by the Commons now assembled in Parliament, That M. Ash
and M. Hampden shall return thanks to M. Ash for the good pains he took in
the Sermon he preached the last Fast day but two at the entreaty of the said
Commons, and that he be desired to print his Sermon, And that no man presume to
print it, but such as he shall appoint, till the House shall take further
Order.

H. Elsyng* Cler. Parl. D. Com.
I appoint Edward Brewster and John Buroughs to print my Sermon.

Simeon Ash.



THE PRINCE OF ORANGE HIS ROYAL ENTERTAINMENT TO THE QVEEN OF ENGLAND.

WITH, The true Description, how the Nobles inhabiting within the Hague,
Rotterdam, Leyden, Amsterdam, Delph, Vtricke, Schedam, and diverse others
congratulated Her Majesty into HOLLAND.

Also the Prince of Orange His Royal Speech to Her Majesty at the Hague, and
Her Majesty's gracious Answer unto the same.

Lastly, the manner how Her Majesty with the Lady Elizabeth were Feasted at the
Princes Palace in the Hague, March. 1. 1641.

First imprinted at the Hague in Holland, and now Reprinted in London for
Henry Barwicke. 1641.

THE Prince of Oranges Royal Entertainment to the Queen of ENGLAND.
THe Prince of Orange having credible intelligence concerning the Queen of
Englands arriving at the Territories of Holland, waited in expectation of her
coming a long time. But at length having information of her Majesty's
resolution, and the Parliament of Englands dubious suspicion, he began to be
ambiguous till afterward being informed by an Embassage from her Majesty, he
began to be in preparation of some Royal Entertainment, correspondent, and
respectively congruent to the merits of so illustrious a Queen First then with
the concommitant association of many Peers and Nobles attended her coming
(...) the Go^st, where she landed, and after some intercedent expressions of
alacrity* and triumph on each side, he consummated his salutations in a brief
and succinct Speech, which he alloquated her Majesty* to the substance of these
words following.

Illustrious Queen of England:
THe resplondent irradiation of your ineffable virtue, and the obsequious
adoration, which I owe as tribute to your sacred Person, have by the delicious
compulsion of your attractive splendour respectively induced me to present the
engagement of my service, and devotion to your gracious Majesty. For maturely
finding not only the liberal hand of Nature, boasting her Masterpiece in each
lineament of you, (which is sufficient to dazzle the captive eye of the amazed
beholder in a repercusive astonishment) but also the singular admiration of
Art, exceeding her self in the facetious eloquence of those Rhetorical
elocutions, which are included in your faecundious brain (which transcends
amazement it self) I conceive here from that either my tongue is too barren of
expressions to describe the virtuous accent of your worth, or Our Country too
indigent to afford a correspondent entertainment for your Majesty

Yet let the discreet reflection of your clemency be more propitious, and what
in perfection we are deficient, in the Embrio of Our desired exoptations shall
be consummated. For the obsequious respects due unto your Liege, the Royal
Monarch of Britain, and the singular obligation of my devotive affection to
Elizabeth, our delicious Spouse, had bin sufficient Arguments of instigation to
have enjoined Us to declare Our affectionate humility of ardent devotion unto
you. But ^hen I perspicuously behold both the Majestic presence of him,
inhabited in the canded structure of your Heroic countenance, and the Real
Effigies of Her Angelical Fabric, delineated in the perfect Symmetry of each
arteriall dimension naturally in you, we are in a triplicity of engagements
induced coactively to recommend Our submissive extent of gratitude unto you.

For when we apparently consider the various multiformity of virtues
compendiously included in the rich Storehouse of your mature perfection, we
thence-from conclude, that you are the abstracted Quintessence of artificial
Nature: your glorious countenance is crowned with Majesty, your brow
interwoven with occasional Lenity, and discreet austerity, your eye (like
mounted Phoebus in his meridian pride) shoots such reflective beams of radiant
brightness, that it captivates the dazzled beholder: your Cupidinean cheeks are
clothed with intermixed Lillies, and Roses: your purpureous lips (like a
Nectarean current) do redound with expressed Oratory: your Mercurian tongue is
guided with such admirable Rhetoric, that the Muses themselves seem to inhabit
there, and make it their Helicon: your Aromatic smelling-breath is so
odoriferous, that it exceeds the Arabian Odours, and seems rather celestial,
then breathed from a mortal creature, your melodious voice is so harmonious
that Apollo may now lay down his Harp, and the Spears themselves become
astonished.

Yea should I dilate this continued expansion of your meritorious virtues, I
might become infinite for these particulars already declared, do respectively
read captivity to my admiring thoughts. This Country was lately desolate of
all consolation, but being now honored with your presence, it seems a
Paradise. But not to presume to far on your clement patience in a preliminary
or tedious discourse; I will consummate our dutiful intentions, and grateful
devotion to your Majesty, in a concise and conclusive period.

We are transported with joy having the happiness of your enjoyed presence; We
do likewise present our affectionate gratitude unto you, in regard you would
vouchsafe thus to honor us with your illustrious person: and finally (in
presentation of our humble duty) we commend all our Provinces to your Gracious
acceptance, which shall be at your command and pleasure, none interdicting
you: yea we do lay Our Royal Scepter at your feet, submissively beseeching you
to accept respectively, what Our Country does afford: while we offer the
Sacrifice of devotive thankfulness to your Deity.

The Queen of Englands gracious Answer to the Prince of Oranges Speech.
Thrice noble Prince,
THe Heroic Dialect of your Rhetorical expressions have bin so incomparably
ingenious, that you seem to me the God of eloquence. For my part Our desirous
intent would regratulate you, but only we are barren of expressions, for you
have contracted the Monopoly of famous elocutions to your self, and some
Language from your facundious words. You have honour^d us too greatly, and more
then either Nature or Art have contributed to us in their various
dispensations, have bin by you augmented. But as you have honored us in this
place, so you have honored your self more, and the place likewise is honored
by your eloquence* And now give me leave to applaud your more meritorious
worth: you seem to me Cicero in your fluent words, Virgill in your Seraphick
Raptures, Cupid in your face, Venus in your eye, Mercury in your tongue,
Apollo in your voice, Diana in your chastity, Hector in your magnanimous mind,
Paris in the stateliness of your body, and lastly in your eloquence a younger
Jupiter, out of whose redundant brain the Minerva of eloquence is extracted.
Your several parts are so admirable, that I went Oratory to express them. But
for your modesty in declaring the indigency of this Country, we find it
otherwise; for rather then deficient (as you confessed) it seems superfluous
of all fertility. And we do most respectively gratify you, for your sedulous
pains, and will to the largest extent of our power endeavor to remunerate your
Royal courtesies.

These Speeches being ended, the Nobles ^nhabiting within the Hague, Rotterdam,
Leyden, Amsterdam, Delph, Vtrick, Schedam, and diverse others congratulated her
Majesty with the Lady Elizabeth, and were conducted to the Prince of Oranges
Palace at the Hague in a stately triumph, every one welcomming her, and showing
submissive salutations to her Majesty. She was likewise Royally feasted at the
Princes Palace, showing her the greatest honor and respects, that can possibly
be conceived. And she likewise gratefully thanked him, and the other Nobles
associating him for their liberal munificence. God grant that she may safely
return to England again, to the comfort of His Majesty, and increments of the
Kingdom.

FINIS.

