A SERMON Preached at St. MARY'S SPITTLE, On Wednesday in EASTER Week, April
13th 1642. Before the RIGHT HONORABLE The Lord MAYOR, the ALDERMEN, And
SHERIFS, of this Famous City of LONDON.

BY William Price, Bachelor of Divinity, and Preacher at Covent Garden.

printer's device of Nicholas Bourne

LONDON: Printed for Nicholas Bourne, and are to be sold at his Shop, at the
South Entrance of the Royal Exchange. 1642.

To the Right HONORABLE Sir RICHARD GVRNEY, Knight and Baronet; And to the
Right WORSHIPFVLL The ALDERMEN, and SHERIFFS of this Famous City of LONDON,
Together with the Right Worshipful Company of DRAPERS.

WILLIAM PRICE Dedicates and Devotes this plain and unpolish't Sermon, as a
Testimony of his peculiar respect and Christian Love to this City, where he
drew his first breath.

To the READER.
Christian Reader,
THe Press is oppressed; almost pressed to death in this scribbling Age: And it is
thought that it deserves to be so, for being so fruitful in venting such
swarms of fopperies, and falsehoods. That Friar was very stupid, that soberly
affirmd that he thought in his Conscience, whatsoever was Printed is true. We
are now tempted to suspect the truth of whatsoever is Printed, because Printed.
I had not now given my hand against my self, to testify, to deliberate views
those infirmities, which in the delivery might have passed by unobserved, had
not the desire of my superiors, and the importunity of my Friends laid a law
upon me. Besides I would endeavor to reduce the prostitute Press to her first
Chastity, by employing it about Divinity: If any critic except that this is
but a homely, popular Sermon, clad with the habiliments of mean Language, and
stuffed with familiar obvious matter; I yield it, nor can yet find in my heart to
repent me of it. He whom these extraordinary, occasional, emergent labors
cannot excuse from his weekly double pains at home, may well be borne with,
though he come not up fully to the expectation, and answer not the prepossest,
prejudicate humor of every fancifull auditour. I can promise you here nothing
but truth, represented in apt expressions, pertinent to the text, to a
promiscuous Auditory, to the time, and to the times: I neither merit, nor court
applause. I contemn contempt. But if my well meaning thoughts purchase
acceptance, it is more then home-spoken truth uses to meet with: whatever
befall, my Record is on high, and if GOD please to cast a ray of Favor on my
slender performance, and make it succesfull to the gaining or building up but
of one Soul, it is the utmost height of my ambition, and I shall think my self
more then well rewarded, and apaid. To the benevolent influence of which
indulgent GOD, I commend thee, who am

Thine in the Lord, WILLIAM PRICE.

ISAIAH 1.21.22. How is the faithful City become an Harlot? It was full of
judgment; righteousness lodged in it; but now murderers. Thy silver is become
dross; thy wine mixed with water.


WHen we divide the old Testament into Historical, Prophetical, and
Dogmaticall books; our meaning is not that they are unmixtly such; we only
denominate them from their chief scope. Otherwise we find in the Historical
books much Prophecy and doctrine; in the Prophetical much History and
doctrine; in the doctrinall much History, and Prophesy. My lot is fallen on a
part of the Prophetical book of the most Evangelicall Prophet. And this
Chapter, whereof my Text is a part, is compounded of History, Prophecy and
doctrine, I have embarked my self in the Historical passages thereof: We may
well derive the word History (...) because it stays the flux, and current of
bypast words, and actions, which else would have bin buried in the grave of
oblivion. We have here an high Assize represented by the perspective of
reflexive thoughts. The Judge, God, the delinquents Judah, and Jerusalem, under
the Reign of Vzziah, Iotham, Ahaz, and Hezekiah. The witnesses, God, the
Prophet, and their own consciences, to which there are many appeals up and
down the Chapter, the manner of proceeding is by Bill. They are arraigned, and
indicted. 1. Of ingratitude, I have nourisht, and brought up children, and they
have rebelled against me, Verse 2.
the Ox knows etc. 2. Incorrigiblenesse, why should you be stricken any more,
^erse 5.
ye will revolt more, and more. 3. Formality, and hypocrisy in the
transaction of holy Services, ^^rse 13. ^^rsse 1.
bring no more vain oblations. 4. Barbarous cruelty, your hands are full of
blood. 5. Apostasy and neutrality, or rather utrality (if you will pardon the
word) and there fall in the words I have selected to task at this time my
tongue, and your attention. How is the faithful City become an harlot, etc.
Here are many magnetique, attractive words that may chain the attention of the
Auditors unto them; responsible; and adapted almost to all tempers.

Art thou spiritually minded? here is faithfulness, judgment, and
righteousness to feed thy ear. Art thou covetous? here is silver to please
thine eye. Art thou a humourer of thy palate? here is wine to satisfy thee.

My desire is, that I in my Commentary hereon may answer all the language of
the Text, That I may be faithful in my message, not betraying my trust; That I
may be righteous like a just Steward dividing to every one of you your portion,
That I may display truth before you in her native colors without adulterate
varnish; That I may be rather auxiliary to God in saving, then to the Devil in
murdering any soul here present, by making, the way to Heaven either narrower
or broader, then indeed it is; That I may not hang jewels of sounding rather
then sound words at your ears, which, like the Israelites, you might snatch
thence to make an Image to adore. That I may not mix the seven times tried
silver, or the generous sparkling wine of Gods word with drossie, watrish,
heartlesse, humane conceits. That I may speak my heart to you, and not my
fancy; and that I may penetrate your souls, as well as beat your ears: my
comfort is, God requires of us Preachers, not our cure, but only our care.
Curam. non curationem. Cathedram in coelis habet, qui corda docet. Aug. Judge.
9.13.
His chair is in heaven, who must work on consciences. And be the Speaker
never so wise, and his words as goads and nails, yet they must be driven to
the head by the great Master of Assemblies. And since my Text speaks of wine,
may this wine like that in Jothams Parable cheer the heart both of God and man.

The Text is considerable in the matter, and the form of it. For the matter,
it is an indictment; The prisoners at the Bar are a whole City; the
indictment lies against them. 1. For Apostasy, set down plainly, and
siguratively. If you demand what they revolted from, the Text names
faithfulness, judgment, righteousness, silver. If what they degenerated
unto; the Text mentions uncleanness, and dross. Thefaithfull City is become
an harlot; the Lodge of judgment and righteousness converted to a Den of
murderers. Their silver transformed to dross; The next Bill filed against them
is for their neutrality, or unlawful blending mixture; Thy wine is mixed with
water. This is the matter of the indictment.

The manner of the deliverie is pungent and patheticall, how is the faithful,
etc. How? Nota redarguentis, admirantis, deplorantis, tanquam ad rem
prodigiosam, exclamat Calvin.
It is a note of admiration, of reproof, of compassion. He blesses himself,
and pitties them. The Prophet breaks forth into an exclamation as at a
portentous, and prodigious thing, How, how is.

This is the plain draught, these the bare lineaments of the Text, I must
run them over again, with colors, taking my rise from the matter of the
Text; And therein from the Persons at the Bar. A City, a whole City. How is
the City become, etc.

The City.

This City is Jerusalem, famous for three things, The Royal Law of God; (...).
the magnificent Temple of Solomon, and the numerous multitude of people. It
was Gods rest, ^i sacrariura ^gia seeds.
and the Kings Seat; the Citizens are this City, for God has no controversy
with the stones and timber. Ill inhabitants make ill places. Sometimes the
denomination is from the better part; as that may be called a corn-heape,
wherein yet there is more chafe, then corn; Here the denomination is from the
greater part, not a house, an ally, a lane, a street, an in ship, but the City
is said to be tainted, whence I cannot but collect this sad truth, that

Usually the most go the worst way.

To the evidencing of which conclusion all periods of time have brought in but
too liberal a contribution. There was but one righteous Noah for a wicked
world. One just Lot, to weigh against two unclean Cities. One faithful,
plaine-dealing Michaiah to countervaile 4.10 false Prophets. All voted Christ
to the Cross. All with one accord oppressed Stephen with a heap of stones
(though indeed they unwittingly stroke him nearer to Christ the Cornerstone.)
^ing, 22, 6, ^8. ^t. 27.22, ^7.57. (...), 8, 9, 10. (...) 1^, 34. (...) 13.7.
All from the least to the greatest gave heed to Simon the Sorcerer; and were
bewitched with his incantations. All with one voice cried up the puppet Diana.
All Kingdoms, Tongues, and Nations were given up to be intoxicated with the
Circaean Cup of the Beast. In the Church as in the Arc (a type of the Church)
the number of the unclean exceed the number of the clean. As the Philosopher
bespake the Courtezan, thou have more clients then I, because I teach the
cragged, thou the flowery way. ^^qua can^^ sed q^a (...). Sen.
Men use to go (says Seneca) not the way that should be gone, but that way
which is most gone. A good man is like a drop of water bearing up against the
rapid current of an Ocean. As Zacheus his lowness of stature, so the press
kept him from the sight of Christ; so besides our native infirmities, that are
the livery of humanity; a crowd of men obstruct our passage to our God.

Who that sets seal to this, would judge of truth or godliness by a
confluence, a City of men. Application. Si justus es, noli numerare; sed
appende Aug. in I^sal. 39 S^mper abundantia contum^liosa in se ipsa est.

Tertul. Multitudo sociorum, monstratte esse haereticum. Hier. Examen, vi
improbum in illa castiges trutina. Perseus. Exodus 23.2.


If thou be a good man, take not Religion by tale or number, but by weight,
says Aug. Truth is truth though but one, though none entertain it; and where
many are gathered together professing it, there is the Church, not for the
many, but the truths sake. Nay Tertullian makes no scruple to affirm,
abundance has purchased a contumelious name. And Hierome doubts not thus to
argue against Pelagius, The swarm of thy accomplices speaks thee an heretic.

And for the regulating of our practice, let not a multitude of presidents
flatter us in our course. Try it not by that scale; follow not a multitude to
do evil is divine counsel, Exodus 23.2. Let not paucity prejudicate
holiness, nor numbers justify baseness. Men like silly sheep, flock
together, they think to the pasture, when it may be to the slaughter. Had Noah
conformed himself to the most, he had been swallowed in the universal
Deluge. Had Lot lived by the eye, he had been suffocated with Sodom by that
hell rained from heaven; as Salvian calls it. Company in damnation will rather
intend, then remit the torments; the more fuel the greater the flame. The
deviating of a whole City in my Text, rather aggravates, then extenuates their
guilt. It is more malignant, because epidemicall.

Before I dismiss this particular, I must mind you, that there is an emphasis,
or rather a brand set upon this City, because a City, especially such a City as
Jerusalem, Citizens of such a City are the more stigmatized for their
delinquencies, because they offend against more light, and means of grace,
then others are blessed with, to consolidate them in goodness, and to reduce
them when lapsed. The sins of a Goshen, a land of light are of a deeper dye
then those of a dark Egypt. They are nearer neighbors to the Temple, and the
thresholds of the Prophets. The heavenly manna lies round about their Tents.
Celestial dew often distills on their fleeces. Government and society might
civillize them. And though soul diseases may be there more frequent, and
catching; yet the same places yield cures parallel to every malady. And yet
we may observe by the many complaints of the Prophets, how Cities do daily
degenerate. There are many Texts concentricke herein to mine. Ezekiel. 7 23.
The City is full of violence, men affected with the sins of the times were
such a rarity, that scarce one in a City was to be found; but if any, they were
to be marked on their foreheads for wonders of their age.

Again, Ezekiel 9.4. Ezekiel. 9.9.
the City is full of perverseness; Cities are the Epitomies, the abstracts,
the spleenes of a King dome that commonly swell so big, Vt in Mare omnin
flumina, sic vitia in Vrbes. Pius 2. ad Platin.
that they make the make the other parts pine and languish: They are too often
the Centers, Sinkes, receptacles of all Irreligious, Superstitious, irregular
persons. As all Rivers flow toward the Sea, and there lose themselves; so all
Vices disburthen, and promiscuously blend themselves in famous populous head,
Mother-Cities: and where there is so much Negotiation and Commerce,
Application. Video civitatem, plenam ^urbis, sed magis turpiticuid^ibus, plenam
^ivitiis, sed ^agis Vit^is. ^^b. 7. cap. 12.
there Fraud, injustice, Collusion, will also abound.

(And may we not take up over this Metropolis, this famous City, Salvian's
complaint over Carthage? I see a City fuller of Lusts, then people; of Vices,
then Riches; ingulpht in all the Crimes, that stained Sodom, Gomorrah, Samaria,
or Jerusalem, in my Text: And were it not that God has some Jewels here that
stand in the Gap, that are our Chariots and Horsemen, our firmest Pillars and
Walls, were it not for the Antidotes of the Ordinances, that we are yet ennobled
with, were it not that God in rich mercy, loves to water, where he has
planted, and to build up, what himself has founded, were it not that the
blood of Christ out voices the cry of our sins, we should sink with our own
weight of sin, and dissension, and be reduced to an indigested Chaos and Babel
of confusion.

Right Honorable, Worshipful, and beloved, know that the eyes of the whole
Kingdom are fixed upon you; all Towns are but transcripts from your Copy,
Mic. 1.5.
impressions from your Press; as it is said in the Prophecy, What is the
transgression of Jacob, is it not Samaria? What are the high places of Judah,
are they not Jerusalem? other Towns and Cities are but the Daughters, this is
the Mother: the Daughters will be ambitious of dressing themselves in the
Mothers Glass; If London be Idolatrous, profane, Heretical, Schismatic,
secure, mutinous, barbarous, proud, luxurious, deceitful: the Country will be
bold to perish upon your credit, and the blood of their souls will be
requirable at your hands. You have sins enough of your own (God knows) to
answer for, you need not load your account with accessarinesse to others sins:
God takes it to heart, that this City that he has so indulgently tendered, (as
if he had minded no City in the world but this) should cancel their bonds of
obedience, and gratitude to him, and fight against him with his own weapons:
imagine you hear him expostulating from Heaven, in the Idiome of my Text. How,
is this, this City become an Harlot?

I am fallen upon the Bills filed against Jerusalem, I begin with her.

Apostacy, she is become an Harlot. Every revolt supposes 2. terms: from
what; and to what: here is Ierusalems pristine, and her present state, we are
put upon a double disquisition, from what, and to what she did back-slide: the
Text fully, and distinctly satisfies us in both, she fell from fidelity to
adultery, from judgment and righteousness to murder, from gold to dross.
Divest the words of the Rethorique, and they are a clear Character of Apostasy.

The terms whereof, I must have leave to handle, Jointly, and severally.

1. Jointly, and so considered, they have a double Aspect, they look upon the
Prophet that pend them, and on that City against which the indictment lies.

In their first Aspect, as they refer to the Amanuensis, the Penman, the
Prophet Esaias, they demonstrate him to be clear of those 2 Vices, that ill
become any Minister, or man, Detraction, and Flattery.

He is no biting Detractor, Jerusalems former worth, he pronounces and records
for after Ages, her Fidelity, he yields her to have bin a Patron, and pattern
of Judgment and Righteousness.

I wish we were all of Esayes stamp, ^^phc.
then we would not Eclipse, and blast the real worth of others, not lie like
Dan in the path, biting at the foot of every passerby; we would not cry, that
Preacher overdoes, this underdoes, that goes too far, this falls short. That's
too plain, this too dark. That too tedious, this too brief. That Is ambitious
in quorations, this shows too little learning in his Sermons. We would not
erect our own fame on the ruin of others. We would not build to darken our
neighbors. We would not make our tongues, quotidiana fornax, as Aug. expresses
it, A daily furnace for our Brethrens good names. To such rash, censorious,
detracting tongus, let me say, that the Geese about the Capitol at Rome, were
to be beaten, if they cacled; and their Dogs legs were to be broken if they
barked without cause. Such punishment do detractors merit, if Cicero may be
Judge. And certainly this sin (a staple sin in this City) will come home by
the guilty. They shall hear ill, that can never speak well. Pro Rose. Amerino.
They shall drink the dreggs of that cup of calumny, which they have wrung out
to others; as Achyllas was hurt 'ith eye by the rebound of that stone, that he
threw at a dead man's skull.

Neither (on the other side) will the Prophet be a parasiticall smoothing
flatterer, but makes bold to dip his pen in gall, giving it liberal leave to
check Jerusalem for drawing a crosse-blacke line over all her former goodness
by her present miscarriage.

If we were all of his temper, Ezekiel. 13.10, 20
we would not set up for Upholsters, sow pillowes under men's elbowes, not daub
with untemper'd mortar. We would not flatter or humor either Prince or people.
We would not lick a Mothina Gnathonicall sordid way. Levit 19.17. Pro. 29.5.
^ro 27.5, 6. and 26, 28. Job. 17.5.
To such tame monsters and man-eaters I must have leave to say. They hate their
brother, They entrap souls, they wound and bring ruin in their mouths to the
flattered; they are destructive to themselves and their posterity; the eyes of
their chidren shall fail, says Job. That they deserve that punishment that
Alexander Severus allotted to Turinus a fauning flatterer, to be stifled with
smoke, and the Herald to stand by and proclaim, he lived by smoke, blinding
men's eyes, and by smoke let him die. They may think to purchase and preserve
love and favor by deifying the undeserving, and crystallizing dusty actions,
They may plead, that he that will not flatter, shall hang under the wheel:
That he that dares tell a great man he is not just, or a General that he is
not valiant, or a Lady, she is not beautiful and virtuous, shall never be
Counselor, Commander, or Courtier. But Solomon a wiser man is rather to be
believed, who bids us take it on his word, Prove. 28 23.
that he, that rebukes a man (though for the present he may storm) shall
afterward find more favor then he that flatters with the tongue. The Prophet
Isay in my Text comes roundly up to Jerusalem, gives her her own, charges her
deeply, and home with Apostasy; which aspect of the words on that City offers
it self next to our consideration.

The sum of which charge I shall contrive into this proposition, that lies like
a pearl above ground, That

Apostasy, backsliding, revolt from God, Religion, profession of holiness, to
the contrary, especially if it prove national and spreading, is a sin, for
which God may justly, and will surely enter an Action against any Land, though
it has been as the apple of his eye, as the signet on his right hand. It
would make a Christian soul bleed inward, to peruse Gods passionate plea with
Jerusalem for her Apostasy in the Prophecy of Jeremy, ^r. 2.2, 5, 9, 10, 1.12,
13.
I remember the kindness of thy youth, the love of thine espousals (like the
fondness of a new married couple.) Thus says the Lord, what iniquity have your
fathers found in me, that they are gone far from me? I will yet plead with
you says the Lord, and with your childrens children will I plead. Pass over
the Isles of Chittim, and see; and send to Kedar, and consider diligently, and
see if there be any such thing. Did ever Nation change their Gods, which yet
are no Gods? but my people have changed their glory for that that does not
profit. Be ye astonished O heavens at this, be desolate, Verse. 19.
for my people have committed two great evils; they have forsaken me the
fountain of living waters, etc. Again, Thy backslidings shall reprove thee;
know therefore, and see that it is an evil thing, and a bitter, Verse 21, 22.
that thou have forsaken the Lord thy God. I had planted thee a noble Vine, how
art thou turned to a degenerate plant? Though thou wash thee with nitre and
much Soape, Ier. 5.7.
yet this iniquity of thine is marked before me, says the Lord. And again,
How shall I pardon thee for this? neither will you wonder that God should thus
take on; if you weigh with your selves,

Diabolum Domino praepo^it: comparationem enim videtur egisse, ut ditatur
pronunciasse esse eum meliorem cuius ^ursus esse smalucrit. Tertul de paen cap.
5.
an Apostate prefers the Devil before God, for he seems to have compared and
weighed them together, and trying both, at length pronounces him to be the
better, to whom he chooses again to be a vassal; says Tertullian, he that
once seemed too resolve to please God by repentance, studies by a repentance of
his repentance to gratify the Devil, who loves with his tail to drawstars
out of the Firmament of Religion Apostacy Rev. 12.4. Qui per paenitentiam
instituerat Domino satisfacere, Diabolo per aliam paeni^entiae * paenitentiam
satisfaciet. Aug.
if now glorified, he were not impassible, if he were receptive of shame,
Apostasy would pierce him, and dye his cheeks with a blushing Vermillion;
Christ lost more honor in the defection of Judas, then in Herod's and Pilates
persecution. The heathen (says Salvian) would thus transfix Christ through
Christians sides. They read the Gospel, and they are unchaste. Heb 6.6.
they follow Christ, and yet ravin and oppress: Evangelia legunt, and unpudici
sunt; Apostolos audiunt and inebriantur, Christum sequuntur, and rapiunt.
Salvian.
what will the uncircumcised say? where are those heavenly raptures you once
boasted of in the service of your God? are those green pastures withered,
wherein you were fed? those Crystal waters dried up, by which you were led?
the heart-blood of an Apostate cannot expiate this reproach.

And yet to see the swarms of renegadoes, Application. 1.
revolters at least in part, from their faith, love, profession, and practice:
many pretended sons of the Church, who are rather wens, and spots on her face,
have nibbled at the established, vital Fundamental points of Religion,
casting an overweening look, back to the Romish Sodom, longing after the
Garlike, and Onyons of the spiritual Egypt. Some change Professions, as often
as Laban did his Servants wages. Many remit of their former fervor and zeal
in Religion, who once Iehu like, did drive furiously, and now heavily, like
Pharaohs Chariots, when the wheels were taken off: As Pope Urbane said of
Baldwin, sometimes Archbishop of Canterbury, he was a fervent Monk, a warm
Abbot, a lukewarm Bishop, and a key cold Archbishop: many begin in the
Spirit, and end in the flesh, like Ephraims morning dew, flying before the
morning Sun, like a fire of straw; soon in, and as soon out; like a
Land-flood, soon up, and suddenly down; Stella cadens, non est Stella, cometa
fuit.
like a Comet, a Blazing Star, glistering more then all the fixed Stars in the
Firmament, and evaporating in a stink. Time was, when you loved, and
encouraged your painful Pastors (I plead not for dim-wasting false lights, but
such as spend themselves to give you light and heat: now many of you are
enamoured on illiterate hinds, proficients only in boldness, therefore
cunning Preachers, because they never learnt; therefore famous, because they
were never so unhappy as to see a College: for every body now will be ready to
set up of our Trade, without serving an Apprentice-ship; though indeed what
need Geese be cackling, when there are watchmen enough about the Capitol? I
ciscountenance none from instructing their own Families, but there is a vast
difference between steering a Boat on a River, and a ship in the Sea; you
plead that God can work by weak means, yes, and God can give you sounder
minds too, but it seems it is not yet his pleasure: time was that this City
was famous, for severe, strict government, but now it is grown almost too big,
either to be fed, or governed, all is turned topseturvie, there is little
difference between Masters and servants, but that the servants are commonly
the firer, prouder, and stouter. I need not be a shamed to speak of that, of
which you are not ashamed to be guilty. The word is a true mirror, that will
represent to you such faces, as you bring to it. I might abound in instances of
our Apostasy, but I have far to go, and not much time to spend. O remember
whence you are fallen, and repent, and do your first works, Rev. 2.5.
was the Angels advice to the Church of Ephesus, and it shall be mine to you,
Remember whence you are fallen, you that have been old Mnasons, ancient
professors, Acts 21.16.
from what a height of excellency, and sweetness; to what an abisse you have
degraded your selves, to the state of brute beasts, so David terms himself,
nay of Devils; Psalm. 73.22. John 6.70.
such our Savior calls Judas. Remember by what steps and degrees you
descended, after how many covenants with God stricken and renewed: after many
and large experiments of his mercy. Upon what slight motives from bubbly
honor, fleeting riches, shadowy pleasures, stinking breath of fame you
declined: Lay your hearts and lives to the nail, thereby you may collect how
far you are retrograde, as by looking on Ahaz's Dyall men might see how many
degrees the Sun had gone backward.

Then repent that you have repented you of your goodness: Calcate me salem
insipidum.
As Eccbolius recollecting himself after his revolt, cast himself down at
the Church door, and cried to the people, kick me unsavory salt, fit for
nothing but the dunghill. And Granmer thrust that hand in a self revenge,
first into the fire, wherewith he had subscribed to Popish Articles.

Then do your first works. Return, return, O Shulamite, return, Ier 3.1,
return, you are graciously invited back. They say (says God) if a wife go
from her husband, and become another man's, will he receive her again? no,
though she return with blubberd eyes, bedewed cheeks, sorrowful aspect,
prostration, ejulations, disheveled hairs, sorrow-prest heart: yet, yet
return to me, says the Lord, come and welcome, to thy God. Mar. 10.49.
Be of good comfort, he calls thee; as it is in the Gospel. It is not
boldness to come, it is disobedience not to come. Saint Peter indeed denied
his Master, but after confessed him. He, who denied him before a Damsel,
confessed him before a Council, like a metled horse, that after a stumble, amends
his pace, and gains way.

If yet thou stand, 1 Cor. 10.12. Phil. 1.27. Ephesians. 4.14. Heb. 4.14. Pro.
14.14. Nemo fit repent turpishmus.
Pluck not thy hand from the Plow; stand fast, be not as children tossed to and
fro with every wind of doctrine. Hold fast your profession: look not back to
Sodom; remember Lots wife: she was metamorphoz'd to a pillar of salt, to season
us with her example. Backslide not, no not in heart; as Solomon speaks, Beware
the least, lowest degree of declension. No man precipitantly falls to the worst
at first. The Devil is modest in his first proposalls, he desires but to lodge
a few sins of infirmity in our souls, as Pompey his weak wounded Soldiers
in a City, who recovered their strength, and opened the Gates to the whole
Army: slips prepare for falls, incurable consumptions begin in a yawning
oscitant listlesnesse.

To this end, that you may persevere, let me prescribe these Antidotes or
preservatives.

Rootednesse, Antidotes.
ground that had no root believed for a while, Luke 8.13.


Pitching our faith on God in Christ, 1 Pet. 1.5 Romans 11.20. Heb. 10.38.
we are kept by the power of God through faith, says Saint Peter; By faith ye
stand, says S. Paul. The just shall live by faith, as a ship in a storm, when
others make shipwreck of faith, and a good conscience, Esaias. 22.23. Qui
ingen^o s^o fidat, amat nihil aliud certum, quam fiduciam suam ferat. Plin. 2.
Tacito.
(and those two wrackes go always together.) A believer is like Eliacim, as a
Nail in a sure place. The Anchor is no stay to the ship, while it hangs on the
ship-side, it must be fixed on somewhat firm. God loves to let go a
selfe-confident man. How near was Peter to a fall, when he rested on his own
bottom? He that trusts in his own wit, (says Pliny) for my part, let him
bear nothing certain away beside his own considence. Pro 3.5. Pro 28.26.
Trust in the Lord with all thy heart, and lean not to thine own
understanding. He that trusts in his own heart is a fool, says Solomon.

Love to the truth, for the truths sake. 2 These. 2.9, 10.
It is rendered as a reason why many are deluded and drawn off, because they
receive not the truth in the love of it. There is no trusting of those that
love scepticall speculations, and victory better then truth.

Integrity, sincerity of heart: Triticum non rapit ventus, inanes paleae
tempestate jactantur. Cyprian. 1 John 2.19.
that which is natural will hold, but wash will off. The wind carries not away
the wheat, the light chafe only is tossed to and fro. They went out from us,
says our Savior, because they were not of us; for had they been of us, they
would not have gone out from us.

Living to God, not to our selves or others: upon us two days with the same
face. If plummets move us, we shall quickly cease our motion as a jacke, when
the weights reach the ground. Tim. 4.10.
The love of the world fetched off Demas. The world, like Absalom, will siltch
our hearts from our heavenly King and father.

Growth in grace. Pet. 3.17, 18.
Fall not from your own steadfastness (says Peter) and that you may not, grow
in grace. Grace is to the soul as balast to a ship, that keeps it upright. A
drop may be dried up, when a stream cannot. A spark may be quickly
extinguished; a flame not so soon. If we grow not better, we shall grow worse,
like an arrow shot upward, if it ascend not, it descends; like a boat against a
stream, if it go not foreward, it goes backward. As they say of a Courtier,
if he be not on the rising, he is on the falling hand.

Sit down, Luke 14.28.
like a wise builder, or general, as the Metaphor is elegantly followed in the
Gospel and count costs. Forecast the worst, when thou first salutest the
threshold of Religion, bethink thy self what it will stand thee in. Thus
Christ used to prepare those that desired to follow him, telling them that they
might be big with expectation of temporal preferrement, Mat. 8.20. Ephesians. 6.15.
but he had not a house to put his head in. In this respect the Gospel is
called the shoes of preparation; because by its warning it carries us dry
shod, through thick and thin.

This do.

And that you may not revolt, warm your breast with these incentives.

Consider, Incentives.


That your Apostasy damps the joy of proficients, Mal. 2.8.
as it is in the Prophecy.

It stiffens the sinew, brazes the face, strengthens the hands, steeles the
hearts of resolved offenders. A backslider, Elephantlike, does more mischief
in his retreat in battle, then ever he did good in his onset-like a candle, if
never lighted offends not, but is extinguished with a stink.

The Devil Jaylour-like,

Corruption optimi est pessima.
The corruption of the best is worst of all. The whitest Ivory makes the
blackest coal. The sweetest wine the sharpest vinegar. Water heat and cooled
again becomes colder then ever.

Such a state is most incurable. Trees twice dead, Jude 12. Heb. 6.4, 5, 6.
It is almost impossible that such should be restored by repentance.

A Bone broken, and set, and again broken is hardly reset. I speak this not
to deter you from repentance but Apostasy.

To Apostatize, is to loose all our fore-past prayers, Nebo, and to look into,
and not to enter Canaan. To faint in the view of the goal, to sink within ken
of the Harbor.

To sum up this point, (which is indeed the sum of the Text, and therefore
my length in it may be justified.

Dear Christians, march on valiantly till you finish your Christian course. Be
like your selves, Always the same, Sempercadem.
was Queen Elizabeth's Motto. Christ loved the youngest Disciple, because he
began so soon; and the oldest, because they held out so long. Move toward
heaven without turning, as the milch-kine went with the Arc toward Bethshemesh
without any diversion or digression. Psalm. 19.
Be unwearyed as David's Sun. Stand not still, as Joshuahs Sun, go not back as
Ahaz's Sun.

He that says, come unto me, says also abide in me. Nature has provided
breasts to bring up, Mat. 11.28. Io. 15.4.
as well as a womb to bring forth. The Lawyers make Tenendum as neefull as
Habendum, to hold as to have. Physicians cry out against relapses. O be as
tender of that spark of Divinity in you, your souls, as you are of your
states and bodies. When God had created every days work, he said at the end
thereof still, it is good; not so in particular, of man after his creation;
Gregory gives the reason. Man was not to be praised before he were tried; he
was not to be judged by his beginning, but his end. Homo probandus antequam
laudandus. Greg.
Christ was Alpha for his happy beginning; and Omega, for his thrice happy end.
Constancy only shall be crowned. O thou great gift of perseverance! He that
wants thee cannot be saved; he that has thee cannot be damned. That reward
that is not leasewise, for term of time, but eternal, is reserved only for
those whose foreheads are marked with the letter Tau, the last letter in the
Hebrew Alphabet, as it is in Ezekiel, Ezekiel. 9.4.
alluding to perseverance.

It may be we may for the present encounter with temptation, vain opposition,
persecution here. But yet a little while, Heb. 10.37.
and he that shall come will come, and will not tarry. Our time is for the
brevity compared, sometimes to a day sometime to a night, sometime to a watch
in the night, sometimes but to an hour, nay, to a moment; Job 14.6. Psalm 30.5.
Psalm. 90 4. Rev. 3.10. 2 Cor. 4.17. Gal 6.9. 1 Cor. 15. ult.
therefore be not weary of well-doing, for in due time you shall reap, if you
faint not. Be steadfast, immovable, always abounding in the work of the Lord,
for as much as you know, that your labor shall not be in vain in the Lord.
Never let it be said of you, it is perpetuated to posterity, as of Jerusalem in
my Text. How is the faithful City become an harlot, etc.

I have yet pursued my Text but in the lump, the gross: I shall now take the
terms of this Apostasy in pieces, acquainting you from what, and to what
Jerusalem fell; exhorting you to the first, dehorting you from the latter. But
the streights of time will compel me to deal with these particulars, as
Colmographers do in their Maps of the world, set down a line for a River, and
a spot for a whole Country.

There are three periods in the Text: I will take them as they lie in order. I
may compare each of them to the cloud that led the Israelites; light on the one
side, and dark on the other.

In the first period, the bright side is faithfulness, Hebr. (...) Fides quam
credimus. qua credimus. qua credimur.
Neemanah, the faithful City.

It is an useful distinction of faith into a

Faith, which we believe. Thus our Creed is objectively called our faith, A

Faith, by which we believe; the habit, the grace of faith enthronized in the
soul, which is the grace of graces, as Athens was called the Greece of Greece.
And a

Faith, by which we are believed, trusted by others, whereof I conceive my Text
speaks. We are used to call it fidelity, or faithfulness.

Which is sometimes ascribed to God. (...). 1 Cor. 10 13. Tit 2.10.
God is faithful. Sometimes to man, as in particular to servants, who are to
show (says Saint Paul) (...) all good fidelity.

Now, this fidelity is expressible toward God, and toward man. And indeed the
one seconds, and attends the other. Therefore was Joseph faithful to his
Master Potiphar, because faithful to his God. Constantius the father of
Constantine the Great, would not trust the faith of any Soldier, Cen. 39.8, 9.
1.
that had violated his faith to Christ.

Fidelity toward God under a threefold relation; as our King; our husband; as
our Lord and Master. Fidelity to God as our King bears the name of homage,
fealty, allegiance, and loyalty to him.

Fidelity to God as our husband, Ephesians 5 27. 1 Timothy 3.11.
as Paul expresses it. Who elsewhere also tells us, that wives must be
faithful in all things.

Fidelity to God as our Lord and Master is a compound made up of many
ingredients, (...).
Singlenes of heart, opposed to eye-service. Zeal for his name, honor and
service, diligence and rigorousnesse in his business, not sloathfull in
business; Col. 3.22, 23. Rem. 12.11.
fervent in spirit, serving the Lord, says Paul. Careful custody of those
ordinances, which he has deposited in our hands; holding fast the faithful
word; Tit. 1.9.
earnestly contending for the faith once delivered to the Saints, Jude 1.3.
whereof they are feoffees in trust. Precisely following his directions in his
worship, (...).
without will worship; as Moses is said, as a servant to be faithful in all
Gods house, keeping to his pattern: In a word, improving, and employing to
Gods honor and advantage; Heb. 3.5.
not napkinning up, burying or embezelling those talents of strength, wit,
eloquence, moral gifts or graces, like a good and faithful servant, Mat.
25.21.
according to that eulogy in the Gospel.

Next fidelity to man in our several relations, stations and spheres. Which
displayes it self in making good our lawful promises, vows or oaths once
passed though to our disadvantage. And in unswayed uprightness in keeping
touch in bargains, trafik, co^merce with all men. (...). Application.
This is termed faithfulness in that which is another man's.

But all this is rather to be wished then expected in the generality of men.
Solomon) will proclaim every one his own goodness, but a faithful man who
can find?

Prove. 20.6.
The Church of Rome had in the primitive times the precious treasure of the
Gospel committed by the Apostles to her trust. How she has disappointed, and
betrayed that trust appears by their adulterating, and obscuring the Gospel
with their corrupt, traditionall glosses. By their preferring the vulgar
edition, which they confess abounds with hundreds of faults, before the
original. By advancing the authority of the Church above the Scripture. And
many other pranks, which time will not suffer me to instance in. And what their
fidelity is to men-ward, Fides cum haereticis non servanda.
we may collect from that maxim of theirs; that faith is not to be kept with
heretics. And how true they have been to this tenent, their dealing with
John Hus at Constance will declare, whom they there burnt to death,
notwithstanding the public faith passed by the Emperor for his safe conduct.
And it is recorded to the lasting infamy of the Romish faith, the Christians
League, confirmed by oath with Amurath the Grand Signiour of the Turks broken
by Vladislaus at the persuasion of Julian the Cardinal. Tur^. Histor.
Upon which breach Amurath in a battle with the Christians, seeing all go
against him, and beholding the cross in the displayed Ensigns of the
Christians, plucked the writing out of his bosom, wherein the late League was
comprised; and holding it up in his hand with his eyes cast up to heaven, said,
Behold, thou crucified Christ, this is the League thy Christians in thy name
made with me, which they have without cause violated. Now if thou be a God (as
they say thou art, and as we dream) revenge the wrong now done unto thy name
and me, and show thy power upon thy perjured people, who in their deeds deny
thee their God. After which saying, victory inclined to his side. But to look
homeward.

Though Rome be unfaithful, yet all unfaithfulness is not at Rome. There is a
vow, a promise we all made by our sureties in Baptism to our God. We have
repeated, and ratified that vow, as often as we have administered, and received
the Sacrament of the Lords Supper; besides, under the scourge, the gout, the
stone, the strangury, upon our beds of languishment we have renewed, and
redoubled our vows. But we have infringed, dissolved, 'crackt all those ties,
obligations, engagements; as Sampson did his cords, like so many twined
threads. Our promises ebb into emptiness, though we should reckon them in the
inventory of our estate; not only what others make to us, but what we to
others.

We promise liberally as Saul to his Courtiers. 1 Samuel 22.7. Numb. 22.17.
Xenophon.
As Balak to Balaam; As Croesus to Anacharsis; As Cyrus to his Soldiers. But
perform slenderly: As Andrew the Hungarian King promised to go to the holy
wars (as they called them) and went with his Forces, and bathed himself at
Jerusalem, as one discharged of his promise, and returned back again. And our
covenants, and agreements with men, though subscribed, and sealed by us, are as
brittle as the glasses we drink in. No bounds will hold us. Graeca fides.
We rob the Grecians of their Proverb, and own it our selves. For some
persons among us to say they will do this, or that, is as much, as if they had
sworn, they would not do it. Unless it be when we embarque our selves in
unwarrantable actions; and then the Sun may sooner be thrust out of his
sphere, then we diverted from our adamantine resolutions. Attilius Regulus a
heathen will judge us, who chose rather at Carthage to suffer the most
exquisite tortures, then to be branded with perfidious unfaithfulness.



If any of the Honorable Assembly of Parliament be present, may he be pleased
to remember, that he utters not his own words; he is the mouth of a Country,
betrusted by thousands with important affairs, and that it will be his honor;
and happiness, to be faithful. And you Right Honorable, that preside in this
famous City; consider that the Sword of Justice is committed to your hands, to
hew down irrefragable, incurable offenders, and to countenance Religion, Deuteronomy.
1.17.
and Justice; you are but betrusted, The judgment is Gods; it will be your
honor, and security to be faithful. You that are the mouth of the people to
God in prayer, and the mouth of God to the people in preaching; bethink your
selves, that you are but Stewards appointed to divide to every of Gods
household his portion in due season, 1 Cor. 4.2.
Now it is required of a Steward that he be found faithful, says Saint Paul.
Put not your spiritual patients bones half in joint; Ier. 6.14.
heal not the daughters of Gods people slightly. It is Gods expression. Study
not rather to be Placentini then Veronenses. Scholars reach my meaning; You
are betrusted with precious souls, the meanest whereof out-weighs the minerals
of the West Indies, and the perfumes of the East, Be faithful.

None is of so inferior an alloy, in this congregation, whom his God, has not
burdened and honored, with some trust or other; some of you are feoffees in
trust; some executors, administrators; be faithful: let the sums of money in
your hands, run clear in their native proper current, which by them that
betrusted you, they were designed for, let not the least rivolet be drayned
another way.

Some of you have servants, and children, they are not yours alone, God has
betrusted you with them; consecrate them to him by strict education, and
government Elies over-indulgence to his sons, proved the loss of the
Priesthood to his house. 1 Samuel 3.13. 1 Samuel 13.5. Sustin.
And Samuels fondness occasioned the change of the civil government: and
Artaxerxes was so unhappy, as not to have one good child among fifty, therefore
you have need to be faithful.

All of you (though in a different degree) are blessed with some talents,
qualified with some endowments or other, whether they be supernatural graces,
or natural dispositions, as a golden wit, a quick fancy, a marble memory, an
acute understanding, a profound judgment, a flowing melifluous expression of
your minds, or whether they be intellectual habits, that (by virtue of
education, industry, art, observation, experience) make you linguists,
disputants, Orators, Lawyers, Physicians, Statesmen, Artizans. Or whether they
be the goods of the body, Bo^a corporis, bona fort^nae ^t crescuntdona
crescuntrationes donerum. Grog.
as sym netry proportion, eucracy, health, beauty, strength, or adventitious
Goods; as extraction from a noble Stock, honor, riches, reputation, as your
talents increase, so do your accounts; be faithful.

Your faithfulness justifies your faith before men, as your Faith justifies
your persons before GOD: Fidelity sets a grace and gloss upon Christianity, it
is the souls Harmony and peace; like the contemperation of the elements, in a
natural body, like the aeviternall, unclashing sway, of the Orbs in the
heavens. Fidelity is the silken string that runs through the Pearle-chaine of
all virtues, and duties. It is the Ecliptique line under which reason and
Religion moves, without deviation: Be faithful unto the Death, and I will give
thee a Crown of Life, Rev. 2.10.
says Christ to Smyrna. What is sweeter then life? what more glorious then a
Grown? what freer then gift? Who is a faithful Steward; whom his Lord shall
make ruler over his Household, to give them their meat in due season? Lu.
12.42, 43.
blessed is that Servant whom his Lord, when he comes, shall find so doing. His
Lord shall say to him, at that great audit-day, Well done thou good and
faithful Servant, Mat 25.21.22.23.
thou have been faithful over a few things; I will make thee ruler ever many
things: enter into thy Masters joy. Enter thou into it, it cannot enter into
thee: as if a man should cast himself into a fulsea of Felicity be faithful
then, but be faithful to the death, (as it was before quoted) even to the
death, that you may not incur the guilt and censure of the City in my Text, How
is the faithful City become an Harlot? Zonah, (...)
which is the dark side of the cloud, and next awaits its handling.

Not to insist on their fancy, that conceive that Jerusalem, (as too many
Towns in this Kingdom) was now turned into Innes, Tavernes, and Alehouses,
because the name Harlot is sometimes in Scripture given to Victuallers, such as
Rahab was. Josh. 2.1.
There are two kinds of Harlots.

1. Lyra.
Those that prostitute their bodies to carnal uncleanness: of whom Lyra, and
some others would understand the Text. It cannot be denied, but this was one of
Jerusalems vices. Ier. 5.7.
They assembled by troops in Harlots houses. And it were an hour well spent,
to whet my style against these brutish Monsters: they are linked in comparison
with Dogs. Thou shall not bring the hire of a Whore, Deuteronomy. 23.18.
nor the price of a Dog, into the House of God. 1. Harlots, and Whore mongers
sin against their fame, their substance, estate. Pro 6.33. Pro. 29.3. Pro.
6.28. Job. 31.12. 1 Cor 6.18. Pro. 6.32. Genesis 39.9. Romans 12.1.
A Whore will bring a man to a mors^ll of bread; against their children and
family. It roots out all their increase against their bodies, enervating, and
emasculating them; against their own souls, stabbing and polluting them
against God, to whom we ought to offer our bodies an holy Sacrifice; against
Christ, whose Members we are, I dare scarce redeliver those words of S. Paul; 1
Cor. 6 15. 1 Cor. 6.19.
against the holy Ghost, whose temples our bodies are; against our neighbor,
for this dart of uncleanness smites through two hearts at once. Levit. 18.28.
Against the Church, filling that (to their power) with an unholy seed; Against
the Land, desiling that. Hos. 4.10. Ephesians. 4.19. Hos. 4.11.
Against all mankind, by robbing it of the blessing of a due increase.
Briefly, this sin damps the light of reason, It makes the soul as a City
without walls, surprizable by the most horrid sins: It takes away the heart, and
makes it listlesse to any good and in some respects it exceedes Idolatry, 1
Cor. 7.14. Deuteronomy 23.2.
because an Idolaters child might enter the congregation, but a bastard might
not enter to the tenth generation. And because God has punished Idolatry with a
permission of adultery; giving such over to unnatural lusts; Romans 1.24.
as now adays, when women turn Roman Catholics, they turn often Catholic,
that is to say, universal women in body too. Now every punishment must
surpass that, whereof it is a punishment; otherwise it will, as an allective
rather invite, then deter.

In this sense the Romanists may justly in imitation of my Text say, Applica.
how is this City of Rome become an Harlot? One of their own writers speaks
of the reformation that a Pope wrought in their City: when he entered the
Popedom there were diverse Stews in Rome; Tota Roma ^upanar.
when he dyed he left but one, all Rome was converted to one Stews Cornelius
Mus Bishop of Bitonto, in a Sermon of his at S. Laurences in Rome, cried, see
thou not, wretched City, how thou art become a Stews of Lechery? It was one of
their 100. grievances, that Priests, Centum gravamina.
that had no mind to keep Concubines, were yet forced to pay for a license for
them, because they might keep them, if they would; It was not the Churches
fault they did not.

And a Priest among them had lost his living, because it was bruited, that he
had a wife, and by that wife a child; but that he pleaded, that she was another
man's wife, and so saved his Benefice. Nay their Popes, the heads of their
Church are infamous for their Concubines.

Alexander the sixth had his Lucretia. Gregory the seventh his Matilda. Leo the
tenth his Magdalena. Paul the third his Constantia. Sergius his Marozia. Nay,
many of their Popes have been Sodomites, and had their Ganymedes. Sixtus the
fourth his Rierius. Julius the second his Germanus. Julius the third his
Innocentius de monte. Leo the tenth his Hippolitus. According to that of
Mantuan.

Sanctus ager scurris venerabilis ara Cynaedis,
Servit, honorandae Diuum Ganymedibus aedes.
I will not English it.

So that well might the Duke of Urbins paynter return that answer to the
Cardinal, that asked him, why he painted S. Peter, and S. Paul so high
colored, when they were meagre and pale with preaching, and fasting; he
answered, that they blushed to see, how those, that styled themselves the
Apostles successors, degenerated from their pious examples.

Neither can we say, that our gardens are without these rank weeds. This City
groans under the frequency, and impudence of Harlots. The Sun often rises in a
cloud, and blushes setting in a kind of remeditation of what obscenities he
has been a spectator in the day. It is a mercy even to ecstasy, that the earth
sinkes not under her unclean load. I grieve to tell you, how many hogs among
you rake in any dunghill; how many kites stoop at any carrion. Any Strumpet is
their heaven. As it was said of one of the Caesar's, Om^^^m muli^^umvir (...).
he was a man for all women. He corrupted Sulpitius his Posthumia; Gabinius his
Lollia; Crassus his Tertullia, Pompess Mutia, and many other.

To the guilty of both Sexes, of what rank, or quality soever you are, let me
say, that, though secrecy, potency, or place may exempt you from humane
tribunals, Heb. 13.4.
yet, if S. Paul have any truth in him, Whoremongers, and adulterers God will
judge.

2. But (under favor) there are another kind of Harlots more properly here
intended. They are those that prostitute their souls.

Or to the world; Amas quae secit, and non cunequi fecit? adulteres. Aug. Suff^
it mihi annulus, saciem videre non desidero. Bern.
For when we prefer them before our Maker, or love God only for their sakes,
it is but a harlotry love. As if a Bride should say, give me my Bride-groomes
goods, I care not for his person; His ring suffices me, I desire not to see his
face. But these Harlots I also pass by, and descend to a Third kind, if a
faithful City be that, which in an entire, orthodoxe worship, cleaves wholly,
and soly to her God, and husband; then a harlotry City, must (by the rule of
contraries) be that which in a false, heterodox, superstitious worship goes a
whoring from her God, and husband, after dunghilly puppets, senseless idols. A
Lapide Ad idola quasi ad adulteros.
A Lapide a Papist, so understands the words, turning to idols (says he) as to
her adulterers.

And this is the ordinary Scripture idiome; there are an hundred Texts running
parallel with this, according to this acception of the word, Harlot. Besides,
the histories of the reigns of those Princes, Vzziah, Iotham, and Ahaz (under
whom Esaias wrote this Prophecy) do testify, that the people were much devoted
to Images, to strange Altars, and fire, to high places. Nay, that they arrived
to that height of superstition, and cruelty, that some of them sacrificed their
sons, and daughters in the fire to the honor of Moloch. Thus was the
faithful City become an harlot.

Mat. 3.9.
to plead with the Pharisees, We have Abraham to our Father, when his
conditions, and ours are so disproportionable. They are Abraham's children, that
do the works of Abraham. Malo pater tibi sit Thersues, du^modo tu sis
Aeacidae similis quam te Thersitae similem producat Achilles. Iuven. Satyr. 8.


It is better to descend from Thersites, and to be like Achilles, then to be
descended from Achilles, and to resemble Thersites (says the Poet.) You may be
made free of this City, but you cannot be saved by your fathers Copy. The City
was once faithful, now turned harlot.

Secondly, Regis ad ^^^pl^m (...). R^^h u^ m^(...) pe mi^^us nobili^^ Inven.
Satyr. 8.
that the purity and adulterating of Religion depends very much upon the
temper, and quality of the Princes and Governors for the time being. Under the
Reign of King David, and Solomon, we hear not of these complaints; But when
Uzziah, Iotham, and Ahaz came to the Crown, the faithful City becomes an
harlot. The whole world is ready to compose it self to Princes examples,
Subjects like Limners, work much by the eye. 1 Chronicles. 13. Hos 13 2. 1 Kin. 14
15. 1 Chro. 1^.2. 1 Chro. 20. 2 Chro 28.^4.
When Saul reigned, the Ark of God was not sought to. Religion was neglected,
When Jeroboam reigned, Calves were worshipped. When David ascends the Throne,
Religion begins to recover breath, to revive to flourish. When Ahaz reigned,
the doors of Gods house were shut.

Thirdly, Mat. 16.18. Romans 11.20, 21, 22.
it being founded on a Rock; yet no particular Church can be so far
privileged, but that it may be possible for it to recidivate, and revolt from
its fidelity in Religion, and profession. Every Church is a Tabernacle, that
may be taken down.

A Plant, that may be transplanted from soil to soil. A branch that may be
broken off from the True Olive. God is said sometimes to depart from a Church,
as Hos. 9.11. Sometimes to remove it out of his sight, as 2 King 23.27.
Sometimes to divorce it, as Ier. 3.8. He is a free Agent, not bound to places,
or persons; not confined (as the Sun) within his Tropicks. And when he
withholds his beams, or influence, the most glorious Church shall wither, and
languish. Neither are the Ordinances chained to any, entayled on them, fastened
to their freehold; they are tranfitory, moveable, I^^. 8.8.
and may be alienated. How do you say we are wise, and the Law of the Lord is
with us? Lo certainly in vain made he it, in vain is the pen of the Scribe.
Amos 8.11. Zach. 13.7. Zach. 11. last. 2 Chro 15.3.
God cansend a famine of the word; so that we may go from Sea to Sea to seek
it, and not find it. The Shepherds may be smitten, and the sheep scattered.
The lights may be dimmed, and darkened, The Prophets removed. Israel was long
without a teaching Priest. They may be hidden, or slain, as 1 Kin. 19.10. Or
driven away, as Mat. 10.23. Or they may fly, as John 10.12. Or a faction may be
so prevalent, that the better side may be under hatches. And the darkness may
be so condensed, that for the present the light cannot break through.

The truth may be so suppressed, like a few grains of wheat amidst a floor full
of chafe, it may be hardly discernible. As in Athanasius his time the world
wondered to see it self turned Arrian. Thus may a faithful City become an
harlot.

Therefore let us not dream of the settled affixing of the ordinances to us.
Application.
If God spared not his natural branches, the Jews, but cut them off, he may
not spare us; therefore be not high minded, but fear; Romans 11.21, 22, 23. Ier.
3 8.
as Saint Paul warnes the Romans. God takes it ill, that Judah should not
tremble, when he had put away backsliding Israel. Let us long and pray for the
everlasting Tabernacle in heaven. Here is no abiding place, we look for
another to come. Abraham expected a City with a foundation. Heb. 11.10.
There is no firmness here. The faithful City becomes an Harlot. But

Fourthly, Whore-dome. Hose. 2.19.20.
Our conjunction with God is a marriage; our deserting of him, or conjoyning
others with him in worship, is adultery. For a Church, a City to follow Idols;
is as if a matron, that before lived soberly and modestly, and in good repute,
should resign her self ever to a wanton, loose, impudent course of life;
leaving her husband, and fixing her affections on strangers, rendering to them
her service, and obedience, and depending on them for her protection, and
maintenan^e. Let us hear the Scripture speak Thou have played the Harlot with
many Lovers. i. Ier. 3.1. Hos. 1.2.
The Land has committed great Whoredom, departing from the Lord. She is not
my wife, Hos. 2.2.5.
neither am I her husband, for she has played the Harlot. Ephraim is joynd to
Idols; let her alone: Hos. 4.17.18.
they have committed Whoredom. The one verse is exegeticall to the other.
Apoc. 17.2. and 18.2. Moechia affinis Idololatriae. Tertull De pudici. Wisd.
14.11.
In this sense Babylon is called a great Whore, with whom the Princes of the
earth commit fornication. Adultery is a kin to Idolatry, says Tertullian. They
are of a house. Prima scortatio excogitatio simulachrorum, says Epiphanius,
borrowing it from the Book of Wisdom, which in this is no Apocrypha. The
inventing of Idols was the beginning of Whoredom. According to this
interpretation.

The City, Rome, that was once faithful, Application.
is become an Harlot. According to the multitude of her houses are her Gods,
her Saints, her Idols, to which she daily pays that homage that is due to God
alone (for the bed, and the throne brook no rivals) The Carpenter, ^t Faber
and pistor mill dedere Deos. Non ipsa timemus, sed cos ad quorum imaginem^cta,
et quorum no.
and the Baker yield them a thousand Gods. When they reply, that they worship
not Idols, but God in them: It is no more then the grossest, heathenish
Idolaters have pleaded for themselves, as we find in Lactantius, we say they,
fear not the images themselves, but those that are resembled by them, and to
whose names we consecrate them. And in Arnobius, we worship the Gods by images.
Besides shall an adulteress allege for her self, minibus consecrata sunt.
Lactan: Deos per simulachra veneramur. Arnob.
that she honors her husband in her paramour? And if they say, they worship
the true, not a false God in their images, as the heathen do, I reply, with
the Apostle, that many of the heathen knew the corruptible God, and changed his
glory into an image; as the Papists at this day do. Besides Micha is branded
with Idolatry for erecting an image, though in memory of the God of Israel.
And, Romans 1.21.23. Judge. 17.3.13.
if it be urged that they worship none but the holy Saints of God: I answer, I
much doubt of that. Had I time, I could prove that many of their Saints are
fictious, such as never were in nature. And their own learned men fear that
some of them are now in hell. However it be; this will no more excuse them,
then it would an adulteress to say, that she lies with none, but her husbands
friends. All the water in Tiber cannot wash Rome from Idolatry. Especially when
we find (and who would think they could be so infatuated, and besotted?) that
they worship Authonies Swine; Annaes Comb, Crispins paring-knife; Francis
Cowle, Georges Scabbard, Joseph's Breeches, Martins Boots, Thoma's Shoes,
Roches Dogs. These Romans sacrifice to God, and to Mary, Deo, and Mariae Deo,
and Mario.
as the ancient Ethnicke Romans did to God, and to Marius for their victory
over the Cimbri. And these deeds answer their Laws, Constitutions, and
Language.

It was promised at Rome, that what good man soever would say before a Crucifix,
seven Paternosters, and seven Avemaries, should obtain 56000. years of
pardon; 14000. granted by Gregory, 14000. by Nicholas; and 28000. by Sixtus the
fourth. Nay hear how they bespeake the Virgin Mary's girdle; Oh blessed girdle!
make us inheritors of everlasting life; keep us from destruction; Flippoman:
Jewel Replic. page 398. Genesis 20.6.
Oh pure girdle! preserve thine heritage; be our strength, aid, wall, defense.

To rake no longer in this dunghill. Not long agee we our selves did fairly
trot toward Idolatry, had not our course been checked, and countermanded by
Divine Providence. Our innovators might with Abimelech pretend, they did all in
the integrity of their hearts; but we may answer them, as God there does him; I
withheld thee from sinning against me.

Let us now look to our footing. Though Israel have played the harlot, Hos.
4.15. Hos. 2.7. 1 Ioh. 5.21. 2 Cor 6.16. Ezekiel 16.15. to 37. Principale crimen
gencris human, Summus seculi reatus. Lo^uples substantia criminis, Tertul.
Ado^ant insensibilia; qui sentiunt, Irrationalia, qui s^piunt, exanima, qui
vivunt, terrena, qui otiunture coelo. Lactan. Instit. L. 1. Romans 1.23. Divina
Majestas in simulachronu^ stoliditate facile co^remnitnur. An. Civit.
yet let not Iudahsinne. Let us return to our first Husband, as the Church
resolves. Let us keep our selves from Idols, as Saint John counsels us. Say
unto them get thee hence; as it is Isay 30.21, 22. What agreement has the
Temple of God with idols, says Saint Paul. Saint Peter calls them abominable
idolatries, (...) 1 Pet. 4.3. Idolatry is the worst kind of adultery, as the
Metaphor is elegantly followd, and continued in Ezekiel. It is the principal
crime of mankind, the highest guilt of any age; a heinous comprehensive mother
sin. It is a braine-sicke, ridiculous sin, as it is delineated to the life.
Isay 44.9. to 21. As good blocks, as Images have layne at the fireback, and
have boiled Diagoras his turnips. In a time of danger they are not able to
keep themselves, much less their keepers. Aeneas at the conflagration of Trey
was feign to save his gods. What more then madness is it, that the sensible
should adore the insensible; they that have the use of reason, the irrational;
the living, the livelesse; they that are heaven-bred, earthly stocks. To make
images, much more to worship them is contumelious to God, (...) (says Clemens
ad Corinthios) what more stolid, and insufferable then to turn the glory of
the incorruptible God into the image of a man, a bird, a beast, as Saint Paul
aggravates it.

It frets God, tha'ts the word, Ezekiel. 16.43. It is unfaithfulness (that I may
have my Text in my eye). It is breaking of covenant, and oath. Ezekiel. 16.59. It
is suing out a divorce between God and us. Hos. 2.2. It gives away Gods honor
and glory. Isay 42.8. Act. 15.20.
It brings Divine Majesty into contempt. It is a hatred of God, as is employed
in the second Commandment. It pollutes the soul. It provokes God to give us
up to a reprobate sense. It is threatened with impunity, which is the worst of
punishments. Let me have none of such mercy, says Aug. Nolo hane misericordiam
Aug. Ezekiel. 16.42. Hos. 4.17.
I will be quiet (says God) I will be no more angry. Ephraim is given to
idols, let him alone. He is a privileged person, he may run to hell without
interruption. It is fatal to any Nation. Most of the miseries,
transportations, captivities of Israel sprung from idolatry. For other crimes
God, Ezekiel 16.23. Iud. 10.6.8. 2 Chro. 28.23. Ezekiel. 16 40.48 Idololatres
homicida estquaeris quem occiderit? scipsum quot Plagit? quo^^ quot
idololatriis. Tertul. Castius dii observantur line simulachris. Aug. Civi. l 4.
c. 31. Crucesnec colimus nec optamus. Arnch. Nec ex horrescunt bea tae
Trinitatis imaginem facere.
and his people (like husband and wife) may have unkind bickerings, but for
this he casts them off. Woe, woe is thee for it, says God. For this Israel was
vexed 18. years. This ruined Ahaz and all Israel. This is threatened with
stoning, sword, fire, consuming in the sight of many (as a spectacle, a
monument of misery) with fury and lasting woe. An Idolater, says Tertullian,
is a manslayer. Do you ask whom he slayes? why, himself. Do you demand at
how many blows? why? with so many as idolatries. In a word; Idolaters are
ranked among that damned crew. Apocal. 21.8.

These considerations moved Justin Martyr to say, I would not believe God
himself, should he say, I should worship images. Never let those hands
Sacrifice to idols, which have received Christ's body, and would receive the
Crown of glory; says Cyprian de Lapsu. God is more chastely worshipped without
images, could Varro the Philosopher say, Euthymius, Fatuum est imaginem facere
adrep. aesentandum D^um, velcam revere^. Durandus. Multo faciliusom
niumunag^^u^ cultus possit removeri, qua^ modus and ratio hujus^e cultus ab
ullo homine de^i^iti. Erasmus.
We neither adore, nor desire Crosses, says Arnobius. They are not afraid to
make an image of the blessed Trinity, complains Enthymius. It is foolish to
make an image to represent God, or to worship it, says Durand. All worship of
images may much more easily be removed, then the measure, and manner of that
worship can by any manbe desined, says Erasmus. Since we are compast about
with such a cloud of witnesses, ancient, modern, Fathers, Schoolmen; and some
soberer Papists, all sworn enemies to idolatry: (I might add Turks, who hate
an image, because they have read the Pentateuch, the five books of Moses) God
forbid, that this faithful Kingdom, and City should ever become an harlot.

I will not offer over much violence to your patience. I shall but point to
what I would have said concerning the rest of the Text, and then I will set
your attention at liberty.

The bright-side of the cloud in the second period of this charge is. The City
was full of judgment. Righteousness lodged in it.

It is a rule for the most part true, that in Scripture, when the word
Righteousness is found alone, ( I speak not of imputed, but imparted
righteousness; and that not only impressed in the soul, but also expressed in
the life, not only toward God, but also toward man.) It includes judgment
also. But when we find judgment, and righteousness, or justice in conjunction
(like a bright Constellation,) They differ, either as special, and general.
Or the first we confine to the public; the latter we enlarge to the private,
and ordinary exercise of justice.

Jerusalem was full of judgment.

Generally, persons of all ranks, in all kinds of causes did put all kinds of
judgment in execution. Imagine the Prophet had thus enlarged himself. Apply
you it, as I proceed.

In this City heretofore there was no sale of Offices, no enhaunsing of fees,
no subtleties of delay, and evasion, no trucking for expedition, no making
snares of petty penal statutes, no extorting of judgment, it dropped as kindly
as honey from the comb; as Francis the first of France, when a woman kneeled
to him to beg justice; bad her stand, for, said he, justice I owe th^e woman;
if thou beg any thing, let it be mercy.) There was no respect of persons, but
every man fared as his cause was (as the Areopagites used to hear causes, and
administer justice in the night, and by dark, that they might not see whom
they acquitted, or condemned. Bribery was odious. Justice had scales, in her
hand, not to weigh gold, but equity. The Indians cast gold into Ganges to make
it run currently, but the stream of judgment needed it not. Power, and
might was no right. There was no such plea beard as that of Pompey to those of
Messina, what talk you to us of law, who have our swords by our sides? They
were ashamed to say, thou have a better cause, but I have better teeth. There
was no scouring up of rusty, obsolete, antiquated Laws, that (cobweblike)
might hold small flies, and suffer great hornets to break through. No, no. The
Judges and Magistrates were as Noah's Arc to take in weary Doves. As the horns
of the Altar for oppressed innocence to betake it serse unto. They curbed the
insolences, and reformed corruption in inferior Officers. They removed all
obstructions that justice might run down like a mighty stream. Nor fear,
nor favor, nor great men's letters did sway them. They considered, that they
were men before God, though Gods before men. Psalm. 82.6. Exodus 4.20. Judge. 7.10.
1 Chronicles. 29.23. Romans 13.2.
That their Rod was Gods, as Moses rod. Their sword Gods, as Gedeons. Their
Throne Gods, as David's. Their power and authority Gods.

The Plaintifs, or accusers did not inform and prosequute through malice,
envy, or for advantage. They did not fish for words, syllables, or letters to
catch unwary, well meaning men. They would not coin falsehoods; nor make hard,
uncharitable, rackt constructions of indifferent, harmless words, and
actions. Witnesses had not hackny consciences, like our knights of the Post.
They were not suborned to swear truth out of the Court. The Lawyers, Advocats,
pleaders, would not call evil good, Isay 5.20.
and good evil, bitter sweet, etc. Nor abuse the Judges favor in granting
them liberty of speech: Nor turn justice into vinegar by delays: Nor pervert,
wiredraw, or shrivell up wholesome laws to the prejudice of afflicted,
overborne innocence. Canes venatrci.
The setting dogs, the Informers, that lie at catch, were not countenanced, or
were severely punished upon any false, unjust, or malicious information. The
subordinate Officers durst not help Potent Delinquents out of the briars, nor
suffer poor men tempest-tost in Law to languish in their business within ken
of harbor for want of giving a sop to Cerberus, or offering to the great Diana
of expedition. No, no. The City was full of judgment. Next, Justice lodged in
it.

Jaalin, as the Hebrew has it, (...), as the Septnagint. (...) Per noctavit:
Iustitia est, quae dat cu^l^bet, quod suu^, nihil arri^iens alienum. Ambr. 1.
de offie.
Justice took quiet rest, and repose there. It was the ordinary, standing
house, and Seat of justice, It dwelt there. There Righteousness was at home.
The Citizens did render to every one their own (which is the definition of
Justice) In a distributive and commutative way (which are the kinds of justice)
According to the Law (which is the rule of justice.) The Law of God, of nature;
of Nations; and the municipall, statute, judicial Laws established among
them: And that, not according to the captious letter always, but the genuine,
uninforced sense, and reason of the Law. Just they were in buying, and selling.
Just in lending, and borrowing. Just in letting, and hiring. Just in
feoffments. Unsway'd in negotiations with all ranks of men; great and small;
acquaintance, and strangers; friends, and foes.

Of this Eucracy; this healthful temper, and constitution the City once was.

But lo, a strange turn, a vicissitude, a revolution in the face of things.
This was too good to hold. Turn your eyes to the black side of the cloud.
Righteousness lodged indeed in the City; like a guest for a night, and away,
but now murderers are tolerated there.

By this complaint gather, how tender God is of the life of Man; Dei domesticum
animal Ambr. De Arca, and Not:
whom Ambrose calls Gods household creature.

Again we see, that they that had broken their Faith with God, would not keep
it with man. They that spare not their God in the duties of the first Table,
will not scruple the abuse of their neighbor in the duties of the second
Table. The City from a receptacle, a tabernacle, an harbor of the just, was
become awildernesse, a den, a cave of murderers. Whether murderers of souls,
by silence, and connivence; 2 Kin. 12.3. Romans 14.13. Iro. 7.18. 1 Kin. 21.25. 2 Samuel 13.15. Dan. 3.4.5.6. act. 26.11.
as Jehoash was to the people. Or by example, and scandal, as in the Epistle.
Or by inticement, as the strange woman to the young man. Or by incitation, as
Queen Iezabel to King Ahab. Or by counsel, as Ionadab was to Amon. Or by
command as King Nebuchadnezzar was to the people. Or by compulsion, as Saul to
many Saints. Or guilty, though not of open, obvious, yet of close, or contrived
murder; covering blood with dust; as we have the expression in the Prophet.
Ezekiel. 24.7.
At least sweld with unadvised, implacable anger, and rancored envy, which in
our Saviors, Mat. 5.21.22. 1 Ioh. 5.15.
and S. John's account are a Tantamount to murder. Or else guilty of rapine,
violence, oppression, grinding the faces of the poor; persecution (which of
the Prophets, Act. 7.52.
have not your fathers persecuted? says Steven. Racking of rents (so called
from rending, and tearing) laying up unable men to crumble away in loathsome
prisons. Not paying of due debts. Withholding of wages. Which is a murder. Not
to bring oil to feed the Lamp, is to extinguish it. Briefly, Despoyling others
of their estates by collusion, fraud, or a pretended course of Law or equity;
which is murder. For it is all one to take away the Life, or the livelihood.

Next, Their silver was become dross, whether you take the silver for men
famous, for piety, and profession of Religion. Plato de Repub.
As Plato calls just men golden, and silvermen. The turned reprobate mettle, as
the Prophet phrases it. Ie^. 6.30. In council. Triburienn An. Dom. 895.
As it was said in a council: time was, when there were golden Priests, though
wodden chalices; now there are golden chalices indeed; but wodden Priests. Or
whether this silver be the ordinances of God; as the word is by the Psalmist
compared to seven times tried silver. Psalm. 12.6. Quid numisma^a, nisi divini
sermones imagine in magni regis impressam habentes Origin. in Johan. (...) 2
Cor. 2.17. Mo^eta fals^.
It is silver for its beauty, firmness, incorruptibility, and value. What is
this money (says Origin) but Gods word bearing upon it the Image, and
superscription of the Great Caesar inhewen? Which ordinances they adulterated,
and sophisticated with humane glosses, inventions, and traditions, which Paul
calls corrupting the word of God. Or (as the greek word imports) playing the
drugsters, or hucksters with it for gain.

Or whether (with D. Kimchi, and others) we understand it literally of embasing
of bullion and coin; Locum Se^ni cosum. Aug.
or passing away drossy for pure silver. Augustine calls this a thorny, a hard
place; and therefore it may well be variously interpreted.

Lastly, Their wine mixed with water.

There was imposture, Inter jura peccatur, innocentia ne^ illie ubi defenditur,
reservatur, quis inter haec subveniat? Patronus? sed Prevaricatur judex? sed
sententiam vendit: qui sedet crimina vindicaturus, admittit. etc. Cypr. Epi. 2.
Donato. sincera sine cera simplex sine plica.
prevarication in Courts of justice. (Justice is like wine refreshing the heart
of the oppressed) they did bear, and keep up formal proceedings, and make a
noise in course, as if they were zealous only for justice; and yet underhand
poisoned, perverted, and everted justice. As it was Cyprians complaint in his
time, no where more wrong, then where right was to be expected; innocence not
there reserved, where it seemed to be defended. Who shall succor the oppressed?
the Patron? he prevaricates. The Judge? he sels his judgment. He that sits to
punish crimes, commits them. etc. To return to the Text. There is hypocrisy in
all their commerce. Mingling bad with good, and selling all for the best. They
use false weights, and deceitful measures. They turn Oeneus into Peleus; as
it is observed by the Critiques on the Text. There is no pure, sincere, genuine
dealing among them. No simplicity, no plainness, no integrity in their
trading. Plaine-dealing has been always counted a jewel; but yet men have
thought, that they that constantly use it are like to dye beggars. I wonder it
should be so, when there are in the world so many beggars, and so few
plain-dealers.

Last of all, The Text may be meant of a blending mixture in Religion. 1 Kin.
18.21: 2 Kin. 17.33.
When men will Halt between God and Baal. And seem (like them in Samaria) to
fear God, and to serve other Gods too. Speaking (like the Jews children)
half the language of Ashdod. Nehem. 13.14. Aos. 7.8. ^eph. 1.5.
Being (like Ephraim) a cake not turned, half baked. Swearing by the Lord, and
by Malchom. Shifting their sails to every wind. Calculating for all meridians.
Shifting (like Maskers) vizors, Pontificii Scoria, and aqua; traditiones, and
superstitiones. Cyrill. Basil. Hieron. and Cornelius a Lapidc. Live. Dec. 1. l.
1. Quaedam colluvies omniu^. Matri indicassem non me quidemiam esse manichaeum.
Sed nec catholicum Christianum. Aug. confess. l. 6. c. 1.
and scenes. Bridge-makers; reconcilers between God, and Dagon; between
religions asystaticall and inconsistent. Making up a linsy-wolsy mungrell
Religion. Making use of all sides to advance ends. Like Metius Suffetius,
always cleaving to the stronger side. Like the Polypus, assuming the color of
what ever-rocke, or sand she cleaves to. Like Constantine surnamed Copronymus,
that would be neither Jew, Christian, nor Pagan, but a hodge-potch, a Babell,
a Chaos of all. Like Redwald the King of the East Saxons, who had in his
Chapel one Altar for Christ, and another for sacrifice to devils. As
Augustine confessed of himself. I told my mother (says he) that now I was no
Manichee; but hear you? by your leave, nor asound Christian neither.
Application.

To Dehort you seriously from this humor; Let me mind you, Application.
That

A man divided between several Religions can be zealous in neither.

God abhorres plowing with an Ox and an Ass together. Deuteronomy. 22.10. Rev.
3.15.16.
He preferres key-coldnesse before luke-warmenesse. As we use to disburthen
our stomachs of lukewarm meats, and drinks. If meats be hot, they contract
the stomach by exsiccation; if cold, by pinching it; both which help
concoction; but lukewarm meats dilate the stomach, and keep it open, that
it cannot digest them.

It is just, that a Neuter should be suspected and hated on both sides: Solon
out-lawed these halvers. I am sure, that he, (...). Plutar.
who in Religion is on both sides, is on no side.

Such (fourthly) will quickly apostatize from what they profess. No marvel
this City turns harlot, Noah's Dove) go, and come; go and come to the Arc of
Religion; and at length go, and never return again.

This mixture is a sad prognosticke of approaching ruin of the guilty.

Fame, and the eye, Non patitur ludum fama, fides, oculus. Eccle 2.13.
and our faith will not be played with. Woe to him (says Solomon) that goes two
manner of ways. They have defiled my name (says God) and I have consumed them
in mine anger, because they set their threshold by my threshold, Ezekiel. 43.8.
and their post by my posts; and the wall between me, and them. As if as this
day, he should say, there is Mass on one side the wall, and my Service on the
other. He never digest this affront. Anastasius the Emperor laboring to
reconcile the Arrian, and the Orthodoxe, was slain with lightning. King Henry
the fourth of France complying with all sides met a knife, first in his mouth,
and after in his heart. To close all with that of Eliah. 1 Kin. 18.21.
If the Lord be God, follow him; and if Baal, then follow him. And with that of
Saint Paul to Agrippa, I would to God, we were all of us, not almost, but
altogether Christians. Act. 26.29.


I had now cast anchor; but that this paper calls upon me to add a word of
charity, and mercy to my discourse of judgment and justice, the argument of my
Text, Psa. 101.1
That my song (like David's) may be of mercy, and judgment. It is not
sufficient to give others their own, which is the proper work of justice;
unless also we give somewhat of our own to others; when charity sues out a
divorce between us, and a part of our goods, Iam. 2.13.
Judgment without mercy (says Saint James) to them that are all for justice,
and show no mercy. To the glory of God be it spoken; to the encouragement of
others, and to the stopping of the mouths of the Romanists, that are always
crying, we are all for faith, and nothing for works. Behold a list of this
Cities this years works of charity. Not extorted from them, as the Papists are
from them, by a Priests hovering over expiring carcasses, and threatening
Purgatory, differing nothing from hell, but in duration.

The terror whereof on them that are so fond to credit it, will work such an
impression; that to avoid it, they will disinherit all their children, and
undo all their family. The love of Christ (I hope) has constrained you to
succor, harbor, and relieve his afflicted members. Then the paper was read.

All this is well; if you be humble (for the eye of man, if you aim at that,
is a basiliske, that kills all good works.) And if you be constant. Be not
weary of well doing. Be still like your selves. Never give cause to the world
to expostulate, (as Isay does in my Text) How is this charitable City become
merciless? Charity did lodge in her, but now flinty-hearted, and closehanded
misers. Remember that riches are called goods, not because they make you good,
but because you may do good with them. That God made thee rich, and thy
brother poor to exercise his patience, and thy liberality. That Christ came to
save your souls, and not your purses. That we may be brought to that exigence
our selves, that our brethren in Ireland, and others are now pressed with. That
the wheel may turn, and we become suitors to those, that are now our
beads-men, and orators. That the poor are Gods treasury, and Christ's hand that
receives our alms. That we lend but to God upon usury, Quod Iudaeo dabis, Deo
non dabis? Amici hodic diem perdidi. Hoc habeo quodcunque dedi. A^s
quaestuosistima. Tertu.
which we will do to a Jew. That Augustus thought that day lost, wherein he
had not done some good. That when Mark Anthony was down the wind, he
protested, that he had nothing now left him, but what before he had given a way.
That Chrysostom calls liberality, a kind of negotiation, a merchandise for our
selves. And Tertullian styles it, a most gainefull art. It is but sowing of
seed, which we think not lost, because it is committed to the ground; we
rather expect a rich crop, and return.

But yet (for a farewell) still eying the Text, Non recipit Deus eleemosynas de
manu raptoris. Ber. in Cantie. Quos pavistis dicitis, non quos necastis, quos
operuistis, non quos expoliastis. Ber. de remed. pecc. Pauperes non ut ferarum
catuli sanguine, and caedibas nutriendi, Plin. Pau. ad Traian.
that speaks of Righteousness, and judgment. Charity must flow out of
justice. Be sure you give your own. You must not think to satisfy, for
eating many men, by feeding one. To break a man's limbs, and then send him to
an Hospital; to undo many, and then to maintain a few is but poor charity.
Selimus the Turkish Emperor would not erect an Hospital with that money which
he took from the Persian Merchants. God will not accept of alms out of an
oppressors hand. Ye tell us (says Bernard) how many you have fed, and
clothed, but not how many you have killd, and robbed. The poor (says Pliny)
are not to be fed like the whelps of wild beasts with blood, and slaughter.

God has shown thee, O man, what is good (says the Prophet) to do justice,
and love mercy. First to do justice, then to love mercy. But justice first,
and then as merciful as you will.

First repay, and then give.

Now the God of heaven make us a faithful City and keep us from corporal,
and spiritual adultery. Continue us just, and righteous. Preserve our silver
without dross; and our wine unmixed, etc.

DOXA THEO

