The Prince of ORANGE VVelcome to LONDON.
To the Tune of, The two English Travelers.
London


P. of Orange.



THe Prince Van Orange he is come to this Land,
Who does in defiance of Popery stand:
He does not desire Supreme for to Reign,
But our Laws and Liberties here to maintain.
Which some evil Persons did strive to Invade,
And we into Bondage might have been betrayed;
We see all their dealings, which troubled us sore,
The Friars and Jesuits daily came over.
In City and Town they did Mass-houses build,
Which was with poor ignorant Proselites fil^'d;
The Proverb of old is made true in this case,
We see that an ill Weed will flourish apace.
They still are inventing and forging of Lies,
Against our Bible and Clergy likewise;
In hopes they might suddenly be overthrown,
And then they concluded the Game was their own.
The Bishops away to the Tower was sent,
As stout and as cheerful as Martyrs they went;
Not fearing what ever might fall to their doom,
They scorn to submit to the Clergy of Rome.
Now while the true Church thus did tottering stand,
It was a great grief to most Men in this Land:
But while we with sorrowful sighings did grieve,
Each Friar and Jesuits laughed in their Sleeve.
And Old Father Peter's was one of the Train,
Who did for a while in his Roguery Reign;
But Fortune was pleased to send him a Frown,
And from his high Honor to tumble him down.
Now seeing himself in this sorrowful case,
He thought it no boot to remain in this place;
And therefore his Breetches with Guinnies he lined,
In order for running some shelter to find.
Now while he was taking this dangerous flight,
He prayed to Saint Francis and Bridget all night;
But yet not withstanding his Religious Prayer.
He was taken napping as Moss caught his Mare.
There is many more as we well understand,
Wishes that they were safe out of the Land;
They Would rather leave Britain, and fly to the Pope,
Than here to take part of the Hatchet and Rope.
And now to return to the Prince Van Orange,
Whose cost, care and Conduct, has wrought this great change
This Nation from Thraldom I hope he will set free,
And then there will none be more happy than we.
And now let us drink a good Health to the Mitre,
And may that Church flourish, though enemies spite her
Next Health to that Seven that stood by out Cause,
As stout as our Martyrs, as just as our Laws.
God bless all the Nobles, Religious and Just,
Who always was faithful and true to their Trust:
I hope they will settle this Nation again,
That we may never have any cause to complain.
And when a Free Parliament shall Regulate
And Compose our Fractions in matters of State,
The Ioys of this Nation again to restore,
Then both King and People may flourish once more.
FINIS.
Printed for G. J. 1688.


