PRINCE ROBERT HIS Proceedings with His MAJESTY'S Army in BERKSHIRE: BEING The
true Copy of a Letter sent from a Gentleman at Newberie in Berkshire,
containing these Particulars following: viz. 1 That (by Secretary NICHOLAS his
repent) His Majesty intends to march with His Army into Sussex, Kent and Essex,
or to Salisbury and Southampton in the West Parts. 2 That the Parliament has
pe^itioned His Majesty for a treaty of peace by the Earls of Northumberland
and Pembroke, and some Members of the Commons. 3 The number of His Majesty's
Army, and the number of His soldiers billeted in diverse places. 4 The effect
of Prince ROBERTS Warrants for contribution, with the quantity of money which
is coined traveling upon wheels, first invented by Leniell His Majesty's
Engineer.


LONDON, November. 8. Printed for J. Faber. 1642.

THE PROCEEDINGS OF PRINCE ROBERT with His MAJESTY'S Army in BERKSHIRE: BEING
The copy of a Letter sent from Newberie in Berkshire to a Gentleman in London.
Right Worthy Sir,
I Cannot but be obliged unto you for your continual favors toward me and my
son Robert at Lincolns Inn: I have understood by your Letters the forwardness
of the City of London, and the strength of men, ordnance, and other implements
of implements of engines in all places, for the resisting of His Majesty's
Forces. I confess possession is it points of the Law, so their managing the
city with strength is a sure ground of resistance, but I believe to little
purpose; for on tuesday I rid to Oxford, and through thousands of His Majesty's
Army, which exceeds the number of your relation, and having spent the day in
the city, I came late to my home at Newberie, and there was no injury offered
me by the way, or had forceably taken from me the value of a point, though it
has been related that neither horsemen nor footmen, wagon or carrier can
travel about their occasions, but the soldiers make them their prey: I can
assure you they are kept in good order, without doing pillage, as is related.
And to come to my former discourse, when I came to Oxford, I saw at the least
fifty burials following one another, and in an hours respit as many more,
which I conceived were the corpse of some ^^at at were slain in the last fight.
After this I came to my Inn at the Katherine-Wheel, and I chanced upon
Secretary Nicholas, with whom I drank my part of a pint of wine, and entering
into discourse, I gathered, that neither the King or his Nephew have any intent
to come to London, but that they will pass the river at Henley, and so march
into Sussex and Kent, and from thence into Essex, where his Majesty is assured
of a great party, if not for the present in those Eastern parts, that then it
is his Majesty's pleasure to go to Salisbury and Southampton, where he expects
great aid from Hopton, Stowell, and others in the West Country. M. Secretary
Nicholas told me, that Sir John Killagrew came with a message from the
Parliament to petition His Majesty that the Earls of Pembroke and
Northumberland might have admittance to parley concerning a treaty of peace,
and that his Majesty was graciously pleased to accept thereof, provided that
none before excepted in his Majesty's Declaration dated the twelfth of August,
presume to trouble his Majesty upon pain of death, and that the Commissioners
exceed not above 20. at the most. He certified me likewise, that his Majesty's
Forces are a great many more then some of your Pamphlets made mention. I cannot
but believe of a greater number, for they were billeted full ten miles in
length, and three miles in breadth, you may judge how they were dispersed; for
at Wallingford there lay a thousand soldiers, at Twiford and Ockingham a
thousand; and on tuesday night last they were both pillaged, as also Reding
has been pillaged of at least five thousand yards of cloth, besides other
things of worth; which happened by the false-heartednesse of each other in the
said town, and none else, as I can hear of about us: diverse Troops of horse
and Foot-companies are billeted at Thetcham, Wellington, and about, besides
great store at Newberie, and many petty Villages thereabouts, and the
soldiers at Oxford and Abbington. Prince Robert has sent a party to Windsore
to demand the town and Castle, but the messengers had a repulse, and were told
by the Parliaments Forces which were billeted there, that the Prince should win
it and wear it: and thus much I can assure you; for I had it from the
Secretaries own mouth.

There is one maine thing which I have omitted, and that is, the multitude of
Warrants which have issued forth under the command of Prince Robert to all
places within twenty miles of his Army, it runs in the nature of General
Lesley his Warrants at his entering of New Castle, commanding all men to provide
and bring to his Army all manner of food and sustenance for his soldiers
relief, as also that the country provide both horse and men for the assisting
of him in the said war, and that all those that will not assist him, to pay a
contribution of money for their refusal.

And this is the effect of the said Warrants, as I can rightly understand.
Plate and money is brought to his Majesty in abundance, and the Coyners of his
treasure carried upon wheels, and coin money traveling. It is a most
excellent invention of Leniell His Majesty's Engineere, whom we thought to have
been cut off in the last fight at Kinton. And so I wish you and yours health,
leaving you to Gods protection, and rest,

Newberie, November. 4. 1642. Your faithful friend, ANTHONY VAUX.


