A SYNOPSIS OF COUNCELS.

By JOHN PRIDEAVX, late Regius Professor of Divinity at Oxford, and Bishop of
Worcester.



OXFORD, Printed by A. and L. LICHFIELD. Printers to the University, 1661.

CAP. I. Of Synods in General.
1. SYnodographie is that, which so Methodically does lay before our eyes a
Synopsis of Councels, and other Ecclesiastical meetings, that it may clearly
appear to him that doubts, how any case in them may be enquired after, and what
may be determined concerning it being found.

2. A Council is a free public Ecclesiastical meeting, especially of Bishops
and also of other Doctors lawfully deputed by diverse Churches, for the
examining of Ecclesiastical causes, according to the Scriptures, and those
according to the power given by common Suffrages, without favor of parties to
be determined, in matters of Faith by Canons, in cases of practice, by
Presidents, in Discipline, by Decrees and Constitutions. Therefore,

3. They are not to be called. 1. For the deciding of Popish and political
Controversies, which more properly belong to Diets, Parliaments, and
Assemblies. 2. Neither is it an office appertaining to the Pope to Assemble;
much less (except he be specially elected thereto by the Assembled) to sit as
chief over them. 3. Neither may others unless Bishops, or some otherwise
Deputed by their Churches, in them pass a determinative sentence. 4. Neither
may any sentence or decree be admitted as necessary unto Salvation, unless it
has strength and Authority from the Word of God. 5. Neither may public
decrees be rejected by private persons who consent unto them by their Deputies,
but they must acquiesse in them and suffer them, until an Authority-frees equal
to that which did bind.

4. Such have been and frequently happen, as 1. Judaical. 2. Apostolical. 3.
Ecumenical. 4. Controverted. 5. Rejected. 6. National. 7. Conferences.


INQUIRIES.
Whether 1. Councels are of divine Authority and simply necessary? Neg. 2. The
Authority of convening Councels rests in the power of one person, or some
certain Prelates or Princes? Neg. 3. Councels may be called to determine
political affairs, or private Controversies? N. 4. Only Ecclesiastical Prelates
have determinative Suffrages in them? Aff. 5. A controverted place of Scripture
may be more safely sought from Councels than from private Doctors? Aff. 6. The
Decrees of Councels contrary to the plain Texts of Scripture are of any
validity? Neg. 7. We must acquiesse in the Decrees of a Council, at least not
publicly oppose them till the like Authority of dissenting men give us liberty
so to do? Aff.


CAP. II. Of Judaical Councels.
1. UNder the Title of Judaical Councels, we comprehend not, either, 1. The
Sanedrim Gedolah, constituted of 72 Elders, Number. 11.24. Or 2. The Sanedrim
Katon, a Consistory of 23 persons sitting at the Gates, Deuteronomy. 16.18. Or 3. The
three Dijanims, the Decidours of Controversies in Smaller Towns, Mat. 5.22.
Because such as these were appointed for the preserving of Doctrine, Worship
and Discipline, as well in the Commonwealth, as in the Church; but the more
solemn meetings about extraordinary affairs for the confirming, removing, or
reforming any thing as the matter required.

2. Such meetings are observed to have bin 1. At Sichem under Joshua and
Eliazer. 1. Concerning prohibiting Society with the Gentiles. 2. Concerning the
rooting out of strange gods. 3. Concerning the burying of Joseph's bones in his
own possession as he himself commanded. Josh. 24. 2. At Jerusalem, the first
under David, Gad and Nathan being his assistants. 1. Concerning the numbering
of the Levites. 2. The distribution of the Priests into 24 Classes. 3.
Concerning each of their Offices, 1. Chron. 13. which Hezechiah restored, 2 Chronicles. 29.25. 3. At Carmelita under Ahab and Elias, where 1. The worshipping of
Baal was discussed. 2. The true worship of God was miraculously confirmed. 3.
Severe punishment was inflicted upon the worshippers of Baal, 1. Kings 18. 4.
At Jerusalem the second under Hezechiah. Concerning 1. The purging of the
Temple. 2. The instituting of true Worship according to David's prescript. Where
it is probable was a Decree made concerning the transcribing of Solomon's
Proverbs, according to the Title, Cap. 25.2. Chron. 29. 5. At Jerusalem the
third under Josiah and Helkiah in which 1. The Temple again was purged. 2.
Idolatry was rooted out. 3. The Covenant with the Lord renewed, according to
the book of the Law found by Helkiah amongst the rubbish of the Temple. 2.
Kings 33. 2. Chron. 34. 6. At Jerusalem the fourth under Zorobabel and Ezra
and other chief persons of the Jews that returned from the Captivity of
Babylon, in which. 1. The Canonical books were chiefly by Ezra set in that
order as now we have them. 2. The Fesukim, Paraschim, and Heptakim were added
for the distinction and reading of the Text. 3. The Masoreth with the Tikkum
Sopherim was begun and prosecuted for the preserving and transmitting to
posterity the holy Language by Hebrew points and other marks, Elias Levita
Praef. 3. Masor. Genebr. Chron. l. 2. p. 183 7. That which is called the Synod
of the Wise under John Hircanus. 1. Concerning the receiving of the Pharisees
and Scribes with their leaders Sammei and Hillel. 2. Concerning the condemning
of the Sadduces with their Authors, Sadoc and Bajethos, who for that reason
betook themselves to the Samaritans, denying the immortality of the soul, and
that there is any reward in the world to come. Where 3. Some suppose the books
which we call Apocryphie were made Canonical by the third Canon of the Hebrews.
Genebrard. Chron. l. 2. p. 197.


INQUIRIES.
3. Whether 1. The Tradition of the Cabala was enjoined at the Synod of Sychem?
D. 2. Some of Solomon's Proverbs were perfected and transmitted to posterity by
Hezekiah's servants according to the Decree of any Council or otherwise? D. 3.
The Masoreth and Hebrew points borrowed their authority from the fourth Council
at Jerusalem? Probable. 4. The writings which we call Apocriphal, were brought
into the Canon by any Synod of the Jews? vid. Genebr. Chron. l. 2. p. 190. and
197. Improbable. 5. The epicurism of the Sadduces, or the proud and covetous
hypocrasie of the Pharisees was more intolerable to the pious and Orthodox or
more pernicious to the Church? D. 6. That meeting under Ptolomie Philometer
concerning the antiquity of the Temple of Jerusalem and of Samaria mentioned
by Josephus Antiq. l. 13. c. 6. Is rightly reckoned by some among the Jewish
Synods? N. 7. The convening of the Priests and Scribes by Herod only for
inquisition of the place where Christ was born, was rather an occasional
consultation then a Council? Aff.


CAP. III. Of Apostolical Councels.
1. TO Apostolical Councels are referred those, which are found to be
celebrated, either 1. Against the Apostles, or 2. By them. Against them were
convented (that the Gospel, if it were possible, should be smothered in the
very Cradle) 1. Annas, Caiaphas, John and Alexander, with the whole Generation
of Priests, Act. 4.6. who ordained that none should speak or teach in the name
of Jesus, v. 18. 2. The same Persons were convened with the Sadduces, where the
Apostles, designed for Massacre, were freed by Gamaleel, and their punishment
was mittigated, and they dismissed only with whipping, Act. 5. Their 3d Council
judged Stephen to be stoned, Acts 6.12. In the 4th Council under Ananias, Paul
was beaten, and welnigh torn in pieces between the Pharisees and Sadduces, Act.
23.10. The 5th is said to be called by Ananias the younger, where James the
brother of the Lord, with some others were sentenced to death, Joseph. Antiq.
l. 20. c. 8.

2. The Counsels celebrated by the Apostles are commonly noted. 1. For the
substituting of Mathias in the place of Judas who betrayed our Savior, Act. 1.
2. For the election of seven Deacons, Act. 6. 3. For not pressing of the
Ceremonial Law, seeing that justification may be obtained by the Grace of God
alone in Christ. Acts 15.11. in which may be observed an exact directory for
the following Councels. 4. For the toleration of some legal observations for a
time, that by such a condescension the weaker sortmight be gained, and the
Mother Synagogue honorably interred and abolisht. Act. 21.18. 5. For the
meeting, wherein was composed the Apostles Creed, by the Apostles met together,
every one contributing his part. 6. For the meeting which did obtrude to the
Church 85 Canons under the notion of the Apostles authority, concerning which
there are various Controversies. 7. For the meeting at Antioch were among nine
Canons, the eighth commanded Images of Christ to be substituted in the room of
Heathenish Idols, the other pious Canons being destitute of the Authority of
the Synod. vid. Bin. Tom. 1. p. 19. and Longum. p. 147.


INQUIRIES.
Whether 1. The Apostles met together in any Synod for the composing of the
Creed which we have? D. 2. S. Clement the Disciple of Peter wrote them in
Greek. Dionysius the less did translate them into Latin.
The Canons commonly termed Apostolical be unjustly attributed to the Apostles?
A. 3. The Author, Authority or number of them be certainly known. vid.
Joverium. p. 2. N. 4. The Epitome of Apostolical constitutions found in Crete
and published by Charles Kapellicus be of any moment? Consult P. Crab. N. 5.
The Assumption of the Blessed Virgin at a convention of the Apostles has any
ground or foundation? N. 6. The Council held at Antioch concerning approbation
of Images be altogether imaginary? A. 7. That complete Council of the Apostles
Act. 15. may be an example for all other Synods to imitate? A.


CAP. IV. Of Approved Ecumenical Councels.
SECT. I. Of the Greek or Eastern Ecumenical Councels.
1. OEcumenicall or General Councels are such wherein Bishops and other
Learned men out of every Country, may freely meet together for the discussing
and determining of Ecclesiastical affairs, piously, prudently, and orderly,
without favor of Parties according to the Word of God, and the received Canons
of the Church.

2. Such are 1. Greek or Eastern. 2. Latin or Western.


Of the Greek Councels as the more famous may be reckoned. 1. The NICENE, the
1. 2. Of CONSTANTINOPLE, the 1. 3. Of EPHESUS, the 1. 4. Of CALCEDON, 5. Of
CONSTANTINOPLE, the 2d. 6. Of CONSTANTINOPLE, the 3d, 7. The NICENE, the 2d.


4. Nicea of Bithinia (where afterward the Arians, Hillar. Socrat. L. 2. c.
29. Baron. an. 359. N. 27. Longus.
that they might make this void, called another Council) by the Authority of
Constantine the Great, in the time of Julius the first, and Sylvester, Popes.
2. It consisted of 318. Bishops, Hosius of Carduba being President, having for
his associats Potomon of Heraclia, Papnutius a Theban, of whom each lost an eye
for Christ's cause, together with Paulus of new Cesaria, who, for the same
profession, was compelled to carry an hot Iron in his hand, and Eustachius of
Antioch, who in the name of the Council, entertained the Emperor with an
elegant Oration, with many more famous for Learning and Miracles. 3. The Canons
of it being only 20. (nor is it sufficiently manifest how warrantable) came to
the hands of Posterity. Perhaps this happened by the power and subtlety of the
Artans. Some obtrude more lately found by the Jesuits, Turrianus and Pisanus
in some hidden places of Arabia, which the more Judicious do little esteem. 4.
Three things especially are reported as condemned by this famous Synod. 1. The
Arian Heresy, Blasphemously denying the Son to be Coeternall, and
Coessentiall with the Father. 2. The dissent of the Eastern from the Western
Christians, about the Celebration of the Passcover, in a manner different from
the Jewish Custom. 3. Together with the Schismatical dissentions of the
Melitians and Novatians, by which they Created perpetual troubles to the
Orthodox Bishops. 5. In this Council the Emperor burnt all the accusations
which the Bishops brought against each other, as unworthy to be seen. 6. An
illeterate Christian grapling with a proud boasting Philosopher, who with his
reproaches persecuted Christianity stopped his blasphemous mouth. 7. In which
also Paphnutius, a single man, did confute some who were earnest against the
Marriage of the Clergy. Consult about. this with Gelasius Cycizenus and Scultet
Analysis. Socrat. Hist. Tripartit. l. 1. c. 8. Ruff. l. 10. c. 1. Bell. de
Consil. l. 1. c. 5, and 13 Calvin Instit. l. 4. c. 7. S. 1. Camerar. Hist. de
Council. Nicen.

5. Gratian and Theodosius the great, and Damasus. 1. Consisting of 150
Bishops. 2. It is not manifest who sat in this as chief, unless it was
Cyrillus of Jerusalem. 3. They condemned and discharged Macedonius, Bishop of
Constantinople, for his perfidious opposing the Deity of the Holy Ghost,
together with Maximus Cynicus, by reason of his Doctrine against Discipline,
mentioned Can. 6. Of whose Canons Caranza reckons only 7. Longus 9. All which
except the first concerning the receiving of the Nicene Belief, and the
banishing of the Heretics are rejected by the Roman Church. 5. The Emperor
nul'd all Confessions except that of those who acknowledge Christ Coessentiall
with the Father, which our present Liturgy retains under the name of the Nicene
Creed. 5. It is thought that Gregory Nazianzen compiled it, according to the
sense of the Synod. 7. These words [and the Sonne] which confirms the Holy
Ghosts proceeding from the Father and the Son, are known to be added to this
Creed by Benedictus the seventh, which Leo the first and the third his
Predecessors dared not to attempt. Longus ex Lombard 1. Sent. D. 11. Bonavent.
and aliis Theodoret. Hist. l. 5. c. 6. and 10.

6. The first of EPHESUS was fortunately called under Theodosius the younger,
promoted by Celestine the first. 2. In this 200 Bishops condemned Nestorius of
Constantinople together with Carisius his flattering Presbyter, who instead of
two Natures, acknowledged diverse Persons in Christ and therefore pleaded that
the Blessed Virgin should be styled (...) only, and not (...), 3. The Mother of
Christ, and not the Mother of God.
In this only Cyrillus of Alexandria is recorded President. Whom Nestorius,
being piously and brotherly invited to a better opinion, proudly contemned, and
having craftily allured John of Antioch unto his Party Anathematized him and
the Council, who had formerly Anathematized him. 4. The matter being related
to the Emperor and thoroughly understood, Cyrillus with his, is cleared, and
Nestorius with his party is banished to Oasis a sandy Habitation, where, like
another Cain, roving here and there, and blaspheming, at length his tongue
being consumed and eaten up by worms, he breathed out his last. 5. There are
two copies of this Council, the first observing 8. the second 13. Canons, which
are comprehended in the Anathema's of Cyrillus. 6. They are carpt at by
Theodoret, but by Cyrillus they are freed from objections. 7. The
Massilianites, termed also Euchites and Enthusiasts were condemned by this
Council, and thereby the integrity of the Nicene Creed confirmed. vid.
Liberatum in Breviar. cap. 11.

7. Bythinia follows consisting of 630. Bishops, called by Martianus the
Emperor, who with his Wife Pulcheria was present at the same; against Eutiches
Abbot of Corstantinople, and Dioscorus of Alexandria his Champion, and it
condemded the suppositions acts of the Council held at Ephesus. 2. They
affirmed one only nature to be in Christ, after his Incarnation, to wit, his
divine Nature. 3. Concerning the President of this Council, excepting the
Emperor, and Judges Moderatours, (who are not named) there is no certainty. By
favoring parties between Leo the first of Rome, and Anatholius Patriarch of
Constantinople, matters were for the most part transacted. 4. The actions
according to Caranza, (which others call Sessions) are numbered 16. to which are
added 29 Canons. 5. These the Romans by no means approved, (for nothing can
withstand their ambition, as if the whole world was created for their service)
for they were ratified by the Greeks after the departure of the Ambassadors of
Leo of Paschasinus, a Lily betan of Lucentius an Asculan, etc. Neither will
they bear with that Canon of the equality of privileges, for the Imperial seat
is challenged by the Constantinopolitans as well as by the Romans, wherefore the
Rome Lion roars, and his Whelps gnash their teeth, as if the principal scope of
the Council, was rather the sincerity of Supremacy, than of Doctrine. Hence the
Romans approve only what pleases them, and abrogate what they dislike, and
endeavor by their subtilities to bring it to pass, that all may fall down and
adore the Beast. 6. They received Dioscorus into favor, before justly
discharged, yet almost a Saint in the esteem of the Africans and Abyssenes. 7.
The recantation of Theodoret, Bishop of Cyrus, was approved, (who to favor
Nestorius, had opposed the Anathema of Cyrillus of Alexandria) and he restored
to his place, who afterward for his Orthodox writings well deserved of the
Church.

8. Justinian had 165 Bishops, Menes being President, or rather his successor,
Eutychius, Patriarch of Constantinople. But Pope Vigilius who came to
Constantinople to summon the Emperor, yet would not be present at the Council,
least a seeming yielding to Eutychius might be prejudicial to his supremacy. 2.
The Emperor endeavored to reconcile the Eutychians, and the Orthodox for the
public trenquillity, and therefore would have revoaked the Articles concerning
the condemning of Theodorus of Mopsuestia, and of an Epistle of Iba to Maris a
Persian, and of Theodoret against Cyrillus that was anathematized. But 3. The
Western Christians with Pope Vigilius constantly opposed it, and confirming not
only the decrees anathematizing those Heretics with their Heresies of the
three preceding Counsels, but also of Chalcedon. 4. The errors of Origin
also expunged, which either denied the Divinity of Christ, or the Resurrection
of the Bodies, or affirmed the restitution of Reprobates and Devils, (whom the
Socinians to this day free from Hell.) 5. Also Peter of Antioch, who pleaded
for the Crucifix to be added to the hymn of the Trinity, and Amhimus of
Constantinople, who, together with the Empress Theodora and others, strongly
favored Eutyches party, with others, were comprehended under the same censure.
6. There are extant eight Collations of this Council, and fourteen Canons or
Anathema's. 7. Here we meet with (worth our reading) a monitory Epistle of Pope
Felix to Peter of Antioch, and explication of the Doctrine according (as
Carranza terms it) to the exposition of Gregory of New-Cesaria. Consult
concerning this Synod. Zonar. in vit. Justiniani. Niceph. l. 17. c. 27. Gregor.
l. 1. Ep. 24. Evag. l. 4. d. 34. Liberat. in Breviar. c. 23. and 24. who should
be read with caution, according to the admonition of Bellarmine de Eccles. l.
1. c. 5. because it does not please the Roman Palate.

9. Constantine Pogonatus, Pope Agatho procuring it by his Legates. 2. In this
were convened 150 Bishops, (they who count 279 or 289 reckon the absent Romans
and others consenting thereto) here the Emperor himself was President, and not
the person deputed by the Pope. 3. Here were condemned the Monothelites,
Sergius, Cyrus, Pyrrhus, Peter, Paul, Theodorus, together with Pope Honorius;
who in the defense of Eutychianism pleaded that there was one only will in
Christ. For the proof of this Macarius their chief Champion, brought
suppositious Copies of some Books either by diminishing from them, or adding to
them. And the doting old man Polychronius ridiculously endeavored to confirm
his Heresy by raising one from the dead. 4. It was finished by 18 Actions, in
which is delivered a clear narration of the whole proceedings of the Synod,
where the Epistles of Pope Agatho about the third action, and of Sophro the
Patriarch concerning the eleventh are most worthy to be read. 5. The 102 Canons
which are commonly charged upon this Council, were not ratified by it, but were
added by the Fathers 227 years afterward, about the 27th of Justinian the
second in the Trullo, that is, a vaulted Cloister of the Emperial Palace, and
from thence they were called Trullians. Nor were they at all approved by the
Romans, because they condemned Pope Honorius, and communicated to the Patriarch
of Constantinople privileges equal with the Pope. Nevertheless, his Holiness
the Pope of Rome, with the Emperor, and 227 Fathers, subscribed unto them as
it is mentioned in the last Canon, and others recite out of Joverius. 6.
Notwithstanding the latter Papists, that they might the better derogate from
the credit of all these, referred the Canon under the title of (...) and
quinisext to a supplement of this and the sixth Synod, which were destitute of
Canons; therefore the Latins little esteemed them, because they proceeded from
the Greeks after their departure. 7. This Council confirmed the Canons, not
only of general but also of particular foregoing Synods, as of Antioch,
Laodicea, and others. Moreover it added what were to be approved in the
Orthodox writings of the Fathers as is manifest in the second Canon of this
Council. vid. Paul. Diacon. in vit. Constant. 4. Adon Viennens. Bed. and others
with Joverius the Champion of this Council, by whose means the universal Synod
Class. 12. p. 69. answered six objections of the contrary party.

10. Constantine wholly restored the Images and Statutes of Irene, together
with the relics formerly broken in pieces by Leo Isaurus, his Grandfather,
and Constantine Copronymus, his great-Grand-Father, the business being chiefly
promoted by Gregory the second and the third, together with Adrian the first,
and Tarasius Patriarch of Constaentinople. 2. From this Imaginary dissension,
the Popes took occasion to withdraw the Western Christians from their due and
sworn allegiance to the Grecian Emperors, and to translate the Western Empire
from the Greeks to the Franks. 3. There met at this Council 350 Bishops, who
with Tarasius the President by seven Actions, and 22 Canons condemned Image
breakers for Heretics. Whose Arguments Calvin repeats, and wisely answers
them, Inst. l. 1. c. 11.. 14. But Germanus confirms them, together with John of
Damascus, whose hand being cut off for the defense of Images they report to be
restored by the Image of the Blessed Virgin: as also the miracles wrought by
the blood of the wounded Crucifix, among the Berithians, to the conversion of
those who maliciously wounded it. 4. Pesides the large disputation annexed to
the sixth action between Gregory and Epiphanius concerning Images and their
worship, and hear and there by the By something conrerning the Corporeity of
Angels, and making unwritten traditions equal with the Scripture, and of
adoring and adorning Images, which the latter do not approve. This was worthy
commendation, that they conclude the Acts of the six preceding Councels should
be ratified and received. 5. In the mean while they attribute Latria to God
alone, against Hales, Aquinas, Bonaventure, and their followers, who judge the
same respect to be given to the Image, and the thing which it represents, to
wit, to the Images of Christ Latria, of the Blessed Virgin Hyperdulia, of
Saints Dulia. 6. Bellarmine and Baronius imagine that this Synod was condemned
by the Fathers at the Council of Franckofourt, under Charles the Great, but
Binnius, Surius and others, as it is in Longus p. 632. strongly withstand the
same. 7. Not long since Albertus Pighius accounted this Synod with the former
as adulterate, whom Turrianus the jesuit endeavors to refute, how well let
the Readers judge. This distick is attributed to this Council. Id Deus est quod
Imago docet, sed non Deus ipse;
Hanc videas, sed mente colas, quod cernis in ipsa.
A God the Image represents,
But is no God in kind;
That Is the eyes object, what it shows
The object of the mind.
Binias mentions two copies of this, one Greek and Latin, the other Latin, to
which you may have recourse at leisure.

INQUIRIES.
3. Whether 1. Any thing concerning the first Nicene Council, the President
convening, the number of the persons convened, and of the Canons, the matters
transacted and determined in it be certainly known by any incorrupt and
Authentic edition? 2. The Canons of the first Council held at Constantinople
be deservedly rejected by the Romans? 3. The Nicene Creed was compiled by
Gregory Nazienzen, and Benedictus the seventh did well afterward by publishing
it with this addition [and from the Son?] 4. The Canons of the Council held at
Chalcedon be rightly disallowed by the Papists? 5. Origin deserved the great
anathema from the Council at Constantinople? 6. Pope Honorius was justly
condemned for a Monothelite by the third Council at Constantinople? 7. It is
sufficiently manifest that the second Nicene Council was rejected by the
Council held at Francfourt? Bell. A. Bin. N.


CAP. V. Of the Latin Ecumenical Councels.
SECT. II.
1. THe Latin and Western Councels run parallel with the Greek and Eastern.

2. Namely 1. At ARIMINUM. 2. The LATERANE. 3. At LIONS. 4. At VIENNA. 5. The
FLORENTINE. 6. The LATERANE the 5th. 7. At TRENT.


3. ARIMINUM is famous for two Councels, Vid. Long, p. 266.
craftily called by the Arians under the notion of the Council held at
Arminium, that this false one might extinguish the true one. 2. Here were
convened 400. Bishops; who was President is uncertain. Constantius the
Emperor, an Arian made an offer to undergo the charges, but the Bishops
rejected it, who regarded more a victory over the Heretics then the Popes
maintenance, who at the same time called another council at Seleucia in
Izauria, that by any means they might disanul the transactions at Ariminum. 3.
But the greater part, and the more worthy of the Fathers of this Synod did
determine. 1. The Nicene Creed punctually to be observed, and the Sons
Equality with the Father in Essence to be asserted. 2. The decrees of the Synod
at Sirmium to be rejected, 3. Vrsacius and Valence with the Arians their
followers to be excommunicated. 4. Who a little before being accused before
Pope Julius, had renounced Arianism, but afterward returned as Dogs unto
their vomit. 5. Thus ejected, they flatter the Emperor too much already,
infected with their feigned services, so that a Council being called in Nica
in Tracia, they framed a form of Belief cunningly effected according to their
own tenants under the title of the Nicene Confession, that by an equivocal
term, the less wary might be deceived. 6. Moreover they proceeded so far, as
to compel the opposite Bishops to their Oopinion, and to force Liberius, Pope
of Rome to their party, so that he subscribed to the condemnation of
Athanasius; whom how Bellarmine would clear, see de Pontif. Romans l. 4. c. 9.7.
Here may be observed the sophistical pretense of the Heretics, who would
remove the word consubstantiality from the Creed, as a word to which the
Scripture is a stranger, and exceeding vulgar capacity, that by such a
stratagem they might overthrow the Nicene Creed. Wherefore 7. They at Ariminum
discharging their Anathemaes against the Arians confirmed it: Which according
to Longus Bellarmine observed not, seeing he allowed only one Synod at
Ariminum, and that the false one: but it appears, otherwise in Athanasius of
Synods. Ambros. Epist. 32. And Baronius himself An. 359. N. 49. and Sq. could
inform as much.

4. Popish dissentions than the Doctrine and discipline of the Church, the
first under Henry the fifth, and Calixtus the second. It had 300 (or according
to Bellarmine 900) Bishops, and 22. Canons. 2. Burdinus the Antipope in this
was laid aside. 3. The Vestures with the Ring and Staff were taken from the
Emperor, and given to the Pope. 4. The Pope absolved the Emperor, and gave
him power of electing German Bishops. 5. There were appointed Crosses for the
Saracen War. That by the means thereof. 6. Pardon of sins might be granted to
them, that undertook that War and their Families. This is not mentioned in
Joverius and Caranza and Bellarmine himself confesses it is not extant: so
diligent were the Papists in searching into the secrets of General Councels.
The II. Lotharius the Emperor and Innocentius the second increased to about
2000 Bishops. 2. It gave out 30 Canons, lately published by Gratian from the
Vatican Library: which Bellarmine rejects. 3. It discharged Peter usurping the
Roman Sea after Leo, under the name of Anacletus the second. 4. It branded for
Heretics Peter of Bruis, and Arnaldus of Brixia, the Disciple of Peter
Abuillard, rejecting Pedobaptisme, Church buildings, and the adoration of the
Cross. 5. It proclaimed those lay Persons to be Sacrilegious, and incur the
danger of Eternal damnation, who receive Tithes. 6. It forbad tourneaments and
Titles, whereby men endangered their lives. And 7. It deprived Usurers of the
Charge of Christian burial, and cursed them to Hell. The III. under Frederick
the first and Alexander the third, by a meeting of 300 Bishops, made up the
difference between this Alexander, and one Octavianus, and his successors
Gindon and John a German taking up the quarrel with him; which dissentions
divided Europe into parties. 2. The Albigenses under the name of Cathari
Publicans, and Paterni taking their rise from the Waldenses were here
condemned. 3. Neither did Lombard the Master of the sentences here escape the
ferula, who affirmed that Christ according to his Manhood was nothing, but was
delivered up to the Bishop of Seno to be chastised. 4. The ordinations made by
the Schismatiques were wholly abrogated. 5. Private Oratories and Priests were
appointed for those which had the Leprosy. 6. The manner of visitation is
prescribed for the meeting of Archbishops, Bishops and Deacons, are not to
exercise Episcopal Jurisdiction. 7.27 Canons are supposed to be made by this
Council no where distinctly to be had, yet they are collected and commended by
Math. Parisiensis. The IV under Frederick the second, and Innocentius the
third, with 400 Bishops, and 80 other Fathers, yea says Bellarmine with 1283
Fathers, whereof 673 were Bishops attempted greater matters. 2. It rejected the
book of Joachimus the Abbot against P. Lombard; it condemned 20 Follies of
Almaricus, especially his denial of Transubstantiation. 3. It established
Transubstantiation, a Popish absolution of subjects from the bond of
alleigeance toward superiors, and auricular Confession. 4. It exacted an Oath
from secular Magistrates to expel Heretics, nominated by the Pope. 5. It
encouraged with indulgences, and promises those that went with Crosses for the
recovering of the Holy Land under Godfry of Bulloigne. 6. It denied plurallity
of Benefices, and sale of Relics. 7. There are extant of this 69 or 70
Chapters briefly contracted by Longus, who sends the Reader to larger Volumes.

5. Frederick the second, and Innocentius the fourth. 2. In this the
magnanimous and pious Emperor well deserved of the Christian Church against
the Infidels, and after the fourth excommunication at least was deposed by the
Pope from his own power and authority, and a prohibition made, that not any
should name him Emperor. 3. Being deposed, heroically he defends his right
with his Gibilines against the Guelphes of the Popish party. 4. Here was
expected no President but the Pope, who under a pretense of recovering the Holy
Land, drew 140 Bishops and Abbots to his side, that by the fifths of the Church
rights they might redeem the East, whilst the West rather needed a freedom from
the Popish Tyranny. 5. Where the Scarlet Hat is designed for the Cardinals, and
among so many bloody cruelties by this Antichristian impiety, prevailing for
above the space of 200 years, new feasts are instituted for the cannonizing of
Popish Saints. 6. The Dominicans, Franciscans, Carmelites, and Augustinians,
especially encouraged by the Pope, do not weaken, but rather enlarge and widen
the difference. 7. The seventeen institutions which are attributed to this
Council, are rather Political and Polemical, than Ecclesiastical; and according
to Bellarmines direction, are to be found in the sixth of the Decretals. The
acts are mentioned by Abbas Stadiensis, and Thrimerius in his Chronicles,
Palmerius, Platina, Onuphrius, and others. II. Rodolphus the first at Haspurg,
procured by Gregory the tenth, famous for at least 700 Bishops. 2. Here was
present Michael Paleologus to the Greek Emperor; who compelled by necessity,
brought in his Greeks to subscribe the thirteenth time with the Latins to the
procession of the Holy Ghost from the Father and the Son; of which returning to
their home, after their manner, they recanted; so little availed a forced
assent in sacred matters. 3. Aquinas sent for to this Council, dies in the way,
and Bonaventure, their created Cardinal, having spent his utmost endeavors
against the Greeks, breathed his last. 4. The Pope for a Subsidy in behalf of
the Holy Land, requires the tenth of all Ecclesiastical Rights, for the space
of six years, which carefully collected, were not an hairs profit to the
Eastern Christians under oppression. 4. Here was ordered the bowing at the name
of Jesus. 6. Of this there are 31 Constitutions, which may rather be styled the
Popes pleasure, than the Councels Determinations. 7. They are omitted by the
Summulists, and are to be found in the sixth of the Decretals.

6. Henry the seventh, noted for 300 Bishops and upwards. In this 1. Boniface
the eighth, persuading Philip the fair to blot him out of the Tables, is freed
from calumnies cast upon him. 2. The Jerusalem expedition is more strongly
urged, the Templars being removed out of the way for the murdering of the
Abissins Ambassador, Intenin. Hist. (...). 3. Tit. 11. c. 3.
and other impieties and Heresis. Trithemius hits the mark, the Templars were
very rich, a sufficient pretense for Heresy and their expulsion. 3. The Clergy
are permitted to take an Oath of Allegiance, not of subjection to Lay
Magistrates, Peter John, the Dulcimists, the Fraticelli, the Begwards, and
Begwins, together with the Lolards, are condemned. Peter John, for that he
denied the soul to be the form of man, harsh dealing, that this should be
accounted Heresy; the others also (though by no means to be born) had Fictions
laid to their charge. Page 851.
6. In the sentence of Clement against the Templars, mentioned by Longus, the
Pope challenges not to himself the power and right of Defining, but the way of
providing or Ordaining, that none for the future should enter into that Order,
unless they yielded the goods of the ejected Templars up to the disposal of
the Apostolical See. 6. The Constitutions of this Council under the name of
Clementine, are extant in 5. Books for a Supplement to the Canon Law. 7. In
which is that famous decree of constituting Professors to be maintained by a
competent Stipend at the Court of Rome, at the Uniuersities of Paris, Oxford,
Bononia, and Salamanca, for the instructing in the Hebrew, Arabic, and Caldie
Languages, that by that means the Jews and Mahumetans might the more easily be
converted to the Faith. Clement. l. 5. Tit. 1. Gag. l. 7.

7. Ferraria, under Albertus Emperor, and Eugenius the fourth; but by reason
of the raging pestilence, was translated to Florence, and there ended. 2. There
were convened in this 141 Bishops, the Pope himself president, who deposed the
Council of Basil at the same time by the Germans, by this notable and very
subtle diversion, was freed from those rigid censurers. 3. There were present
at this Council John Paleologus, with the Patriarch Joseph, and the Greek
Doctors. 4. In it were debated Articles concerning 1. The Holy Ghost's
proceeding. 2. The addition to the Nicene Greed [and from the Son.] 3.
Purgatory. 4. The power of suffrages and Sacrifice for the dead. 5.
Transubstantiation. 6. The administering unleavened bread in the Eucharist. 7.
But especially concerning the Popes supremacy, to all which the Greeks are said
to have consented with the Latins, howsoever returned home they quickly fell
off. 4. Such was the Popish piety and prudence, that the Emperor himself with
his, must in their seals give place to his Holiness and the Cardinalis. 5.
Joseph the Patriarch, no disease foregoing, suddenly after subscription
expired, yet a scrole is found in his hands, which testified a full consent to
the Latins. 6. This Council had twenty five Sessions, sixteen at Ferraria, the
other nine at Florence, in which they easily overcame the Greeks, it had been
wished that sincerity had more, and covetousness, pride, and lofty ambition had
less prevailed. 7. The institution of the Armenians, which is added to this
Council at Caranza and Longus, is omitted by others, and it was only a Popish
fiction after the Council was ended, as appears by conferring times.

8. Pisa, Begun under Julius the 2. E^ded under Leo the 10. 1515.
were some Cardinals met against the perjured Pope. 1. There were convened in
it 114 Bishops, under Maximillian the first Emperor, and Pope Julius the
second President. 2. It had 12 Sessions, five of which were under Julius, the
other seven were finished by Leo the tenth, after his death exalted to the Popes
Chair. 3. To the ninth Session are so many Canons annexed for the reformation
(as is pretended) of the Court of Rome, but they were to little purpose, nor
were they more valued then the censurers of the whole Council, which Suarez
Ca^etan, and Navarius profess to be rejected. 4. The pragmatical decree, made
at the Council of Basil in defense of Ecclesiastical liberty against Popish
usurpings, is here discussed and exploded. 5. Mountains of Piety are here also
commodiously raised, from whence as from a public Treasury, the poor
indigent artificers and Virgins, otherwise without dowry, might seek for
succor. 6. The immortality of the soul is moreover defended, concerning which
many at that time doubted, others wantonly disputed it, or divilishly denied
it. Wherefore the chief in the Universities are enjoined to confirm the
Orthodox doctrine about these Articles, especially against the prevailing
Atheisms of some weak Philosophers. 7. Nor is liberty permitted to those that
preach to wrest the Scripture at pleasure for the spreading of strange
opinions, but they must keep themselves (as much as may be) within the bounds
prefixed by their Ancestors. By which means something is added concerning the
impression of Books, least any one, without the approbation of Learned men,
should impose upon the world what they list.

9. The Council of TRENT under Charles the fifth and Ferdinand the tenth. Faul
the third, Julius the third, and Pius the fourth, did make great stir for 18
years together. 2. After many turnings concerning 1. The Scripture. 2. Original
sin. 3. Justification. 4. The Sacraments in General. 5. Baptism. 6. The
removing of the Council. 7. When some decrees of Reformation were interposed in
10 Sessions, as it seemed good, the Fathers assented, thunderings of Anathemaes
being added. 3. Julius the third reduced the whole pack from the Haven of
Bononia to the Channel of. Trent. Where concerning. 1. The Eucharist. 2.
Repentance And 3. Extreme Unction, some grains of Reformation being cast in by
the same method in other Sessions the matter is ended. 4. Pius the fourth
(these two Champions being removed out of the way) at length enters the Scene,
and concerning 1. Communion of Lay Persons under one kind. 2. The Sacrifice of
Mass. 3. The Sacrament of order. 4. Matrimony. 5. Purgatory, Worshipping of
Relics, Invocation of Saints, and of images. 6. Indulgencies, the Choice of
meats, Fastings, and Feastings. 7. Of an Index of books, abreviaries and a
Missal, in the last 9 Sessions he brings it to the expected end. 5. In these 25
Sessions the Popes by their deputies were Presidents. Here are granted safe
convoyes to three Protestants, that they might have a free and safe address to
the Council, to propound the reasons of their dissent, but with this craft, to
be instructed by them as Dictators and Masters, not to obtain the reformation
of any thing. 6. Secular Princes expect and press by their Orators communion
under both kinds, at length they transmit it to the Popes Judgment, to whom
also is referred the purging of the vulgar Edition, the Catechism, Breviarie,
and Missal, and other trash, as it seems good to this infallibility: In the
mean while 21 abuses observed by the sworn Delegates of Paul the third, and
resated to the Pope are slightly past by, and corrected with silence. 7. This
Council, cried up by so many Acclamations, and so solemnly confirmed by the
seal of the Fisher, the French admitted not, nor did the more learned Papists
much value it. Some did reject it as Kemnitius, Gentiletus, and Calvin some
part. P. Suavius Venetus published the story thereof; its subtleties a Frenchman
discovered, rendered in English by D. L. Speeches made therein are extant in one
volume, by which it may appear, that not for the composing of differences, but
for the imposing on Christians, so many learned Papists were hired and seduced
in this last Ecumenical Council, so much approved by them.

INQUIRIES.
Whether 1. The first Council held at Arminum, may worthily be accounted an
Ecumenical approved Council? Aff. Long. Sum. Consil. p. 266. 2. The Decrees of
the fourth Laterane Council, which are extant, be of doubtful credit? Aff.
Widrington Rejoinder, p. 368. 3. The Greeks in the second Council held at
Lions, as afterward in the Florentine Council, did by force rather then freely
and according to their opinion, subscribe to the Latin Decrees? 4. The
Clementine Constitutions of the Council held at Vienna may undoubtedly be
accounted Canon Law? 5. The instruction of the Armenians is to be reckoned
among the acts of the Florentine Council? 6. The pragmatical Decree was
Lawfully abrogated by the 5th Laterane Council? 7. The Council of Trent be a
sacred delusion of Christianity and Christian Princes?


CHAP. VI. Of Controverted Councels.
1. COntroverted Councels are such as Bellarmine has digested in a peculiar
classis partly approved, partly rejected. If this distinction may be admitted
among books, why may not the Turks Alcaron find admittance under the same title
among Christian Calenders? Hence truly it is manifest, that a Council is
nothing else but a device of the Pope, whereby he admits and rejects what
pleases him: which he makes use of, not for the Churches benefit, but under the
color and pretense of Religion, for the establishing of the Roman See: In the
mean while we may see how the footsteps of the Priests may be traced.

2. Therefore these are reckoned for Controverted Councels 1. At CONS
TANTINOPLE the 4th. 2. Bell. de Ecclesia. l. 1. c. 7.
At SARDIS 3. At SYRMINA 4. At QUINISEXT 5. At FRANCOFURT 6. At CONSTANCE 7. At
BASIL.


3. Basilius the murderer of Greek Emperors, and Adrian the second usurping
the Roman See, notwithstanding the opposition of the Roman Emperor. It
consisted of 102 Bishops. 2. The chief business of this was to discharge
Photius the most learned Patriarch of the Greeks (who left to posterity a book
concerning folly) because he had touched the Popish Tyranny with his sharp
writings, and was an enemy to Images, and without the canonical assent had
possessed the Chair due to Ignatius who was more pliable to the Roman Commands;
whatsoever the matter was, he is cited, contumilies are cast upon him, he is
ejected, and by an injunction of Repentance, all his counselors and followers
are sufficiently punished according to the Roman Ambassadors pleasure. 3. To
9. Actions in which these things were transacted there are added 27 Canons, in
which besides the foolish rage against the Photians and the honor bestowed on
Images, that is to be commended of the sixth Canon, which forbids Priestly
vestments to be used in scenical plays though for sports sake. 4. The
Bulgarians newly converted to the Faith enquire at this Council whether they
should address themselves to the Greek or the Roman Church, but concerning
what is to be done, the Romans sparingly declare their mind, not silently
passing over the increase of the Roman greatness. 5. This is manifest that the
Ambassadors relying upon the protection of Adrian the usurping Emperor, did so
superciliously behave themselves toward Photius and the Greek Bishops, that
returning home to their Lord they were assaulted by the Sclavonians, who
deprived them of all their goods, and took from them the authentical copy of
the Council which contained the handwriting of the Emperor and all those that
consented, for the relics of this which. 6. Remain, we are beholding to
Anastatius the Library keeper, who was present at the transactions and Decrees,
and what he saw he noted and transmitted to Posterity. For the clearing of
which Andr. Schottus the Jesuit in Praef. Bibl. Photii. has contributed much
light. 7. Nevertheless the Greeks reject this Synod, moreover according to
Bellarmine, all things are here laid down, as suppositions and uncertain, since
there are those who affirm the same Photius, who as we read was deposed by this
Adrian, to have been restored by John the eight, that is Pope Joan his
successor, whence it appears, that neither the Greeks agree with the Romans,
nor the Romans among themselves about the acts and authority of this Synod.

4. Constantius and Pope Julius. 2. In it are numbered 376 Bishops, of which the
300 Western confirmed the Nicene Creed, to this end, that Athanasius, who was
banished Rome for the space of three years, should be restored to his place at
Alexandria, but the other 76 Arians meeting at Philippolis confirmed Arianisme
under the title of the Council of Sardis. 3. No President is here mentioned but
Hosius of Corduba, who without the Popes Ambassadors with Gaudentius and other
Godly Bishops ratified 21 Canons. 4. It is commonly called an appendix to the
first Nicene Council. In whose Canons not a word of the Popes supremacy or of
appeals to him from remote Churches (as Longus would have it out of Prolix
Baronius) 5 Augustine and those who are deceived by the equivocation, do not
reject this Council, but that held under the name of this at Philippolis by the
Arians. 6. It is reported there was one Orthodox Arius present at this Council,
converted (as supposed) by Athanasius at Laodicea. 7. Binius largely describes
the History of this Synod out of Socrates, Sozomen, and the Tripartite History,
in which those three Canons the 3, 4, and 5, which approve of appeals to the
Pope of Rome, do not determine them as necessary but as Arbitrary, neither do
they oblige the Bishops Universally, but only the subjects of that
Patriarchship.

5. Syrmia so trembled and groaned under the Arian tyranny of Constantius, that
the supremacy and Presidentship of Pope Liberius dared not to appear. 2. There
were present besides Eastern 300 Western Bishops and upwards for the hearing
and deciding the cause of Photinus, who complained to the Emperor that he was
unjustly condemned at the Synod of Sardis. What had he committed? Namely he
preached that Christ was only mere man, and inferior to his Mother, which is
the opinion of the Socinians. 3. Marcus Arethusius composed a confession in
Greek against this weak Heresy so subtily, that Hilary and Liberius doubted
not but to approve thereof, because he declared not in words the Herefie he
entertained in his hearr; perhaps he conspired with Vrsacius and Valence, who
effected another in Latin, not only deficient in the word Consubstantiality,
but altogether opposing it. 4. It is miserable here to read, how Hosius well
near an hundred years old was compelled by whipping, after so many triumphs
over the enemies of the Homousians, to subscribe to Arianisme, yet he would not
condemn Athanasius, and before his death he cleared himself from his relaps by
a most devout Recantation. 5. The popish infallibility freed not Liberius from
the same error, although Bellarmine does wittily excuse him. De Romans Pontif.
l. 4. c. 9.
6. Of this Council (says Longus) there is nothing extant besides three Forms
of Belief, which are found in Binius, but he tells us there are extant 26
Anathemtes, which together with the Orthodox Confession Caranza has published,
of which Longus could not be ignorant. 7. This Synod is more largely handled by
Socrates l. 1. c. 24. and Sq. Sozomen. l. 4. c. 5, and 6. Epiph. Haeres. 7.

6. Balsamon) is counted by Bid and very many Latins an erroneous Synod. 2.
The Fathers who were convened in it under Justinian the second and Pope
Sergius, because the fifth and sixth preceding Synods commanded nothing
concerning manners and Ecclesiastical discipline, thought it very fit that that
defect should be supplied. And therefore they ratified 102 Canons in the Trullo
of the Imperial palace, which from thence are called Trullans. 3. The I atines
reject these, who are displeased that without their knowledge and consent, but
especially without full power and authority from the Pope, they should be
published. But that troubles them most, that in the 36 Canon, the Patriarch of
Constantinople is equalled to the Roman, and in the 13 Canon Matrimony is
granted to the Clergy, and other things which relish not with the Roman
palate. 4. In the mean while it is manifest, that Gregory the second and
Adrian, with the second Nicene Synod did make use of the Trullan Canon against
Image-breakers; and moreover, Gratian reports that this Synod was received by
those of Nicene did. 16. c. 5. but they say Gratian was mistaken, and that he
cited others, not to prove it Authentical in it self, but that it was so
esteemed by the adversaries. 5. Bellarmine by 5 Arguments contends, that these
Trullan Canons are of no force. de Pont. Romans l. 2. c. 18. because they are of
no general Council, and without the authority of the Pope; and particular
Synods do not oblige universally those that are absent as present. It is not to
be expected therefore that the Protestands should be obliged to the Tridentine
decrees. 6. p. 989.
Longus adds out of Anastasius the Library keeper, that neither they were
received by the other Patriarchs, but accounted as unworthy to be transcribed
and laid up in the Archives, it is a wonder therefore by whose means they came
to us; wherefore they are rather to be esteemed as Canons from their agreements
with the Scriptures, than otherwise to be judged by negligent censurers. 7. But
how Orthodox these Trullan Fathers, and their Canons were, appears by the
second Canon in which they declare a manifest agreement with the preceding
Synods and Fathers, with whom there can be no just occasion to contend.

7. Ecumenical or Provincial, the latter writers will have it Provincial
because it seems to be an enemy to Images. The more Ancient acknowledge it to
be Ecumenical, because it was called by Charles the Great, and Adrian the
first, and at least 300 Bishops. 2. The reason of its call was, because
Elipardus Archbishop of Toledo and Felix Vrgelitanus Bishop of Aurelia
preached that Christ was only the Adopted Son of God. Which Aquinas refutes,
3. part q. 23. art. 4. 3. This Heresy was chiefly opposed by Paulinus in a
Sacred Collection read before the Emperor and approved by the Fathers. 4. But
Binius with Longus and others Contend, that this Synod confirmed the opinion of
the second Nicene Council concerning the adoration of Images, which opinion
(says Bellarmine) I could wish to be true, but I suspect to be false, with
whom agrees Baronius) whence he concludes that whatsoever this Council
determined is not much to be valued; because without doubt the second Nicene
Council is to be preferred before it. 5. There are extant concerning the
transactions of this Synod, some books of Charles which as Bellarmine affirms
are stuffed with many falsities. Wherefore he declares those books to be
neither of Charles nor of any else to whom any Credit might be given, but to be
as it were another Melchizedech, without Father, without Mother, without
Geneology, an Anonimus breaking forth into the light, which are certain Toakens
of deceit. 6. Yet manifest it is that Adrian the Pope confutes him, but affirms
it not to be the writing of Charles, but an heretical book sent to the Pope by
Charles to be answered. 7. That book of Adrian is extant in the third Tome of
Councels, but by this means it happened that the complete acts and decrees of
this Council might not see the light.

8. Sigismund and John the 23. having about 1000 Bishops and Doctors for the
removing of Popish schisms out of the Western parts. 2. Since after Gregory the
11. who removed the Roman See from Avignion, (where it had continued for the
space of seventy years) some Cardinals exalted Vrbane the sixth, who continued
at Rome, to the Popes Chair, others Clement the sixth, who removed it again to
Avignion, the Nations are divided into parties, our English with the French and
Spaniard adhere to Clement; Vrbane dying at Rome, Boniface the ninth supplies
his place, but Argalus a certain Venetian Tanner succeeds him under the title
of Gregory the 12, Clement also removed out of the way, had for his successor
Peter de Luna a Spaniard, under the name of Benedictus the 13. 3. For the
extinguishing of these combustions the Cardinals and Bishops meet at Pisa, and
those Schismatics being discharged, they exalt one of Creet under the title of
Alexander the 5 unto the Papal dignity; but this Peter Philaretus of Creet
suddenly sickned (as is reported) by an intoxicated Glyster, and John the 23,
by an election of the Pisan Cardinals possessed his place who by the persuasion
of Sigismond called his Council at Constance, and was present thereat. 4. In
which he being accused of about 60 crimes, yields himself to the censure of the
Synod, from which afterward having changed his mind he fled in the Night; and
recanting, is deposed, and Martin the 5 by the Council is exalted to the Papal
dignity. Whence that happened to John, which falling from his Chariot before the
Gate of the City he presaged, exclaiming, in the name of all the Devils here I
lie. 5. There were forty five Sessions of this Council, in it are condemned
forty five Articles of John Wickliffe whose body moreover is ordered to be
taken out of the Sepulcher and burnt to ashes. That which is ascribed to him in
the sixth Article ( Deus debit obedire Diabolo should be read Deus dedit) as
Bernard of Lutzenburg has it. 6. Concerning the injuries and burning of John
Husse and Hierom of Prage (against the promised safe conduct of the Emperor)
there are large Tragedies. The Fathers conclude the Council to be above the
Pope, which savours not with the Modern Papists: And an engagement with an
Heretic not to be kept, which now they defend not, to the end that the
incendiaries may more secretly act their treacheries. But that is a strange
decree in the thirteenth Session, concerning the denying the Cup to Lay persons
notwithstanding the practice of our Savior and his Apostles. Hence the noble
Bohemians justly provoked, in an Epistle with 54 seals to it heroically
profess, that they lie in their teeth who lay Heresy to their Charge, as
being Hussites and that they are ready to defend the law of Christ with their
blood, wholly rejecting all humane statutes that contradict the same. And
Poggius of Florentineis witness of the admirable learning of Hierome of
Parage, Solomon Gesnerus.
which he delivered in a peculiar tract. 7. There accompanied this Council (as
one has it) 450 common women, 600 barbers, 320 jesters, etc. But good men
(says he) unspeakable for their ratity, all which notwithstanding without safe
conduct were free from burnings or other censures.

9. Sygismund the Emperor procuring it of Martin the fifth, and afterward of
Eugenius the fourth: in it Cardinal Julian of Arelatum was President, continued
almost the space of 18 years. 2. It had 45 Sessions, in which not only Bishops,
but other Learned men, which was not permitted in the foregoing Councels, had a
definitive sentence, the number of the persons voting is uncertain. 3. In it
Pope Eugenius the fourth is cited, and not appearing is deposed for his
contempt, and Amadeus Duke of Subaudia who lived an Hermites life in the
Mountains of Ripalia, by the Cardinals is exalted to the Popes Chair under the
name of Foelix the fifth. These three Truths were confirmed. 1. That the
Council is above the Pope and all others. 2. That the Pope cannot dissolve
prolong or remove it being lawfully called. 3. And he that denies these things
is an Heretic. 4. Nevertheless Eugenius, these things being thus transacted,
constitutes an Anti-Synod at Ferraria, which afterward removed to Florence,
where he acted with the Greeks, the Emperor being present, and effected many
things which are completed in the Council of Florence They of Basil in the
mean while confirm the pragmatical Decree, they condemned popish Bastardy,
suppressed Concubines, ordered how the Jews might be brought to Christianity.
Declared the blessed Virgin to be free from the contagion of every sin,
indulged to the Lay Bohemians the use of the Cup in the Eucharist, behold an
Alter, against an Altar -- Pares aquilas and pila minantia pilis. 6. At length
by reason of the raging pestilence, they at Basil betake themselves to Lausanua
where Fredrick the Emperor persuades Duke Amadeus to renounce the felicity of
Pope Felix, unto which for peace sake he willingly assented, so Eugenius being
reconciled, and Amadeus honored with a Cardinal's Cap, and dignity of being a
Legate, the Council ended. 7. Nothing of this was ratified and approved, but
some orders about Ecclesiastical benefices says Bellarmine, Leo the tenth, in
the eleaventh Session of the Laterane Council condemns it as Schismatical and
Seditious, howsoever we read it was often approved of by Nicolaus Eugenius.
Especially before the death of the Emperor Sygismund, Aeneas Sylvias, largely
describes it and commends it, who was present thereat, and afterward obtained
the Popedom under the title of Pius the 2d, but his opinion was changed with
his Dignity; our Fox in his Martyrologie relates it more plainly and fully, and
Bodlies Library at Oxford can show the undoubted Copy of this Council.

INQUIRIES.
Whether 1. The fourth Synod of Constantinople may be reckoned among the
Controverted Councels? 2. That of Sardis may be worthily esteemed an Appendix
to that of Nicene? 3. The Socinianisme of these times concerning the Holy
Trinity be not renewed Photinianisme? 4. The Quinisext or Trullan Synod may
deservedly be rejected as erroneous? 5. The Francofurt overthrowes the opinion
of the second Nicene? 6. Those of Constance and Basil were lawful and general
Synods? 7. The Popes and their Adherents agree among themselves concerning the
number and Authority of General Councels?


CHAP. VII. Of Rejected Councels.
1. SUch Councels pass under the name of Rejected Councels, which either
determine Heretical opinions, or raise up Scisms and troubles to the dispersing
of the Christian Flock.

2. Among which are noted above the rest, these 1. At ANTIOCH. 2. At MILLAINE.
3. At SELEUCIA. 4. At EPHESUS the second. 5. At CONSTANTINOPLE. 6. At PISA the
first. 7. At PISA the second.


3. Bellarmine reckons, Longus also names this, and mentions other Councels of
Antioch. 2. This is referred to the times of Constantius and Julius the first,
the banishment of Athanasius is sufficiently known, and his restoration by
Constantine the son of Constantine the great, which the Arians declare to be
unlawful, because the same authority must restore which did eject: The Matter
is referred to Pope Julius, he summons the Synod to appear at Rome. 3. But the
Eusebians chief of the Heretics, that they might avoid this, easily seduced
Constantius to be at the Consecration of the Magnificent Temple built by
Constantine the great at Antioch: where met about 90 Bishops, 30 of which being
Arians the favor and Authority of the Emperor, against the double Suffrages
of the Orthodox procured the condemning of restored Athanasius 4. In the room
of the deposed is placed by Eusebius a Nicomedian one Eusebius an Emyssen a
famous Champion of Arianisme, but not as yet entered into orders, he as the Poet
has it, A se tantaledes onus invidiamque removit.
By slighting honor envy he removed.
Therefore Gregory a Capadocian possesses the Chair, which some call George,
supposed to be the Saint so much honored by us; it is manifest that he was
quickly took out of the way, nor was it difficult to the triumphing Arian to
honor their Martyr in cannonizing him on horseback. 5. Baron. Long.
Gratianus and Caranza cite many things of this Synod as Orthodox, wherefore by
the late Writers they are condemned. 6. They did set forth a Form of Belief so
intermixed with truth and error, that he which is heedful least he be deceived,
in his greatest wariness can scarcely be safe, for by the omission of that
which might establish the truth, they weaken that which they undertake to
maintain. 7. The 25. Canons of it, which you have mentioned in Longus with some
observations, do rather concern the received discipline then the opinions of
the Church Socrat. l. 2. c. 5. Sozomen. l. 3. c. 5.

4. Constantine the Emperor, and Liberius the Pope. 2. In it were met about
300 Bishops, the Emperor himself was President, an utter enemy to the Orthodox
party. I (says the Emperor) am an accuser of Athanasius, in my name give
credit to them. 3. The Western Catholic Bishops who were present (for there
were few Eastern) promised to consent to the Arians if they would first
subscribe to the Nicene Creed, but Valence and Vrsacius the chief Leaders of
that Faction withstood them, relying on the Emperors Epistle which was read in
the Synod. 4. Then followed the degrading of the Bishops, the corrupt
Ecclesiastical determinations; so that you might style it rather a conspiracy
of impious persons than a convention of Christians. 5. This was effected
especially that they might allure Liberius Bishop of Rome either by gifts or
threatenings to their impieties who is reported (both his threatenings and gifts
being slighted) thus heroically to have answered the Emperor, who had judged
him to be banished to Thrace, and offered him the charge of his journey. Thou
have robbed the Churcher of the Earth, and now offerest to me condemned and
indigent an alms, go first and become a Christian thy self. 6. Felix a Deacon
placed in the room of Liberius mixed with the Arians, yet he always entirely
observed the Nicene Creed, which was a little displeasing to the Orthodox. 7.
Hosius of Corduba at that time well nigh an hundred years old escaped not the
stroke of his tyranny, Hilarious the Deacon by whipping is urged to subscribe,
others by banishments and riflings are forced to consent. Neither under

5. Constantius, did the persecution cease. 2. At that time were convened at
Ariminum (as Bellarmine will have it out of the Chronicles of Jerome.) 600
Bishops of which the Eastern Heterodox being overpowred both in number and
Arguments by the Orthodox, by the Emperors Command they remove this Council to
Isauria in Selucia. 3. But here the Acacians altogether reject
Consubstantiallity, the Semi-Arians admit it in their sense, still retaining
the leaven which corrupts the whole lump. 4. In this dissension the Semi-Arians
prevail; and determine, that the form of Faith composed at the dedication at
Antioch should be retained and subscribed unto, but they ejected the dissenting
Acacians or Arians from their places. 5. Thus condemned they betake themselves
to the Emperor, and so far prevail with him, that at another meeting called
at Constantinople they are wholly restored: here they frame a new Creed, in
which not only the terms of substance; but also of Hypostasis or subsistence
are excluded. 6. The Semi-Arians on the other side rejecting this are by force
banished from their places by the Acacians, Act. 22.10. Apud Hilar. l. 2. p. 44.
in the mean while the Catholics condemn Arius the Author of their Sect. Like
as the Pharisees and Saduces, assailing each other in the cause of B. Paul,
are overcome by their own dissentions. 7. Hilarie of Pictavia (whom they report
to be a Svbellian) together with the Western Catholics, will not start an
hairs breadth from the Nicene Creed the Emperor interposes this, that the
determination of no Council whatsoever shall have power, to which the Statutes
of this Council denies Power and liberty. He forced the Bishops to subscribe to
such a form of Belief brought from Ariminum to Constantinople, that by the same
command of the Emperor, one was the Western Profession of Faith, another the
Eastern. Consult with Ruffin. l. 10. c. 21. Socrat. l. 2. c. 31, 32. Athanas.
de Synod. Baron. An. 359. N. 61. and. Seq. Long. p. 270. August. Hieron. Basil.
apud Bell. de Council. l. 1. c. 6. and others.

6. Sozomen. c. 35 Hist. Tripart. l. 5. c. 34.
The occasion of the 2. Council of EPHESUS was Eutyches an Archimandrite of
Constantinople, who after Manes and Apollinaris denied the flesh of Christ to
be like ours, Flavianus Patriarch of Constantinople, and Eusebius Bishop of
Doril, and others their associates. He was so far from repenting that he
obtained from Theodosius who was very pliable, by the means of Chrysaphius the
Eunuch and ^udoxia the Empress, both seduced by his allurement, that the
Examination of a famous Synod might end the matter. 3. Therefore this at
Ephesus by the Emperors authority is called, there met 128 Bishops Dioscorus
of Alexandria being President, Leo is summoned from the West, and least he
should seem to be neglected, he sends three Legates; all being convened, all
things are transacted at Dioscorus his beck, who not more full of Eutychianisme
than of arrogance and tyranny, as little valued the letters and Ambassador of
Leo, as he had the condemnation of ^utiches by Eusebius of Doril. 4. At length
Putiches is absolved, and the reclaimers are forced to subscribe by
club-Arguments. Flavianus opposing is so furiously trodden upon (and among the
rest as some affirm by Dioscorus himself) that three days after he committed
his soul into the hands of God. 5. Ibas an Edyssen, Eusebius of Doril, and
Theodoret of Cyrus, with other very learned Bishops are discharged of their
places. The Popes Legates not without very great danger of their lives,
returned home. 6. Of which more than barbarous inhumanity an Acacian Bishop
complained to Dioscorus, afterward pleading the cause before the Calcedon
Fathers. They compelled and forced us, having suffered many evils, to subscribe
to a blank paper, and kept us gainsaying and opposing them in the Church
until the evening, and we being sick they permitted us not to rest, but sent
Soldiers to us with clubs and swords, and thus made us subscribe. 7. Whence
this is called by all the pious, the Synod of Thieves, in which Satan erected
his Throne, not long after to be dashed in pieces by the most famous Council of
Calcedon Liberat. in Breviar. c. 12. Evagr. l. 1. c. 9, 10, Niceph. l. 14. c.
47.

7. The Council of CONSTANTINOPLE, rejected is by some, accounted two, Bell. de
Cont. l. 1. c. 6.
which others contract into one, but the distinction is manifest, because the
first is said to be celebrated under the Father Leo Isaurus An. 730. The 2d by
Constantius Copronymus An. 755. 2. One in the mean while opposes the
worshipping of Images and Relics, upon which account both may be esteemed as
one, or at least united. 3. The first under Leo discovers intercession of
Saints to be imaginary, and the worshipping of Images mere Idolatry. Germanus
Patriarch of Constantinople, John Damascene, and others too much inclined to
Images are deprived of their dignities. 4. Gregory the third intercedes for
Images in a Roman Anti-Synod, in which he excommunicates the Eastern with the
mark of Heretical Image breakers, these things terrify not Constantine
Copronymus the son from declaring himself to be an Image-breaker. He gathered
together at Constantinople, 338 Bishops over whom he is President, and
persecutes the maintainers of Images. 6. Some receive this and the seventh as
Ecumenical, but the Romans so abhorred it, that for this Controversy about
Images they rebelled against the Greek Emperors their lawful Princes: Whence
afterward followed the Western and Eastern division, which opened such a gap
to the enemies of the Church, never to be made up. 7. The second Nicene Council
corrects the errors of this, but how strongly and divinely appears by its
decrees. Concerning these Synods, vid. Paul. Diac. l. 21.22. rerum Roman. and
Zonarum in annal.

8. Bellarmine is doubtful whether to reckon the first Council of PISA among
the rejected or approved, Bell. de council. l. 1. c. 8.
by some it is taken for a general Council, and defended in a three days
disputation by Laurentius Rodolphus of Florence, as is testified by Antonius,
Gerson Azorius and others. 6. There were present thereat 23 Cardinals, 3
Patriarchs, 300 Archbishops and Bishops, 28 Governors of Monasteries, and an
infinite number of Divines and Ambassadors of Princes. 3. The intolerable
differences between Benedict the 12. and Gregory the 13. well nigh making the
Popes Chair like double Parnassus, occasion this meeting of so many famous men,
concerning which something is before spoken in the Council of Constance. 4.
Both having been summoned, are deposed by the Council for contempt and perjury,
by its own authority places Alexander the 8th in Saint Peter's chair which
howsoever removed not the difference yet Alexander thus elected is reckoned in
the Catalogue of the Popes. 5. There were 23 Sessions of this Council, and its
Acts printed at Paris by the privilege of the most Christian King An. 1612.
are extant. 6. 3. Part. Tit. 22. c. 5. ^. 2 3
Antonius rejects this for a headless Council because called in a tumult by
the Cardinals without the Popes Authority. 7. ^ut remidies are to be applied to
extraordinary events, not which the Law affords, but which are ready at hand,
for how could they consult the head, which was distempered with a double
impostum: the Christian Princes had applied a cautrie, especially the Emperor,
but because they consented not with the Cardinals, the decrees are esteemed as
not nulled, because they wanted the Popes seal.

9. The second PISA was called by Maximilian the Emperor and Lewis the French
King against Pope Julius the second. 2. This Julius had bound himself by an
oath to celebrate a general Council within the space of two years after his
election to the Popedom, but secular troubles intervening, more regard is had
to policy than to his oath. He flinches, prolongs, and deludes those that
expect. 3. Therefore under the Protection of the Emperor and the King of
France, some more eminent Cardinals meet at Pisa, they summon the Pope to make
an appearance, and give an account of those things which shall be objected
against him. 4. He is so far from obeying, that he thunders his
Excommunication against them altogether with the King of France. The Emperor
himself scarcely escapes, but being become more mild for a time, he declined a
combustion. 5. The Pope calls a Laterane Anti-Synod at Rome, the Cardinals and
Bishops which favored his party meet, before whom he excuses his perjury,
cleares himself from objections, and dies. Leo the tenth succeed scontinues the
Council with great applause, ratifyed many decrees, as was related before in
the fifth Laterane Council among the Oecumenicall Synods. 6. The Pisan
Cardinals with theirs submit themselves, and after supplications are restored
to their former dignity. The Frenchman persists and coins money with this
inscription Perdam Babylona, I will destroy Babylon. 7. There are no decrees (I
know) of this Schismatic Council extant, it is rejected by the Pope,
especially for these reasons. 1. Because it was not called by the Pope. but
insolently against the Pope, by his subjects. 2. Because the time prefixed was
too short for the appearing of those that were called. 3. And the City of Pisa
Consumed and spoiled by the foregoing Wars was not a fit place for the
Council. 4. Because it was wholly denied and rejected by the following Laterane
Council. And truly the Pope howsoever perjured and wicked, was not to be
reprehended by his own; but to be called orderly by his Lord the Emperor and
other Christian Princes.

INQUIRIES.
Whether 1. The Council of Antioch may be esteemed rejected, because not
called by the Pope? 2 Constantius the Emperor at the Council of Millaine
could lawfully undertake the Presidentship, and be an accuser of Athanasius? 3.
The Statutes of any council without the confirmation of the Emperor be invalid
with his subjects? 4. The Synod of Ephesus may deservedly be called (...) or a
Synod of Thieves? 5. The Image-breakers under Leo and Copronymus may be rightly
esteemed as heretics 6. The Idolatrous Treachery of the Popes upholding
Images, did traitorously withdraw the Westernes from the Greek Emperor? 7 The
second Synod at Pisa might lawfully suspend Pope Julius the second from
Spirituals and Temporalls?


CAP. VIII. Of National Synods.
WE have spoken already of General Counsels, (in some manner so caled,)
National follows, which comprehends the Provincials of every Metropolitan or
Diocesian Bishop within their own bounds.

These 1. give place to general Counsels. 2. Nor do they oblige out of their
own prescribed limits. 3. Yet their decrees conformable to Scripture and
confirmed by general Councels are in force every where.

2. They are distributed into 1. ITALIAN. 2. SPANISH. 3. FRENCH. 4. GERMANE. 5.
EASTERN. 9. AFRICAN. 7. BRITAN.


3. Which cannot be severally handled in a compendium, for many of them are
either by peece-meales delivered by historians without Sessions of Canons, or
are strangly accommodated to the condition of those times or being obsolete are
become useless, therefore it is sufficient cursorily here and there to handle
those things which may be of some use unto us, and by a digression to speak to
some things which may make way for larger.

4. In ITALY we meet with 115 such Synods, as it were national, which go
under the name of Roman Councels those may be considered, which are multiplied
by Victor and others concerning the celebration of the Pascha; and those which
received penitent Apostates into Church communion, against the more then
Stoicall austerity of the Novations. Gelasius that is of more weighty moment,
Long. p. 413. Did. 15. c. Sancta Romana.
namely an Index Expurgatorius of Orthodox and Hetrodox books, composed at a
Synod of 70 Bishops, and brought the Canon Law by posterity, where we may read
of more things concerning the extirpation of the Legends of Infidels and
idiots, but nothing of the Popes supremacy which is added by the Moderns 4.
That Simcessan Council is not to be past by in silence celebrated by 300
Bishops in very troublesome times, Long. p. 160. Bell. de Romans Pontif. l. 4. c.
8.
in which is condemned Pope Marcellinus because he did Sacrifice to Idols,
neither was he excused from his error, because he did it in fear, and
afterward repented; these things may prevail with God for pardon, but not with
men to acknowledge the infallible condition of the Pope 5. John 23 for the
Coronation of Sigismond the Emperor. where an Owl boldly offering himself
with his iterated ominous aspect, brought a trouble and dissolution to the
whole business. Papia courageously excommunicated the Pope, who on the other
side had Excommunicated the Emperor and them; and that of Brixia without any
scruple removed Gregory the 7. commonly caled Hilderbrand, Long p. 734. Id. p.
739. Id. p. 741.
the most furious Champion of all the Popes from his Chair. 7. In the Melfitan
Synod, and others, there are many things concerning Ecclesiastical discipline
most worthy observation, laying aside some superstitious and Ambitious Synods
too much favoring of the corruptions of that age wherein they were called.

5. The SPANISH Councels are. 1 At Toledo 25, in which many things were piously
and prudently decreed, as chiefly that assertion of belief against the
Priscillianists. 2. The Elibertine, which ratified 81 wholesome Canons; the 36
forbad pictures in the Church. 3. That at Caesar Aug. also against the
Priscilianists, in which was ordered, that none should challenge to themselves
the title of Doctor, unless he was lawfully advanced unto it. 4. That at
Ilerda. 4. Canons whereof Gratianus cites, one of which is that nuptials are
not to be celebrated in Lent. 5. At Bragara the first and second, in which not
only the Manichees Mathematicians, and Priscilianists are deservedly
stigmatized, but also some things not inconsiderable are added for the
preserving of order and decency in the Church. 6. At Matiscona the first and
second, reforms the vices of the Clergy, and urges the paying of Tithes, and
the pious observation of hospitality, at this time too much esteemed. 7. That
at Hispalis against the Acephali which disallowed the consecration of a
Presbyter, by a Presbyter, and of Churches by Diosecian Bishops, these things
are more largely handled in Garsia Loaysa, who more diligently searched into
and collected the Spanish Counsels.

6. Nor is FRANCE to be esteemed as less fruitful in conventions. 1. Long.
433. Id. 643.
In which one of the 13 Parisian Counsels against sacrilegious persons, and
another distributed into 3 Books urging upon Princes, Bishops and Subjects
wholesome things, are of special moment. 2. At Arelate, the first in the case
of Cecilianus and Felix Bishop of Aptungis; the second against the Photinians,
Bonosians, and concerning discipline to be observed by the Clergy; The 3 which
declares the anathemes of Faustus of Rhegium, and the Confession of Lucidus,
above the rest are worthy consideration. 3. Seven Counsels at Aurelia have
many things concerning Ecclesiastical discipline that are not inconsiderable,
and that is observable in the first concerning rogations and Letanies to be
celebrared before the ascension of our Lord 4. Id. 429.
At Arausia the 2d wholely confutes the Pelagians and Semi-Pelagians out of the
writings of Augustine. 5. At Byturis, it confirms the Pragmaticall Sanction
against the Popish plots and contrivances. 6. Id. 562.
That at Cabellonum upholds the privileges of the sanctuary, and restores the
reverence of the Sabbath. 7. Id. 258.
That at Vaso commands gloria patri and Kyrie Eleyson, together with the
Trisagium to be inserted into the Liturgy Consult Jacob Germundus his
collection of the French Synods.

7. In the higher and lower GERMANY, besides 9. Synods at Colonia, these
Councels above the rest are observable 1. The Augustan concerning the
reformation of the Clergy. 2. The Bavarican concerning the Saboath and the Gods
of the Church. 3. That at Worms concerning a decorum to be observed in
Ecclesiastical matters, and the punishment of Wicked persons. 4. The Moguntine
the first concerning Ecclesiastical immunities, the 2d against Gotteschalcus:
and thhe 3d, in which prayers are enjoined in behalf of King Arnulphus and his
Wife, and also for the good estate of Christianity. 5. At Aquisgranum
concerning Ecclesiastical orders. Erfordian concerning festival days. 7. At
Dort against the Remonstrants, Socinians.

8. Under the EASTERN are comprehended the Grecian of Europe, and the
neighbor African; of which sort among the Grecian are numbered. Constantinople
33.2. The Synod at the oak in the case of Chrysostom and Photius. 3. The
Eastern against the Massillianites, who deceived the Church with their
subtleties. Ancyran concerning the receiving and rejecting those that fell
away. 5, Laodicea, against Angel-worship can. 35. and concerning the Canon of
the Scripture can. Gargra, concerning the religeous reformation of manners. 7.
The Tyrian, in which that great man Athenasius was troubled and freed.

9. Under the title of AFRICAN Councels almost 20 are mentioned by the
Summulists, whose Canons are so promiscuously collected in one volume, Vid.
Baron. An. 394. n. 32 l. 346.
that they were hardly distinguishable by those that lived after. 2. Of the 15
Carthagenians the 6 is more worthy observation, by which the subtleties of the
Roman Popes are discovered in obtruding a superstitious Canon of the Nicene
Council for the receiving appeals. 3. Moreover the three first, concerning
the disaproving of the baptism of Heretics between Cyprian and Stephanus,
do manifest, that there is not so great an inequality of authority, as that
the African should yield to the full power of the Roman. 4. Above the rest we
meet with worth the observing the Milevetan ynod, in which Pelagianisme by the
Bishops was wholly confuted. Long p. 342.
5. The Council of Hippo collects and contracts the more convenient Canons of
other Synods. 6. In tthe Cavernan Council there is observable, a notable
Skirmish between the Primanists and the Maximianists which often happens to mad
brain Schismatiques, who when once they have forsaken the Church, they do not
long agree among themselves August. in Ps. 36.7. To which also may be referred
the Bagian Council, where 340. Bishops are gathered together by Primianus of
Carthage, they put down Maximainus and his followers to the lowest seats.
August. contr. Cresonium L. 3. c. 53. the African Counsels are more diligently
collected and pvblished by Julius.

10. Among the BRITAN Counsels these are noted above the rest. 1. At
Winchefler in the time of Edgar under Dunstane, where a wooden cross gave a
suffrage against the married Priests, whence these verses, Humano more crux
praesens edidit ore,
Coelitus effata, quae prospicis hic subarata,
Ab sit ut hoc fiat, and coetera commemorata.
Like man the cross this Heaven begotten word
Uttered which this subscription does afford,
Be it not so, and such like on record.


2. At Oxford by Stephen Langthon Archbishop of Canterbury, who distinguished
the Bible into Chapters, and did illustrate it with Commentaries: from him we
have Excommunications, and 48 Constitutions concerning the right government of
the Church, which Linwood here and there inserts in his provincials; they may
be read together in Binius, Longus, and others. 3. At Claringdon under Henry
the 2d. John of Oxford by the Kings command being President; in this are
established 16 Chapters of English Customs, as Math. Paris relates: which the
Romans relish not, as is manifest by their censures, it [condemned] and
[tolerated,] each being mentioned by Longus. 4. The Council under Edward the
6th; in which 39 Articles of the English Confession was concluded and
confirmed. 5. The Synod under the same Person, from which we receive the
English Liturgy which now we have, Composed by seven Bishops, and four
Doctors, and confirmed by the public consent of the Church: which (as also
the preceding Articles) the succeeding Princes Elizabeth, James and Charles,
ratified and commended to Posterity. 6. The London Synod; in which 141
Constitutions, relating to the pious and peaceable government of the Church,
presented to King James by the Bishops and others deputed by the Church met
together, are worthily confirmed by his Regal Authority. 7. The Council at
Perth in Scotland, where were Articles concerning administering the Sacrament to
the sick. 2. Concerning private Baptism, if necessity required. 3. Of
Confirmation. 4. Of admitting Festivals, and 5. Of kneeling at the Receiving of
the Sacrament (though the Sectaries snarl at it) and is allowed of venerable
customs. If any desire more knowledge in these Brittan affairs, that famous
interpreter of Antiquity, D H. Spelman will abundantly satisfy him: there is
extant a more full declaration and defense of the Synod of Perth.

INQUIRES.
Whether 1. National Councels do more immediately oblidge the Subjects
thereof, than General Councels which are more remote? 2. The infalibility of
the Pope being granted there is no need of any Council, especially the
Italian? 3. Zsiomus Boniface and Celestine did fraudulently obtrude upon the
Africans the Canon of the first Nicene Council? 4. S. Augustine and other
dissenters in the six Carthagenian Synod, did die excluded from the Communion
of the Roman Church? 5. The Synod of Brixia could lawfully depose the Pope? 6.
The decrees of a general Council, can for any pretense be abrogated by a
particular Synod? 7. The Laity have only a receptive not a preceptive Authority
in commanding the rites of the Church?


CAP. IX. Of Conferences.
1. ECclesiastical Conferences are meetings of some Divines; in which nothing
is canonically determined, but the opinions of dissenters are brought to trial
and discussed.

2. And that either, 1. By the order of some public authority. 2. By a
private arbitrary convention of Learned men.


3. Public Conferences of the first Classis have been either with 1. The
dissenting Brethren. 2. The Papists. 3. The Lutherans. 4. The Anabaptists, 5.
The Remonstrants. 6. The Anti-Trinitarians. 7. The Disciplinarians.


4. For composing the differences of the Brethren have been Conferences 1.
Marpurg concerning the removing the difference about the Eucharist. Adamus in
vit. German. Theol. page 30. 2. Spira, where the name of Protestants was first
heard. Alsted. Chr. p. 192. 3. Smalcaldican, where were present the Britain
Ambassadors, and others, that the League of the reformed might be ratified.
Id. 4. Interimistican, concerning pacification in which is written the
Conciliatory book of Augusta, which by reason of the scope of the disputants
raised an indifferent war which was expired in the form of Passavius, 5.
Altenburg among the Lutherans concerning justification, Adam. p. 613. as also
afterward performed among the same at Quidlingburg concerning Ubiquity. Id.
622. 6. Torge, concerning diverse Articles of Religion Id. 649. as afterward in
a Conference at Bipont. Id. 780. and at Bades. Id. 655. 7. Hetzburg about the
book of concord Id. 750.


5. The more eminent Conferences with the Papists are 1. At Worms two, the
first A. 1541. Sled. in that year, Adam. p. 338. The second concerning divese
articles of Religion, A. 1547. Adam p. 349. 2. At Ratisbone three, the first A.
1541. The second 1546. concerning diverse Articles of Religion by the same. The
third concerning the Judge of controversies, A. 1601. which is fully extant, by
many, either approved or handled. 3. At Possiace, A. 1561. concerning diverse
Ecclesiastical matters, Sleid. Adam: 4. At Saint Germains in the same year
concering the same matters. Adam. 5. At Mompelgard, concerning the Sacrament
and the person of Christ, A. 1586. where Beza is the chief disputant. It is
entirely extant. 6. At Oxford in which Cranmar, Archbishop of Canterbury,
Latimer Bishop of Worcester, and Ridley of London were invincible Champions of
the truth, and suffered Martyrdom, Fox Martyrol. 7. At London, the first in the
time of Q. Mary, in which John Philpot excellently acted his part. The second
in the beginning of Queen Elizabeth; where the Papists challenged (as the armed
Ephramites) to a combat, scarcely without laughter yielded themselves.


6. Calvinists, or Zwinglians (as they say) and the Lutherans, Malbrun
concerning the Lords Supper, Wittenburg, between Vrbanus Pierius, and Hunnius,
and other Lutherans 3. At Francofurt, Casimire the Palatine procuring it.
Alsted.

7. Conferences with the Anabaptists, frantic persons, and Enthusiasts are
these************

8. With the Remonstrants especially is that Conference at the Hague, published
diversely by diverse, as a prologue to which was the contest between Amesius
and Grevinchovius.

9. Conferences with the Anti-trinitarians are 1. At Geneva of Calvin with
Servetus***********

10. Private Conferences may be added to these, as 1. The Vinarian Strigelius
and Illyricus concerning free will, Adam p. 474. 2. At Argento: between
Illyricus and Jacobus of Adrea concerning original sin. 3. At Swalback between
Pareus and Melhusius and other Jesuits. 4. At Fontbellack between Peronius and
Du Plessis. 5. At Paris between Du Moullin and Guntyr. 6. Of Fulk, Hanmer and
Chark, with Campian the Jesuit. Reinold with Heart, which is full of Learning,
to which others, which may be met with of the same kind, may be added by the
Studious.

An INDEX of CHAPTERS in the SYNOPSIS of COUNCELS.
Of COUNCELS. 1. Of SYNODS in general, page 1. 2. JUDAICAL, p. 1. 3.
APOSTOLICAL, p. 8. 4. ECUMENICAL GREEK, p. 11. 5. ECUMENICAL LATIN, p. 21.
6. CONTROVERTED, p. 31. 7. REJECTED, p. 41. 8. NATIONAL, p. 49. 9. Of
CONFERENCES, p. 55.


A Catalogue of Councels.
CHAP. 2. Of Judaical Councels.
Such have been meetings 1 At Sichem, page 5. 2 At Jerusalem the first page 5.
3 At Carmelita, page 5. 4 At Jerusalem the second page 5. 5 At Jerusalem the
third page 5. 6 At Jerusalem the fourth page 5. 7 The Synod of the wise, page
6.


CHAP. 3. Of Apostolical Councels
Such Councels are commonly noted 1 For substituting Mathias in the place of
Judas. p. 9. 2 For the election of seven Deacons. p. 9. 3 For the pressing the
Ceremonial Law. p. 9. 4 For the toleration of some legal Ceremonies for a time.
p. 9. 5 For the meeting wherein was composed the Apostles Greed every one of
them contributing part. p. 9. 6 For the Meeting which obtruded to the Church 85
Canons of doubtful Gredit, under the notion of the Apostles Authority. p. 9. 7
At Antioch. p. 9.


CHAP. 4. Of Greek Ecumenical Councels. or Eastern.
The more famous of them were 1 The Nicene the first, p 12, page 13. 2 Of
Constantinople the first, page 13. 3 Of Ephesus the first, page 13. 4 Of
Calcedon p 13. page 13. 5 Of Constantinople the second p. 15. 6 Of
Constantinople the third p 16. 7 The Nicene the second p 17.


CHAP. 5. Of Latin Ecumenical Councels or Western.
These run parallel with the Greek 1 At Ariminum p 21. 2 The Laterane p 22,
and 23. 3 At Lions p 24. 4 At Vienna page 26. 5 At Florence page 26. 6 The
Laterane the fifth p 27. 7 At Trent p 28.


CHAP. 6. Of Controverted Councels.
Of which sort are 1 At Constantinople the fourth p 31. 2 At Sardis page 33. 3
At Syrmina page 33. 4 At Quinisext p 34. 5 At Francofurt p 35. 6 At Constance p
36, 37. 7 At Basil p 38.


CHAP. 7. Of Rejected Councels.
Among these are noted above the rest 1 At Antioch p 41. 2 At Millaine p 42. 3
At Seleucia p 43. 4 At Ephesus the second p 44. 5 At Coustantinople p 45. 6 At
Pisa the first p 46. 7 At Pisa the second p 47.


CHAP. 8. Of National Councels.
They are distributed into 1 Italian p 49. 2 Spanish p 50. 3 French. p 51. 4
German p 51. 5 Eastern p 52. 6 African p 52. 7 Britain p 53.


CAP. 9. Of Conferences
Ecclesialtical Conferences are meetings of some Divines, and such were 1 By
order of public authority, of which Classis are those with 1 The dissenting
Brethren for composing of their differences, viz. 1 At Marpurge, p. 56. 2 At
Spira, p. 56. 3 The Smalchaldioan, p. 56. 4 The Intermisiican, p. 56. 5 At
Altenburg, p. 56. 6 At Torge, p. 56. 7 At Hetzburg. p. 56.
2 the Papists, the more eminent of which are 1 At Worms, p. 57. 2 At
Ratisbone, p. 57. 3 At Possiace, p. 57. 4 At Saint Germians, p. 57. 5 At
Mompelgard, p. 57. 6 At Oxford, p. 57. 7 At London, p. 57.
3 The Lutherans, Calvinists, Zwinglians among themselves 1 At Malburne 58 2 At
Wittenberg 58 3 At Francofurt 58
4 The Anabaptists, **** ibid, 5 The Remonstrants, especially that at Hague
**** ibid, 6 The Antitrinitarians, as 1 At Geneva, **** ibid, 7 The
Disciplinarians, ibid,
2 A private arbitrary disputation of Learned men, to which may be referred the
1 The Vinarian, p. 58. 2 At Argentor, p. 58. 3 At Swalback, p. 58. 4 At
Fontbellack, p. 58. 5 At Paris, p. 58. 6 Of Fulke Hanmer, etc. with Campian the
Jesuit, p. 58. 7 Of Reinolds with Heart **** p. 58.



FINIS.

