A Seasonable QUESTION, AND AN Useful ANSWER, CONTAINED

In an Exchange of a LETTER between a Parliament Man in Cornwell, and a Bencher
of the Temple, London.

Printed in the Year, 1676.

(...) as we can, we shall yield up to the Kings pleasure all the Laws
whereby the Rights and Inheritances of the King and Subjects, ought to be
distinguished and determined.

Truly Sir, these are edged Tools, not to be played with, I would not come 200
miles to put my Neck in a noose. An honest Old Cavalire whispered the other day to
me, That he supposed this prorogation came from French Counsels, not only to
prevent the Parliament from stoping in time the French Kings increase of power
at Sea and Land, but to lead his Majesty in obscure, undifcerned paths to the
mount of absolute power. The French knovving too well, that whensoever the
English People shall discover their Liberties and Laws to be invaded, such
fires will be kindled as they may run away in the smoke, and vveshall not be
able to contest with them either the power of the Sea, or the equallity of
trade. But whosoever advised the prorogation, Pray Sir, let me know whether it
be a Dissolution. You may perhaps save me a scurvy winter Journey, and Money in
my Pocket, and I assure you we are all very poor, and I do not expect to be
paid for secret serviec, I know you can resolve this question as well (at
least) as my Lord Chancellor. If it be but a doubtful point, I should think I
had best stay at home, none but an undoubted parliament being able lawfully to
deside the case, His Majesty out of parliament is no competent Judge for
himself in this point; and if we should declare our selves to be a parliament
legally continued by the Prorogation, according to the Kings will though not
according to the Laws, I should tremble to be assistant in such a sad doom of
England, that the meeting of our Parliament, and the benefit of our laws, are
of the kings Grace, and not of right to be enjoyed; only when, and as he
pleases. Neither should I think such a resolution to be of any authority,
because we should be parties, and Judges, and give sentence to continve our
selves in power.

You must not, Sir, deny me your whole thoughts of this great affair, I have
come to parliament twice or thrice, to provide against the multitude of
mischiefs and grievancs that threaten our ruin, but did but verify the
proverb, That I came ninescore miles to suck a Bull, you know we have not been
suffeerd to do anything of moment for several Sessions; but I shall fool my
self more, if I should now come 200 miles to sit gravely, and prepare my self
for the Gallows, when soever the subjects shall demand right against us, or
the Crown shall descend to any whose interest shall lead him to call in
question what we shall do.

You know, Sir, you and I were Confessors of old under his Majesty's father,
and narroly escaped being Martyred for the Protestant Religion, the Laws of
the land, and the Privileges of Parliaments, as we belived, we carried as many
of those Declarations in our Pockets, as we had shillings of his Coining,
whilst we fought under his Banner, and should not I (Sir,) be an impudent
Knave, if I should now come and sit in parliament, to declare, that his majesty
may of right take away from his subjects the benefit of their principle
fundamental Laws, about their meeting in Parliament, when and as long as he
pleases, and if he will never suffer a Parliament to sit to claim one of the
privileges we swore to maintain. I long for your Opinion (Sir) upon the whole
matter, I would neither disobey any lawful command of his Majesty, nor
diminish the just English regal Power. I would not crop a leaf of any flower
of the Crown, yet I make as much conscience not to betray my Country, or easily
yield up the Ancient laws and Government of England, by parliament, to the
kings Will, to make English freemen tenants at will to the king, of their
laws, their parliaments, their liberties and lives. I am resolved to be an
honest man, and thy faithful friend and hearty servant.

The Benchers ANSWER.
SIR,
YOu demand my Opinion in a Question of the greatest moment, that ever was
moved since England was established under civil Government; the absolute ruin
for our age or the safety of all the ancient English liberties and excellent
Laws depend upon the right resolving your Question. Whether this Parliament be
actually Dissovled by the last Prorogation for 15 months? He that will clearly
answer you, ought first to consider whether a prorogation ordered and continued
beyond a year, can be made to agree with our laws and statutes concerning
holding of parliaments (which, by the way are the birthright of English men)
It seems you have been told of two statutes which enact, That a Parliament
shall be holden every year; doutbless they in ended those printed statutes of
the 4. of Ed 3. Cap. 14. and that of the 36. Ed. 3. Cap. 10. where it is
enacted, That for maintenance of the statutes, and redress of diverse mischiefs
and grievances which daily happen, a parliament shall be holden every year, as
an other time was ordained. These are most taken notice of because they are
printed, and were reinforced by that notable Act of the 16 of the late King:
which provided effectually for the summoning and electing a parliament every 3
year, without the Kings concurent asent, if he neglected or refused two years
together to summon a parliament according to those statutes of Edw. 3. And
although this parliament has repealed that statute and taken from the people
that excel^ent means to secure their right of parliaments yet they have left
us to the force of the ancient laws in the case, and in the same Act of repeal
16 Car. 2. they have declared and acknowleged those laws of Ed. 3 to be still
the laws and statutes of this Realm; and they have enacted no clause or
article that derogates from them, or abates their force. Those latter clauses
of that Act which seem to be enacting being (as my brethren of the robe speak)
nugatory and insignificant, only praying the King not to intermit the holding
of parliaments above 3 years at the most, but to call them as often as there
shall be occasion, which in plainer English is an humble motion that he would
not neglect his duty, to put the laws in execution longer than two years, but
that he would call parliaments as often as ocasion did require, and that Act was
to commence from the end of this parliament, what ever was intended by that
Act, it does neither weaken the force of those two ancient printed statutes,
nor of any other unprinted for annual parliaments, this Act being only
affirmative and consistent with the other. And I ought to tell you that there
are 4 more at least to the same porpose. That of the 1. Ri. 2. number 95. in the
Rolls relates to the Jurisdicttive power of parliaments which is often very
necessary, as well as the legislative. It enacts, That a Parliament be yearly
holden to redress delays in suites, and to end such cases as the Judges doubt,
the 5. of Ed. 2. n. 9 and 13. and the 2. R. 1. 2. n. 73. and in the 50. Ed. 3.
n. 177. In the parliament called, the good Parliament, the same thing was
enacted and confirmed; and in the opening the parliament, in the 2. Ric. 2. n.
4. the Lord Chancellor in showing the causes of calling that parliament gives
for the second reason of it, That it was enasted that a Parliament should be
yearly holden. And the message sent from the parliament to the King in the 9.
Ric. 2. by the Duke of Gloucester, tells that King, That one old statute and
laudable custom is approved, which no man can deny, that the King once in a
year do summon his high Court of parliament, there to consult with the wise
men, and so you may read in Grafton, Page 3. 48. It seems the course of holding
yearly parliaments then passed not only for statute law wherein that Kings
Ancestors had joined with his kingdom to ordain it, but as the most undoubted
Custom of England, that is the Common law dedeclared in and by the statutes,
they clayming it as their most unquestionable inheritance, being the only Root
of all their Liberties and Properties, and the only pollitick means of their
defense and safeguard, and no doubt our Ancestors had reason sufficient to
claim their yearly parliaments as the custom or common law of England, seeing
no Antiquary nor record can show the original of that usuage, having its
beginning with the Government it self. Certain times for Parliament meeting are
in truth of the essence of the English government: Parliaments were the first
appointers or creators of all other Offices, Jurisdictions, Powers and
Prerogatives in the Government, Don Wallo writing of the British laws tells
us of Parliaments annual or oftener amongst them above 400 years before Christ.
And the Mirror of Justice tells us that king Alfred ordained it for a
perpetual usuage, That twice in the year, or oftener, they should assemble at
London to treat in Parliament of the Government of the People. So it was in the
Saxon's time, and continued in the Normans, being admitted by Duke William,
called the Conqueror, as the Custom of England, as appears by that ancient
Treatise called, Modus antiquus tenendo Parliamenti, And after great contest
between the king of that Race and the people, it was settled by Statutes often
renewed, That Parliaments should be yearly, as the Statutes show.

Upon the whole, I think it beyond dispute, that by the Laws and Statutes of
our Realm, a Parliament ought to be holden every year: And surely it is as
certain, that the last prorogation beyond a year, being persisted in by the
king till the year is past over, did prevent and defeat the execution of those
Laws, and is in direct opposition to them.

The sense of what the Lord Chancellor said to prorogue the parliament, was a
plain contradiction to these laws. He tells them It was his Majesty's Will
that there should be no Parliament holden for one whole year and some months
next follovving. Then the question will be (if it be any) Whether the king's
Will and Word in the Law, or his Word in the Lord Chancelor's mouth is most
potent? The whole Kingdom in Parliament, and all the Books of the Law, have
always judged the Law to be the kings Superior, to judge of the validity of
all his Grants, Orders, Commissions, Patents under Great and Little Seal, and
every Court in Westminster Hall, have always thought its Authority sufficient
to Judge His Grants under Seal, or any thing he has done, void, if they did
not agree with the Law. It Is a Civility and honor that our Laws pay to the
king, that they will not suppose him to will any thing otherwise than as the
Laws direct or allow him; and thence it was received as a Maxim, That the King
can do no vvrong; Indeed all he does contrary to Law, is doing nothing; it is to
be holden for nothing by Magna Charta it self, therefore if the last
Prorogation do not agree with the Laws, it is a mere Nullity.

It is worth your remembering, that in the 38 Chap. of the Great Charter it is
ordained, That no King should devise or invent any thing to infringe or weaken
the Liberties and Laws. And if either King or Subject, should seek out any
thing against them, it should be of no value, and holden for naught. If the
Prorogation were a device or trick sought out to weaken the Laws for holding
Parliaments every year, it is judged to be naught, or no Prorogation by 30 or 40
Parliaments, which have confirmed and re-enacted the same Charter.

But I ought to acquaint you that there are great endeavors to support the
Prorogation, some alleging with noise enough, That many Kings have intermitted
Parliaments not only for more than a year, but for many years; But these seem
not to understand the Question, which is of the validity in Law of what the
king has done to the Parliament. It Is not now enquired, what Remedies there
are if Kings shall leave undone what the Law and their Trust require in calling
parliaments; all the positive exercises, of power by the king, may and ought to
be judicially sentenced, and approved for good, if agreeable to the Laws, or
holden for none if they be contrary to the Law. And this has been the
un-interrupted usuage of England in all Ages; They have sentenced all his
Charters, Grants. yea his very Pardons, that seem to come so singly from his
Sovereign power or prerorogative; and the Prorogation ought upon the same
reason to be tried by the Law, and judged void, if so it be by the Rules of the
Law. But the kings omission to put the Laws in execution in calling Parliaments
at the times limited by the Statutes, or in appointing sufficient Guards for
the Seas, or in issuing out Commissions to the Judges, or any the like, These,
I say, cannot be brought into Question Judicially, there being no possible
relief for the People in such cases, but by supplimentary laws to be made in
Parliament, in case of such Omissions, as was done by the parliament 1641. It Is
well for the People that the law has provided, that whatever the king shall do
contrary to law, shall go for naught, though they suffer by his neglect, their
right and laws remain to them, and such Omissions of the king as are before
mentioned, have always been esteemed by Parliaments and People, Failers or
breaches of the kings high and sacred trust, and it is a pitiful Argument to
prove that the kings might of right, or by the laws omit to do what the law
has trusted to their care, because they have sometimes broke their Trust.

His late Majesty in his Declaration of the 12 of August, 1642, when the
unhappy War began to rage, freely confessed, That it was upon his Prospect the
unhappy State of the kingdom, and of the inconveniences and mischiefs that had
grown by the long intermission of Parliaments, and by the parting too much from
the known Rule of the law to an arbitrary Power, that induced him to consent
freely to that Act in 1641, called vulgarly, The Triennal Act, which was in
truth for Annual Parliaments, re-enacting those very Acts of Edw. 3. before
mentioned. He said, he was willing in Justice and Favor to his Subjects, to
make them Reparations for their Sufferings they had undergon by him in omitting
Parliaments. I remember this chiefly to show, that his late Majesty, when his
Subjects were in Arms against him, freely acknowledged the wrong he had
formerly done them, by failing to summon Parliaments as the Law required: And
professed that he had the year before, freely and heartily consented to that
Act which re-enacted those Ancient laws of Edw. 3. which are conceived amongst
others, to make the Prorogation void. Yet I must tell you there are those that
affirm, all the laws for Annual Parliaments, to be Musty absolete Statutes
whose strength and life are devoured by time; But it is enough to stop their
mouths, that they have been declared by two Parliaments within 40 years last
past, to be the laws of our Realm, and indeed they are laws of such a nature,
as cannot be weakened by any neglect of their due execution, being declarative
of the common law, and a most essential part of the constitution of the English
Government, which altogether lives and subsists in and by the certainty of
Parliaments meeting. If it were admitted for Truth, That neither the
Common Law, nor the Statutes did indispensably oblige the Calling of
Parliaments, at any certain times, but that their Meetings were only at the
Wills of the kings, then the kings did no wrong if they commanded the people,
as was once done in a kingdom, by Proclamation, Never to mention parliaments
more. If these laws be dead of Age, the Ancient Famous English-Liberty is dead
with them, the English must never more claim the Name of A Free People, if they
have no share by right in the Government of themselves, by their certain
rightful times of Parliaments. But my Lord Cook, part 1. of Instit. page 81.
concludes rightly, That no Act of prlaiament can loose its force, or be
antiquated by non user. unless the Reason of it fail, and the Use of it is
impossible, and by change of time becomes a public mischief; but not those
especially which are made to bind the Kings themselves for the Common good,
for such are the Laws for parliaments. Yet he that observes in our English law
books and Histories in the time of king John, Hen. 8. Ed. 1. and Ed. 2. How the
Nobles and Freeholders claimed their right by the Common law to meet in
Parliament before these Statutes were made, and how often they compelled their
kings, (I do not say how lawful such compulsion was) when need required to
call parliaments, and if he observes also how constant these statutes for
Annual parliaments were executed in many whole kings reigns succeeding each
other next after their making, and if he considers how slowly and slily this
Grand Right of the peoples was invaded and stolen upon in latter Ages, he will
have little reason to pretend a non user of those Statutes yet if some neglects
and defaults have been committed against the laws, it concerns his Majesty in
Conscience, and the people in Interest much more, not to permit it hereafter,
least patient sufferance of the wrong, become an argument against the peoples
Right.

Pray Sir, read the sense of our Ancestors upon the kings neglect of executing
a law against the Pope, whom they then adored, it is the Statute of Provisors of
the 25 of Ed. 3. These are the words, The king seeing the damages and
mischiefs before mentioned, and having regard to the said statute, etc. Which
statute holds its force, and was never defeated, repealed, nor annulled; and
by so much he is bounden by his Oath to cause the same to be kept as the law of
the realm, though that by sufferance and negligence, it has been sithence
attempted to the contrary.

Truly Sir, these seem to be honest, plain, old English words, and if the
Statutes about parliaments were put in the front or preface, they would sound
well from his Majesty's mouth in a New Statute. But some there are, Sir, who
find softer Cushons in a Parliament Seat than you do, who to avoid the nullity
of the prorogation, assert, That the Statutes for yearly Parliaments, may be
dispensed with by the kings Sovereign power and prerogative, being (say they)
only Councils and Advices to the king, and not obligatory.

This is boldly said, if it could be as soundly proved, it would put all
questions between the king and his Subjects to everlasting silence; if he can
legally or of right dispense, or absolve himself from all the bonds of the Law,
for holding parliaments, by whom the Laws are to be maintained, and the
highest transgressors punished, he may dispense with the laws whereby all
other Courts sit, and then he is loose from all laws, and nothing of right can
be claimed of him by the subject. To dispute with statutes of this nature by
the king without limitation of time or other rule than his Will, is the same in
other words, as to repeal or anull these statutes, and revive them again when
he pleases; and that is to asume to the Crown, singly, the legislative power
which consists as much in anulling as in making laws. And if that be the kings
rightful power, then all the laws are absolutely dependant upon the Will of
the king. I have read that an attempt of the same kind was made by king Rich.
2. in setting up a Phantatick opinion (as the Parliament then called it)
saying, that the laws of the Realm were in his head and in his breast; but it
cost the people very dear, both in blood and treasure, to confute it: and the
poor king lost his Crown, and life for that fancy. I will not trouble you or my
self with the Common (yet dangerous) Doctrine of my Tribe, about the kings
Power to dispense with penal laws, by his non obstante: I am only to inquire
in this case, what dispensing power the king has, over the statutes made and
declared only to bind and limit the kings themselves, in the execution of their
Trust about the Government, such as are in their prime true intent, sacred
Pacts, or Arguments between the king and People, though in honuor to the king,
there could not be aded to them the sanction of a penalty upon the king
Judicialy. These statutes that I now discourse of, are the Foundations of our
Government, and declarative only, showing what our Government is, that is, by
king and Parliament, and how far the Crown is trusted with the power of caling
Parliaments; that is, as often as there should be ocasion within every year,
and not otherwise. Our government was never originally founded upon such
rediculous folly by our wise Ancestars, as to intend themselves to be a Free
People, to make and alter their own laws, for their Government with their
kings, and he to call them to parliament to that intent, and to leave it
absolvtely to the kings Will, even lawfully, or of right by their Fundamental
laws, to defeat their meeting in Parliament for ever. If our Government were so
founded, and does so continue, our English Crown is of right, or by law, in no
kind restrained, limited or bounded in the exercise of the Regal power unless
it please, and if the kings shall condescend to consult with Parliaments, and
agree to some Statutes to limit themselves, there is no more done than was by
the men of Gotham, that made a Hedge for the Coockows.

These Reasons, Sir, are not urged to show any defects in our Government, which
may or ought to be amended, but to prove, that our Government was founded upon
such certain laws and Customs, that the kings never had absolute power, but
that the power of Parliaments, and their certain Meetings, were of right, and
as much a part of our Government as the kings themselves. And I think it self
evident from the nature and manner of the English Government, owned in all
Ages, to be quallified by laws, binding both King and People, that the king
cannot more dispense with the Laws which limit the times wherein parliaments
ought to be holden, than with the laws that preserve our lives and estates from
being subject to this Will. Parliaments are of the Essence of our Government,
and must have the times of their assembling indispensible; and if it be not of
right by law, that they are to be held within cercain Circles of time, as
Custom and law have appointed, then there is no necessity in law that they
should be held at any time if the king please, and by consequence, they are
none of the Essentials of our Government, but the Government may be without
them. If the kings may of right dispense with the times appointed for holding
Parliaments, they may break all the bonds of other laws, no other power daring
to question them, all but parliaments deriving their power from them. Charles
the seventh, and Lewis the eleventh of France, first subverted the liberty of
the French, and all their ancient Customs and laws by usurping that pretended
prerogative, of dispensing with the certain times of the meetings of their
assembly of Estates, by that means they suffered them to meet very seldom, and
their immediate Successors proceeded to arrogate to themselves more power over
those Assemblies, until they have in fact (perhaps not in right) abolished
almost the memory of them, and reduced the people to a miserable slavery, the
people having no other fence of their liberty. Dear Sir, to deal plainly, I
believe the opinion that the King might dispense with Parliaments meeting
notwithstanding the statutes, or prorogue them as long as he pleases, is built
upon that gross vulgar Error, That Parliaments are the Creatures of the kings
Will, because they are summoned by his Writs, and dissolved also when he
thinks sit.

I wish our Government were better understood both by our Lords and Commons,
they ought to know that the Writts of Summons for a Parliament once a year, are
to be issued by the king in obedience to the laws, and if there be occasion for
calling them oftener, the Writts issue in performance of the kings Trust and
Oath, to remove by Parliaments, the mischiefs that afflict the People.

The Statute of Provisors 25 Edw 3. speaks this plainly, viz. The Commons
pray the King, that since the right of the Crown of England, and the Law of
the said Realm is such that upon the mischiefs and damages which happen to
his Realm, he ought and is bound by his Oath, with the accord of his People in
Parliament, thereof to make remedy and Law. This king and people agreed, that
it was the English Constitution, and Kings Duty to Call Parliaments as the
Laws required; and if any mischiefs happened, he was bound by his Oath then
to call them and to join in accord with them to remove the mischiefs and
damages, before they were dissolved; else by the declaration in this law he
saved not his Oath by calling them. And as the law binds the king upon Oath, to
send out the summons for parliaments, so it provides the very form of the Writ
which must be sent, the king must summon them in no other form than the law
has appointed, The law has not trusted the king to add to, leave out, or
alter one word in the writ of summons; an Act of parliament only can vary one
tittle of it. The law has also prescribed to parliaments their business in
general, which are the matters that concern the king, the state, and the
defense of the Realm. These are words so large, that there seems to be nothing
that concerns the welfare of king or people, which does not fall under their
consultations. But, Pray Sir observe, that it is not the kings will that
impowers your brethren, that is no more than a Command of the law by the king ex
Officio, that the people do empower such as they elect they are to authorize
them as the writ declares, to do and consent to what shall by the Common
Council of the kingdom be then ordained; Ita quod (says the Writ) pro defestu
potestatis hujusmodi, etc. So that for want of such power, the foresaid
business may not remain undone. The Parliament derives not any power from his
Majesty, but from the first Root of Government, the Peoples Choice, according
to the laws: For that reason, Indentures are, and ought to be sealed between
the People and the Elected, and then they are immediately invested with a share
of the legislative power, for that time, which is the greatest and highest
power and therefore in its own nature independent, every estate having share in
the legislative power, for the Proportion it has therein, has its
independency of the other two and of its proper right, as founded in the
fabric and fram of the policy and government, not derived from the grace of
the king by grant or Commission. I have said too much I doubt against the power
of the king to despense with the statutes for yearly parliaments, and yet I
must add this one thing more, That parliaments are by many statutes as well as
by the Common law, our highest Court of Judicature, before whom comes writts of
error, And the last appeals in all cases. And that Ancient Mirror of Justice
tells us that their Judicature was intended to hear and determine the
complaints of the wrongful Acts of the king, the Queen, and their Children,
and of those persons against whom the subjects otherwise could not have common
Justice; now if the king can of right dispense with the certain appointed
sitting of this Judicature, he can lawfully say the wrongs that I and my great
Ministers (too bigg for other Courts,) shall do to the people, shall never be
heard or Judged but at my will; their complaints shall not be admitted once in
50. years, nor till domes day, unless I please.

If our men of the Robe will maintain such a dispensing Power in the king with
the statutes in question, they must say, that the king may by law prevent and
defeat the last results of Justice, and null the highest Court of Judicature,
founded on the common law, and let them tell me, why he may not, by the same
right and reason, despence with the laws whereby all the inferior Courts of
Judicature now fits, or adnull the Courts themselves, and throw all things into
a confused Chaos, where the strongest shall enjoy every thing, Upon these
Premises, I may dare to conclude, That the laws for holding a Parliament every
year, stand firm and immutable, until an undobted parliament shall repeal
them by some express words, and that the prorogation can never be reconciled to
those laws; or be helped by any power of the kings to despence with them, but
must be Judged inconsistent with the laws, that are of the essence of our
government; having actually defeated the execution of them, and therefore ought
to be holden for nothing, and the day appointed for your meeting to be no day,
for that purpose, in the sense of our law.

Supposing then, that I having hitherto rightly concluded, the question will
be, Whether the kings dismission of the parliament, without any day set for
their return and their continuing so beyond the year, be a dissolution?

Ill, tell you, Sir, the method of my thoughts upon this Question, that I might
not be couzened with words, nor entangled in trifling disputes about them I
first consider, whether dissolving a Parliament were a term of art in our law,
and ought to have some peculir sense gained by the use of it in the law; But
finding it used only in its vuilgar sense. I perceived it signified to break
off, or put an end to a Parliament, and all their business and authority; so
that a dissolution may be made, without the king or Lord Chancellors, saying,
you are hereby dissolved, The force of the law or custom of England, may put an
end to a Parliament. Of old, the finishing the business of the people, for
which they were called, did dissolve them. See the ancient Modus tenendi
Parliamt. The custom was that when all the petitions for relief against
grievances were dispacthed, proclamation was made, demanding if any petition
were yet unanswered, and if there was none, the parliament forth with departed,
this was the natural death or dissolution of a parliament, but if the king did
command the Lords, and Commons to depart before they had suffitiently consulted
about the state; and defense of the king and Kingdom, and set up-day for their
return, that was the voilent death of a Parliament, and I doubt a violence to
the kings conscience.

But it was usual for the kings to dissolve Parliaments either by leave or
command given them to depart, fixing no day for their return; so testify the
Ancient Rolls of the 37. Ed. 3. n. 38. and 38. Ed. 3. n. 31. 40, Ed. 3. n. 16.
45. Ed. 3. n. 13. 50. it is by force of law that the writ of sumons to Parliament
abates or becomes void by the kings natural death, and the Parliament, is
thereby dissolved. Upon the same reason a failer of some circumstance, as the
naming such a time as the law allows, to which it is adjourned, the holding
and continuing a parliament, if Judged necessary by the law, for preserving
both the form and substance of the Government, I say such a fayler in time
only, may by Act of law, dissolve a parliament even against the will of the
king, and if such a failer happens, if the king should step out of the form of
the law to revive a parliament, it would alter the whole Government by owning a
power in the king to vest in such as he please the legislative power out of the
form of the law. In making a parliament, the king has his power from the law
to summons, and the form wherein only he can exert that power: And the Elected
have their power from the people by the writ of the law, what to do and consent
to on their behalf at the time and place then mentioned (as the writ says, tunc
and jbidem) and these powers must by the law be strictly and punctually
persued, and nothing less than an Act of parliament can help any defect or
failer in persuance of these powers; if the Parliament then meet as the law
requires, if they fayl to be continued in the form of the law, then by the Act
of law, they are dissolved, not being able to create to them selves a day or
time which will not agree with the returns to the writ of summons, by which
their Masters empowered them to consent on their behalf. Neither is this a
nicety or quirk in law, but a form essentialy necessary to preserve our
liberties. If the representatives, trusted for the people, to do and consent
for them at the time and place mentioned, in the lawful writ, after a fayler
of continving their trust, as the law directs, pceede to Act as a parliament,
they must do it without any appointment or power given them from the people, in
any form of law, and in the appearance and Judgment of the law, without any
Authority, and if they might do it after fayler of a legal continuance one
year, they may do it after 20 years; and because they were once commissioned by
the people to represent them in one parliament, they should therefore make
themselves Lords of the people, and of their Laws Lives and Liberties for ever;
and admit whom they please (as some have done heretofore) into their society,
and if it should be admitted, that any number of men, might exercise a share of
the legislative power, without evidence in law, upon record, that they were
thereunto first sufficiently authorized and therein legally continued, it would
give a fatal stroke to the Ancient English government and all its laws and
liberties, Sir from these principles I tell you freely my opinion, That the
parliament is dissolved, having been dismissed, or commanded to depart, without
a day to return within the time that the Laws require a Parliament to be
holden, and that time also lapsed since their dismission; I think it not
material in the case, what words the Lord Chancellor said when he dismissed
them; If he said, you are prorogued, or you are dismissed, or you are sent
home, or you must be gone, it is all one; I mind what was really done; you were
in substance and sense of the words commanded to dissolve your Assembly, and
you were told that all the business before you was at an end, as if it had not
been; and that you must not assemble again or hold Parliament for above a year
then following; and you did separate your selves, and never held Parliament
within the year, and this by the act and judgment of the Law has Dissolved
you; there has been a failer of any such act in law as could continue you in
the Commission and Authority whereunto the People has chosen you, in the Form
that the laws has prescribed: The King declaring, under the name of proroguing
you that all the (...) you had begun should be void, and that you should not
meet in parliament the next ensuing year (as the law required, I say that
declartion of the kings could not in any construction of law, be an Act of
continuance of your power and commission, you had from the people, the
execution whereof was thereby wholly defeated; likewise there was no Act of
your own, by adjournment of your house, to continue you, and therefore your
Authority was wholly superseded, and discontinued. I know nothing that can be
pretended to prevent your discontinuance, but the kings will that you should
sit again 3 months after the year expired; but his prevention of your sitting
for above a year, having contrary to the law and his trust, first discontinved
you, his Will cannot give, or renew, those Parliamentary powers, that the
people gave you in return of the legal writ; The Lord Cook says 3. Part.
Instis. Chap. Parl If you sit again, you are a several Parliament from what
you were, (if you be a Parliament) every distinct session, being in law a
several Parliament. And your former Authorities being Ceased by a failer of
continuance, you can have none but what the kings will vest in you, and I need
not tell you, that the king cannot choose for the people their Representatives.
To me it seems plain, that the king having not continued you, nor you
continued your selves, nor having set or held Parliament for above a year, the
law has dissolved you, and Judged you for none.

I have not time to write you all the talks of the Town upon this question;
some have invented a new fashion prorogation, for the king to prorogue without
day, and call the Parliament again by proclamation; but their mouths must be
stopped, if they be only told, That such a practice or use of prorogation, has
no foundation in any Statute, Custom usage, or Reason of Law, and the king
cannot change the laws and customs or introduce new. I take a prorogation,
Sine die, if any such be made, to be as void in law, as a writ of summons of a
Parliament would be, that named no day for their sitting.

And there can be no pretense of Antiquity for such prorogations, the words of
Adjornment and Prorogation, having been used in differently for the same thing
about 400. years, if not more They were so taken in the state of 13. E. 4. n.
42. and how long after I cannot find; but it would have been a plain
contradiction in terms, to have said, then the Parliament is adjorned, Sine
die, that is, it was appointed to meet at another day, without a day. Its a
sign that men are sore pinched, when they will assert contradictions rather
then submit to truth.

I ought to tell you one thing more that is said in this case; they pretend a
president, that the king has prorogued above a year, they say, that in the
great plague, in the 7. of Eli. that Parliament was prorogued for a year and
three days, what then? say they therefore the king might do it now. Such
arguers show themselves pitiful Logitians, lack-lerning lawyers, and
degenerate English men; Is it a logical arguments to say, that what ever any
king of England has once or oftener done, may be lawfully done by any other
king. An English king; Rich. 2. by pretense of Royal authority cut many a
worthy man's throat, and murdered his Uncle, the Duke of Gloucester. An other king,
John, sold this kingdom to the Pope May it therefore be lawfully sold? and have
any lawyers learned so little, as not to know that there is no President to be
alleged against an express Statute? or not to know A Transgression of a
statute, even by the king, if silently passed over, and never brought into
Judgment, is not in the meaning of the law to be called apresident. There Is no
use of presidents, unless it be to show the usage where there is no statute in
the case, or to serve the construction of a statute, where the meaning is
doubtful; but where so many statutes are plain and express, as in this case,
it is in vain to allege what has been done, and connived at, without
Questioning it, as a president to warrant the present breach of those statutes*
or rather to anull them forever. And they must also as much degenerate from
English men as from Logic and Law, who shall assert that the kings of England
may acquire a right or power to themselves and their successors for ever, by
their Ancestors transgressing any statute, made to bound the Regal power.

All true English have always maintained with their blood, that our kings were
limmitted by the laws and that they broke their oaths if they did not carefully
see to the execution of them. And in days of yore, they have been so far from
allowing the son and succesor of a king, to break any of the laws, because his
father did so before him, they have rejected the father because he kept not
within the limmits of the law, and taken the son upon his promise not to walk
by his fathers Example.

Sir, I have told you my thoughts upon the Question, being satisfied that the
kings will being declared upon record, that you should not hold Parliament
within the time limmited by law, you were thereby dissolved, and the
Authorities given you by the people, did thereby cease and return into the
People; and the kings will that you should afterward hold Parliament again,
being not agreeable to law, could not revive your power. And in my poor
opinion, if you now assume to your selves to exercise Parliamentary powers,
because the king will have 'it so, you must pass this fatal Judgment against
the old English government, That the king may lawfully prorouge you for 40.
years if he please, and may refuse for ever to hold a Parliament; and if such a
Judgment, seemingly passed in Parliament against our Fundamental laws and
liberties, shall ever be left to the interpretation of any successors to our
gracious king, who shall intend a Tyranny, he shall claim by that record to be
our absolute master, and neither Lords nor Commons, to have any right to
provide in Common Counsel for the defense of the Realm, and their own good
government and welfare, unless be please.

In fine, our innocent babes shall hereafter read in that record, that you
Judged your selves and them to be perfect slaves, all prostitute to the will of
the king. Doubtless if it be granted that the People have no right to
parliaments, but at the kings will, we shall never have any king after this,
that will tell us, as king James did, in his speech to the parliament held
March. 19. 1603. That he was not ashamed to confess it, his principle honor,
to be the great servant of the Common wealth, and that he knevv himself to be
ordained for the people, and not the people for him. I shall not advise you to
come or stay I have herein delivered my one soul; as becomes

Your Fithfull and Affestionate Friend* H. P.

FINIS.

