A Looking-glass FOR A PROUD PHARISEE, (very zealous and very ignorant:) As
also for a TRVE CHRISTIAN (very meek and very merciful:) Discovering an
Effectual way (by the Mystery of God) For the healing of the Land, through
the Uniting al sides to God, and one to another, by JESUS CHRIST.

Humbly presented to the City of London, By ROBERT PRIER, a member of it.

For I bear them record that they have a zeal of God, but not according to
knowledge. ROMANS 10.2, 3. LONDON, Printed by J. M. and are to be sold by Henry
Overton in Popeshead Alley, and Giles Calvert at the West end of Paul's. 1648.

THE EPISTLE: OR A Word in kindness, and good will, to inform the READER.
Courteous Reader,
I Have made bold to present unto you some plain words; and my advice is, judge
not according to outward appearance, but judge righteous judgment; for a little
Religion goes a great way amongst rich people; and the rich have many friends
but the poor man has but few in the day of his distress: And so likewise the
most men and women have the truth of God in respect of men's persons, as a
Bishop, or a great learned Doctor, or some noted man; these, and no other must
be the men to speak the truths of God, because they have the School Arts and
this is the peoples cry as though the Ministry o^ Christ were a Ministry o^
Art; but I answer, the Ministry of Christ is a ministry and a gift of the Grace
of Christ, given unto men of all sorts, as well to unlearned men as to learned
men; as you may read ACTS 4.13. EPHESIANS. 3.7, 8, 9. And if there were less Art and
more Honesty, it would be better for us all. And as for the Ministers sent
forth only from men, there are two things that spoil them; And the first is,
the looking after a great benefice; And secondly for honor among men: Now the
deceitfulness of riches and honor are as thorns which choke the Word, which
these men have got by Art, and other men as well as they, so that they all
become unfruitful, Mat. 13.20, 21, 22. Now the Ministry of the grace of Christ,
I mean all sorts of men, they are to mind the good of men's bodies, but
especially the souls of men; for they freely receive, therefore they must
freely give, and depend upon God, Mat. 10.8, 9.

Courteous Reader, though I be mean, and illiterate, and a Tradesman, and so
contemptible, and compassed about with sin, as all other men are, and in my own
esteem a worm, nay a fool; yet do not trample upon me, nor be angry with me,
for anger rests in the bosom of fools, Eccles. 7.9. nor rise up in scorn
against me, for any thing that I have done or writ: And I pray you, let not
this little handful of words seem tedious to read: Read them all over before
you judge; and then observe that golden rule, 1 These. 5.21. Prove all things,
hold fast that which is good. Read with a single eye, and if you find any
truth, mind the truth, mind not me; and mind the truth for the truths sake, and
take up no prejudice against the truth, because it comes through such unworthy
hands as mine are: All things should be done for the glory of God, and for the
good of one another. If you have found truth, give God the glory of it, and so
you answer my desire; and as Paul says, 2 COR. 4.5, 6, 7. I am your servant
for Jesus sake, in all offices of love.

The meanest of the servants of CHRIST, Robert Prier.

A Vindication, etc.
Courteous Reader,
I Had finished all my Copy, and it was licensed, and almost finished at the
Press, before Master Edwards departed this life: This I relate unto you,
because I have spoken much of him in my Treatise; I should think it would have
been a blemish unto me if I should have spoken but one word after his
departure; for that would have been as the taking up of weapons to fight with a
dead man: But let the living make use of what has been said, and take heed
that they be not such.

An Explanation touching the word Note, Hand, or Behold.
THe words [ Note and Hand or Behold] in Scripture, when God speaks of himself
in his Christ, these are remarkable and full of sweetness, and kindness; for
the hand and finger of God, in a Believers heart, puts back all the bars, and
bolts, and deadness in the soul, and leaves the soul full of sweetness and
longing after him.

The word Note, Romans 16.7. or Hand, Cant. 5.4, 5. or Behold, Isa. 42.1, 2, 3,
4. are remarkable, excellent and full of sweetness.

An Explanation touching the Hand or Finger of Oppression.
BUt when God takes notice of the putting forth of the Finger of men, the
Finger of Oppression by men, and the faigning love of men, and the winking with
the eye, and the jears with the tongue, that most men and women now use; this
shows the great fall of men from God, and if so then no kindness but cruelty
from them: the putting forth of the Finger by most men is grievous and
burthensom. The Hand, Isaiah. 58.9. or Finger Ezekiel. 33.30, 31, 32. of
Oppression, Psa. 35.19, 21. Jer. 5.1, 2, 5, 30, 31. Jer. 4.22. Joh. 7.48, 49.
By the unjust Judges, and by the proud and ignorant Clergy, and the sottish
people, which love to have it so, and the feigning love of most men, and the
wink with the eye, and a jear with the tongue, these are full of infamy, the
Lord sees it.

Why do poor souls here weep and wail
When ordinances do them fail?
Since they to substance are a shade
And Christ to us their all is made.
And tho in the grave he is seen no more,
He Is risen and he is gone before,
That where he is we all may be,
As he is to eternity.
R. P.

A WORD To you that are SCHOLARS IN Christ's School.
Courteous Readers,
MY language in my Book may have something amiss in it, but it is plain to a
single eye; and that which may seem to be amiss unto one, may not be amiss to
another. Christian Readers, my language in my Book is not dressed with school
Arts, nor with the curious phrases of Scholarship, for these do but dazzle the
eyes of the people. I wonder that a beautiful child should be disliked because
it is not dressed in fine clothes: the naked and plain truth is most beautiful;
naked Christ is most amiable and sweet, when the wisdom of men does not appear,
but only the wisdom of God: God will have the foolish, and the weak, and the
base things of this world to bring to naught the wisdom of fallen man, 1 Cor.
1.24, 25, 26, 27, 28. But the wisdom of the new man is a mystery in the world;
and not many mighty, nor many learned men receive it, 1 Cor. 2.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.
Therefore the loftiness and the haughtiness of men shall be made low; And the
Word which was made flesh, and is the Lord our God, he alone shall be exalted
singly in that day, and then we shall cease from man, Isa. 2.17, 22. Psa.
131.1, 2, 3. Now you that stand so much upon your scholarship, and rest upon
that, consider what I have said, and the Lord teach you to know the plainness
of Truth in singlenes of heart, and to own the Truth for its own sake, and own
naked Christ, which is the joy of the Lord and your strength, though he be not
dressed with humane Eloquence, Nehem. 8.10.

Yours in the Lord, TO. PRIER.

A WORD Touching the Author and Nature Of this TREATISE.
I Shall not add much to the bulk of this book, though there is occasion
administered unto me so to do; only three or four things (by way of preface) I
judge meet thou should be put in mind of, whoever thou art that seek after
God in reading it, viz. the Author, Nature, End, and opportuness of it coming
forth: As touching the Author, a thousand to one, if thou knew his person,
thou would have him in very great contempt, not for the evilness of his
conversation; for were his adversaries his judges, they would not be able
scarce to charge him with those infirmities that are common to man, such is his
known innocence, sweetness, meekness, faith, sincerity, love, God having very
plentifully showred down of his grace upon him: But that which would be a
stumbling block unto thee, is, the meaness, lowness, and obscureness of his
Condition (in respect of writing books, according as man judges) who being
neither a Prophet, nor a Prophets son, as it is said of Amos, should thus
boldly, and groundedly, stand up to the reproof of the Prophets and Seers of
this Age, and Nation, making it to appear, that the most of them speak out of
the vision of their own hearts, and say, the Lord, the Lord, when they have
seen nothing: Will they not say he takes too much upon him? But their
predecessors said so of Christ, and have charged the same offense upon his in
all ages, especially if they have (as he) publicly appeared to discover the
blindness of the leaders and teachers of the people.

2. As concerning the Nature of this book, I find three things excelling in it,
plainness, homeness, and the heavenly favor of it; First, the plainness of it
is such, that I may say to the readers of all sorts, that he of them that runs,
may read it; the vision of God in it is made so evident, and written (as the
Lord bid the Prophet Isaiah, stilo humano) with a man's pen, so that in it, as
some say of the Scriptures, for the lowness of it, the Lamb may wade; and for
its depth and glory, the Elephant may swim; or to make use of the Scripture
simile, there is found in it, milk for babes, and stronger meat for them of
riper age in Christ. In the second place, the homeness of it is no less to be
observed, for we shall find scarce any man of any opinion whatsoever in these
times, that is not touched to the quick, I mean justly judged and taxed in it,
for one miscarriage or another tending to the scandal and reproach of pure
Christianity, which is scarce thought on in these times: So that in it as in a
glass, (a clear and cristal one), the Christians, whether Popish or Prelatical,
Presbyterian or Independent (as we now speak) may at once see their deformities
together with the way and means, as it were Bethesdas pool stirred to their
hands, by the descent of that high and holy Angel, the Angel of the Covenant,
(Jesus our Lord) that they, yea even King and Parliament, and those of either
party, might step therein, and be made every whit whole and in joint again.
Lastly the savor of it is so sweet and heavenly, That, methinks I find it
altogether such savory meat, as the Author speaks of, in the body of his book,
which Rebeccah (the Churches type) cook't, and Jacob brought (in Esaus The man
that makes so great ado in hunting up and down to no purpose in all Ages.
absence) to his father Isaac when he was old, and not able to walk abroad,
which he relisht well (for he tasted God in it;) by this, Jacob a plain man,
without art and fraud, got the blessing (as this man will certainly do) from
his elder and churlish brother Esau (a forward man, that came forth first); In
one word, it is of a most comforting, quickening nature, Aqua vitae to the
drooping, fainting soul; not letters, and sillables only, or as the Apostle
speaks, a voice of words, and no more, but as our Savior says, Spirit and Life,
to them that have their senses exercised, through the communication of the same
spirit of truth, to discern betwixt good and evil: As for unspiritual men, and
women, they are so vitiated by a customariness in feeding upon other things,
the cucumbers, onyons and garlic, the fleshpots of Egypt; I mean the
traditions of men, that are, as themselves are, Carnal, that it is no marvel
they so distaste this Manna, as the Israelites did the like, upon the same
account, that they cry out in Town and Country (O si) O that they would give us
flesh to eat; for our soul is dried up, for there is nothing, Numb. 11.
besides this Manna (that which we know not what to make of) before our eyes:
Yet let me tell thee Reader, (for therein I shall undertake to divine and
prophecy;) wait but a while, and there will be nothing left for to refresh the
Nation, but that which their soul abhors, this Manna, of which they say what is
it? though they have had flesh in such abundance, as the Israelites had quails
(a bird of the earth) that it comes out at their nostrils, their shame and
folly is even now so manifest unto all.

The third thing I propounded was to give a hint of the Authors end in framing
this holy Conference within himself, concerning all sorts and sects of men in
these times; and that I have learned only, by acquaintance with his person and
perusal of his book; by means of both I have collected, and comforted my self
with this, that he had in his eye, yea in his heart, as Moses sometimes had in
Egypt, the falling out that was not only between the Egyptian and the Hebrew,
in the which quarrel Moses willingly engaged himself and was the death of the
Egyptian, as every true Israelite seeks to be, for who was this Egyptian a
figure of? but the old man or the man of sin that transforms himself into all
shapes, and under various pretenses disquiets both Church and State even till
now: Therefore Moses took care to bury him in the sand (when no body was by)
into which Pharaoh with his mighty host sank afterward, being offended greatly
(as the world is now) at the meekness of this meek man Moses, by whom yet Egypt
is overthrown and Israel set free: But that which Moses was most offended with,
was to see two Hebrew brethren strive together, and therefore he is bold to
tell him that did the wrong, Wherefore smitest thou thy fellow? to which the
guilty person returns an angry answer, as though Moses were of his mind, to
kill his brother; will thou kill me as thou did the Egyptian yesterday? every
man's afraid of his brother now; thus it is in the Egypt of this world, in the
which the most, even of professors, are as yet found doing that, one against
another in the face of Christendom and to the shame of Christianity, which the
Egyptians do one against another; yea that which the Egyptian did against the
Hebrew. And therefore as none was found so fit a man as Moses (a man mightily
preserved, but the meekest man in all the earth) to bring these dissenting
brethren out of Egypt, and be their Captain to lead them through the
Wilderness; so none will or can in any age be found, (and therefore not in
this) but one that is, as Moses was, a man of a meek and quiet spirit, I mean
Christ himself brought forth in them that believe, none but he in the Spirit
will ever be able effectually to bring the Church of God out of the Egypt it is
yet in, and free it from under those infinite numbers of Taskmasters, that lie
in wait (like foxes) to have dominion over it: For what has the Nation done
hitherto, in a manner, (I mean in relation to Religion) but built Pithom and
Raamses, two treasure Cities, to spiritual Pharaoh, the King of spiritual
Egypt, the name of the one being by interpretation (as they say) os defectionis
vel gehennae, the very mouth or gate of hell; the other importing a thing as
evil, Commotionem tineae, the eating of the moth; the name of the one, in plain
English, is, A Form of Godliness, the labor and strife of these times,
accompanied with her sister, or rather her daughter City, situated next unto
her, yea lying in her bosom, The want of the power of it (if called by her name
Negative) but her positive name is, The superfluity, or the overflowings of
evil: I have therefore prayed, that God would take of this spirit of Moses, I
mean that meek and quiet, that sweet and saving, that high, holy, and healing
Spirit that sometimes rested in our Lord, in the form of a Dove, and is in the
same similitude in the heart, word, and life of his members, as appears in this
man, and this discourse, and put it upon, and pour it out in great abundance
upon the heads and hearts of all sorts of men, especially the leaders of the
people, in the Land, for the reconciling and uniting them to God the fountain
of peace and sweetness, and one to another, that the voice of the turtle ( rara
avis, a rare bird) may be heard again in our land, that every one may sit under
his own vine, and under his own figtree, that the voice of war may be heard no
more amongst us: This, we see evidently, was the drift of this author and this
book.

The last thing is the opportuness of its coming forth; for it may serve to
check those proud waves, that are now arising, I mean, calm those unruly
passions that are this day found boiling up in the spirits of most men and
factious, to the endangering and unquieting of all: How sweet and welcome, at
such a time as this, would that prevailing, mighty voice of our Savior be,
which indeed is heard in this man and in this book, of them that have cars to
hear, I mean that Peace be still which may save the ship we are all in as it
did that wherein the Apostles were with Christ, in expectation and hope of
which I remit all to wait on him, and rest,

Yours in the service of the Gospel, R. B.

IF Verse becomes a tract so grave, as this,
As Psalms in Scripture show that treat of bliss;
Then let us awake, and to Jehovah sing,
For here is a Dove, that does the Olive bring
To England, and the Ark of God in it:
The waters sink, that would have drowned it.
The mountains, hills, and stately trees appear
That overwhelmed with inundations were.
A resting place on earth there is yet for God,
The Sea's dried up by h's wonderworking rod.
All sects and sides before him silent are.
He quiets all and makes an end of War.
R. B.

The Authors Request.
Courteous reader, for the better directing you in the reading of this book,
look into the plainness of the Table, in the which many things remarkable may
be found presently; and let me desire this one thing of you, and that is, to
read the Table of Contents all over, which you shall find at the end of this
Book.

R. P.

A LOOKING-GLASS FOR A Proud Pharisee, Who is Very Zealous and yet very
Ignorant.
CHAP. I.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

JOhn 8.33. Joh. 8.36. Mat. 16.6. Mat. 15.1, 9. Romans 10.2, 3. Isa. 63.3. Isa.
59.16. 2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3, 4. compared with cap. 19.26, 27, 28, 29. Col. 1.18.
Mat. 20.2, 13, 14. Romans 9.31, 32. Romans 9.32. Luke 16.15. Den. 9.4. Ps. 101 5.
Isa. 65.5. Joh 9.28, 29. Joh. 5.39, 40. Mat. 17.5. Joh. 7.49. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
Mat. 9.2. Luke 5.29, 30, 31. Isa. 53.2. Rev. 3.17. Ephesians. 1.7, 8, 9. Prove. 8.18.
Rev. 3.17. Prove. 8.19, 20. Luke 16.14. Mat. 21.31. Heb. 11.31. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28.
Act. 13.46, 48. Mat. 6.7. Eccles. 7.16. Mat. 5.17. Mat. 6.5.6. Mark 12.38, 39,
40. Romans 9.32. Luke 18.9, 10, 11 12. 1 Chro. 29.14. 1 Cor. 15.8, 9, 10. Luke
18.9, 10, 11, 12. Isa. 65.5. Dent. 8.17.

CHristian Friend, I have made bold to present you with some Scripture
cautions; they are such as our Savior gave to his Disciples, and the Prophets
gave to the high-conceited Jews, who boasted of a freedom by Abraham, which is
without, Joh. 8.33. and called God Father, and yet knew not the Son of God
whose freedom is within, which is best of all: Joh. 8.36.

Now do ye Pharisees [says Christ] make clean the outside of the cup and the
platter; but your inward part is full of ravening and envy: and yet you think
you are righteous, and despise others: Luke 11.37, 38, 39. Luke 18.9.

The kingdom of God comes not with observation, or with outward show: Luke
17.20, 21.

For he is not a Jew, which is one outwardly, says the Apostle: And there are
now which say they are Christians, and are not; but are Antichristians: Romans
2.28. Rev. 2.9, 10.

But he is a Jew which is one inwardly, and Circumcision is that of the heart,
[in the Spirit] and not in the letter, whose praise is not of men, [but of
God:] Read these Scriptures and consider well of them: Romans 2.29.

The first Caution is, Mat. 16.6. Take heed and beware of the leaven of the
Pharisees, and of the Sadduces: which is called Verse. 12. the Doctrine of the
Pharisees, and of the Sadduces.

Pride and hatred do proceed from those that are ignorant of Jesus Christ; yet
these Pharisees of Jerusalem knew the Commandments of God, and were strickt in
their Traditions, and yet none broke the Commandments of God more then they;
for they were blind, and yet they said, we see; and so they supposed to draw
nigh to honor God, but it was with the mouth and the lips, their hearts being
far from me, says our Savior; as you may see in Mat. 15. from ver. 1. to 9.
For in vain do they worship me, says our Savior, that break my Fathers Laws,
and teach men so to do.

Romans 10.2, 3. For I bear them record, says the Apostle, that they have a zeal
of God, but not according to knowledge: For they being ignorant could not find
the way to Gods righteousness, so went about to establish their own works, and
so submitted not to Jesus Christ.

For he is alone, and of the people there was none with him, Isa. 63.3. No
intercessor: Therefore Christ's arm brings salvation and deliverance alone in
all straits, Isa. 59.16. Take heed and follow not the example of Ziba in that
unjust act of dividing with his Master, as you may read 2 Samuel 16.1, 2, 3, 4.
verses, compared with cap. 19.26, 27, 28, 29. Christ is our Master, we must not
divide with him, for in all things he will have the preeminence, Col. 1.18. Take
heed likewise of making a bargain with him; for the laborer had his penny, Go
thy way; as you have it in Mat 20.2, 13, 14. But to conclude with that woeful
miscarriage of the Jews in Romans 9.31, 32. But Israel which followed after the
Law of Righteousness, has not attained to the Law of Righteousness. What is
the reason? because, says the Apostle, they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law: partly by their works, partly by Christ: O! it is
a sweet and a precious work of the Spirit of Christ for man and woman to be
brought wholly from themselves, and set wholly upon Christ, the root of Jesse,
out of which root does flow Light and Life, Rest and Peace, the Spirit of
Knowledge and a right Understanding, and of the fear of the Lord, and unfeigned
Love flowing forth to the Lord Jesus Christ, and to all the Saints. To
conclude; Take notice of those words in Romans 9.32. [but as it were] by the
works of the Law, as it is to be feared many in these days do, and so stumble
at Jesus Christ: Consider what is said, but God must give thee understanding.

Take heed of Self-Righteousness, Moses complains of it in his time, and Christ
tells the Pharisees of it in Luke 16.15. Ye are they which justify your selves
before men, but God knows your hearts. Speak not thou in thine heart, for my
righteousness the Lord has done this for me, Deuteronomy. 9.4. The righteousness of
Christ, the riches of his goodness leads man to Repentance; but the conceited
righteousness of man lifts up the heart, Psa. 101.5. Vain thoughts about
their sacrifice, as those in Isa. 65.5. Which say, Stand by thy self, come not
near to me; for I am holier then thou: these are a smoke in my nose, says the
Lord, a fire that burns all the day.

Beware of carnal confidence, John, which rest upon the Scriptures and not upon
Jesus Christ; as you may read in the 28, 29. Verses: And they reviled him that
was blind, and said, Thou art his Disciple, but we are Moses Disciples: We know
that God spoke unto Moses; as for this fellow, (meaning Jesus Christ) we know
not, say they, from whence he is. Search the Scriptures, says our Savior, for
they testify of me; for in them ye think ye have eternal life, by working out
as it were your salvation; and ye will not come to me that ye might have life
freely, Ioh. 5.39, 40. The Father himself which has sent me has born witness
of me: Mat. 17.5. This is my beloved Son, hear ye him. But you have despised me
and those that follow me: Joh. 7.49. 1 Cor. 1.27, 28. I bring good tidings to
the world; I open the blind eyes of the body, and of the understanding: I set
at liberty those that are bound up in prison by their sins, and bid them be of
good cheer, Mat. 9.2. I break the heart, and bind it up comfortably again: I
come not to call the righteous, but sinners, to repentance. The goodness of
Christ to be amongst sinners makes the Pharisees murmur: Luke 5.29, 30, 31. The
whole need not a Physician, but they that are sick. For which of these good
works do you persecute me, and those that follow me: You know not the gift of
God for all your zeal for God: Moses in whom ye trust.

Take heed how, Isa. 53.2. Take heed likewise how and with what you are rich:
Thou say, I am rich, Rev. 3.17. but thou art miserable, poor blind and naked,
and thy garments wi not cover thy nakedness. There is a poor rich man; but God
has purposed in himself, the poor in spirit that are in this world, shall be
made rich with the riches of his free grace, Ephesians. 1.7, 8, 9. And these Riches
are in me, says Jesus Christ, Prove. 8.18. yea durable riches and
righteousness. So likewise there is a rich poor man, as you may see in the
forenamed place, Rev. 3.17. Thou say, I am rich, but thou art poor without
me, says Christ: Though thou have great possessions in the world, as the
young man in the Gospel, came to Christ rich, but went away without him;
therefore he was poor: as many men and women in the world that be rich, but not
from the Creation of Christ Jesus in them. Christ Jesus comes down from heaven,
laden with spiritual riches, and sends forth his voice, and cries, My commodity
is better then gold, yea then fine gold: Prove. 8.19, 20. Now Christ Jesus comes
amongst the Scribes and Pharisees, and the Jews, and the Lawyers, and the Chief
Priests, and these were zealous men and had the Scriptures of the Prophets; and
Christ was daily in the midst of them, and councelled them to buy of his gold
and of his white raiment; and of his eye salve, that they might see, Rev. 3.18.
But now Christ being in the likeness of a poor man, and these Pharisees being
rich of themselves, they would have none of his treasures, but scorned and
derided him: Luke 16.14. Insomuch that he told them, That the Publicans and the
harlots go into the kingdom of God before you, Mat. 21.31. As you may see in
Heb. 11.31. By faith the harlot Rahab perished not with them that believed not.
Thus the Prince of Peace could have no place, amongst the Scribes and
Pharisees, to put off his heavenly treasure; but sent for the same and the
blind, and the foolish, and weak, and base, and despised creatures to confound
the wisdom of this world, as you may read 1 Cor. 1.27, Acts 13.46. But seeing
you put Christ, the Word of God, from you, lo we turn to the Gentiles, says
the Apostle; for they will be glad and rejoice in the grace of our Lord Jesus
Christ, but you will not, verse. 48.

And when ye pray, use not vain repetitions, as the heathen do: [for they
think] that they shall be heard for their much speaking, Mat. 6.7. Eccles. Mat.
5.17. But he knowing their hearts, justly taxed them of their hypocrisy, For
they love to stand in the corners of the streets and in the Synagogues, and to
say their prayers, that they may be seen of men, Mat. 6.5. Now a
Pharisaical-spirited man or woman may say a prayer, but they cannot pray,
because they josle or crowd out the Spirit of Jesus Christ from them: Mat. 6.
and Mark 12.38, 39, 40. But more plainly in Romans 9.32. where the Apostle does
plainly express in ten words; the words are these, [but as it were by the works
of the Law] that is, partly by their own works, they looked for to have what
they had; and partly by Jesus Christ, and so they missed of Christ and stumbled
at him: and thus the Pharisees do: and this was the condition of the Jews; but
especially of the precise Pharisees in that age; and in all ages down to this
day: And so now the most men and women in the world, that seem to be religious,
are like unto that unjust servant [Ziba] as you read of him, in 2 Samuel 19.29.
and so in Chap. 16.1, 2, 3, 4. Verses: [Ziba] will divide with his Master, and
so the Pharisee with Jesus Christ: Now the Pharisee's heart being lifted up, he
will be something with Christ in all that he does, as you read in Luke 18.9, 10,
11, 22. He will be something in his prayers, and something in his humiliation,
and he will do something in his preparations and in his qualifications, to fit
him for Christ and to deserve from God: as those people that Moses brought out
of the Land of Egypt to possess the good Land; for which they said, for my
righteousness the Lord has brought me in to possess this Land: No, says
Moses, Not for thy righteousness, for thou art a stiffnecked people against
Jesus Christ: and thou do set up thy own righteousness together with him:
Deuteronomy. 9.4, 5, 6. Note; To be something. 2. Note; To be nothing.
To be something in our selves is a principle of corrupt nature: But to be
nothing in our selves is a principle of divine grace: Lord, says David, what am
I, and what is my fathers house, and what is this people? all that we do is
from thy hand, 1 Chro. 29.14. And so likewise Paul, speaking of the appearance
of Christ to him, as to one born out of due time: that is, an untimely birth
which comes to nothing: so Paul accounts of himself as nothing: But by the
grace of God, says he, I am something; By grace I am what I am, 1 Cor. 15.8,
9, 10. God I thank thee, I am not as other men are, or even as this Publican;
for I fast twice in the week, I give tithes of all to the Priests: Here is one
something of himself, and despises others, as you may read in Luke 18.9, 10,
11, 12. And so likewise in Isa. 65.5. you have them that say, Stand by thy
self, come not near to me, for I am holier then thou: Compare this place with
that in Luke, and you shall see a Pharisee hangs upon every thing that he does:
but as it were by my own works, Romans 9.32. And if God at any time, cast any
thing upon him that he would have, then, in his heart, he says, my power and
my performances has gotten me these things, and so he robs Christ of his
glory, Deuteronomy. 8.17.

CHAP. II.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Psa. 69.12. Neh. 6.6. Joh. 12.19. Joh. 7.47, 48, 49. Joh. 12.10, 11. Acts
15.50. Jer. 7.4, 14. Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. Luke 18.18. Ezekiel. 36.20, 21, 22, 23.
Isa. 43.25. Numb. 14.12, 13, 17, 18, 19. Psa. 25.11. Tit. 3.5. Jer. 33.6. Isa.
58.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Joh. 8.42. Joh. 14.6. Heb. 10.29. Isa. 48.17. Job 8.13,
14. Ephesians. 5.5. Luke 12.19. Psa. 116.7. Isa. 1.11.15.

CHrist is the best thing that ever God sent down from Heaven; Martha, there is
one thing needful: But the Pharisees saw no need of him; and though they seem
to come to him, yet they would never be quiet til they had sent him out of the
world again, as you may see an instance in Mark 15.9, 10, 11. [ for Pilate knew
that the Chief Priests and the Pharisees had delivered him up for envy:] And
the Chief Priests and Pharisees moved the people: This is worth the taking
notice of; Psa. 69.12. and so in Neh. 6.6. There Sanballet charge the Prophet
with rebellion, and those that were with him: and thus the Pharisees accused
Jesus Christ of being a wine-bibber, and a gluttonous man, and a friend of
Publicans and sinners, and of coming to break the Law, and to be a Ringleader
of Sectaries, as you may read in Joh. 12.19. And the Pharisees therefore said
among themselves; Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing, behold the world is gone
after him: And they tell the people, they who know not the Law are accursed: and
in the mean time they themselves believed not on him who was the Law, and the
life of the Law, Joh. 7.47, Lazarus, therefore the Chief Priests and Pharisees
hated him: as you may read in Joh. 12.10, 11. And the Chief Priests and
Pharisees consulted, for to put Lazarus also to death, as well as his Master:
Now the reason why they did so, was, because many of the Jews went away from
them and believed on Jesus. Now who will follow Jesus Christ, must make account
to suffer from the stricter sort: and as Paul said, all men have not faith,
therefore unreasonable; so all men and women have not the knowledge of Christ,
nor the love of Christ in them, therefore unreasonable, though they seem to be
zealous: for the devout and honorable women, and the chief men of the City,
raised persecution against Paul, for preaching Jesus Christ, Acts 13.50. Thus
you may see what hard usage Christ had in the world, and those that he draws
after him with the cords of his love. We seem all to profess and follow one
Christ and one Religion;



The first is, Jer. 7.4, 14. All things are as a shadow that passes away;
trust ye not in your own lying words, saying, the Temple of the Lord, the
Temple of the Lord are these; For what profit have thou in the Temple of the
Lord, or in the Ordinances of the Lord, or these, if thou see not Jesus Christ
there, and know him by the power of his Resurrection:

The second place of Scripture is, Mat. 7.21, 22, 23. To be something with
Jesus Christ, by way of merit or desert, is the next way for Christ to shut us
out of door: Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied, and prayed, and humbled our
selves, and in thy Name have cast out devils? and in thy Name done many
wonderful works? Mark the argument that's pleaded; Lord, Lord, have not we done
something to lean upon, and as it were with thy help to bring us to heaven? And
so that proud Pharisee, in Luke 18.11, 12. God I thank thee, I fast and pray,
and give alms, and I am not as this Publican: and so says the Ruler, What shall
I do to inherit eternal life? Luke 18.18. Now I will show you the difference
betwixt a Pharisee and a true Believer: The Pharisee, or the outside Christian,
argues from what he has done, or from what he will do: Ezekiel. 36.20, 21, 22, 23.
where the Lord argues with his own holy Name, for to deliver the people that
was in bondage; But I had pity, says the Lord, for mine holy Name, and gave
them rest: and so in Isa. 43.25. I, even I am he, says the Lord, that blotteth
out thy sins for mine own sake: Now there is nothing of man that can move God,
but God for his holy Names sake moves himself: This is the great argument which
the Saints of old have made use of: as for instance, Lord, says Moses, I
beseech thee for thy Name sake, do not destroy this people, but let the power
of my Lord be great, that is, let the Name of my Lord be great in showing
mercy, Numb. 14.12, 13, 17, 18, 19. And so likewise David argues, Lord, says
he, for thy Names sake, pardon mine iniquity; not but that David knew that his
sins were pardoned, but David desires a comfortable and a constant assurance of
the pardon of his sin, in his own breast, Psa. 25.11. And so the Apostle
speaks, Not by works of righteousness which we have done, but for his Names
sake he saves us, Tit. 3.5. Here I have showed you the difference between a
true Believer and a Pharisee, or an outside Christian: Now a true Believer
makes the Name of God his great argument, nay more, he calls the Name of God,
The Lord his righteousness, Jer. 23.6. But a Pharisee, or an outside Christian,
raises his argument upon what he has done: instance that forenamed place,
Luke 18.11. God I thank thee, I am not as other men, I fast and pray and do
many things: and so in Mat. 7.22. In thy Name we have done many wonderful
works: Now Christ answers, I profess I never knew you, that is, I do not
approve of you, depart from me: But why shall we depart from thee? Because you
do but seem to draw nigh me with your mouth and with your lips, but your hearts
are against me: And ye are they which justify your selves before men, and this
you highly esteem, but God knows your hearts: for that which is highly
esteemed amongst men, is abomination in the sight of God, Luke 16.15.

Now the third place of Scripture which I shall name, is, Isa. 58.2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7. Now an ignorant zealous man or woman knows not Jesus Christ to proceed forth
and come forth from God, and to be sent forth from God, Joh. 8.42. to be the
Way, Ioh. 14.6. for lost man to return back again to God. Now Christ is the new
and living way, Heb. 10.20. Now mark, all those, that are not in this new and
living way, are subject to walk in by-ways; and like unto a man that is in the
water, and likely to be drowned, he will hang upon every thing to save himself;
so the Jews, for the most part, did hang upon their own performances; and so
the Pharisees in Christ's time; and so to this very very day: as for instance in
Isa. 58.3. Wherefore have we fasted and done so much, say they, and thou see
not? wherefore have we afflicted our soul, and thou take no knowledge of us?
Now the Lords answer is this; These be but your bodily exercises, and will
profit you but little: It is not a form of godliness, but the powerfulness of
Gods Spirit in you, and that must teach you to profit, Isa. 48.17. Now in the
next place you have the Lords description of these outside professors, in these
words; Yet they seek me daily, and delight to know my ways: they ask of me the
ordinances of justice: they take delight in approaching to God, Isa. 58.2. Now
they reply from this, in these words, Wherefore have we humbled our selves and
prayed? why, says the Lord, your performances which you have woven are but as
the spiders web, which shall not be garments to cover you; Isa. 59.6. compared
with Job 8.13, 14, 15. To what purpose is the multitude of your sacrifices unto
me, says the Lord, when you have not faith and love in your inward parts: I
delight not in your vain repetitions and lukewarm discourse, it is an
abomination unto me, says the Lord, because they are your Idols, or a false
Christ of your own making: if Christ, the Son of God, be not all in all in the
heart of a man or woman, then the heart is full of Idols and false Christ's, Isa.
44.16, 17. So the most part of the world are full of heart Idolatry and false
Christ's.

Beware of Covetousness, Idolatry, Ephesians. 5.5. And I will say to my soul, soul
thou have much goods, take thy rest; Luke 12.19. now here is a false Christ,
For there is no rest but in Christ, Psa. 116.7. Now it is a good thing to throw
down outward Idolatry and Superstition; When ye spread forth your hands, I will
hide mine eyes from you; yea, when ye make many prayers, I will not hear you:
that is, I will not regard you, Isa. 1.11, 12, 13, 14, 15.

CHAP. III.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Lev. 10.1, 2. Rev. 8.3, 4. Prove. 15.8. Mark 11.13. Rev. 22.2. Genesis 3.7. Ezekiel.
16.8. Mark 15.16, 24. Joh. 6.63. Ezekiel. 36.22. Romans 8.26. Mark. 10.17, 18, 19,
20, 21. Joh. 14.6. Joh. 4.23, 24. Joh. 1.4, 5. Rev. 3.7. 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. 2
Cor. 3.6. Jam. 3.10, 13, 14, 15, 16. Gal. 5.22, 23. 2 Timothy 1.7. Joh. 5.39, 40,
41, 42, 43, 44. compared with Joh. 12.42, 43. Psa. 50.19, 20, 21, 22. Mat.
5.17. Mat. 9.3, 4. Luke 7.33, 34. Mat. 12.24, 25. Joh. 5.16, 18. Joh. 9.16.
Joh. 18.30. Joh. 11.47, 48. Joh. 12.19. Joh. 15.18, 19, 20. Joh. 18.30, 31.
Mark 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Joh. 19.14, 15, 16. Joh. 5.39, 46, 47. Jer.
23.21. Jer. 14.12, 13, 14. Acts 24.2, 5, 6. Acts 19.23, 24, 25, 26. Acts 17.18,
19, 20. Genesis 9.22, 23, 24, 25. Acts 22.22, 23, 24, 25. Revelation 17.7, 9, 12,
13, 14, 15. 2 Thessalonians 2.3, 4, 7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Zachariah 2.7. Zachariah
1.19, 20, 21. Acts 26.11.22.3, 4, 5. Acts 22.3, 4, 5. Acts 26.9, 10, 11. Acts
8.3, 4. Exodus 7.10, 11, 12. 1 Kings 18.21, 22, 23, 24, 25.38. Leviticus 9.24.
Jeremiah 14.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. Ezekiel 13.10, 11. Ier. 6.13, 14. Zach. 10.2,
3. Jer. 23.28, 31, 32. Mat. 24.24. 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. Phil. 1.15, 16. Act.
4.20. 2 Cor. 4.13. Phil. 3.2, 18, 19. 3 John 9, 10, 11. Psa. 15.3. Luke 11.35.

NOw to give you the reason of what has been said of the Pharisee or outside
professor, Nadab and Abihu, which took fire, but not from the Altar, and so
offered strange fire; And there went out fire from the Lord, and devoured them,
and they dyed before the Lord, Lev. 10.1, 2.

Secondly, [Christ is that golden Censer in which the prayers of the Saints
are.]

Thirdly, [Christ as God is that golden Altar upon which the prayers of the
Saints are offered.]

Fourthly, [Christ is the first and the only accepted with God, and has in
himself much incense; and in him are all the prayers of the Saints acceptable
and sweet before God; and by him alone are all the prayers of the Saints
offered up to God as a sweet smelling savor:] Rev. 8.3, 4.

Now it is otherwise with a Pharisee or an outside Christian; for they come to
God alone by themselves, Nadab and Abihu did: And so likewise they have no
golden censer for their prayers, nor sweet incense to offer with their prayers;
nor any to offer their prayers upon the golden Altar, but themselves; for they
know not Jesus Christ, whose place it is to offer up prayers to God: for he is
the only accepted of God: and if they seem to know him, yet they will not give
him the preeminence in all things: instance in those Jews, Romans 9.31, 32. But
as it were by the works of the Law; that is, partly by Christ, and partly by
their own works, They would come to God; but to come to God without Jesus
Christ, is as if the stubble should come to the flaming fire to be agreed:
Jesus Christ the preeminence in all things, as you may read in Col. 1.15, 16,
17, 18, 19. And thus they foolishly strive to be something of themselves, with
Christ, in all things that they do; and Christ not to be all in all things for
them; but themselves, as it were, to do something of themselves, and so their
prayers become as vain babbling, as Christ speaks, Mat. 6.7. for Christ will be
all in all things to a man, Solomon says, The prayers of such a man, and all
things that he does, are an abomination to the Lord; but the prayers of the
upright are his delight, Prove. 15.8. because he sees the Son of his delight to
be all in them.



And the first place of Scripture is, Mark 11.13. concerning the Fig Tree; And
Christ seeing a fig tree afar off, having leaves, he came, if happily he might
find any thing thereon, and when he came to it, he found nothing but leaves:
Here are three things remarkable, with relation to a Pharisee or an outside
Christian.

The first is, Luk 11.42, 43, 44.

Secondly, Joh. 11.47, 48, 53. and took counsel together to put Christ to death.

Thirdly, for the healing of the Nations, as is spoken of in Rev. 22.2. But
rather a bringing in of judgment, and a wounding of a Nation; as Adam and Eve
did, by seeking themselves, in eating the forbidden fruit, they brought sin
upon the Nations of the world, and so became naked; and they sewed figleaves
together to hide their nakedness, Genesis 3.7. And this is the Pharisee's way; But
I will show you a more excellent way: The Lord God himself made coats of skins
for Adam and Eve, and covered their nakedness; and in his goodness said, The
seed of the woman, meaning Christ, should spread his skirt of love over them
and cover their spiritual nakedness, Genesis 3.15, 21. Ezekiel. 16.8. And thus much
shall serve by way of comparing the Pharisee to the Fig Tree, that had leaves
but no fruit for Christ.

Mark 15.16, 24. The Pharisees caused Christ to be put to death: and I believe,
that there are Pharisees now, Christ to death, they will proceed to put Lazarus
to death also, Joh. 12.9, 10, 11. And yet they will strive for Christ's garments;
Isa. 58.2. And yet they are like dying men, whose garments can neither warm
them nor keep life in them: If Jesus Christ be not the life and the heat in all
his ordinances, It is the Spirit that quickneth, says Christ, the letter
profits nothing, Joh. 6.63. Jesus Christ tells the Pharisees, that they are
miserable and naked: Rev. 3.17. No, say the Pharisees, for we have the
ordinances of God and our duties, and these are as garments to cover our
nakedness. Now this is a strain of spirit that does rest upon most people and
Ministers; as one may hear in these expressions: Since we have begun these
morning Exercises, says one, God has given us in 70 victories; Israel, nor
for your prayers, be it known unto you, but for mine holy Names sake, are these
victories given unto you, Ezekiel. 36.22. Yet I will be sought unto, says the Lord.

O! Romans 8.26. But it is a bad thing to set the crown of praise upon the head
of our prayers and performances. O that we could do our duties out of love to
Christ alone! and then take our hearts and our hands off from them, and have
our eyes fixed upon Christ alone, and not upon our duties: for why should we be
like the [Hen] that when she has done her duty, she tells all about her: Give
God the praise, says the Pharisee to the blind man that was cured, and as for
this [Follow] meaning Jesus Christ, we know not from whence he is, Joh. 9.24,
29. A Pharisee does not really know Jesus Christ; therefore he does carnally
complement with Christ Jesus: Good Master, says the Pharisee, what shall I do
that I may get heaven? Why, says Christ, thou know the Commandments, and
yet thou can not spel my Name in them; Mark 10.17, 18, 19, 20, 21. And this
web, says Christ, which thou do trust unto, shall be as a spiders web, and
shall not cover thy nakedness; and this staff, which thou do lean upon, shall
be as the spiders house; But it shall not stand; though thou shall hold it fast,
it shall not endure, Job 8.13, 14, 15. Though a Pharisee seem to come to Christ;
yet at the same time he does thrust Jesus Christ away from him.

Now the third comparison,

The first is this: A Pharisee is one that seems to worship God zealously, but
has no knowledge of Jesus Christ: I bear them record, says the Apostle, that
they have a zeal of God, but not of Christ, Romans 10.2, 3. and so they are
ignorant of the true way which God will be worshipped in, which true way is Jesus
Christ, Joh. 14.6. I am the Way and the Truth, says our Savior: And God is a
Spirit, and they that worship him, must worship him in Spirit and in Truth: for
the Father seeks such to worship him, Joh. 4.23, 24. Search the Scriptures,
says our Savior to the Pharisees, for in them ye think ye have eternal life;
and they testify of me: And ye will not come to me, that ye might have life.
Now a Pharisee, Idolaters even with the Scriptures themselves:] What is the
Scripture to thee, if thou mistake it? In them ye think ye have eternal life;
but thy darkness comprehends not the light that shines in them; as you may
read in the Gospel of John 1.4, 5. For what is the body without a soul? Or what
is the Scriptures to thee, if thou have not the key of David, to open and
unfold them unto thee? Rev. 3.7. Or what is the Word to thee, if thou have not
the Spirit of God, by which it was given, to open the mystery unto thee, that
is in it; and then that Spirit will teach thee to profit by the Word, and will
instruct the in righteousness, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17. And thou can not take
liberty to sin, as the great outcry goes now in our days: but so much for
that. Mistake me not, my advice is to account it a very great mercy to have the
Word of God amongst us, one another as we do: and this is the crown of Paul's
rejoicing, to be made an able Minister, not of the letter, but of the Spirit,
for the Spirit gives life, and works love in our hearts, 2 Cor. 3.6.

O Lord, James speaks: My brethren, these things ought not so to be, James
3.10, 13, 14, 15, 16. Is this the Spirit of Jesus Christ? [No, in no wise:] For
the fruit of the Spirit of Christ is love, joy, peace, longsuffering,
gentleness, goodness, meekness, temperance, Gal. 5.22, 23. For these gifts the
Spirit of God works in the hearts of the Saints, as the Apostle speaks: For
God, says he, has not given us the spirit of fear, and of error, and heresy,
and division; but of power, of love, and of a sound mind, as you may read, 2 Timothy 1.7. You Pharisees, the Scriptures, but ye will not come to me: For how can
ye believe in me, when ye receive honor one of another, John 5.39, 40, 41, 42,
43, 44. compared with John 12.42, 43. and you shall find, And they cast him out,
John 9.32, 33, 34. And so you may instance in Lazarus: But the Chief Priests
consulted, that they might put Lazarus also to death: For he was a cause that
the people went to meet Jesus Christ, as you may read in the Gospel of John,
Chap. 12. Verse. 10, 11, 18, 19. Have not we many chief Priests and Pharisees
now in our days, as well as there were in Christ's time, that sit and consult
against their brethren? as you may see in John, Chap. 11. Verse. 47, 48.
Instance, if you will, in Mr [Edwards] a mighty man in the Scriptures, and yet
hardly knows Jesus Christ, like to Nicodemus, Joh. 3.1, 4. He is something like
to [Tertullus] too, who disputed maliciously against Paul; a notable Orator,
and one that had learned a leaf past grace; and could talk nimbly, but to
little purpose; as Mr [Edwards] does: read Acts 24.1, 2, 5, 6. But now if Mr
[Edwards] had an ear to hear what the Lord says, he would tremble: Thou give
thy mouth to evil, says the Lord, and thy tongue frames deceit: Thou sit
and speak against thy brother; thou slanderest thine own mothers son: Mr
[Edwards] have you not done these things? does not your conscience accuse you
yet? The Lord will reprove you: Mr Edwards, consider whether you have not forgot
God? read Psa. 50.19, 20, 21, 22. Mr Edwards, I shall refer you to one place
more. Have you heard of the doctrine of Jesus Christ? Now the doctrine of
Christ is,

First, For Information; Without me, says Christ, ye can do nothing pleasing
to God, Joh. 15.5.

Secondly, It is for Exhortation to you, Mr Edwards; beware of being like to
the Scribes and Pharisees, Mar. 12.38
which neither loved Christ nor his followers. Mistake me not, I am no favorer
of Sectaries; yet I can, with patience, look upon them til God does change
their hearts.

In the third place, I advise you not to be like an unskilful man, to pluck up
the wheat in stead of tares.

And in the fourth place, Beware of being like unto the Scribes and Pharisees,
in loving to be chief, and to have the uppermost places, and to have
domination; and beware that you be not like the Pharisees and Lawyers, that
lode men with burdens grievous to be born; and for a pretense make long
prayers, and so devour widows houses; that is, you oppress the weak and poor,
by your power and self-seeking: Read, if you please, Mark 12.38, 39, 40. and
Luke 11.44, 45, 46. Master [Edwards] be not angry with me for quoting these
Scriptures unto you; for they are the words of our Savior to the Pharisees and
to the Lawyers; and they were as wise men as your self [Mr Edwards] and as
zealous; read Joh. 5.16, 17, 18. and yet they made no conscience in seeking to
kill Jesus Christ; Edwards] for to restrain you, or else what is it that you
would not do? [and so the chief Priests and Pharisees likewise were very
skilful in clothing Jesus Christ with a filthy garment of their reproaches; and
then they made the people out of love with him; Barabbas must be let loose, and
Christ must go to suffer:] As for instance in their reproaching of Christ:

The first is this, They thought Christ was come to destroy the Law, Mat. 5.17.

The second is this, They said Christ was a Blasphemer, Mat. 9.3, 4.

The third is this, They said Jesus Christ was a gluttonous man, and a
winebibber, and did resort to ungodly men, and to sinners, Luke 7.33, 34.

In the fourth place, They said that Christ was a Conjuror; This fellow, say
they, does cast out devils by Beelzebub the prince of devils, Mat. 12.24.

In the fifth place, They accounted Jesus Christ to be a breaker of the
Sabbath, and a loose fellow; for which they did persecute him, and sought to
kill him, Ioh. 5.16.18. Ioh. 9.16. Ioh. 18.30

In the sixth place, They thought Christ would give liberty to sin; and this
they said, tempting him; Moses, in the Law, commanded us that this woman should
be stoned for the act of adultery, but what say thou? And thus the subtle
Pharisees sought whereby they might have something to accuse Jesus Christ of,
[as Mr Edwards does his members;] Joh. 8.3, 4, 5, 6.

In the seventh place, The chief Priests and the Pharisees took counsel against
Jesus, and said, What do we? For this man with his new doctrine and his new
light, will draw all men after him, and then we shall lose our places, Joh.
11.47, 48.

In the eighth place, the Pharisees consulted among themselves against Christ,
and said, Perceive ye how ye prevail nothing, [Behold, the world is gone after
him] he will increase, and we shall come to nothing, if we let him alone, Joh.
12.19.

Is not this your clamor [Master Edwards] against those that will stand,

In the ninth place, Here you may see the base esteem that most in the world
have against Jesus Christ, though they seem to profess Religion: [it appears in
this] that they hate those which Christ loves; If the world hate you, [ye know
that it hated me before it hated you] Joh. 15.18, 19, 20. Now Master Edwards,
if you will come in, and give your vote, with the High Priest, and Pharisees,
and people, against Christ, come in; but that I suppose you will not do: But the
Pharisees had incensed the people against Christ; And they all cry out to
Pilate, If he were not a Malefactor, we would not have delivered him up unto
thee, Joh. 18.30, 31. Here you may see the reproaches and mockings which Christ
did bear. Mr Edwards, I would desire you to take notice of the spiteful
behavior of the [Chief Priests] and the people, whom the Chief Priests [had
moved to call for Barrabas, a murderer, to be let loose, and Christ, our Savior,
to be crucified] For Pilate knew that the chief Priests had delivered him to be
crucified for envy, read Mark 15.8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. And Pilate said, Behold
your King: But they cried out, Away with him, away with him, crucify him:
Pilate says unto them, Shall I crucify your King? The chief Priests answered,
he is none of our King; and thus you may see their blindness, Joh. 19.14, etc.
Mr Edwards, I shall crave leave to ask you one question, and that is this, What
is the reason that the chief Priests, and the Pharisees, and Lawyers were so
blind concerning Jesus Christ? They had the Scriptures of the Prophets, and
they did testify plainly of Christ; as Christ himself speaks, Ioh. 5.39, 46,
47. But they had but the letter of the Word; and to deal plainly, Mr Edwards, A
question.
I think you have no more: They had the letter of the Word, but they had not
the life and spirit of the Word: therefore they could not see Jesus Christ,
though he was amongst them; nor love him, because they had not the love of God
in them. M. Edwards, Is not this your case? You have the letter of the
Scriptures, and you say that you are a Minister of Christ; and by this rule the
Jesuits and Friars, and the learned Doctors of Rome, Edwards] I ask the
question: Have not you done so? Consider what God says, I have not sent these
Prophets, says the Lord, yet they ran: I have not spoken to them, says the
Lord, yet they prophesied: read Ier. 23.21.

Beware of false Prophets, Mat. 7.15. Act. 20.29
but would have an iron mace in their hand to drive the sheep of Christ withal;
[as some have the black rod in their mouths, to spot the sheep with their
reproaches, and make them odious in the eyes of all men:] Instance in that
simple book, that libelling book of M. Edwards called the Gangraena, page 61.
and 172. There are false Prophets now, and false Ministers; as you may read, 2
Pet. 2.1. Beware M. Edwards: Some call them dissenting brethren, whom you
despise and reproach, and upbraid, because the hand of God has sent the
pestilence into their house; and another with his eyes being picked out with a
pike in the streets. [M. Edwards] I did ask you, if you would give your vote
with the chief Priests and Pharisees against Christ: but I did suppose that
would be too gross for you in these days: but now I know you will come forth;
nay, you are come forth to accuse your brethren, though unjustly: And now
[Master Edwards] Try if you be not a Minister or an Orator like unto Tertullus
that disputed against Paul that was a true Minister of the Gospel; read Acts
24.2, 5, 6. Or like unto Demetrius, who could not agree with Paul's way because
he was like to lose his gain, read Acts 19.23, 24, 25, 26. And so likewise you
do, as those in Acts 17.17, 18, 19, 20. If they cannot walk by your dark light,
then you cry out of this new doctrine and this new light: The chief Priests and
the Pharisees moved the people to envy against Christ: Mr Edwards, do not you
move the people to envy the members of Jesus Christ? I ask you the question, it
is plain, you have spoke very ill of some by name, instance in [Mr Bacon, M.
John Goodwin, M. Henry Burton, M. Holmes, M. Buroughs, M. Greenhil, M. Peter's,
M. Walden, and diverse others, both public men and private;] But God will cause
these men to grow in favor, when the world shall see your folly and emptiness:
Mr Edwards, consider that it was a sin in Ham, that he did not cover his
fathers nakedness; nay, it was a double sin, to declare his fathers nakedness:
he went and told his brethren; and this was a sin in Ham, as well as it was a
sin in Noah to be drunk: But mark, M. Edwards, Noah's sin was forgiven him, but
Ham was cursed for his sin: read Genesis 9.22, 23, 24, 25. And are not you, M.
Edwards, like unto those in the Acts, that cried out against Paul, when he had
spoken of Jesus Christ? And do not you so cry out, Mr Edwards, against these
men, saying, Away with such fellows out of the Kingdom, for it is not fit that
they should live amongst us? read Acts 22.22, 23, 24, 25. And in your tenth
head, you charge them, under the name of Sectaries, with hypocrisy, under
pretenses of piety and holiness, page 61. [M. Edwards] do not these ten heads,
which you have laid down to accuse your brethren, though falsely, come forth
from you, like unto those ten horns which came out of the seven heads, and
these seven heads are seven mountains; and this is the mystery of the woman,
and of the beast that carried her: Read Rev. 17.7, 9, 12, 13, 14, 25. The Lord
teach us to know this mystery and a false Prophet; for there is a mystery of
iniquity, as well as of godliness, as the Apostle speaks in 2 These. 2.2, 3, 4,
7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Now in the next place, M. Edwards, Are not your ten Heads,
which you have produced in your 61. page, like unto the horns which the Prophet
Zechariah speaks of; and will you push the Church with these horns, and scatter
Israel and Judah? Here you may see a power that did scatter Israel: or here you
may see a mountain of power that will scatter Israel: But who art thou, O great
mountain? before Zerubbabel, that is, before Jesus Christ, thou shall become a
plain, Zech. 4.7. For the Lord has showed me four Carpenters, says the
Prophet: Then said I, What come these to do? And he spoke, saying, These are
the horns which have scattered Judah, so that no man did lift up his head: [
but these are come to fray them, or to cut them off, and to cast out the horns
of the Gentiles, which lift up their horn over the Land of Judah to scatter it,
Zech. 1.19, 20, 21.] This was the Prophets glorious vision concerning the power
of Christ, which is not by might nor by power, but by the Spirit of our Lord
Jesus Christ. And he shall bring forth the head stone of Reformation in the
hearts and spirits of men, and then we should serve one another in love, and
rejoice with shoutings, crying, Grace, grace unto it, Zech. 2.6, 7. Mr Edwards,
I think you are but little, or nothing at all acquainted with these sweet
workings of the Spirit of Christ: But with the former places, which I have
named, I think you are very skilful, because you give your mouth to
reproaching; and your tongue is like unto a horn that gores your neighbors and
brethren; and this you do, as it were, out of zeal, pushing the members of
Christ up and down; like unto Saul, Being exceedingly mad against them, he
persecuted them even unto strange cities, Acts 26.11. Acts 22.3, 4, 5. And yet
for all this [Mr Edwards] you say you are a Minister of Jesus CHRIST; which
seems very strange.

But, Mr Edwards, say either from Cambridg or Oxford: and there you learned
your Arts, and the Tongues; and you can talk of the [Fathers by roat;] and by
your Logic you mistake, and call white black, that is, you call Truth Error.
Mistake me not; I highly prize the use of Tongues and all humane Learning, in
its place; but this will not prove you to be a Minister of the Gospel, but only
a Minister of men, and so sent out from amongst men: The Lord teach the people
this mystery: [ Saul was a Minister of the Gospel, if this rule be true, before
he knew Jesus Christ and the Gospel: for he had all humane Learning, and yet
was no Minister of the Gospel, as he himself confesses: I was brought up,
says he, at the feet of Gamaliel, a learned Rabby, and taught according to the
perfect manner of the Law of the fathers, and was zealous toward God, as ye
all are this day: And I persecuted this way unto the death, binding and
delivering into prisons both men and women: [as also the high Priest does bear
me witness,] read Acts 22.3, 4, 5. Acts 26.9, 10, 11. Acts 8.3, 4. [And thus
you may see what it is to be a Minister sent out only from men:] A Minister
sent out from men [is a Minister of Terror] and [not of Tenderness,] Aarons rod
did; but Aarons rod had the preeminency, Exodus 7.10, 11, 12. And so likewise,
Ahabs false Prophets externally did the same things that the true Prophet of
the Lord did: These false Prophets did choose one bullock for themselves, and
cut it in pieces, and laid it on wood, in like manner as Elijah the true
Prophet did; [but they had no heavenly fire:] but Elijah the true Prophet
called on the name of the Lord, and he was answered by fire from heaven; but
the false Prophets had no answer from Baal: Therefore they were mad before the
Altar: and the God that answered by fire, he was God: read 1 Kings 18.21, 22,
23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 38. Levit. 9.24. And thus you may see how far the
false Prophets may go in external performances; they may run when God does not
send them, Jer. 14.12, 13, 14, 15, 16. and so seduce the people, Ezekiel. 13.10,
11. and heal the hurts of the people slightly: And this they do, in seting the
old Adam up without the strength of the new Adam, Jer. 6.13, 14. And for this
the Lord calls them idols, speakers of vanity, diviners, false dreamers, that
comfort in vain, Zech. 10.2, 5. And use their tongues, and say, the Lord he
says; but this does not profit the people: The Prophet that has a dream, let
him tell a dream; and he that has my Word, faith the Lord, let him speak my
Word faithfully: What is the chaff to the wheat, says the Lord? Jer. 23.28,
31, 32. Take heed [M. Edwards] the false Prophets are like unto chaff, [but the
true Prophets are like unto wheat:] The Old Testament declares that the false
Prophets ran up and down amongst the true Prophets: [Consider those Scriptures
forenamed.] And shall we think to be free now in the time of the Gospel? No,
says our Savior, There shall arise false Christ's, and false Prophets, Mat.
24.24. and they will have a show of godliness, like the Pharisees, but they
cannot see the power of it, and so they become proud and covetous, false
accusers, fierce, despisers of those that are good, striving after high
matters, loving of pleasures and profit: read 2 Timothy 3.2, 3, 4, 5. M. Edwards,
I pray you mistake not your self in the application of these few lines; for
these are perilous times: for some indeed preach Christ out of envy and strife:
and those that preach Christ thus, have it by Art and not by Grace, Phil. 1.15,
16. And thus a natural carnal man may preach Christ, having the common gifts of
the Spirit, which are common to all men, as the Arts and the Tongues, which may
be learned at Oxford; [and then the help of a great Library, and a good pen,
and sit at it all the week, it be, we have great store of it now in our days:
And those men, that so preach, are subject to speak evil of those that preach
Christ out of good will: [To preach Christ out of good will is a saving gift:]
And such men cannot but speak the things which they have seen and heard, Acts
4.20. Now true preaching is to believe: We having the same spirit of faith,
says the Apostle, therefore we speak, 2 Cor. 4.13. though we be evil spoken
of, and upbraided with new doctrine and with a new light. M. Edwards, are not
you guilty of this clamor? and I fear others besides you are. But I remember a
caution that the Apostle gave to the Philippians; Beware of evil workers, says
he, who boast of the letter and of the outsides of Religion, and yet are
enemies to Christ; for they mind earthly things, Phil. 3.2, 18, 19. as profit
and preeminence. [M. Edwards] I pray you be not like unto [Diotrephes,] who
loves to have the preeminence among them, and receives us not, says the
Apostle: But when I come, says the Apostle, I will remember his deeds which he
does, prating against us with malicious words: and not content therewith,
neither does he himself receive the brethren, but speaks evil of them, and
forbids them that would receive them, and casts them out of the Church:
read 3. Epistle of Joh. 9, 10, 11. M. Edwards, I shall take leave of you now: I
shall speak of you again: only I shall present you with two cautions.

The first is, Follow not that which is evil, and take not up a reproach
against your neighbor to do him harm, Psa. 15.3.

The second is, Take heed that the light which is in you, be not darkness, Luke
11.35.

CHAP. IV.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Rev. 2.17.2.2. Cant. 2.8. John 10.4, 5, 27. 1 Cor. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16, Ioh. 14.10, 11, Ioh. 17.21, 22, 23, 14. Ephesians. 1.3, etc. Lu. 7.44, etc. Psa.
1.2. Psa. 66.16. 1 Pet. 2.5. Joh. 2.20, 27. Act. 2.17, 18. Joel 2.28. 2 Timothy
3.15, 16, 17. Joh. 3.2, 3, 4. Mat. 21.16. Psa. 8.2. 1 These. 5.21. 1 John 4.1.
Col. 4.17. Gal. 5.1. 2 Cor. 11.19, 20. Colos. 2.18, 19. 1 Pet. 5.2. 1 Cor. 5.4,
12, 13. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.13. Mark 9.35. 1 Cor. 7.23. Prove. 6.16, 19. Romans
14.5.23. 1 These. 2.7, 8. 2 Cor. 1.24. Act. 15.5, 10. Joh. 11.47, 48. Luke
22.24, 25, 26. John 13.15. 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. Psalm. 133.1, 2. Genesis 13.8. Isa.
49.15, 16. Ier. 32.40, 41. Genesis 42.36. Acts 27.22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 5.32. Genesis
30.27. Genesis 37.19, 20, 21, 22. Genesis 42.21, 22. Genesis 45.3, 4, 5. Genesis 50.20.
Genesis 45.27, 28. Mat. 23.24, 25. Luke 17.20. Mat. 23.23. Ier. 7.4. Mat. 25.8,
10, 11, 12. Genesis 45.24. 1 These. 5.21. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. 1 Cor. 6.5, 6. Mat.
15.14. Isaiah 2.2, 3, 4, 5. Matthew 10.9, 10. Luke 10.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Matthew
6.31, 32, 33, 34. Luke 22.22; 25, 26. Matthew 26.47, 48, 49, 50. Luke 11.45,
46, 52, 53, 54. Matthew 26.3, 4. Ephesians 4.22. Psalm 31.11, 13. Psalm 35.13,
14, 15, 16, 19, 20. Acts 14.22. Luke 18.9. John 8.41, 42. John 9.16, 29. John
2.3.11.47, 43. John 12.10, 11, 19.

THere is great contending, Ans. But they who have an ear to hear what the
Spirit of God says unto the Churches, Rev. 2.17. are enabled by the spirit of
Christ, in some measure, to try them, which say they are Apostles and are not,
and have found them liars, Rev. 2.2. The Church of Christ only knows the voice
of Christ: It is the voice of my beloved, says the Spouse, Cant. 2.8. My sheep
hear my voice, says Christ, and a stranger they will not follow, for they know
not the voice of strangers, and will flee from them, John 10.4, 5, 27. Here is
the report that Christ gives of his sheep, which holds forth a sufficiency in
them by his holy Spirit, to try the messages that the messengers or ministers
of the Gospel do bring unto them, [and that by a divine authority.

Now here will arise an Objection: and that is this:



Ans. David, that is, the Spirit of God, to teach him the mystery] when the
learned man may have but the history: There is no man in the world, though
never so learned, so able as the Saints are. Are true Believers to give out the
spiritual meaning of the Word of God? [It is true indeed, learned men may take
up the Truth as other men lay it down, and so they may talk of it.

But the believing man, Cor. 2.10, 11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. The believing man is
the only man, for these Reasons.

The first is, God is in Christ, Joh. 14.10, 11.

The second is, Christ and God is in every true Believer: I in them, and thou
in me, says Jesus Christ, Joh. 17.21, 22, 23, 24.

The third is, Every true believing man and woman were in Christ before the
world was; and as soon as they came into the world, they went astray, Ephesians. 1.3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8. A great sinner once made a true believer; such a man and woman,
is the only man and woman that can magnify free grace. Mary Magdalen, a great
sinner, was overcome by the free grace of God in Christ; and then she washed
Christ's feet with tears, and kissed his feet, and anointed them: [Free grace
begets much love,] Luke 7.44, 45, 46, 47. And so Paul, a great sinner; Blessed,
says he, be the God and Father of our Lord Jesus Christ, who has blessed us
with all spiritual blessings in heavenly places in Christ.

In the next place, Paul, for his free grace.

Secondly, The man in Christ is the most able of all men for to try the
doctrines that men bring, whether they be of God or no: for a man in Christ is
blessed with spiritual blessings in Christ; and he tries the doctrines of men,
whether there be any spirituality in them or no; Psa. 1.2.

Thirdly, A true Believer in Christ is able to declare the truth to others, and
that out of experience; Come, says David, I will tell you what God has done for
my soul, or in my soul, Psa. 66.16. Here you may see the ability and the
authority of the members of Christ, which is the Church of Christ. Now for the
abilities of the Saints there are degrees, some more able to try the doctrines
of men, and some less able; and so some are more able to declare the truths of
God to others, and some are less able, as it pleases God to bestow his gifts
to men.

Now the reason or ground, why, or how they come to be thus able?

Ans. They are built upon Christ a spiritual house, an holy Priesthood to offer
up spiritual sacrifice, acceptable to God by Jesus Christ: read 1 Pet. 2.5. And
so likewise they have that unction from the holy One, that is, Joh. 2.20, 27.
and by that they come to know the mind of God in Christ, 1 Cor. 2.16. And so it
comes to pass, now in our days, that there is a beginning to fulfill the
promise, which has been spoken of long ago; I will (says God) in the last
days, pour out of my Spirit upon all flesh; and your young men, and your
maidens, shall be able to declare the Truths of Jesus Christ to all that are
about them, Act. 2.17, 18. Joel 2.28. Timothy from a child to know the holy
Scriptures, and to know the mind of God in Christ therein, 2 Timothy 3.15, 16, 17.
when the old zealous Nicodemus's know but little of God, and nothing of Christ,
though they have the holy Scriptures before them: read Ioh. 3.2, 3, 4. But out
of the mouth of babes and sucklings God does perfect his praise: and they, for
the most part, speak so, as though they had, by experience, tasted of the
sweetness of the grace of God in Christ: read Mat. 21.16. Psa. 8.2.

Now by these few lines you may take notice, That none but those that know the
voice of Christ, whether young or old, are able to try the doctrines of those
that say they are the Ministers of the Gospel.

Secondly, All those that are thus enabled, have a divine right and authority
to try the doctrines of men.

The Church has liberty from God to try their Officers before they trust them:
[ Prove all things; hold fast that which is good, 1 These. 5.21.]

Secondly, Believe not every spirit, but try the spirits, whether they are of
God; because many false Prophets are gone out into the world, 1 John Chap. 4.
Verse. 1.

Thirdly, The Church ought to admonish their Pastor and their Officers; for the
shepherd may err, as well as the sheep may go astray: Therefore says the
Apostle to the Church of the Colossians; Bid Archippus take heed to his
ministry, Col. 4.17.

I shall now, in the next place, of bondage: [but you that believe stand fast in
the liberty of Christ, and for the liberty of Christ with meekness of spirit,]
Gal. 5.1. 2 Cor. 11.19, 20. And beware lest any man spoil you through
Philosophy and vain deceit; and let no man beguile you of your liberty nor of
any part of it, [but hold fast Christ your head, from which all the body by
joints and bands having nourishment ministered, and knit together, increases
with the increase of God,] Col. 2.8, 18, 19. And consider those that you have
given power to rule amongst you, I mean, your Ministers and your
Church Officers; for they are as servants to the Church: but it is an honorable
service, if they rule well; [but beware they do not rule over you with
constraint,] read 1 Pet. 5.2. and with a vast and unlimited power, and then put
the name of Divine Right upon it; even to put them out from amongst them, if
they walk disorderly, as some in our days have done; When ye are come together,
says the Apostle to the Church of the Corinthians, put away from among your
selves that wicked person: and if that wicked person, then by the same power,
the Church may put away from among them either Minister or Church Officers, if
they walk contrary to sound doctrine; 1 Cor. 5.4, 12, 13. The Bishops of late
memory pleaded a Divine Right for what they did, and so they made fools of men
and women; they made fools of women, in causing them to come covered with white
vails through the streets, to be churched, as they call it: and they made fools
both of young men and of old, in making them to sit bare-headed an hour or two
together to hear their divine Service, as they call it; and they durst not be
covered in their unsanctified presence: And so likewise they made fools both of
men and women, in compelling them to come up to the Rails, and to fall down upon
their knees, to receive the Sacrament; and this they did for decency and for
uniformity, as they said: and so they made fools of the poor, that some of them
were fain [to sell their pot to them their tithes:] And is this Divinity?

Here you may see how these men were subject to err; Commissioners, who could
have no place among our rigid Clergy. Mat. 18.17. 1 Cor. 5.13. And so likewise,
if you have any that would be great over all, let him be servant unto all,
says our Savior, Mark 9.35. The Church of Christ knows the voice of Christ,
and the mind of Christ; therefore they are able to discern the inward
indowments of a Minister. The multitude of this Kingdom take al upon trust, and
cry out, O! he is a brave scholar, he is a great learned man; be not the
servants of men; for ye are bought with a price, 1 Cor. 7.23.

I shall now set forth three paths: and those that walk in them. I think they
are not like unto the Ministers of Jesus Christ.

The first is this: There is much talk, now adays, that be Ministers of the
Gospel indeed, should have means to live on; that they and theirs may live
comfortably in this world, yet the people ought to be free, and not constrained.

The second path is this, He that sows discord among brethren, Pro. 6.16, 19.
I ask the question: Do not many of our Ministers walk in this way? O, it would
be a sweet thing, if our Ministers were men of peace! and would labor to make
peace among the people; but I think they are unfit men, because they cannot
agree among themselves, many of them.

The third path is this: For whatsoever is not of faith, is sin, Romans 14.5, 23.
And such Ministers as compel men's consciences, are not like the true Ministers
of the Gospel: For Paul proved himself to be a Minister of the Gospel, in these
words, [ We were gentle among you, even as a nurse cherishes her children; and
ye are dear unto us as our own souls, and this is the language of the true
Ministers of the Gospel, 1 These. 2.7, 8. And as for us, says the Apostle, we
have not dominion over your faith, but are helpers of your joy; for by faith ye
stand; read 2 Cor. 1.24.

We have an old Proverb amongst us, The burnt child fears the fire: We are
newly come out from Prelacy, and from the High Commission Court of bondage,
which was at Lambeth house, where the Bishop of Canterbury did sit and impose
an Oath upon men's consciences; and if they did scruple at it, then he did send
them unto a reverend Divine, as he said, who did live in London, Dr Gouge.
Dr Gouge by name; and he said, he would resolve them of the lawfulness of it;
and if they could not be resolved by him, then they were sent to prison,
Diotrephes did over the Church of Christ, read 3 John 9, 10. I desire likewise
that there may be no fierceness of spirit in our Ministry or Ministers, to
command by force, or to compel by violence, and so put a yoke upon the people
of God, which neither our fathers nor we were able to bear; and thus the
Apostle complains of a sect of Pharisees, that would have commanded the Church,
by force, in his time, Acts 15.5, 10. [And so likewise the chief Priests and
the Pharisees cried out against Jesus Christ, Joh. 11.47, 48. Now if those that
profess themselves to be the Ministers of the Gospel, desire to be great either
over men's persons, or over men's consciences, let them well consider these two or
three places of Scripture.

The first is this: Our Savior calls his Disciples, and tells them, The Kings of
the Gentiles exercise Lordship over one another; and they that are great in
authority are called Benefactors: And thus the Disciples, though they were with
Christ, had foolish thoughts about greatness; but, says Christ, it shall not be
so amongst you, for ye are brethren, and I have given you an example that ye
should go before one another in holiness and meekness of spirit: But he that
will be greatest among you, let him be as the younger, and he that is chief, as
he that does serve, Luke 22.24, 25, 26. John 13.14, 15. Mark 10.42, 43, 44.

The second place of Scripture is that in Peter, where the Apostle does exhort
the Elders of the Church, or the Ministers of the Church, to feed the flock of
God gently, and not by constraint; neither to be as lords over Gods heritage,
or lordly against them, but to be as ensamples to the flock in all humility and
love, 1 Peter 5.1, 2, 3.

Now I shall desire, another, and have fervent love among your selves; the which
you shall be able to do when God does shed his love abroad in your hearts; and
these alone will heal our divisions, and put an end to our strife; and this will
be amiable when our eyes are opened: For which consider these three places of
Scripture.

The first is this, Behold, says the Prophet David, how good and how pleasant
it is, when brethren dwell together in unity: It is like the precious ointment:
It is like the smell of a pleasant field, Psa. 133.1, 2.

The second place of Scripture is that of faithful Abraham, whose faith wrought
by love; for Abraham said unto Lot, Let there be no strife, I pray thee,
between me and thee, and between my herdmen and thy herdmen, [ for we be
brethren, Genesis 13.8.] Now those that would have some speedy course taken
against their brethren, and so put them to grief, Abraham, but they are like
Esau against Jacob; and in this they are like the Pharisees against Jesus
Christ.

The third place of Scripture is this, concerning Joseph, who was a type of
Christ: Joseph gave gifts to all his brethren, but to Benjamin he gave double:
God gave large gifts unto Joseph, and that was the ground why his brethren
hated him, and called him dreamer, as you may read, and so they fought to slay
him: Take heed ye sons of Jacob, do not think evil against Joseph, nor against
Benjamin: but if there be any amongst you that is like unto Reuben, hearken to
him: for Reuben would have preserved Joseph from the rage of his brethren, but
he could not; yet consider once more, Joseph has his Benjamin, and Jesus
Christ has his Benjamins, and loves them, and has engraven them upon the
palms of his hands, Isa. 49.15, 16. Take heed, ye sons of Jacob, what ye do
against your brethren: and be not like unto the world, which cry out for some
speedy course to be taken for the suppressing of their brethren; but it is
under the name of Sectaries: and so they cry out, that they may be declared
against, and then they may have something to proceed against them for: But I
will tell you what I think; that many of those that are so far out of your
affections, are as Benjamin when his father Jacob named him, sons of the right
hand; Benjamins that Jesus Christ loves, Jer. 32.40, 41. Now you that think you
do God service, when you put your brethren to grief, and speak harshly against
them, because they are not of the same mind with you: Consider what Jacob said,
Joseph is not, and Simeon is not, and now ye will take Benjamin away: [I cannot
bear this:] all these things are against me, says Jacob unto his sons. The
irons have entered into Joseph sides in the Prelates time, and Simeon was bound
up in prison, and will you now take Benjamin from me, Genesis 42.36. and send him
into a far Country, or else put him to grief at home? Consider Lot, he being in
Sodom, it could not be destroyed for his sake, whilst he was there: And so
likewise consider whether your zeal be according to knowledge, as the Apostle
speaks, Romans 10.1, 2, 3. And consider Paul's being in the ship; all the men's
lives were preserved for his sake, Acts 27.22, 23, 24. These be great
mysteries, as the Apostle speaks, Ephesians. 5.32. But I speak concerning Christ and
his Church; Christ loves his Redeemed ones, one as well as another, and the
world is blessed for their sakes: But I am sorry to see them that do profess
themselves to be knowing men, and yet know not so much as Laban did concerning
Jacob; Laban said, he had learned by experience that the Lord had blessed him
for Jacobs sake:] And Laban did entreat Jacob to abide with him and his family,
and he should have contentment and respect, Genesis 30.27. But now ye sons of
Jacob, you are worse then Laban, for you evilly entreat your brethren and speak
harshly of them; and the Kingdom is too little to hold you both; nay, say some,
the Kingdom must be rid of them before all things can be well; and is this the
way to make all things well? Will this please Jacob? nay, will not this displease
Jesus Christ, to see brethren of one profession, in a Kingdom, in a Family, to
bite at one another, to strike at one another, Jacobs sons did of Joseph.



But as they are Sectaries, STATE, and will not be conformable to our
GOVERNMENT, and for this we ought to deal roughly with them.

But now let me speak a word unto you that are of this mind; and I shall tell you
that you are like to Joseph's brethren; for they did not hate their brother as
he was their brother, but because he did something, or said something that they
did not like of, and so they called him Dreamer: And they said one to another,
Behold this dreamer comes: Come now therefore and let us slay him, Genesis 37.19,
20, 21, 22. Read the whole Chapter, if you please. Now Reuben, being one of the
brothers, and amongst them, he said, Let us not kill him, let us shed no blood.
Take notice of one thing that is remarkable here: There may be some among you
that may be gentle toward their brethren, when they see the anguish of their
soul, beseeching you to hear them, but you will not. There may be some remaining
among you like unto Reuben, in the day of your distress, that may put you in
mind of all your hard dealing and bitter words which you have used against your
brethren: And this Reuben put his brethren in mind, and spoke unto them,
saying, Spoke I not unto you, saying, Do not sin against the Child, and ye
would not hear? therefore, says Reuben, all this distress is come upon us,
Genesis 42.21, 22. This Joseph was one of the sons of Jacob, [and a servant of
Jesus Christ,] therefore his love continues unto his brethren, and he speaks
comfortably unto them in their great distress, when they were at their wits
end; then Joseph spoke un^^ his brethren and said, I am Joseph; does my father
yet live? Come near to me: [notwithstanding ye put me away in your hatred,] but
come near unto my love: Come near to me, I pray you: and they came near; and he
said, I am Joseph your brother whom ye foolishly sold into Egypt: be not
grieved nor angry with your selves that ye sold me hither: for ye thought evil
against me, but God meant it unto good: Genesis 45.3, 4, 5. Genesis 50.20.

The spiritual application of what has been said, Joseph gave unto his
brethren for their advice; and he said unto them, See that you fall not out by
the way, for ye be brethren: You may travel from Egypt to Canaan now with joy,
for I have freed you from all your fears; see now that you fall not out by the
way: [Consider Jesus Christ the spiritual Joseph, who has delivered you from
spiritual Egypt, and does give you spiritual joy, that you may travel to the
heavenly Canaan, and will you yet fall out by the way.] Again, consider Jesus
Christ as he is a Prince of peace, and of his peace there shall be no end:
Christ is our spiritual Joseph, and our elder brother, and has left this Word,
Go tell my brethren, that I ascend to my Father and their Father, to my God and
their God; and I will prepare a place for them, and they all shall be where I am.

A Prayer. O sweet Jesus, shall thy people be with thee, who art the Prince of
peace, and live with thee in heaven? O Lord, make this a lively motive to all
thy people, that as they shall live in heaven together, so they may live in love
and be at peace on earth together, though they cannot agree about
circumstances: if the Lord would be pleased to enlarge our hearts, then we
should by his strength run the way of his new command, Love one another. Lord,
do thou teach us and help us, that we may not fall out about the way to Canaan:
but we pray thee plane us into Jesus Christ, who alone is the new and the
living way, and gave unto us such a spirit as Jacob had, when he did see the
wagons of Joseph's love, It is enough, Joseph my son is yet alive, Genesis
45.27,

When our spirits are a dying, then to have news from Jesus Christ would be a
reviving to our spirits; and we shall say as Jacob said, It is enough, my son
Joseph is alive. It is enough, my friend Jesus Christ is alive, and does send
good news to my soul, and I shall go and live with him.

To conclude, We should not rest in making clean the outside of the cup, and of
the platter, Mat. 23.25. For the kingdom of God comes not with observation, or
with outward show, Luke 17.20. Neither let us take content in tithe-mint, and
anise, and cummin, when we are ignorant of the weightier matters of the Law, as
Judgment, Mercy and Faith, Mat. 23.23. And so it will be for our shame and loss,
if we take the shadow for the substance, and say, The Temple of the Lord are
these, Jer. 7.4. and so be like unto the five foolish Virgins whose lamps were
out, and their oil was spent; and they went from Christ to buy grace, when as
indeed they should have come to Christ; but in not coming they missed of Jesus
Christ, Mat. 25.8, 10, 11, 12. Yet let us not fall out by the way as we are
traveling through the wilderness of this world; but let us admonish one another
in love, and think upon Joseph's advice to his brethren, when they were to
travel from Egypt to Canaan to their father; says Joseph, Ye be brethren, see
that ye fall not out by the way, Genesis 45.24.



1. We are not now to expect Prophets and Apostles to pen new Scripture.

Secondly, We are now to look for men gifted, to open the mind and meaning of
God in the Scriptures, which were written for our learning.

Thirdly, We are not to take upon trust what men do deliver, because God does
command us to try that which men do deliver, whether it be from God or no, 1
These. 5.21. 1 Ioh. 4.1.

Fourthly, Now we have no infallible men, as the Prophets and the Apostles
were, therefore we should do as the noble Bereans did, search the Scriptures to
see whether those men, that preach, preach according to the Scripture, or no,
Acts 17.10, 11.

But it may be you will object and say, Is there any that can infallibly search
the Scriptures, and so be able to try others?

I answer: Christ has given gifts unto men to try as well as to teach, and it
is his command to try; Try all things, hold fast that which is good, 1 These.
5.21.

But it will be counted a boldness in a man that dwells in a Parish to try the
Minister or the Church Officers; but the Church may call them to account: I
mean, the whole Parish, or a select Congregation may call their Officers to
account, for they are but as Stewards to the Church. I shall conclude with that
of the Apostle Peter; [ As every man, says he, has received the gift, even so
minister the same one to another, as good stewards of the manifold grace of
God: And if any man speak, let him speak as from the Lord: and if any man
minister, let him do it as of the ability which God gives, that God in all
things may be glorified through Jesus Christ, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11.

There has been much said, may go astray: as for instance, the Bishops said
they were the Church: and every superstitious Priest in a parish, that could
preach no better then a Cobbler, and yet had two or three hundred pound a year,
he would say, he was an Officer in the Church, and who should control him? Now
in this case, amongst them, the Officers would not cast out the Officers; but
they all conspired against the people to keep them in bondage: Is it so, that
there is not a wise man amongst you? if there be, then consider among your
selves, and if the case be difficult, then if you please, you may take the
advice of your neighbor Church, and so end the difference among your selves,
and never trouble the Courts; and this will be a means to save the peoples
money, 1 Cor. 6.5, 6. Those that bear office in the Church ought to be meek and
wise, might: and how then shall we find out Gospel Ministers and Church Officers
which have discerning spirits? And if this gift of discerning be wanting, then,
it may be, we shall take an enemy into our bosom, and cast out our friends, and
then both the Ministers and Church Officers will be at a loss among themselves.
Now the Lord help us out of this way: and for the most part of the people in a
parish, they have a vail before their eyes: [and how few in a parish are there
that can make out a right knowledge of Jesus Christ! how unable then are such
people to choose Church Officers!] It may be they will choose ignorant men instead
of knowing men, and blind men instead of seeing men: And then it will come to
pass, as our Savior said, If the blind lead the blind, it is very likely they
may both fall into a ditch, Mat. 15.14.

But you will say,

I answer: The clear spiritual and Evangelical preaching of the Gospel: For
unto this will all the Nations flow: Lord, and he will teach us of his ways: for
out of Zion shall go forth the Law. And we shall have the swords of our enemies
beaten into plow-shares, and then we shall learn war no more: read that
Evangelical Prophet Isaiah 2.2, 3, 4, 5. And so Jesus Christ does enable his
Apostles to be Evangelical: and those that be his Ministers, he does enable
them to deliver the spirituality of the Gospel: for they have received that
freely, and they cannot but freely give that out again: And so likewise Christ
does send forth his Ministers, and bids them Provide neither gold nor silver in
their purses: neither two coats, neither shoes, nor yet staves to lean upon,
and so to be Independents, but lean upon him and depend upon him, for he will
provide for them, and go before them, and move the hearts of some men, and they
shall find favor, and be refreshed by them for their labor; and so they shall not
need to make a bargain for a hundred or two hundred pound a year, teach others
to live the life of faith, so they ought to be ensamples to live the life of
faith in the use of that employment which God has set them about, Mat. 10.9,
10. He that has the faith of Jesus Christ is a son of peace, and does not make
a sale of the Gospel, but is content with that which is given him, and with
that which is set before him, Luke 10.4, 5, 6, 7, 8.

In the time of greatest trouble, Mat. 6.31, 32, 33, 34. Judas had his hand
upon the Table to betray Jesus Christ, Then his Disciples were foolishly
striving among themselves who should be counted the greatest: But mark now how
Christ calls them, and tells them it shall not be so amongst them, for they were
his Disciples; and it shall not be so amongst those that are my Ministers, says
Christ, for they shall be gentle, as a nurse amongst her children: My Ministers
shall not strive nor be rough-handed: for this is the Heathens way, and the
false Prophets way; But ye, my Disciples, and you that be my Ministers indeed,
ye shall not be so; but he that will be great among you, let him be in the lowest
place; and he that will be as the chief among you, let him be as one that is a
servant, Luke 22.23, 24, 25, 26.

To conclude,

Now, in such cases as these, there is need of that gift of discerning: for in
most parishes there are three sorts of people.

Judas; now Judas betrayed the Truth of God into the hands of sinners, Judas
did not love Jesus Christ, therefore he did betray him with a fair word, Hail
Master. Mat. 26.47, 48, 49, 50. Is not this in use now in our days, I ask the
question: Are there not many, in most parishes now, that are like unto Judas in
this? They will go along with the Truth in a formal way, and they will keep
company with Jesus Christ as the time will bear it; as though the life of
Religion did lie in outward forms, and observing of times: Now true love to God
is the life and power of Religion: But if this love to God be wanting, and then
the times do turn, and put on a Prelatical face,

Luke 11.45, 46, 52, 53, 54. For they did urge and provoke Jesus Christ to
speak of many things; laying wait to catch something out of his mouth, that
they might accuse him; for they consulted how they might take Jesus by
subtilty, and kill him, or cause him to be put to death, Mat. 26.3, 4. I pray
God that we may not use his members so in our days; for in most parishes there
are many that can talk like Lawyers, the truth as it is in Jesus, Ephesians. 4.21.
Therefore there is such secret jeering and disdainful behavior, and such
vaunting in pride, and reproaching one another, and scornful looks against our
brethren and neighbors: Take one instance, David he takes notice of these sorts
of people; [ Lord, says he, I was a reproach among all mine enemies,] but
especially among my neighbors; fear was upon me when they took counsel against
me, Psa. 31.11, 13. But when they were sick, I prayed for them as though they
had been my friend or brother; but they rendered evil for good: for when I was
in distress they were glad, with hypocritical mockers in feasts, the abjects
gnashed upon me, and did tear me; and when I went by them they winked with
their eye: and if thy rod, O Lord, does but touch me, then they say, Aha, aha,
now God will forsake him: And besides all this, O Lord, says David, they devise
deceitful matters against them that are quiet in the Land, Psa. 35.13, 14, 15,
16, 19, 20, 21. But you will say, this was in David's time, and against David. I
answer: It was so likewise in Christ's time, and against Christ; and it is so in
our time, and against the members of Christ: for he that has a mind to follow
Christ, must take up a Cross; For the way to enter into the Kingdom of God is
through much tribulation and accusation, Acts 14.22.

The third sort of people, which trusted in themselves, that they were
righteous, and despised others, Luke 18.9. Now a Pharisee is one that seems
to worship God zealously, and yet knows not Jesus Christ: We have one Father,
said the Jews to Jesus Christ: Now Christ answered the Jews; If God were your
Father, ye would love me: for I came out of the bosom of the Father, Ioh. 8.41,
42. And so likewise those Pharisees, that were so zealous for the Sabbath day,
yet they knew not Jesus Christ the Substance of the Sabbath, and the Rest of
the day. Jesus Christ had opened the eyes of one that was born blind; a
convincing miracle; Yet these Pharisees said, This man is not of God, nor from
God, because he keeps not the Sabbath, but does such things as these on the
Sabbath day, Ioh. 9.16. These Pharisees had the Scriptures of the Prophets,
which held forth Christ clearly, yet they were blind, and saw nothing but the
outside of the letter; they did not know the mind of God in the letter, which
mind of God is Jesus Christ: We know that God spoke unto Moses, say the
Pharisees, but as for this fellow, meaning Jesus Christ, we know not from
whence he is, Ioh. 9.29. So ignorant were the Pharisees, and yet very zealous.

I ask a question, [Have not we, They will put you out of the Synagogues, says
Christ, yea, they will, even to the very killing of you, think that they do God
service: And these things will they do unto you, because they have not known the
Father nor me, Ioh. 16.2, 3. Take one instance; The chief Priests and Pharisees
first gathered a counsel to put Jesus Christ to death, Ioh. 11.47, 53. And then
after that, they consulted to put Lazarus to death also, Ioh. 12.10, 11, 19.
Wherefore? says the Apostle, because they sought it not by faith, but as it
were by the works of the Law,] Romans 9.31, 32. Romans 10.2, 3.

CHAP. V.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Acts 20.28. 1 Timothy 5.17. Acts 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Acts 15.2, 3, 4, 22. Col.
4.16, 17. Cant. 4.12, 13, 14. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Psa. 32.8. Isa. 48.17. 1 Pet.
4.11. Acts 6.3, 5, 7, 8. Cant. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Cant. 2.3. Mat. 23.4, 5, 6, 7.23,
24, 25, 26, 27, 28. Mat. 15.1, 2, 3. Jer. 7.4. Exodus 3.2, 6, 7, 8. Isa. 58.2.
Zech. 7.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. Isa. 58.6, 7. Mat. 23.27, 28. Micah 3.5, 6. Jer.
5.30, 31. Micah 3.9, 10, 11, 12. Zeph. 3.3, 4. Joh. 6.63. Luke 3.16, 17. Isa.
35.5, 6. Isa. 30.18, 19, 21. Zeph. 3.9. 1 Samuel 3.9, 10. Mat. 22.11, 12. Luke
2.29, 30. Cant. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Cant. 4.8, 9, 10. Cant. 1.12, 13. Joh. 13.1. Heb.
13.5, 6. Mat. 6.9. Joh. 21.20. Isa. 41.10. Heb. 10.19, 20. Habbak. 3.17, 18.
Psa. 121.1, 2, 3. 1 John 1.3, 4. Joh. 17.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.4, 9. 2 Timothy 1.9. Col.
3.3, 4. Joh. 14.19, 20. Joh. 17.23, 24, 26. Joh. 16.13, 14, 15. Isa. 33.16, 17.
Mat. 3.11. Joh. 1.26. Act. 19.2, 3. 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Timothy 3.2,
3, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 36.25. Isa. 44.3. Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. Mark 1.8. 1 John 3.18, 19,
20, 21, 22, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 12.12, 13, 14. 1 Cor. 10.17. 1 Cor. 6.17. Gal. 6.15.
1 Cor. 1.14.19, 23, 24. Joh. 20.11, 16, 17, 18. Gal. 6.14, 15. Col. 2.12, 13,
14, 15. 1 Pet. 3.21. Ephesians. 2.5, 6. Joh. 29.30. 1 John 3.18. 1 Cor. 14.20. Mark
10.16. Acts 2.39. Heb. 2. Romans 9.11, 12, 13. Mal. 1.2. Luke 1.43, 44. Joh.
3.29. Jer. 1.5. Exodus 2.3, 4, 6, 7, 8. Isa. 29.11, 12, 13. Exodus 12.33, 39.
Exodus 14.19, 20. Isa. 58.3. Titus 3.4, 5, 6. Deuter. 9.4, 5. Isa. 64.6. Rev.
19.8. Mat. 7.22, 23. Mat, 25.11, 12. Gal. 2.20. Isa. 26.12. Romans 7.12, 13, 14,
22. Joh. 16.7, 8, 9. Psa. 103. Romans 5.8. Isa. 43.25. Col. 2.13, 14, 15. Psa.
68.13, 14. 2 Cor. 4.13. Cant. 1.3, 5. Ezekiel. 16.14. 2 Pet. 1.2, 3, 4. Isa. 53.6,
10, 11. Col. 2.15. 2 Cor. 4.10. Phil. 3.18, 19, 20, 21. 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. Mat.
6.7. 2 Timothy 2.19. Jer. 31.18. Romans 6.12. Romans 9.32. Ephesians. 6.13, 14, 15, 16, 17.
2 Cor. 10.4, 5. Rev. 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21. Heb. 4.12, 13. Romans 2.4. Genesis
39.8, 9. 2 Cor. 7.8, 9, 10, 11. 1 John 1.7.



And the first is this, Take heed to your selves, says the Apostle, that you be
made skilful; for your skill, if it be right, does extend to all the flock of
God: Therefore such men must be taught of God, or else they will never be good
guides, nor skilful watchmen; for these gifts must be singular in such men, and
far above ordinary gifts: And so likewise, such men must be full of the holy
Ghost; and the holy Ghost must make them overseers, and enable them, or else
they cannot break the bread of Life, nor open the Fountain of living Water to
hungry and thirsty souls, which gape for the sweet consolations that flow forth
from Jesus Christ, to feed the Church of God which he has purchased with his
own blood. It is to be feared, many of our preaching Elders are not so enabled,
as to preach out of their own experience, but speak other men's words, and
deliver other men's judgments; and if it be so with our preaching Elders, it is
likely to be so with our lay Elders: and if so, then the Church is like to be
poor, and will be like a starved child with a bad nurse. Take heed, says the
Apostle, to your selves, and see that you make known the good will of God, as I
have done, to all the flock of God, and that by the power of the holy Ghost,
and feed them with the food of the Gospel, Acts 20.28.

The second word that I shall commend to the Elders, is this, Let the elders
that rule well, says the Apostle, be counted worthy of double honor, if they
rule according to the Gospel, especially they who are made acquainted with the
labor of love, in the word and doctrine of Jesus Christ, 1 Timothy 5.17. These be
preaching Elders that are here spoken of, which are able in some measure to
teach the people; for the Elders ought to be able to teach the people, and that
for three Reasons.

The first is this: preaching Elders abroad to gather in souls into the Church,
and to strengthen them that are gathered in [and the Church sent forth
Barnabas, that he should go as far as Antioch, and the Elders were to teach the
people, and to instruct them in his absence.] Read Act. 11.20, 21, 22, 23, 24.
and 15.2, 3, 4, 22.

The second Reason is this: Archippus, says the Apostle to the Church of
Colossians, and bid him take heed to the ministry, and look that he speak no
more but what he has received from the Lord, and fulfill that with love and
diligence. Read Colos. 4.16, 17.

The third Reason is this. Can. 4.12, 13, 14. The Church of Jesus Christ is
like unto a pleasant University, whose Scholars are believing Christians,
whose Schoolmaster is Jesus Christ, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. And these Scholars are
all taught of God. I will instruct thee, and teach thee in the way which thou
shall go, says the Lord, and I will guide thee with mine eye, Psalm. 32.8. And
again, I am the Lord thy God, which teaches thee to profit, Isai. 48.17. Now
for this Reason, the Elders which are but as stewards to the Church, ought to
be able to teach the people, of the manifold grace of God, as the Apostle Peter
speaks, 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. Put the case, the preaching Elder should die; then you
may take, if you please, the Apostles advice; Look ye out among your selves a
man full of the holy Ghost, and wisdom, and choose such a man. Read Acts 6.3, 5,
6, 7, 8. This is the Apostles advice; for the Church of Christ in its young
age, had many men in it that were full of the holy Ghost, and of heavenly
wisdom: and I hope the Church now, in its old age, has many more that are made
able to teach others. If we do not set up a form for Religion, and deny,
through ignorance, the power of Religion, and so take the shadow for the
substance, which we shall do, if we rest upon those that seem to teach others
that which they have not learned themselves.

Now the third, Can. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Now the poor soul having found Jesus Christ,
sits down under his shadow with great delight, and his fruit was sweet to my
taste, says the thirsty soul, Can. 2.3. Now the Elders clean the outside of the
cup and platter, and the washing of hands; and in the mean time, these ignorant
Pharisees omited the weightier matters of the Law, as Judgment, Mercy, Faith,
and Love; for Love which comes forth from true Faith, I think there is but very
little of it in use now in our days; if there be, What means neighbors
vaunting, in pride, Matthew. 23.4, 5, 6, 7, 23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 28. And so in
Matthew. 15.1, 2, 3. And we seem to take content in outward observations, and
say, O! the Temple of the Lord, the Temple of the Lord; and the ordinances of
the Lord are these: and yet we know not the good will of him that dwelt in the
bush, Jere. 7.4. Exodus 3.2, 6, 7, 8. And thus we outwardly appear before men,
but inwardly we are ignorant of God, and of Jesus Christ, [as it will appear in
most Parish Churches: for one says, he has believed ever since he could
remember; and another, she says, she has as good a heart as the best; and
another, he hopes to be saved for his good meaning, and for his good thoughts;
and another says, he believes as the Church believes; and another says, he
believes what the Preacher says; and whether it be true or false, he cannot
tell, but God forbid, but he should believe his Minister.] Now such people are
soon drawn to a form of Religion of any fashion; for as the State changes, so
they will change. Now there are some others that can talk learnedly, and they
think they know much; but indeed and in truth, they understand but little of
Jesus Christ: yet they may have a curious form of Religion, may do, and does
do. Mistake me not, I speak not against the using of good Books, for I know
those that are lame must have a crurch. But one word with understanding and
grace, is better then a thousand words in a Catechism without understanding.

And so likewise, Isaiah speaks, Isaiah 58.2. If we do that which is like
unto the Jews, then we are like unto the Jews: and if we do not fast unto the
Lord, then we do fast unto our selves; but if we do fast unto the Lord, then
what means this bleating of the sheep, says Samuel to Saul; what means,
says the Prophet Isaiah, this putting forth of the finger, and speaking
against our neighbors and brethren; what means this strife and debate, and
this biting and devouring one another, and this smitting with the fist in
private? Is not this wickedness, to bow down our heads as a bull-rush, and yet
these things remain, and we seemingly call upon the Lord. But this is not to
fast unto the Lord. Read Zech. 7.5, 6, 7, 8, 9, 10. [Now if it would please God
to help us but to keep one right Fasting day, then we should loose the bands of
wickedness, and undo the heavy burdens, Isai. 58.6, 7. Now the Elders that are
not able to feed the flock of God, they outwardly appear to be religious before
men, as Christ speaks; so you may read Matthew. 23.27, 28. And so says the
Prophet Micah, concerning the Prophets; and so says the Lord, They make my
people err, they seem to be that which they are not, that bite with their
teeth and cry, Peace: and he that puts not into their mouths, Have not we
had many such Prophets and Elders in our days? read Micah 3.5, 6. And so
likewise the Lord takes notice of the people, as well as of the Prophets and
the Priests. The Prophets prophecy falsely, says the Lord, and the Priests bear
rule by their means; and this is a horrible thing committed in the land; and my
people, says the Lord, love to have it so: Mark this O ye people of England,
for the Lord takes notice of you that call truth error, and error truth, Jere.
5.30, 31. Now the Elders that are not able to feed the flock of God; and the
priests that teach for hire, and the heads of the house of Jacob that abhor
judgment, or neglect to do justice to the poor, and so pervert all equity; yet
says the Prophet, they will lean upon the Lord, and say, Is not the Lord among
us, none evil can come upon us. My desire is, that these things were not to be
found amongst us at this day, read Micah 3.9, 10, 11, 12. Zeph. 3.3, 4. Mark
what the Prophet Micah says, They lean upon the Lord; that is, they lean upon
the ordinances of the Lord in a carnal way; they lean upon being outwardly
baptized, and the hearing of the Word preached, and the outward receiving of
the Sacrament; and they lean upon Church Fellowship, and upon an outward
Confession of Faith, only in words. But mark now what our Savior Christ
speaks, John 6.63. The flesh profiteeh nothing: mistake me not [I say to lean
upon the outside of the ordinances of God, profits nothing; which the most
part of the world does to this day. The leaning upon being baptized with water,
either young or old, profits nothing;] but the being baptized with the holy
Ghost, Luke 3.16, 17. And so to lean upon the outward preaching of the Word,
that will not profit us, until Christ open our ears and speak in our hearts,
and say, this is the way, and I will enable you to walk in this my way, and you
shall spiritually hear this voice; and I will wait, says the Lord, to be
gracious unto you, and I will turn a pure language unto you, and you shall
serve the Lord with one consent, read Isai. 35.5, 6. and 30.18, 19, 21. Zeph.
3.9. And when this is, we shall profit, and with Samuel we shall say, Speak
Lord for thy servant hears, 1 Samuel 3.9, 10. And so likewise, to lean upon the
outward receiving of the Sacrament, it will profit nothing. speechless, when
Christ speaks unto him, read Mat. 22.11, 12.

Now a Saint and a true Believer are in a better condition, the most holy of
all; Mine eyes, says old Simeon, have seen thy salvation, O Lord, Luke 2.29,
30. A Saint sees Christ in the Spirit, though he be veiled with flesh: A true
Believer sits down at the table with Christ, who is the King of this banquet,
and there is friendly discourse between Christ and a poor soul: A poor soul
sits down under the shadow of Christ with great delight; and the graces of
Christ are sweet to my taste, says the poor foul, Cant. 2.3, 4, 5, 6. Now
Christ answers the poor soul again, and says, Thy graces smell sweeter, that I
have given thee, then the ointments of all spices, Cant. 4.8, 9, 10. Now a
believing soul is married to God and Christ, and does confess all her
sufficiency is from God and from Christ, While the King siteth at his table,
says the poor soul, my spikenard sends forth the smell thereof; Cant. 1.12,
13. Now Christ being once in the soul, is for ever in the soul, and with the
poor soul for to help it in all its wants, and loves it to the end, that is,
for evermore, Joh. 13.1. And Christ promises, That he will never leave the poor
soul, nor forsake it in its greatest wants, Heb. 13.5, 6. Now a poor soul
begins to be strong in the Lord, because Jesus Christ has taught it to call
God, Father, Mat. 6.9. And Christ himself calls the poor soul his brother and
his sister, and tells them he will [pray] his Father, and their Father, Joh.
21.20.

soul begins to be without slavish fear, and without bastard-like fear, because
God has said, [ Fear thou not, for I am with thee; be not dismayed, for I am
thy God; I will strengthen thee, yea, I will help thee, O thou poor weary soul!
yea, I will uphold thee with the right hand of my righteousness,] Isa. 41.10.
Now this is that which holds up the head of a believing man or woman in this
troublesome world; Heb. 10.19, 20. And so likewise a believing man, by the eye
of faith, does see himself secure in this new and living way, though the world
should be turned upside down: What says the Prophet Habakkuk? Although, says
he, the fields should yield no meat, and the flocks were cut off from the fold;
and there should be no herd in the stals; Mark the condition of a true
believing man; Yet, says he, I will rejoice in the Lord, and I will joy in the
God of my salvation, Habak. 3.17, 18. I will lift up mine eyes, says the
believing man, unto the hills, from whence comes my help: My help comes from
the Lord, which made heaven and earth, Psa. 121.1, 2, 3.

Now in the next place, to lean upon Church Fellowship, this will not profit us:
But there is a fellowship, which the Apostle speaks of, Joh. 1.3, 4 and this
fellowship is by way of union, I in them, and thou in me, that they may be made
perfect in one, Joh. 17.23, 24.

I shall now speak a word to those that are in external Church Fellowship, God,
which he had purposed in himself before the world was; and has chosen us with
an unchangeable love in him, [that is, in Christ Jesus] before the foundation
of the world, That we should be holy, and without blame before him in love,
read Ephesians. 1.4, 9. 2 Timothy 1.9. Here you may see the original of the Saints, from
whence they are; They come forth from God, and they go with Jesus Christ to God
their Father again: For their life is hid with [Christ in God,] read Col. 3.3,
4. Joh. 14.19, 20. For at that day, says Christ to the Saints, ye shall know,
that I am in my Father, and you in me, and I in you; and because I live, ye
shall live also: And where I am, there shall you be also, and you shall behold my
glory, says Christ to the poor souls of men, and rejoice in that, and you shall
see my Fathers love in me, and it shall be in you, and I will be in you, read
Ioh. 17.23, 24, 26. Here you may see from whence the Saints are, and upon what
fellowship they lean; They lean upon the unchangable love of God, and they lean
upon their friend Jesus Christ, forth of the sweet Spirit from God, and from
Jesus Christ into their hearts; and that sweet Spirit will show them [things to
come] as Christ tells them; and that blessed Spirit will teach them to profit,
and he will make Jesus Christ beautiful in their eyes; for he shall receive from
God and from Jesus Christ, [and shall show it unto them,] as Christ himself
speaks; read Ioh. 16.13, 14, 15. Isa. 33.16, 17. Here you may see what heavenly
provision, and what a sure place of rest the holy one of Israel has prepared
for every true believing soul: and here you may see what fellowship God and
Jesus Christ have with every true believing man or woman: [And will you, that
are called Anabaptists, I indeed baptize you only with water, says John, Mat.
3.11. Joh. 1.26. And this you do, and mightily lean upon this weak shadow or
figure; and it is to be feared that many amongst you are like unto those in the
Acts, where Paul asked them, If they had received the holy Ghost; and they said
unto him, we have not so much as heard whether there be any holy Ghost, Acts
19.2, 3. Are not you carnally minded about the ordinances of God, for the most
part of you, as the Apostle speaks in 1 Cor. 3.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7. Does not
the most part of you rest in outsides of Religion, being but very little
acquainted with the truth and power of Religion, as it is in the Spirit? What
difference is there between parishes, and you, from which you dissent? Tim.
3.2, 3, 4, 5. and think they were baptized when they were young; and if they
hear Sermons then they may be admitted to the Sacrament, as they think, by the
Minister or Elders; and if there be no more but this, it is a mere outside
show, and a form that will not profit; and is it not so with many of you that
are called Anabaptists? If you be but admited by those that say they will
baptize you, even the sprinkling of clean water upon you, and this will purge
your corrupt natures; Ezekiel. 36.25. And this water will refresh thy parched soul,
Isa. 44.3. And this water will be as a Well of Living Water for to comfort thee
in all thy straits, Joh. 7.37, 38, 39. He, shall baptize you with the holy
Ghost, meaning Jesus Christ, Mark 1.8. Now you that are called Anabaptists, and
you Presbyterians, if you were acquainted with the Baptism of Jesus Christ,
that would clear up your judgments, which I conceive are very dark, [for God is
Love;] and if you were acquainted with this Baptism, it would teach you to love
one another, read 1 John 3.18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23, 24. But one of you prays
against the other, which is not well.

One word more to you that are rigid Anabaptists; Cor. 12.12, 13, 14. And those
that are one with Jesus Christ, you judge not fit to be members or one with you,
if they be not of your judgment or opinion; [But we being many, are one bread,
and one body; for we are all partakers of that one bread,] 1 Cor. 10.17. And by
one Spirit, says the Apostle, we are all baptized into one body, 1 Cor. 12.13.
[And those that are joined to the Lord, are one spirit with the Lord,] 1 Cor.
6.17. And will you slight those, or separate your self from those that God has
joined to himself? This is not well; judge not according to externals, be not
over rigid in censuring; [Cease to be legal; learn to be spiritual; and then
you will love one another; for salvation does not depend upon diping, or
sprinkling, or plunging, or washing,] read Gal. 6.15.

Anabaptists: Do not the public professors of this Kingdom, both Ministers and
people, for the most part, rest in an outside and a visible form of Religion? I
know you will answer, Cor. 1.13, 14.23, 24. The Baptism of water, for
profession, is nigh at hand, and both young and old receive it; But the Baptism
of the Spirit is far off, and few there be that have it; but those that have
it, do not go back again to the shadow, because Christ the Sun does shine, who
is the Substance. Mary Magdalen, after she had seen Christ was risen from the
grave, she did not return back again to look Christ in the grave, Joh.
20.11.16, 17, 18. Now you that lean so much upon the Baptism of water, if you
have no more, that will profit but little: But moderate and Christian friend,
the Baptism of the Spirit of Christ will teach us to profit in all conditions;
It will teach us to know the world to be passing away, and all the glory of it
to be but as grass: It will teach us to dye to the world with Christ upon the
Cross, Gal. 6.14, 15. It will teach us to go down with Christ from the Cross
into the Grave, and there to see sin, the devil, the world, the grave, and the
old man conquered and subdued; and Jesus Christ triumphing from the Cross to
the grave, and in the grave; and this is the Christians daily work, if they
have faith, read Col. 2.12, 13, 14, 15. And so this blessed Spirit will baptize
every true Believer every day more and more into the resurrection of Jesus
Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. Now a true Believer, being raised up from the grave,
together with Jesus Christ, is made to sit together in heavenly places in
Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.5, 6. And this is the Baptism that will profit us, and
answer all our doubts, and fill our hearts full of the joy of the Lord, that is,
Christ, the bridegroom of the soul; and the soul stands to hear the voice of
Christ, and greatly rejoices in that: Jesus Christ is the spiritual Loadstone
that draws up the soul to himself, John Baptist did rejoice in Christ's
Ministry, for he saw that to be glorious, and said, Christ should increase, and
the glory of his Ministry should run up into Christ's Ministry; He must
increase, says John, but I must decrease, Joh. 3.29, 30. Now you that rest so
much upon water, the Baptism of an outward profession, and slight all those
that are not of your opinion, and you contend much for the time when, and the
manner how, this ordinance of God must be administered; [Not to young children,
you say, but to men and women of years, because a young child cannot make a
verbal Confession of Faith,] it is true indeed; but a man or a woman, in years,
may learn by education to make a verbal Confession of Faith in a customary way,
the kingdom besides. Much may be said of faith, in word, and in tongue, but
very little said, in faith, in deed, and in truth, 1 John 3.18. Much may be
said in formality, but very little said in spirituality: and is not this
discernable to be in men and women of years, and of several opinions, which are
like unto children taught of men for to read a form of letters, and to turn
them into words; and so they speak like children in understanding, 1 Corinthians.
14.20.

One word concerning young children. Mark 10.16. and makes a promise unto them,
Acts 2.39. and [this promise begets faith in them;] Heb. 12.2. Now the God of
all grace and power, the ordinance of baptism? I know you will say, because
they cannot make a confession of their faith.

I a^k, have you the gift of discerning for to know whether or no your men and
women in years make a confession [in faith,] or not?

You will say, you cannot look into their hearts.

I ask, how know you then,

You will say, you ought to have charity toward them.

[I pray you in like manner have charity toward young children, Jacob have I
loved in the womb, Romans 9.11, 12, 13. Mal. 1.2. And so likewise, Christ is the
object of his childs love, though it be in the womb. Instance, The babe leaped
in my womb, says Elizabeth, for joy, or with joy in Christ, Luke 1.43, 44.
John 3.29. And so instance in Jerem. 1.5. And so in that remarkable instance of
Moses; where you may see the tender eye of God ever over them, for to preserve
them in all straits and dangers in the womb, and at their mothers breast, and in
their grown age, read Exodus 2.3, 4, 6, 7, 8.

Loving and Christian friends, I have made bold to speak a word or two unto
you, but with submission to better judgments; one word more, and I shall
conclude. Friends in love, I conceive you are very dark in the spirituality of
the Gospel; the Presbyterians are against you, and call you Anabaptists, and
you are against the Presbyterians; but I shall make bold to tell you both, what
my judgment is of you both. I conceive for the greatest part of you, learned as
a book that is sealed, and the unlearned say, they cannot read this book, but
are taught the fear of the Lord by the precept of men, Isai. 29.11, 12, 13. Yet
they have the letter of this book in a form, but want the spiritual part of it,
which is Light and Love: and for want of this, we are in a wilderness of war,
and in a red sea of blood. Is Jesus Christ, and the Scriptures, become a pillar
of a cloud, that is dark unto you Anabaptists, ones, as Master Edwards is in
his Gangraena, who would set up a form of Religion, and all that cannot sit
down in that form, must be of no esteem among men? Nay, we will proceed against
them as Sectaries, and thrust them out of the Kingdom, Egyptians did the
Israelites, Exodus 12.33, 39. But stay a while, The angel of God, Jesus Christ,
will go in a pillar of fire, and in the pillar of the cloud, for to be a light
unto the despised ones, but no new light. Mark this, you that jeer at new
light; but in a pillar of a cloud that is dark to you, that are despisers of
your brethren; the Scriptures are as a cloud that gives light to Israel, but
they are a cloud and darkness to the Egyptians; so that they could not see for
to come to the Israelites, for to do them any harm at all, because the angel of
God, which went before Israel, removed and went behind them in the pillar of
the cloud; and that part of the cloud that was toward Israel, gave them light
in the night; but that part of the cloud which was toward the Egyptians, was
darkness to them, Exodus 14.19, 20.

A word in next place, Isai. 58.3. Not for my works, says the true believing
man, nor for my prayers and performances, but thy goodness, O Lord, moved thee
to look upon me, read Titus 3.4, 5, 6. For my righteousness, says the outside
Professor, The Lord will open heaven to me, and I most do something with Christ
for life, that God may bless me on earth, Deuter. 9.4, 5. But the true
believing Christian says, My righteousnesses are as filthy rags, and I am as
an unclean thing; but I am pure and clean in Jesus Christ, and I shall be
clothed in fine linen, clean and white; which linen is the righteousness of
Christ for Saints, Isai. 64.6. Revel. 19.8. I have done, says the carnal
Professor, many works in thy name, O Jesus: I have preached, and I have been
baptized, and I receive the Sacrament, and I gave alms to the poor, and I am a
member of a Church; and will not all this deserve heaven, O Jesus, together
with thy help? No says Christ, I will be all in all things to men, or else I
will be nothing at all to men; therefore, you that will do something with me,
in that I will not own you: depart from me, for this is a work of iniquity,
Mat. 7.22.23. and 25.11, 12. But the true believing man or woman says, Though
they live and move, and act, yet not they, but Christ lives in them, and the
life which we now live, it is from Jesus Christ, and by his strength we do all
that we do, and he shall have all the praise; for he works all our works for
us, and in us, Gal. 2.20. Isai. 26.12. There has been, and is now, any dislike
to sin, with a fancy concerning hell, as it is a prison for sin and sinners,
and so arises a false fear, or a slavish fear; and so no true knowledge of God,
nor of Jesus Christ, who is the Law of God; and he makes sin to become
exceeding sinful, Romans 7. verses 12, 13, 14, 22. None but Christ can forgive
sin, nor none but the Spirit of Christ can convince of sin, John 16.7, 8, 9.
Our learned make large confessions of sin, and so almost all other men do, or
may do; for to make a confession of sin by roat and in a customary way; and so
to think by confession of sin, they have done enough to get the pardon of sin;
and this the Papists do: but this will not profit neither them nor us. And do
not the most of men do this? Mistake me not, I speak not against confession of
sin to God; for a right confession of sin to God, turns to the praise of his
freegrace, who has forgiven our sins before we confess them, and has blotted
out our sins for ever, from before his face, and will not bear them in his
mind any more. Read that remarkable story of David, Psalm 103. read the whole
Psalm; and so Romans 5.8. Isai. 43.25. The end of my speech is against the
formality that is in the confession of sin, by the most of our learned and
others; and how few there be that make a right confession of sin, as from the
cross of Jesus Christ, Colos. 2.13, 14, 15. The unbelieving men, Ministers as
well as others, may make a very specious confession of sin, for matter of form,
and yet have neither faith in God, nor love to God, nor joy in the holy Ghost.
But the believing men, Ministers as well as others; they are the most able men
for to make confession of sin, because they have faith toward God, and love to
God, and joy in the holy Ghost. As for instance, Though I have lien among the
pots, says the believing man, yet I shall be as white as snow in Salmon: I
believe this, therefore have I spoken, Psalm 68.13, 14. 2 Cor. 4.13. I am
black, says the believing man or woman, but yet comely, through that
comeliness which Christ has put upon me; therefore my soul is in love with
Jesus Christ, Cant. 1.3, 5. Ezekiel. 16.14. So likewise, the true believing
Christian can make a confession of sin rejoycingly, and with great joy, seeing
the victory, and the spoiling of the powers of sin, and darkness; by the divine
nature of Jesus Christ, read 2 Peter 1.3, 4. Which threw down the humane nature
of Christ, Isai. 53.6, 10, 11. And this, Christ, as God, did, and does crucify
sin and the old man every day, triumphing over them is it [or in himself,]
Colos. 2.15. And is not this matter of great joy to a poo^ soul, that carries
about in his body, every day, the dying of the Lord Jesus 2 Cor. 4.10? O thou
poor soul, thou must lose thy self, and be taken up by the power of God, and
thou shall be found in Jesus Christ, Phil. 3.8, 9, 10. Ephesians. 1.18, 19, 20, 21.
Be of goo^ cheer, O thou poor soul! for if thou be dead with Christ, thou shall
live in eternal glory with Christ; and if thou suffer persecution, either from
the tongue, or from the hand, with Christ or for Christ, thou shall reign with
Christ, 2 Timothy 2.11, 12. O thou poor soul! if Christ has enabled thee for to
make such a confession of sin [in faith,] thou have cause to walk rejoycingly.
Now here will arise two objections.

The first is this,

I answer, Matthew. 6.7. and as most people do; but it is a forsaking of sin, as
the man in Christ does, 2 Timothy 2.19. It is not a bare confession of sin in
words, but it is a turning from sin to God: [and this is the work of Christ
only,] and none of thine O man. Turn me, O Lord, says Ephraim, for I cannot
turn my self, Jere. 31.18. We that are dead to sin, says the Apostle, and
risen again with Christ; we cannot live any longer therein, because grace does
abound, Romans 6.1, 2.

Now you will ask in the next place, Romans 9.32.

I shall answer your question, the shield of Faith, by which they are able for
to quench all the fiery darts of the devil, and wicked men: the second weapon
is, the helmet of salvation, which shall cover men in the day of battle: the
third weapon is, the sword of the spirit, and that is Jesus Christ, the living
Word of God, which will subdue all things unto himself. And is not this matter
of great joy? Read those two remarkable Scriptures, Ephesians. 6.13, 14, 15, 16,
17. 2 Cor. 10.4, 5.

But you will object, and say,

[But I say no, by no means, Revel. 19.13, 14, 15, 16, 20, 21. Heb. 4.12, 13.
The goodness of God leads men to repentance, and makes a man fly from sin:
How shall I, says Joseph, do this sin against my good God? Romans 2.4. Genesis
39.8, 9. Now this is the root that godly sorrow grows upon, and is not to be
repented of; but fleshly and carnal sorrow causes or works death; but godly
sorrow causes hatred against sin, and love to God; and is not this a great
cause for to walk rejoycingly? Read that remarkable Scripture, 2 Cor. 7.8, 9,
10, 11.

One word more, and so conclude: It is not thy brine tears, nor thy legal
fears, nor thy sad countenance, when thou make confession of thy sin; not it
is not thy saying, that thou art sorry for thy sin, [but it is the blood of
Jesus Christ that cleanses us from all sin,] 1 John 1.7.

CHAP. VI.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

John 5.10, 16. John 9.16. Isa. 581, 2. Jere. 7.4, 5, 6, 14. Luke 17.20. Neh.
8.8. Matthew. 23.2.3, 4. Matthew. 15.12, 13, 14. Phil. 1.16. Phil. 1.15, 16, 17.
Rev. 2.2. Romans 14.23. Romans 14.15. 2 These. 2.4, 7, 8, 9, 10. Jere. 32.40, 41.
Ephesians. 5.27. Romans 13.5. Dan. 3.18, 19, 20. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Romans 15.23. 2 Pet.
2.1. Matthew. 17.15. Matthew. 7.16. 1 Cor. 1.19, 20, 28, 29. Matthew. 23.28. Ephesians.
4.21, 22, 23, 24. Ephesians. 2.10. Joh. 15.4, 5. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 14, 15, 16. Act.
4.2, 3, 13, 21, 23. 1 John 5.20. Nehe. 8.2, 3, 5, 8. Acts 4.13, 20. Luke 24.27.
Matthew. 13.3, 34. John 3.3, 4. Luke 8.10. Psalm. 25.14. John 3.1, 3, 4. Romans
1.16. Psalm. 110.2, 3. Psalm 116.7. Heb. 10. 2 John 9, Heb. 10.23. Heb. 2.14.
Acts 22.22, 23. John 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. Acts 5.45. Isai. 29.11, 12. Matthew.
13.11. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. Matthew. 13.34, 35. Jere. 1.5. 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. Romans
14.19. Jude 1.20. Revel. 19.10. 1 Cor. 2.10, 15, 16. Numb. 11.29. Luke 10.5, 6.
Luke 6.22, 23, 26, 1 These. 2.7, 8, 9. Acts 20.33, 34. 1 Pet. 4.10, 11. John
4.10. Revel. 5.5. Isai. 29.18, 23, 24. 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. Isai. 29.11, 12. Acts
22.3, 4, 5. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6. John 3.1, 3, 4. Acts 26.9, 10, 11, 12. Luke 7.37,
38, 47. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. Cant. 1.2, 3. Mark 14.3, 4. Matthew. 15.1, 2. John
7.47, 48, 49. John 12.42, 43. 1 Cor. 13.6. 1 Pet. 3.4. 2 Pet. 1.7. Matthew.
13.27, 28, 29. Mal. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Matthew. 13.30. James 3.8, 9, 10. James 3.17,
18. John 8.42. John 17.8. Ioh. 16.27. Ioh 15.4, 5. Ioh. 14.9, 10, 11. Phil.
4.13. Gal. 2.20. Gal. 4.19. 1 Cor. 6.17. 1 Cor. 12.13. 1 Ioh. 1.3. Rev. 5.8, 9,
10, 11. Mat. 7.15. Mat. 7.16. 2 Pet. 2.3. Ephesians. 4.14. 2 Timothy 3.6. Acts 5.42.
Micah 3.5. Mat. 7.15. Col. 2.8, 18, 22, 23. 1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 8.7, 8. Ioh.
16.2, 3. Ier. 23.21, 30, 31. Ioh. 18.2, 3. Acts 20.29. Ier. 5.31.

Mat. 15.1, 2. Now these Elders did assume unto themselves to be much for the
glory and worship of God, and to have much zeal for the Sabbath day; and yet
they knew not Christ the Lord of that day, and the Rest of the day: but sought
to persecute him and to slay him, Ioh. 5.10, 16. and 9.16. And is it not so now
in our Kingdom and Cities at this day? Do we not seemingly seek and delight to
know the ways of God, as a Nation that did righteousness, and forsook not the
ordinance of God, and take delight in outward approaching to God? Isa. 58.1, 2.
And do not we rest upon the outward observations of these things, as the Jews
did, and cry, The Temple of the Lord, and the ordinances of the Lord, are
these? And thus the Jews did, Jer. 7.4, 5, 6, 14. And thus the Pharisees did;
but Christ told them, That the Kingdom of God comes not with observation, or
with outward shows, Luke 17.20. And do not the Pastors and Elders of our
Kingdom, for the most part, insist and go on in observations and outward shows,
which are as wels without water? As for instance, How many blind and ignorant
Ministers have we in the severel parts of this Kingdom; and may not one say in
this City also, that please themselves in outward shows, and observations, and
times, and it may be read the book of Homilies, and the book of Common prayer?
But now the time is altered for that; yet they have a good mind for to do it
still, Ezra the Priest did, Neh. 8.8. And thus the most people are kept in
ignorance by those that are only [Ministers of letters] and no more: and may
not a boy of eight years old do as much as such men?

Now the second sort of Ministers are such that have strength of natural parts,
and no more, [as a strong memory, and a large utterance, and the gift of humane
learning, and the help of a great Library, and so sit at that all the week; and
so by this means a man may get one or two hours discourse, for one day in a
week:] Now such men are [Ministers only of words.] And have not we experience
abundantly, in these our sad times, of their frothy and empty words? May not
one say now of such men, as Christ said of the Pharisees, They only say? Mat.
23.2, 3, 4. And may not one say, Let them alone, as Christ said of the
Pharisees, they be blind leaders of the blind: and if the blind lead the blind,
what danger are they both in? And are not the most parishes in this Kingdom in
such danger and in such a ditch? Mat. 15.12, 13, 14. Witness Cornwall, and
Wales, and Oxfordshire. And may not one come nearer, even into London, and find
the most people in most parishes so [sotish] that they will be led any way, and
be pleased with any thing, as formerly with the reading of the Common prayer
Book, which is a form of words that a boy may read: And so likewise they will
say, such a man is a brave Teacher, or an excellent Preacher, a great Scholar,
or a mighty learned man; not knowing that Christ may be preached by help of the
Natural Arts that are among us, though grace may be wanting: And thus it comes
to pass, that Christ is preached out of contention amongst us, and not
sincerely, but in strife, as you may see plainly, Phil. 1.16. And thus the most
people are pleased with outward shows, but little acquainted with the true
preaching of Jesus Christ, which is the inward Substance.

Now the third sort of Ministers, they profess themselves to be of the Kings
party; and they have their followers; and they say they preach the truth, and
they stand for the truth. I ask, Is Christ divided, whose Ministers you say you
are? You say those that preach against that which you preach are rebellious;
for you preach the Truth, and you stand for the King.

I have spoke of three sorts of Ministers; yet there is but one Truth: Now this
one Truth not being rightly known, by these three sorts of Ministers, hence it
comes to pass, That they preach Christ, says the Apostle, out of envy and
strife, one against another, Phil. 1.15, 16, 17. He that stands for the Truth
as it is in Jesus, and so preaches it, he only stands for the good of the King
and Kingdom: All of you say that you stand for the truth, and preach the truth;
so there were some in the Church of Ephesus, that seemed to be great, and said
they were Apostles, but they were found liars, Revel. 2.2.

There is an old proverb, Like Priests, and so on the other side, as a State
changes or alters in matters of Religion, so the people will change and alter
in matters of Religion: but a State or a Council of those men that are called
Divines, are not to fit at the stern, as the steer-man does; for to compel by
force, or to force men in matters of Religion, contrary to that which he knows
himself; and so doubtingly a man does that out of fear, which afterward
becomes sin: For whatsoever is not of faith is sin, Romans 14.23. Therefore we
ought to wait till God does persuade the heart of a man; for a man ought to be
persuaded in his own mind, that he may do nothing against the truth, but for
the truth, Romans 14.5. So in the next place, let us look to him, whose place it
is to sit at the stern, and that is Jesus Christ. Now there is none that will
presume to sit in that place with Jesus Christ, but only one, and that is
Antichrist; and he with his, do exalt themselves above Christ, who is God, as
you may plainly see, 2 These. 2.4, 7, 8, 9, 10. And this mystery of iniquity is
discovered in these latter times, by the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and with the
brightness of his coming. Iere. 32.40, 41. Ephesians. 5.27. And so likewise, Christ
leads forth the soul actively to be subject to the Magistrate in all lawful
demands, Romans 13.1, 5. And so likewise, Christ does help the soul passively to
be subject to the Magistrate in all unlawful demands; that is, to suffer, if
you cannot do that which they command you: as for instance, Be it known unto
thee, O King, say those three Worthies, we will not serve thy gods, though thou
cast us into the burning fiery furnace, Dan. 3.18, 19, 20. And those that
Christ does thus enable, can pray, and do pray for the Magistrate; therefore
let them live peaceably by you, in your Cities and Parishes, and do not disdain
them and force them to say, as Paul said in another case, and now we shall have
no more place in these parts, hardly to live in, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. Romans 15.23.

There have been false Prophets, Pet. 2.1. Therefore says our Savior, Beware
of false Prophets, and false Teachers, Mat. 7.15.

Quest.

Ans. By their fruits, says Christ, ye shall know them, Mat. 7.16.

Q. What is meant by Fruits, Learning, or an outside show of holiness, for this
the chief Priests and Pharisees had?

Ans. Cor. 1.19, 20, 28, 29. Mat. 23.28.

Q.

A. Ephesians. 4.21, 22, 23, 24. and 2.10. Ioh. 15.4, 5.

Q.

A. can they judge? But the spiritual man is able to judge of all things, because
he knows the mind of Jesus Christ, who only knows the mind of God, and reveals
it to them by his Spirit, who searches the deep things of God, 1 Cor. 1.18,
19. 1 Cor. 2.9, 10, 14, 15, 16.

Q. Now you will ask, what can these men do more then other men,

A. Peter and John, took notice of them that they had been with Jesus, and the
chief Priests and the Elders put them into prison, and threatened them, as we do
the poor Independents, read Acts 4.2, 3, 13, 21.23. and so 1 Ioh. 5.20.

Q. But you will say, an instance of such abilities in learned men, and
unlearned men, and are there any such now in our days?

A. Ezra the Priest did read in the Book in the Law of God distinctly, and gave
the sense, and caused them to understand the reading, Neh. 8.2, 3, 5, 8. And so
likewise Peter and John, the Disciples of Christ, they were unlearned men, and
yet they could not but speak the things which they had heard and seen, Acts
4.13, 20. And so likewise it was the practice of Christ himself, beginning at
Moses, and all the Prophets, he expounded unto them in all the Scriptures
[things concerning himself] Luke 24.27. The letter of the Scriptures is as a
parable to the learned of the world, and to the unlearned, Mat. 13.3, 34. Ioh.
3.3, 4. But to the scholars of Christ, it is given to them, in all times, for
to know the mysteries of the Scriptures, Luke 8.10. The secret of the Lord is
with them that love and fear him; and, because he loves them, he will show them,
Christ, his Covenant, Psa. 25.14.

Object. you, or whom do you mean?

Ans.

Object.

Ans. the City of London, are ignorant of the pure Religion, Nicodemus, that
ignorant learned man, that came to Christ by night, and asked Christ, How a man
can be born when he is old? Can he enter the second time into his mothers womb,
and be born? John 3.1, 2, 4. Now there are abundance of such professors in our
days, both learned and unlearned, that can complement with Religion, and with
Jesus Christ, as a good man: But there are but few that know Christ spiritually
as the power of God, or the day of Gods power; or as the day of Gods rest; Romans
1.16. Psa. 110.2, 3. Psa. 116.7. Heb. 4.10.

Q. Pure Religion?

A. John 9. Heb. 10.23. Heb. 2.14.

I confess, though I have made two objections, make a great deal of ado, about
an outward show in matters of Religion, which are but circumstances, and
through ignorance they neglect the substance.

A. Sir my answer to you is this: Rome take pleasure in usurping authority over
Kings and over whole States: and those that differ with them about their ease
and their profit are like to go to the Inquisition house? And so you may
instance in the Lord Bishops of England; Those that did differ with them about
their Lordly authority, or about their fifteen hundred or two thousand a year,
were had up into the High Commission Court: And so now, those that differ with
them about ease, or about the profit of three, four, or five hundred a year,
shall be had up for a Sectary or an Antinomian: Mistake me not, I grudg not
against the well being of a deserving Minister that preaches Christ purely and
without mixture; for such ought to be had in singular respect because of
Christ; and such ought to be provided for, that they and their wives and
children may live comfortably. Now the Discipline that you say the most of the
learned differ about, is circumstances: but, I say it is well if they do not
make them substances. Sir, I think you are mistaken, for not one of five
hundred of the learned do differ about Discipline; for they are all of them as
one man; and yet they are questionable; and he that differs from them gets
himself a blot. Sir, are not we taught for to have the truth of God, in respect
of places and persons, and cry one place up and another place down; and cry up
such a man with respect to his habit, for he must have a black gown, or a black
suit and cloak, and look like a Minister, or else most people will take up a
prejudice against the truth of God; and so likewise a man must not worship God
as the Spirit of God does dictate unto him, or teach him; Edwards siteth at the
receipt of Custom, and raketh up all the filthy rags from all the parts of the
Kingdom for to make paper of them; but it proves but bloting paper; and so is
but little worth: but yet he makes a shift for to make a book of it full of
accusations and filthy reproaches, and lays them upon the heads of his
brethren, and brings them upon the stage of the world, and uncovers their
nakedness, nay it may be their weakness, and says, Lo these be the Sectaries
that trouble us: and then he calls them Independents and Antinomians or
Anabaptists: and then the people answer him, and say, as they said of Paul,
Away with such fellows from the earth, read that place, Act. 22.22, 23. Is this
the fruit of a Gospel Minister, Mr Edwards? for you say you are one. But if
this be the fruit you bear, I shall pray to God for to deliver me from such a
Ministry.

Sir, I pray you one word more which I had almost forgot; many of those that
seem to be zealous for the Presbyterian Government, do not care for coming to
the Elders; I conceive it is because they are so ignorant, for the most part of
them, in the principles of Religion, that they cannot tell what to say; and I do
wonder at many that are forward for that Government they know not, neither can
they soon understand it.

Q.

A. Believe me, says Christ to the woman, neither in this place, nor in that
place, Joh. 4.20, 21, 22, 23, 24. As well in a House as in a Church: and this
was the practice of the Apostles to preach the Gospel of Jesus Christ, Acts
5.42.

Object. and whom you hear?

A.

Q. But what think you;

A. For decency I agree with you:

Q. Is it not fit and necessary,

A. men; and the Clergy of Rome have abundance of it; and yet neither they nor
we can open the mysteries of Christ in the Scriptures with that key of humane
learning; Read Isa. 29.11, 12. [But the learned man in Christ, and the Scholars
that are taught of Christ, to them it is given to know the mysteries of the
Kingdom of God,] Mat. 13.11. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. [But those that are not taught of
Christ only know the Scriptures as a Parable,] Mat. 13.34, 35. And that is the
reason why there is such a hub-bub and such combustions in the world about
Religion: Jeremiah was; I have ordained thee a Prophet unto the Nations, says
the Lord to Jeremiah, Chap. 1.5.

Q.

A. you out of 1 Cor. 14.23, 24. But if all be able to prophecy, says the
Apostle, then they may, but it must be decently and in order. Now, whether you
call this preaching or exercising, or speaking to the people out of the word of
God, it is all one. Now every man ought to administer his gift as a good
steward, [for this end] to make out the things of peace, wherewith one may
edify one another, Romans 14.19. And [for this end,] that the Church may know
her self built upon the rock Christ, which is her most holy faith, praying in
the holy Ghost, Jude 20.

Q.

A. All that are of the Church, have the testimony of Jesus, 19.10. And this
spirit does reveal the mind of God, and the mind of Christ to them, 1 Cor.
2.10, 15, 16. And they may all prophecy one by one, that all may learn, and all
may be comforted; read these three places of Scripture, and consider well of
them, Rev. 19.10. 1 Cor. 2.10, 15, 16. and 14.29.30, 31, 32.

Object.

Ans. Moses request; and Moses said, Would to God that all the Lords people
were prophets, and that the Lord would put his Spirit upon them; and this sweet
Spirit will teach them the order of God, Number. 11.29.

Q.

A. Luke 10.5, 6. And why then may they not have a house to speak in? Now the
true Ministers of the Gospel of Christ, they are not to expect any favor from
the world of men, but they are for to expect reproach, and their name to be
cast out with an evil report upon it, as Antinomians, Anabaptists, or Familist,
or Sectary. And this is matter of joy for Christ sake. Read Luke 6.22, 23, 26.
And so likewise, a Minister of Christ is tender and gentle, even as a nurse;
and he does not mind his back and his belly, but his aim is to bring Christ
and the soul together; for that is dear unto him, 1 These. 2.7, 8, 9. And he
does not eagerly pursue, or covet after any man's silver or gold, Acts 20.33,
34. Now I think there is none, but ignorant and foolish men, that will be
contentions, and speak evil of such men.

Now I shall prove, As every man has received the gift, so let them minister
the same one to another, as good stewards of the ability which God gives to
edify one another with all, and for the glory of his holy name, 1 Pet. 4.10,
11. I speak of the gift, I speak not of the office; for all may prophecy, yet
all are not in office. Secondly, the place where these gifts are to be made
out, it is in the Church, or where the Church does meet. But if any more speak
in our Parish Churches besides one man which we call our Minister, it is likely
such a man may have dirt flung in his face.

Q.

Answ. John 4.10. And he will open the Book of letters, and give the original
of it in the Spirit, which is best of all. Read that place, Revel. 5.5. And
those that have not the Tongues, and yet no learning at all in the Book of
Letters, and are weak in understanding, Jesus Christ will teach them for to
know doctrine, and they shall be able for to speak of it unto others. Read
Isai. 29.18, 23, 24. Now on the other side, Those that have all Tongues, and
all the learning of men, they may want the testimony of Jesus, and become as
sounding brass, which gives an unpleasant sound, because it cannot sound forth
Christ, which is love, 1 Cor. 13.1, 2. And so likewise, the learned may both
preach and speak from the Scriptures, and be zealous as Saul was, and yet the
Scriptures may be as a sealed book to them; and so some learned, and some
unlearned, are both of them in the dark, read Isai. 29.11, 12.

Take two or three Instances for what has been said; and the first is of Paul,
when he was Saul, Acts 22.3, 4, 5. Phil. 3, 4, 5, 6. The second instance is of
Nicodemus, a great ruler of the Jews, John 3.1, 3, 4. Now such men to whom the
everlasting Gospel is as a book sealed; they are subject for to persecute
others, either with the tongue, or with the hand, as Paul does confess of
himself; And being exceedingly mad against them, says Paul, I persecuted them,
even unto strange cities. Read this place, Acts 26.9, 10, 11, 12.

Friend what think you, Edwards, the Minister of Christ, as he calls himself,
and some other men now in our days, Acts 9.1.
who breathe out threatenings and enmity against those that are not of the same
opinion that they are. I ask, is not the Scripture to such men, as Mary's box
of ointment, full of sweetness; but the Scripture; which is the box, it is
sealed up to such men, and they have not the key of love for to open it, as
Mary did, Luke 7.37, 38, 47. Is there not some ground for to judge thus, when
one sees what vaunting there is against one another, and how little forbearing
one another, and how little kindness there is amongst some men? this is for
want of love, Read 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7. And if there come one, that has the
key of love, for to open this box of ointment, I mean, the Scriptures, which
are full of Christ, who alone is the sweetness in the box, which makes the
Virgins for to love him, read Cant. 1.2, 3. Now when such men do appear, that
can with spiritual skill speak of the sweetness of Jesus Christ, they may in
some sort expect many men to be like unto Judas; for to have indignation
against them, for opening this box of precious ointment, and pouring it out
amongst poor souls, read Mark 14.3, 4.

Friend, I have heard Mr Edwards many times, and I shall hear him sometimes
still; but I confess unto you, that I hear but very poor and cold matter from
him; and I tell you, I think that the most of his matter is taken out of other
men's works: for a man may run into a great Library, and with the help of a pen
and a good memory he may get an hours discourse; and so he may speak other men's
words, and deliver other men's judgments: and thus I have heard him, for the
most part of an hour, deliver this fathers opinion, and the other fathers
judgment; and in the end he has uttered bitter and unsavory words: and is this
preaching of Jesus Christ?

Friend, I will tell you there are four or five men which he has unchristianlike
reproached, from which men you may hear more sound, and savory, and plain
words, for the edifying of you in the knowledge of Jesus Christ, in one hour,
then you shall have from him in many hours, nay it may be in many years: I will
name you the men: The first is Captain Hobson; the second is Mr Kissin; the
third is Mr Patience, and the fourth is Mr Spencer, the new startup preacher,
as he calls him, sometimes coachman to the Lord Brooks: And thus you may find
him in his Gangraena jeering, I am loath to say, like Ishmael: I think if Paul
were alive again, Mr Edwards would jeer him with being a Tent-maker. The fifth
man is Mr Wallyn, an ancient acquaintance of his: I would Mr Edwards would be
his scholar and learn good of him, and let him alone, and not put him into his
book of bloting paper: but Mr Edwards will let no man alone that is not of his
judgment: and this is Mr Edwards, and yet a preacher.

Well,

Q. Independent, for you do not speak like a Presbyterian!

A. Independent, nor Antinomian, nor Anabaptist, nor Presbyterian; but if there
be any thing of Jesus Christ in any of these four that are named, I shall own
that and give that the right hand of fellowship: And furthermore, I am a
constant hearer in your public places, in your Churches, as you call them; and
I do daily observe which way you steer your course: and my desire is that you
may steer toward the Land of Canaan, and not toward Rome, to add burdens of
grief to any man, as Mr Edwards would have the Magistrate to do.

Q.

A.

The first thing is this; Mat. 15.1, 2.

The second thing is this: John 7.47, 48, 49.

The third thing is this: The Pharisees held the people in great slavery, lest
they should be put out of the Synagogue, read Joh. 12.42, 43. But I hope it will
not be so in our days.

Friend, I shall conclude, with my last Answer unto you, in a few words: we all
seem to be zealous for God; and the most men strive mightily for a form of
Religion: But may not one ask, where is the power of Religion, and where is the
power of Love to rejoice in Christ, Cor. of a meek and a quiet spirit, which is
in the sight of God of great price? 1 Pet. 3.4. And where is the power of
Religion shown forth in brotherly kindness, and unfeigned love? read 2 Pet. 1.7.
And when these things are in us, and abound, then we shall learn war with the
sword no more; and then we shall cease to war with the tongue any more.

Q.

I shall return you an answer by way of caution: Sir, will thou that we go and
pluck up, and separate these tares, or these sectaries, from the wheat? Now you
that will be called Presbyterians, be cautious what you do; for if one should
return this word Tares upon you, would you your selves be willing to be routed
up? [he said nay] lest while ye gather, or pluck up the tares, ye root up also
the wheat with them, Mala. 3.1, 2, 3, 4. Now the Ministers that come from Jesus
Christ are full of meekness and love, and patience, and they wait upon Christ
for to do his will, and not their own; and they wait for the Word from Christ's
mouth, that is, his holy Spirit; And I will say to the reapers, says Christ,
Mat. 13.30. But some men will not stay til Christ says.

I humbly crave leave to ask two questions, and the first is this:

What means this throwing out of Common Council men and others? Independency
upon them, then they must be Sectaries too, though they be godly, religious
men, and have proved themselves faithful to the State, and have ventured their
persons and their purses; and yet they, for all this, shall have no place of
trust, no not so much as to be the Beadle of a Ward, if most may have their
will. I ask, what do you judge these men to be tares that you strive to pluck
them up? Stay til Christ speaks, for he will say to the reapers: But I am
persuaded that Christ will never make you his reapers; for he loves them that
you cannot endure to be near you.

My second question is this, speak a word for the Church: Now such men are
content with any thing for the Church; and if they may have a specious form of
Religion, which is as a shadow, they make no great matter for the substance: Is
not this the temper of most Parishes and most Wards? Bastwick, one of their own
judgment, Bastwick, that has been spoke of, is he that gave an absolute Rout
to the Independents, as he himself says; but I rather think he has faced
about, and is now to be found in the front of a new Army, fighting with his
tongue, Bastwick is to be found in another posture, jeering of his friends, and
telling the world that they have gristed faces, and that their countenances
look like the belly of a toad: O horrid forgetfulness! I think Mr Edwards and
Dr Bastwick may go together for the two Metropolitan Champions over all
England.

And in the first place, Dr Bastwick jeers one of his friends by name with
having a basket-hilted beard, and a set of teeth in his head that stood a great
distance one from another, so that he was fain to pick them every morning with
a bed-staff: Take notice of such men as jeer the work of their Creator.

In the second place, Mr Edwards, he sits jeering, in his Gangraena, of one Mr
Spencer, a new up-start preacher, who was formerly a Coachman, as he calls him:
It is no matter if he were a Coachman, if God be pleased for to make him a
fisher of men: Surely, Mr Edwards thinks no man must or can speak of the Truths
of God, but old Preachers: I am persuaded that this Spencer, which he calls the
new startup preacher, is able to speak feelingly and experimentally of the
Truths of God. A Lawyer may plead an hour at the Bar, and use a little
divinity; and so may Mr Edwards preach an hour or two, Edwards, but to declare
what man may do by art: And if any man appear for to speak against the carnal
preaching of Jesus Christ, he is presently accused of speaking of some new
light. I honor Dr Bastwick for his sufferings, if he suffered singly for
Christ's sake: But Mr Edwards is a dishonor to the Presbyterians, for jeering:
and so will Dr Bastwick, for jeering of his friends, if they do not both mend.
But I shall give them both a gentle reproof, as the Apostle James did to the
scattered Tribes, My brethren, says he, these things ought not so to be, read
James 3.8, 9, 10. But it may be, they will jeer me for my love; but if they do,
I shall take it patiently, and not answer them again.

Loving and Christian Presbyterian friend, I shall take my leave of you, only
I shall ask you one question, which is of great concernment; Do you and those
of your opinion, know the pure Religion; the pure Religion which is from above,
is first pure, then peaceable, gentle, and easy to be entreated, full of
mercy, and good fruits, without partiality, and without hypocrisy: and the
fruit of righteousness is sown in the prince of peace, and those that have this
fruit, are sons of peace, read James 3.17, 18.

John 8.42. and 16.27. and 17.8. And a true Christian he does proceed and come
forth from Jesus Christ, as the branches do from the vine, John 15.4, 5. And as
Jesus Christ told Philip the words that he spoke, and the works that he did, it
was not he that spoke the words, and did the works, but it was his Father, that
dwells in him, that did speak the words, and do the works, John 14.9, 10, 11.
And so a true believing Christian, he says, it is not he that does, but it is
the strength of Christ that does enable him for to do all that he does, Phil.
4.13. And the life that he lives, it is not he, but Christ that lives in him,
Gal. 2.20. And thus Christ is formed in a Christian, Gal. 4.19. And he that is
joined unto the Lord, is one spirit with the Lord, 1 Cor. 6.17. And being
baptized into one body, all are made to drink into one spirit, 1 Cor. 12.13.
And thus a true believing man has fellowship with God, and with Jesus Christ,
1 John 1.3. And thus a true believer, being one with Jesus Christ, gives all
praise and honor unto Jesus Christ, Revel. 5.8, 9, 10, 11.

One word more concerning false Prophets, Beware, says our Savior, of false
prophets, which come to you in sheeps clothing, but inwardly they are ravening
wolves, Matthew. 7.15.

Q.

A. says Christ; Do men gather grapes of thorns, or figs of thistles? Matthew.
7.16. I shall name three things, by which you may in part know them: And the
first is this, Pet. 2.3. And with cunning craftiness, Ephesians. 4.14. And thus
they creep into houses, nay, into men's purses, nay, into the house of men's
judgments and affections; Tim. 3.6. Mistake me not, I do not mean those that
preach now in houses; for this was the Apostles practice, Read Acts 5.42. But
there are others that creep into houses, witness the whole Clergy of Rome, a
ministry, but not of Christ; and these are they that lead captive whole
Kingdoms and Cities, and the people must not say, what do you; and if they put
not into their mouths, they will prepare war against them, and though these
crafty ones cry peace, yet they will bite with their teeth, Micah 3.5. And so
they become like unto wolves in sheeps clothing, Matthew. 7.15. But I hope it
will not be so amongst us.

The second thing, Coloss. 2.8, 18, 22, 23. And so they, and those that they
teach, are both natural and carnal: Now the natural man perceives not the
things of God, but after a foolish manner, 1 Corinthians. 2.14. And a carnal
preacher and hearer, are both of them at enmity with God and Christ, and with
the members of Christ, Romans 8.7, 8. John 16.2, 3. But I hope we shall have none
such amongst us.

The third thing that discovers the false prophets from the true Ministers of
Jesus Christ, is this, Adam, only natural as the heathen Philosophers were,
and they were great Scholars. Now these pretending prophets and preachers, That
run when the Lord does not send them, and yet they say, he says, Though they
steal the word they speak from their neighbor, read Iere. 23.21, 30, 31. Now
the light that these false prophets and preachers walk by, it is the light of
nature, and the light of the nation, and the light of morality; and they have a
word to speak for Christ, and they have a word to speak against Jesus Christ
when time shall serve; and they are most conversant in outward external
observations for Christ, and none more forward, then they, for to persecute, or
betray Christ and his members, when time does serve. Instance in Judas, John
18.2. Then they came with their lanthorns, and their torch-lights, for to seek
for Jesus, and Judas was in the midst of them, John 18.3. Now it is the nature
of false prophets and preachers, for to be grievous wolvish to the flock, Acts
20.29. they love to have it so, read Ierem. 5.31. Who would think that there
were such prophets and people in the world! it is to be feared,

CHAP. VII.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

1 Peter 5.1, 2, 3. Micah 2.5, 6, 11. Deuteronomy. 32.8, 9. Matthew. 15.1, 2. Mat. 27.1.
John 11.47, 53. 2 Timothy 3.5. 1 Cor. 2.14. 2 Timothy 4.5, 22. Gal. 6.12, 13. Gal. 4,
17, 21. Acts 6.3, 5, 6. 1 Timothy 5.17. 1 Cor. 12.6, 10, 11. Matthew. 26.59. Acts
5.21, 28, 40 Act. 24.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 2.14. Isa. 56.10, 11, 12. Jere.
5.30, 32. Micah 3.5, 11. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Phil. 3 2, 18, 19. Matthew. 6.9, 10.
James 3.9. 2 Cor. 12.14. Matthew. 25.8. Psalm 82.5. 1 John 4.20, 21. Psalm. 4.2,
6. Gal. 5.26. Psalm. 68.26. Psalm. 87.1. Revel. 21.2, 3, 4. Psalm. 87.7. John
17.8. John 1.18. 1 Cor. 2.16. Joh. 17.18, 26. 1 John 1.3. John 16.13, 14. Heb.
2.12, 13. Isai. 54.13. Joh. 6.4, 5. 2 Cor. 5.19. John 16.13, 14, 15. John 3.1.
1 Cor. 2.14. Romans 1.19, 20. 1 Corinthians. 1.24. John 14.6. Romans 3.11, 12. 1 Corinthians. 15.46, 47. Romans 5.14. Acts 22.2, 3, 4, 5. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1
Cor. 2.14. Romans 10.14, 15. Matthew. 8.22. John 10.3, 4, 5. Psalm. 23.1, 2, 3. 1
Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. 1 These. 2.7, 8. 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 7. Isai. 66.11, 12, 13. Psalm.
45.1. Psalm. 66.16, 17. 2 Corinthians. 4.5. John 10.12. Acts 20.28, 29, 30. Matthew.
10.8. 1 These. 2.8. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. John 10.12, 13. 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. 1 Cor.
12.4, 5, 6, 7. 2 Cor. 3.6. Romans 7.4, 6. Romans 7.4. Phil. 3.3. 1 Cor. 12.6, 7. 1
Cor. 15.45. John 6.63.

A word in season to two sorts of Elders, in love.
THe Elders which are among you, says the Apostle, I exhort you to feed the
flock of God, read 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3.

Now the Elders that are not able for to feed the flock of God, let them be of
what sort of Elders you please for to call them; Micah 2.5, 6, 11. Deuteronomy. 32.8,
9. Now there are two sorts of Elders.

Matthew. 15.1, 2.

Matthew. 27.1. John 11.47, 53. Now such Elders that are not able for to feed the
flock of God, and possess, and keep that place, They do as much as in them lies
for to sterve the flock of God; now the Elders that are but only able for to
feed the flock with shadows, and no more, as the letter of the Scriptures; so
far as natural reason can reach, and so literally examine the people, and ask
them questions, and legally admonish them, but not able for to break the bread
of life to the people; Tim. 3.5. I believe that there are many [Elders] that
are naturally very wise; But the natural man perceives not the things of God,
neither does this wise man know the things of God, read 1 Cor. 2.14. Tim. 4.5,
22. But the fleshly Elder, that is the natural man, he is not a fit, nor a true
Elder; for he desires to make a fair show in the flesh, and constrain men for
to submit to them, that they may glory in their flesh, Gal. 6.12, 13. And thus
they zealously affect you, that you might affect them, and exclude us that are
true Ministers and Elders of Jesus Christ, says the Apostle; but this is not
well, for they would draw you from the truth, and put you under the bondage of
the law again, Gal. 4.17, 21. This may fill the ear, but it cannot feed the
heart; this may please sense, but not have the benefit of faith. Now those that
are right Elders, whether they be lay Elders or learned Elders, they must be
men of honest report, and full of the holy Ghost and wisdom. If the Deacons
were such as the Apostles did approve of, read Acts 6.3, 5, 6. much more the
Elders, who are for to teach the people the word and doctrine of Jesus Christ,
which is the ground of the peoples being ruled well; [for the Elders are to
teach the people, Tim. 5.17.

First,

Secondly, Cor. 12.6, 10, 11.

I ask, does not the greatest part of people in this Kingdom, and the most
people in most Parishes, resemble the Papists, as much as face does face in a
glass? The Roman Catholic must not, nor will not, do any thing in matters of
Religion, without the consent of their holy Father the Pope; and then the
Jesuit, and the Friar, and the Mass-Priest must be their Confessor, and what
they spoke it must be Canonical. And thus the people are led along in
ignorance; but they please the people once a year with a voluntary carrying of
Christ upon the Cross, for the people to kiss at the high Altar; and then
Christ is upon the Cross in another place a dying, and the people adoring his
picture; and then there is public confession of sin, with penance and
pilgrimage; and then there is private examination and confession of sin to the
Priest at other times; and then he absolves them, and remits their sins, and
then they are fit for the Eucharist, as they think; and when Easter day is
come, and Christ is risen, and they have received the Eucharist, then they are
merry, and think they have done enough for all the year after; and with a
devotion they eat up that Christ, which they observe days and times for: for
they say, The bread is his very flesh, and the wine is the very blood of Jesus
Christ, which they drink; and thus they please themselves with shadows, and go
crossing themselves to their graves, rejoicing in the shadow, and yet remain
ignorant of Jesus Christ the substance.

I ask again, English Protestants, and the greatest part of people in most
Parishes, resemble the Papists, as face does face in a glass; for they must
not, nor will not do any thing in matters of Religion, without a Council or a
Synod. Now it is plain,

Instance, Now the chief Priests and Elders, and all the Council, sought false
witness against Jesus to put him to death. Matthew. 26.59. Now these men had the
Scriptures of the Prophets to be their guide,

The second instance is, That they should not teach in Jesus name, nor speak
any more of his doctrine; and so when they had beaten them, they let them go.
And I think this was an error, read Acts 5.21, 28, 40.

And so the Synod of Clergymen of Rome, as it is in Jesus. And thus far
Antichrist has crept in amongst us; he has crept into our Almanacks, nay,
into our Ordinances, nay, into men's hearts, and they dance after his pipe, in
the observing of days and times, Christmas in a confused remembrance of our
Savior and the keeping of Candlemas out of love to the Virgin Mary, and the
holy time of Lent for observation, and Good Friday, as you call it, for dolor,
and Easter day, when Christ is risen, for Recreation; and so likewise, the most
people amongst us, observe a day for superficial holiness, as for to be more
holy upon a Sabbath day, then upon other days; [mistake me not,] and so upon
Fasting days, and so likewise upon Sacrament days, as when they receive at a
Cathedral Church, as Paul's, and the like; and so upon Easter day, in other
places. All this is like unto a child that says his verbal prayers in a
morning, and afterward grows wanton all the day after. we in our external
devotion, as those silly women that went for to be churched in white Vails, and
that devoutly, in the Prelates time; and so likewise, we have many amongst us,
that think if they have not prayers said over their dead, when they bury them,
that they are like unto heathens that know not God. Now the great business that
makes all to be Christians, as we think, and all in Parishes strive after, is
this; Some will have their children to be baptized, though it be with the sign
of the Cross, and Godfathers for to witness it, because it is the old way; and
some will have their children for to be baptized to make them Christian souls;
and this is the reason that they give: and to have words in abundance, even for
to silence an Elder; and yet these men may be but Orators, like unto Tertullus
that disputed against Paul, Acts 24.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Though these men be
naturally able for to speak fine words, it may be, Yet as natural men they
cannot perceive the things of God, because they are spiritually discerned, 1
Cor. 2.14. How much need have we then of discerning [Elders;]

The condition of most men and women, is such, That if they hear the Word
preached, and receive the Sacrament, they think this is enough for to
Christianize them, though they be but as Heathenized; for Christ has no room
with them, but in the stable, or in the High Priests hall; yet customarily they
will go to the Church, and do as their neighbors do.

Now, to come to the last act of Christianity, Our English Protestants Religion
explained for the most part.
They will have their dead buried like unto Christians, that is to say, As the
reading Priest has used to say, Thou have taken to thy self the soul of our
dear brother, here departed: This they would say, Though he lived and died a
blasphemer of God, and an enemy to Jesus Christ, and has a heathen amongst
men, and yet he will call him a Christian brother, and so commit his body to
the earth, saying, Earth to earth, ashes to ashes, in sure and certain hope of
resurrection. And thus with Mass and Mattins, and saying Prayers over the dead,
we make up our outside Christianity. And this is the common profession of the
most of our Protestants in all Parishes. Mistake me not, I do not say all, in
all Parishes; neither conceive of me, as though I did slight the Ordinances of
God, or any decent way that is of good report, or praiseworthy: But I speak of
the formality, and gross ignorance that is amongst us, and being too like the
Pharisees, in resting and glorying only in the outside of Religion. Now I
conceive, the blind and ignorant Priests, are a great cause of the gross
ignorance that is amongst the people; Like priest, as you may read, Isai.
56.10, 11, 12. Jere. 5.30, 31. Micah 3.5, 11. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Phil. 3.2, 18,
19. Now he that will not marry with the Ring, and Christen with the Cross, and
say Prayers over the dead, and say over the Ten Commandments, and the Creed for
a prayer, together with the Letany, and Epistles, and Gospels upon holy days,
and so conclude with the Lords prayer in a form of words; but when they come to
that Petition, Thy Kingdom come, Matthew. 6.9, 10. Then they become like unto
those that Saint James speaks of, Jam. 3.9. They seem to pray, thy Kingdom
come, but they indeed with the same tongue, revile and reproach those into
whose heart the Kingdom of Grace is come.

Now he that will not do this, that has been spoke of, he shall not be the
Parson of a Parish, by the most peoples consent, for, says he, I seek not
yours, but you, 2 Cor. 12.14.

I shall conclude in a word or two, All seeming and false pretenses, whether in
preaching Elders, or in lay Elders, or in seeming and outside Christians,
though they be never so specious, they will vanish all of them when Jesus
Christ does appear; Give us of your oil, for our Lamps are gone out; or they
are a going out, Matthew. 25.8. God stands amongst the mighty, he judges among
the gods; and those that say, They are for God, when they are not; he tells
them, that they shall die like men, though they think they are as gods. Then let
the gods do righteous judgment to the poor and needy; for the righteous God
will judge the earth, and inherit all Nations: but I think as David did, for the
present, That all the foundations of the earth, are out of course, and out of
the order of Christ, whose order is love, Psalm. 82.5. read the whole Psalm. How
few are there, that in truth love one another; But he who loves God, loves
his brother also, 1 John 4.20, 21. This will try our Christianity in the midst
of our fleshly vanity, Psalm. 4.2, 6. Therefore, Let us not be desirous of vain
glory, provoking one another, envying one another, Gal. 5.26.

Right Elders.
from whence, the true, and the right Elders do proceed, and take their
degrees; whether they be Preaching Elders, or Ruling Elders, or Lay Elders, as
you call them; they all came from this Fountain and Wellspring of learning.
Now this fountain is the blessed [God,] who is the fountain of Israel, Psalm.
68.26. Now Jesus Christ is in this fountain, and in the holy mountains, Psalm.
87.1. Now Jesus Christ and his Spouse, the Church, comes out of this blessed
fountain, Revel 21.2, 3, 4. Now the Church, which is true believers, they
confess all their springs of learning, [are in God, and in Jesus Christ.] All
my springs are in thee, says the Church, Psalm. 87.7. Now Christ was sent out
from God, John 17.8. None knows the mind of God, but Christ which is in the
bosom of the Father, he has declared him, and he does declare him, John 1.18.
1 Corinthians. 2.16. Christ sends his Scholars, and his Elders into the world, for
to declare the good Will, and the Word of his Father; and that which they see
and hear of Christ, that they declare unto men, John 17.18, 26. 1 John 1.3.
John 16.13, 14. Christ, as an Elder brother, comes forth from God, and brings
his brethren along with him, and declares his Fathers name unto them, and
says, They are his children, and bids, Behold him, and the children which God
has given him, Heb. 2.12, 13.

None so fit as these for to be Elders, Israel, which is an infinite
Wellspring of heavenly learning, and they are taught of God, in Christ, by the
blessed Spirit of God, Isai. 54.13. John 6.45. 2 Cor. 5.19. John 16.13, 14, 15.
This is a happiness to be an Elder in Christ, or old in Christ: But its but a
small glory, to be an Elder amongst ^en.

But you will object and say,

I answer, many men have it, and grossly abuse it. Instance, in the Clergy men
of Rome, and England too, for the most part, who keep a fluttering in the air,
with the wings of their schollarship, Nicodemus was, John 3.1. And these are
great disputants in matters of Religion: Instance, in your Bishops and great
Doctors, and Deans, and your great Rabbis, for the most part: And these,
naturally, are notionally full in the brain, and are fluent in their
discourses; but for all this, these natural men receive not the things of the
Spirit of God, but in a customary way, and by hearsay from others; neither can
a natural man know the things of God, says the Apostle, because they are
spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14. The natural man compares the Scripture
naturally or literally together with his natural reason; and so he may find
out, that there is a God, a causer of all causes, To. 1.19, 20. but he cannot
find out the way to this God: this is man's misery, that he knows not Christ the
power of God and the wisdom of God, 1 Cor. 1.24. and the true, living and ready
way to God, read Joh. 14.6.

The natural and earthly Adam, Adam natural had no understanding for to seek
after the man Christ, who is God blessed for evermore; the supernatural and
second Adam, which is the Lord from heaven, of which the first Adam was a
figure, Romans 3.11, 12. 1 Cor. 15.46, 47. Romans 5.14. All humane Learning and
Scholarship, and the Arts and Sciences of Schools, and the speaking all Tongues
and Languages, and to have all Logic, Rhetoric and Philosophy; this is the
glory of natural men, as it was to Paul [when he was Saul, and had zeal to God
joined with it,] Acts 22.2, 3, 4, 5. All this, in Saul's account was his gain;
but in Paul's account these things were counted as loss for Christ, after he did
know Christ, Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. All these things grow in natures garden and
are excellent in that place; Cor. 2.14. And again, though they be never so
great scholars, How can they call on him in whom they have not believed? Let the
dead bury their dead, Mat. 8.22. That is, to Christ; and that is the reason
there is so much barrenness in the most part of this Kingdom: Now the sheep of
Christ will not follow strangers, but flee from them; for they know not the
voice of strangers, but they know the voice of Christ only; and he calls them
by name, and leads them out into green pastures, and by still waters, read
Joh. 10.3, 4, 5. Psa. 23.1, 2, 3.



NOw such Elders are able for to feed the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5.1, 2, 3. And
they are gentle among them, even as a good nurse to her children, which out of
her affection feeds them with good milk, 1 These. 2.7, 8. Even the sincere milk
of the living Word, which is truth, and the taste of the grace of the Lord
Christ; and he is preious in their esteem, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3, 7. And they suck and
are satisfied with his breasts of consolation, and grow up into abundance of his
glory; and he, like unto a mother, is always comforting them, read Isa. 66.11,
12, 13. Now such Elders as these are like unto a good nurse, David, My heart,
says he, is inditing of Christ, and my heart boyleth within me, or, as water,
bubbleth up; I am pained until I have declared Jesus Christ, Psa. 45.1.
Therefore, says he, come thou poor soul, and I will declare unto thee what
Christ has done for my soul, and we will praise him both together, Psa. 66.16,
17. Cor. 4.5. But he that is an hireling sees the wolf coming, and is not in
relation to the sheep, and has no will nor skill to help them, Ioh. 10.12. Acts
20.28, 29, 30. Now the good Elder is in relation to Jesus Christ, and so to the
sheep of Christ; and has both will and skill to lead the sheep apart from the
wolves, and as they receive freely, so they give freely, Mat. 10.8. Out of
their storehouse of love and good affection, as Paul said, not only the Gospel
of God, but our own souls, for ye are dear unto us, 1 These. 2.8. Now on the
other side, the hireling loves not the sheep, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3. And so if he see
a fatter benefice, or a better, abroad, he will leave the sheep for others that
can feed them better, though he cannot feed them at all, but with husks in
stead of fine wheat; for he can neither pray nor preach, The ^ircling flees,
because he is an hireling, and he cares not for the sheep, read Ioh. 10.12,
13. Now on the other side, the good Elders, whether they be Lay Elders or
preaching Elders, they will very gladly spend and be spent for the good of one
another souls, as Paul said of himself, for they have the same spirit that
Paul had to make him a Minister, read 2 Cor. 12.14, 15. 1 Cor. 12.4, 5, 6, 7.
Now the reason and the ground why the good Elders are so able, it is this, Cor.
3.6. And again, they are raised from the dead, with Jesus Christ, for to bring
forth fruit unto God, But not in the oldness of the letter, but to serve him in
newness of spirit, Romans 7.4, 6. Now these being married unto Jesus Christ, are
the circumcision, which worship God in spirit, and rejoice in Christ Jesus, and
have no confidence in the flesh, read Romans 7.4. Phil. 3.3. Here you may see the
Lay Elder as well as the Learned Elder, is, in some measure, able to feed the
flock of God; For the Spirit is given to every man to profit withal; and God
works all in all, 1 Cor. 12.6, 7.

Now you will object and say,

I answer, Adams quickening spirit, 1 Cor. 15.45. Though the soul may seem to
live a natural and fieshly life, yet it is as though it were dead, if the life
of the Spirit of Christ be not communicated into it: It is the Spirit that
quickens, says Christ, your living soul and natural fleshly life will profit
nothing; The words that I speak unto you [or in you] they are Spirit, and they
are life, says Christ, Ioh. 6.63.

CHAP. VIII.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Gal. 6.2. Romans 14.5, 23. Mat. 7.12. John 13.35. Romans
14.17, 18, 19. Col. 3.12. Ioh. 12.26. Isa. 14.12, 13, 14. Rev. 9.11, 18, 19,
20, 21. Revel. 12.10, 11, 12, 13. 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9. Genesis 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Genesis
4.3, 4, 5. Acts 26.9. Acts 22.3. Romans 9.31, 32. Zech. 7.10. Psa. 15.2, 3. John
8.44. Genesis 4.8. Acts 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6. Psa. 119.11. Psalm 119.105. John 14.6.
Genesis 4.8. Ioh. 12.10, 11. 1 Cor. 2.6, 7, 8. Mat. 6.11. Psa. 150.5, 6, 7, 8.
Hosea 13.9. Hosea 14.4. Isa. 43.25. Ier. 31.33, 34. and 2.5.19. Micah 7.18, 19.
Exo. 34.6, 7. Isa. 38.17. 1 John 3.1. 1 Timothy 2.5. Lev. 16.21, 22. Job 33.23,
24. Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18. Iere. 50.20. Isa. 53.6, 7. Col. 2.13, 14, 15. Romans
8.33, 34. John 13.10. 1 John 3.23, 24. John 1.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Prove. 8.22, 23. 1
These. 2.19, 20. Mark 8.24. Acts 17.18, 19, 20. John 18.19, 20, 21. Mark 8.25.
Exo. 4.10, 12. and 4.14, 15, 16. c. 7.1, 2. Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.
James 2.8. 1 John 3.23. James 4.11. 1 Cor. 13.4, 5. Phil. 3.15. Ez. 13.22. John
21.15. Psa. 64.3. Rev. 12.10. Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. Ier. 23.6, 7, 8. Ephesians.
1.4, 5. Gal. 4.19. Isa. 66.12, 13. Isa. 49.22, 23. Psa. 39.8. Prove. 6.22, 23. 1
Ioh. 5.3, 4, 9, 10. Romans 5.8. 1 Ioh. 1.7.2.1, 2. Gal. 6.15, 16. Psa. 1.2. Ephesians.
4.20, 21. John 14.6, 7. Isa. 9.6. Psa. 90.1, 2. 1 Pet. 2.5, 6. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.
Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. John 8.42. Isa. 8.18. John 15.26. John 16.13, 14, 15. Isa.
32.15. 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. Genesis 1 26. Mat. 28.18, 19. 2 Cor. 5.17. Genesis 2.11, 12,
29. Heb. 1.2, 3. Rev. 2.7. Genesis 2.9. Prove. 8.22, 30. Mat. 17.5. Col. 2.9. Psa.
68.26. Isa. 11.1, 10. John 14.10, 11. John 17.8, 21. John 1.18. Psa. 2.6. Ephesians.
1.22, 23. Col. 2.10. Psa. 45.13. Heb. 1.9. John 1.16. Psa. 133.2.3. Psa. 46.4,
5, 6. 1 Cor. 2.14. Zech. 6.12. John 15.4, 5. Phil. 4.13. Heb. 11.6. Isa. 26.12.
Isa. 11.1, 10. John 1.18. John 17.23, 24. Ephesians. 4.6.4. John 1.32, 33, 34. John
3.34. Col. 2, 9. Col. 1.19. Col. 3.3, 4. John 5.30. Joh. 14.8, 9, 10, 11. Gal.
2.20. Ephesians. 2.10. John 4.24. Joh. 12.32. John 6.44, 45, 46. Col. 2.8, 18, 19,
20. Phil. 3.3. John 20.11, 12, 13, Luke 24.5. Cant. 3.3, 4. 2 Cor. 4.13. Ephesians.
4.21. Isa. 60.8. 2 Timothy 4.22. James 1.17, 18. Acts 17.28. Isa. 61.3, 9, 10, 11.
with Psa. 1.3. Isa. 26.12, 13, 19, 20. Isa. 30.21. Isa. 30.7. John 4.10. 2 Pet.
1.3, 4. Isa. 2.17, 20, 21, 22. 2 Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. John 14.10. Isa. 44.22.
Romans 5.8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 9.22, 28. 2 Samuel 23.4, 5. Heb. 10.16, 17, 18, 19.
Isa. 42.6, 7. Heb. 10.12, 14. Rev. 13.8. Heb. 7.24, 25. Isa. 35.5, 6, 7. Lam.
1.16. Psa. 51.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. Cant. 6.3. 1 Cor. 2.12, 13. Psa. 103.4, 11, 12.
Romans 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. Deuteronomy. 30.13, 14, 15, 19. Ezekiel. 18.31. Ier. 10.23.
Romans 3.11, 12, 18. John 8.44. Ier. 13.23. Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5. Ezekiel. 16.6, 7, 8. 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 2.14. Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Col. 3.3. 2 Cor. 5.17, 18, 19. Mal.
1.23. 1 Timothy 3.15, 16. Mat. 16.16, 17. 1 Corinthians. 2.12, 13, 16. Romans 9.16.
Ephesians 2.8, 9. Genesis 6.5, 11, 12, 13. Prove. 20.27. Genesis 2.17. Romans
8.6, 7, 8. Psalm 135.5, 6, 7. Romans 9.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23.

A Cordial PETITION for our SICKLY TIMES, Humbly presented unto all sorts of
men.
London, that request and crave that thanks may be returned unto you by the
several Wards in London: Let me humbly crave leave to present a second Petition
unto you, which is from the word of Christ; and if this take effect, it will be
for the healing of our Nation.

My Petition is this:

If there be therefore any consolation in Christ, says the Apostle, if any
comfort of love, if any fellowship of the spirit, if any bowels, and mercies;
Fulfill ye my joy, that ye be like minded, having the same love, being of one
accord, of one mind. Let nothing be done through strife or vain glory, but in
lowliness of mind let each esteem other better then themselves. Look not every
man on his own things, but every man also on the things of others. Let this
mind be in you, which was also in Christ Jesus; Phil. 2.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. And so
bear ye one another burdens, and so fulfill the Law of Christ, Gal. 6.2. Let
every man amongst you be fully persuaded in his own mind: For whatsoever is not
of faith, is sin, Romans 14.5, 23. Therefore all things whatsoever ye would that
men should do to you, do ye even so to them: for this is the Law and the
Prophets, Mat. 7.12. And by this shall all men know, says Christ, that ye are
my Disciples, if ye have love one to another, John 13.35.

Now if there be but two men in a City, or one man in a Parish, that are able
to serve Christ in these things, and so to get hands and hearts to follow after
the things which make for peace, and things wherewith one may edify another,
Romans 14.17, 18, 19. And so put on bowels of mercies, kindness, humbleness of
mind, meekness, long-suffering, Col. 3.12. Now if any man serve me, says
Christ, in these things, he shall not need to seek the praise of men, for him
will my Father honor, John 12.26.


The Devil is an Independent; read O Lucifer, son of the morning, one of the
first creation of Angels, who had a mind to exalt his throne above God, and to
ascend above the heights of Jehovan, and to be like the most high, how art thou
cast down? O thou Independent, that would not depend upon God, how art thou
cast down to Hell, Isa. 14.12, 13, 14. This great King of Assyria was a figure
of the King of the bottomless pit, and the false prophets, whose hurt is in
their mouths, Rev. 9.11.18, 19, 20, 21. Now these false prophets, and the great
Dragon, that old serpent, called the Devil and Satan, have been a casting out
of heaven in all ages, and that by the power of Christ; for this Satan is the
accuser of the brethren: Now woe to the inhabiters of the earth, for the devil
is come down unto earthly minded men, having great wrath, because he has but a
short time, and he and his Angels being Independents themselves, would cloth
others with that filthy garment, Rev. 12.9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Now this Mystery
of iniquity which is amongst men, and men of specious pretenses too, shall be
consumed with the Spirit of Christ's mouth, and with the brightness of his
coming, 2 Thessalonians. 2.7, 8, 9.

And so likewise every fallen man, Adam and Eve were by Satan's instigations, who
would have them to be as Gods, but they did depend upon fig leaves, upon God,
as the most men do in these days, Cen. 3.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. And so every
unregenerated man is an Independent as Cain was, who leaned upon his offering,
and not upon God, Genesis 4.3, 4, 5. And so Saul before he was Paul, was an
Independent, and apart from Christ, Verily I thought with my self, that I ought
to do many things contrary to the Name of Jesus, Acts 26.9. And so likewise
Judas, he would not live under Christ's Government, but he would depend upon the
bag, and make a fair show as long as he could, and I think we have many such
Iudasses now adays: Acts 22.3. and upon their own righteousness, Romans 9.31, 32.

Edwards, are these Independents, or no? and I pray what rule do they and you
walk by? I say not by the Law of God; for the Law of God says, Let none of you
imagine evil against his brother in your heart, read Zech. 7.10. What mean
these filthy reproaches you cast upon honest men, Mr Edwards? I think they were
in your heart, before they were in your mouth. Take heed, Mr Edwards; and not
only you, but others as well as you; for it is a dangerous thing to take up a
reproach against ones neighbor, read that place, Psa. 15.2, 3. Mr Edwards, I
have drawn up the Devil, Judas, the chief Priest and proud Pharisees, Cain,
Pilat, the young man in the gospel, and so likewise Adam and Eve, For they
sought to be better then GOD had made them. M. Edwards I think you are the
fitest to bring up the rear.
ten Independents into a file, an the Devil is their Captain, whose works they
do, John 8.44. And Cain, he which slew his brother, Genesis 4.8. he is the half
file leader; and now Mr Edwards, you may, if you please, bring up the rear! for
that is a Lieutenants place, to bring up the rear: But I hope you will be taught
to face about and to leave that company, as Saul was taught when he was going
post to Damascus with his letters, read this place, Acts 9.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6.
And when you are taught thus, Mr Edwards, then you will be another manner of man
then you are now: and so fare you well for the present.

Now those that are usually called by the name of Independents, whether they be
Ministers or other men, they are not Independents: and this is their
vindication which David does express, Lord, says he, thy Word have I hid in
mine heart; that I might not sin against thee, Psa. 119.11. Or rather thus,
Christ had lodged himself in David's heart, and Christ was a lamp of spiritual
light in David's heart, and this light did shine in David's heart, as a bright
candle in a clear lanthorn, to guide David's earthly feet; and this light did
shine, as the Sun at noon day, in David's soul, and was his light to guide him
in his heavenly pathway, which way is Christ: Thy Word is a lamp unto my feet,
and a light unto my path, Psa. 119.105. John 14.6.

Thus much by way of vindication of those which are called by that reproachful
name of Independents, which will live under no Government, as they say. But here
I have showed you what spiritual Government they live under, and what light
they walk by and depend upon, it is even the Light and Government of Christ,
which the chief Priests and Pharisees, those Independents, and the others which
were aforementioned, would not live under, nor endure them that did: Witness Cain,
who slew his brother, Genesis 4.8. And witness the chief Priests and Pharisees,
which consulted that they might put Lazarus to death also: Because that by
reason of him, many of the Jews went away from them, and believed on Jesus,
John 12.10, 11.

And thus much shall serve for the internal part of Dependency, which those have
in Christ and upon Christ, which are falsely so called by the name of
Independents. Now this internal part of wisdom is a mystery, which none of the
Princes of this world know, none of your great learned Rabbis, chief Priests
and Pharisees know: For had they known it, they would not have crucified the
Lord of glory, Europe over, to this very day.

In the next place, these Independents, falsely so called, and these
Antinomians, foolishly so called and despised; all their Dependency, for
external things, is upon that form of doctrine, which Christ taught his
Disciples to say; Lord, give us this day our daily bread: and this is their
daily prayer, which you call the Lords prayer; Mat. 6.11. And so likewise they
depend upon a word of promise against all their sins, and against the devil and
wicked men; and they hope in a Word that has power in it to deliver them from
all troubles, straits and difficulties, of what kind soever: I wait for the
Lord, says David, my soul does wait; and in his Word, that is, in Christ, do I
hope: For in him there is plenteous redemption; and he has redeemed me from
all my iniquities, Psa. 130.5, 6, 7, 8.

Edwards does in his ^angraena, page 172. These things ought not so to be.

these Sectaries, these disturbers of the peace.

Let me speak a word in the behalf of these men that are so reproached; They
have been faithful to the State in time of trouble; they are peaceable among
their neighbors; they desire the Kingdom may be in peace; they are subject to
the Magistrate in all lawful demands: and for the worship they ow to God, I
think they are the nearest to the Word of Christ and the practice of the
Apostles: But if there be any that do walk contrary to found doctrine, as I
believe there are many amongst you Presbyterians, both Ministers and people: I
say, the Word of Christ gives neither them nor you any such order. I am sorry
to hear such reproaching one of another: I shall instance in some particulars:
Nigh, the Minister, to be a Jesuit: and so likewise the many reproaches that
have been cast upon Mr Saltmarsh, in printed books and by word of mouth, a man
eminent for meekness of spirit, like unto Moses; and excellent in the mysteries
of the Gospel, like unto Paul: And so likewise Mr Burton, a man well known, he
is counted as a mad man, and such like reproaches as these may be found in the
Gangraena's of Mr Edwards, and by word of mouth up and down:

Let him be crossed and hanged, and so I pray
That every wilful INDEPENDENT may:
When once the gallows he is hanging on
He has got something to depend upon.
Gentle Reader, This is a verse that strikes at honest godly men under that
name of Independent: Such bitter and unsavory spirits have we now adays, that
under a shadow and outside form of zeal and piety they endeavor to make honest
godly men seem odious to the world: Instance in Mr Edwards, Gangraena, page 61.
172. and there you may find him reproaching of honest godly men under the name
of Sectaries; and he draws them up into ten heads.

















Edwards own eye,

Edwards would have all men to be clothed in, that do not look like himself or
tread in his steps.

THE LOVE of GOD AND THE Blood of Jesus Christ Are a sovereign medicine to take
away sin, past, present and to come, 1 JOHN 1.7, 9, 10.
Christ is the Rule of a Christian, or the Law he walks by, Gal. 6.15, 16. Psa.
1.2.
J Cannot but speak a word or two of the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus
Christ, which is a Gospel of free grace, and the alone means to break a hard
heart, and the only means to melt a frozen soul; and the only cordial to
comfort a sick soul; and the only staff of love to stay up a drooping spirit; O
Israel, thou have destroyed thy self, but in me is thine help, says the Lord,
Hosea 13.9. I will heal thy backsliding, I will love thee freely, says the Lord,
The Lords free love unto al his people.
Hosea 14.4. I, even I am he that bloteth out thy transgressions for mine own
sake, says the God of Love; and I will forgive thy iniquity, and I will remember
thy sins no more, Isa. 43.25. Jer. 31.33, 34. Now he that knows the Lord for
his own good, knows the Lord after this manner, and believes the report that
God in Christ has made of himself, That he is a God that delights in mercy;
and that he has cast all the sins of his people behind his back, and he has
cast all the sins of his beloved people into the depths of the sea of his Sons
blood, which is able to quench the fears and the flames of hell in any man's
soul, 2 Cor. 5.19. Mich 7.18, 19. Exodus 34.6, 7. Isa. 38.17. The learned world
knows not this manner of Gods love, 1 John 3.1. Neither do they know [that
fit man] the one Mediator between God and men, the man Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy
2.5. Who has carried all their sins into a Land of forgetfulness, a Land not
inhabited; this is a fit man of the Lords sending out, Levit. 16.21, 22. This
is a ransom that the Lord has found, and he will be gracious through him, Job
33.23, 24. And this Messenger is sent to bind up the broken hearted, and to
proclaim liberty to the captives, Isa. 61.1. Luke 4.18
and the opening of the prison to them that are bound. Now in these days, and
in this time, says the Lord, The iniquity of Israel shall be sought for, and
there shall be none; and the sins of Judah, and they shall not be found any more,
Jer. 50.20. For the Lord has laid all our sins upon the back of Christ, Isa.
53.6, 7. And Christ has nailed them to his cross, and buried them in his
grave, and we are complete in him, Col. 2.13, 14, 15. And sin shall not condemn
those that believe; for Christ is risen again, to save, and sanctify, and
glorify those that are one in him, Romans 8.33, 34. and he has made them clean
every whit, Joh. 13.10.

But if I speak after this manner, Antinomian; of which name our Pulpits have
rung of late time, and by this means some people have got a habit of a proud
and a high look, Antinomian that will have no Law of God to walk by, as they
say, and live as they list and pray for no pardon of sin; under this name which
is a false one, many honest godly men seem odious to those they live by.

I shall instance only in five men, which they say have, and do preach
Freegrace, which is an occasion, to open a gap to all licentiousness.

And the first man is Doctor Crisp, a man that was famous and eminent for
virtue, and an able Minister of the Gospel of Grace, and one that made the Law
of Faith and Love, his rule for to walk by, 1 John 3.23, 24. Now this man was
brought upon the stage for an Antinomian, and Master Burges at Lawrence Church,
did dispute learnedly against him (but to little purpose) as one that would
take up the weapons of a dead man, to fight with him when he was dead.

The second man is young Master Simpson, a man unblameable in his conversation,
and a man eminent in the work of the Lord, but counted an Antinomian, and so
looked upon as contemptible.

The third man is Master Peter Sterry; such a man, as there are but a few in
respect of the great number that are called the Ministers of England; yet this
man lies under two reproachful names, as Antinomian or Familist, or else jeered
at by some, for a Free Grace Preacher. This Peter Sterry is a man approved to
be an Evangelical, Heavenly, Divine Preacher of the Mystery of the everlasting
Gospel.

Now, no ministry but such a ministry, can be a soul-comforting ministry,
because it is full of Light and Life, Peace and Joy in the holy Ghost; But no
new light, as some cry out; but an old light of Jesus Christ, John 1.1, 2, 3,
4, 5. which was before the foundations of the earth were laid, read Prove. 8.22,
23.

Now the fourth man is one like unto Mr Stirrey, and that is Mr Saltmarsh, a
man eminent to declare the King in his beauty, and that is Jesus Christ, who is
the rose of Sharon, and the lilly of the valleys; And as an apple tree among
the trees of the wood, is excellent, even so is Christ among his sons and
Christ is the pearl in the field; and as a shadow of a great rock in a weary
land and all this Christ is to them that know him; and such can tell how to
speak to his praise.

The fifth man, that I shall speak of, is, Mr Bacon, a man of worth, if some
amongst us had ears to hear and eyes to see: But there are some, nay many, both
in London and in the Country, to whom he is approved, both in their hearts and
consciences, to be an able Minister of the Gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ; and
one that is Evangelical and spiritual; and one that is made able, by the Spirit
of Christ, to give a good Exposition of the holy Word of God, which is a
strengthening of the feeble knees, and the hands that hang down, and this is
his glory and joy, as Paul said of the Church of the Thessalonians, read 1
These. 2.19, 20. And this is his crown, let him go where he will.

But there are some that are like the blind man, as you may read in Mark 8.24.
that are half-sighted men, and they encountered him, and call him babbler, and a
setter forth of strange doctrine, or new doctrine, that they do not know, and
it is strange unto them; and this was Paul's condition, read Acts 17.18, 19, 20.
And so it was with Christ, Ioh. 18.19, etc. But when Christ does touch these
half-sighted men the second time, then they shall see doctrine clearly, Mark
8.25.

But some do object and say, that he is slow of speech, and of a slow tongue,
and so was Moses; Lord, says he, I am slow of speech, and of a slow tongue,
Exodus 4.10. But if Moses his Lord be with his mouth, and the Lords Christ teach
him what he shall say: Aaron can speak well, and will be glad in his people, and
he will be there spokesman.) I mean, God in Christ, is, and will be with those
of a slow tongue, when he has made them like unto Moses; and then he will
teach them, and they shall teach others, Exodus 4.12, 14, 15, 16, and 7.1, 2.

I desire that I may not be accused of seeking the applause of these men that I
have spoken of: for the praise of men to me, is as a feather upon my sleeve,
which the wind will blow away; but I have had thoughts of their worth, and not
of theirs only, and so I rest.

Now you that make your boast of the Law, Romans 2.17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22, 23. If
ye fulfill the royal Law according to the Scripture, then you would love your
neighbor as your self, James 2.8. But how little of this Law of Faith and Love,
do you practice among your neighbors: if they be not of the same mind which
you are? Do not you turn away from them with pride and disdain, 1 John 3.23.
and so begin to speak evil of them, James 4.11. under some notion, as
Antinomian, that will have no Law of God to be their rule, nor ask for the
pardon of sin, and live as they list? And so you begin to call them Sectaries,
and say there must be some course taken with them, for they are infectious; But
if you had the Law of Christ in your hearts, that would be kind and suffer
long, and not envy, nor vaunt it self, nor be puffed up, as some are, nor seek
her own, nor easily be provoked, as the most are, love thinks no evil, 1 Cor.
13.4, 5. And if in any thing ye be contrary minded one to another, God must
reveal even this unto you, and love will suffer long for it, Phil. 3.15.

But on the contrary side, Calamy, to the grief of my heart, in an open and
public Congregation, make these people loathsome by his expressions, meaning,
nay, naming these Antinomians or Law-destroyers; saying, That these people are
worse then the Papists, for they would but take away the second Commandment;
and that they are worse then the Prelates, for they would but take away the
fourth Commandment; and that they are worse then the bloody Cavallers, that
burned Towns, and dashed out the brains of men. But says he, These men do
labor for to dash out the brains of all the Commandments at once, or to this
effect. Now the Caution given with the accusation, which is false, in reference
unto those that lie under this odious name of Antinomian. But his Caution was,
That they should be as wary of them, and shun them, as they would shun a man
that has the plague, and have nothing to do with them: And this caused such
postures, and such jestures, and such sighing in many of the hearers, that it
caused a second grief of heart in me, to see it; and when they came forth from
hearing, they fell into scorning and disdaining of the innocent, and contemning
of the upright.

But you will object and say,

I answer, Eze. 13.22. Neither would I have the Lambs of Christ to want their
food, read Joh. 21.15. and then put into a Beats skin, and worried with the
tongue, and bitter words, Psalm. 64.3.

Now this is the fruit, and the effect, of those filthy devil-like names, as
Antinomian, Independent.

The devil would have no law of God, neither would he depend upon God; therefore
clothe men and women with these names, and then they shall be odious; but let
some take heed, lest they be like the accuser of the Brethren, which is cast
down, Revel. 12.10. I am persuaded, there are many that shall live in Heaven
together, that do not live in love and peace upon the earth together. And this
is the issue, and the sad effect, that those filthy names do produce, which are
frequent abroad, and it is an abomination to the Lord, for to sow discord among
Brethren, Prove. 6.16, 17, 18, 19. If there be any errors abroad, or any thing
amiss, throw your foolish and filthy names aside, and preach the Gospel of
peace [if you can tell how,] for that only will bring health, Jere. 23.6, 7,
8. Which will be as the Fathers Commandment, and as a loadstone to draw thee up
into Christ, out of whom, thou shall proceed and be born, read Ephesians. 1.4, 5.
Gal. 4.19. Isa. 66.12, 13. and 49.22, Christ and a Christian together.
23. And Christ who is the Law of God, shall be with thee when thou go, and
shall lead thee; and when thou sleep, he shall keep thee; and when thou
awakest, he shall talk with thee read and consider these Scriptures, Psa. 32.8.
Prove. 6.22. For Christ is a lamp, and the light of the Law, which is in no wise
grievous, read Prove. 6.23. 1 Ioh. 5.3. And Christ is the love-token of his
Father, read Romans 5.8. And thus those that are counted loathsome Antinomians, do
embrace him as the effect of his Fathers love, which is the efficient cause of
taking away sin from men, read 1 Ioh. 4.9, 10. And so they account the blood of
Jesus Christ, God-man, to be the meritorious cause, that has and does cleanse
us from all sin, past, present, and to come, 1 John 1.7. and 2.1, 2. And so
likewise, Christ is the rule of a Christian, and the Law of God, which a
Christian does walk by: And so likewise, Christ is a Christian Schoolmaster
for to bring him to God, Gal. 6.15, 16. Psa. 1.2. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. John 14.6.

O sweet God, Isa. 9.6. A Prayer from the Scripture, to the Father, Son, holy
Spirit, opening that Mystery.
Thou art a sure foundation, and a sure dwelling place, Psa. 90.1, 2.

O sweet Jesus, thou that art built, in, and upon this foundation, 1 Pet. 2.5,
6. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. And thy sons, and thy daughters, being in thee, thou
proceedest forth, and come forth from God, and bring thy sons, and thy
daughters along with thee, Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. John 8.42. Isa. 8.18.

O sweet, and holy, and blessed Spirit of God, which comes from the Father,
John 15.26. and from the Son, and is sent by the Son into the hearts of his
sons and daughters, for to make Christ, who is God-man, glorious in their eyes,
John 16.13, 14, 15. Isa. 32.15.

O sweet and blessed Spirit, which art one of three, and yet undividable, thou
art but one God, Cor. 8.5, 6.

But out of thy love and wisdom, O sweet God, thou have made a distinction of
thy self in the first Creation, when thou said, Let us make man in our image,
after our likeness, Genesis 1.26 And thou have made it good again in the second
Creation, when thou said, Go and make new Scholars, or new Disciples. Then
thy power, O blessed Father, Son, and holy Spirit, goes along, and makes a new
Creature in Christ, or for Christ; Old things are past away, behold all things
are become new, read Matthew. 28.18, 19. 2 Cor. 5.17.

A natural Tree growing up out of the earth, An excellent Si mile.
having his roots therein, and by the mighty power of God in his Creation,
there goes effectual power from the earth into the roots, and so up into the
body of the Tree, and so up into every branch, and causes leaves and Fruit for
the use of man, which Tree has its Seed in its self, Genesis 1.11, 12, 29. Heb.
1.2, 3.

Now our Friend, Jesus Christ, Revel. 2.7. Genesis 2.9. Now God the Father is the
paradise, and the only sweet Divine Garden, Revel. 2.7. And Christ his Son, is
the only sweet Flower in the Garden; and he is daily his Fathers delight, and
in him only God takes his pleasure, read these two Scriptures, Prove. 8.22, 30.
Matthew. 17.5.

Col. 2.9. Psa. 68.26. Isa. 11.1, 10. John 14.10, 11. and 17.8, 21. and 1.18.
And so Christ is Gods King upon his holy Hill of Sion; and God has given him
to be the Head over all things to the Church, which is his Body; now the true
Church of God, is the fullness of Christ; and the true Church, is most complete
in Jesus Christ, Psalm. 2.6, Ephesians. 1.22, 23. Colos. 2.10. Psalm. 45.13.

of his fullness, even grace for grace, in Christ Jesus, Heb. 1.9. John 1.16.
And so likewise, it is an inlivening comfort to a poor fainting, panting, and
thirsty soul, for God to pour out his precious ointment upon the Head of thy
Aaron, that is, Jesus Christ: And so from him, as thy Head, this ointment runs
down upon thy Beard; nay, it runs into thy heart, into every corner of thy
heart, and it runs down to the skirts of his garments, that is, to every poor
member of his; and he fills, and refreshes them with his Grace, which is as the
dew that descended upon the mountains of Zion; for there the Lord gives a
blessing, even life for evermore, read Psa. 133.2, 3.

Now this is the River, the streams whereof shall make glad the City of God.
[Now the heart of a right Christian; and a true believing man or woman, is the
City of God,] and the holy place of the Tabernacles of the most High, and the
infinite Divine Consolations of the Spirit, which is God, blessed for evermore;
runs through this City, and makes it glad, when the world is turned upside
down, read Psa. 46.4, 5, 6.

Now you that stand for Fruits, the natural man receives not the things of the
Spirit of God; neither can he know them: and if he hear of them, by the hearing
of the ear, he makes a jest of them, for they are foolishness unto him, 1 Cor.
2.14. But if you grow in the Tree of Life, as the Branch does in the Vine;
which Tree and Branch, Zech. 6.12. is Jesus Christ; then you shall live and
receive of his life, and bring forth fruit by his strength; for in him, and
with him, and by him you shall be able to do all things, and without him you can
do nothing to please God, John 15.4, 5. Phil. 4.13. Heb. 11.6.

O sweet and blessed Spirit of God, which workest all our works in us, and for
us, Isa. 26.12. And as a natural tree, whose seed is in it self, and having its
roots in the earth; and so receiving nourishment in at the roots, without which
it could not live: But that nourishment which the roots do receive in, runs up
the body of the tree, into every branch of the tree, and causes a fruitful
flourishing of green leaves, and fruit for the use of men, and this turns to
the praise of God, and the good of men; and all this is the work of the sweet
Spirit of God, through the whole course of nature. Isa. 11.1, 10. John 1.18.
John 17.23, 24. Now the sweet Spirit of God, which is only one God, Ephesians. 4.6.
comes down from heaven into Christ, not by measure, but in the fullness of God,
to dwell in the body of the tree of life, which tree is Jesus Christ, John 1.32,
33, 34. Joh. 3.34. Col. 2, 9. and 1.19. Now the sweet Spirit of God is the head
and life of this tree; and this tree is the head and life of the branches,
which are surely graffed into this tree. Now God is the head of Christ and his
life; and Christ is the head of the Church and their life, Col. 3.^, 4. Now
Jesus Christ, being man united unto God, and God dwelling in this man Christ;
now Christ, being man, and so weak, says this of himself, I, says he, can of
mine own self do nothing; as I hear I judge, and I seek not mine own will, but
the honor of the Father which has sent me, John 5.30. And thus Christ reasons
with Philip, that he might lead Philip through himself unto the Father, that he
might give God the Father the honor of his love for Christ; and thus Christ
seeks the honor of his Father. Now Christ, being the spiritual tree of life,
and Philip a branch of this tree, the spirit of life runs through this tree
into all the branches, and causes the branches to bring forth the fruit of
praise to God.

And thus Christ and his members do seek to advance the glory of the Spirit of
life, which is God, as you may see by these words, Have I been so long with
you, says Christ to Philip, and yet have thou not not known me? He that has
seen me has seen the Father: And how say thou then, Show us the Father?
Beleevest not thou, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me: [The words
that I speak unto you, I speak not of my self,] Mark this; But the Father that
dwells in me, he speaks the words, and he does the works: Believe me
Philip, says Christ, that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, Joh. 14.8,
9, 10, 11. And thus Christ, the tree of life, bears and brings forth honor to
his Father; and thus the branches of this tree bring forth fruit, and give the
honor of it wholly unto God; instance in Paul, The life, says he, that now I
live, it is not I, but it is God in Christ that lives in me, Gal. 2.20. And
thus the sweet Spirit of God comes down into the head of the body, which head
is Christ, and so down into the branches, which are the body of Christ, and the
Church of Christ, which Church is created in Christ Jesus, Ephesians. 2.10. God is a
Spirit, John 4.24. If I be lifted up from the earth, says Christ, I will draw
all men unto me, Joh. 12.32. that is, Christ, who is God in the Spirit, shall
draw men, John 6.44, 45, 46. And thus you may see, that a Christian, in deed
and in truth, is not in Jesus Christ, or for Jesus Christ, after a carnal
manner, or after the rudiments of the world, or after the laws of men's making,
Col. 2.8, 18, 19, 20. But as the Apostle Paul says, [We, says he, worship God
in the spirit, and we rejoice with the spirit in Christ Jesus,] and have no
confidence in the flesh, or fleshly ordinances, Phil. 3.3. Carnal reason and
fleshly wisdom may and do handle those things which we call the ordinances of
God, and it may be very learnedly, and with a seeming show of zeal and piety;
and yet, for all this be but carnal and fleshly; and like the grave where Mary
stood weeping, An allusion.
because she could not find her Lord Christ there: now Christ was risen and
gone, and she sought the living among the dead, John 20.11, 12, 13. Luke 24.5.
And so a poor soul stands by the ordinances, that most men handle, Mary did, I
weep, because I cannot find my Christ here: These men cannot tell me of my
beloved Lord, whom my soul loves.

Let me advise thee a little, An Advice.
O thou poor soul, thou must go a little beyond these dark and dull watchmen; I
was, but a little passed from these watchmen, but I found him whom my soul
loves; I held him and would not let him go: such is the love of the soul unto
Jesus Christ, that it cannot be satisfied without Christ, read Cant. 3.3, 4.
Such a man is the only man for a sick soul, that believes what he speaks, A
true preacher.
and speaks what he has seen and learned of Christ, read 2 Cor. 4.13. Ephesians.
4.21.

Now the man in Christ, flee as a cloud, and as the doves to their windows, for
shelter and for food, Isa. 60.8.

The Spirit of God is the original good, The Spirit of God
and the only sweet good unto the spirits of men; The Lord Jesus Christ, says
the Apostle, be with thy spirit, 2 Timothy 4.22. Thus the sweet Spirit of God
comes down into the tree of life, which is Christ, and so into the branches
that grow in this tree of life; Christ is the tree out of which these branches
grow and come forth, James 1.17, 18. The Saints life.


Every true believing man and woman is a branch in Christ, the tree of life;
and the sweet Spirit of God is their life that they live by, Acts 17.28. And it
pleases the sweet Spirit of God, to give this title to the branches in Christ,
That they might be called trees of righteousness, Lord, by the rivers of his
sweet Spirit, that he may bring forth fruit in his season; read and compare
Isa. 61.3, 9, 10, 11. and Psa. 1.3. together. And thus the sweet Spirit of God
works all the Saints works in them and for them, Isa. 26.12, 13, 19, 20.

And thus the holy Spirit of God does write his Law in their hearts,

Secondly, Isa. 30.21.

Thirdly, Our strength is to sit still, says the Prophet, read Isa. 30.7.]
Christ is a gift of God, John 4.10. and not for us to get of God or from God.
We are not to work for life, but we are to work from a principle of life which
is in Christ Jesus: A right knowledge of this; and the exceeding great and
precious promises, and the in-comes, and the in-dwelling of the Divine Nature
in our nature and in our hearts: Now this is the seed in the tree of life, For
wherein are we to be accounted of? Now in this day, and at this time, The
loftiness and the haughtiness of men shall be made low: and the Lord alone shall
be exalted in that day, read and compare 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Isa. 2.17, 20, 21, 22.
together. Now when the grace of God in Christ does abound in your hearts, says
the Apostle, That will make you that ye shall neither be barren nor unfruitful in
the works of the Lord, nor in the knowledge of our Lord Jesus Christ, read 2
Pet. 1.5, 6, 7, 8. Now this will stop the mouths of your adversaries, that say
that you say, Christ has done all for you, and you need to do nothing: Now I
know you will answer and say, as Christ said to Philip, The words that you
speak, The Saints defense.
and the works that you do, it is not you that do them, but it is Christ, who
is God, that dwells in you, that does all in you and for you; and by the
strength of Christ you do what you do; and Christ shall have all the praise,
Ioh. 14.10.

Fourthly, Of the pardon of Sin.
Now the Love of God, and the Blood of Jesus are the pardon of sin, and the
pardon for sin: and the sweet Spirit of God is the Messenger that brings the
Manifestations of this pardon unto the soul, nay into the soul, and makes it
glad: In my love I have bloted out thy sins as a thick cloud, says the Lord.
Isa. 44.22
And with my Sons blood I have written a pardon, Romans 5.8, 9, 10, 11. Heb. 9.22,
28. Now this pardon lies in the Covenant, ordered in all things, and made
everlastingly sure, though I do not as yet believe it, or at sometimes I do not
so clearly see it, or feel it in my soul; Read and consider 2 Samuel 23.4, 5.
Hebr. 10.16, 17, 18, 19.

Now in time of Trouble, The time of Temptation.
or in time of Ignorance, when men do not believe; or in time of Desertion,
when God does withdraw himself, or hide his face; or in the time of men being
weak in faith, then they are apt to think that there is no pardon, or that
there must be one got made for them; but there is one ready for them before
they pray for it or call for it, Isa. 42.6, 7. Now the love of God, and the
blood of this man, says the Apostle, meaning Christ, who offered one sacrifice
for sins, from the foundation of the world, 1 John 4.9. Heb. 10.12, 14. Rev.
13.8. Now this is the pardon that is ever ready for poor siners to come unto,
and it is able to save them to the uttermost, Hebrews 7.24, 25, 26.

Now we are not so much to ask for the pardon, for that is sure and steadfast in
the heaven of God; but we are to ask much more for the manifestations of this
pardon in our own souls, and that by the Spirit of God; and this will make the
lame man leap as an Heart, Isa. 35.5, How the soul is refreshed.
6, 7. and make the sick man well, and heal all our doubts, and expel our fears,
and make us holy and heavenly before God; as for instance, says Jeremiah, The
Comforter that should relieve my soul, is far from me, Lam. 1.16. And so in
David, Lord, says he, I know my pardon is sure, David's prayer Ps. 51. opened.
and cause me to hear the joy and gladness that I had wont to have in and with
the Spirit of Christ. that the bones which thou have broken, may rejoice. The
absence of thy Spirit, O God, is as the breaking of bones: and the presence of
thy Spirit, O God, is as marrow and fatness, and as wine upon the lees: And
thus it was in David, Psa. 51.8, 9, 10, 11, 12. And thus it was between the
Church, and the Spirit of Christ, in her union and communion with the Spirit of
Christ; I am thine, and thou art mine, says the soul to Christ: I am my
beloveds, and my beloved is mine: And this we know, says the Apostle, by the
Spirit of God, which he has freely given unto us, Cant. 6.3. 1 Cor. 2.12, 13.

Now the question is not, whether there be a pardon or not a pardon; but
whether I, says a poor soul, have any interest in this pardon, or no, The
perplexities of a poor soul wanting assurance.
I know not. And if I had, says a poor soul; or if I could but get, says
another poor soul, the assurance of the pardon of my sins, then I should tread
the world under my feet. I know, says another poor soul, that there is a
pardon, but whether it be for me or no, it is not as yet revealed unto me; but
if it were revealed in my soul, then it would be as a crown of life to me: as
David said, Lord, says he, thou have crowned me with loving kindness, and with
tender mercies, Psa. 103.4, 10, 11, 12.

Now the word Pardon, which is so much spoke of amongst us, and prayed for by
us, Adam made the sore, Romans 5.18. 1 Timothy 2.4, 5, 6. And life, and death, good
and evil, blessing and cursing, are set before men: therefore choose life, O
men! for why will ye dye, O ye sons of men? Deuteronomy. 30.13, 14, 15, 19. Ezekiel. 18.31.

Now you will say,

I answer; An Objectionmade and answered.
I am for that which God is for; It is not in fallen man to direct his steps to
God, Jer. 10.23. All men in Adam went out of the way from God and are to be
found in a way of sin, Romans 3.11, 12, 18. Can the Ethiopian change his skin? or
the Leopard his spots? No, it is their nature: we have a proverb, That custom
is a second nature: Man, at the first, falling into sin, sin is become a
custom, and so is become a second nature; and so men drink in sin, as a fish
drinks in water, John 8.44. The Ethiopian cannot change his skin, no more can a
man change himself, that is accustomed to sin, Ier. 13.23. A man, in his sins,
is dead to true living actions, Ephesians. 2.1, 4, 5. Now God, in his time of love,
came the second time to man, Live; and this was a more high and excellent life
then that which the first Adam had, read Ezekiel. 16.6, 7, 8. Now a man, in and by
nature, may give credit unto God: and thus the Heathen Philosophers did: And so
men may naturally give credit to the Scriptures; and thus the most men do, and
no more. That the most high God came down, and became Christ, Tim. 3.16. Heb.
2.14. and was made in the likeness of man, and was found in fashion as a man,
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. And he was our pardon and our ransom to free us from sin, and
from hell and the grave; and has raised us up together with himself, that we
may be where he is, and that is in God, Col. 3.3. Now if you would find God,
you must look for him in Christ:

Now if you ask, Where the Church is.
where you may find the Church; you may find the Church and God both together
in Christ, 2 Cor. 5.17, 18, 19. Now this is a great mystery, to know Emmanuel,
or in us, Mat. 1.23. receiving us up into glory with his Son, or in his Son, 1 Timothy 3.15, 16. Now fallen man has not free will to believe this great mystery: he
may hear the report of it, but he cannot see it; For flesh and blood has it
not to reveal unto him, Mat. 16.16, 17. 1 Cor. 2.12, 13, 16. and does
acknowledge, No free will to good.
that it is not of him that wills, nor of him that runeth, but of God that
shows mercy, Romans 9.16. And Faith is the gift of God in his new Creation,
that the boasting of free will which is natural, earthly, and a work of the old
Creation, may be abased, Ephesians. Genesis 6.5.11, 12, 13. read the whole Chapter. The
spirit of a man is the candle of the Lord, as the Sun in the Firmament is,
Prove. 20.27. Now the spirit of man being darkened by that sin of eating of the
forbiden fruit and so degenerating from its first principle of light, Genesis
2.17. Now mark, This is a way through which God does produce and bring forth
his greatest light into the world, Now fallen man, in that estate, has not free
will to do good, but he has free will to do evil constantly: And the reason is,
because such a man is at enmity against God, Romans 8.6, 7, 8. Now free will to do
good does only belong to the most high God, Whatsoever the Lord willed or
pleased, mark this, that did he in heaven and in earth, in the sea and all deep
places, Psa. 135.5, 6, 7. Therefore, Free will belongs alone to GOD.
because he is above all and there is none equal with him, he may lay mercy on
whom he will lay mercy, and whom he will withdraw his mercy from, such a man
hardens presently: Instance in Pharaoh, Romans 9.17, 18. Why does God as yet
find fault, or complain; for who has resisted his will? Romans 9.19. Nay, but, O
man, says the Apostle, that reply against God? There are secrets with the
Lord concerning this thing, which thou can not reach unto with thy natural
reason, nor compass in thy carnal understanding: For what if God be willing to
show mercy to one and not to another, and give no account of it: Is there any
equal with him, for to call him to an account, and to judge him? if not: then be
still O vain man; for he does what he will, Romans 9.20, 21, 22, 23. And thus
much of freewil in the blessed God, and of freewil in sinful man.

CHAP. IX.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Isai. 55.1, 2, 7. Revel. 13.8. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 5.8. Psalm. 68.18. Romans 8.3.
Heb. 9.22, 28. 1 Cor. 2.14. Psalm. 25.11. 2 Samuel 23.5. Mal. 3.6. Psa. 30.7. 1
Pet. 1.5, 7. Isa. 43.1, 2, 5. Joh. 20.13. Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8. Psalm. 51.8, 12.
Psalm. 73.25, 26. Psalm. 36.8, 9. Cant. 1.3, 12, 13. Eze. 16.14. Cant. 4.1. Psalm.
118.22, 23, 24. Cant. 2.4. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5. John 1.16, 17, 18. Isai. 53. the
whole Chapter. Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57, 58. Heb. 2.14, 15. Heb.
12.2. Ephesians. 2.10. Matthew. 5.15, 16. 1 Cor. 1.30. Matthew. 9.2. Revel. 2.9, 10,
11, 13. Luke 6.22, 23. John 16.32, 33. John 15.5. Psalm. 119.32. Psalm. 110.3.
Romans 7.22. Psalm. 1.2. 1 John 5.3. 1 Cor. 6.17, 19, 20. Phil. 2.13. 2 Pet. 1.8.
Heb. 2.9, 10, 11. John 17.4, 5, 6. John 19.30. John 4.10. Ioh. 15.5. Dan. 9.24.
Psalm. 17.15. Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 149.4, 5, 6. 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49.
Luke 1.35. Gal. 4.19. Psalm. 27.4. 1 John 3.9. Luke 10.42. Luke 18.19. 1 Cor.
15.50. Romans 7.18. Gal. 5.17. Gal. 6.14. Romans 7.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Col. 2.13,
14, 15. Heb. 2.14, 15. Romans 7.4. Tit. 2.11, 12. Mark 10.17. Luke 18.11, 12.
Romans 9.30, 31, 32. Psalm. 27.1, 3, 5. 1 Pet. 2.3, 7. Psalm. 45.1, 2. 1 Timothy 1.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 27.13, 14. Tit. 2.11, 12. Cant. 2.4, 5, 6. Cant.
8.13, 14. Psalm. 16.11. 1 John 4.8. 1 John 4.8, 9, 10. Ioh. 17.6. Ioh. 6.68, 69.
2 Samuel 23.2, 4, 5. Psalm. 27.1, 3. John 15.26. Psalm. 27.4, 5. Ephesians. 3.16, 17,
18, 19. Romans 5.5. John 16.13, 14, 15. John 17.21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26. Psalm.
103. read the whole Psalm, Revel. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. Acts
17.28. Revel. 14.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 87.6, 7. Psalm. 68.26. 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. Heb.
12.18, 21, 27, 29. Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. Isai. 33.14.
Exodus 3.2, 3, 4. 1 Cor. 2.11, 12, 13. 1 Pet. 1.5, 7, 8. Heb. 13.8. Psalm. 1.4,
5. Psalm. 50.19, 20.21. Habak. 1.13. Heb. 2.14, 15. Revel. 22.16. 2 Chronicles.
18.19, 20, 21, 22, 33, 34. 1 Samuel 17.47, 48, 49, 50. Acts 14.15. Genesis 49.26.
Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31, 42, 43. Psalm. 139.14, 15, 16. Psalm. 49.12. Genesis 1.31.
Genesis 3.1, 5. Genesis 4.8. Genesis 2.7, 16, 17. Genesis 3.7, 8, 16, 17, 19. Romans 8.21,
22. 1 Cor. 15, 44, 45, 47. Revel. 5.5, 8, to the end, Hebr. 1.10, 11, 12. 2
Cor. 3.17, 18. Psalm. 94.7, 8, 9, 10, 11. Genesis 1.31. 1 John 3.8. Romans 8.28.
Psalm. 103.14, 15. Hosea 13.9. Psalm. 30.5. Isai. 27.4. Hosea 14.4. Genesis 3.8.
Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Psalm. 110.3. Revel. 22.2, 4, 5, 16. 1 John 3.9. Matthew. 12.28,
29. 2 Cor. 7.1. Luke 18.9. Romans 7.18. Colos. 2.14. Gal. 6.14. Col. 1.27, 29.
Gal. 6.14. Romans 7.15. Romans 7.25. Iere. 23.21, 30, to the end, 1 King. 22.11,
12. 2 Pet. 2.1. Matthew. 24.24, 25. Phil. 3.20. Ephesians. 2.20, 21. John 14.2. Isai.
33.17. Phil. 3.20. Genesis 5.24. Heb. 11.5. Psalm. 9.10. 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. Isai.
1.11, 12. Isai. 58.2, 3. Iere. 7.4, 8, 14. Iere. 5.30, 31. Phil. 3.4, 5, 6, 7,
8. 1 Corinthians. 1.18, 19, to the end, 1 Corinthians. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 John 3.11,
12, 13. James 4.1. Mark 7.21, 22. Revel. 12.1. Genesis 2.2, 3. Heb. 4.9, 10.
Matthew. 17.5. John 17.23, 24. Hebr. 2.11, 12, 13.

I Shall speak a word of the freeness of the pardon, which is, in general,
Isai. 55.1, 2, 7. This is the ground, I confess, of every ones coming, that
comes aright. If the pardon be free to every one, before the foundation of the
world, Rev. 13.8. Ephesians. 1.4, 5. Romans 5.8. Psa. 68.18. Romans 8.3. Heb. 9.22, 28.
And so much in general of the pardon of sin. Now I shall speak a word of this
pardon in particular. And here lies a scruple, and here lies everlasting
comfort.

I know,

I answer, spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

Secondly,

Now here comes in a right panting, and breathing, O Lord (says David) pardon
my sin, Psalm 25.11. Now David, at this time, did know that his sins were
pardoned.

You will ask, how I know that?

He himself said, That God had made with him an everlasting pardon or covenant,
ordered in all things, and sure; and this is all my salvation, and all my
desire, although he make it not to grow, says he, 2 Samuel 23.5. And I know the
Lord changes not, Mal. 3.6. Now David was a strong man in the Lord; and yet he
was up one while, and down another while. flourish like a green baytree, and
then his mountain was strong; but when the sweet Spirit of God did withdraw it
self, then David was troubled, Psalm. 30.7.

Now a poor soul in its winter season, when its fruits are in its roots, Pet.
1.5, 7. Isai. 43.1, 2, 5.

Now a poor soul not having the heat and sunshine of the Spirit, is
discontented, though it may have its eye fixed upon its pardon, which is sure
and steadfast. O, says Mary Magdalen, they have taken away my Lord: And so
says the poor soul, John 20.13. O Lord, says David, let the light of thy
Spirit shi^e into my soul; and that will make me more glad, then corn and wine
increased, Psalm. 4.6, 7, 8. One smile from thy fatherly countenance, O Lord;
one beam or glance of the refreshings of thy sweet Spirit. O let me hear of
spiritual joy and gladness, and then I shall follow thee all the day long. My
soul pants for thee the living God: heart and my flesh fail me. But God is my
rock, and my wellspring of joy, and he never fails: and this is all my joy,
Psalm. 51.8, 12. and 73.25, 26. and 36.8, 9.

The poor soul once being possessed of this spiritual dew, it begins to speak
of the excellency of Christ, while the Spirit of grace sits as king in my
soul, his throne in my soul, says the Church, my graces send forth a pleasant
smell. a bundle of myrrh to my soul. And the king says, I am fair, and there
is no spot in me, because of the comeliness which he has put upon me: and he
says, that I am fair, and have doves eyes, read Cant. 1.3, 12, 13. Eze. 16.14.
Cant. 4.1. Now a poor soul being brought by the king into the banqueting house,
on the day of the Lord, nay, in the day of the Lord, Psalm 118.22, 23, 24. Now
Christ is the king of this day, and the day it self, in which, every true
believing soul does abide for ever; any, Christ himself is the house, banner of
love over a poor soul, and makes it glad in himself, Cant. 2.4.

Now Christ and the soul have sweet communion together, before the foundation
of the world; and that he has chosen it in him, and blessed it with all
spiritual blessings, in heavenly places in himself. And Christ tells the soul,
that it shall stand [in him] for ever [before God.] be holy and without blame
before him in love, Ephesians. 1.3, 4. And Christ tells the soul, that he came out
of the bosom of the Father, to be its ransom, and to pay its debts, to the law,
and to sin, and to hell, and the devil, and the grave, John 1.16, 17, 18. Isai.
53. read the whole Chapter, Hosea 13.14. 1 Cor. 15.54, 55, 56, 57, 58. Heb.
2.14, 15. And so likewise, Christ tells the soul, he will enable it to believe
all this, Heb. 12.2. And so Christ tells the soul, he will make it fruitful in
good works, before God and men, that they may glorify God on their behalf,
Ephesians. 2.10. Matthew. 5.15, 16. And Christ tells the soul, Cor. 1.30. And Christ
bids the soul, be of good cheer for its sins are forgiven, Matthew. 9.2. and he
has overcome the world for it, call it Antinomian; that will live as its own
list: For Christ has done all for it, and it needs to do nothing at all. And
this they say, It will not pray for pardon of sin; for God sees no sin in it:
and they say, Be of good cheer, poor soul, for I know thy works, and thy
tribulation, and patience, and poverty, and where thou dwell, even where
Satan's throne is, Revel. 2.9, 10, 11, 13. But be of good cheer, O poor soul,
though these men hate thee, yet thou art blessed; cast out thy name as evil,
for my sake; rejoice thou in that day, and be of good cheer; for I have
overcome this world of men, Luke 6.22, 23. John 16.32, 33.

Now mark how Jesus Christ does vindicate these reproached ones. that without
me you can do nothing, Joh. 15.5. When I have enlarged thine heart, and put my
self therein [saith Christ] then I will be thy law, and thy rule, and thy day,
and thy power; and thou shall be willing in me, and I will be thy law, in which
thou shall delight; and it shall not be grievous but thy joy, Psa. 119.32. and
110.3. Romans 7.22. Psalm. 1.2. 1 John 5.3.

Secondly, own, I have bought thee with a price, and thou art joined unto me,
in, and by the Spirit; and thou shall live as I will have thee, both to will,
and to do of my good pleasure, and thou shall not be barren nor unfruitful, 1
Cor. 6.17, 19, 20. Phil. 2.13. 2 Pet. 1.8.

Thirdly, son unto glory, and bids thee be of good cheer, for he has finished
the work which God gave him to do, for thee, O poor soul, [and thou need not
for to do any thing at all for life, or for to get Christ, who is thy life]

[Mistake me not here,] people do mistake this point. Christ tells thee, O poor
soul again, That he has finished all for thee upon the Crose,

Now as Christ has done all for the soul, so Christ tells the poor soul, vine,
and the soul is a branch in him, and it shall work from a principle of life,
which is in him, which is its original; and he will pour into it spiritual
influence and nourishment, and it shall bring forth much fruit, because of him,
read Heb. 2.9, 10, 11. John 17.4, 5, 6. and 19.30. and 4.10. and 15.5.

Fourthly, to sing the song of the Lamb, and to have the high praises of God in
its mouth, Dan. 9.24. Psalm. 17.15. Revel. 14.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psalm. 149.4, 5, 6.

Fifthly, born in thee, O thou poor soul; and this holy thing shall be formed
in thee, O thou poor soul: and this is [the seed of God] which shall [be born
in thy heart] [and it cannot sin, because he is born of God.] Martha. [Now this
good thing, flesh and blood inherit the Kingdom of God: for in my flesh, says
Paul, I know there dwells no good thing. Now a true Christian in this life,
does consist of good and evil. Now the good part in a true believing man or
woman, Cross of our Lord Jesus Christ, to be crucified, as Paul speaks; By
which Cross, says he, I am crucified to the world, the flesh, and sin; and the
world, the flesh, and sin, are crucified unto me, upon this Cross. And I thank
God, through Christ my Lord, which has freed me from the body of this death;
So that with the mind, I my self, says the Apostle, serve the Law of God; but
in my flesh, there is a law of sin, which is nailing to the Cross of Christ
every day, 1 Cor. 15.47, 48, 49. Luke 1.35. Gal. 4.19. Psalm. 27.4. 1 John 3.9.
Luke 10.41, 42. and 18.19. These Scriptures show where God sees no sin.
Corinth. 15.50. Romans 7.18. Gal. 5.17. and 6.14. Romans 7.21, 22, 23, 24, 25. Col.
2.13, 14, 15. Heb. 2.14, 15.

Sixthly, Romans chap. verse 4. Titus 2. verses 11, 12.

Seventhly, evil report upon these men, for Free Grace sake. Now by this means,
there is a disaffecting, and a great neglecting of the speaking of Free Grace,
and rather a teaching of men for to do some good thing of their own, Good
master what shall I do, says the young man, that I may inherit eternal life?
Mark 10.17. And so says the Pharisee, I have fasted and prayed, and done many
things; therefore, I am not as other men are, Luke 18.11, 12.

Now is it not apparent, that most people and Ministers, Romans; But as it were
by the works of the Law? Together with thy help, O Christ, we look for a
blessing, and for heaven, and for what we have, Romans 9.30, 31, 32.

Now for want of Preaching of Freegrace, A Simile.
we know not where the strength of Samps^n lies, I mean Christ; and so we begin
to set up our selves, as it were, to be partners with Christ, and thus the
people are at a loss. Now on the other side, it is no more I, but the Lord is
my light, and my life, and my strength, and in this will I be confident; and
this Free Grace causes to grow, Psalm. 27.1, 3, 5.

Now he that has tasted of the sweetness of Free Grace, cannot but speak of
it, because it is the only means for to break a hard heart, and the only
cordial for to comfort a sick soul, 1 Pet. 2.3, 7. Psalm. 45.1, 2. 1 Timothy 1.12,
13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Psalm. 27.13, 14. Now on the other side, he that has not
tasted of Free Grace, but speaks of it by hearsay, to speak of the Free Grace
of God, in and through Christ, for they speak but little of it; and that is the
reason, that the most people are so ignorant of it, and live so much in sin,
read Tit. 2.11, 12. When grace does appear, sin vanishes away, O the glorious
truths of grace, that lie under that black cloud of Antinomianism! That
reproachful name, which causes the people for to sin, in speaking evil of that
which they know not.

Now I shall reflect back, banqueting house, where Christ does acquaint the
soul, what the pardon of sin is, and that its sins are done away, both past,
present, and to come; of this I spoke before. Peter, help Lord; send the
evidences of thy Spirit to acquaint me of the sure mercies of David; and thus
the soul does acquaint Christ with its wants; and then the soul does find the
left hand of Christ to be under its head, when it is in communion with Christ
in the banqueting house, the right hand of Christ does imbrance me, says the
soul: [Now these embraces, that Christ gives the soul, they are the sweet gayls
of the Spirit, which put all things out of doubt in the soul,] Cant. 2.4, 5, 6.

Now it pleases Jesus Christ, Christ like a mother draws a curtain.
sometimes to draw a curtain between himself and the soul, as a mother does
sometimes in love to her child, and then the child cries after her; and thus
the poor soul cries after the Spirit of Christ, in all occasions, to come and
comfort it: Make have my beloved, says the soul to Christ, and be thou like to
a Roe, or to a young Heart, upon the mountains of spices: Flee away, make haste,
do not stay by the way, says the soul that longs after Christ: No comfort like
unto thine, O my Love! No love like unto thine, O my Joy! Cause me to hear thy
voice quickly, that I faint not. O my dear! I hearken to thy voice, O sweet
Spirit of Christ, let me hear it, and it suffices me, though I dye, and come
to thee, which is best of all: For in thy presence is fullness of joy; and at
thy right hand there are pleasures for evermore, Cant. 8.13, 14. Psa. 16.11.
And thus he, whose Name is [Love] 1 John 4.8. does descend and come down into
the hearts of his people, to manifest himself unto them and in them, 1 John
4.8, 9, 10. John 17.6. And thus the blessed God does manifest himself, and make
known things unspeakable and full of glory; and does let into the soul high
manifestations of his love, which is the original of the pardon of sin. Now if
there come a black cloud, at any time, between the soul and the Sun of
righteousness, who is God blessed for ever; yet the soul, in this case, can
say, as Peter said, I am sure that my sun is in the living God, words of
eternal life unto me, John 6.68, 69. For the Spirit of the Lord put his Word in
my mouth, says David, and has made with me an everlasting Covenant, which is
sure, I know: and though my sun does not always shine, yet in him will I be
confident, read 2 Samuel 23.2, 4, 5. Psa. 27.1, 3.

Now here comes in the work of the John 15.26. Now here follows the souls
desires, that has tasted how gracious the Lord is; first, That it may dwell in
the house of the Lord, which house is Christ, and there to behold the beauty of
the Lord, and to have it made out in his holy Temple, which Temple is Jesus
Christ, Psa. 27.4, 5. And here to have the light of his fatherly countenance,
and the sweet smiles of his holy Spirit, constantly upon its soul; and to have
the high manifestations of the love of God in Christ, as the Apostle prays for,
Ephesians. 3.16, 17, 18 19. and to have the evidences kept close unto its soul.

Now Christ answers the soul; keep thee, guide thee and show thee things to
come concerning me; and he shall make me beautiful in thine eyes, and he shall
shed his love into thy soul, which will cause thee to love me, Romans 5.5. And
thou shall have all thy treasure in me, says Christ to the soul: for all
things that the Father has are mine, and I and my Father are one, and thou
shall be one with us in my union, and with me shall thou have communion, John
16 13, 14, 15. and 17.21, to 26.



O blessed God, the fountain of Israel: O my God, thou have turned all my
prayers, that I made for the pardon of my sin, into praises, or praising of
thee, O my God, who have forgiven all my sins: Bless the Lord, O my soul, says
David, and forget not to praise him for all his benefits, who has forgiven
thee all thy sins, whodoth forgive thee al thy sins; and he does continually
declare unto thee the forgiveness of all thine iniquities, that thou might
rejoice before him in the forgiveness of all thy sins; for he has healed all
thy diseases, and he does heal all thy diseases, and he will continually heal
all thy diseases: Therefore thou may be of good cheer O my soul, for thou
may and do swim in rivers of pleasures for evermore: Now this river is
loving kindness and tender mercies, whereof the soul does drink and is
abundantly satisfied; and it lives in this river, and shall never more thirst
after sin, read Psa. 103.1, read the whole Psalm.

Now this river is God himself, Rev. 22.1, 2, 3, 4, 5. Psa. 36.7, 8, 9.

Secondly, This Fountain of Israel, which is the sweet God himself, is the air
in which the soul does live, and in which the soul does move, and act, and has
its being, Acts 17.28. And so likewise the soul, as a bird, does fly up and
down in this air, admiring of God, and praising of God, Rev. 14.4, 5, 6.

Now the soul does wind up its conclusion in giving all honor unto its
original, All my springs, says the soul, are in thee, who art the fountain of
Israel, which is God blessed for evermore, read Psa. 87.6, 7. Psa. 68.26.

And so much,

But I, Why do thou so, unto him?

Fifthly, You are accused of saying, That God sees no sin,



Secondly, There is no equality between Christ and sin, or Christ and siners;
neither has Christ any accord with sin: And what agreement has, Christ, the
Temple of God with idols, which is sin? None at all, 2 Cor. 6.14, 15, 16. God
sees sin contrary unto himself, therefore he appears as a consuming fire unto
sin; and not unto sin only, but unto all created forms and beings, Heb. 12.18,
21, 27, 29. Heb. 1.10, 11, 12. 2 Pet. 3.10, 11, 12, 13. And so likewise to
siners, that is, sinful men and women, dwell with devouring fire, and with
everlasting burnings. And thus God appears unto all that look upon him out of
Christ, Isai. 33.14.

But now on the other side, Baptized with the fire of the Holy Ghest, this is
their proper heavenly element that they live in; and they are like the bush
that was all on a flame of fire, and was not consumed, Exodus 3.2, 3, 4. Now
this fire will burn stubble and all manner of sinful works of men, 1 Cor. 2, 11,
12, 13. But this heavenly fire is nourishment unto that which is of it self, 1
Pet. 1.5, 7, 8. Now these seeing God in Christ, see him unchangeably good, and
the same yesterday, and to day, and the same for ever, Heb. 13.8. Now God is
not as sinful dark men judge him to be, that is, to be made up of love and
hatred, Fury is not in God Isa 27 4.
and wrath and fury; and so they stand a far off from him, hard Master. Now
what a mistake is here, for God is the only true Good, he is loving, merciful
and just, and sin shall not stand near him; but sin shall be bowed down, and the
siner whose heart is a throne for sin to be his king, he shall not stand upright
in the judgment of God in Christ, Psa. 1.4, 5. Now sin does delude a man to
think that God is like unto himself, read Psa. 50.19, 20, 21. But God is of
purer eyes then to behold such evil, and to look on iniquity and sin, and not
to destroy death with his sting, Habak. 1.13. Heb. 2.14, 15.

Now I shall speak a word, by way of comparison,

Now the comparison will fall infinitely too short: But suppose, a curious
Artificer makes a Watch very curiously, but something falls out in a very short
time and puts the Watch out of order, and this we call an accident, and use to
say, there is such an accident fallen out and has put the Watch out of order,
and it does nothing now but jar; and it never goes right until it be taken in
pieces, and a second Art applied unto it, and so new made up again; but now if
this Artificer could have prevented this accident, he would not have suffered
this accident to have fallen out upon his Watch, and spoiled it. But it is not so
with God; Nothing done without Gods providence.
but for God, and permited by God to be or not to be, and are suffered by God
and ordered by him to bring his own designs about. Now an accident is in
relation to men, as not knowing God, and so they use that word accident, or
luck, or chance, or, as some grossly call it, fortune; not knowing that God is
near unto that which they call accident or luck, and does dispose of it and
them, as shall make most for his own glory: As for instance, The lying spirit
was admited to go into the mouth of the Prophets of Ahab, and so Ahab was
deluded: And so likewise the arrow was ordered, that was drawn out of a bow at
a venture, and was directed to the joints of the harness of the King of Israel,
David hasted and ran to meet the Army, David being a type of Christ, Revel.
22.16. as it is written, by promise, he shall bruise the head of Goliath, and
cause the Champion of the Philistims to sink in the head of their Army: and
though they may rise again, and bruise his heel, yet a stone shall be directed
from a sling and shall sink in at Goliahs forehead, and he shall fall, 2 Chronicles.
18.19, 20, 21, 22, 33, 34. 1 Samuel 17.47, 48, 49, 50. And so a man going along
the streets, Nochance but providence does all.
a fly comes into his eye and troubles him; and so a tile falls from a house
and hurts him: Now none of these be accidents in respect of God, but through
our weakness we call them so; but God has his design in them all.

which made heaven and earth, and the sea, the round world, and all things that
are therein, Acts 14.15. This God is a wonder-working God, and his blessings
are unto the the utmost bound of the everlasting hills, Genesis 49.26. Now this
wonderworking God, Psalm. 107.8, 15, 21, 31, 42, 43. made and wrought curiously
his first Creation, that we might behold him in it as in a glass, far more
curiously then any Artificer can make a curious Watch: Lord, says David, thou
have wonderfully made me, and curiously wrought me out of the dust of the
earth, or belly of the earth thou have fashioned me, Psa. 139.14, 15, 16. Now
all this makes way for the appearance of Christ; yet nevertheless man being in
this honor abides not, Psalm. 49.12.

Now comes in that which God neither created nor made, and that is sin: Now God
saw every thing that he had made, and behold it was very good, Genesis 1.31. Now
God made not sin; Sin is none of Gods Creation but a vail over it.
for sin is very evil and very ugly, and sin has drawn a vail of deformity
over the whole Creation, that was given to the first Adam: Now Adam and Eve
seeking themselves, and to advance themselves, in eating the forbiden fruit,
they met with sin, and sin deceived them both; and before they were aware, they
had slain a man, Genesis 3.1, 5. And Cain did the like, Genesis 4.8. And thus you see
what a curious piece of work the first Creation was: Instance in Adam, while he
lay, in his form of a man, upon the earth before the Lord, without life; and
after the Lord had breathed into him the breath of life, he was a very curious
piece, but he continued but a very short time, for he forgot the Law of his
God, and the Command of his Maker, Genesis 2.7, 16, 17. And so sin and the devil
broke in upon him, and so in him sin brought shame, sorrow, pain and grief upon
all, Genesis 3.7, 8, 16, 17, 19. And this is that which the Apostle speaks of and
says. The whole Creation groaneth and traveleth in pain, until now, to be
delivered, Romans 8.21, 22. And thus you see how sin has caused a jarring in
this earthly and natural Creation, 1 Cor. 15, 44, 45, 47. Instance in Adam and
Eve, and Cain, and Job: So that nowhere is nothing but an earthly sound, Every
one stands weeping for Christ though they know him not.
and earthly music; and every man is groaning in the grave of his earth, and
stands weeping until the Lion of the tribe of Judah teach him to know the time
of restoration, and the time of refreshing, and the time of the new Creation,
whereby they shall see the heavens that were first made to perish and wax old,
as a garment and as a vesture; God will fold them up, or as a painted-cloth is
taken down and folded up, so shall these first Heavens and this first Creation
be changed: Lion of the tribe of Judah shall unloose the seals of the
Everlasting Gospel, and shall teach men to sing the new song, song of the Lamb
that was slain by Adam and Eve, in the eating of the forbiden fruit, and so by
Cain, in slaying of Abel. By this Lamb I mean Jesus Christ, who shall change men
from the first Creation, which is full of sin and misery, into the Liberty of
the Spirit of the Lord which is the new heaven, read these three Scriptures,
Revel. 5.5, 8, to the end, Hebr. 1.10, 11, 12. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.

But you will say,

My answer is, Psalm. 94.7, 8, 9, God permits of many things for his own glory.
10, 11. God did not create sin, nor make it; for sin is very evil; and that
which God made, was very good, Genesis 1.31. Therefore Gods design is to destroy
sin, for he sent his own Son into the world for that purpose, 1 Ioh. 3.8. Sin
shall work for good, Romans 8.28. And Gods design is to bring forth his own glory
through all, in making a new Creation and bringing forth Jesus Christ: God in
his first Creation considers the weakness of men in sining, that they are but
dust, Psalm. 103.14, 15. Therefore he says, you have destroyed your selves, but
in me is your help, Hosea 13.9.

Now if God look away but a moment, man's capacity takes it for anger, Psalm.
30.5. Then God comes and says, Anger is not in me, fury is not in me; I will
love you freely, Isai. 27.4. Hosea 14.4. in the cool of the day; that is,
Christ my son is the day, and with thee, in him, I am well pleased; The Godhead
is the womb out of which every good and perfect gift does proceed.
and my Sons blood shall be a cool plaster to heal thy heat of sin, Genesis 3.8.
By the washing of regeneration from the womb of the new birth, and the renewing
of the holy Ghost, by which thou shall be born, read Tit. 3.4, 5, 6. Now the
Godhead is the womb of the morning, and Christ is the first child in that womb,
Psalm. 110.3. And Christ is the bright morning Star in that womb, read Revel.
22.2, 4, 5, 16. And all those that are Christ's are born out of that womb, and
God sees no sin in himself; therefore God sees no sin in that which is born of
himself: for that which is born of God, with reference to Christ, cannot sin,
because it is born of God, and is the seed of God, 1 Ioh 3.9. And this is the
new Creation in which God sees no sin, or sees no sin in them, or in that.

Now here, God sees no sin in the new creature because it is his seed.
upon consideration it may be found where sin has its seat, or where sin is to
be found, and that God sees this or that sin. A true believing man does consist
of two parts; A strong man to sin, and a strong man to cast out sin, Matthew.
12.28, 29. Sin is a filthiness that does rest both in flesh and spirit, 2 Cor.
7.1. Mark this you that are self-righteous, Luke 18.9. For the seat of sin is
in the flesh, says the Apostle, Romans 7.18. But the death of sin is upon the
Cross of Christ, Col. 2.14. Gal. 6.14. Christ in you the hope of your glory is
the strong man in you that does cast out sin and satan; Col. 1.27, 29. Gal.
6.14. The best of men have sin in their flesh, and they hate it, Romans 7.15. But
in their spirit they observe no sin to obey it, but serve the Law of God, and
love it, Romans 7.25.

Now God sees sin as the great false the false Prophets that were, and the
false Teachers, or the false Prophets, that now are amongst us, which run
before they be sent of the Lord; and they steal my Word every one from his
neighbor, says the Lord: And they say, I said, when I have not spoken to them;
and yet they prophecy, says the Lord: though it be but a dream, and it may be
call themselves Ministers of the Gospel. Now none more likely then such men, who
privily shall, says the Apostle, Great learned men are as ignorant of Christ as
unlearned men, instance in Nicodemus and Saul.
bring in all manner of heresies, even denying the Lord that bought them: And
yet for all this, these men may be great learned men, but the God of this
world, that is, the Devil, has blinded their minds, and yet they may remain
Prophets and Teachers, though they do but teach the air of their own brain,
Prince of the air, who exalts himself in the Temple of God, and is like unto
a Lamb in sheeps clothing: beware of these, says our Savior, and so says the
Apostle. Let none of these men deceive you by any means, says the Apostle,
though they make a fair show in the flesh, showing themselves that they are for
God, and so compel you; and if you oppose them, you shall find them inwardly
ravening Wolves, or openly like Lions for to tear you.

Now to make it appear to you, Jere. 23.21, to the end; and so likewise, read 1
King. 22.11, 12. And so likewise, to make it appear to you, that there are
false Prophets, and false Teachers, even now amongst us, read 2 Pet. 2.1.
Matthew. 24.24, 25. Now I would not be mistaken here, in what I have said
concerning false Teachers; for I do not mean mechanic men, nor illiterate men;
though there may be some things amiss amongst them; yet they can speak the true
thetorick of the Heaven of God, which is very sweet unto them; for their
conversation is in God, and with God, read Phil. 3.20.

Now these mechanic men, built upon the foundation of the Apostles, and Christ
himself is the chief corner stone, Ephesians. 2.20, 21. And they are acquainted, as
Christ is, with the mansions in God, John 14.2. And they see the land that is
afar off, read Isai. 33.17. Want of humane learning is no let in revealing
Christ.
Now I had rather hear such mechanic men one hour, then some great learned men
twenty four hours, though they should come from Oxford or Cambridg: In case
they should be but only learned in the brain, and so learned in the theorick,
that is, to speak of an outside, and no more.

Now I will give you a reason of what I have said. A learned man having the
School-Arts, may by the help of a Globe, or a Map, Spain or Italy, or
Constantinople, though he himself were never there: And so by the letter of the
Scripture, and the help of a Library, he may talk much of Heaven and God, and
yet know but very little concerning that which they talk so much of: Therefore,
I said I had rather hear some mechanic men, because their conversation is in
heaven, as the Apostle speaks, Phil. 3.20. Now such men can speak the truest of
that place, walk with God, as Enoch did, and they please God, Genesis 5.24. Heb.
11.5. And they know his name, and therefore they trust in his name, and speak
good of it, Psalm. 9.10. Therefore it is more profitable to hear such mechanic
men, or such illiterate men, though it may be they are jeered with the spirit;
and what they do, say some, they do it by the spirit: and this is spoken by way
of a jeer. But I will tell you what I think, That God does see this as great a
sin in England, as any one sin. And this is that spirit of Antichrist, which
denies Christ come in the flesh, or in our flesh, as you may read 1 John 4.1,
2, 3. The Papists confess Christ come in the flesh, but they must not confess
him to be come into their flesh, for to guide and to lead them, and teach them;
but they must be taught by their great Doctors and Rabbis of their Church, and
they must be led which way they will: and is it not even so amongst us at this
day? As for instance, in our Clergy men of England, they are divided into two
parts, The one part for the King, and the other part for the Parliament. Now I
ask, is Christ divided? Directory after the best Reformed Churches, and the
nearest to the Word of God, as they say; but they themselves will be the Judges
over other men's Consciences, one God, one Christ, and one holy Spirit: And if
these great learned men, could but speak experimentally of God the Father, who
is first; and Christ coming out of the Father, who is second; and the Holy
Ghost proceeding forth from them both, and is the third; and yet these three
are but one. Now if our learned men could, or would insist upon this divine
matter, which is the Substance of Religion, Jews did, and yet remain ignorant
of the Spiritual part of Religion, which is the Substance of Religion.

Now to let you know, Isai. 1.11, 12. and 58.2, 3. Iere. 7.4, 8, 14. and 5.30,
31. Now when the Substance of Religion is come into you, or amongst you, then
your Pharisaical shadows and outsides, wherein you trust, will vanish, and
Christ will be all in all, unto you and in you, instance in Paul, Phil. 3.4, 5,
6, 7, 8.

Now, of Clergy men that were striving about the sha^ows and outsides: I do not
mean all of them; for I am persuaded, that a few of them are feelingly
acquainted with the substance and power of Religion; but for the most part of
them, they have done, and do now, strive for outsides and for forms, in matters
of Religion, and neglect the Substance of Religion, which is to speak of Christ
spiritually. Now therefore, then some of your Doctors and learned Rabbis. Now
let me tell you, that God has chosen these things which are foolish, as you
call them, or these foolish men. Now if you ask me, What God has chosen these
foolish men for to do? the Apostle Paul will answer you, and give you the
reason, and the ground of it: The reason is, for to destroy the wisdom of the
worldly wise, or the wisdom of the flesh: For God calls for the worldly wise,
and says, where is the fleshly scribe, and where is the carnal disputer of
this world? for I will make the wisdom of these men foolish. That no flesh
should glory in his presence, and say, I have done this, and by my wisdom, I
have done that; and Lords wisdom alone shall be exalted in that day, says the
Prophet: And the high looks, and the great strength of men, and all their
natural parts, with their wit, and humane policy, shall be confounded, says
the Lord. For it is written, says the Apostle, he that glories, let him glory
in the Lord. The Apostle being in the Church of the Corinthians, amongst many,
he took notice of some which had a spirit of pride, ignorance, contempt, and
disdaining of their Brethren and Neighbors, as it is even now in the Church of
England: And in all Parishes, more or less, there is a despising, and a
disdaining of those which God loves; and a speaking such words of them, as the
Apostle speaks, calling them foolish things, and week things, and base things,
and things which are despised, and things which are to be of no account. But
let me tell you what these foolish, base, and despised things are;

Now the Apostle taking the part of the weak ones, and the despised ones, and
the unlearned ones in his time; he takes occasion, for to speak the speech and
the language of those that did vaunt themselves in their pride, over their
Brethren and Neighbors, talking much of the Law of God, and of Reformation, and
yet themselves quite out of the exercise of love to their Brethren; as you have
it upon record, and written for our learning, read 1 Cor. 1.18. to the end, and
so likewise read 1 Corinthians. 13.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. 1 John 3.11, 12, 13.

Now what think you, England, and should take notice of the most in all
Parishes in England, would he not say, that they were carnal, Some proud and
ignorant, and some ignorant, and yet zealous.] Now as Saint James says, in the
fourth Chapter of his Epistle, and the first verse, From whence, says he, come
the wars of the tongue? Now Christ answers, and tells us, the place from whence
wars arise: Out of the heart, says he, proceeds evil thoughts, pride, and an
evil eye against your Neighbors, Mark 7.21, 22. And the Apostle, he comes and
rehearses, and explains the temper of our times, and tells our ignorant-zealous
ones, Independents or Antinomians, Brownists or Separatists, and the like; and
so bring them into no account, or as men which are not, that they themselves
may be mighty, or as lords over Gods Heritage, as the Apostle speaks. But now
mark what the Apostle says, [you despisers of your Brethren,] God, says he,
has set apart these foolish and weak men, to confound the worldly wise men,
and to overturn the mighty; and those you so account, and call the basest men
in a Kingdom, or in a Parish, and cause them for to be despised: Why, says the
Apostle, such has God chosen which you disdain, and will hardly account of
them to be as men; yet these men, says the Apostle, which are not, or are not
in your account, shall by the wisdom of Christ, God-man, bring to naught the
wisdom of such men, as think themselves to be that which they are not; for
Christ is the power of God, and the wisdom of God, unto such as are saved; for
the foolishness of God is wiser then men, and the weakness of God is stronger
then men, as we have experience at this day, and in our times; read and
consider well that forenamed place, 1 Corinthians. 1.18, to the end. The Child
Jesus is the first wonder in Heaven.
Now I stand amazed for to see the great wonder, that does appear, in heaven,
as you may read Revel. 12.1. Now Christ is the Heaven of God, Genesis 2.2, 3. Heb.
4.9, 10. Matthew. 17.5. Christ and a true Christian are unseparable. I in them,
and thou in me says Christ, John 17.23, 24. For which cause he is not ashamed
to cal^ them Brethren; Saying, I will declare thy name unto my Brethren, i^ the
midst of the Church, Heb. 2.11. 12, 13.

CHAP. X.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Luke 7.30, 34. 2 Cor. 6.16. Joh. 14.23. Ephesians. 1.3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11. Psalm.
110.3. 2 Cor. 5.17. Isai. 43.14. John 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7. 1 Ioh. 3.9. 1 Pet. 2.2,
3. Jere. 31.18, 20. Isai. 66.11, 12, 13. John 8.38, 39, 41, 42. 1 John 3.12.
Gal. 4.11, 19. Luke 2.40, 52. 1 Cor. 3.16. 2 Cor. 13.5. Colos. 1.27. Phil. 2.6,
7, 8. Ephesians. 2.15, 16. Colos. 1.19, 20. Ephesians. 2.15. 2 Pet. 1.3, 4. Phil. 2.7,
8. Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. Mark 14.29, 30, 31, 32. Luke 23.34. John 19.30. Isai.
52.14. and 53.2, 3, 4. Ephesians. 4.9, 10. Psalm. 68.18. Heb. 11.27. Colos. 3.3, 4.
Gal. 2.20. Colos. 1.12, 13. Ephesians. 4.20, 21. 1 Ioh. 2.27, 28. 2 Cor. 3.17, 18.
Col. 2.9, 10. Matthew. 1.21, 23. Luke 2.26, 27. Ephesians. 4.6. Colos. 3.4, 11. John
17.23, 24. John 1.16. Ephesians. 4.13. Psalm. 27.1. Matthew. 1.23. Deuteronomy. 6.4. Luke
2.26. Isai. 62.3. Psalm. 36.7, 8, 9. John 1.4, 5. Psalm. 17.15. John 17.21. 1
Cor. 8.5, 6. Luke 6.22, 23. Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Revel. 5.4, 5, 6, 7. Colos.
3.4. Gal. 2.20. Romans 8.33, 34, 35. John 15.26. John 14.19, 20. Romans 8.7. 1 John
3.12. Romans 2.17, 21, 23. Genesis 25.27, 30, 34. Genesis 27.41. John 9.13, 14, 15, 16,
29. John 7.45, 48, 49. Acts 9.3, 4, 5, 6. and 26.16. Acts 26.9, 10, 11. Ioh.
16.2, 3 Acts 7.58, 59, 60. Exodus 20.2, 3. Iere. 31.33, 34. Cant. 5.4, 5. Psalm.
40.7, 8, 9. Acts 16.14, 15. John 11.41, 42. Mal. 3.14, 15. Job 7.19. Psalm.
68.13. Job 7.20. and 7.11. Isai. 49.14. and 49.13, 15, 16. Mal. 3.12. Phil.
1.29. Mat. 6.10. Luke 22.42. John 12.27, 28. John 12.24, 25, 26.

NOw when I consider in my self, I wonder and admire, the good pleasure of the
Lord, in choosing such men, and contemptible men and women, as he does for the
most part: for not many wise men after the flesh, not many mighty rich men
after the world, nor many noble are called; but the foolish men are called
foolish, weak men are called, I say weak, in respect of the mighty worldly
learned men; and the base men of the world are called, I mean, as the worldly
men do account of them to be base, and do speak basely of them, and cause them
to be despised. And thus the zealous Pharisees and Lawyers did, Luke 7.30, 34.
But Christ, the wisdom of God, is justified of all his children. Now Christ
being the Heaven of God, and God choosing such foolish, weak, base, despised men
and women, to be an habitation for himself and Christ, who is one in him, to
dwell in, and to walk in them, and to take up their abode in them, read 2 Cor.
6.16. John 14.23.

Christ is the Mother of Spiritual Children.
are said to be in Christ four or five several times, as you may read, Ephesians.
1.3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11.

Now Christ is the womb of the morning, and has the Dew of his youth, as you
may read, Psalm. 110.3. And thus Christ may be said to be a Mother, as the
Prophet and the Apostle does alude unto; and Christ himself do confirm it, If
any man be in Christ, says the Apostle, he is a new creature, 2 Corinthians. 5.17.
And it shall spring forth, says the Prophet, Isai. 43.19. And be born again,
says Jesus Christ, John 3.3, 4, 5, 6, 7.

Now if any will inquire further, after this heavenly birth, let them consider
the first Epistle of John, the third chapter and the ninth verse, and the Lord
teach them to understand it.

Now to show you what diet these newborn children do feed upon, it is that
which the Apostle Peter speaks of, 1 Pet. 2.2, 3. Now, they once tasting of
this heavenly Food, can never be content with a lame ministry, or a lame
Minister; that is, only a reading Minister, whose food is likely to be but hay
and stubble, or straw; or it may be a lame preaching Minister, build gold,
silver, precious stones, as the Apostle speaks. But upon trial this work proves
but brass, or as a house that's built upon the sand.

Now these newborn children, hay, stubble and straw, or with gilded
fig leaves: the Faith of the Son of God: This is the only ministry for to
feed these children. Now these newborn children do not hang upon the breasts of
the creature, A new creature does not suck the breasts of the creatures, but the
breasts of God alone.
or any created forms, no nor upon ordinances only, but even upon the breasts
of God alone; and through Christ [they milk out their divine consolations, and
therewith they are abundantly satisfied.] A true believer is as near unto
Christ, as a natural child is unto his mother. [Christ as a Father or a
Mother, is more indulgent unto his children, then any earthly mother can be,]
as you may read, Ephraim is my dear son, he is a pleasant child: Surely, says
God in Christ, I have heard Ephraim bemoaning himself, therefore my bowels are
troubled for him, I will surely have mercy upon him, says the Lord, Jere.
31.18, 20. Christ as a mother does bear his children upon his sides, A good
president.
and as a mother, does bear with the weaknesses and infirmities of his
children, and does dandle them upon his knees; and as a mother, does comfort
his sick children and bemoan himself over them, Isa. 66.11, 12, 13.

pitiful and tenderhearted unto his children, and I hope you will be so too:
But then what means this crying out, for to have something against them? I
think you mean a power, and then you would proceed against them; and under the
name of Sectaries or Independents, you would put the children out of house and
home, and make the free children to sit at your footstool. But now you will
say, as the Pharisees said to Christ, That you are the children of Abraham too,
and have but one father, even God. Now I shall answer you, as Christ answered
the Jews, If God were your father, says Christ, then ye would love your
Brethren, Joh. 8.38, etc. Now mark this, all you that verbally say, You believe
in God the Father, Almighty, Maker of Heaven and Earth, and yet you hate your
Brethren, as Cain, that wicked one did, who slew his brother; see the reason of
it, and judge of it among your selves, read 1 John 3.12.

Now, Christ must be born in our hearts and then we shall grow.
or is to be born in men and women, that come to be true Christians, as the
Apostle makes it plain, My little children, says he, of whom I travel in birth
again, until Christ be formed in you, or born in you, Gal. 4.11, 19.

Mark this, all you that mind the shadow, more then growing up into the
Substance; for this spiritual Child Jesus, must be born in thy heart, O man or
woman! as well as in the womb of the Virgin Mary, the grace of God through
Jesus Christ, will be upon thee, or in thee: And this Child Jesus, will
increase in wisdom; and thou, O man or woman! in whose heart this Child is
born, thou shall be in favor with God and man: But I do not mean fleshly man,
for thou art out of favor with him; for he jeers and scoffs at thee, like
Ishmael, for Christ's sake, as we almost all do at this day, though we talk so
much of Reformation: But thou, O man! in whose heart this Child Jesus is born,
shall be in favor with God, and with the Man Christ, and in this favor, there
is life for evermore, Luke 2.40, 52.

Now I shall confirm what has been said of the Child Jesus, being born in the
heart of a man; with Christ in the Spirit, now dwelling in the hearts of some
men. Know ye not, says the Apostle, that the spirit of God dwells in you,
and ye are the temple of God? and so examine your selves: Know ye not how that
Jesus Christ is in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. Cor. 13.5. Now Jesus Christ living in the
heart, is the ground and the hope of a Christians glory, Colos. 1.27. Now
Christ in God, and God in Christ, taking up the form of this Child Jesus, and
every true believing man and woman, and that freely of Free Grace; and all this
by way of union freely, read Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. Now God in Christ, making in
himself of two, one new man; and this by way of union with himself, and the
Cross of Christ, as you may read, Ephesians. 2.15, 16. Colos. 1.19, 20.

new man that the Apostle speaks of, Ephesians. 2.15. Which comes to be made
partaker of the divine nature, as you may read, 2 Pet. 1.3, 4.

Now if one should say, The Child Jesus is the second wonder in Heaven, which
the devil in men, does seek for to persecute.
That the most men in our age, nay, almost all men, does persecute this Child
Jesus, as soon as he begins to be born, but in a quite contrary way to that of
the Jews, and the zealous Pharisees; for they persecuted this Child Jesus,
from the first unto the last, because he came in the form of an unlearned and
weak man; and he became as a servant, and humbled himself for to work out a
redemption for his creation; Phi 2.7, 8 Psalm. 40.6, 7, 8. No sufferings like
unto Christ's sufferings.
yet these blind learned Jews and Pharisees, persecuted this Jesus in the days
of his flesh, from the very first unto the last, and said, he had a devil, and
came to break the Law, and that he was a loose fellow, and a gluttonous man,
and a wine bibber, and a friend of lewd persons; and they laughed him to scorn,
an spit in his face, and struck him upon the face, and scourged him, and then
put a gorgeous robe upon him, and jeered at him; but not being content with
this, they platted a crown of thorns, and put it on his sacred head; from
which, the precious ointment runs down upon our souls: and when they had
crowned him with prickling thorns, upon his tender head, then they jeered him,
and said, Hail king of the Jews; and they put a reed in his right hand, and
they bowed the knee before him, as to a King: And thus the learned Jews, and
the precise Pharisees, together with the sotish chief Priests, and the rude
multitude made a mocking stock of this Child Jesus: no room for [him] in the
Inn, but he was fain to be laid in a [horse manger] and there they sought to
destroy him: And as soon as he was grown a little in age, they thrust him out
of their City, and led him unto the brow of an hill to cast him down headlong,
to break his neck; thus they made him a man of sorrow and grief all along to
the very last; and after they had made him a King, they took off the purple
robe from him, and put his own raiment on him, and led him away to crucify
him; and as they went they spit upon him, and took the reed out of his right
hand and smote him on the head, and said he was a Malefactor, and so to the
Cross he must go, and there to be hanged; that is, he had his arms stretched
out, his merciful hands were both nailed to the Cross, and both his feet, in a
cruel manner, and there his natural life did languish upon the Cross for some
certainhours together, and in all this misery these hard hearts mocked at him,
and gave him vinegar to drink mingled with gall, and they that passed by railed
on him in this distress, when he hung by the hands and feet fast nailed to the
Cross; then they wagging their heads at him, and bid him save himself and come
down from the Cross. Now here is one thing of note, the chief Priests with the
Scribes among themselves were mocking of Christ, Let Christ the King of Israel,
A ministry or people, being ignorant of Christ, are the most forward to do all
manner of cruelty even unto death.
that saved others, descend from the Cross, that we may see and believe, Mark
15.29, 30, 31.32. Now Jesus being long upon the Cross for the sin of man, at
length he gave up the ghost: But yet their malice did not rest here, though he
was dead, for they came to break his legs, but being prevented of that, one of
them took a spear and pierced his side, or thrust it into his side: All this
was done unto his body, which was humane, besides his troubles in the spirit,
when he was in an agony in the garden, where his sweat was as it were great
drops of blood falling down to the ground. Now never were any man's sorrows like
unto the sorrows of Jesus Christ: yet for all this their malice did not change
the stream of love which was in Jesus Christ; for when they were a thrusting
him out of the world, and he was going unto God his Father, Christ, and
anointed of God above all his yellows, prayed, Father, says he, for give them,
for they know not what they do; for they are full of the seed of the serpent:
Yet nevertheless O righteous Father, says Jesus Christ, A full Redemption by
Christ for all men if all men had but faith to believe.
I have finished a sufficient Redemption for the whole world, if thou, O
Father, wilt but give them faith to believe it, or to give a true credit unto
that report, for it is finished: And thus [Jesus Christ bowed his head] and
took his leave of this cruel people, and this wicked world together, as you may
read, Luke 23.34. John 19.30.

Now these blind Jews, and Lawyers, [within the vail] the most holy of all:
therefore they fell upon him and judged him to be forsaken of God, and so they
marred his visage, and despised him, and saw no comeliness or beauty in him
that he should be more desired then another man, Isa. 52.14. Isa. 53.2, 2, 4.

Now the man in whose heart the Child Jesus is born, [sees within the vail] and
sees Christ spiritually, sees Christ as God-man, full of divine amiableness and
sweetnesses of beauty, and unspeakable comeliness of the spiritualnesses in
Christ, when he was veiled with his flesh; but much more now, Christ is
ascended far above all heavens, to fill the souls of men full of spiritual gifts,
unutterable and full of glory, Ephesians. 49, 10. Psa. 68.18. Now the soul of such a
man or woman is sick of love for the delightful in-comes of a spiritual Christ
now unvailed, by faith Moses saw him that was invisible, Heb. 11.27. Now a man
in Christ is a new creature, and Christ being born in a man, makes him partaker
of the Divine Nature, as the Apostle speaks; Now Christ is our life, and our
life is hid in God, Col. 3.3, 4. Now the life which a true christianized man or
woman, that is, a true believing man or woman, or a true believing man in his
young age, as well as in his old age; now the life which they live, it is not
they, but Christ lives in them, and as a Father, he does translate them into
the substance of the Gospel, the inheritance of the Saints in light; but no new
light: Gal. 2.20. Col. 1.12, 13. Now Christ being in a Christian, and a
Christian in Christ, Christ becomes the Christians Schoolmaster, and does
Gospelize him, Ephesians. 4.20, 21. 1 Jo. the Lord is that Spirit that does all in us
and for us: And in the glory of the Lord every true believing man, or woman, is
changed into the image of Christ, for in him dwells all the fullness of the
Godhead bodily; and a true believing man or woman is comple at in him: Now all
this is done by the Spirit of the Lord who is both Lord and Christ, read 2 Cor.
3.17, 18. Col. 2.9, 10.

Now you will object and say, child Jesus is to be born in the heart of a man,
or Christ the Son of God for man, who is the Son of God in man, he is to be
formed in the hearts of men, or Christ to be born in the heart of a man, which
is God with us, or God in us, Mat. 1.21, 23. Luk 2.26, 27.

I answer, who is above all, and through all, and in you all, and when this
Christ does appear in thy heart, O man or woman, then thou shall also appear
with him in glory, Ephesians. 4.6. Col. 3.4, 11.

One word more to prove that there is but one true Christ, dye and vanish away,
and this Sun does live in men and in all creatures, with his light and heat:
but men and creatures are distinct from this Sun, and apart from it; so that
every man or creature is not a Sun as this natural Sun in the Firmament, which
I have spoken of, but every man and creature does partake of the fullness of
this Suns light and heat, and so they are nourished: And so likewise in the
last place, I shall prove, That every true Christian, I in them, and thou in me:
I will, says Christ, that they be with me, where I am, to behold my glory, Joh.
17.23, 24.

Secondly, For communion of the fullness of Christ, Every true believer
receives grace after grace, Joh. 1.16. Ephesians. 4.13.

Thirdly, The light of the Lord is my light, says the soul of every true
believing man, and it is my joy and delight to walk in this light, and his
salvation is the strength of my life; of whom shall I be afraid? Psa. 27.1.

Fourthly, Christ is my life, says a true believing Christianized man, in whom
I live, and move, and have my being; and the life which I now live in the
flesh, I live by the faith of the Son of God, or God in us, and his name is
Emmanucl, Mat. 1.23.

Now every new born child of God, and every Christ-like man, does live, and
walk, and talk in the Son of God, who is the fountain of life and light, and is
the divine Sun of righteousness, who does shine into the hearts of true
Believers.

Now, as I spoke before of the new born children or true believers to be in the
Sun of righteousness, the fountain of life and light, and that God is in them;
it does not follow that they are so many Gods or so many Christ's; no, there is
but one God who is Christ; Hear O Israel, the Lord our God is one Lord, Who is
God blessed for ever, Luke 2.26. Yet though these be not Gods nor Christ's,
which have been spoken of, yet they are shining Stars in the Heaven of God; and
they are Kings with crowns of glory in the hand of the Lord, A true believing
man is as a shining star and a royal diadem in the hand of Christ.
and a royal diadem in the hand of Christ, who is the hand of God and thy God;
Isa. 62.3. Nay more, they are as streams flowing from the fountain of life; and
as rivers run back again into the sea from whence they came, even so do the
Saints return into God in Christ, from whence they came; and there they solace
themselves in the ocean [sea] of divine pleasures, and they are abundantly
satisfied with the drink of that river;

Now as the men of this world do walk up and down in the light of the natural
Sun in the Firmament, And in his light they see light, for there is a fullness
of light, read Psa. 36.7, 8, 9. Ioh. 1.4, 5. And every Saint or true Believer
has his part or portion, which is a fullness to him and in him: Psa. Saints are
not Gods nor Christ's but sparks of the divinenature
17.15. And though a true believing soul be in so near a union with God and so
close a communion with Christ, and such an unsupparableness of oneness between
God and the Saints, as you may read Ioh. 17.21. yet they are not Gods and
Christ's unto themselves nor unto others, as you did object and say, that I
seemed to make them so: but they all say, as the Apostle said, Though there be
many that are called gods; yet, say they to us that believe, there is but one
God, the Father, of whom are all things, and we in him, and for him; and to us,
there is but one Lord Jesus Christ, by whom are all things, and we by him, and
in him, 1 Cor. 8.5, 6. Now this is the poor souls rest, that all things are
done by the hands of Christ's for its good; and this is the weary souls great
comfort, that Christ is a City of rest for it to be in: and this is the great
joy of an oppressed soul, that Christ is the King of that City, together with
an innumerable company of the first born, which are enrolled in heaven, and
these run to God as a bride prepared and adorned for her husband: Now these
poor jeered ones and hared for Christ's sake, and separated from their company,
are reproached by zealous men, their names cast out as evil: yet these
persecuted ones in this storm have great cause to rejoice, for their rest is in
heaven, Luke 6.22, 23. And they, as loyal subjects, Lamb which is in the midst
of the throne of grace, before whom they stand with boldness and much
confidence, as you may read at large, Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Rev. 5.4, 5, 6, 7, 13.

Now I shall make two Uses of Comfort, which will be useful unto a poor soul in
every sad condition. And the first Use is this:

Christ is the life of the oppressed soul, First Use of comfort.
and the actings and movings of the soul; if the soul be spiritually sensible,
it says thus, Though I live, it is Christ that lives in me, and moves me, and
acts in me; and the life which I now live in the flesh, I live by the faith
of the Son of God, Col. 3.4. Gal. 2.20. Now the Faith of the Son of God, it is
Christ, Mary toward Lazarus; even so a poor soul in its sadest conditions has
its head lifted up, until Christ speak in the soul, and then the soul is
quickly upon the wing, Mary did, and then the poor sad soul says, Lord if thou
had been here, my brother, my husband, my child, had not dyed, nor my estate,
which is so near unto me, and so comfortable unto me, had not wasted, nor been
taken from me, and I left in such a sad condition: Now Christ seeing the soul
in this sad condition, why, Christ himself groans in the Spirit and is troubled
with the poor soul, and weeps, and again groaning in himself, he troubled
himself,



Now Christ answers the soul again, as he answered Nathaniel, The soul is weak
in faith when it says Christ is far from it.
When thou wast under the fig tree, I saw thee. O thou poor soul, when thou
wast under such a sad burden; then I saw thee, and when thou wast in such a sad
condition, then I was with thee, and when thou wast so much dejected and cast
down, even then I was with thee, and held thee up, that thou should not
faint. I was never absent from thee, trial of thy faith, and for the exercise
of thy graces. Fear not, O thou poor soul, for sin shall not condemn thee; for
it is I, thy Christ, thy Jesus, that died for thee; yea, rather that is risen
again, and is in God, ever speaking good of thee, and for thee, O thou poor
soul, and my Father hears me always, Romans 8.33, 34, 35. And I and my Father
will send a comforting spirit into thee, for to cheer thee up; and at that day
thou shall know, that I am in my Father, and that thou art in me, and that I am
in thee, Joh. 15.26. Joh. 14.19, 20.

Now this soft hand of the Gospel moves the heart of a man to a godly sorrow:
The goodness, and the kindness, and mercy of God, applied to the hearts of men,
that leads men forth to a true repentance and a right breaking of heart.
draws my soul after him with the cords of love, folly, seeing Jehovah has
taken hold of my soul with his love?

Now the rough hand of the Law, as it is unskilfully handled by the most of our
learned, Men that know not Christ handle the law roughly.
rather hardens the hearts of men, and sears them up in their sins, then it
mollifies and softens the heart, because the Law is a strict rule, holy, just
and good, not given for men to do and live thereby: Now the strict rule of the
Law, in the letter, meeting with a crooked siner, these two fall to variance, as
Cain did with Abel: Now this carnal siner looks upon the Law as too strict, if
he offend in one point, he is guilty of all, and so lies liable to a curse for
not continuing in all things which are in the book of the Law to do them: Now
this siner looking upon the Law [out] of the hand of Christ, subject to the Law
of God, Romans 8.7. And if it were possible, this carnal minded man would destroy
both God and his Law, for the very same reason that Cain slew his brother, 1 John 3.12. And thus a man comes to be seared up in his sins, when both he and
his minister look upon the Law carnally and not in the hands of Christ, rest in
the Law, and not in Christ, and yet make their boast of God, and seem to be
Teachers of others, and yet not able to teach themselves, and yet make their
boast of the Law, and remain carnal in the Gospel, and can hardly tell how to
speak any thing of Christ.

[Esau] cuning men of the field, men that love red pottage, and see no beauty
in Jacobs heritage, but despise it: How can these men apply savory meat unto a
poor hungry thirsty soul, whom they hate for the blessing wherewith it is
blessed in Christ? And Esau said in his heart; Now Esaus heart being full of the
seed of the serpent, he said, he would slay his brother Jacob, as Herod would
have done Christ: Now by savory meat, I mean, the sweetnesses and the
refreshings of Christ unto a poor weary soul, which these men by experience
know not, as you may take an instance of the Jews and Pharisees, Instance.
great zealous talkers of the Law of God, and the Worship of God: Nay, they
made their boast of God, and yet they did not know Jesus Christ, though he was
present amongst them, but dealt roughly with him, according as they did see the
Law, as you may read at large Romans 2.17, 21, 23. Genesis 25.27, 30, 34. and 27.41.
John 9.13, 14, 15, 16, 29. Have not we many now in our days which hold forth
the Law as the chief Priests and Pharisees did, that is, quite out of the hands
of Christ, and they tell the people, they know not the Law, but they must
believe it as they hold it out unto them; for the chief Priests and Pharisees
told the people in Christ's time, That the people who know not the Law are
cursed: And thus the Law did seem to be rough by their unskilful handling of it
out of the hands of Christ, as we also may do at this day, John 7.45, 48, 49.

How the Law in the hand of Christ turns to be Gospel, Christ is the living law
of God and the only rule for a Christian.
and does the greatest work: as for instance, Saul in his height of malice,
when he was going to Damascus, the light of Christ did shine round about him,
and changed his evil heart; He did not hear the voice of thundering and
lightning at Mount Sinai, but a gentle hand, and a soft sweet voice speaking
unto him, and saying, Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me in my members? Now
Saul was not afrighted out of his wits, but said, Who art thou Lord? and the
Lord said, I am Jesus whom thou persecutest; but thou shall do so no more, for
I will make thee a Minister of grace; and though Saul trembled, yet his heart
was possessed with love to the Lord, and to those that he had persecuted; for
says he, Lord what will thou have me to do for thee, and for them that I have
so wronged? Now this is a Gospel-change, Acts 9.3, 4, 5, 6. and 26.16.

exceeding mad to shed the blood that was shed in Guildhal-yard; but it seems
they were of Saul's mind, Men in our times, like unto Saul and the chief
Priests and Pharisees.
thinking that they might do many things, nay, any thing against a man or a
woman, under the name of Independents or Sectaries; that is, to put Christ and
his members out of their Synagogues and City, nay further, even to kill Christ
in his members, or Christ and his members together, and in so doing, To think
that they do God service: These things are done, and the cause is, they neither
know God nor Christ: these are Christ's own words, as you may read Acts 26.9,
10, 11. John 16.2, 3. But I am of Stevens mind, and shall say, Lord, lay not
this sin to the charge of this City, Acts 7.58, 59, 60. Now the Law being in
the hands of Christ, and the Spirit of Christ, who is the only blessed God,
and the efficient cause in changing of that which we call Law into Gospel. Thus
God in Christ, says unto every soul, I am the Lord thy God, 20.2, 3. Now this
Law is brought by the Spirit of Christ, Christ makes way for himself in the
hearts of men.
into the heart of a man or a woman, and there it is planted and engraven,
Jere. 31.33, 34. and Christ puts in the finger of his sweet Spirit in at the
hole of the door of the heart, in at the hole of the lock, as it were, and his
Spirit is the key that opens the heart; and Christ with his finger puts back
all the bars and bolts that stand between him, and the soul; and Christ looks
into the soul, and takes away all drousie distempers, and waters the soul, and
refreshes it with his sweet graces; Christ is a sweet Law, and the soul follows
him in delight.
and then the bowels of the soul were moved after its Christ, and rose up to
open to its beloved, and its hands dropped with myrrh, and my fingers dropped
with sweet smelling myrrhe' which Christ had left for me upon the handles of
the lock which he handled, Cant. 5.4, 5.

Now Christ is the Law of God, and the Rule of a Christian, and he alone opens
the heart, and plants himself therein; and then the soul does begin to wait
upon Christ, and attend to hear what Christ speaks, as it is plain in the case
of Lydia. Now she being baptized with the baptism of the holy Ghost, she begins
to love the servants of Christ, and to constrain them in love, to abide in her
house, Psalm. 40.7, 8, 9. Acts 16.14, 15.

Now this is a good president for all you that are rigged Presbyterians, be out
of zeal, does come into his or her Master and Mistress, and solicit them for
to turn away their servant, because of their opinion, it may be for not coming
unto their Parish Church, or the like. My Brethren, these things out not so to
be; for it is believed, that these are the servants of Christ, which you labor
for to put so far from you. This is not to be like unto Lydia, to constrain
them to abide in your houses, but like Gaderens, to thrust them out of your
coasts, and so to add trouble and grief unto a poor soul.

But now let me speak a word, The Lord knows how to deliver thee; and before
thou call, the Lord will answer thee, even the secret pantings, Father I thank
thee, that thou hear my inward groanings, and complaints: I know that thou
hear me always, and see me, and art ever present with me, John 11.41, 42.

Now some will object and say, A sad complaint of a troubled soul.
and extreme heavy burdens, and mighty difficulties, and in many wants;
sorrows, griefs and pains, do possess them day and night: And the light of Gods
countenance is hid from them, and they want the assurance of his love and
favor, and new troubles do arise every day and overtake them, and they are
dejected in themselves, and either forsaken or forgotten of God, and rejected
of the world; and as for their part, they cannot say as Christ said, Father I
thank thee, that thou hear me; I know that thou hear me always; Christ
indeed said so: And as for my part, in my troubles, I call upon God, and I know
that he hears me, and sees me, and stands by me, and looks upon me in all my
miseries; but yet he does not deliver me out of my troubles, but lets them lie
heavy upon me still. And I see likewise, That all things come alike to all;
there is one event to the righteous, and to the wicked, to the good, and the
clean, and to the unclean, to him that sacrifices, and to him that sacrifices
not; as is the good, so is the sinner; and he that swears, as he that fears
an oath: Yet for all this, I do not say, It is in vain to serve God, or what
profit is it that I have to keep his ordinances? that tempt God, are even
delivered, Mal. 3.14, 15. But as for my part, I am not let alone so long as to
have time for to swallow down my spittle, but one trouble is in the neck of
another upon me, Job 7.19. And God stands by me, The reasoning of a troubled
soul with God.
and looks upon me in all my miseries; and I know that he is a pitiful heavenly
Father. Now this is that which I wonder at, and am astonished to see a natural
earthly Father, as soon as he sees his poor child in misery, he endeavors to
help him out of it presently. Now I know, that God is a tenderhearted Father,
and is able for to help his poor children out of all their troubles in a
moment; but he suffers them to lie among the grimy pots, and the thorns a long
time, it may be all their life time, Psalm. 68.13. So that I may say as Job
said, Why have thou set me as a mark to be shot against, so that I am a burden
to my self, Job 7.20.

Alas poor soul, I shall answer thee; Thou speak out of the anguish of thy
own spirit, and out of the bitterness of thy own soul, as Job did, Job 7.11.

Now I shall answer these objections,

Alas poor soul, Isaiahs time: And Zion said, The Lord has forsaken me, and
my Lord has forgotten me, Isai. 49.14.

Hearken now, Christ's is near in troubles, to help his that they faint not.
O poor soul, and behold thy God in Christ bids thee break forth into singing,
for he has graven thee upon the palms of his hands; and thou art continually
in his eye, and his mercy is round about thee, when thou art afflicted; he
stands but behind the curtain; though thou think he is far off, yet he is
there to be thy protector, Isai. 49.13, 15, 16. And he will step into thee, and
acquaint thee with his mind and dealings toward thee; and when this is, thou
shall be a delightsome land, or as a fragrant Garden full of sweet smells unto
thy God, Mal. 3.12.

Now it is Gods mind and will, that thou shall suffer for Christ sakes, as
well as to believe on him, that thou may be like unto him, Phil. 1.29. For
he does teach his Disciples to pray, Thy will be done in earth as it is in
heaven, Matthew. 6.10. And it was his own practice, O father, says he, if thou
be willing, remove this cup from me; nevertheless, not my will, but thine be
done, Luke 22.42. But for this cause came I unto this hour, Father glorify thy
Name, John 12.27, 28.

Now let me tell thee, O poor soul, life eternal; and it is for thy exceeding
honor for to serve Christ, and to follow Christ; for where he has been, thou
must go, John 12.24, 25, 26.

But now let me speak a word of comfort unto thee, that art a believing man or
woman: Though thou be in never so great extremities, difficulties, wants,
griefs and pains, and revilings, temptations of the right hand, and of the
left; and though all these should come as thick as the pains of a woman in
travail, thou need not to be disheartened, Christ's stands by the soul in
trouble.
for thy God stands by thee: The angel of the Covenant, the messenger of peace
and rest, does appear from Heaven, for to strengthen thy soul.

CHAP. XI.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. Romans 5.14. Isai. 2.17. Luke 18.9, 11, 12. 1 John 3.2. 1
John 4.17. Colos. 2.2, 3. John 14.2, 3. Psalm. 145.14. Luke 22.43. Revel. 3.19.
Heb. 8.12. Jere. 31.34. Isai. 53.11. Mal. 3.2, 3. Romans 5.3, 4, 5. Isai. 53.6.
Heb. 2.10, 11. Isai. 43.2. Isai. 32.2. Psalm. 46.1, 2. James 1.2, 3, 4. Revel.
1.9. Job 1.21. Revel. 3.18. Isai. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. Prove. 8.18, 19, 21. Acts
24.24, 25, 27. Luke 19.14. Matthew. 27.62, 63. Luke 11.45. Jere. 4.22. Luke
19.27. Genesis 17.18. 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12, 13. Ephesians. 6.14, 15.
Psalm. 91.13. read the whole Psalm, Ephesians. 6.16, 17. Joh. 1.1. and 4.24. and
15.26. 2 Cor. 12.10. 2 Cor. 4. read the whole Chapter, Psalm. 66.16. Luke 8.2,
3. Mark 16.9. Acts 26.9, 10, 11. Acts 7.57, 58, 59. Acts 22.19, 20. and 26.10,
11. Numb. 11.26, 27, 28, 29. Jere. 50.6. 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Romans
2.29. Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6. Luke 19.5, 8, 9, and 8.43, 44, 45, 46. 1 Pet. 2.13,
14, 17. 2 Samuel 24.17, 24. 1 King. 3.16, 26, 27, 28. Isai. 58.2, 6, 7, 9. Zech.
7.5, 6, 9, 10. Isai. 58.8, 9. Jere. 31.24, 25, 26. Ezekiel. 13.7, 8, 9, 10. Jere.
23.30, 31, 32. and 14.18. and 50.6. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Jere. 4.22. and 5.30, 31.
Jere. 14.18. 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 7.15, 21, 22, 23, and 15.13, 14. Acts
8.30, 31, 34, 35. Luke 24.45.

BUt now in the next place, let me speak a word for thy observation, O poor
soul, that art so oppressed: Thy heart is like an earthly Garden, Christ is the
seed of God, growing through the earthiness of men's hearts.
even so Christ, the Rose of Sharon, the Lilly of the Valleys, and the Seed of
God, grows in thy natural, earthly, fleshly heart, and cracks the partition
Wall all to pieces, Ephesians. 2.14, 15, 16. and breaks down the strong holds of
sin, and self, and high imaginations, and does subdue every thought that is
stout against God. Now Christ, the seed of God, which lay veiled and hid in the
earth of the first Adams heart, who is the figure of him that was to come, Romans
5.14. Now this seed has been a working it self out of the earth in all ages,
but in several ways of working: Law; and secondly, Law, and now under the
Gospel. Christ will take away all men's righteousness and carnal confidence
which they have of their own works.
This seed is pulling down the foundations of the money changers, and the
tables of those that sell doves, and endeavor to set up false christ's in the
earthy hearts of men. And this seed is now striking down all the
self-righteousness of men and women, and all their fleshly wisdom and carnal
confidence, that they have of themselves, and their ways and works. And this
seed, Christ, will have the loftiness of men broke down, and the Lord alone
shall be exalted in that day. Now Christ is that day, read Isai. 2.17.

Now, thou poor soul, that made such a pitiful complaint, like a woman in
travail, mountains, and filling up the valleys that were in thy heart, and
taking every thing out of the way, that he may bring his whole train of graces
into thy soul; and when he does thus appear in thy heart, then he is a raising
thee out of the grave, and he will cause thee to leave thy grave-clothes
behind thee. grave-clothes to wrap thee in, as the Pharisees did, Luke 18.9,
11, 12. And when this seed Christ, does appear to be in the earthiness of thy
heart, he will cause thee by his grace and power, to grow up out of that
earthiness, together with himself; and he will enable thee to rise out of the
grave, and make thee as the sons of God: And when he does thus appear, we shall
be like him; for we shall see him as he is, 1 John 3.2. Nay, more then so, for
as he is, so are we in this world, 1 John 4.17.

wisdom, tender heartedness: And these are hid in Christ, and are as mansions
for thy troubled soul to dwell in, Col. 2.2, 3. John 14.2, 3. Now when thou art
in thy saddest troubles, and greatest perplexities, and sharpest miseries, and
heavy temptations lying upon thee, ready to sink thee; one day thou shall
perish by these troubles: Alas poor soul, these troubles are for the honor of
God, and for thy own good, as I shall tell thee anon.

Be of good cheer, thy troubles shall not sink thee; and when thou think
that [God] has forsaken thee, or forgotten thee, he has thee by the hand;
Psalm. 145.14. God is more tender hearted then a mother can be.
and when thou think that thou art falling, then God steps in like a tender
hearted father, and says, O my child, and takes thee up in his arms, and puts
thee in his bosom, and thou look into the ark of his strength; which ark is
Christ, and there thou receivest such food, that thou art able to go forty
days in the strength of it, to encounter with new troubles again.

One word more unto thee that seem to be discontented in thy troubles, when
they are more then ordinary; Thou ought to be contented and to rejoice in
them; and if they seem too hard for thee, so that thou begin to wrestle with
them, then there will appear thy God, An angel from Heaven to strengthen thee,
and to uphold thee in the hour of thy distress, Luke 22.43.

Now in the second place, As many as I love, I rebuke and chasten, Revel. 3.19.

Now by rebuke and chasten, God is as good as his word, not to remember sin,
because he is satisfied.
that it is a punishment for sin; no, for this would be to remember sin again;
but God has said, He will remember their sins no more, Heb. 8.12. Iere. 31.34.
Because Christ has paid a full price for all our sins, and he has crossed the
Book, and God is fully satisfied, Isai. 53.11.

Now I tell thee, O distressed man or woman, God having brought a whole train
of graces into thy soul, he will exercise them for his own honor, and for thy
good; and if there be any rust at any time upon thy graces, Christ sits as a
refiner of silver, and he will purify thy graces as gold, Mal. 3.2, 3. Now the
end of exercising thy graces, is, that thou thy self may know that thou have
grace, and that the world may know that thou have grace. Chastisements are for
the exercise of Faith and Graces.
Now thou having grace, art to exercise thy grace, in glorying in tribulations,
knowing that tribulation works patience, and experience of the sufferings of
Christ; of which, thou must be partaker, that thou may come to a lively hope
through Christ; and this hope makes not ashamed, Romans 5.3, 4, 5.

Now the miseries, surety again, Isai. 53.6. Mistake me not, I do not, in the
least, give any liberty to sin; for if patience have its perfect work, it makes
you perfect, and entire, wanting nothing: but that which does befall thee in
this life, it is for the trial of thy faith, and for the exercise of thy
graces; and if any thing does befall thee, which the world calls sin, then comes
in the trial of thy faith, and lets thee see the wiles of Satan, the Captain of
thy salvation; Heb. 2.10, 11. And thus thy graces are exercised; and for this,
God will be honored before the world, because the world shall know that he does
uphold thee with his grace, and is with thee in a promise; And when thou
passest through the waters, he will be with thee, and when thou go through
the rivers, they shall not overflow thee, because he is with thee; and when
thou walk through the fire, thou shall not be burnt, because he is with
thee; neither shall the flame kindle upon thee, because he is with thee, Isai.
43.2.

Now this [man Christ, Christ is as a privy Chamber for the soul to retire
into, to refresh it self.
God and man] he is an hiding place for a poor distressed soul to go into, from
the wrath and fury of the men of the world; and so he is a covering for a poor
distempered spirit that is troubled with sin and Satan, fears and doubts; and
as rivers of water in a dry place, are sweet and comfortable, and pleasant,
even so is Christ unto a thirsty soul: And as the shadow of a great rock in a
weary land, even so is Jesus Christ unto a poor panting, drouping, fainting,
weary spirit, Isai. 32.2. Now, thou poor soul, that have such a very present
help in time of need, therefore thou need not fear, read Psalm. 46.1, 2. but
count it all joy when thou fallest into diverse sorts of troubles, and
temptations; knowing this, that the trying of thy faith works patience: And
this is a needful grace in this troublesome world, read Jam. 1.2, 3, 4.

Now in the third place, brother and companion in tribulation, and in the
kingdom and patience of Jesus Christ, and this John said, Revel. 1.9. And so
says an exercised Christian, I brought nothing into this world but sin, The
Lord gives trials, and takes away troubles as be pleases.
and that I shall leave in the grave: The Lord gives trials, and the Lord takes
away troubles, Blessed be the name of the Lord, says Job, Job 1.21.

Now a Christian that has been in the mount with God, speak good of his name,
when he comes into a wilderness of troubles, as Moses and John did; and as
Christ does, so does a true Christian. Christ comes and says, The commodities
of Christ, are his graces, and they run forth freely to sinners.
Buy my white raiment, my righteousness to clothe thee, that thy nakedness do
not appear; and anoint thine eyes with my grace, that thou may see. And thus
Christ sets forth his commodities in the market places, and in the fairs
amongst men, and says, I beseech you, come and buy my riches; my honor, my
riches will endure for ever: I entreat you to take my commodities, you shall
have them without money, and without price; and if you take my commodities,
your soul shall live, Revel. 3.18. Isai. 55.1, 2, 3, 4. Prove. 8.18, 19, 31.
Now, Most men complement and dissemble with Jesus Christ.
the most men and women in the world, they come and complement with Christ and
his commodities, it may be his ordinances; and they will come and hear him, as
Felix did Paul: But they have no mind at this time to buy his commodities; for
they have married a wife, and bought a yoke of oxen, and they cannot stay now,
but they will come some convenient season and call for him. And thus the most
men and women do in a formal customary way, go to Church, and so come home
again, and make a little verbal discourse, but leave Christ and his members, it
may be, in prison, and in misery, out of some dislike against them; and to show
some a favor, as Felix was willing to show the Jews a pleasure, and left Paul
bound, Acts 24.24, 25, 27. And thus for all the fair pretenses of some men for
Christ, yet they are like his Citizens, or those Citizens that hated him,
19.14. And thus Jesus Christ coming nigh to Jerusalem, and suppose to London,
he added, spoke a parable; for at Jerusalem there were the chief Priests and
Pharisees, the politic Scribe, and the subtle Lawyer, and all the [sotish]
people, together against Christ, Matthew. 27.1, 62, 63. Luke 11.45. Iere.

I ask, may not one say so of a great many of our Citizens that did frequent
Guildhal, in that troublesome time, when it was as much as a man's life was
worth, though he were a good Christian, to be under the name of an Independent
in that multitude. But now hearken, what Christ says to such Citizens, But
those mine enemies which would not that I should reign over them, bring hither,
Luke 19.27. I have not spoken of the sentence which Christ gave in the end of
this verse, but I shall conclude with that of Abraham. And Abraham said unto
God, O that Ishmael might live before thee, Genesis 17.18.

A man that has not the love of God in his heart, and gives a good report of
Christ and his graces. Christ says, Come and buy without money. Now this
buying, is but an exchanging of thy sins and thy lust, for grace to adorn thy
soul; [Christ in thee] will take thy sins, and nail them to his cross, and then
take them from his cross, and throw them into his grave, and there they shall
die; and thou shall have possessions of grace for them and this is a good
change for thee. A man that has bin in the Mount with God, gives a most
excellent repert of his graces,
the believing Christ-like man, he comes and gives a most excellent report of
this grace, and says unto all, Come take this grace, thou may have it
freely, thou need not to labor and toil for it; and when you have this
grace, it will enable you to run into Christ, who is the way of Gods
Commandments; and when thou art straightened in thy heart and thoughts, toward
God, then this grace will enlarge thy heart; and when thou art withered as a
tree in Winter, or as a dry tree, then this grace will so refresh thee, that
thou will be as green as a tree in Summer, that is planted by the Rivers of
water: And so likewise, this grace will cause thee to see sin in thy self,
Grace discovers sin.
every day more then other, and thou in thy self not able for to resist sin:
But this grace will be sufficient for thee in thy weakness; so that thou may
rejoice in thy infirmities, because this grace of Christ is made perfect in thy
weakness, 2 Cor. 12.9, 10. This grace inables a man to wrestle with spiritual
wickedness, or wicked spirits; for Christ stands about thee as the Armor of
God, so that the wiles of the devil cannot pierce through to hurt thy poor soul,
Christ the power of God is a Christians might, Ephel. 6.10.
because thou stand in Christ, the power of Gods might, Ephesians. 6.10, 11, 12,
13. And this grace is a girdle of truth about thy loins, and Christ is thy
breast plate of righteousness, through which no dart of wickedness can enter,
and thy feet are shod with the grace of the Gospel of peace; so that thou may
tread upon the Lion and Adder, and they shall not bite thee, Ephesians. 6.14, 15.
Psalm. 91.13, to the end: And so likewise, this grace is as a shield to enable
thee against danger, and to enable thee to do great things, as those Worthies
did in the eleventh of Hebrews. Now Christ is the Fountain of this grace, and
he is the helmet of salvation over thy head; so that those that strike at thee,
strike Christ first: But he will be too hard for them; and so thou have the
sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of God. Ephesians. 6.16, 17. John 1.1. and
4.24. and 15.26. And so likewise, this grace will enable a man or a woman, to
take pleasure in reproaches, in necessities, in persecutions, in distresses, in
revilings, in mockings, even in imprisonments. And this grace will enable a man
to take pleasure in all manner of troubles; because when we are weak in our
selves, then Christ is our strength, 2 Corinthians. 12.10. and 4. read the whole
Chapter.

Now those that have the trial of this grace, David says, Come all you that
have the Lord for your portion; is not his grace very comfortable, and as
marrow and fatness in your bones? Come let us speak to the honor of his grace,
Psalm. 66.16. Come thou likewise, that art the greatest sinner that ever the
earth did bear: seven devils in thee, as Mary Magdalen had, The greatest sinner
may have hope in Christ for cure.
Luke 8.2, 3. Come to Jesus Christ, for he calls, and his grace is sufficient
to heal thee; for I tell thee, his grace is a sovereign Antidote, O it is a
precious balsam, it will cure every disease, it will heal any sore. Be of good
cheer, wherefore do thou doubt? I will speak a word of comfort in thine ear.
When Christ is risen in thy heart, thou shall know his appearance, he will
appear first unto thee that wast a great sinner, sooner then he will to others.
And this is for thy comfort; For when Jesus was risen early, he appeared first
to Mary Magdalen, read Mark 16.9. Come you likewise, whether you be young men
or old men: Come you young men that were too forward at Westminster, and at the
Parliament door, and afterward at Guildhal for some days together, name of
Sectaries or Independents, saying, it was not fit that they should live in the
City; neither could they stand safe or quiet by you, though they were good
Christians. May not one say of you, as Paul said of himself, when he was Saul,
That you were exceedingly [mad] against them, to persecute them, even unto
strange Cities? Acts 26.9, 10, 11. And yet you called for Reformation like unto
Saul: 7.57, 58, 59. Yet for all this, come to Jesus Christ, his grace is so
sovereign a plaster, that it will heal this wound. Come, his grace will make
up this breach; it may be it was done ignorantly. Come you old men,
Westminster, and after that to Guildhal, it might have produced sad things, but
God prevented it; even as sad things, All men by nature like unto Saul.
as Saul accused himself of unto the Lord, Lord says he, They know that I
imprisoned and beat in every Synagogue, them that believed on thee; and when
the blood of thy Martyr Steven was shed: I also was standing by, and consenting
unto his death, and kept the raiment of them that slew him. And I gave my voice
against those that did speak of the Name of Jesus; and when they were put to
death, I gave my consent; and when they were to be persecuted, or any did but
speak evil of them, I also gave my vote against them.

I ask, Acts 22.19, 20. and 26.10, 11. I am persuaded, that we have many
Aldermen and Common Counsel men, and others, That are good religious men; yet
it is possible that good men may do unworthy actions.

As for instance, Joshua was a good man, Good men sometimes may do bad actions,
as Joshua did, Numb. 11.28, 29.
and the servant of Moses, and one of his young men; now he hearing another
young man complaining to Moses of Eldad and Medad, that did prophecy in the
Camp; Joshua he seconds him, and answered and said, My lord Moses, forbid them,
that they may not prophecy. Now this was an unworthy action of Joshua, as you
may see by the reproof that Moses gave him, read Numbers 11. verses 26, 27, 28,
29.

Now had we not a whole Council that did envy against such men as did
prophecy, or preach, or speak, call it what you will? Witness our [City
Remonstrance] which did request, That they might have something against such
people; that they might proceed against them, as Sectaries or factious persons,
and so stop their mouths, and compel them; and so likewise, our young men, and
other good men amongst them, meeting at Guildhal many days together, they
sotishly reviled those that were good Christians; Sectaries, Independents; and
so thrusting them up and down the Hall, and the yard, with their Elbows and
Shoulders: And this was the simple behavior, and gross ignorance, with their
proud mockings, and secret whisperings, and outward scornings, and contempt of
those that are good Christians: and this was done by many or the most in that
multitude, as also now at this day, under the name of Sectaries; as he that
has eyes in his head may see: And this did prove but of bad consequence at
Guildhal, which made those wounds that are not healed yet, A word to the
Citizens whom I love.
to the grief of some. But shall I point you unto the word of the Lord, and
consider well of it? My people, says God, have been lost sheep, their
shepherds have caused them to err, or to go astray, If God turn you, you shall
see a fountain of grace to wash away your spots.
Jere. 50.6. But yet for all this, turn not away from the Lord, but turn to the
Lord with all your hearts; nay rather, the Lord will turn your hearts, and
cause you to see a fountain of grace open, to wash off all your spots. O it is
a comfortable grace, it will make you new men, it will purge your corrupt
minds, it will make you love them that formerly you did hate, it will cause
you sweetly to rejoice in Christ Jesus. O it is a sovereign Grace, it will heal
you as it did Paul: It may be you did, what you did, ignorantly in unbelief; A
man may be very zealous, and yet have neither faith nor love.
yet be of good cheer, for it was Paul's condition, I, says he, before I had
this grace, was a blasphemer, and a persecutor, and injurious; and yet I was
very zealous for the worship of God in my way, and yet I had neither faith in
Christ, nor love to his people: But when this abundant grace, this translating
grace, came into my heart; then I, that thought my self to be righteous, did
see my self to be the chiefest of sinners. And when this sweet grace and mercy
came, I was, and am a pattern, to show forth the long-suffering of God to me;
and I also am taught of the Spirit of Christ, to give forth most excellent
reports of this grace and mercy, says Paul, An outward show may seem good, and
yet not profit. No true ground to rejoice in, but only in Christ spiritual.
because this mercy endures for ever: It is not the having of an outward
Church Fellowship, nor the being a member of a visible Church, nor any external
privileges whatsoever, that is a sufficient ground for the soul to rejoice in;
but only the circumcision of the heart in the Spirit, and to worship God in
the Spirit, and to rejoice in Christ Jesus, and have no confidence in the
flesh, but in the appearance of Christ alone in the Spirit, read these three
Scriptures, 1 Timothy 1.12, 13, 14, 15, 16, 17. Romans 2.29. Phil. 3.3, 4, 5, 6.

O this grace of God is a sovereign grace, it healed Zacheus: Art thou an
oppressor of the poor [hast thou plundered the poor Christians out of spite,
against Jesus Christ,] Zacheus, Behold Lord, says he, the half of my goods I
give to the poor, and if I have taken any thing from any man, by false
accusation, or by oppression, I restore him four fold for it, read Luke 19.5,
8, 9.

O you ignorant, bloody issue twelve years, and have spent all their hope, and
all their wit, and all their living, upon natural policy; and have fastened
their hope upon the King, and upon the Parliament, and Army: Why none of these
can heal this bloody issue, England and Ireland, that have had this bloody
issue seven years,] Nothing but the grace of Christ will heal England and
Ireland.
and yet uncured: Your Physicians cannot heal you, though you spend all;
nothing but the grace of Jesus Christ can heal you. You have not as yet touched
the hem of Christ garment, that virtue may come out from him, and stench your
bloody issue, and heal you, Luke 8.43, 44, 45, 46. We have all looked for the
King, and the Parliament, and the Army, to be our Physicians to heal us: but
our Physicians have let the Kingdom blood, but the grace of Christ alone will
heal us: Therefore let us pray to God, for to fill the Kings heart brim-full of
this grace of Christ, that he may love the brotherhood; that is, the union
between Christ and his Church; and that we may have all the fear of God, and
then we shall honor the [King Jesus Christ,] and honor all men: The King as
supreme, and Governors under him, 1 Pet. 2.13, 14, 17. Now this grace of Christ
will move the [Kings heart] to be like a nursing father, David said, But [these
sheep, what have they done?] England and Ireland, what have they done? I shall
easily be entreated now, to part with any thing, or to do any thing, quietly
all their days. And thus Davia reasoned with the Lord, as you may read, Sam.
24.17, 24. Now this grace will help us to do more then a [Covenant of our own
making:] Therefore let us pray to God, that he would be pleased to pour into
the hearts of the King and Parliament, Solomon, in dividing of their great
affairs for the peace of the kingdom, and that with speed; even as Solomon did
with the two harlots, in seeming to divide the child, the right mother came to
enjoy her own child. Now amongst all your divisions, the Lord teach you to
maintain the privilege of free Subjects, Solomon, To give the living child to
the right mother; and this will make you famous, 1 King. 3.16, 26, 27, 28.

Now what has been said, Germany: For the prevention of which, the Lord teach
you, and enable you, for to keep one right Fasting day to the Lord; which is,
to loose the bands of wickedness, and to undo the heavy burdens, and to let the
oppressed go free; and that ye break every yoke, and deal your bread to the
hungry, and bring the poor into their possessions again, and to relieve the
naked; and hide not your selves from your own flesh, for matter of opinion; and
if you take away from the midst of you, the yoke, the putting forth of the
finger, by some of the ignorant and sottish Clergy, and those that stand to do
justice, and do none, read Isai. 58.2, 6, 7, 9. Zech. 7.5, 6, 9, 10. your light
shall break forth as the morning, righteous judgments shall go before you, and
the glory of the Lord shall be your rereward; and when you cry, the Lord will
say, here I am to help you. Now God in Christ, he is the good Physician that
brings health and cure to Kingdoms and Cities, and bids the inhabitants dwell
in peace, and go forth with their flocks; for he will satisfy the weary souls,
and replenish every sorrowful soul: And when a Kingdom or a particular person
do arise, and behold this, then their sleep will be sweet unto them, as it was
to Jeremiah, Isai. 58.8, 9. Jere. 31.24, 25, 26.

Now some will object and say,

I answer, speaking of vanity, and using deceit, by the most of the Prophets in
their time, which stole their words from their neighbor, and say, [God says,]
read Ezekiel. 13.7, 8, 9, 10. Jere. 23.30, 31, 32. and 14.18. and 50.6. A Ministry
not built upon Christ in the Spirit, does not profit the people, for they seek
themselves, and not the peoples souls, Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. And so likewise, and
people, for the most part, are possessed with ignorance and sottishness, as you
may read, and consider well of it, Jere. 4.22. and 5.30, 31. If I go forth into
the field, says the true Prophet, then behold the slain with the sword: And if
I enter into the City, then behold them that are sick with famine: yea, both
the Prophet and the Priest, go about into a Land that they know not. Or make
merchandise, As the Margent of the Bible reads it.
as the Margent reads it, against a Land, and the sottish people acknowledge it
not, Iere. 14.18.

Now you will say, it is true, Peter shall answer you, There were false
prophets formerly, says he, and there will be, and are false teachers among
you, even at this day; which come to you in sheeps clothing, says Christ, and
use fair and enticing words, and yet are ignorant and sottish concerning me,
says Christ himself: Beware of such teachers, for they are blind guides,
says Christ, 2 Pet. 2.1, 2, 3. Matthew. 7.15, 21, 22, 23. and 15.13, 14. The
Auditory of the Common Prayer Book, for the most part, are like little children
that learn to say their lesson after their Master; and so they are weak in
knowledge, like young children.
I speak not against any thing that is good in that Book; but I speak of the
unsufficiency of such a Minister, or Ministers; and then of the peoples
weakness and ignorance, in a customary way; like unto little children, they go
to School to learn their letters, and after a short time, it may be they can
say over an Epistle and a Gospel by rote, and understand but little or nothing
at all; and it may be they can say over some Prayers without book, when their
Minister it may be, cannot do so much: And this has been the custom, and the
rejoicing of the most people in this Kingdom; and it is so now at this day in
this City. In some Parishes they rejoice in that easy Common Prayer Book: I
call it easy, Eunuch did, that was reading the Prophet Isaiah, but confessed
he understood not that which he read, Acts 8.30, 31, 34, 35. Be not angry with
me, I pray you, Letter only, or to be a Minister of the Letter only, and no
more, or to be a hearer only of the Letter, and not to be acquainted with
Jesus Christ in the Spirit. The Eunuch he read the Letter, as the most in our
times do, and neither he, nor they, understand the mind of God in the Letter:
The Eunuch he read of Jesus Christ, before he was come into the flesh, As a
sheep led unto slaughter, and like a lamb dumb before the shearer, so opened he
not his mouth. Now in our times, we read that Jesus Christ has come in the
flesh, and is gone again, and now he is to be looked for in the Spirit; and of
this, the most in our times, are as ignorant as the Eunuch was; nay, some in
our days will jeer at the Spirit, Eunuch did not: We indeed can read so many
letters, as to make up two or three words, as Jesus Christ our Lord; Turks: And
though we may read the Word of God, and the words of Christ, [yet I] and our
reading Ministers of the Common Prayer Book, nay, our Preaching Ministers may
remain as ignorant as the Eunuch did; for he read, but he understood not what
he read, until the Spirit said unto Philip, that he may understand what he
reads: [Nay, it is the Spirit of Jesus Christ alone, that opens the
understandings of men, to understand the Scriptures,] as you may read, Luke
24.45.

CHAP. XII.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Phil. chap. 1. Acts 8.35. Mark 14.3. Acts 17.22, 23. Jere. 50.6. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2
Cor. 12.14, 15. 1 King. 18.23, 24, 25, 26, 27, 29, 33, 38. Phil. 1.15, 16. and
3.2. Jere. 4.22. and 5.31. Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Phil. 3.18, 19. Luke 4.16, 17, 18,
19, 20, 21, 22. Nehe. 8.2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23. Isai. 29.11,
12. Mark 14.3. Luke 6.45, 46. 1 Cor. 14.14, 15. Romans 8.26, 27. Romans 7.4, 6.
Act. 2.13, 15, 16, 17. and 26.24, 25. 1 King. 22.26, 27. Matthew. 27.63. John
17.21, 23, 24. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. 2 Cor. 6.16. Psalm. 25.14. Ephesians. 3.3, 4, to the
end. Colos. 2.9, 10. John 1.16, 17. Ezekiel. 2.1, 2. Psalm. 82.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7,
8. Jere. 31.23, 24, 25, 26. Psalm. 85.1, 2, 3, 4, 8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13. Prove.
8.14, 15, 16. James 3.17. 1 Pet. 4.14, 15, 16, 19. Luke 3.14. Isai. 9.6. Luke
10.6. John 11.27. Luke 10, 38, 39, 40, 41, 42. Luke 10.40, 41. John 4.24. James
1.17. John 14.10, 11. Heb. 11.27. Col. 2.9, 10. 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 3.9. Act.
2.24. Acts 2.36. Revel. 1.11. 1 Timothy 1.17. Joh. 1.13, 14. Matthew. 5.48. Colos.
1.17, 18. Revel. 19.12, 13. 1 Corinthians. 1.24. Colos. 2.3. Matthew. 1.21. Heb.
7.25, 26. Heb. 9.14. Acts 20.28. Ephesians. 2.15. Psalm. 113.6, 7, 8. John 10.29,
30. John 16.32. John 11.42. Acts 2.22, 23. and 4.26, 27, 28. John 19.10, 11.
Psalm. 35.19, 20. 2 These. 2.3, 4. 1 John 4.2, 3. Acts 4.27, 30. Luke 1.31, 32,
35. Mark 12.4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Acts 4.25, 26, 27. Acts 2.36. John 11.47, 48.

NOw I shall crave leave for to whisper a word or two in the ear of those that
are Ministers of the Common Prayer Book, or some others that can Preach, yet
are like unto them. My two words are these:

The first is, lively, spiritual, and soul-comforting Ministers.

And the second sort,

But there is a third sort of Ministers, which lies between the true Ministers
and the Magistrate;

And these men are imitating Ministers, like unto those that Paul speaks of, in
the first of the Philippians. Some, says he, read Christ, even out of envy;
and some, says he, preach Christ out of envy and strife, and out of
ostentation, and for the applause of men, legality, spirituality.

Now I know that some will object and say, That knowledge comes by reading; but
it seems, that I would deny the use of such means, as the reading of the
Service Book.

I answer, search the Scriptures; but a Minister only of the Common Prayer
Book, cannot search the Scriptures; for he can but only read them, and so can
I at home, as well as he does at Church.

But you will object and say,

I answer, Philip did to the Eunuch, Act. 8.35. It is well if the Book be not
sealed, so that they cannot expound nor preach Jesus to the people. If it
should be so, then I shall give my second answer,

That such men or Ministers as these, people come to hear of the commodities,
they desire for to see these commodities, but he that should show these
commodities, has no key to open this box.

Now by this Box, I mean, the Scriptures, the Word of God, which is full of the
precious graces of Jesus Christ: But such men as I have spoken of, have no key
to open this Box; they cannot break the bread of life to the hungry people;
they cannot do so much as Mary Magdalen did, for she brake the Box of precious
ointment, and poured it on Christ's head, Mark 14.3.

Now the bare Letter of the Scriptures, is as a Box, and we have many men in
this Kingdom, that have got this Box, and no more. I mean, unsearchable riches
of Jesus Christ, as Paul did; and for want of this, in many places of this
Kingdom, the people are like the Athenians, ignorantly worshipping God, or more
grossly and superstitiously, setting up Altars to the unknown God, Acts 17.22,
23. Yet these people have had the Service Book all their days, and they will
have it still, and remain ignorant with it; and so the proverb holds true, Like
Priest, like people.

But mark you dark-sighted Ministers, My people have been lost sheep, says the
Lord, their shepherds have caused them to go astray, 50.6. A Minister to be
unskilful in the Gospel of Grace, begets ignorance in a people; ignorance in a
people makes them unstedfast. Now such a people will sooner fight against the
Truth, and speak against the Truth, then they will entertain the Truth, or
speak a good word for the Truth. of the New Testament, A Minister sent from the
Spirit of Christ, is the most excellent Minister.
not of the Letter, but of the Spirit; for such a ministry, or such a Minister
is the most excellent Minister, for he cares for the souls of men, and would be
spent for them; and the more he loves them, the less he is loved of them, 2
Cor. 3.6. and 12.14, 15. Now the reading Minister only of the Common Prayer
Book, and the [imitating] preaching Minister, that preaches literally,
legally, historically, and artificially; These two are both alike, and they
both seek themselves: But it may be some will take exception at this word
[imitating.]

But I shall give you two instances for it, One in the Old Testament, Two
instances.
and another in the New: The false Prophets of Baal did imitate, to do as the
true Prophet Elijah did; they could choose one Bullock for a sacrifice, and cut
it in pieces, and lay the wood together, and lay the Bullock upon the Altar;
but they wanted fire from Heaven, they had no light in them, Kings 18.23, 24,
25, 26, 27, 28, 29, 33, 38.

The second instance is out of the New Testament. Some indeed imitate to do as
the true Apostles did, but they cannot; so then they preach Christ out of envy,
and some out of strife, Phil. 1.15, 16. and 3.2.

Now these two sorts of Ministers are self-seeking men,

Now these self-seeking men, Cripplegate Parish, London: And so likewise, in
diverse places of the Country, where there are great Benefices; and their
Minister takes this, but the poor people have little or nothing but the Book of
Common Prayer, or the reading of a Homily, or the like. And thus they cure
themselves, and take the charge of the people, but the poor people are still
uncured. This the Lord takes notice of, and complains, and says. His people
perish for want of knowledge; they are sottish children, They are wise to do
evil, but to do good, they have no knowledge, read Iere. 4.22. and 5.31.

A ministry taken up only from men, such kind of men seek themselves, and not
the flock; they feed themselves, with cruelty have they ruled them, or do rule
them: seeking of vanity, speaking of vanity? read Ezekiel. 34.2, 3, 4. Phil. 3.18,
19.

Common Prayer Book? I tell you, For he stood up to read a place of Scripture
unto the people; And when he had read the verse, he closed the Book, to teach
the people: And the eyes of all them that were in the Synagogue were fastened on
him: and all bare him witness, and wondered at the gracious words which
proceeded out of his mouth, read Luke 4.16, 17, 18, 19, 20, 21, 22. Now it is
to be feared that you which are Ministers only of the Common Prayer Book, if
the book should be closed up to you, all the people might bear you witness,
[Ezra] the Priest and those that were with him, caused the people to understand
the Law: so they read in the book of the Law of God [ distinctly, and gave the
sense,] and caused them to understand the reading, read Nehem. 8.2, 3, 4, 5, 6,
7, 8. Now if the people should expect as much from you that are Ministers of
the Common Prayer Book, Ezra the Priest did, who was a Minister of Jesus
Christ] how unlike the Ministers of Christ would the people find you!

Now I shall desire to speak a word jointly unto you that are Ministers of the
Common Prayer Book, and unto you that are imitating preaching Ministers, A note
agreeable for our times.
Historical men, Litteral men, such a Christ will not own for the present, read
Mat. 7.21, 22, 23.

I desire likewise to join your hearers unto you, and so to speak a word unto
you all three: Now the word is by way of question, as the Prophet Isaiah speaks
of.

Now the question is unto you that are Ministers only of the Common Prayer
Book, and no more; The lively part of the Scriptures is as a book sealed to
natural men, though never so learned.
become as the words of a Book that is sealed, which men deliver to one that is
learned, saying, Read this I pray thee, and he says, I cannot, for it is
sealed: And this book is delivered to him that is not learned, saying, Read
this I pray thee; and he says, I am not learned, read Isa. 29.11, 12. I would
it were not so now in our days with the Ministers of the Common Prayer Book,
and with the imitating preaching Ministers, which are historical men,
artificial men, fine Theoricians, to whom the Scriptures seem to be as a book
sealed, Mary Magdalen, as you may read, Mark 14.3. But such men want a key to
open this box, A literal reading of preaching Minister does but speak empty
words in the ears of people.
or they want heavenly art to break this box, that the sweet smells of Jesus
Christ may come forth into the world amongst men: Such men can speak of the
letter of the Word, which is as a Cabinet; but they can speak little or nothing
of Christ in the Spirit, which is the Pearl in this Cabinet; and this is one
reason why your hearers are so ignorant; and there is so little love to God in
the world, and love unto our neighbors.

Now I shall give your hearers one Caution, Lord, but to have the grace of
Christ to enable them to do his will, read Luke 6.45, 46. It is not the hearing
of the Common Prayer Book read, A form of Prayer only taught by men does but
beat the air.
that will profit you: It may be you may hear it read, and be zealous in that,
and pray, and yet remain ignorant in what you hear, and in what you pray, and
your understandings full of darkness: But the Apostle says, He will pray with
the light of the Spirit, and that light will enlighten his understanding, that
he may edify others, 1 Cor. 14.14, 15. The definition of prayer, viz.
nay it maybe say over many prayers without the book, but this is not prayer;
and herein you are mistaken; [for prayer consists not in length of words, nor
in strength of words, A true and a comfortable prayer comes from the spirit of
grace and returns to the spirit again.
but in the breathings of the Spirit of God into the soul, and the souls
breathings back again unto God:] And this is that which the Apostle says; The
Spirit it self makes intercession for us, or in us, with groanings which
cannot be uttered; And he that searches the hearts, knows what is the mind
of the Spirit, Romans 8.26, 27.
because he makes intercession for the Saints according to the will of God. Now
this grace of Christ in prayer comforts every soul that has it, and makes them
able, in the public, for the Kingdom, and it makes them able for their
families in private. This grace of Christ makes those that are the Ministers of
his Gospel, sufficient and able, in the newness of the Spirit, to bring forth
fruit unto God, Romans 7.4, 6.

Now I know that you that are readers and hearers of the Common Prayer Book,
Ministers, mystery of Christ, and of the unsearchable riches of the sweet grace
of Jesus Christ; but they can speak pleasingly of the history of Christ, and of
the letter only. I know now that you will plead liberty of conscience, to hear
and to have this manner of reading and preaching: And for my part you should
have the liberty of your conscience; A people delighting in a litter alministry
are sotishly ignorant, for the most part of them, and full of segality.
but I am sorry that your understandings are so dark, that you are not able to
discern the natural artificialness that is in some men's reading and preaching:
and I am grieved to see that you are not able to discern between the
naturalness and the spiritualness of Ministers. Some by the principles of
nature can preach elegantly and use plausible words, and this pleases you well;
and this you cry up and magnify: But the spiritualness which some Ministers
have from the Spirit of God, this you cry down, and say it is new light, or new
wine; and with mockings say, these men are full of new light; or with a jeer,
Festus did to Paul, saying, Too much of this learning makes men mad: And thus
natural parts are advanced, and true Ministers of the Gospel discountenanced,
as you may read, Acts 2.13, 15, 16, 17. Acts 26.24, 25. 1 King. 22.26, 27. Mat.
27.63.

Paul was; such Ministers have the mystery of [God, revealed unto them by the
spirit of God: They are full likewise of knowledge, of the mystery of Christ in
God, and God in Christ; and Christ who is God and the new man, mystery, read
John 17.21, 23, 24. Ephesians. 4.23, 24. 2 Cor. 6.16. Now such Ministers are made
able by the gift of grace, and the effectual working of the power of God, that
they may preach the unsearchable riches of Jesus Christ unto a poor soul; A
ministry built on Christ does administer grace to the hearts of the people
now such Ministers have the secrets of the Lord revealed unto them, Psa.
25.14. And they do declare unto all the world, the mystery which has been hid
in God from the beginning of the world, but now in these last times it shall be
made known by the Church of Christ, the manifold wisdom and love of God, in his
eternal purpose in Christ Jesus our Lord, in whom we have boldness and access
with confidence, that we shall be filled with all the fullness of God: And thus
the true Ministers of Christ are furnished from God to speak the things of God
Evangelically; and to speak spiritually what they hear and see of Jesus Christ;
and this you may read at large Ephesians. 3.3. the whole Chapter. And so likewise
every poor member of Christ is complete in Christ: For in him dwells all the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and of his fullness have all we received, and
grace for grace, Col. 2.9, 10. Joh. 1.16, 17.

Now if the Lord would be pleased a King, lost something which is his own, to
purchase peace for his people; and then he would be as a nursing Father unto
his people, which I desire to see: all this a tenderhearted father does for
the good of his child; he will part with much of his own, because he loves his
child. And this grace must move the Parliament, if they be like unto a
tenderhearted father. Now those that are like unto a tender father; If they
see any one lie under a burden, though it be but light, they go speedily, they
make no delays in taking off the burden.

Now when this grace and wisdom come from above, it will teach and move the
Parliament to make haste without delays, to take off the unsupportable burdens
from this Kingdom, which they groan so much under; oppressed go free, and to
ease those that bear the heavy yoke, and to loose the bands of wickedness, in
taking away the finger of oppression, which makes men hang down their heads,
and bring the poor into their possessions again: give unto Caesar his due: for
why are

The Spirit of God is the only curer both of King, Parliament and people.
as he did into Ezekiel, then he will set them both upon their feet, and then
they shall hear God speaking peace and rest unto his people; and if they deliver
the poor and needy, and do justice to the afflicted and needy, then they shall
be most like unto God: for God stands in the Congregation, and he judges,
and he sees the King, and he sees the Parliament, that both their foundations
are out of course: he sees England, and Ireland, and Scotland out of course:
but now if the Lord would be pleased to help you both to do justice to the poor
afflicted and needy, and to rid them out of the hand of the wicked, flourish
like a green bay tree: then our Land would flourish with the goodness of God,
and yield her increase, read these Scriptures and consider well of them, Ezekiel.
2.1, 2. Psalm. 82.1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 8. Jere. 31.23, 24, 25, 26. Psa. 85.1, 2,
3, 4, 8, 9, 10.11, 12, 13.

Now when Christ comes into the heart of the King, and Parliament, and people,
[he will set us all in the way of his steps, in mercy and in truth, in justice
and peace,] read Psa. 85.13. Prove. 8.14, 15, 16. first pure, James 3.17.

Now I shall speak a word unto the Soldiery or Army, reproaches, A word in
season to the despised Army.
and jeers, and slanders, being branded with the name of Sectaries and factious
persons, by some of our proud ignorant Clergy, such as Mr Edwards was; and by
some simple people likewise, who will say as they say.

Suffer a word of advice now, I pray you: Let none of you suffer as a murderer,
or as a thief, or as an evil doer, or as a busy body: But if you suffer and be
reproached for the Name of Christ, happy are ye, for the spirit of glory and of
God rests upon you, 1 Pet. 4.14, 15, 16, 19. And if you suffer the loss of
your Freedoms, and privileges of free subjects, after you have purchased them
at so dear a rate; yet suffer all this with the spirit of meekness, and commit
your selves, and your losses, unto the Lord, and he will repay you.

And to conclude, John Baptist said unto the Soldiers, Do violence to no man,
[when you have it,] Luke 3.14.

Now let me advise you to trust [God] with the Liberty of your Consciences, and
your wrongs, The grace of God through Christ is as falt, and it will season
every condition.
and your reputations: and you that are worthy, [God] will vindicate you in his
own time: And let it appear from you, that the grace of God in Christ is the
sweet and golden rule for a Christian to walk by, to make peace, because Jesus
Christ is the Prince of peace, Isa. 9.6. And those that are his subjects are
sons of peace, Luke 10.6.

Now I shall return to the second use, which I drew from the 11. Chapter of
John; and I shall conclude with that of Martha and Mary: Now though Martha had
received Christ into her house, nay Christ had entered himself into her heart,
as you may see by her confession, John 11.27 yet for all this, Martha was
cumbred, and troubled, and distracted about many things, which were below Jesus
Christ; Martha, in being angry with Mary for sitting at Jesus feet; and she
heard his Word, good part, or the most excellent way, as the Apostle says:
that is the most excellent way, not to hear the voice of the world, but the
voice of Jesus Christ, as Mary did, Luke 10.38, 39, 40, 41, 42.

Martha, and if it were possible they would command Jesus Christ to send away
those that sit at his feet, and hear him, who is the living Word of life; and
like unto Martha, they would have Christ to send away those that are like unto
Mary, to serve with them in their low acquaintances with God, as some of our
learned are, Martha, do not understand why Mary sat at the feet of Jesus, but
they are ready to think much, and foolishly to say, they are looking after new
light, they have got some notion into their brain, they are possessed with some
whimsey or other, some new doctrine has taken hold on them: now such poor
silly men and women are cumbred and troubled about many things, which are below
Christ, and are ready to say as Martha did unto Jesus, send them away, bid them
come to us, and serve as we do, and be as we are. Now mark, for this is worth
the noting; The spiritual Evangelical Christian that is like unto Mary, beloved
Disciple, and he does taste of the spiritual sweetnesses which are in Christ,
who is God; I say, such a soul cannot leave such delicate spiritual food to
come to Martha: Such a lively Christian man, Martha; neither does Jesus bid
Mary go and help Martha to serve: And this is worth your noting, Luke 10.40, 41.

Now in the second place, Martha and Mary did; Martha comes and says, Lord, if
thou had been here, my brother had not dyed; and so says Mary too: Now this
is according to the far off in the time of our troubles: Martha said, [ Lord,
if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed; but thou wast not here.] Now
this is a carnal and a fleshly knowledge of Jesus Christ: as for instance; One
man may know another by sight, but one man cannot see another man's spirit; even
so Martha did see and know Jesus Christ by sight and by sense, as A note of
great concernment.
and more then a man; it sees the Spirit of Jesus Christ, which is God, for God
is a Spirit, Joh. 4.24. James 1.17. It sees the Father of spirits, which is
God; this sight sees this one God, the Father of Christ, and of all, The sight
of Faith is the only sight to see God in the man Christ.
doing all the great works in Christ and by Christ, as Christ himself speaks,
as you may read, John 14.10, 11. And this sight Moses had, for Moses saw him
who is invisible, read Heb. 11.27. Now the Evangelical man, the spiritual man,
the new man, the man in Christ, is taught and acted by the Father of spirits to
see Christ in the Spirit, which is God, manifesting himself in the flesh, and
taking up the humane body of Christ and the Saints to be an habitation for him
to dwell in [with all the fullness of the Godhead,] Col. 2.9, 10. Now this [God]
does manifest himself in the flesh of men, and as a seed lies hid in the
earthiness of men's hearts, but in his own time he breaks through, unlooses the
pains of death, mystery, as you may read, 1 Timothy 3.16. 1 John 3.9. Act. 2.24.

Now he that is Alpha and Omega, wise God, [this God puts himself under many
names, Acts 2.36. And this is for us to distinguish, that we may see his love
and his power, Revel. 1.11. 1 Timothy 1.17.

Now God, as a Father, speaks forth a word of power and good will for men; [now
this word of God] was clothed with flesh, or made flesh, as a man, Joh. 1.13,
14. And this God is in man making one perfect man; Mat. 5.48. Colos. 1.17, 18.
Now this word, which was spoken from the heart of God, Christ is the living
Word of God.
becomes our Christ, for his name is called the Word of God, and the wisdom and
power of God, and in him are hid all the treasures of wisdom and knowledge, Rev.
19.12, 13. 1 Cor. 1.24. Colos. 2.3. Now God comes and brings forth himself
under the name of Jesus, To save his people from their sins, Matthew. 1.21. And
those that see Christ as God, see him mighty and able to save them: they do not
say as Martha said, Lord, if thou had been here, my brother had not dyed: No,
God in Christ and both in the flesh making one new man; this is a great
mystery, read Ephesians. 2.15.
they see God in Christ ever present to save them to the uttermost, and they
see Christ, as God, offering up himself by his own eternal Spirit, as a
sacrifice without fault, to purge, and to purchase his Church with his own
blood, Heb. 7.25, 26. Heb. 9.14. Acts 20.28. And this is the good will of our
good God; He comes down from his Throne to behold what is amiss, nay he goes
into the dust of the earth to raise up the poor, and lifts the needy out of
the dunghill; this is the good pleasure of our God, Psalm. 113.6, 7, 8.

Now the design of God is to bring forth himself and his Christ to suffer both
together for fallen man,

Now you object and say,

I answer, not capable of being cut: God cannot be cut with an ax,

But mark now for your comfort; [God] goes along with Christ, God was with
Christ in the grave for thy comfort, O poor soul.
for God and Christ are one, John 10.29, 30. God goes in Christ before the
chief Priests, and before Pontius Pilate, and so to the Cross, and there he was
jeered; and he went with Christ from the Cross into the grave, and raised him
out of the grave; God never left Christ alone, though Christ said, My God
forsake me not: yet Christ said, God heard him always, read John 16.32. John
11.42. by the determinate counsel of God, Acts 2.22, 23. and 4.26, 27, 28.

Now Christ himself does confirm what I have said, Pilate; And thus a true
believer, in Christ and with Christ, says, John 19.10, 11. [And God stands by,
and looks upon the proud and disdainful behavior of one neighbor toward
another, read Psalm. 35.19, 20.] 2. Notes in particular.


Christ suffers and is crucified now in the hearts of men, Pontius Pilate and
Herod: [Mans heart should be an habitation for God to dwell in,] but That man of
sin, and the world, Temple of God, and exalts himself in the heart of a man
above God, and shows that he is God; but this is that spirit of Antichrist
which would keep the true Christ out of the hearts of men, that Jesus Christ
should come in the flesh of men, These. 2.3, 4. 1 John 4.2, 3. Now when God will
have the possession of the heart to be his Temple, then he sends his holy child
Jesus, was conceived by the Holy Ghost, Acts 4.27, 30. Luke 1.31, 32, 35.

Now the heart of every man, by nature, is like unto those husbandmen that
consulted against the only beloved Son of God, and said, Come let us kill him;
and they took him, and killed him, and cast him out of the vineyard, that is,
out of their hearts, read Mark 12.4, 5, 6, Herod, Pontius Pilate and the rude
multitude, against the spiritual and holy Child Jesus, who is both Lord and
Christ, Acts 4.25, 26, 27. Acts 2.36. John 11.47, 48.

CHAP. XIII.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

1 John 4.20, 21. Acts 9.4, 5. and 26.14, 15. Acts 22.3, 4, 5. John 12.10, 11.
John 5.18, 19, 20. Mat. 20.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. John 16.2, 3. Eccles. 7.29. Genesis
6.5. and 8.21. John 19.17, 18, 20. Mat. 15.19, 20. Luke 6.45, 46. Mark 3.27.
Ephesians. 4.24 Romans 5.14. John 12.32. Heb. 2.14, 15. Acts 2.23, 24. Mat. 27.63,
64. Isai. 29.11. Col. 1.26, 27. Romans 10.2, 3. Mark 15.10, 11, 15. John 10.19,
20, 24, 25, 31, 39. Luke 1.35. Heb. 2.14, 15. John 16.13, 14. Luke 20.19, 20,
21. Matthew. 13.25, 38, 39. Luke 6.45, 46. John 14.17, 18. Acts 4.28. Ioh. 12.32.
Luke 3.16. 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2. John 12.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.3. Romans
6.5, 6, 7, 8. Heb. 2.14, 15. Romans 6.3, 4, 5. Gal. 6 14, 15. Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24.
Col. 1.12, 13. 2 Cor. 5.17. 2 Cor. 3.18. Romans 6.5, 8. and 8.11. Phil. 3.9, 10.
1 John 1.3. Romans 11.36. Rev. 19.4, 5, 6. and 21.3, 4, 9, 10, 11, 22, 23. John
11.42. 1 Cor. 2.13, 14. Genesis 18.1, 2, 3, 4. and 19.1, 2, 3, 4. Dan. 3.24, 25,
26. Isa. 43.2, 3. and 43.3, 4. Philip. 2.6, 7, 8. Romans 8.3, 4. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.
1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 9.11, 12, 13, 14. Psa. 27.1. Rev. 1.10, 11, 12. John 16.13,
14, 15. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23. 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 13. 1 Timothy 3.16. Luke 17.34, 35. Rev.
1.7, 8. Acts 26.18. Luke 3.16, 17. John 3.29, 30. Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6. Isai. 9.6.
Mat. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Isai. 7.14. Psa. 113.5, 6, 7, 8. Col. 2.19. Ephesians. 2.21,
22. Col. 2.9, 10. Eccles. 1.7. Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. Ephesians. 1.22, 23. and 5.32. Romans
8.17. Phil. 3.10, 11. Gal. 6.14, 15. Isai. 29.20, 21. Acts 24.13, 14. Luke
18.11, 12. 2 Cor. 3.6. 2 Cor. 13.3, 4, 5. 1 Cor. 2.4, 5. Matthew. 7.21, 22, 23.
and 15.13, 14. Luke 6.39, 40.

I Shall give you two instances of what I have said, and prove it by Scripture;
We all say that we love God and Christ whom we never have seen, and yet the
most of us hate our brother whom we see daily, 1 John 4.20, 21. Now this is a
pure contradiction; A contradiction.
for we all say that we love God, and yet God says, Why persecute you me in my
Christ, in my Saints? Saul, Saul, why persecutest thou me? Acts 9.4, 5. and
26.14, 15. Most men are zealous for God, Paul, when he was Saul, Acts 22.3, 4,
5. And so likewise those that say verbally [Thy Kingdom come] and contend so
much for the form of the Lords prayer, power, and the glory of this kingdom,
but labor to put those far from them, sought to put Lazarus to death, out of
envy against Christ, John 12.10, 11. Yea the time comes that [whosoever]
kills them in whom I appear, says Christ, they will think they do God
service: [Note] this; The time comes, says Christ, though men have fair
pretenses to know God and Christ, as the most in these our days have, way, and
they know Jesus Christ verbally, to discourse of him only with the tip of the
tongue, husbandmen did, Ioh. 5.18, 19, 20. Mat. 20.35, 36, 37, 38, 39. Mark
now, The time comes, says our Savior, that is, in these our days we do as
much as the Jews, Pontius Pilate did, in a spiritual way, against the holy
Child Jesus. Now the ground of all this, is because we do not know God, nor
Jesus Christ spiritually; and these are Christ's own words, read John 16.2, 3.

I shall give you a reason, as God shall enable me, why I said Christ suffers and
is crucified, even now, in everyparticular man's heart that shall reign with him.

God has made man upright: Eccl. 7.29.
but they have sought out many sinful inventions, Every imagination that is in
the heart of fallen man, is evil from his childhood, his very purposes and
desires, Gen 6.5. and 8.21.
all his thoughts are evil continually.

Now notwithstanding that Jesus Christ was crucified at Golgotha, unto
Jerusalem, in the days of his flesh, John 19.17, 18, 20. Yet for all this the
most men's hearts remain as full of all manner of wickedness, as pride, and envy,
and evil thoughts, murders, adulteries, fornications, thefts, false witness,
blasphemies; and these are Christ's own words, concerning fallen man, or corrupted
man, or the old man, which brings forth abundance of evil treasure, Mat.
15.19, 20. Luke 6.45, 46.

Now Jesus Christ is the only good man, and the only strong man, Adam was a
figure of, Luke 6.45. Mark 3.27. Ephesians. 4.24. Romans 5.14.

and I, of a man, says Christ, I will draw the whole heart unto me,] John
12.32. Now Jesus Christ, being lift up in the heart of a man, he begins to play
the good man, and the strong man, and he delivers fallen man from the corrupted
and old man, which is sin and the devil, Heb. 2.14, 15. determinate counsel of
God,] Acts 2.23, 24. And as the Jews did crucify Christ in the flesh, even so
does every particular man now crucify Christ in the spirit, Pilate to condemn
him; and they had a rude multitude that cried, Crucify him, Crucify him;
release Barabbas and crucify Jesus; [and thus it is in every particular man's
heart now.] For the corrupt heart of a man, now in our days, for all our
customary and seeming outside shows, holy child Jesus in a spiritual way,
fleshly way: but this holy thing, which shall be born in the heart of a man, will
be both Lord and Christ now in a spiritual way, and rule in the midst of his
enemies; [but when this holy Child Jesus, which is Emmanuel, God with us, or in
us,] does but begin to stir in the heart of a man, then the corrupt heart of a
man does gather up all his forces against God in Christ, A remarkable note.
and says, I will not have this man to reign over me: And so likewise the
corrupt heart calls for a counsel against Christ in the Spirit.

And the first in this counsel is the wilfulness of the will which is in fallen
man, and this will is stubborn against God, and disaffected to the true Christ,
as the ignorant chief Priests and Pharisees were, who called Jesus Christ
Deceiver, and thought to have kept him in the grave with a band of men, Mat.
27.63, 64. God is but one and he is all in all his appearances.
The second in counsel against [God, who is both Lord, and Christ, and Jesus,]
it is the dark, and the blind understanding which is in the hearts of all men
now, the most learned men as well as others; for the mystical book of God coming
into the flesh, Col. 1.26, 27. Romans 10.2, 3. Mark 15.10, 11, 15.
even unto them, is sealed, Isai. 29.11. and likewise to the zealous for God,
but without knowledge, to them also, as well as the rude and ignorant multitude.

The understandings of most men are so full of darkness, even now in our days,
therefore they jeer at such a Ministry, or at such a Minister, with the name of
new light or strange doctrine, He has a Devil, and is mad; And thus most men
are confused in their understandings, not knowing Jesus Christ who is [Gods
Truth,] but are ready to take up stones to stone him, as the Jews did, as you
may read at large, John 10.19, 20, 24, 25, 31, 39.

Now the third that comes in counsel [against God, who is that holy child
Jesus,] who is that holy thing which was born of the Virgin Mary, and took our
flesh upon him, Luke 1.35. This God will come now in another appearance and make
way for himself into our hearts, God is the first and last and his Church in
the middle.
into our flesh, and that spiritually into his people, Heb. 2.14, 15. John
16.13, 14. Now the third, as I said before, that comes in counsel against God,
it is the affections and the love that are in every man's heart, for I am now
speaking of every man's heart in particular: Now so far as a man's heart is
possessed with the old corrupt man, with the envious man, so far a man plays
the Judas with Christ, to betray him, even in his heart; from the heart
proceeds evil thoughts against God; and man's dissembling love, that feigns it
self to be a [ just man for Christ, when in the mean time he is like a spy to
betray Christ, and to accuse Jesus Christ; Luke 20.19, 20, 21. Mat. 13.25, 38,
39. Luke 6.45, 46. Now the will of man, that will have none of Christ; beauty in
Christ why he should be desired, and the dissembling love of man, that cannot
affect Jesus Christ.

And then comes in the fourth, which is the blind judgment of man, and this
gives sentence against Jesus Christ, and like Pilate condemns Christ and
releaseth Barabbas: Pontius Pilate, against Christ now in the Spirit; and thus
does every particular man in his own heart. And though Christ gave himself unto
the Jews to be crucified, and to have his body lifted up on a tree, read John
10.17, 18. according to the counsel of his will determined before to be done,
Acts 4.28. Yet it was his design, who is God blessed for evermore, [in his
love, to lift up his Spirit within every particular man's heart, whom he does
intend to baptize with his Spirit,] read John 12.32. Luke 3.16.

Now this being done, Pilate; I desire to know nothing, says the Apostle, save
Jesus Christ [ and him crucified; and him crucifying all within my heart that
is contrary unto himself;] Read at large 2 These. 2.7, 8, 9, 10. 1 Cor. 2.1, 2.
And every thing that is man's own shall be destroyed, and dye on this Cross, the
Son of man must be glorified; and except thy soul, O fallen man, a corn of wheat
fall into the ground and dye, and be found in Christ, it abides alone; but if
thy soul dye, O fallen man, and be buried with Christ in his grave, and there put
off its naturalness, which is as thy grave clothes, and so arise with Christ,
or so arise in Christ unto spiritualness in heavenly places; I say, if so, then
thou shall bring forth much fruit,] read John 12.23, 24. Ephesians. 1.3.

Now if thy corn of wheat dye, I mean thy soul, Romans 6.5, 6, 7, 8 Heb. 2.14,
15. Now thou must know, O man, this Cross of Christ to be within thy heart, as
well as to know by hearsay, the Cross of Christ which Christ was crucified on
nigh unto Jerusalem: in thy heart against Christ spiritually, as Christ had
enemies in and about Jerusalem.

Now, as I said before, we must dye upon this Cross of Christ, and be buried
with Christ; nay, we have need of this Cross of Christ every day: for it is a
Christians glory and joy to have this Cross of Christ; for by the power of this
Cross, Adam; and by the power of this Cross of Christ, the world and sin are
crucified unto a Christian daily, and a Christian is crucified unto sin, and
the world, and himself, daily, [and lives a new creature in the new Creation,
in Christ and with Christ spiritually, and that continually,] Romans 6.3, 4, 5.
Gal. 6.14, 15.

Now if we dye upon this Cross of Christ, then Christ takes the soul down into
his grave, a putting off the old man, which is corrupt, and a being renewed in
the Spirit, and a putting on the new man, which after God is created in
righteousness and true holiness, Ephesians. 4.22, 23, 24. a translating us into the
kingdom of his dear Son, Col. 1.12, 13. And this is called a passing away of
old things, for all things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. a being changed into
the same image from glory to glory, even as by the Spirit of the Lord, 2 Corinthians. 3.18.

Now this is a very glorious condition, for a Christians comfort, conformable
unto the death of Christ; if we be made partakers with Christ in his death,
then for certain we shall be made partakers with Christ in his resurrection,
Romans 6.5, 8. and 8.11. Phil. 3.9, 10.

But first we must be crucified and dye with Christ, be found again in him [by
the power of his resurrection, and the fellowship of God who is the holy
Spirit,] read 1 John 1.3. For of him, and through him, and to him are all
things, to whom be glory for ever, Amen, Romans 11.36.

And now, woman, thou that have walked through the vale of Death, and art
arrived at the haven of Life, which is God in Christ; now this God is thy God
in all his several appearances, dwell with thee, nay in thee; and thou shall
reign with him: Blessed and holy is he that has his part in this first
resurrection. And now, loving Christian, seeing thou art come into this haven
of rest, here I will bid you farewell; no more death to you, neither sorrow, nor
crying, neither shall there be any more pain; for thy God will wipe away all
tears from thine eyes; and the Spirit will show thee great things coming out
from God; and the glory of God shall be thy light, which is a light most sweet
and clear; and there shall be no night with thee, nor in thee; and thou and the
whole Church of God shall be but as one Temple for the Lord God Almighty and the
Lamb: Lord God Almighty and the Lamb are a Temple for thee and the whole Church
of God to worship in: And thou and the whole Church of God, are like unto a
City that has no need of the Sun: glory of God does lighten you, and you are
as a City, which the Lamb is the light of, read Revel. 20.4, 5, 6. Rev. 21 3,
4, 9, 10, 11, 22, 23.

Now a Christian, Martha and Mary did, Lord, if thou had been here, my
brother had not dyed: Now such have but low comforts, because they think God to
be in this place, Martha and Mary did: But a Christian that knows Jesus Christ
to be the only wise God, knows him to be omnipresent in every place, and knows
all his wants, and hears all his cries and groans; and he can say as Christ
did, Father, I know that thou hear me always, John 11.42.

Now the Gospelized man, at several times in the flesh; but now in these last
times his appearances in our flesh are in a spiritual way, foolishness to them,
1 Cor. 2.13, 14. God has made diverse appearances in the flesh; as for
instance, those three Angels which Abraham ran to meet, Genesis 18.1, 2, 3, 4. And
these Angels do signify the Trinity, as some say; and so likewise those two
Angels that Lot did meet and converse withal as men, Genesis 19.1, 2, 3, 4. And so
likewise that same astonishing appearance of God in the fiery furnace with the
three children, to make good his promise, read Dan. 3.24, 25, 26. Isa. 43.2, 3.
And so likewise now in these last times [God] who is the Father of all, Son and
a Savior of all, Isai. 43.3, 4. And thus God was found in the fashion of a man,
Phil. 2.6, 7, 8. And as he was second, so he was sent of the first in the
likeness of sinful flesh to condemn sin in thy flesh, and to forgive thee thy
sin: And this is that which the Jews stumbled at; for they did not see Jesus
Christ as [God] to forgive sins: therefore they crucified the body which God
gave unto Jesus Christ, Romans 8.3, 4. Heb. 10.5, 6, 7.

And so likewise this is a great mystery, high Priest to offer up himself as a
sacrifice without spot unto himself, and that through the eternal spirit, which
spirit is the only blessed God,] 1 Timothy 3.16. Heb. 9.11,

Now God comes in these latter days in his great and most excellent
appearances, and that is spiritually in all his ordinances. the learned nor the
unlearned will jeer me for using these expressions: For by the light of these
appearances God will dis-throne Antichrist which is very much amongst us; light,
and is but darkness; and God will set up his own true Christ, which is himself;
The Lord is my light, says David, Psa. 27.1.

beauty in it, why they should desire it. But when the Spirit comes into the
heart of a man, and makes his appearances, then this sweet Spirit, which is
God, who is Alpha and Omega, first and the last, and so the poor soul is even
at rest in the bosom of God, Rev. 1.10, 11, 12. And there it is taught all
truths by the Spirit, who is God, and the Spirit shows the soul glorious things
to come, and the Spirit makes Jesus Christ very glorious in the eyes of the
soul; Father has, is Christ's, and all that Christ has is a Christians; and
Christ and a Christian are Gods, John 16.13, 14, 15. 1 Cor. 3.22, 23.

Now when God does make these glorious appearances in our flesh, then he does
teach us to justify him in his spiritual appearances, which things the Angels
desire to look into, 1 Pet. 1.11, 12, 13. And we speak of this mystery unto
men, and it is believed by some men in the world; and as Christ is received up
into glory, so he will bring down his glorious wisdom and holiness into the
hearts of his people: And as Christ is wisdom, even so he makes his children
wise, that they may justify him who is wisdom it self; for wisdom is justified
of her children, 1 Timothy 3.16. Luke 7.34, one God and Father of all in all his
appearances, and through all the appearances which have been spoken of, as
Jesus Christ our Lord; therefore we shall be enabled to keep the unity of the
Spirit, and to be at peace with God; one Spirit, one Lord Jesus Christ, who is
the one God, and he is first and last, Which is, and which was, and which is to
come; the Almighty, Rev. 1.7, 8. And there is but one true Faith, which is in
him, and by him, and from him, which is the blessed God, Acts 26.18. And there
is but one true Baptism, which is from him, and by him, and of him, who is the
only wise God, and our good God: Now this one Baptism made John rejoice, and
his joy was exceeding full, because of Christ which is the souls bridegroom,
Luke 3.16, 17. John 3.29, 30.

Father of all; and every thing that is good does proceed and come out from
him: of all good: He is the first cause of all good to the creature: He is all
in himself and to himself: He is all to the soul, and he is all in the poor
soul: He is all in all his appearances: He is the Father of all, and above all,
and through all, and in you all, read Ephesians. 4.3, 4, 5, 6.

[To us a Child is born, to us a Son is given, and the government shall be upon
his shoulders, and his name shall be called wonderful, counselor, the mighty
God, the everlasting Father, the Prince of peace.] God will renew the heart of a
man, or woman, and make it as a chaste Virgin to bear Christ in the spirit, as
well as the Virgin Mary did bear Christ in the flesh.
Now here is one, and all; and all, and yet but one, read Isa. 9.6. And so
likewise Behold a Virgin shall be with Child, and shall bring forth a Son: [Now
it is meant thy heart, O man or woman, shall be a Virgin to bear this Child, as
well as the Virgin Mary: And when [God] does appear as the holy Child Jesus, in
a man, then man does begin to be happy; and the name of this Child shall be
called Emmanuel, which being spiritually interpreted, is God with us, or God in
us,] Mat. 1.20, 21, 22, 23. Isa. 7.14. Who is like unto the Lord our God, God
comes down into every low condition to comfort a poor soul.
in high places and in low places: Our God comes down into every low condition:
Is not this a great comfort for the poor souls of men? He raises up the poor
out of the dust, and lifts the needy out of the dunghill: This is the good will
of our good God; He leaves no contemptible place unsought to find out his
people, though it be in a dunghill: He was with Job upon the dunghill, that he
might set him and all his poor despised people, as Princes, even with the
Princes of his people, Psa. 113.5, 6, 7, 8.

O the wonderful greatness of our God that has made his Christ, and given him
to be the head over all things to the Church!

O the wonderful wisdom and endless mercy of our God, body in Christ, Christ
being the head!

O what a sweet harmony and agreement there is between the head Christ, and his
members!

O poor drouping soul! A note of great comfort to a poor soul.
and behold thy God who is thy head, from which all the body by joints and
bands, having nourishment ministered and knit together, increases with the
increase of God, Col. 2.19.

And now, poor soul, thou art so fitly framed together, and so complete in
Christ, that thou art become an holy Temple in the Lord, In whom ye also are
builded together for an habitation of God through the Spirit, Ephesians. 2.21, 22.
Col. 2.9, 10.

Now when God does teach a poor soul to live upon this, it will be as the
lifting up the head above all waters, above all temptations, above all
reproaches of men, and above all the false doctrines of the men of the world.

And now I will call thee a full soul in the close of all that I shall say unto
thee; The fullness of him that fills all in all.]

Now this is a wonder and a great mystery to the world, That the Church should
be the fullness of God in Christ; That a poor soul should be the fullness of
Christ which fills all in all. All the rivers run into the sea, yet the sea
it self is not full, Eccles. 1.7. All the rivers of grace and glory come from
God, fullness of him which fills all in all,] Ephesians. 3.17, 18, 19. and 1.22, 23.

Now this is a great mystery, but I have spoken concerning Christ and his
Church, Ephesians. 5.32.

I have in much weakness received a little strength, and I have in much dimness
received a little sight, to see fallen man, grave clothes of the soul; and then
to rise the third day, which is the Lords day, we must suffer and be crucified
with Christ, rise with Christ and be glorified together with Christ, read Romans
8.17. And then we shall know the power of the resurrection of Jesus Christ, read
Phil. 3.10, 11. And this is a Christians glory to be made a new creature in
Jesus Christ, Gal. 6.14, 15.

Now, to conclude, Isa. 29.20, 21. As it was said of that eminent and truly
religious man, Dr Crisp by name, and many others besides him: But after the way
which some call [Heresie,] so, says the Apostle, worship a the God of my
fathers, believing all things which are written in the Law and the Prophets,
Acts 24.13, 14.

We have an old Proverb amongst us; That the blind eat flies: Now if the blind
feed the blind, they are both likely to eat hay, stubble, and chaff, in stea^
of manna: By manna I mean [Christ;] and by hay, stubble, and chaff, I mean a
natural gravity in years, and an artificial form of holiness before the eyes of
men, and a feeding upon man's own actings and workings, good meanings and good
endevors: This is an Error, and much in use: And this is an earthly Christ,
which most men lean upon. It is not the being old in years that makes a
Minister of Christ, though never so learned, but to be grave in grace and in
the knowledge of Christ. Now those that know not Christ, will take up any to be
their guide or Minister, and say they understand them. Now I wonder that the
ministry of Christ is so little understood amongst most men, but the Spirit of
God will show the reason. Read these Scriptures, Matthew 23.24. and Chap. 15.14.
The first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 3. Verse. 12. Revel. 3.17. Matthew
19.20, 21. Jeremiah 5.31. The first Epistle to the Corinthians, Chap. 2. Verses
6, 7.

NOw the occasion of all Errors amongst us is, because most men know not the
true Christ; fal^e Christ's, such as their good medning is, prayers and
fastings, and their alms-deeds, and their own good endevors to please God, as
the Pharisee did, Luke 18.11, 12. And if men know not the true Christ, New
Testament, 2 Cor. 3.6.

Now for the proof of this Ministry, The ministry of Christ proved; Christ and
his ministry always together.
Christ and this Ministry are always together, and that in your hearts, always
teaching you, says the Apostle, except you have not as yet heard of Christ,
nor as yet known Jesus Christ, 2 Cor. 13.3, 4, 5.

Now if men know not the Ministry of Jesus Christ, then they are subject to
take the wisdom of men for their Ministry, Cor. 2.4, 5. And thus Antichrist is
crept into the world. Lord, Lord, that makes a Minister of Christ; yet such a
man may prophecy and preach of Christ, many things in his name, and yet for all
this not know Christ, False Christ's are within a man as well as without a man, 1 Timothy 6 9, 10. Luke 12 20, 21. Mat. 24.24
nor have any acquaintance with him, neither does Christ approve of him, and if
Christ approve not of him, [God will root him up] as you may read, Matthew. 7.21,
22, 23. and 15.13, 14. For such a man is but a blind leader of the people,
though the people think that he sees, Luke 6.39, 40.

CHAP. XIV.
The Spiritual Opening and Application of these Scriptures: VIZ.

Psalm. 27.4, 5. Luke 10.42. John 4.10, 14, 32. Rev. 4.6, 7, 8. Acts 22.24, 25.
Heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Jerem. 5.30, 31. and 4.22. Isai. 6.1, 2, 3. Rev. 1.10,
13, 19. and 4.6, 7, 8. John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15, 16. John 7.37, 38, 39. Acts
7.55, 56. Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Psalm. 45.9. 2 Timothy 3.12. Mat. 10.36. 1 Pet. 4.16,
17, 18, 19. Psa. 73.25, 26, 28. 1 John 1.3, 4. John 16.32, 33. Gal. 6.1, 2. 2 Samuel 23.3. Isai. 49.23. Psalm. 78.70, 71, 72. 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. 2 Samuel 23.3. Ruth
2.7, 8, 9. Ruth 2.18. 1 John 2.20, 21. John 3.8. Psalm. 45.1. Cant. 2.3. and
4.16. Matthew. 10.19, 20. Joh. 17.23. Joh. 14.10. Mat. 10.20. Act. 3.6. Psalm.
66.16. Ruth 2.15, 16. Psalm 103.1. Rev. 5.13, 14.

Christ is the best thing in the worst times: No man can give him, and no man
can take him away: Christ is the only good thing, he will make a man wise, and
rich, and full of all good things in time of need, which no man can take away:
[Christ is the free gift of God,

NOw the best thing, in troublesome times, is to have one good thing, nay the
only good thing which heaven and earth can afford, one thing needful, nor take
away this free gift of God, which will make a man free in troublesome times: An
Use of sweet comfort.
[Now Christ is the good thing, and the one thing needful, and the free gift of
God, and the substance of Religion within a man; and by his Spirit he will be a
Well of living water, springing up into everlasting life, within the soul and
spirit of a man: meat and drink spiritual, which the world knows not of. This
will refresh a man in the time of greatest troubles, Psalm. 27.4, 5. Luke 10.42.
John 4.10, 14, 32.

And though men of all sorts be striving now for externals in matters of
Religion, mere circumstances, shadows that will fly away: Yet amongst these men
there are two sorts of men which may be divided into four sorts of men, beasts
were, which you may read of, Rev. 4.6, 7, 8. And these four sorts of men may be
divided into two parts comparatively, Presbyterians and Independents.

Now if you will divide the Presbyterians into two parts, beasts, which I before
spoke of: And the first beast is like a Lion, and the second beast like a Calf;
and the third beast had a face as a man; fourth beast was like a flying Eagle.

Now the first part of the Presbyterians, chief Captain said of Paul, Let him
be brought into the Castle, and be examined by scourging? Acts 22.24, 25.

The second part of the Presbyterians moves like a Calf, that is, more slowly,
more moderately, and with less harm.

Independents into two parts; and the first of them moves, and has a face like
a man, that is, more rational, more temperate, more condescending in the
worship of God, to do as he would be done by

Now the second part of the Independents moves like an Eagle, that is, flying
high, unutterable and full of glory; Independents, as some call them.

But now the Lion-like, and the Calf-like, and he that had the face like a man,
begin to raise troubles and jealousies against him that is Eaglelike, [because,
say they, he flies too high, we cannot discern him, nor agree with him.]

But shall I now, Eagle? dull of hearing, and are unskilful in the word of
righteousness; for ye are as babes; for strong meat belongs to them that are
of full age, even those, who by reason of use have their senses exercised to
discern both good and evil,] as you may read heb. 5.11, 12, 13, 14. Prelatical
Clergy, for the most part, were wont to call those that were Eagle-like,
Puritans; Roundheads; and others there are that call them Familists and
Sectaries.

Now here are three that are striving in the world, and make a great deal of
stir about circumstances and things which will change.

And the first is the Presbytery,

Now the second is the Independents, which would fain have their own way, but
they shall suffer for it, if some had but power.

Now, while these two are striving, the third party, Episcopal or the
Prelatical party, A ministry not coming out from Christ is not Christian but
Antichristian, that loves not the flock, for they cannot feed the flock, Mar.
13.21, 22, 23 1 John 4.1, 2, 3. John 21.15, 16, 17.
skarfs and girdles with roses at them, as though they were singular above all
other men; and they bring in their easy common Service Book, and an old
Homily, or a Sermon preached over and over, and it may be never the better; a
piece of art which they for the most part study; and this art does consist of
Rhetoric, that is, to be elegant, and to speak plausible words, though it may
be they are but little acquainted with the lively part of divine Theology, but
only the Theorick; they are fine Theoricians, that is, they can speak much of
that which they can practice little or nothing of, and with this the most
people in this Kingdom are well pleased; Take an Instance Jere. 5.30, 31. and
4.22. And thus these three are striving for external things, mere outsides,
circumstances, fig leaves: And thus these three feed upon low, mean food, but
some of them, I hope, do feed upon true food, though like babes, weakly: But
for the most part of these three, which I have spoken of, they feed upon low,
earthly food, as outside forms, with little or no love in them; or, as it were,
A ministry that has Christ in possession witnesses a good profession of
Christ in Faith and Verity, 1 Timothy 6.11, 12, 13.
with gilded fig leaves, and the like: But now the Eagle-like, or the man that
is like the flying Eagle, he is about the throne of God, and feeds upon Angels
food, Isai. 6.1, 2, 3. Now such a man does the work of Angels, because he is in
the Spirit, as John was on the Lords day, which day is Jesus Christ, Rev. 1.10,
13, 19. and 4.6, 7, 8.

Now such a man feeds upon delicate spiritual food in the heaven of God,
instance in Mary; two glorious Angels sitting in white, that gave Mary content,
Master, O Master! thou art he whom my soul loves,] John 20.11, 12, 13, 14, 15,
16.

Now the only good thing in troublesome times, and in the hour of distress, and
in sad temptations, is to have rivers of living Water, living comforting water
of life, which Christ gives: Now this water is the Spirit, the Spirit of
comforts, or the gracious comforting Spirit, John 7.37, 38, 39.

Now this sweet water of life is comfortable in sickly times, glory of God, and
Jesus Christ the right hand of God, opening himself to receive his poor weary
soul; O what a refreshing comfort is this unto a dying man! A believing soul
sees it self happy and complete in God through Jesus Christ.
and the Son of man [Godman] standing with the souls of men which he has made
just and perfect, and they standing as the right hand of God in Christ, as a
Queen in gold of Ophir: All this you may have an instance of in Steven, if you
do but read Acts 7.55, 56. And so likewise in the whole Church of Christ, if
you do but read Heb. 12.22, 23, 24. Psalm. 45.9. And thus a poor soul is
received from misery unto glory, even into Abraham's bosom, that is, Steven
did;] but while the poor soul does live in this world, it shall find trouble:
For all that do live the life of God in Christ Jesus, shall suffer persecution
in this world, 2 Timothy 3.12. All relations under the Sun variable, as the
relation to a wife, to a family, in Church fellowship in professed friends in
parents, and in children, in riches and in outward contentments; but in Christ
all these are constant and dureable.
For a man's enemies shall be they of his own household, Mat. 10.36. Nay in Church
fellowship, which is like an household, if they differ in judgment; read, 1 Pet.
4.16, to 19. If it be so in a man's household and in Church fellowship, as there
is experience, between the Presbyterian and the Independent; I shall conclude,
and say as David said, It is good for me to draw near to God, and to desire him
to plant my confidence and my joy in him alone; for in every external condition
in this world I shall find trouble: But my fellowship is with the Father, and
with his Son Jesus Christ, and spiritually there I shall find good cheer, read
these Scriptures, Psalm. 73.25, 26, 28. 1 John 1.3, 4. John 16.32, 33.

grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, bear one another burdens, and so fulfill the
Law of Christ, that is, to restore the poor groaning subjects in the spirit of
meekness, that they may rejoice once again, Gal. 6.1, 2. Now he that rules
over men must be just; ruling in the fear of God, read 2 Samuel 23.3.

Now my hope is, and my desire shall be, that God would be pleased through
Christ his strong arm, to make good that Prophecy in our days, which is spoken
of in the Prophet Isaiah, That Kings may be nursing Fathers, and Queens may be
nursing mothers in these our days: O that we might truly say once, out of
experience, that we are beholding to them as nourishers, or for their good
nursing, Isai. 49.23. [For this end God did set up Kings at the first, as David
and Solomon, Psa. 78.70, 71, 72. But of this we have had but little these many
years; instance in those domineering Bishops and the high Commission Court,
which was of long standing, and persecuted godliness under the name of
Puritans, or some other names; but I hope it will not be so now; therefore let
us follow the Apostles Exhortation, That prayer be made for Kings and for all
that are in Authority, that we may lead a quiet and peaceable life, in all
godliness and honesty, for he, or they, that rules over men must be just,
ruling in the fear of God, 1 Timothy 2.1, 2. and 2 Samuel 23.3.

Courteous Reader,

Now my first word is, vain thing; I speak the words of truth and soberness.

But seeing the customary and the outside Pharisaicalness, which most men and
women of all sorts use in matters of Religion, Ministers as well as others; this
I saw, and was at a loss within my self, [but the Lord did teach me to consider
of it; and then I went to glean, as Ruth did into the field of Boaz,] read
Ruth. 2.7, 8, 9.

But the field that mine eyes was upon, to glean in, it was not the field of
external Art, nor the field of a great Library, field is the Scriptures, the
only one Book which I had, and no more, and that is the Bible, which is the
Word of God.

Now, courteous Reader, I have gleaned, and am satisfied; and I commend that
unto you which I have reserved; and as Naomi did make use of the barley which
Ruth did glean, as you may read Ruth 2.18. so I desire that you may be wise to
make use of what has been said, for your own good, and I shall be glad.

that unction from the holy One, which will teach thee to know all things; for
that anointing abides in thee, an^ teaches thee all truths, and thou shall
abide in him, or it, 1 John 2.20, 27. Therefore I speak to thee, O man or
woman, who art [ baptized with the Spirit of Christ, wheat and chaff.

True Christian Reader, when I first set pen to paper, my heart was enabled to
indite of matter concerning the Lord of Lords, and I spoke of things touching
[Christ the King, blow sweet gales of wind spiritually into my heart, Ioh. 3.8.
And I was so refreshed by them, for [they] so comforted my heart, that my
tongue became as the pen of a ready writer: The knowledge of the mystery of God
in the flesh of Christ and the Saints, and the givings forth of the Spirit are
not got by labor and toiling, nor by industry; they are not got by studying in
a great Library; but they are the incomes of God into the souls of men, and
that in a moment, 1 Timothy 3.16 Mat. 10.19.20. Joh. 7.38, 39. and 16.13, 14, 15.
And this shall be to the praise of my good God, as David does express, Psa.
45.1. And I sat under the healing of Christ's wings with great delight, Cant.
2.3. And the North wind did blow, that is, the Spirit did blow [in or upon my
garden or heart] and then the spices, and the graces, and the flowers did grow
out; and then my soul, with Christ, did feed upon his pleasant fruits, which
were very sweet to my taste, Cant. 4.16.

And now, beloved Christian, I have gathered a posie of sweet flowers out of
the living Word of God for you to smell upon; [And yet I neither labored nor
toyled for them, nor wrought for them; neither did I get them by my study, but
they were given me freely and that in a moment;] for they were brought into my
hand or heart, and droped down one by one; and I was enabled and taught the
same hour to gather them up with great delight, Mat. 10.19, 20.

Now I shall conclude, and give all honor, glory, and praise unto God my Father,
as my sweet Savior Christ did, and that by way of union, for every [true
Believer is in the Father, John 17.23. and the Father is in every true
Believer; and the words which they speak, they speak not of themselves, but the
Father that dweleth in them he speaks the words,] read John 14.10. Mat. 10.20.

Come, beloved Christian, and I will declare, Beloved Christians silver and gold
have I none, but such as my God has given me, such I give unto you for the
honor of Christ my Lord and your Lord, Acts 3.6.
to the glory and praise of the Lord my good God, what he has done for me, and
by me, Psa. 66.16. how bountifully he has dealt with me [even as Boaz did with
Ruth, Let her glean, says he, even among the sheaves, and reproach her not;
and let fall also some of the handfuls of purpose for her; and leave them, that
she may glean them, and rebuke her not,] Ruth 2.15, 16. Even so bountifully
has the sweet Spirit of God dealt with me, he has brought me in amongst the
sheaves to glean; nay he has [let handfuls fall of purpose for me to take up;
this is the good will of my God;] He does open the mouth of the soul wide, feed
it with spiritual food: God like a mother does open the mouth of the soul and
then he does feed it with his divine sweetnesses, and then the soul says,
Bless the Lord.
[He does all for the soul, and he does all in the soul, and he is all unto the
soul:] Therefore bless the Lord, O my soul, as David said, and all that is
within me bless his holy Name, Psa. 103.1. Rev. 5.13, 14. And to this every
[Christ-baptized soul] will answer and say, Amen. So be it.

IF Christ thou truly know,
thou art not poor; He that has Christ has all, though in the worlds eye he
seem to have nothing.

He will suffice thee,
though thou have no more.
If Christ be hid from thee,
thou art not wise:
All other knowledge is
not truth, but lies.
THE CONTENTS Of this BOOK, Directing to the Chapters, Sections and Pages,
where they are spoken to.
CHAP. I.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. Page 1, 2. The difference betwixt
freedom without and freedom within. P. 2, 3. Sect. 1. The leaven of the
Pharisees, ancient and modern, opened, and advised against. Page 3, 4. 2. The
danger of zeal without knowledge. P. 4.. 3. Many deal with Christ, as Ziba with
his Master, divide or make bargains with him. P. 5. S. ib. A sweet thing to
stand on Christ alone. P. ib.. 4. Self-righteousness and Christ's weighed
together in the balance. Page 6, 7.. 5. Confidence in the flesh, a cloud that
darkens the sun of righteousness in men. P. 7, 8. S. 6. There Is a poor rich man,
and a rich poor man. P. 9. S. ib. The speech of Christ upon his coming down
from heaven. P. ib. S. ib. Why the testimony of Christ is not received. P. 10.
S. 7. The Pharisee thrusts out Christ of his prayer, and will be heard for his
own sake. P. 11, 12. S. ib. To be something in our selves, a principle of
corrupt nature; but to be nothing, a principle of divine grace. P. 13. S. ib. A
Pharisee hangs upon every thing he does. P. 14.
CHAP. II.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. Page 15. Sect. 1. Who represent the
chief Priests and Pharisees in these times. 15, 16 S. ib. Christ the Law and
the life of the Law. P. 17. The followers of Christ suffer from the stricter
sort. P. 17. Where men bite and devour one another (as in these times) Christ
is not. P. 18. S. 2. All Is but a shadow where Christ is not. P. 18. The
different arguing with God betwixt a believer and an unbeleever. P. 19. Christ
the way of God to man, and of man to God. P. 21. As the spider, the Pharisee
leans upon his own building. P. 23. S. 3. Men have pulld down outward, but have
set up inward Idolatry, in these times. P. 24.
CHAP. III.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. P. 24, 25 Sect. 1. God will not accept of
any thing besides Christ. P. 26. Christ the golden censer in the which the
prayers of the Saints are. P. ib. What it is to come to God with strange fire,
as Nadab and Abihu did. P. 27. 2. How the Pharisees cloth themselves, and how
God clothes his people. P. 29. The outside Christian discovered by the figtree
that had leaves only. P. ib. Men strive about ordinances but have Christ in
contempt, they are like the soldiers that put him to death, P. 30. Ordinances
without Christ are as clothes about dead men. P. 31. An expression in the
morning exercise London modestly reprehended. P. 31.. 3. The Pharisee like the
hen, having done his duty tells all about him. P. 32.. 4. The Pharisee, Papist,
and outside Christian all alike. P. 33, 34 Who are enabled of the Father to
worship him. P. 34. How men become idolaters even with the Scriptures
themselves. P. 34, 35. A mercy to have the Word, but a greater to have the
Spirit of the Word among us. P. 35.. 5. That the Spirit of Christ is scarce to
be found amongst us. P. 36 Not to be of one faction or another is offense
enough in these days. Page 37. A large debate with and about Mr Edwards
touching his writings. P. 37, 38, 39, 40. That the Jews said as much against
Christ as M. Edwards does against his members. P. 40, 41, 42.. 6. The course
the world take to have a fling at the truth. P. 42. Its to be feared Mr Edwards
had but the letter, not the life of the Word. Page 44. How the Jesuits, Popes,
P. 44. ^. 7. The shepherds of these times would rule Christ's sheep with an iron
mace. P. 45. Some named that were reproached in Mr Edwards book. P. 46. Mr
Edwards ten heads in his book like the ten horns, Rev. Zech. P. 47 What it is
that frays these horns, viz. the Spirit of our Lord Jesus. P. 48, 49 S. 8. That
Saul was a Minister upon the same account that many are at this day. P. 50, 51.
A Minister sent out from men, is a Minister of terror, not of tenderness. P.
51. How the false Prophets are mingled among true, as heretofore, so even now.
P. 51, 52, 53. The Confidence of most Preachers, P. 53. Upon what account there
is much preaching to little purpose in these times. P. 54.
CHAP. IV.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. P. 55 S. 1. None but believers able to
prove, approve of, and reprove Ministers. P. 57, 58. S. 2. There is no cure for
the world but free grace. P. 59. Jesus Christ is a Saints spiritual magazine.
P. 60. S. 3. That in these days God begins to pour out of his Spirit upon all
flesh. P. 61. That upon this account believers speak more profitably then their
teachers. P. 62. That believers have a divine right and authority to try the
doctrines of men. P. 63 A Caution given believers not to be despoiled of their
liberties in Christ. P. 63, 64. Many pretend falsely to a divine right in these
times. P. 64. S. 5. How the people have been, and yet are abused by Clergy men.
65, 66 What divine right is, and to whom it does belong. P. 66, 67. The
honorable Commissioners why not approved of by the Ministers. P. 67 The
ignorance of the people taxed, in not being able to try their Ministers. P. 68.
lead captive silly women. P. 68. That discord among brethren arises from the
Ministers of this age. 69.. 6. Who they be that bind heavy burdens and lay
them on men's shoulders. P. 69, 70. Dr Gouge his complying formerly with the
Archbishop, Page 70. To rule with force and violence does ill become Ministers.
P. 71, 72.. 7. A word to Ministers and people, to unite them into one band of
love by the Spirit. p. 72, 73. The story of Abraham and Lot, of Jacob, Joseph
and his Brethren, excellently opened and applied to these times. p. 73, 74, 75,
76, 77. What men pretend that mind persecution. p. 77.. 8. A sweet prayer to
God for Unity. p. 80.. 9. Arguments to persuade to Unity. p. 82, 83.. 10. Where
and what is the power of the Church. p. 84, 85. Who are Evangelical Preachers,
and that none profit the people but they. p. 87, 88.. 11. That most Ministers
seem to read Christ's advice, Mat. 6.31. p. 89, 90. Who are Elders according to
God. page 90. Three sorts of corrupt men in a parish. page 91, 94. That Jesus
Christ is the mind of God. page 94. That most of our Protestants are fit matter
to make Papists. p. 95.
CHAP. V.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. p. 100, 101.. 1. A most excellent and
spiritual instruction given to the Eldership in the Church of God. p. 101, 108.
The Church is a school, and Christ the alone teacher in it. p. 104. The Church
in the Apostles time had many young men in it that were full of the Holy
Spirit. p. 105. Many hungry people in the Church, whom nothing can satisfy but
Jesus Christ. p. 106. Great use of Elders (if right) in the Church of God. P.
106. Religion without love is Pharisaism. Page 107. How the Religion of the
most is Popish. P. 108. That there has been much hypocritical fasting in these
times. P. 109. 2. A true fast to the Lord, is a feast to men. P. 110. The most
content themselves with the shel, but neglect the kernel of Religion. P. 112,
113. The holy Spirit is the love-token of Christ in the hearts of the faithful.
P. 115.. 3. What food the Saints live upon. Page 116.. 4. Too much confidence
placed now adays in Church Fellowship. Page 117. A just reproof of such. P.
ibid. What is the Churches foundation. 118 Upon what the Christians lean. 118
The commonly called Anabaptists reprehended and that justly. 119, 120. They
justify the parishes they seem to condemn. Why the Anabaptist and
Presbyterians disagree. P. 121. That Anabaptists are mistaken in the foundation
of Church Fellowship. 122 An excellent reason against rebaptizing. P. 123,
124.. 5. A modest debate with a moderate Anabaptist. P. 124. That the soul
enjoys all things in Christ. P. 125. Upon what account the believer is
conversant in external observations. P. 125.. 6. Of the baptism of infants, and
that they have faith, and may be admitted as well as others thereto. P. 126,
127. A whisper in the ear of an Anabaptist and Presbyterian. P. 128 The same
Lord is now a Cloud to the Egyptian world, but a pillar of light and fire to
the spiritual Israel. 129.. 7. The plea of an unbeleever. 131. Of the
confession of sin, and how few confess sin aright. P. 132, 133. The believer
has joy from the Cross of Christ in the confession of sin. 134 The death of
Christ most divinely opened. P. 134. Several Objections answered, made against
confession of sin with joy. p. 135, 136, 137.
CHAP. VI.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. page 138, 139.. 1. What the most of our
Elders and Pastors are, and what they are able to do. p. 140. Who seek the good
of King and Kingdom. p. 144.. That there is no steers-man in the Church on the
heart of a true Christian but Jesus Christ. p. 145. Christ the guide of a
Christian, in his active and passive obedience to Magistrates. p. 146, 147. A
wise caution given to Magistrates, and why. page ibid.. 3. Several objections
answered touching the discerning of true teachers and false by their fruits. p.
147, 148. p. 149. Those that have been with Jesus, and in whom Jesus is, alone
understand the Scriptures. p. 149 Christ the Covenant of God. p. 150. What
learned men they be that are unfit for the ministry. p. 151. Christ is the day
of Gods rest. p. 152. That many talk of Reformation that are ignorant of the
pure Religion. page ibid.. 3. What the pure Religion is. 152. The most of the
learned in Christendom do agree in pleasure, ease and profit. p. 153. Many
zealous for Presbyterian Government care not for coming to the Elders, and why.
p. 156. That one place for worship is not to be preferred before another. ibid.
Whether it be decent for Ministers to go all in black. p. 157. Of humane
learning, of what use and profit it is. p. 158. A word of Ordination. ibid.
That all men in the Church of God have liberty to exercise. p. 159. A word
touching Order. p. 160. Who are and what the true Ministers of Christ must
expect of men. p. 161. 5. That the Apostles order cannot be observed in our
parish Churches without offense. p. 161, 162. The good gift of God to men in
the Church is Jesus Christ. p. 162. The Scriptures as a box of ointment are
full of Christ. p. 164. That this Author was a hearer of Mr Edwards. p. 165. A
vindication of some reproached by Mr Edwards. p. 166. The Author no Sectary. p.
166, 167. That the Religion of most is but traditional. p. 167. That there is
much form and little power of Religion in these days. 168 The Ministers that
are for persecution put to silence by an argument of their own. p. 169. Many
Citizens reprehended for changing their Common Counsel men. p. 170, 171. p.
172. Doctor Bastwick reprehended. p. 172. That old preachers are not always the
best. p. 174.. 6. That as Christ proceeds and comes forth from God, so does
a true Christian proceed and come forth from Jesus Christ. p. 175.. 7. Who the
silly women be that are lead captive. p. 177. Three characters by which to know
the false Prophets of this age. p. 178, 179.
CHAP. VII.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. page 180, 181.. 1. A word in season to
two sorts of Elders. p. 182. Bad Elders like unto a bad Nurse. p. ibid. He that
is an Elder in Jesus Christ is a good Elder. p. 183. The fleshly Elder fills
the ear but feeds not the heart. p. 184. 'Twere to be wished that the Elders had
the gift of discerning spirits. p. 185. Under what delusion the Papists are. p.
186.. 2. How the Protestants resemble the Papists. p. 186. That a Synod or
Council may err. p. 186, 187. How far Antichrist has crept in among us in
England. p. 188. How difficult it is to get right Cedars in a parish to build a
Church on. p. 190. The superstition of the common Protestant. p. 191. p. 192.
Why it is so hard a thing to get and keep a good preacher in a parish. p. 193.
How few men will stand when Christ appears. p. 194. Why all things are out of
course both in Church and State. p. 194.. 3. The fountain from whence the true
and the right Elders do proceed. p. 195. The fountain of Israel and the
welspring of learning is God himself in Christ. p. 196. That many men have, but
grossly abuse school Arts and humane learning. p. 197. The way to God few men
know. p. 198. Humane learning and School Arts grow in Natures gardens. p. 199..
5. Of right and good Elders. 200 How the hireling and the true shepherd differ.
p. 201, 202. What all things are without the Spirit. 204.
CHAP. VIII.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. p. 204, 205.. 1. A cordial Petition for
our sickly times. p. 208, 209. A vindication of those called by the foolish
name of Independents. 210. 3. 1. the Devil, 2. Judas, 3. the chief Priest, 4.
the Pharisee, 5. Cain, 6. Pilate, 7. the young man in the Gospel, 8. Dives or
the rich man, Luke 12.9. 9 Adam, 10. Eve. p. 211, 212, 213. How Christ's lodged
himself in David's heart. p. 214. How Christ is a crucifying in his members all
Europe over. p. 215. Upon whom the Independents have their dependency. p. 216..
4. Whence it is honest men are called Sectaries. p. 216, 217. Mr Nigh falsely
reputed a Jesuit by some. p. 218. A Rhyme to reproach the Independents taxed.
p. 219. The ten heads under which Mr Edwards ranks the Independents or
Sectaries. 219, 220.
R. B.

THE CONTENTS Of this BOOK, Being the second Part, Directing to the Chapters,
Sections, and Pages where they are spoken to.
. 5. THe love of God, and the blood of Jesus Christ, are a sovereign medicine
to take away sin past, present, and to come. p. 221. What alone is able to
quench the flames of hell in any man's soul. 222 The fit man that undertakes
with God for man. p. 223. How unjustly men are charged with the name of
Antinomian. p. 224. The person of Dr Crisp and several other men instanc't in.
224, 225, 226 A word of Mr Burgess at Lawrence Church. p. 225. The pretended
Law-defenders the greatest Law-breakers. p. 228.. 6. A word of Mr Calamy. p.
229. The filthy names on foot in these times the cause of much evil. p. 231.
That Christ is the rule of a Christian. p. 232. A sweet prayer to the Father,
Son, and holy Spirit, opening that mystery. p. 234. An excellent simile opening
the mystery of Christ. p. 235. Whence the Christians comfort does arise, even
from the anointing of the Father. p. 236.. 7. p. 237.. 8. Christ a spiritual
tree, rooted in God, of which the Saints are branches. p. 238. How Christ led
Philip, and every one that believes, through himself to the Father. p. 239.
That the Spirit of Christ is God. 240. That a Christian is not in Christ after
a carnal manner. p. 241. Why a Christian weeps (as Mary) by the ordinances, p.
242. An excellent advice to a troubled soul. p. ibid.. 9. A true preacher what
he is. ib. The Spirit of Christ the Saints resting place. p. 243. The Saints
life, what it is. ibid. That the Saints cannot live as they list. p. 244. That
they that believe work from, and not for life p. ibid. The Apology, they that
believe, make for themselves. p. 245. What is the pardon of sin. p. 246. The
condition of a man in trouble about the pardon of sin. p. 247. What is the
refreshing of a weary soul. p. ibid. David's Prayer Psa. 51. opened. 248. The
great business of assurance spoken to. p. 249. An objection touching general
Redemption and free will. p. 250. Where the Church is to be found. 251. What is
free will in man. p. 252. Who alone has free will. p. 253.
CHAP. IX.
THe Scriptures opened, set down. P. 255.. 1. By what a man is encouraged first
to come to God. p. 256, 257. Touching a particular assurance some objections
opened. p. 258.. 2. Christ the day in which every true Christian abides for
ever. 261.. 3. How Christ opens himself in the heart of a true believer. 262,
263. How Christ vindicates a Christian from the slander of men. p. 264.. 4.
Christ has done all for, and does all in the soul. p. 265. How God sees no sin
in his. p. 266. What was the better part of which Christ spoke. p. ibid. Of the
Cross of Christ in the heart of a Christian. p. 267. p. ibid. A defense of the
doctrine of free grace. p. 268. Who the most of men and women fall in with in
these times. p. 268.. 5. Whence it is that many learned men are mere fumblers in
speaking of free grace. p. 269. What Is the cloud that lies upon the doctrine of
free grace. p. 270.. 6. What is the banqueting house, into which a Christian is
brought. p. 271. How a Christian opens himself (in his longings) to Christ. p.
272. Of the work of the third person in the blessed Trinity. p. 273.. 7. p.
275. What is the appearance of God to sinners.. 8. To whom the appearance of
God is pleasant. p. 277. The multitudes mistake of God. 278. Whether sin came
into the world by accident. p. 279. That accidents are not against, but for
God. ibid. Not chance but providence does all. p. 280. Sect. 9. Of the author,
use, and end of the first Creation. p. 281. Sin is none of Gods Creation, but a
vail over it. p. 282. That Christ was slain by Adam and Eve. ibid. How Sin and
the Devil broke in upon man. ibid. How the whole Creation greans till Christ
appear. p. 283. What is the heaven of God. ibid. God permits of many things for
his own glory. p. 284.. 10. The Godhead is the womb out of which-every good and
perfect gift does proceed. p. 285. God sees no sin in the new Creature because
it is his seed. p. 286. p 287. Sect. 11. That there were, and yet are, false
Prophets many. p. 288. Want of humane learning is no let in revealing Christ. p
289. Why unlearned men that believe speak more truly of heaven then others. p.
290. What is the great sin of England. ibid. How our English Clergy are
divided. p. 291. Few of our learned men can speak experimentally of Father,
Son, and holy Spirit. p. 291, 292. Sect. 12. That God has made use of
illiterate men for the propagating of the truth in these times. 293. What are
the foolish things the world despise. 294. Sect. 13. What the Apostle Paul
would say if he were now living in England. 296. Whence Wars arise. 296, 297.
The child Jesus is the first wonder in heaven. 298.
CHAP. X.
THe Scriptures opened and applied set down. P. 299. Sect. 1. The womb in the
which the Children of God are conceived. 302. What a one a lame Minister is.
ibid.. 2. What are the breasts the New Creature is nourished by. 303. Christ's
tenderness a president to the Ministers of this age. That many call God,
Father, who hate his children. 305.. 3. How Christ is said to be both mother
and child. P. 305. That the holy child Jesus must be born in the heart of man.
ibid. How Christ is the ground and hope of a Christians glory. 306. How a
Christian comes to partake of of the divine nature. 307.. 4. How the Jews dealt
with Christ in his low estate. 307. Christ overcame the malice of the world
with love. 308, 309.. 5. How a man comes to look within the vail. 312. That a
Christian is Gospelized by Christ. 313. The heart of man is the pulpit in the
which the spirit of grace preaches. 314.. 6. That Christ is but one,
illustrated by a simile taken from the Sun. ibid. A true believing man is a
shining star and a royal diadem in the hand of Christ. 317.. 7. What is the
light of that world to come in the which the believer walks. 317. Christ is the
King of that City to which the Saints fly for rest. 318. Christ is the life of
the oppressed soul. 319. That a poor soul has the substance of faith within it
self. 320. Sect. 8. The soul is weak in faith, when it says, Christ is far
from it. 321. The soft hand of the Gospel moves the heart of a man to a godly
sorrow. 322 The rough hand of the law unskilfully handled hardens the heart of
men. 322, 323. What Cains enmity of Abel was a type of. 323. Sect. 9. The rough
handlers of the Law set forth by Esau. 324. What was Jacobs savory meat. ibid.
Many handle the law as the Pharisees, quite out of Christ. 325. 325. Paul's
conversion well opened. 325, 326 Sect. 10. The madness of those in the
Guildhal-yard taxed. 326. That the Law is planted by Christ in the heart of him
that believes. 327. The fruit of rigid Presbyterianism. 328. Sect. 11. A sad
complaint of a troubled soul. P. 330. Sect. 12. To which is a spiritual reply
for consolation. 332, 333.
CHAP. XI.
THe Scriptures insisted on, set down. P. 334. Sect. 1. Christ is the seed of
God, growing up through the earthiness of men's hearts. 337. How Christ, the
seed of God, lies hid in the earth of the first Adams heart. 336. Christ is the
day of God, in the which the loftiness of man is laid low. 337. That a
Christian in trouble is as a woman in travel till he bring forth Christ in the
knowledge of him in his heart, Rev. 12. 337. What is the grave-clothes many a
man is buried in. 338. Sect. 2. A word of consolation to one troubled every
day. ibid. What are those treasures that are hid in Christ for a Christian.
339. What it is for a Christian to look into the Ark of Gods strength. P. 339.
That a Christian in his trouble has an Angel from heaven to comfort him as
Christ had. 340. How God remembers the sin of his people no more. ibid. Why
chastisements from the Lord are upon the Christian. 341. Sect. 3. That God does
not punish a Christian for sin. ibid. Christ is as a privy Chamber for the soul
to retire into, to refresh it self. 342, 343. Trials are given and taken away
again according as God pleases. 344. Sect. 4. The commodities of Christ are
his graces, and they run forth freely to sinners. 344. Most men complement and
dissemble with Jesus Christ. 345. Who were the Citizens that hated Christ.
ibid. Of the trouble raised at Guildhal of late by some Citizens. 346. Sect. 5.
What kind of bargain Christ makes with a believing sinner. 347. A man that has
been in the Mount with Christ gives an excellent report of him. P. 347. Christ
the power of God is a Christians might. 348. Grace discovers sin. ibid. Those
that strike at a Christian, 349. S. 6. The greatest sinner Christ calls to
himself to do cure on him. 350. A whisper in the ear of the young men of the
City that made that ado at the Parliament door, Guidhal and elsewhere. 350, 351
That they did as Paul did whiles he was Saul. ibid. That Christ is calling and
alluring them to himself. 351. A word to the old men that had their hand in the
same thing. ibid. That good men may do bad actions. 352. The City Remonstrance
the cause of much evil. 353. A sweet saving word to these troubles of the Land.
354. That a man may be very zealous yet have neither faith nor love. 355. How
men are mistaken touching Church Fellowship. 355. A word to the plunderers of
Christians in these times. P. 355.. 8. A word to the sottish and ignorant
people of these times. 356. Nothing but the grace of Jesus Christ can heal the
Land. 356. That our Physicians (King, Parliament, and Army) have let the
Kingdom blood, but none but Christ can heal it. 357. What will do the King
good, and in him the Land. ibid. That the grace of God will do more then a
Covenant of our own making. 358. A word to the Parliament, that they as Solomon
give the living child to the right mother. ibid.. 9. It Is necessary that
something be done with speed for the settling of the people. 359. One right
Fasting day would set all right. ibid. Who are the obstructers of peace and
truth in the Land. ib. Upon what account the Author upbrayds the ignorant and
sottish Clergy for speaking lies. 360. Who has made merchandise of the
people. Page 361.. 10. As there were in times past, so there are now false
teachers among our chief rabbis many. ibid. What is the learning the most of
the Prelatical, many of the Presbyterian, and some of the Independent men lean
on. 362. Of the people devoted to the Common Prayer. ibid. A miserable thing to
be learned in the Letter only. 363 That Jesus Christ is now come in the Spirit.
364. That there is no other interpreter of the Scriptures but the holy Spirit.
364.
CHAP. XII.
THe Scriptures opened, set down. 365. 1. There be three sorts of Ministers.
Who preach for applause. 367. Of Ministers that cannot expound the Scriptures.
Page 368. The Scriptures are a box of precious ointment, but the most want a
key to open it. 369. 2. Who be the true Ministers of Jesus Christ. 370.
Imitating Ministers who they be. 371. How the people are deceived by their
pretended Ministers. 372. That the most Ministers feed themselves and not the
flock. 373. 3. A word to the Common Prayerbook Ministers. ibid. A Note
agreeable to these times. 374 Who they are to whom the Book of God is sealed.
375. Whence ignorance and enmity does arise. 376.. 4. Of the common sort of
hearers. ibid. Of the nature and mystery of prayer. 377. 378.. 5. Of the
Ministers that have the mystery of God manifest in them. 379. What alone will
be able to make the heart of the King willing to yield to the Parliament. 380.
What will do the Parliament good. 381. What is the glory of the King and
Parliament. 382 What alone is able to settle the three Kingdoms, England,
Ireland and Scotland. 382.. 6. A word to and of the Army. 383 The Christian
trusts God with his liberty. 384.. 7. The strife betwixt Martha and Mary well
opened and applied. 385, 386. The carnal Christian (as Martha and Mary) knows
Christ as after off, but the spiritual sees him nigh at hand. 388, 389. A note
of great concernment. 388.. 9. How the Almighty God vails himself, that he may
manifest himself to and in men. 390. Christ is the living Word of God. ibid.
How God humbles himself to do good to men. 391. Whether Christ suffered in his
divine nature, an excellent similitude to open it. 391. How God went in Christ
before the chief Priest and Pontius Pilate, yea into the grave with him. 392.
Sect. 10. The fellowship of Christ's sufferings sweetly opened. 393. How Christ
is crucified in man, and who have a hand in it. 394.
CHAP. XIII.
THe Scriptures spoken to, set down 395. Sect. 1. How many men are zealous for
God, and yet have Christ in contempt. 397. That many think they do God service
in killing those in whom Christ appears. 398. Sect. 2. That Christ has as many
enemies now as he had when he dyed at Golgotha. 399. When Christ is born in the
heart of men there is a Council called there against him. P. 400 Who be those
that sit in council in the heart of a man against Christ. 402. That every man
has a Judas in his heart to betray Christ. 403. Who it is that gives sentence
against Christ in the heart of man. ibid.. 4. How the Cross of Christ is in the
heart of man, and what is crucified thereon. 404, 405. The spiritual and first
Resurrection opened. 405. The virtue and power of Christ's Cross in the heart of
man. 406. How Christ takes the soul into the grave with him. ibid.. 5. What a
blessed thing it is to be conformable to Christ's death. 407. A word to him that
is arrived at the haven of life, which is God himself. 408. Here the Author
takes his leave of the Reader. 408.. 6. That the whole Church together are a
Temple for God and the Lamb to dwell in. ib. The true Christian enjoys God
every where. 409. Of the Gospelized man. ibid. Of the various appearances of
God to man. P. 410. Of carnal Ordinances which profit not without Christ. 411.
That neither the learned nor unlearned will have cause to jeer at these
expressions, because after this manner Antichrist is disthroned. 412. How God
is Father, Son, and holy Spirit, first and last. 410, 412.. 7. That the
Christians see Christ as the Angels do. 413. How the unity of the Spirit is
kept in the Church through the knowledge of God. 414 S. 8. How all good is from
God. 415 God will renew the heart, and make it as a chaste virgin, to bear Christ
in the Spirit, as well as the virgin Mary did bear Christ in the flesh. 415 God
comes down into every low condition to comfort a poor soul. 416 S. 9. A note of
great comfort to a poor soul. 417 Ecclesiastes the first and the seventh
sweetly applied. 418 The Authors Testimony concerning himself. P. 418. S. 10.
What the names of Error and Heresy is a vail unto. 419 Whence it is that many
feed on hay and stubble, in stead of Manna. 420 Whence Errors and false christ's
arise. 421. That Christ and his Ministry are still found together ib. That a
Minister not rooted in Christ shall be rooted up. 422.
CHAP. XIV.
THe Scriptures opened, set down. 423. Christ is the best thing in the worst
times. ib. What it is neither King or Parliament, Army, Synod or City can
neither give nor take away. 424. The vanity of men's strivings in these times
about matters external and circumstantial in Religion. 425. Presbyterians and
Independents like unto the four beasts, Revel. 4.6, 7, 8. ib. Two sorts of
Presbyterians: The first like a Lion: The second like a Calf. 426. Two sorts of
Independents: the one like a man, the other like an Eagle 426. The Lion-like,
the Calf-like, and he that had the face like a man, are offended at the
Eagle-like Christian. ib. The strife betwixt Presbyters, Independents and
Prelatical men. 428. How they have not all the same food 429 Who they are that
feed on Angels food. ib. What gives fullness of comfort when a man lies on his
deathbed. 431. How all relations fail, but that of a man to God in Christ. ib.
That a flood of the grace of our Lord Jesus running into the hearts of King and
Parliament will only heal the Land. 432.. 4. The blessing of a right Magistracy.
433 Sect. 5. What moved the Author to undertake this work. 434. Boaz field in
the which the Author as Ruth gleaned. 435. Sect. 6. Of what sort of readers
it is the Author looks for acceptance. 436. Of the sweet refreshing the Author
had in writing this book. ibid. That the writing of this book cost the Author
no labor or study. 437. The Author gives the glory of all to God. 438. How God
dealt with the Author as Boaz dealt with Ruth. 438. That God opens the mouth of
the soul and fills it, as the mother deals with her child. The Conclusion of
all is Christ the fullness of all
ERRATA.
Page 66. read, sold their pot to pay their tithes. P. 138. l. 5. r. thy. P.
156. l. 10. supply not. P. 182. l. 12. r. margent of the Bible. P. 303. l. 5.
supply have. P. 328. l. 20. supply put. P. 329. l. 1. r. unto. P. 374. l. 27.
r. as.

Possibly some other faults and false pointings have escaped, which the Reader
is desired to correct as he shall find them.

FINIS.

