THE Unequal Unyoked AND The Equal Yoked, AND Light separated from Darkness,
and Darkness and Blindness joined together.

In Answer to a Paper that would join together Truth and Untruth, the true
Worship and the false.

And here it is discovered, and the Author thereof in part rewarded, by joining
him justly to those he unjustly joined others to.

By a Lover of Justice and Equity, and Hater of the Contrary, PETER PRICE.

Her Priests have violated my Law, and have profaned my holy things; and have
put no difference between the Holy and the Profane; neither have they showed
difference between the Unclean and the Clean, and have hid their Eyes from my
Sabbaths, and I am profaned among them, Ezekiel. 22.26. And as Troops of Robbers
wait for a Man, so the Company of Priests Murder in the way by consent, for
they commit Lewdness, Hosea 6.9. London, Printed and Sold by Andrew Soul at
the Crooked-Billet in Holloway-Lane in Shoreditch, 1683.

The Unequal unyoked and the Equal yoked, etc.
THere came a Paper to my hands, from a Bishop, as I am credibly informed, and
I have strong Reasons to believe that it came from his hand, or some of his
Priestly Generation. 1st, Because the Comparisons came not from the Spirit of
God, but from a Darknist, who is ignorant of the Truth of God, that did not see
the difference between us and his Father, the Pope: 2dly, It is plainly seen,
that it came from a malicious Heart, that would have a suffering peaceable
People still to suffer, and so does join with the Oppressors to oppress the
Oppressed; and thus he says;

That any man may see and discover how near Quakers and Papists are in Opinion,
let them read these following Comparisons of the one to the other.

1. Quakers claim the Spirit to Infallibility, so does Pope and Papists.

Answ. The Spirit of God is Infallible, which we do own and possess; and
would thou have us to deny the Spirit of God to be what we know it to be,
because Papists, as thou say, do own it so to be! It is clearly seen that
thou art a stranger to the Spirit of God, who would have it to be fallible;
and not only so, but also any Enemy to it, that would undervalue the
unchangeable and infallible Spirit of God. Now if any man have not the Spirit
of Christ, he is none of his, Romans 4.9. and verse. 11. He that raised up Christ
from the dead, shall also quicken your mortal Bodies, by his Spirit that
dwells in you; and verse. 15. But ye have received the Spirit of Adoption. The
People of God in all Ages had (and now have) the Spirit of God to be their
Teacher, Counselor and Instructor in all things, and it is given to every man
to profit withal; and if we cannot claim title to the Spirit of Infallibility,
what benefit may we expect from that which is given to fail, to change or to
alter? But the fallible deceiveable Spirit does enquire after large Livings,
great Wages, and most Hire, Benefit and worldly Riches to enjoy; and this is an
earthly, worldly, selfish, greedy, covetous Spirit, which ever was (and now is)
against the Spirit of God, and all those that were (and are) led by it. This is
the Wolfs devouring Spirit that casts to Prison, and devoureth the goods of
them that cannot feed it: Behold the Devil shall cast some of you into Prison,
Rev. 2.10.

2 Quakers make themselves the sole Church, so Papists.

Answ. Here we are falsely accused; for we do not make our selves the sole
Church; for what we are is of the Lord, and not of our selves, and he has made
us Members of his Church, and the Lord added to the Church daily such as should
be saved, Acts 2.47. The Church is the Body of Christ, Col. 1.24. And we could
not make our selves the Body of Christ, the Body must be like the Head; for by
him they are redeemed out of the Sins, which the World does live in; for they,
by Christ their Head, are washed, cleansed, purified, fitted and prepared for
himself to dwell therein. These, and such as these, are the Church of God.

3. Quakers hold no Salvation, but in their Meetings, so do Papists but in
their Communion.

Answ. Here we are again falsely accused, for we hold Salvation no where else
but only in and through Jesus Christ, the Son of the living everlasting God.

4. Quakers are Recusants, so Papists.

Answ. How now, Bishop and Priest! (I speak to them only that are guilty) would
you now make us Recusants because we cannot seed your greedy Bellies, nor
maintain you in your Pride and Covetousness? we dare not feed that which Christ
came to destroy, the which would destroy Christ in his Members.

5. Quakers deny Bishops to be jure divino, so Papists, witness the Council of
Trent.

Answ. We do deny you to be what you are not, and we do own you to be what you
are; for we wrestle not against Flesh and Blood, but against Princi^^lities,
against Powers, against the Rulers of the Darkness of this World, against
spiritual Wickedness in high places (as they did) Ephesians. 6.12. Your jure divino
is your spiritual Wickness in high places. Come down exalted boasted
Selfishness; the everlasting Bishop we own, and those that are called and
chosen by him, are also by him made divine, and it is his right to oversee the
Soul; but you that covet after filthy Lucre we deny.

6 Quakers are of rebellious Tenets, so Papists.

Answ. Let all People that are not defiled with Tithes, judge who are most
quarrelsom, troublesome, burdensome, and whose Tenets are most Rebellious against
all appearance of Godliness, and who are bad Examples, you or us? As the high
Priests did stir the Magistrates and People against Christ Jesus and his
followers, persuading the People, that he did those mighty Works which he did
through Beelzebub, and that his Followers were movers of Sedition, and turners
of the World up-side down. So likewise this man, who is one in Enmity and
Malice, with his Predecessors (the Highpriests) has falsely belyed us,
expecting thereby to stir Persecution against us; so his envious Spirit is seen
and judged.

7. Quakers, as they piece up the Word of God by wild Fancies, pretended
Revelations, so Papists by Traditions.

Answ. The Word of God thou know not, which cannot be pieced, broken,
changed or altered; thou do botter know how to compel the People to maintain
thee (whilst thou have the Magistraies on thy side) than to speak of things
that are too high for the Nature thou art in; but the Natural man parceiveth
not the things of the Spirit of God, for they are foolishness unto him; neither
can he know them, for they are spiritually discerned, 1 Cor. 2.14.

8. Quakers are against Common Prayer, so Papists.

Answ. Thou who art sensual, it is, that need the Common Prayer, who have
not the Spirit of God to pray by, which the holy men of God had to teach them
to pray, and to declare the things revealed to them by the Spirit of God.

9. Quakers for nothing in the Bible but what serves their turns, so Papists
for Latin, which the Vulgar cannot understand.

Answ. We are for what the Scriptures are for (and it does all serve our turn)
and against what the Scriptures are against; they are against Hirelings that
run for their Wages, and against all manner of Ungodliness, and so are We; yet
all does make for us, (which came from the Spirit of Truth) and against you,
from the beginning of Genesis to the end of the Revelations; therefore we
cannot mislike any part of the Scriptures of Truth; for they were declared by
the Spirit, which is our Teacher.

10. Quakers, they alone Godly, so Papists, Holiness of Life being one of the
Marks of their Church.

Answ. It seems, by these thy Comparisons, that thou do disallow of
Godliness, and that the Marks of thy Church is Wickedness; and it is true, for
what manner of Wickedness, that can be thought of, but is committed among you,
who call your selves the Church of England, the miserable Sinners, without
Health in you? witness your general Confession.

11. Quakers will be judged by no man, so Papists.

Answ. The Worldly, Earthly, Natural, Selfish-minded man is not to judge any;
but he that is spiritual judges all things, yet he himself is judged of no
man, 1 Cor. 2.15.

12. Quakers have been of our Liturgy, so Papists.

Answ. It is true, we have been too long in the ungodly Life, (where still you
are) and then you did love us, but since we came out of that Life to lead a
godly Life, and to testify against that Life (which we did, and which you do,
to this day live in) then did you hate us, persecute us, and speak Evil of us;
read Ephesians. 2. v. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5. and there it may be seen what we were, and
what we are, according to the operation of the same Grace.

13. Quakers would have no Secular Power for Clergy, so Papists.

Answ. Poor man! thou having not the Wisdom and Power which is of God, art in
the Wisdom which is foolishness with God; read 1 Cor. 1. from verse. 17. to the
end, and thou shall or may see what your Wisdom, Power and Glory is, and what
it will be made of. In the 5th Comparison thou would be jure divino, and here
secular Power; it seems, the Honor that has an end, and the corrupt Riches,
your hearts are fixed upon, and the more you have, the more you desire to have;
so that nothing can satisfy your greedy Hearts, like your greedy unholy
Father, the Pope, who would have all Power to himself.

14. Quakers will propagate Religion by the Sword, when able; so Antichrist and
Mahumet.

Answ. Here thou have not yoked us with Pope and Papists, but with Antichrist
and Mahumet; it seems thou have better thoughts of Papists, than that they will
fight for their Religion, or else thou would have put them in with us in
this, as well as ^n all the rest of thy false Accusations: In this thy cruel
Envy and bitter Malice toward us, more than any other People, is made
manifest, and in thee this Scripture fulfilled, but as then, he that was born
after the Flesh, persecuted him that was born after the Spirit, even so it is
now, Gal. 4.29. The Enmity is against the Seed begotten of God, and in time he
will clear the Innocence of his suffering peaceable People: If we had relied or
had any thoughts of purting our Trust in outward Weapons, or in the strength of
man, we had been by men destroyed before now; but the living Lord God, the King
of all Kings, the Judge of all Judges, the Bishop of our Souls, he is on our
side, he is our only Strength, Keeper, Preserver and Redeemer, our Teacher,
Counselor and Instructor; he does lead us, and we are the Lamb's Followers,
and he does own us to be his People, and the Sheep of his Pasture; so that we
fear not what the uncircumcised in heart and ears can do to us; for before our
Father, who has begotten us from amongst you, must you all stand and appear,
and he will judge you according to what you do against his Children, except in
time you will Repent.

15. Quakers pretend Miracles, else why do they decry human means of Learning?
so Papists.

Answ. Miracles done by Christ were not believed by an envious persecuting
Generation, even so it is now; and we are for Learning, and do keep our
Children at Schools, but we are against all that make bad use of their
Learning, and by it come to be burdensome to others, and make themselves more
like Lucifer than if they had been without it: We are not against any good
thing, but against making a bad use of any thing that is good.

16. Quakers they are Martyrs, when punished for Faction, Sedition and
Separation; so Papists, punished for Treason.

Answ. Here again we are falsely accused, for Faction and Sedition we deny, and
it could not be proved against us, neither were we punished for it, neither can
any of you truly make it appear, that we are Factious or Seditious; but as to
the word [Separation] I confess that we are separated from your ungodly Lives,
unprofitable Ceremonies and unfruitful Meetings, and have our Meetings and
Worship in the Spirit and living Truth of God, and in this we do rejoice, and
to this I would have you all to come, that with us you may partake of the
spiritual Virtue that we enjoy, and is not known but to the Birth begotten of
God, which only has right to call God Father, and is hidden from that Nature
that ravens for Hire and Wages, and not to gain Souls to Christ.

Here thy Comparisons are answered, and thy foolish Malice made manifest, and
that which thou would cast upon us, (undeserved) returned to thee and them,
according to your Deserts, as follows;

1. Bishop and Priest having not the Infallible Spirit of God, (at some of them
confess) do gather and come together by sound of Bells, so Pope and Papists.

2. Bishop and Priest do feed the People with what men command them, so Papists.

3. Bishop and Priest do cast a little Water on Childrens heads and the sign of
the Cross, to make them Christians, so Papists.

4. Bishop and Priest are set at work by men, and receive their Wages from men,
so Papists.

5. Bishop and Priest have Crosses on the Houses where they worship, so Pope
and Papists.

6. Bishop and Priest do compel the People to maintain them, so Pope and
Papists.

7. Bishop and Priest do exalt humane Learning above its place, so Pope and
Papists.

8. Bishop and Priest do wear their several sorts of Caps, and other sorts of
vain useless Garments, according to what Title they give themselves; so Pope
and Papists.

9. Bishop and Priest would punish all that will not join with them in their
Worship, so Pope and Papists.

10. Bishop and Priest are such Persecutors of others, that they cannot be
equally yoked without Pope and Papists.

11. Bishop and Priest having not the Sword of the Spirit, which is the Word of
God, cannot subsist without Law in their own Courts, carnal Weapons, or help of
Magistrates; so Pope and Papists.

12. Bishop and Priest cannot live by the Gospel, which they have not, but by
the Tithes, which they will have, while they can; so Pope ane Papists.

13. Bishop and Priest count all Faction, Sedition, Heresy and Separation,
that separate from them, and cannot feed their Lusts and Pride, so Pope and
Papists, that will not join with them in their Mass. Bishop and Priest, in what
do you differ from the Pope and his Deputies? Had it not been a shorter work to
show in what you do differ, than in what you are one with them? Wherein does
your Worship and Discipline differ from the Pope and Papists?

14. Bishop and Priest, you may be joined with Pope and Papists in your
Bowings, Bendings, Stoopings and vain Gestures and Postures, Forms, Traditions,
Customs, Fashions and Ceremonies, which do not at all concern the Worship of
God, which is to be in the Spirit and in Truth, and not in the aforesaid vain
things, or the like.

15. Bishops, we are not against the Name; for such a Bishop as is allowed by
the Scriptures of Truth, we allow of, read 1 Timothy 3. but such you are not, but
Persecutors of the Life and Godly Condition that they did live in, and you and
your Families are more like proud Morriee-dancers, than modest civil orderly
Christians: And seeing you and your Followers in a sad desperate Condition, I
cannot choose but in love acquaint you with it, and declare against it, that you
may be left without excuse, and keep my Conscience clear toward God and you.
And what I say in this case to you, I say to all that are in your Condition,
Repent, Repent, Repent in time, before it be too late, and the Door of Mercy
shut, and you kept out with the wicked World, which go the broad Way and wide
Gate that leads to destruction, where many do go; for the narrow Way and strait
Gate that leads to Salvation, where the little Flock has and does strive to
enter in, you do not love, but speak evil of; for Covetousness, Pride, Malice
and Selfishness cannot enter in there: These and the like are the burdens which
hinder, and must be cast away, or else no entering in for such; so Pope and
Papists.

16. Oh! how my Heart does pity the People which by you Bishops and Priests are
deceived; of such there was a Complaint, and of you there is a Complaint, 2
Cor. 4.3, 4. But if our Gospel be hid, it is hid in them that are lost, in whom
the god of this World has blinded the Minds of them which believe not, lest
the Light of the glorious Gospel of Christ, who is the Image of God, should
shine unto them. The Gospel, which is hid, is the Power of God, and the God of
the World that does hide it, is the Devil, and the means that the Devil has to
hide the Gospel, and to blind the Mind, is Sin; Your Sins have separated you
from God, and your Sins do ^cause him to hide his face from you, and your Sins
hinder good things to come unto you; and he that commits sin is of the
Devil; and we know that we are of God, and the whole World lies in Wickedness,
John 5.19. And the holy men of God in all Ages did declare and cry against the
Sins which you now live in; and they that can truly witness a godly Life now,
do deny you, and cry against you: And as the Godly by the Ungodly formerly did
suffer, even so it is now; so one with Pope and Papists in Persecution.

17. Bishop and Priest have Organs and Singing-Boys in their Worship, so Pope
and Papists.

18. Bishop and Priest do take to themselves what belongs to God, to judge of
Conscience in matter of Religion; so Pope and Papists.

19. Bishop and Priest are for Churching of Women, so Pope and Papists.

20. Bishop and Priest do idolize the Parish-house, where they meet to Worship,
and call it a Church, and hold it to be a more holy Ground and virtuous Place
than other Ground and Places, witness what a vain Meeting, Preaching, Blowing
and Praying there was (the Service cannot be acceptable, where the end is not
right) to consecrate and sanctify the new builded Church (as they call it) at
Glaisbury in Radnorshire, by William Lucy, Bishop of St David's (so called) and
his Hireling Priests (as it is generally reported) there was so much Idolatrous
Practice, Ceremonies and unprofitable Worship there then, as if it had been by
the Pope in Rome; for their old Church being on the Sandy Foundation, was
undermined by the River Wey, which has made a separation between the Priest
and his Church, so that he nor his Parishioners cannot go to their Church, nor
their dead Church to them; but the Gates of Hell, the Devil and all his Power
cannot prevail against the true Living Church in God; but the River Wey is too
strong for the old House, falsely called a Church. The true Church from the
false you may know, if you read and believe the Scriptures, Mat. 16.18. and
18.17. Acts 2.47. and 20.28. Ephesians. 5.24, 25. Col. 1.24. 1 Timothy 3.15. compare
what Christ and his Apostles did declare the Church to be, and what the Priests
do call a Church, and you shall or may see great disserence; and the cause of
my Writing is, that you may come to be Members of the true Church, where Christ
is the Head.

21. Bishop and Priest do pretend to keep Holy days in remembrance of some
holy men that are dead these many hundred years ago; so Pope and Papists; for
by the Pope they were set up.

22. Bishop and Priest, many of your Forms, Customs and Traditions are contrary
to the Scriptures of Truth; so Pope and Papists.

23. Bishop and Priest do compel the Country in their Parishes to buy and keep
them sine Linen Cloth, as much as will make them a Garment to cover their
black Clothes (but it will not cover their black ugly Sins) and they call it by
the Name of a Surplice, that they wear during their common Service, and burying
their dead, and Churching their Women (as they call it) Oh, the blindness of
Popery!

24. Priests in our Country do go from house to house to Church Women, with
their Sexton to carry their Book and Surplice, and to say Amen, and they will
have Money for so doing; so (by report) do the Papists, their pretended holy
Water.

25. Bishop and Priest do keep Courts to punish Offenders, and when they do
appear, they must contract for a Sum of Money, and it must be such a sum, that
every Member, according to what he paid for his place, must have such a Sum
that he may live by it, and then the Offender shall have forgiveness of his
Sins, and pardon under Hand and Seal: Lest I should mistake, and the Papists
not be so bad as you in this thing, I shall not compare them with you.

26. Bishop and Priest, you and your Courts have been more troublesome and
burdensome to some of us, the People, than all other Courts and Taxes that we
have paid since your heavy Yoke and cruel Bondage came upon us, which makes us
to feel the weight and burden of it in our Estates, and in our Consciences.

27. Pope and Bishop, Papist and Priest, you are here (and may be more at large
so) yoked together, that you cannot be separated while you continue in your
Will Worship, and compelling Fellowship, and carnal Ordinances, and dry empty
Forms, and forcing People to join with you whether they will or no, and your
cruel Dealings with those that cannot for Conscience sake join with you in your
Self-Worships, which do not profit Soul nor Body. I say, while you do use the
same means, and live in the same Condition as Pope and Papists do, what
difference is between you and them? And who will join in Worship with such a
cruel merciless self-ended People, as many of you are, except it be some in a
slavish Condition, out of fear, or some that make gain from your unchristian
Wages, or some other by-ends, as it appears, and as we find by the fruit of
your corrupt Trees, which you have been all this while planting and dressing,
and while they do feed you, you are at peace with them, be they never so bad
and wicked; for if you will tell them of one fault, they can tell you of
another, if not of two; so like Priest, like People, as the Scripture does
declare; if you should deny this, will not your Parishioners confess it? Christ
said, When thou are converted, then strengthen thy Brethren. From what is evil,
and to what is good are you converted? except it be from a small Means and
Wages to a greater, which is no Conversion, but Promotion: While you live in
Covetousness, you cannot do the People any good; a good Tree cannot bring forth
evil Fruit, neither can a corrupt Tree bring forth good Fruit, Mat. 7.18. and
in verse. 15. Beware of false Prophets, which come to you in Sheeps Clothing,
but inwardly they are ravening Wolves. V. 16. Ye shall know them by their
fruits, do men gather Grapes of Thorns, or Figs of Thistles? Here you are
plainly seen and known to be the false Prophets; your Fruit does make you
manifest to every honest single-hearted man. And are not many of you as cruel
as Woles, and your good fruits a^ hard to be had as Grapes of Thorns, or Figs
of Thistles. And is there any in the Nations like you, or to be compared to you
i^ Cruelty and Oppression? And (...) not they blind, and want true
Understanding, that cannot see, that you have the Marks that the false Prophets
in all Ages had? witness the Scripture, from the beginning to the end, where it
speaks of false Prophets You cannot hide your selves in this the day of the
Lords Power, made manifest in and to his People; for this is the day that the
Lord God makes up his jewels, and does separate his People from amongst you the
Goats, Wolves, Thorns and Thistles, and we are his People, and the Sheep of his
Pasture; and we know his living voice, and the dead voices of you, who to him
are strangers, we will not hear nor follow; for you cannot ^ead us but where
you are, in the dark Kingdom of this World, but the Lord, who is our living
Shepherd, he has and does lead us to his Kingdom, which is not of this World,
as Christ said; and in his Kingdom he does feed his little flock, and there by
him they are refreshed, nourished and preserved out of your cruel hands and
corrupt food that is to perish, and cannot feed nor serve your turn in time of
need: And our food, our rest, peace, joy, comfort, happiness, fellowship and
well-beeing is a hidden Mystery to you Priests; if not, you would not seek us
to come to you back again, where you have been too long already, and are
resolved in the Name of our God never to come back; Go not to them, but let
them come to you, says the Scriptures. Is there any reason that we should pay
you wages while you do us no service, and we deny you and your Service? yet
notwithstanding you would reap where you do not sow, and have the wages where
another does the work, and feed your greedy Bellies upon other men's Rights and
Labors; and you make many poor in making your selves rich; and many do go bare
and fare hard to maintain your pride and fullness. And thus you persecute Gods
heritage, and are the greatest Oppressors and Vexers of the People as any this
day in this Kingdom: And if he that had not the Wedding Garment was cast into
utter Darkness, where is wailing and gnashing of Teeth, what will become of you
that are clothed with the Garment of unrighteous Gains? If he that was among
the People of God, and for them, and as to outward appearance, one of them, was
thus dealt with, what will become of you that are against them and their
Meetings, and hinder them, and break their Meetings? And if Christ did say to
them that in his Members did not visit him in Prison, Depart from me, ye
cursed, into everlasting Fire, prepared for the Devil and his Angels, what will
he say to you that do cast him, in his Members, into Prison? seeing that Christ
said so to them that were too short in their Duty toward his People, what will
he say to you that are cruel and spiteful toward his People? read Mat 25.32.
to the end, and you may see the reward of both the godly and ungodly, the
portion of the faithful and unfaithful. And if the five foolish Virgins came
too short, the door shut, and they kept out that were in company and profession
with the wise Virgins, what will become of you that do not only hate the
company and profession of the godly, but also set your selves to strive against
them, that they may not trim their Lamps and prepare themselves to make read to
enter in with the Bridegroom: And plainly this is your work, to hind the
little slock to meet and follow the Lamb their leader. And if the Righteous
scarcely be saved, where shall the ungodly and sinners appear? I Pet 4.18. If
those whom God has separated from the ungodly world, and united them to
himself, to witness for him, and against the Sim of the World, if they have
nothing to spart, but scarcely be saved, Oh! where shall they appear that live
in sin, and plead for sin, and say, they must sin whilst they live in the
earthly body. No thanks to cease when you can sin no longer in the body. If you
must live in Sin whilst you are on thi^ side the Grave, when will you live in
Righteousness, seeing the Scripture says, Know ye not, that to whom ye yield
your selves Servants to obey, his Servants you are, to whom ye obey, whether of
sin unto death, or of Obedience unto Righteousness? Romans 6.16. For the wages of
sin is death, v. 23. They that serve sin, or live in it, are Servants to the
Devil, and cannot serve two Masters. And is not the Lord God, that made the
Heavens and Earth and all things therein, stronger than the Devil to lead out
of sin? for as God will not lead to sin, so the Devil will not lead to any
thing that is really good; and many People are led by the Devil, and not by God
who made them. And if they live and you dwell in sin, what good do you to the
People for your hire and wages? They could live in sin, and keep that to
maintain themselves that does maintain you; and are not you the unprofitable
Servants, while you and your followers do live in Sin? And are not you to
receive your wages with the unprofitable Servants that did live in sin as you
do? Was it not sin that did separate from God, and lead into the fall, and does
separate from God? And is it unpossible to remove that which did separate from
God? And must People still remain in the fall, and from God? And while you live
in that which keeps from God in the fall, how can you come out of the fall to
God again? And can you obtain forgiveness of sin, while you live in sin? And
must not sin be forsaken? They that forsake their sin shall have mercy, says
the Scripture; bet do not you say to the People, They have mercy, though they
live in sin? A false Doctrine, which proceeds from a dark unclean Spirit, and
not from the Spirit of God.

Bishop and Priest, how can you but deny Perfection in this life, while you
deny the effects of Christ's coming (which does perfect his work in his People)
and are not his works to be done within, where the Serpents head is to be
bruised? And can his head be bruised without Christ, the only means ordained of
God to do it? and so his work in you is not yet done, but his Enemies work in
you does yet stand, which is sin and uncleanness, and this makes you to oppose
the work of Christ, which is, (...) bind the strong man, and to cast him out of
possession, and to lay the Ax to the Root of the unfruitful Tree (which by God
was never planted) and the Serpent and his seed, and all that does belong to
him turned out, root and branch, and all that belongs to the Enemy of God, by
Christ, the higher Power, destroyed. And then the Image of God wrought, and the
fruit of the Spirit known and witnessed; as it is written, And such were some
of you but ye are washed, but ye are sanctified, but ye are justified in the
Name of the Lord Jesus; and by the Spirit of our God, 1 Cor. 6.11. And they
said, Christ in us the hope of Glory; and know you not your own selves, how
that Jesus Christ is in you, except you be Reprobates? 2 Cor. 13.5. Thus Jesus
Christ has and does do his works in his People, whilst unbelievers do talk of
his coming, and sin in them still remaining, which is the work of the Devil.

Bishop and Priest, Christ says, Learn of me, and you say, learn of us, and
them that do not, are prosecuted in your Courts, and cast into Goal, and goods
taken from them. And Christ said, Feed my Lambs, Joh. 21.15. Feed ye the Church
of God, Acts 20.28. Feed ye the flock of God, 1 Pet. 5.2. Mind what Christ
says, Feed my Lambs, my Church, my flock. And in effect you say, We will make
you all feed us, or else we will have a suit in Law against you, and recover
trible damage, and drive away your cattle or goods, or cast your Bodies to
Prison until you pay us. This we believe you will do, and you have done
already: The People of God that had the largest measure of the Spirit of God,
and of the Virtue, Wisdom and Knowledge of God, were Servants to the rest, and
good Examples, and did exceed others in meekness, mildness, lowliness, and all
manner of humility, according to the largeness of that of God, which they had
received. And you, according to what of men you have received, are by them
preferred and entitled, Lords, Bishops, Masters, Priests. So herein one with
Pope and Papists, and also one with the Heathen, exercising Lordship over the
People (contrary to Christ and his Disciples, who were all Brethren, and he
their only Master, Mat 23.) and so bear sway and rule over the People, and
compel them as Servants to you, or more like slaves than servants; for Servants
may change their Masters, if they do not like them, but the People cannot
change you, be you never so cruel and bad although they do complain, and deny
you and your stolen ware out o^ other men's works, and not from the Spirit of
God. Is it not a slavis^ condition to compel a People to what they know will
not serve their turn, and to make them pay for that, although they do refuse it?
If it we^^ upon the account of worldly things, it would be the better boren;
b^^ it does concern our Souls Health and Salvation, and everlasting Happine^^
and Well-beeing, world without end. And the Lord God whom we obe^ can deliver
us out of our merciless hands; but if we should obey yo^ you cannot deliver us
out of the just hand of God; therefore we little matter what you can or will
do, while we keep our Consciences void of offense toward God and men. You are
easily to be known; your rising up has brought many down; You are black
without and dark within; your making thick has made many thin; those that do
feed you, you cry peace to, and those that do refuse to follow you, are your
Adversaries, be they never so good; so that we do plainly see, that you did not
come for our good, but for our goods; not to feed the flock, but that the flock
may feed you, as it is written, Woe to the Shepherds of Israel that do feed
themselves: should not the Shepherd feed the flock? ye eat the fat, and ye
clothe you with the Wool; ye kill them that are fed, but you feed not the
flock, Ezekiel. 34.23. Here you may see, that you do the same works as the false
Shepherds did before you, and we declare against you, as the godly did against
them; ye kill them that are feed, (mind that) do not you seek to destroy that
which is led by the Lord, and by him begotten, which is the New Birth, wherein
dwells Righteousness; with it does all things become new; therefore if any
man be in Christ, he is a New Creature, old things are past away, behold, all
things are become new, 2 Cor. 5.17. Is there any thing in you become new? or is
the corrupt Birth still alive, from which nothing that is good can proceed, and
so you cannot witness your selves to be new Creatures in Christ, but in self
and selfishness, and seek your selves more than Christ, and the good of the
People: You run for (and after) the things of this World, and the Kingdom of
God you cannot see, who do not witness the New Birth, as Christ said, Except a
man be born again, he cannot see the Kingdom of God, Joh. 3.3. God said of your
Fathers, who did as you do ( viz. run and were not sent) I have not sent these
Prophets, yet they run; I have not spoken to them, yet they prophecy, Jer. 23.
People, let him that wishes you well, desire you to read over this chapter in
the fear of God, and consider of it, and lay it to heart, and you may plainly
see, that those were the Fathers of the false Prophets now; and it may be now
said to these, as it was then said to those in this chapter, and elsewhere. I
say, let them be compared in the old and new Testament with the false Prophets
and Hirelings then, and you may see these (where they were, doing what they
did) sowing Chaff instead of Wheat, and telling a Dream instead of preaching
the living Vord of God, that was with God in the beginning, John 1. And this
living Word came to the Prophets of the Lord, saying; and what the Word ^f God
said and made known to them, that was written in the Scriptures ^y several of
the Prophets; and John did witness the same living Word, which Word was Christ;
and he was clothed with a vesture dipped in Blood, and his Name is called the
Word of God, Rev. 19.13. and those whom God did send, did direct the People to
the same Word of God, and said, The Word is nigh thee, even in thy heart and in
thy mouth; that is the Word of Faith which we preach, Romans 10.8. Not only what
Paul did preach, for he said what we preach. And they did direct where the
People might find the Word in the Mouth and in the Heart; all that do not
direct the People to this living Word, have but a dream to tell them, Jer.
23.28. Mind what a dream is: A man may think to be where he is not, and to do
what he does not, and to see what he does not see; just so are all these
Dreamers, who do not direct the People to Christ, and where to sind them. But
if ever these Dreamers will awake out of sin and unrighteousness, they will
come to see, that all that which they have done is but as a Dream, and not
Truth; and as there was in former Ages false Prophets, as well as true Prophets
of the Lord, even so it is now. And the Lord God formerly made use of the
meanest sort (in the account of the World) to confound the wise, so now, as it
is written, For ye see your calling, Brethren, how that not many wise men after
the flesh, not many mighty, not many noble are called; but God has chosen the
foolish things of the World to confound the things that are mighty, and base
things of the World, and things that that are despised, has God chosen; yea,
and things that are not, to bring to naught things that are, 1 Cor. 1.26, 27,
28. As it was then, even so it is now, and the worldly Wisdom and its learning,
and all that it can do, is too short to bring man into Rest and Peace with God;
it is not the learning bought for Money, but the free learning of Christ, that
does give People the saving knowledge; therefore in vain is it for you to
strive in your own strength, wisdom and its learning; come to Christ, that you
may see that you are poor, that you may receive the Gospel, and that the Eye
which the god of the World has blinded may be opened, and you out of the
Devils Prison may be set at liberty, to serve the living God: And this will he
better for you, than to think you are what you are not, and deceive your selves
and others; and better than to obtain high Places and large Riches in the
world, which are uncertain, if lawfully obtained.

Bishop and Priest, this is not a time for you to think to hide your selves,
for the Lord God does raise his witness in his People, and he does open their
understandings, and they come to see what they did not see, and to love that
which is good, and to hate the evil and declare against it, as faithful
Witnesses for our God: And most of the People do now see your ungodly,
covetous, selfish Lives and Practices, and how little good service you have
done in the Country, and how troublesome and burdensome you have been, and how
you have exalted your selves in Pride above measure; your Coaches, Horses and
vain Attendance do witness it: The People will come more and more to see you,
as their Understandings will be opened, and they enlarged in the knowledge of
God. And now there are many out of fear (of your High Places, Threatenings and
Courts) that do heat and follow you, more than out of love to any good they
receive from you: And as People do come into the true fear of God, the slavish
fear will wear off from them, and you they will not follow; for Pride and
Self-exaltedness will have a fall, and great will the fall of it be: And this
is our Joy, that the Lord will reign, whose right it is, who is worthy to be
exalted, honored, magnified, glorified, praised, and forever obeyed. He, the
Lamb of God will have the Victory, and it is in vain for you to strive against
him who gave you Breath, and can take it from you when he will; Stand in awe,
and sin not, and strive not against Christ in his Temple, in his People, as the
Scripture says, Know ye not, that ye are the Temples of God, and that the
Spirit of God dwells in you? 1 Cor. 3.16. He that defiles the Temple of God,
him shall God destroy; for the Temple of God is holy, which Temple ye are, v.
27. What! know you not that your Bodies are the Temples of the holy Ghost, chapter
6.19. Ye are the Temples of the living God, as God has said, 2 Cor. 6.16. You
know not what you do in hating those People whom God loves, and dwells in.
You strive to draw from God those that strive to draw you to God. You seek to
destroy those that seek to save you from destruction. You would draw us from
good to the evil, and we would draw you from the evil to the good. You would
draw us from the Teachings of the Grace of God, to be taught by you (...) and
we would draw you to the teachings of the Spirit, that makes ali^^ to God. You
would draw us from a heavenly Condition to the earthly, where you are; and we
would draw you from the earthly to the heavenly, where we are, through the
mercy of our God. And thus you reward us evil for good, and we desire to do you
good for evil. You hate in us what God loves, and we hate in you what God
hates, and what ye ought to hate, which is Sin. You not believing in the
Infallible and Discerning Spirit of God, cannot judge the things of God (...)
right, but do as it is written; Woe unto them that call evil good, and go^^
evil, that put darkness for light, and light for darkness; that put bitte^ for
sweet, and sweet for bitter, Isa. 5.20. You may here read you^ selves, and see
your condition; you do as in verse. 23. take away the Righteousness of the
Righteous from him; and it is our desire to take aw^^ the Unrighteousness of
the Unrighteous from you, and that all may co^^ to know the Righteousness of
Jesus Christ, and in him to witne^ their Souls Health and Salvation, and with
us to partake of the heavenly Enjoyments, that in the Treasure-House of our God
is to be enjoyed and thus we wish that all men may come to the acknowledgment
of the Tr^^^ that they may receive Forgiveness of their Sins, and be saved from
the Wrath of God that comes on the Children of Disobedrence, Col. 3.6. Romans
1.18. chapter 2.5, 6, 7, 8, 9. Here you may see that the portion of the Disobedient
is the Wrath of God, and you must all be either obedient or disobedient to
Christ. Oh! that you would mind it, consider it, truly weigh it, and lay it to
heart, whether of these you are, that ye may not deceive your selves in
thinking to be what you are not, and so come short of your expectation; for you
must reap of what you sow, (and how can ye expect to sow one kind of Seed, and
reap of another?) as its written, Be not deceived, God is not mocked, for
whatsoever a man sows, that he shall also reap; for he that sows to the
flesh, shall of the flesh reap Corruption; but he that sows to the spirit,
shall of the spirit reap Life everlasting, Gal. 6.7, 8. People, come to Christ
the Light, that ye may see what Seed ye sow, and be no longer deceived by the
windy Doctrine of ungodly men, who draw nigh unto God with their Mouths and
with their Lips, but their Hearts are far from him, teaching for Doctrine the
Traditions of men; this is Scripture; and these are the Deceivers which the
People are to draw from, and to come to the Grace of God to be taught, which
was and is the Teacher of the Godly; For the Grace of God that brings
Salvation has appeared to all men, teaching us, that denying Ungodliness and
worldly Lusts, we should live soberly, righteously and godly in this present
world, Tit. 2.11, 12. This is the true Teacher, the Grace of God; and the true
Messengers of Christ did and do direct the People to the Grace of God, which
will not deceive them. And these that in truth do direct them to that which
will not deceive, cannot be Deceivers; but those that do direct the People to
any other thing or things, from the living Teacher, that will not be removed
into a corner, are Deceivers and deceived, Isa. 30.20, 21.

Bishop and Priest, the living God says of Christ, This is my beloved Son in
whom I am well-pleased, hear ye him: And you have that which ye have received
of men, who have set you at work, and it does well please you; and if we will
not hear and pay you, you persecute and brand us with Names of Reproach, and
will stir up the Magistrates against us; thus you have done, and this you are
yet like to do. But this is the Work of Christ, who did and does work love,
peace and good will toward me^ and forgive Enemies? or is it not the Devil's
work to make strife and ill will, destroy Goods, cast to Prison, and stir up
the Magistrates against a peaceable People? If, this be not the Devil's work,
whose work is it? for I am sure it is not of God; for the righteous God by his
Word in his People, in all Ages did declare against those things (and the like)
of your Practice. And as for those People formerly, which did the same work as
now you do, who may be called your Fathers; John said to them, O generation of
Vipers although they did come to his Baptism, not having fruits meet for
Repentance^ were not accepted, but called, Generation of Vipers, Mat. 3.7.8.
And woe unto you Scribes, Pharisees and Hypocrites, for ye shut up the Kingdom
of Heaven against men; for ye neither go in your selves, neither suffer ye them
that are entering to go in, Mat 23.13. Is not this now your work? you will
neither enter in your selves, nor suffer them that are entering to go in: Can
you say^ that you have entered into the Kingdom? or can you deny that you do no^
seek to hinder others to enter in, and keep them in the Kingdom of the World,
where you are? or can you give a true account of the Way to the Kingdom, or of
the Government therein? or how and when you did enter into the Kingdom, and
what you did meet with by the way? or who o^ your followers did follow you
then? or can witness that ever you did direct them then? and how could you
direct others where you your selves are strangers? And so as it written, The
People do perish for want of knowledge, and the Leaders of the People do cause
them to err, and they that are led by them shall be destroyed? And as Elymas
did turn away the Deputy from the Faith; so do not you now turn the People from
the living Faith which is the gift of God, to a dead form of Worship; and why
may no^ we say thus to the Guilty now, since it was said to one of old more
sharply, if ye do the same work as he did, and pervert the right way of the
Lord (...) Acts 13.7, 8, 9, 10. I can plainly make it appear, that you (I speak
to the guilty) do the same works as your Forefathers, the ungodly Generation
did, and is not their reward due to you? and did not Christ, and Paul hi^ true
Messenger, say, that the ungodly in the Ages before, were fathers of the
ungodly in their age? even so may we say now. And it was not their saying that
they were Abraham's Children, made them so to be, while they were (...) their
Father the Devil (as Christ said) and doing his works; neither will (...) serve
your turn to say, that you are Children of God, while you do hate and hurt his
People, which is the work of the Devil, as has been proved. Speaking, when God
requires Doing, is not regarded; when the works are contrary to the words, the
heart is deceitful; and from the old heart, that is n^^ by God renewed, cannot
proceed any thing to please God; for when the old corrupt Nature speaks true
words, they are not accepted with God and although they say, The Lord lives,
surely they swear falsely Jer. 5.2. F^^ what soever is not of faith, is sin,
Romans 14.23. But without Faith it is impossib^^ to please God, Heb. 11.6. Faith
is the gift of God, and is within to be found and the meek, mild, lowly and
single (...) hearted ones do sind the precio^^ Peace, and are enriched with
th^^ (...) Riches that shall never be tak^^ from them: But greedy Worms (...)
and feed themselves with th^^ which will not serve in time of ^eed and
necessity.

THE END.

