A PRINTED PAPER CALLED THE LORD DIGBIES Speech to the Bill of Attainder OF THE
EARL OF STRAFFORD.

TORN IN PIECES, AND BLOWN AWAY.

Printed in the year. 1641.

A PRINTD PAPER CALLED THE LORD DIGBIES Speech to the Bill of Attainder OF THE
EARL OF STRAFFORD.
Torn in pieces and blown away.

THe sandg, that is the incohaerent selfe-deviding and selfe-forsakeing speech,
that endeavors to show how the same man, might both condemn and acquit the
same man (the Earl of Strafforde) does not so much call for the stroke of an
hammer, to batter it, as a puff of wind to blow it away, to encounter it with
the Votes of the two houses of Parliament, with the United opinion of the
Judges, with the learned Argument in Westminster Hall (before the Co^mittees of
both houses) were to Kill a fly with an Axe, and to honor, rather then to
overthrow it. For certainly the strength of it, is only great in the
kindness (that I say not the weakness) of the Reader, stealeing a way the
affection, not convincing the Judgment; if Arguments be raised from it; they
are such as need an Hospital, being blind and lame, if Arguments be raised
against it the speech falls before them, like grass before the Mower.

Will you see an Argument of this paper, and indeed a paper Argument?

If it does not appear to him by two Testimonies, that the Army of Ireland was
to be brought over to reduce this Kingdom then the Earl of Strafford is not
guilty of High Treason.

Now does he believe himself in this proposition, when he sees diverse other
charges of Treason besides laid against him; if three or four treasons be
objected and proved, is it a sufficient cause of cleareing if on be not proved
to his mind, and as he says but by a single Testimony, though the other by
more? if the Author can not be drawn to a better belief by the cords of
Reason, I think he would certainly be drawn to it, by the cords of a
comparison. If himself were tied with three or four cords, and a friend had
freed him from one, would he tell his friend, let me alone for I am free
enough, though I am bound by the rest; surely I think the other cords (after
some stay at least) would persuade him to change his mind by his inability to
change his place.

But faults in this paper do not go alone For is he not willingly blind when
he sees not the very clause, Of reducing this Kingdom by an Irish Army
manefestly appearing in the former, and as it were looking him in the face? For
a former Testimony of two witnesses says, that his Majesty is absolved from
all rules of Government and may do what power will admit: certainly most
besides himself do see what power will admit the use of an Irish Army and
any other that the same power can purchasc, or command. So that where he
quarrels for want of an Irish Army he has gotten now about his ears, Irish,
English, Dutch. etc.

But yet again he multeplies and is fruitful in absurdeties. He says, that
he has no notion of subuerting Law treasonable but only by force; certainly
this Argument then will never subvert the Law, for it has no force in it, it
is an Argument taken only from his own Ignorance, and runs, or rather haults
thus, he knows no other therefore there is no other: to frame this right it
should runn thus.

There is no way of Subuerting the Law, but that which I know, but I know no
way of subuerting the Law, but by force. Now in the first of these is to much
knowledge, and in the latter to much Ignorance.

But who says this? Is it some ancient Judge or Father of the Law, that has
swallowed and digested the great volumes of that judicious and weighty
profession? Or is it the speech of one that looks more into the Court then
the Innes off Court? I pray behold an Engine strongly framed to lift up and
ouerpoyse the trust and belief of a whole Kingdom in point of Law, A young
gentleman Knows it not.

But if he be not skillful in common Law, he may be some what skillfull in
common Reason, and that may tell him; that if nothing but force can subvert
Law, then Judges can not subvert Law upon the seats of Justice; For though
they wilfully pronounce judgment contrary to Law; stop lawful defenses and
rob the Subject of the benefit of Law; and let loose the prerogative upon the
Law to destroy it, except they drive the Subjects away from Courts of justice
by Halberds and Guns; they may take the Law from them by false judgments,
denying Prohibitions Habeas corpus, and all Legal Remedies and yet not subvert
the Law. If this Authors estate should be lost by this way of Injustice, he may
comfort himself (and let it be his comfort alone) that it is not lost by
Subverting the Law. O unhappy Tresilian that thou did not live in the times,
when such Patronages might have been given thee, for then might thou have
lived out thy time; since thou could not committ Treason by subverting the
Iron Laws, but only by Iron.

And now I am fallen upon Tresilian, I may not forgett this Authors Argument,
to which this Tresilian will give an unhappy conclusion.

He argues thus:

The Earl of Straffords practices have been as high, as tyrannical, as ever
any. But the practices of Tresilian and others have been as high as
High Treason. Therefore the Earl of Straffords practices have been as high as
high Treason.

Thus you see how this Author with the help of Tresilian has pronounced
sentence against the E. of Strafford. So that if he had no other Judge this one
thus assisted would condemn him, when he goes about to save him.

But that is nothing to the purpose, that he is condemned; for though he be
condemned; and so condemned, that he can never be absolved till he be
dispatched into another world, yet this Author will not have a hand in this
dispatct.

A merciful Inference and most unsuitable to the premises, especially if it
come out of the mouth of a Judge. Mark how it soundes in such a mouth, I being
a Judge condemn you as guilty of murher or of as high a treason as ever any,
but I will have no hand in your sentence or dispatch. If Judges should ride
their Circuits and end their Assies in this Logic, granting the premises, and
denying the conclusion, were it not most vain and a mere mockery of Justice?
For it were only to fi^d faults and not to correct them, and to turn justice
into mere words. It would shortly make a kingdom a den of Thieves, murderers
and Traitors, and safe for none to dwell in; no not for those that teach this
doctrine; though they may be thought by teaching to deserve it. Nec enim Lex
equiar vlla etc.

Lastly, who can believe this man's suspicions rather then Sr. Henry Vanes Oath
upon advised Recollection? And oath that gets an addition of belief from the
speeches going before (jointly testified by the Truly Noble Earl of
Northumberland) and backed by a memorial written the same day when the words
were spoken: which words called venomous by this paper, had their venom from the
speaker, not the hearer, and being Recorded the same day wherein they were
spoken, did arise thereby to such a pregnance of Testimony, that it became very
great, and might in a wise man's eye (be it M. Pym or any other) look very
near as big as two.

But though the Testimonies be big, or many, and the charges many also; and the
Earl of Strafford as high and Tyrannical in practices as ever any (by this
authors confession) yet he must at once be both condemned, and saved. Though in
his saving, the Votes of both Houses be condemned, and the Kingdom and law in
danger not to be saved.

FINIS.

