Primula Veris: A Brighter Gem, AESOP's Cock never found, Teaching (never taught
yet) SPEECH's perfect ground. OR, The Third Part OF CALVERLEYs Notes: Which
Notes (after Discovery of the wondrous Mistakes, needless Difficulties, and
Prolixity of the Common Grammar) initiate a Method which may Be a Glory to the
NATION, And an Encouragement to the Learning Youth of Europe: THEN All must
learn this true Distinction's glance,
Else Babes will jear us for our Ignorance.


LONDON, Printed by T. H. for the Author, in High- Holbourn, and sold by Mr.
Butt, in Princes-Street, near Drury Lane, 1681.

The Third Part of Calverley's Notes, etc.
THe Action of any thing, is a Verb, as To Love; a Verb (in Latin) ends
principally in re, as Amare, or in i, as Dignari: its other endings are Nine,
all Ten set down in that called the Infinitive Mood, but is (indeed) the
Kingdom of the Verb, and the Ten endings are its principalities, expressing the
Action of the Noun so amply as she (in honor) can.

There are four Families of Verbs, each known of what Family ^t is by the Vowel
long or short before the ^a^d re or i, A^, The 1st. Family has (...),
long-before re and i, as Amare, Dignari. The 2d. Family has e, long before re
and i, as Habere, Tueri. The 3d. Family has e, short before re and i, as
Legere, Gradi^ The 4th. Family has i long before re and i, as Audire, Orini.

There is no Infinitive Mood, for the Verb is a pious Queen, clearly free from
all Moodish humors and person, for person is prince of Nouns, and therefore
very nonsensically called a Pronoun; and the Noun has the Indicative,
Imperative, and potential Mood, and to force the Verb to Answer to the humor
of any of his three persons singularly and plurally throughout all the Moods
and Tenses, he brings Two Hundred and Sixty other endings, thereby personating
the Verb, and that by barbarous cutting, dismembring, murdering, and patching
for Verbs of the First and Third Families are personated (in the first person
presenttense singular Indicative) by cutting off the Verbs Belly and Feet, and
setting o-instead thereof, as Amoare, Legoere.

The same Person, Mood, and Tense, in Verbs of the 2d. and 4th. Families, are
personated by cutting away the Verbs Feet, and setting o instead thereof, as
Habeore, Audiore.

Yea, and by cutting off both Head and Body, all save the Feet, and adding o
after the reservation, as Ineo.

The rest of the 260 personating terminations are all personally attending each
its person through ou^ the Moods and Tenses, and that so punctually as if those
terminations and these distinctions had been made together at once, and not any
labor added, but great certainty and delightful knowledge.

1. o. as. at. amus. atis. ant. 2. o. s. t. mus. it is. nt. 3. o. is. it. imus.
itis. unt. 4. o. s. t. mus. it is. iunt.

And so forth as in the Tenses.

Personating brings a Verb from her free Queens Estate, to a Noun-Verb a
Servant; yea, a mere Hermophrodite. And yet Authors place the personating Cubs
of the Nouns, Tyranny and murderous Usurpers in the Queens Throne, so that all
men have taken the Feet for the Head, and not so much as taken any notice of,
the Verbs Royal bounty, which she (in her Kingdom and Regency) freely
bestows, nor of the singular benefits exacted from her in her Captivity and
suffering, showing our selves as if we did not at all understand the true
Grounds of Speech. Let us now set the benign Queen in her Throne to lead the
dance, and make the encroaching Personaters retire to places meet, as Amoare
avi atum.
Habeore vi itum.
Legoere; legi lectum.
Audiore ivi itum.


Yet the Verb is not without her triumph, for she almost as often as any Noun
comes after her, flings him forth of his Throne into what state or case she
lists, Viz. sometimes into a Genitive, as Miserere mei; or into a Dative, as
Da mihi; or into an Accusative, as Dilige Virtutem; or into an Ablative, as
Vtere Virtute.

Yea, higher Triumph also, for the Verb has the honor to be Mother of the
most Noble and Graceful Nouns, as from the Principality u. by changing the u
into io. as of Amatu, Amatio; of Doctu, Doctio; of Lectu, Lectio; of Auditu,
Auditio: or by changing the u for or, as of Amatu, Amator: Doctu, Doctor;
Lectu, Lector: Auditu, Auditor: and many by the addition of s, to the u, as
Auditus, Visus, as you may see more at large in the 15th. Page of the Second
Part.

By this Method, any one Sentende is sufficient example for parsing all
whatsoever: As if your Word be a thing, it is a Noun; if it signify the Action
of any thing it is a Verb; if it be neither Noun nor Verb, then it is an
Adjunct, the signification whereof shows what kind of Adjunct it is: do so by
every Word in that or any other Sentence, and it makes thee (hitherto grievous)
labor and doubts in parsing, a very sport. To pleasure your self and Company,
ask of what Gender are Common Nounds ending in l. Your Rule in Propria
Generibus, is, in l. are Neuters: Ask again, How many common Nouns in en are
Masculines; look in the Exception over against that Rule, and it shows One.

The like question in any Rules in Propria Generibus, will pleasure you, and
the bystanders, and instruct him whom you question; so easy and plain is
every Rule and thing in this Method, that more thorough knowledge may be gained
in Three Months, than in any former Grammar, in so many Years:

For depressure, irksomness, toil, dismay,
Are here exchanged for most delightful play.
Nunquam sera est ad meliora via. FINIS.

