A SATYR AGAINST Commonwealths.

Fallitur egregio quisquis sub principe credit
Servitium: nunquam libertas gratior extat
Quam sub rege pio.
Claudian. de laudibus Stiliconis. LONDON, Printed for Joseph Hindmarsh
Bookseller to his Royal Highness, and Francis Hicks, Bookseller in Cambridge,
1684,

A PREFACE TO THE READER.
IN vain do we give Kings the pompous Titles of Great and Mighty: In vain has
Heaven allotted them a Power, resembling that of its own, free and
uncontrolable, if like Billiard-Table Kings they are only set up to be shaken
and thrown down by the saucy touches of their humble Vassals. If their
Authority has such confinements, as some Men would have us persuaded it has,
Princes are at best but glittering Pageants, all the professions of steady
Loyalty but solemn impertinencies, and Heaven it self is a sharer in the gaudy
Delusion. It is not long since this Isle was reckoned amongst the blackest
instances of Treason and Rebellion, when the best of Kings and the best of Men
fell by the rude violence of a consecrated Axe; ever since we have felt the
unfortunate consequences of that dismal Blow; a Blow which like that that was
given to the Worlds great Redeemer, rent the Vail of the Church of England in
two, abolished all its pious Canons, and made them give place to the
Newfangled Whimsies of Religious Hypocrites; a fact so horrid and unexampled,
that if we may believe Salmasius, Cui simile nec praeterita secula viderunt,
nec ventura forsitan videbunt. All this was done under the flattering disguises
of Religion, by Men who had the impudence to boast of a more than ordinary
Inspiration, and who pretended to have received more light from Heaven, than
that Ass whom the Ancients fondly accused for drinking up the Moon, who could
throw themselves into all the Postures of Religion, with as great facility as a
Skillful Tumbler can act the Italian Strades, and with a sort of popular Piety
cheated three Nations into a belief, that whatsoever they did, was highly
lawful, so true is that which Machiavel says, fere omnes homines magis specie,
and color rerum, quam rebus ipsis permoventur and judicant. In vain do our
learned Tribe go about to reclaim these Men by dint of Argument, all their
sober reasonings are to them but important Trifles, and were always accounted
too weak baits to catch the Carpes of Geneva Lake. And who I pray would take
the pains to convince a Tailor by a Syllogism, who perhaps after the
consummation of a pair of Breeches, creeps into a Coffee-House, where after he
has lined his Pallet with that factious juice, he looks upon his long and
limber Fingers to have been contrived by Nature for the handling of a Scepter,
and curses the bitter fates that had dwindled it into a Needle, away he goes
home, and performs the Offices of distributive Justice upon his Apprentices
shoulders, and fancies every piece of Parchment cut from an old Bond to make
his measures withal, little less to be than clippings from of Magna Charta.
Such a Knave as this deserves no other Logic than what the Pillory can afford
him, to make his Ears pay for the petulancy of his Tongue. Another sort of Man
there is, whom in the Country Language we may call Substantial, who perhaps has
got fourscore pounds a year, and joys in having a little Dove-coat annexed to
his Farm-house, who is famous all over the Neighboring Villages for his little
Chestnut Mare, who in a Race at a late Wake signalized her self by distancing a
Cart-horse; such a Man as this you can never convince by dint of Argument, he
tells you roundly that at the first opportunity be'l draw his Yard and half of
Rapier to defend his Religion and rusty Bacon from the rude insults of
Arbitrary Power: You would laugh in your Sleeve (if you have any) to hear his
brisk and debonair reasonings, about the Authority of the Commons of England,
and you cannot imagine with what deference and regard he is entertained amongst
the Mobile, beeause he gives them to know the transactions of State, and fills
the whole Lordship with News; it is odds but you shall see him at the next
Election of a Knight of the Shire, brandishing in his Campagn Coat and
Mountero, at the head of a Troop of Dapper-Day-Labourers, on whom prodigal
Fortune has munificently bestowed two pounds a Year, and who with complicated
Interests are striving to set up their Idol Representative. Now the defections
of such a Man as this from the Principles of Loyalty, we cannot think to
obviate by the most improved reasonings; his Prejudices stop up all the Avenues
of his Soul, hindering the least beam of Truth to enter in, and enlighten his
Understanding: his too fervent Zeal for his Principles will not give him the
leisure to be convinced, and his ignorance baffles all the attempts of Reason:
as he does not take up any Opinion for the Affinity it bears to Truth, so
neither does he relinguish any for its opposition to the same, if his interest
invites him he easily accords with any thing, and his Reason finds no regrets
in entertaining a profitable Error: as you cannot disengage him from his
mistakes, so neither can you settle him in a Truth, although you bring all the
Credentials of a firm Demonstration, and the reason is, because a Discourse to
him is no more than it is to a Schoolboy, the jingling of a Noun and Verb
together. If then any thing will do, it must be Satyr, and we may if we
observe, find in the dullest apprehensions a quicker resentment of a Jest than
of an Argument, the one renders that ridiculous, which the other perhaps cannot
make appear to be false, and Satyrs are like those Indian Apes, of whom I have
read, that when Alexander came into those parts, They straight rallied thelr
deformed Squadrons, ranked themselves in Battalia, camp'd and decamped with all
the moving Solemnities of a real Army, and brought greater affronts upon that
all-conquering Army with their Martial Grimaces, than all the force of Darius
and Parus, I have made the Comparison, let some courteous Reader make out the
Application. For this cause it is that I have ridiculed all the Commonwealths
that lay in my way, from great old Rome to little modern Geneva; What I have
said on this Theme, if the Peruser be not too phlegmatic, must needs create in
him some fastidious thoughts of that way of Governing. More especially I have
hinted at our late pretended Republican Powers, and in particular at their
monstrous innovations about Religions; where I have let any thing slip from my
Pen, that may seem extravagant, I hope it will not be looked upon as an unruly
Effort of my own, but only as an endeavor to expose the Giddy Enthusiasts of
those times. I shall say nothing neither as to the matter or manner of the
Verse, I know the whole Poem will labor under the imputations of uneasy
roughness, yet I could never imagine that smoothness should be so absolutely
necessary in the dressing up of a Satyr; it always seeming to me as
disagreeable to see a Satyr Clothed in soft and effeminate Language, as to see
a Woman scold and vent her self in Billings-gate Rhetoric in a gentile and
advantageous Garb. I have no more to say, only to desire the Reader to be as
favorable as he can to the first endeavors of an unexperienced Pen, which is
all from

H. P.

A SATYR AGAINST Commonwealths.
(1)
I WILL not forbear -- for who can longer stay
When Loyal Muses bid me not delay
But nodding promise an auspicious way?
Thus Caesar once Heaven's anger to atone
Beck'nd to, by a God, passed Rubicon,
To scourge his own Republic, haughty Rome.
A Commonwealth! curse on that nauseous name
Which from the Devil with damnation came;
He first set up the cursed reforming Trade,
And boldly sought Heaven's Empire to invade;
Till blasted by Joves Thunder, down he fell,
State-holder to the Commonwealth of Hell.
It Is a poor sneaking form of Government;
Kings, Gods: but they, the People represent;
Here Men with swinging Trowsers awe.
And divine Collar-bands give Law.
Tell me my Muse for thou knows best
-- Is it not worth a Jest?
To see a pair of Representatives
Leaving their charge of Children, and their Wives,
Who the other day in their nown Country sat
As Referees about a broken pate?
And talked Sedition over Table-Beer
At the Next Sessions straight appear
To manage Government's grand Affair?
Would it not make a Stoic laugh to see
Those Men of mickle Glee,
Who in their Parish Church all their devotion owe
To a fringed Cushion or a matted Pew,
Distinguished from the crowd of the Church-militant,
By a gilt Bible of Alma Mater's print?
And amongst the Rout for Devotees do pass,
'Cause their Devotion's height'nd by their bass,
At the next opening of a Parliament,
Loudly dispute about Church Government;
And with grave Speeches, tell you to an hair
Where lies the Placket of the Roman Whore.
Nay and unravel, with the greatest ease
Rash Calvin's Mystical Decrees.
Can tell the Intrigues of the Celestial Powers;
And open Heaven as a Chest of Drawers:
In this Box, they give out the Elect must lie,
In that Reprobates damned to Eternity.
(2)
Lash Satyr, lash with furies hissing Snake
Those Knaves, who killed their King for Conscience Sake.
'Twas Conscience was the fatal Dog and Bell
That led those blinded Bigots down to Hell.
In outward Show they hated worldly Coin,
Yet Conscience still, like Christmas-Box, took in
Cavaliers Feasters, and without a Sin.
They used the cutting Hanger of the Spirit;
As Switz his Sword for Money, not for Merit.
Had they seen Jove when Danae's lap he wet
With Golden Showers, to Heav'en he near had got,
Tho a God, to Guinies he had turned him straight.
They made a Golden Calf without a Sin;
Each Attribute had a Jacobus been.
Conscience in them was very free, and kind,
It was the Spaniel dictate of the Mind
That leaped for every thing, that Rump ordained.
What ever Government was framed by Fate,
Shock fetched and carried still the Glove of State;
O Conscience! Conscience! what thou art I Will tell;
Thou art the Goodman's Goose, that with each yell,
When Danger's nigh, saves the Souls Capitol.
Thou art the bad Man's A River Famous for it is petrifying quality.
Peak, that straightway turns
All the Souls softer dictates, into stones.
Like the prodigious Hebrews Rod,
That turned the Egyptian Waters all to blood.
(3)
From Presbyter to Independent pass:
We Will throw some Grains in Nol the Brewer's Face,
It Is true he would have his Beer both old, and strong,
But his Religion always new and Young.
H' abused the Catholic Faith in pious mock,
And Primitive Religion, styled old Hoc.
Yet for all his Zeal, to reform the Rout,
He always wore a Popish Snout;
The red upon his Nose as Poets tell;
Looked like what we a Scarlet Hood do call,
Couchant on Surplice Theological.
Not in Hell his Nose more piercing flames could find
Tipped with damnation, while on Earth he reigned:
Prometheus did not his whole Man inspire,
His Nose only was damask'd with that fire.
(4)
This England once was thy unhappy State,
When best of Monarchs felt the worst of Fate.
When they had sent the Martyr to his grave;
They threw hey jinks what Government they would have:
They Fillip'd up what Powers should prevail,
And stead of Head the Counter threw up Tail,
For proof of which, to the English Rump was given,
A pair of Span-new Breeches, sent from Heaven.
These were their Arms, by which a Man may guess,
Codpiece, and Conscience was the Good old Cause.
Long had the English Nation been
Fed with the Manna of a Monarch's Reign;
Long had one Dish, their cravings satisfied,
Their weak and squeamish Stomachs cloyed,
At last, their vicious Palats, not content,
Would have an Ollio of Government:
Something of every thing they crave,
An Anarchy or nothing they would have.
The Gods, who never punish with remorse,
Gave 'em their wish, although they wished a Curse.
'Stead of the Royal Oak, which long had stood,
The top, the glory, of the Wood:
From off the Poplar Tree, the giddy Rout
Wedged their blockish Sovereigns out.
From thence they hewed those Logs of Power,
And whittl'd Scepters, as you whittle Scures.
A brace of Patriots from each County sent,
Sat like the Ghosts of deceased Government.
And without the House of Lords --
Made but a Rigdel Parliament.
These Ap'd their Sovereign with as good a mien
As Dives's Guinies did the Lawful Coin.
They robbed the Land, by Wars before decayed,
And whilst they robbed they wept and prayed,
TO atone the mighty sin they fast in Tears,
They prayed by Sabbaths and rebelled by Years.
Thus the Gods punished Charles's Foes,
Thus the Gods reparteed all their rebellious Vows.
(5)
Tame Tarquin! that so easily was won
To part with all the splendours of a Crown;
Unking'd he fell in Age and Glory green,
When Rome was Young and in her Teens.
The Latin Rebels pushed him from his Throne,
And put a brace of Consuls in his Room:
These clubbing in Conjunction did dispense
Like Planets their united influence.
A Snivelling Peer that loved his Spouse too well,
Rather than be a Cuckold would rebel;
For's Country's sake he thought it was no sin:
For well knew he
That Petticoat and Property
With the same Letters did begin.
Lucrece the Chaste, the Fair, of Noble blood
Would not be buss'd for all that is good,
She would not truckle to her Loves decree,
She would not kiss, poor heart, not she.
Bravely the Noble Doxy strove,
Though at last forced to pay her Tax of Love.
When the lascivious Scene was done,
And the Slut saw she was not made a Queen,
She tore her Hair and dainty Quoif,
With a sharp Poniard ended all the strife,
And quickly did the little job of life.
For this the Roman Bullies seized his Crown,
For this they threw the mighty Lecher down,
And in his stead two Consuls filled the Chair,
Almanac Kings that lasted but a Year:
They and their Senate all reformed anew
From Cit and Bumkin to the Nobler Crew.
The Alphabet it self was crossed,
The Letters that made Rex were lost
And S. P. Q. did Rule the Roast, Letters that often occur in Roman History for
Senatus populusque.

At last their Civil Wars made such a stir,
They were forced to accept the Kingly Power
A Monarch of three Syllables an Emperor.
(6)
Speak out Venetian Punk, thou that do prate
Of a Republic of so long a date;
An Idle Commonwealth, that has
These several hundred years been making Glass!
Each puny Mortal there, pretends to Power,
A calcined Cobbler makes a Senator.
A Covie of Islands seated in the Sea,
Make up this proud Venetiae:
Amongst the Quae-Genus-Monsters she is found,
Only in the Plural sense declined;
Some bits of Earth from th'Continent purloyn'd
Make up the Wonders of that place;
Famous for Bawds, and mighty pretty Lace;
Each suppliant Punk unto her Lord does pay
The glorious Tribute of Poynt-veny.
Each Senator for's Crown a Thimble takes;
And Hieroglyphick Bobbings Scepters makes.
A Duke they have, God-wot, so low in stock,
That his Toes stink for want of Royal Sock.
His stingy Meals, hardly deserve a Rhyme,
He keeps an exc'llent House in Peas-cod-time;
At second hand he buys his Clothes,
And runs on Tick for Hose and Shoes:
Scarcely odd Money they allow the Crotchet,
To keep the Devil out of's Pocket.
(7)
Stand off you little dwindling States, make room
Holland the Buttock of the World is come
Although not half so generous as the Bum
That freshly does discharge it is natural load
Relieves the hungry Earth with dung and food:
But they like greedy Leaches still suck in
They drink, and eat, and drink again,
Till like them too You Would think they would burst their skin
They love their ransacked, sordid Pelf so well
That their Low Countries may be reck'ond Hell
Pluto and they in the same Region dwell.
Frugal they are beyond all measure,
They Will damn their very Souls for Treasure.
They hate free spending as they hate Free Grace
And count it fond Arminianism in Purse
Their Dortish Synod has determined thus.
For Gold they search the World and traverse Indies,
For Sickly Earth that has the Jaundies;
They Will change their Athanasian Faith
For a Rich Diamond or an Elephants Tooth:
Give 'em a China Dish or Persian Cap,
They Will straight turn Turks and Nice for Mecca swap;
Of an English Herring they make no bones,
Their Commonwealth consists of Milts and Roanes;
The Apostles here in great esteem are had
Only because they practiced fishing Trade,
These Knaves those pious Anglers imitate,
And boldly British Gudgeons captivate.
To let you see what good they wish
Unto the Commonwealth of Fish,
Elziver prints with greatest care he can
Fishmonger Hobs's great Leviathan,
A Book which proves Men to be Whales,
A state of Nature stuck with finns and scales,
They are a People fit for Satyr,
Their Low Countries are no better,
Than the Pudenda of modest Nature.
Those Netherlands of which they boast,
Are but Creation below the Waste.
(8)
Cold Switzers that amongst your other ills
Have planted a Republic upon Hills;
Their Snow that on their Mountains lies,
Gives them kib'd Heels and Consciences;
That cold and dirty Clime puts them hard to it,
They Never can make a Law without their Boot,
Neither do Justice without riding Coat.
They fetch all their Dictators from the Plow,
Who scarcely any other Purple know,
But when with Frosts their fire burns blew.
A Cold and barren Soil's the reason why,
Kind Heaven never thaws 'em into Monarchy.
It Is strange that there a Commonwealth should thrive,
Or that republic Weeds or Alps should live.
These Men so much extolled by Fame,
At first from Hannibal's Vinegar bottle came;
When he to cut an easier way did use
That acid, peevish, and ill-natured juice,
The riggling Animals that thence did rise
Leaped into Men, and made this brutish Race.
(9)
Of all the Commonwealths of greatest Fame
Once more step forth Romulian Dame
Let your Rebublick Consuls if they can,
Match the Victorious Macedonian,
A King, whese actions spoke him more than Man.
Sauny the great who'th Race of Men subdued,
Conquered the World was drunk and spu'd.
To the furthest East he spread his Victories,
His glories set where the Sun's Glories rise;
A fight to him was but a drinking bout,
With his Enemies lives he paid the shot,
Their Veins like Pitchers emptied out,
He grudged over one World tippling to stand,
He would have drunk a dozen in a hand,
Finely faith he firkt the Persian Ninny,
Whose Father got his Kingdom by a Whinny,
Mounted on Buceph'lus this Bully Cracked to ride
Inch and half-stone with any King beside,
Match him all Latium, match him if you can,
Consuls you had when Commonwealths began,
Conquered a lust or two but never a Man.
Poplicola of whom fame speaks so loud
Demolished his Farm-house to please the Crowd,
To pull it down he thought 'twas best,
Cause 'twas a Cock-loft higher than the rest.
For these and such like things by Livy told,
Amongst records of Fame he stands enrolled.
(10)
All hail Geneva! to thy Lake all health,
Whom Calvin made a Commonwealth:
Calvin a Bishop grudged to see
Lord it in Robes of Sovereignty.
He pushed the Miter'd Moppet from his Throne,
He threw the mighty Lawn-sleeves down:
Bishop and Bible both believe me
Got a Translation at Geneva.
She cleansed away the filthy Rags of Rome,
Landress she was to the Whore of Babylon;
With Gospel-Soap she purged her Popish sins,
Stifned her Rites and starched her Disciplines;
Women reformed there at their will,
Women the strapping Sex that spells so ill.
The City Dames more zealous far than wise
Put the Apocrypha under their Pies,
And made Bumfodder of the Maccabees.
Judith they forced to stop a broken pane,
And gave Holofernes his Head again.
Christ-cross out of their Alphabet they turned
Each Babe an Horn-book had true Protestant.
Tell me Religious Roysters, tell me now
Why you are so angry when the Organs blow?
Our thoughts like Theban Stones disordered lie,
Till that Religious Harmony
Shapes and cements them into Unity.
I hate that Commonwealth of all the worst,
I hate their Prick-ear'd Senate and their Priests,
Who love a common Whore,
But hate the Common Prayer.
(11)
Fain would I know eternal Dunces why
You hate the Godlike sway of Monarchy?
A Government in Heaven allowed,
Where the bright Monarch makes his Throne a Cloud,
And gently aws the Angelick lovely Crowd.
Where Cherubins like glorious Muses sit,
And praise the Almighty Power in numbers fit,
In the Seraphick strains of heavenly Wit.
Grossly then must they err who do affirm,
That Commonwealths are of an heavenly Stem,
And make an Hans-town of the New Jerusalem.
No, base Republics you can never agree
With that delightful Unity.
Your tide of Rule runs in divided streams.
Glowworms of Power, you shine in separate beams*
I hate that gaudy Sanhedrim of Lights,
Who by Gommittees rule the Nights;
I mean the Stars, whose short Commissions run
All in the Name of the departed Sun.
Give me the glittering Monarch of the Day;
At whose approach those Tapers sneak away.
He reigns by Day and all the Night he drinks,
He sips and Revels on the Ocean's brinks,
And like a Monarch never shrinks.
The Epilogue being an Anti-Republican Catch.
(1)
Let the Speculative Sot,
Who thinks and lives not,
Tell the World what paps Alma-mater has got;
Let him if he please his Appetite bilk,
And Huzza the King's Health in a glass of her Milk:
From the Nipples of the Vine (the wiser do know)
That a brisk and more generous liquor does flow.
(2)
Would you be a Bard Sir,
Of any regard Sir?
Believe me Wine is the best Crambo word Sir.
Homer was drunk as ever Son of a Woman was,
When he Hickupt so often (...),
And the old Greekish Rhimer had been dabling in Claret,
When he made that reeling Verse we call Pindarick.
(3)
A Pox of old Noll,
Who our Barrels did toll,
And excis'd each Caviliers affluent Bowl.
To be revenged of him, and his Council of Asses,
Let Us break on the Table all Commonwealth glasses,
Boy, take that Venice Glass to Republican Saints;
We'll drink the King's Health in true English Flints.
FINIS.

