Ancient Christianity Revived: Being a DESCRIPTION OF THE Doctrine, Discipline
and Practice, Of the Little CITY BETHANIA.

Collected Out of her Great Charter, the HOLY SCRIPTVRES, and confirmed by the
same, for the Satisfaction and Benefit of the House of the Poor.

By One of Her Inhabitants, who desires to Worship God after the way which
some Men call Heresy.

Ps. 132.15. I will abundantly bless her Provision, and satisfy her Poor with
Bread.

LONDON, Printed by George Larkin, 1688.

To his very much Esteemed Friends, those three Societies of Leominster,
Worcester and Litchfield, the Atthor wishes whatsoever may conduce to their
Spiritual and Eternal Felicity in this World, and in that which is to come;
even so, Amen.
Christian Friends,
ALthough the whole Israel of God are dear to me, and after whose Consolation I
am greatly longing; yet you are the People above all others with whom I have
been most concerned, and unto whom I am most engaged, and therefore to you
chiefly do I dedicate these my small Labors; who though I have been a long
time in Congregational Union with one of you, yet my growth in the most true
Divinity is very small; for when I was in the chief of natural Perfections, and
being of low Stature, and climbing a Tree to see JESUS, like Zacheus, my feet
slipping, thereby I got a dangerous fall, and you, though you used all the
means you could devise for my recovery, yet it proved all in vain, till at last
Addressing your selves to the Father of Mercies, after many Prayers and Tears
were made and spent, you obtained an answer of Peace; but it was to me an
answer by such terrible things in Righteousness, that it left such deep
impresses on my Soul, the which lasting time can hardly declare, yet I being
very weak in my Spirit, and unfit for action, it pleased the wise Physician of
Souls to retire me for almost Seven Years, into a den of Darkness, and a place
of many dangers and difficulties, where I lived by such Provisions as your
earnest Prayers procured for me of the Father of Mercies; at last after many a
dangerous wound by the sting of the fiery Serpent, the nature of which being
known to God and me, this longed-for Trumpet of Jubilee was graciously sounded
in mine ears, viz. Tell her that her Warfare is accomplished; yet I abode in
this retirement for some time after, and then at length obtained a full
release; but much of the shining dross of this World, together with the
deforming Leprosy of Corruption, was happily left behind me; but then I could
hardly leave that Society of Worcester, with whom my Spirit was now so deeply
entangled, and having obtained leave of you, I abode with them; the issue of
which, was to me a state of joy and trouble; for when I beheld you, O ye my
dear Friends of Worcester, so strongly assaulted by the seat of violence, I
almost dispaired of your security, and fell for a season into such a fainting
state, that I had but little natural strength left in my Body; yet obtained
help of God by strong assaults at the Throne of Grace, and you and I came out
of that Tribulation with little inward or outward damage. But Satan began to
work, against us some other way, by which both I and some of you were sore
wounded in the house of our Friends, the which I greatly desired might still be
born with a Christian calmness, but hardly obtained my desire herein, as the
event did show, therefore some of you giving way to the unruly Spirit of
Belial, he let in diverse other Spirits into your Souls, till some of you became
dangerously entangled in the Spirit of Apostasy, and others of you stood
tottering in great dimness and sore discouragements, which sunk me down into a
second and more great despair, for when I saw the Weeds grow so fast, and there
was no way to root them out, I sorely feared the whole Field would be forsaken
for them; but at last the workers of Iniquity began to go to their own place,
and so the little Children had a little relief. And while we were thus
entangled in Pihahiroth, in the Mountains of Straits, I was importuned, and at
last consented to write down the sum and substance of my belief about those
things our Mothers angry Children had me in suspicion; but while I was
exercised about these things, some things fell out concerning some persons,
which made me like Moses, break the Tables, and so this ensuing Treatise lay
almost asleep for a good while; yet I had many fears in my Spirit, by reason of
my neglect herein, both before and after I came to Leicester Prison, where now
by the Grace of God, in the midst of some distractions, I have at last finished
this brief description of the estate of the true Church of Christ. And
forasmuch as it was by reason of you, O ye my dear Friends of Litchfield, that
I was first cast into these parts, by whose importunity also, at last these
Papers have been completed, you must needs be taken into the number of those
to whom they are now dedicated, for you have been and still are exceeding dear
to me; and concerning you, I have had more than ordinary experience of the
Mercy of the Holy, both in natural and spiritual things, even at all times, and
have felt great benefit by your Prayers, as I believe, both to Soul and Body;
therefore I cannot but esteem and prefer you with those Societies with whom I
have had more long acquaintance, unto whom, all of you together, do I present
these the first fruits of my poor endeavors; desiring you to make the best
construction of it, and carefully to weigh and consider, before you approve or
reject ought you find therein. And now the heartsearching God, that tries the
Heart and all things, knows my end in these Papers, and I have declared it in
part in the Epistle to the Courteous Reader, and do yet again profess to you,
that I desire as well as I can, the glory of God, the advantage of Truth, the
benefit and satisfaction of Souls, the which I beseech the Father of Mercies to
bring to pass; and though I have been as one of the feeble, and as a Tree
shaken with the wind among you, yet have I not kept back ought that I had from
you, that I judged might have been profitable for the good of your Souls; but
like one of the little Children in the Marketplace, have been ready upon all
occasions to talk with you touching those things which concerns our Fathers
Kingdom, the which being a land of distances unto many of us, we have showed
our selves to be like that Man whose eyes Jesus had almost opened, and so could
see Men but seem to walk as Trees, and we have yet need, notwithstanding all
our great confidence, to be crying to the Lord for a second Touch, that all the
scales might fall from our Eyes; and I do know well that I have but a dim
Sight, and a stamering Tongue, it is too much to be doubted that others also
are somewhat dull of hearing, and from hence it might and yet may arise, that
our Mothers Children have had some occasion to be angry with me; however I am
greatly inclined to still them as well as I can, so that I may keep Truth from
falling in the Streets, and a good Conscience from being violated by any means.
And you may plainly percieve that I have no end at my own glory in these
things, in that I have not attempted to beautify it at all with humane wisdom,
but with great simplicity as becomes the Title it presents it self to view.
Neither do I mind mine outward profit by any thing that is now undertaken, my
mind being but little inclined thereunto, ever since you and I have had to do
one with another. And by reason of many natural Impediments, both pains and
loss are like to be my present rewards, and you are witnesses, and God also,
that I have coveted no man's Gold, or Silver, or Apparel, though I migt have had
all these from you with right true desire, but these hands for the most part,
through the good providence of God, hitherto ministered unto my necessities, and
so what I have freely received, I would freely give again, desiring the Ever
Blessed God to make all my poor endeavors, as the wilderness-Feast of Barley
Bread and Fishes, which was blessed for the nourishment of very many Souls. So
not being willing to burden you too much, nor too long to detain you from the
things that follow, I desire earnestly the continuance of your serious requests
for me, as I hope mine will be still for you,

Who am your unworthy Servant in what I can, for your Souls Advantage. W. P.

THE PREFACE TO THE READER.
Courteous Reader,
THou art here presented with a little Treatise, which mere Necessity forces
into the World, being a Summary of the Faith and Practices in brief of the
Christian Catholic Church, which in her Militant Estate is rightly styled
Bethania; and it was first occasioned by some Suspicions and Accusations cast
upon the Author, chiefly by some of his Mothers Children, touching the
Principles of his Belief, who being known to be one that holds Universal
Redemption, has been charged, or at least suspected, to hold many gross
Opinions, by them that are of a contrary Mind, as Free Will, or Single Power in
the Creature, in the work of the Souls Conversion. Secondly, Of denying the
Humanity of our Savior, and sometimes also his Divinity. Thirdly, Of holding
the Mortality of the Soul, and denying the Resurrection of the Body from the
Dead, or something equivalent thereunto; sometimes suspected of Arianism, of
Praying to Angels, and Justification by Works, and such like things, which
suspicious minds could frame; All which things he has sometimes born with much
calmness of Spirit, thinking it sufficient that his own Conscience has
pronounced him innocent as to things of this nature, and also rejoices in
Divine Grace, by which he has been kept in such a state, although full of
imperfections, as that occasion has not been given to the accused, or much
suspected, of an impious Life; yet for the sake of the poor in Spirit, his only
companions, and which are very dear unto him, he has given forth a brief
declaration of the Christian Faith, Order and Life, in the which he himself
expects to be saved; and his design is to further the good and benefit of all
serious Souls, who in very many tossings to and fro, have almost been tired and
discouraged on the Mountains of Wandering; but yet this is not all: for he would
fain awaken the Careless Daughters, and give a Midnight-Cry to the Foolish
Virgins, that if possible, they might see the Bed of Christian-Profession to be
too short, and the Covering of Church Communion to be too narrow to rest secure
in, from that Heart-searching God with whom we all must shortly have to do: But
the Author did first intend to have left this little Treatise in Manuscript
only to three Societies, with whom he has been more than ordinarily concerned;
the which, though little in Bulk, is great in Matter, and contains that which
might have been the Subject of many great Volumes, it relating to the whole
Mystery of Godliness from first to last, the which, without controversy, is
exceeding great; and it is designed to be promoted by the Author, as his poor
Abilities will afford, not only in the Theory thereof, but also in the
practical Part, which is indeed the Substance of true Divinity; and though it
may come forth in a Name and Title somewhat strange at first, yet when the
Reason thereof is given, it may not always appear a wonder; for as the Church
of Christ is sometimes in Scripture called a City; as in Psalm. 46.4. There is a
River, the streams whereof makes glad the City of God, the holy Place of the
Tabernacle of the most High: So, Mat, 5.14. it is said to be the Salt of the
Earth, and a City set on a Hill that cannot be hid; and in Ephesians. 2.19. Now
therefore ye are no more Strangers and Foreigners, but Fellow-Citizens of the
Saints, and of the Household of God. So also there are diverse Cities and Towns
in Scripture, that do very much represent the same; among which Bethania is no
small representation, according to the Hebrew signification of it.

And first it is represented by Zion, which signifies Dryness, and so indeed
she is, with respect to her own estate, but that the Rivers of the waters of
Life from the Rock in the weary Land, Isa. 32.21. flow unto her, and is a place
of broad Rivers and Streams therein, Isa. 33.2.

Secondly, Israel, signifying the Vision of Peace, and indeed this City where
Christ the Prince of Peace dwells, must needs be the elearest sight of Peace
on this side Heaven it self, and the Peace of God which passes all
understanding, Phil. 4.7. does keep the Hearts and Minds of them in perfect
Peace, who as the true Israel of God, do steadfastly walk by the New
Creature-Rule, Gal. 6.16. Besides, this City does not only see Visions of Peace
from God, but also Visions of Peace are seen from it to Men, being a Kingdom
which is not of this World, John 18.36. Neither consists in meat or drink,
Romans 14.7. but in Righteousness, and Peace and Joy in the Holy Ghost.

Thirdly, Bethlehem, which signifies the House of Bread; and in the true Church
of Christ this Bread of Life is the only food of Souls, the which being the
flesh of Christ our Life, all the heavenly Offspring live thereby, John 6.57.
He that eats me, shall live by me; and from hence the Bread of Life is also
ministerially tendered; For the Spirit and the Bride say Come, and let him that
Hears, say Come, and whosoever will, let him come and take of the Water of
Life freely, Rev. 22.17. and so Prove. 9.5. Come eat of my bread, and drink of
the Wine which I have mingled. So Isa. 55.2 Why do ye spend your money for that
which is not Bread, and your Labor for that which satisfies not?

But fourthly, by Bethsaida, the house of Fishing, and in this City the Fishers
of men do dwell, who being crafty with a divine subtilty, catch Souls of Men
for Christ, and bring them home to their Master. 2 Cor. 12.16. From hence came
that Squadron of Fishes, of whom Merlin told Lucius, that should enter upon his
Territories unarmed with Sword or Spear, unto whom all Nations should in time
obey, who shall destroy the Temples of thy Gods, O Lucius, and convert them to
the service of their Eternal King. These are also skilful in Fishing in the
great deeps, and find in the Book of Scripture and the book of Nature many
precious Jewels.

Fifthly, by Timnath-heres, Judges 2.9. signifiing the image of the Sun, and
upon this City does the Sun of Righteousness arise and shine with great, yet
with invisible Glory, to the World, and to the careless Daughters, Mal. 4.2.
and is a Sun and a Shield unto it, Psalm 84.11. for this City has Truth in the
inward parts, Psalm. 51.6. and is all glorious within, Psalm. 45.13. And as the
natural Sun by shining through a little crevice into a House, forms his own
image on the wall or on the floor, even so the glorious Sun of Righteousness
shining into the hearts of the Inhabitants of this City, 2 Cor. 4.6. forms his
own most precious Image there, Chap. 3.18. from whence the beams of divine
virtue shine forth to the World; by which they become a light to men.

Sixthly, by Bethania, which in several languages, as skilful men observe,
signifies diverse things, as sometimes the House of Obedience, and indeed the
obedience of Faith is eminently found in this City. Secondly, the House of
Affliction, of which she is often partaker, as a state that naturally attends the
Gospel. Thirdly, of the Grace of the Lord, which is the only virtue by which
this City Works, and Reigns, and Shines. Fourthly, the House of a Song, from
the new Song, which by redeemed Souls, is sung to Jesus their Savior, who came
to save his People from their Sins. But Fifthly, the House of the Poor, from
the Hebrew Bith and Gnania, from this signification is derived, and this is the
true state of the Church of Christ, with respect to humane excellencies, being
poor in Spirit, but rich in Faith, empty of guile, but full of Sincerity; is
become a Fool for Christ, in respect of Worldly Wisdom, but wise in Christ,
with that Wisdom which is from above; she is weak and feeble as the Conies, a
feeble folk, Prove. 30 26. with respect to humane Power, but full of might and
Power by the glorious Spirit of the Lord, Mic. 3.8. she is ashamed of all her
own Righteousness, both of nature, and also that which is of the Law, it being
imperfect by reason of the fall, and so she accounts it as filthy rags and as a
menstruous cloth, but is full of the everlasting Righteousness Christ first
imputed to her, and after wrought in her, by his divine Power; yet all her
natural glory is wholly veiled, for the Son of Righteousness has looked upon
her, and she is become black and undone in her self, because her eyes have seen
the King the Lord of Hosts. Cant. 1.6. Isa. 6.5. but this Poverty consisted not
only in internal things, but also in the things of this World, in which she
seldom flourishes in uncertain Riches, nor appears in that Pomp and State in
which Babel shines; she sets light by the unrighteous Mammon of this World, it
being the portion of men of earthy Spirits, therefore she is often in Hunger,
Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, she has been Destitute, Afflicted and Tormented,
has wandered from one kindred to another People, and has seldom any certain
dwelling place; oft-times this Abel is slain by this Cainish brood, but like
the Phoenix she springs again out of her own ashes, and the gates of Hell do
not prevail against her. Babel has Golden Chalices, but Wooden Priests; but
she is contented with wooden Chalices, and rejoices in her golden or shining
Ministry. Lo this is that little City which we call Bethania, where also the
poor wise man (Eccl. 9.14.) is content and delights to dwell, who became poor
for our sakes, that we might be made rich by him, he had not a hole to rest his
head in this World, that we might possess Eternal Mansions of Glory in the
World to come, he left Heaven that we might be redeemed from Hell, came out of
the bosom of his Father, that we that were banished from it might return. He
was crowned with Thorns, that we might obtain by him a Crown of Righteousness
and Glory; he was content to bear his Father's wrath, that we might obtain an
interest in his Eternal Love. In fine be died an accursed Death, that we might
live a Blessed Life, so that visible poverty has been incident to Christ and
his little City; and it is like to be the Estate of his espoused Virgin till
the Marriage of the Lamb be come, and she be instated in his eternal Riches.

But now Bethania was a certain City or Town almost two Miles from Jerusalem,
John 11.16. situate on the Mount of Olives, Mar. 11.1. and was a Place which
Jesus often visited; into Bethania he went out of Jerusalem to lodge, after the
Children had sung Hosannah, Mat. 21.17. Near this Place stood the Fig Tree
which he cursed in his return again into the City, bebecause it bare nothing
but leaves. ver. 9. It was in Bethania where the Woman anointed Jesus's feet,
Mat. 26 6. and John 12.3. In this Bethania Jesus mildly reproved Martha, and
justified Mary in waiting rather for something from him, than being cumbred
with Martha, in preparing something for him, Luke 10.38, 39, 40, 41, 42.

In this Bethania he raised Lazarus, and wept for Sympathy, John 11.35, and 43.
In or near Bethania he blessed his Disciples, Luke 24.59. and from thence was
taken up into Heaven, verse. 57. Acts 1.9, 12. And to this Mount of Olives,
where Bethania stands, Jesus, for ought appears, may come the second time, as
the first Place he will visit in his Return, as being the last he left in his
Ascent to Heaven, according to that Prophecy, Zech. 14.4.

This Bethania therefore is a clear Representation of the true Church of
Christ, where his quickening Spirit revives the otherwise dying Souls of men;
here he mildly reproves those who do one good thing, when another more weighty
should be attended; in this place and state of poorness of Spirit are the
spiritual Blessings enjoyed from Christ our Savior; and here Souls sit with a
weeping Mary in great humility at Jesus his Feet; here Jesus seems to weep
through Sympathy with his poor and afflicted People, and will not forget the
Congregation of his poor for ever, 34.19. This City is indeed a true Communion
of Saints, according to that ancient Article of the Apostles Creed; and in the
fullness of this Union, Meum and Tuum are not the native Speech; this Union is
perfectly compacted and maintained by unfeigned Love, the Bond of Perfection,
Col. 3.16. And where Love abounds, Life, and Goods, and all, will very easily
go for the Brethren; therefore we long greatly to see this Place and State, and
often express our Desires in this manner; O that the Salvation of Israel were
come out of Sion! And, Return, Return, O Shulamite, return, return, that we may
look upon thee; for the Shulamite has long time dwelt in the Clefts of the
Rock, and the secret places of the Stairs; and our Church has yet recovered
but little of her Beauty; nevertheless, we have found out her Charter, and out
of it collected some part of her Divinicy; and it is greatly desired that all
the true Sons of Sion would leave all their Fury in which they have appeared
like a wild Bull in a Net, Isa. 1.200.
and take poor Bethania by the hands, that Sharon may be a Fold of Flocks, and
the Valley of Achor, Isa. 65.10.
viz. a state of trouble, for a door of hope, Hos. 2.15. That the ruins of
many gener ations may be repaired, and that the Divisions of Reuben may not
fill the Souls of the Poor with the cup of trembling for whose sakes chiefly we
have written this little Treatise, and have likewise given an Account why we
call it Bethania; who, though we have been born out of due time, and very
unworthy to be numbered among the Repairers of Breaches, yet we have endeavored
and attempted to cast in our Mite in order thereunto; and in all that we have
done, do really design the Glory of God, the Benefit of the poor in Spirit, the
Satisfaction of all our Mothers Children, the Advantage of Truth, and Profit of
our Fellow Creatures, and desire herein to be judged by the great Charter of
Bethania; and so, Courteous Reader, I commit thee to the Father of Mercies,
desiring, that the Wonderful Counselor may be thine infallible Guide, and keep
thee from every crooked Path: Even so, Amen.

W. P.

Ancient Christianity REVIVED: etc.
Principles of Doctrine believed in Bethania, laid down in several Articles for
the Removing of Doubts, touching the Faith of the House of the Poor.
FIRST.
THERE is one only God acknowledged and believed in Bethania, Joh. 17.3. Joh.
4.24. Col. 1.15. 1 Kings 8.27. Heb. 13.8. Rev. 1.4. Jer. 23.24. 2 Cor. 6.18. 1 John 4.16. 1 Timothy 6.16. Jude 25. 1 Pet. 1.16. Heb. 13.20. Psalm. 145.9. Psalm.
103.17. Deuteronomy. 32, 14. Exodus 34.7. Psalm. 103.2.
who is purely a Spirit, invisible, incomprehensible, eternal, infinite,
omnipotent; who is Love it self: dwelling in light, unto which no man may
approach: and is most wise, most holy, a God of Grace, full of tender and
Everlasting Mercies; yet, most just, without iniquity, and will in no wise
clear the guilty: knows all Secrets, and fills all places, of whom are all
things: who is distinguished, not divided, into Father, Son, and Spirit.

SECONDLY,
II. 1 Cor. 8.6. 1 John 5.7. 1 Timothy 3.16. Joh. 14.9. Heb. 1.3. Rev. 1.8. Phil.
2.16. Isa. 43.10. 1 Cor. 8.6. John 1.3. Rev. 3.14. Colos. 1.15.
Who that he might become manifest unto Angels and to men, gave forth an
express Image of his own invisible substance; which Image, is the First-last,
the very form of God, before whom there was no God formed: by whom were all
things made that were made; who is the beginning of the Creation of God, and
Firstborn of every Creature; the Head of all Principality and Power; The
glorious Root of David, and Upholder of the whole Universe; in whom dwells the
fullness of the Godhead bodily, and from whom the glorious Attributes and
Properties of the absolute Deity do shine forth in full Perfection: He is of
the same Essence with the Father, as firmly believed in Bethania.

THIRDLY.
III. Which glorious Image in fuilness of time, Gal. 4.4. Heb. 2.14. Isa. 7.14.
Heb. 7.14. Romans 1.3. Heb. 4.5. Luke 21.23.
assumed humane Nature, and was born of a pure Virgin: A branch sprung out of
David, and made of his seed according to the Flesh, and so in all things like
unto us, sin only excepted: in which humane Nature, he was nourished by, and
subject to Parents: And in it was circumcised, and fulfilled the whole Law; who
also about thirty years of Age, was baptized to fulfill all Righteousness both
Legal and Evangelical. Mat. 3.15.
In it he was tempted, but overcame the Tempter, Mat. 4.3.
and then went out to preach to the lost Sheep of the house of Israel. Act.
2.22. Luke 24.19. 1 Pet. 2.21. Isa. 53.4. Chap. 7. Phil. 2.8. Col. 2.15. Isa.
53.11. Dan. 9.24. 2 Cor. 5.19. John 1.29. Luke 1.77. Chap. 24.27. Exodus 34.7. 1
Cor. 15.4. Dan. 9.24. Romans 4.25. Acts 1.3, Chap. 1.11. Heb. 12.3. Mat. 15.18.
John 5.27. 2 Cor. 5.10. Mat. 1.21, 23.
In our humane Nature he wrought many famous Miracles, and gave forth a perfect
pattern of absolute Piety: At last quietly endured the smitings of God, and
uttermost cruelties of men; subjecting himself to the Death of the Cross; by
which he spoiled the Principallity of Darkness, satisfied Divine Justice, and
so made Reconciliation between God and Man. And having obtained Eternal
Redemption for us; opened a way for the Remission of sins, which before Divine
Justice would in no wise admit of: And then the third day in our Nature, rose
again from the Dead, and brought in Everlasting Righteousness for our
Justisication: And after he had reigned forty days over Death in this World, he
ascended in our Nature, into Heaven; and sat down on the Right Hand of God,
and so has all power in Heaven and Earth delivered into his hands; who as he
is the Son of Man, will come again the second time, to judge the Quick and the
Dead, and give to every one as his work shall be. He is our Emanuel, and our
only Savior in Bethania.

FOURTHLY,
IV. Genesis 1.1. Exodus 20.11. Col. 1.16. Rev. 4.11. Psalm. 103.19, 20. Mat. 18.10.
Heb. 1.7. Verse 14. Ezekiel. 28.15. Verse 3. Ephesians. 21.22. Rev. 4.10. Chap. 19.14.
Jude 6. 2 Pet. 2.4. Mat. 25.41.
Touching the Creation, in it glorious Elohim (the number of whose Name is
Three) Created three sorts of living Creatures: The first whereof were Angels,
unto whom Heaven was assigned for their Habitation. These by Nature are
Spirits, and their Life is only rational and immortal, of whom the firstborn
of every Creature was and is Sovereign Lord, being the glorious Head of all
their Principality; and after whom they were to move in great Subordination.
Their Essence is immutable, but their State in Creation subject to change:
Therefore many of them breaking the order designed by Creation, and kept not
their first Estate, were cast down to Hell, and are reserved under Darkness in
Chains, unto the Judgment of the Great day: after which, they are deeply
involved in Gods Eternal Wrath, out of which there is no Redemption.

The Second sort of Creatures was Man, Heb, 1.7.
who was by Creation, a little lower than the Angels: but his Soul was a
rational Being, therefore of the same Essence with them, not capable of
Annihilation; but only a change of State: Genesis 3.22. Chap, 2.8.
His Body was immortal, in which it was to be confirmed by Eating of the Tree
of Life; his place was Eden, his State was Paradise, Male and Female, Genesis
1.27. Eccles. 7.29,
capable of producing an Offspring. He was made in he Image of God, viz. in
Holiness, Wisdom, Sovereignty: and was Lord of all the inferior Creation, unto
whom all the communicable Attributes of the Divine Nature were communicated; as
Mercy, Justice, Patience, Bounty, Love, Humility, and suchlike. He was
naturally inclined to good but capable, being as yet unconsirmed, Genesis 1, 3^.
of being drawn into Evil; therefore being tempted, Chap. 3, 19.
broke that Righteous Law that was given him by reason of which his Body was
designed to the Dust, Eccles. 12.7. Chap. 20.21. Jer. 2.21.
his sensitive Spirit to extinguish as the Spirit of a Beast: and his rational
Soul to a change of State: as having lost the Image of God, and fallen into the
Image of the fallen Angels, sunk down with them into the same Wrath of God, out
of which, neither by himself, Ephesians. 2.2. Psalm. 49, 7.
nor yet by any other Creature, there was no Redemption. This point will be
further argued and endeavored to be cleared unto any sober Person that shall
doubt thereof, if he inquire further about it in Bethania.

The Third sort of Creatures were those that move in the Air, in the Earth, and
in the Waters. Their Estate was inferior to man's, as man's was inferior to
Angels. Their Place or Habitation was and is in this World; Genesis 1.26. 1 Pet.
2.11.
but since the fall man does cohabit with them, Heb. 11.13. Chap. 13.14. Job.
1.21. Romans 1.12. John 3.5.
yet is but a stranger in it, and has no continuing City here; he enters this
World naked and mourningly, lives in it sinfully; and except he be Born again,
and so recover himself to his first Estate, he must leave it miserably; this
third sort of Creatures have no Rational Life, therefore their end is only
anihilation, there being no state after Death proper to them.

FIFTHLY.
Touching the Decrees of God, Ephesians. 1.11. Jam. 1.17. Jud. 4. Mark 16.16.
about the everlasting state of men, it is concluded and believed in Bethania,
that they are eternal and unchangeable, and that they do respect the Persons
and not the Qualities of men; Mat. 25.34. Mat. 3.10. Psalm. 50.22. Mat. 24.5.
so that there is a state of Election, and a state of Reprobation proper to
men, as they are found in a state of Regeneration to Christ, which is the true
estate of Election; or remain in the Fall, which is the true state of
Reprobation. Even so that Decree which is proper to that estate is executed
upon them.

SIXTHLY.
It is concluded in Bethania, Tit. 3.3. Ephesians. 2.3. 2 Timothy 2.19. Esa. 42, 1. Rev.
5.5. Romans 11.17.
that none are elected but such as are in Christ, who is the only Elect of God,
and the Foundation that stands sure, in whom the Lord knows them that are
his: So that he is the Elected Root, and Heaven-born Souls are the Elected
Branches, 2 Cor. 5.19. 2 Pet. 1.4.
and there is no real being in him, but what is by Regeneration, Ephesians. 4.15. 2
Cor. 2.18. Romans 8.29. v. 30. Romans 1.16.
in which the New-creature-Soul is partaker of the Divine Nature, being
Ingrafted into him as a Graft into a Stock, and so partaketh of his virtue;
from whence springs up the Divine Nature and Image, which is the Image of the
first born among many Brethren; unto a conformity to which Image, God has
predestined the Sons of men, and into a conformity thereunto he does call
them by the Gospel of his Grace; and in that consormity he does Justify them,
and Glorify all those that shall be Eternally saved.

SEVENTHLY.
Bethania further believes, Ephesians. 2.2. Romans 3.11. Mat. 7.18. Luke 19.10, Col.
1.13. Act. 26.18, John 15.15. 1 Cor. 15.10
That man in the Fall is dead in sin, and averse to every thing that is good;
and therefore though means be prepared of God for his recovery, yet without the
Grace of God to help him to lay hold on that means, he is like still to
continue in that lost Estate, for deeply entangled in the Kingdom of Darkness
he is, therefore held by the Prince thereof in great Captivity and Bondage;
which being firmly believed, it must needs follow, that Free Will is a great
stranger in the House of the Poor.

EIGHTHLY.
Therefore that Grace by which Christ our Lord tasted Death for every man, Tit.
2.11. Heb. 2.9. Chap. 9.15. Ephesians. 2.4. Tit. 2.12. Romans 2.4.
and procured by the merit thereof Salvation for them, has appeared, and does
appear unto all men, reaching them the way, and administering to them the power
to deny Ungodliness and Worldly-Lusts: For the observation of which appearance,
and for the complying with which power, the Lord waits in long forbearance
upon men, and calls upon them by the loud Calls of the Gospel; striving with
them by the frequent working of his holy Spirit, Genesis 6.3.
that so they may come into that Estate in which this Salvation may be obtained
by them.

NINTHLY.
So that the first moving cause of man's Conversion is God, Ezekiel. 16.6. Genesis
3.9. Heb. 12.2. Act. 14.27. Phil. 1.27. Act. 11.18. Isa. 65.2. Prove. 1.25. Luke
13.34. Matt. 22.9.
who is the Author of their Faith, and opens the door thereof, and gives
power to believe, and grants unto men repentance unto Life; stretching out
his Arms of Mercy unto the Stubborn and Rebellious, and to such as set at
naught all his Counsels; seriously desiring to gather in all those, who in the
end are not gathered; inviting to the Feast, and that in good earnest, those
that do not come; marveling at their unbelief, and reproving their wilful and
careless refusal; Hos. 11.4,
but his manner of working in the dispensations of Grace, is to persuade, not
to force the will of man; theresore it is concluded in Bethania, that the power
to repent and believe are the Gifts of God, Mark. 1.15.
but the Acts of Believing and Repentance are the Acts of men.

TENTHLY.
And seeing Bethania has been suspected in her Doctrine, about the great work
of Christ's Satisfaction; She seriously professes, and has fully concluded,
Heb. 7.27. Rom, 5.10. 2 Cor. 5.18. Heb. 10.12. Verse 14.
that by the sufficiency of Christ, the work of Reconciliation of God to men,
was fully wrought; and satisfaction for all sins past present, and to come, was
completely made; and justification and remission of sins, by that means was
effectually procured: so that he needed to suffer no more, his Sacrifice being
every way sufficient for those ends for which it was designed; John 16.2. John
5.22. Mark 16.16.
upon which satisfaction made by Christ's sufferings, the Father delivered all
Flesh into his hands, that he might give Eternal Life, or dispose to Eternal
Torments, such as conform, or remain Nonconformists to the gracious Terms of
the Gospel. Romans 3.25.
So that in the first Acts of Repentance and Faith, men do only receive
Remission of sins that are pasto according to the riches of the Grace of God
through Christ; and in case any truly converted Soul be overcome by the
violence of Temptation, Heb. 4, 15. Chap. 7.15. Joh. 1.9. 2 Cor. 7.10. 1 Timothy
2.5.
and slip and fall, and thereby be bruised very sore; yet if he readily confess
his Sins, and enter into most true Repentance for the same, Jesus our Savior,
as a Mediator between God and man, by virtue of his Intercession, is able to
recover them, and to save to the uttermost those who thus come to God by Him:
Hos. 14.4. Isa. 57.18. Heb. 9.22.
so pardoning and healing the wounded but Penitent Soul; and into this capacity
he was put, and entered into the Holy place for this end, by his own blood,
without which there is no Remission of Sins; so that the work of Reconciliation
was only wrought by the death of the Son of God, but the Salvation of
Reconciled Souls is fully completed by his most precious Life, Romans 5.9. Heb.
7.25.
as may clearly appear by Christian Principles, professed and believed in the
little City Bethania.

And thus, having laid down in certain Articles, The sum in brief of the
Doctrine of Bethania, as it respects God to Man: I shall as the Lord shall
assist, briefly hint at her Doctrine as it respects Man to God.

And ELEVENTHLY.
There are six things believed in Bethania, to be the Foundation upon which
Christian Religion is to stand; And they are written, Heb. 6.1, 2. The first of
which, is, Repentance from Dead Works: Act. 3.19. 1 These. 1.9. 2 Cor. 7.10.
Ephesians. 4.18. Isa. 14.29. Col. 1.21. Ephesians. 5.8. Joel 2.13, 14. Psalm. 51 17. James
4.10. Job 42.6.
which is a true turning of the whole mind to God; without which turning, it is
impossible that men should walk with him; the which turning is not only a
change of Judgment, but also a change of Life: For from a mind estranged from
God, proceeds (as from the Serpents Root) an evil Judgment, and a wicked
Life; but when the mind is wholly turned to God, a Right Judgment and a New
Life presently ensues. Besides, Repentance is an hearty sorrow for Sins that
are past, which shows forth it self in great brokeness of Heart, and deep
humblings of Soul before the Father of Mercies; abhorring it self in Dust and
Ashes, in that it has lived so long in sin against him from whom all its good
proceeds; Act. 9.11. Psalm. 109.22. Job 31.1. Chap. 34.32.
and this godly sorrow works Repentance unto Salvation, not to be repented
of: and further appears by earnest Prayers, and frequent fastings, and careful
Circumspection, with steadfast Resolutions through the Grace of God for time to
come, to lead a Holy Life. In this Estate the Soul is received into Mercy, Luke
1.77.
and through tender Mercies obtains Remission of Sins.

TWELFTHLY,
The Second thing, Joh. 6.29.
is Faith, in which there are three parts: The first of which, James 2.19.
is Credence; by which we believe the things reported of God and Christ;
Salvation, and the way thereof, to be true.

Secondly, Adherence, By which we believe the things reported to be good, John
12.42.
excellent, and very profitable, adhering to them in our Affectionate Desire.
Thus far went the Rulers and many others in the way of Faith, believing the
things reported by Christ, Mark 6.20.
to be true, and adhering unto them as good things; Mat. 25.10. Act. 8.21.
Chap. 11.23. Ephesians. 1.13. Ephesians. 4.2. Mark 7.29. Hos. 11.8. Act. 15.9. John
1.16. Psalm. 97.2. Psalm. 66.9.
but yet for all this, came short of Salvation: which stands at utmost end of
Faith.

The Third and last part of which, is Compliance; By which the Souls of men
comply, and become one with the things of God. And herein Faith arrives at his
Maturity and Fullness; being now completed in all its parts; in which complete
state, it reaches unto the very Heart of Christ, in whom all fullness dwells;
and draws that virtue from him, by which the saving health of God is brought
into, and also maintained in the believing Soul.

THIRTEENTHLY.
The Third thing is Baptism, in which also are three parts: Heb, 6.2. Acts
10.42. Chap. 38. Romans 6.4. Mat. 28.19.
And therefore, in this place called Baptisms: The formal part of which, is
Water; in which the whole body is dipped or plunged in every part; and this
done, in the Name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Spirit. By
this formal part of Baptism, Acts 8.13.
we are baptized into the Name and Profession of Divine Christianity; which
outward washing is a true figure of the inward washing of the Soul by the Blood
of Christ, 1 Pet. 3.21. Heb. 10.22. Tit. 3.2. Romans 6.5. Isa. 1.6. Acts 15.9.
and Sanctification of the Holy Spirit; and is the laver of Regeneration, but
not Regeneration it self. It is a sign of our being dead unto Sin, and burial
with Christ in the likeness of his Death, and of our Resurrection with him into
Newness of Life: And therefore, as every part of the Soul was defiled by Sin,
and is actually cleansed in its turning to God, even so also, as a true figure
hereof, after Repentance and Faith is professed, every part of the body is to
be washed; John 13.10. 1 Cor. 6.11. 1 Cor. 12.13. 2 Pet. 1.4. 2 Timothy 1.7. John
3.6.
showing thereby the Universal Defilement of the Soul before its cleansing, and
that after its cleansing, it ought to be universally pure.

The Second part of Baptism is that of the Spirit, by which cleansed Souls are
baptized into the Mystical Body of Christ, 2 Cor. 2.15. Gal. 5.16. Isa. 30.11.
and into the Nature, Power, and Virtue of Divine Christianity; This Baptism is
Effected, when the whole Soul is Spiritualized and Regenerated into the Divine
Nature of Christ, and formed after his own Image, that as in outward Baptism
the whole Body is covered over with Water: even so also in this Baptism, the
whole Soul is covered over with the Spirit of God, in which it is to live and
walk, and act in Divine Things; and this is true Regeneration; of which the
other part is but the Laver. Blessed therefore are those Souls who are born not
only of Water, John 3.2.
but also of the Spirit.

The Third Part of Baptism, Luke 20.20. 2 Timothy 1.8.
is that of Afflictions; and into this the Spiritual Soul is deeply plunged for
the Gospel sake; and as Christ our Lord was straightened in himself until this
part of Baptism was also accomplished; even so the spiritual Soul desires to
confirm his Love to him, Romans 5.3.
by great and overwhelming Tribulations: Therefore, though this Scripture, Heb.
6.2. mentions, Baptisms: yet Bethania believes, Heb. 10.32.
that according to Ephesians. 4.5. That there is but one Baptism: of which these
three are the several parts.

FOVRTEENTHLY.
The fourth thing is laying on of hands, Heb. 5.12.
which is believed in Bethania to be one of these first Principles of the
Oracles of God, Mat. 28.20.
and therefore given by Christ to his true Ministers, to be by them performed
upon believing and baptized Souls; Act. 8.14. Chap. 19.6.
with which they use earnest Prayers and serious Supplications to the Sovereign
God, in whom is infinite fullness, that those Souls may receive his holy Spirit;
and that Divinely assisting Grace, 2 Cor. 12.9. 1 Cor. 1.8.
by which they may be instructed, confirmed, and enabled, to walk and persevere
to the end, in that Divine Christianity in which they are now engaged by holy
Baptism. This principle is to be asserted by all Christ's true Ministers, 1 Cor.
15.1. Act. 20.20. Verse 27.
as their own indispensible Duty, and by them to be performed as an highly
excellent privilege for believing and baptized Souls in Bethania.

FIFTEENTHLY.
The fifth thing is the Resurrection of the dead, both of Just and Unjust, Act.
24.15. Joh. 5.28.
and is a Doctrine that in Bethania has been earnestly contended for, and is
still of great estimation in the house of the Poor, that as by the fall, both
Soul and Body lost their paradisical Estate, and became dead unto it; Even so
God has appointed a way by him who is the Resurrection and the Life, John
11.25. John 5.5.
to obtain it again; and it is begun first in the Soul, and that in this world,
who by the Voice of Christ, in the Dispensation of Grace, Tim. 5.6. Romans 6.11.
is raised up from a Death in Sin, to a Life of Righteousness, which is a true
state of true Regeneration and Spiritual Resurrection, 1 Pet. 1.23. Ephesians. 2.16.
by which it recovers again the Divine Image, 2 Col. 3.18. 1 John 1.3.
and so obtains communion with God; the which by the Fall, was utterly lost.
2 Samuel 14.14.
In which communion stands the Divine Joy, which is a true paradisical state, 1 John 1.4.
and first part of that Resurrection of Just men, in which Bethania obtains
great consolation. Job 19.25. Sam. 26.19. Mat. 27.52. Romans 8.11. 1 Cor. 15.42.
The second part is that of the Body, which will be accomplished when Jesus
shall appear the second time; by whose Voice of Power, in the dispensation of
Glory, he will bring it to pass, that has said, John 6.39. Phil. 3.20.
I will rise again at the last day, in which these Eyes shall see God, and
these Vile Bodies of ours be made like the Glorious Body of Christ. Romans 6.19.
So that these Members of our Bodies, Job 17.14. 1 Cor. 4.11. Psalm. 49.12.
which were yielded in this World as Instruments of Righteousness unto the
Glory of God, although by reason of the Fall we are sunk down into a state of
Corruption, afflicted with Hunger, Thirst, Cold and Nakedness, subject to
Sickness, Pains, Persecutions, Deformity and variety of Likeness, like the
Beasts and Fowls, into whose Kingdom we now are fallen, having lost our own,
Eccl. 3.19. 1 Cor. 15.43.
which at first was Paradise, and therefore subject to Mortality and Death, as
they are; yet this very Essence, shall rise again, but in a far more excellent
Estate, and become a glorious Body, like the glorious Body of Christ; Matt.
22.30. Gal. 3.28.
in which Estate it will be neither Male nor Female, neither Marry, nor be
given in Marriage, nor be of variety of Form, nor yet appear in the
imperfections of old Age or Infancy, but all Heaven-born Christians, whose
Souls are formed into the Image of Christ, and also grown up into his
Similitude, and into the measure of his Stature in the inward man: Even so in
the Resurrrection, Phil, 3.21. Ephesians. 4.13.
the Bodies of the Saints shall be all of one entire likkeness one with
another, fashioned in the likeness, and raised up into the measure of the
Stature of the Glorious Body of Christ, and now become meet Companions for
their Heaven-born Souls; unto whom in their corruptible State before the
Resurrection, they were mere Prisons; 2 Cor. 5.2.
and in this united State of Body and Soul, Rev. 19.7.
the whole Catholic Church becomes Triumphant, and is the glorious Bride the
Lambs Wife; Chap. 21.9.
who being now Married unto him, which is the highest degree of her Blessed
Union; Verse 7.
she is therefore Instated in his Unspeakable Glory, in which she lives, and
with whom she shines for evermore. Blessed therefore are those Souls which
shall at last obtain this glorious Resurrection of Just men, Mat. 13.43. Rev.
20.6.
about which the Faith of Bethania is firm and unshaken; but as for Unjust men,
who will not hear the Voice of Christ in the Dispensation of Grace, and come
out of the Grave of Sin by the sweet awakening Call of Gods convincing Spirit;
Prove. 6.9. Joh. 16.8. Ephesians. 5.14. Joh. 8.44.
these must arise from Death and the Grave by force, in the dispensation of
Vengeance; and as their Souls have lived in a state of Sin unto the lusts and
will of the Devil, by reason of which they are deeply defiled with diverse kinds
of Impieties, and so in the sacred Scriptures are rightly called Serpents, Mat.
23.33. Chap. 7.6. Ver. 15. Luke 13.32. Job 20.5. Isa. 14.12. Job 41.34.
Vipers, Dogs, Swine, Wolves, Foxes, and such like: Even so in the Resurrection
their now beautiful and stately Bodies, in which they are proud, and triumph
like the Peacock with his flourishing Tail, following the steps of Lucifer
their Infernal King, shall receive an ugly deformed monstrous shape, suitable
for such a Devilish Soul; whose Image they received in this World, 1 Cor.
15.38. Ephesians. 2.2.
and in whose Spirit they walked while in this World; therefore in that Image
their Souls and Bodies must appear in the World to come, and sink down in it
into Gods Eternal Wrath; in which, as in unquenchable Fire, maintained by the
Breath of the Eternal God, as a stream of Brimstone, Isa. 30.33. Mark 9.46.
to make their Torments everlasting.

SIXTEENTHLY.
The sixth thing, according to the Doctrine of Bethania, Act. 17.31. Romans 2.16.
2 Cor. 5 10.
is Eternal Judgment, or a day wherein or in which God will Judge the Secrets
of men by Jesus Christ; before which Judgment Seat must all both good and bad
appear, and there receive, according to the things done in the Body, whether
they be good or evil; Mat. 12.37.
in which time the Justification of Christian Souls shall be fully completed,
who were Justified first from the Sin of their Nature, Joh. 1.29. 1 John 2.2.
by the mere Merits of Christ, who as the Lamb of God, takes away the Sin of
the World. Secondly, from the Sin of their Persons, through faith in his Blood,
Romans 3.25. Romans 2.13. Rev. 22.14. Matt. 7.21.
even from all the Sins that were past through the forbearance of God, and now
lastly, are Justified as doers of the Commandments of Christ their Lord; Matt.
25.34. Rev. 14.13.
and so all acts of Obedience to him, and all exercises and sufferings for him,
with all acts of Charity to his People, are brought into open view before
Angels and Men, Heb. 9.15. 2 These. 2.16. Jer. 15.20.
and so rewarded with an Eternal Inheritance to their everlasting Consolation;
in which Judgment the Sin of those true Israelites may be sought for, but
cannot be found, Act. 3.19.
being blotted out in this time of Refreshings, which is now enjoyed in the
glorious Presence of the Lord; then there shall be a clear discerning between
the Sinners and the Saints in Sion, Mal. 3.18. Isa. 33.14. Dan. 5.25. 1 Samuel
2.3.
between them that served God, and those that did but seem to do so; for now
Mean, the time of numbering for actions is past; and Tekel, the weighing of
actions is come; and therefore the Wheat and the Tares, though they have grown
together in one Field, Mat. 13.30. Chap. 25.32.
must be perpetually separated, and the Goats and Swine must depart on the
left hand, and the Sheep and Dover come on the right hand, and each kind be
fixed in their proper and Eternal State; Psalm. 101.1. Rev. 15.3.
from which most just and wise proceedings of a Righteous Judge, shall
Christians have cause to Sing the Song of Mercy and Judgment unto great Jehovah.

Then shall also that monstrous number, and hanious nature of Wicked men's Sins
be discovered, Eccles. 12.14. Job 20.11. Psalm. 50.21.
and set all in order in most ample manner before their Faces, the Books of
Heaven being now opened, and the Records of Conscience witnessing to their
Truth, reduces the Sinner into a speechless silence, Rev. 20.12. Matt. 22.12.
and there is none now in Heaven, Earth, or Hell, that will or can undertake to
plead their cause; no Angel in Heaven will undertake it, and so they know not
unto which of these Saints to turn; Job 5.1.
and as for Christians, they have now but one mind and will with Christ their
King, and therefore confess all his ways to be most Just and True; Rev. 15.3.
therefore the Father will neither sorrow nor now regard to see his wicked Son
condemned to Eternal Flames; nor yet the Wife her Husband; neither the Children
their Parents, nor any other Relations; for there is no knowing one another
after the Flesh any more; 2 Cor. 5.16. 1 Timothy 2.5. Act. 10.36. Prove. 1.24. Joh.
8.20.
and as for Christ the only Mediator, by whom Peace in time past might have
been made; he was not at all reguarded by them in the day of Grace: And now
that Harvest is past, and that Summer is ended, and so Mercy to them is out of
date; for he is descended from the Throne of Grace, Isa. 36.34. Chap. 59.17.
and exalted upon a Throne of Glory, and clothed with the Garments of
Vengeance, and so the meek and gentle Lamb appears as a fierce and terrible
Lion; Rev. 6.16. Romans 2.8. Matt. 5.11. Romans 2.24. Heb. 10.29.
from whose Face the Rocks and Mountains in this dreadful day cannot hide; it
is he whose Mercies they have carelessly slighted, whose Commands they have
wickedly disobeyed, whose People they have unjustly persecuted, whose most
glorious Name they have most grievously blasphemed, trampling under their Feet
the precious Blood of the Covenant, Chap. 6.6.
and crucifying unto themselves afresh the Son of God; so putting him to an
open shame, and doing despite unto the holy Spirit of Grace, and therefore in
no reason can they expect any relief at at all from Christ, whom they have thus
wickedly abused; nor from his Holy Spirit whose Counsels and Convictions they
have refused and set at naught: Acts 7.51.
And as for Rocks and Mountains, they administer them no security; for Heaven
and Earth it self will flee away from the Face of this Terrible and Angry
Judge; Rev. 20, 11.
and therefore cannot hide from his All-seeing Eye, Heb. 4.13. Romans 6.16. Zach.
1.11.
with whom they now must have to do. And as for the Devil, whom with great
Diligence they have served in this World, walking securely in it, as if God had
taken no notice of them at all: He will appear to them a very help less Master,
for he must himself to his Eternal Den of Darkness, Mat. 25.4, Mark 6.40.
where he and all his Followers in Rebellion against God, must be woeful
Companions together in that State, where the Worm will never dye, nor the Fire
ever be quenched; and so the State of unconverted Men in this terrible Day,
must needs be miserable. Therefore, no marvel if all the Workers of Iniquity,
of what Rank or Quality whatsoever, Rev. 6.15. Acts 24.25.
and such as Felix, fear and tremble at it.

SEVENTEENTHLY.
From these Principles Christians in Ancient Times went on to Perfection, Heb.
6.1. Col. 1.29.
laboring after it, and striving unto it according to the Power of God which
brought in them mightily,

But because this Doctrine is become very doubtful, and that to many serious
Persons, by reason of their long Converse in the earthly Jerusalem; John 6.60.
in which it is counted a saying too ^ard to bear; and in that also they have
pitched their Tents so near the Suburbs of Babylon, in which it is no marvel to
hear it flatly condemned ^s Heresy. We shall now therefore state it, as it is
believed in the little City Bethania.

And First therefore, Mark 4.28.
There is a Perfection of Nature, unto which every Creature, the very Beasts,
Fowls, Plants and Trees do incline and arrive to, if no Impediment hinder.

Secondly, There is a Perfection of Grace, and this in Bethania is called a
Perfection Commanded; Therefore her Inhabitants, are longing for it, James 1.4.
Phil. 1.10. Mat. 20.21. Heb. 11.40.
and laboring after it, that nothing may be wanting in the Obedience of Faith;
cheerfully enduring the Burden and Heat of the day; resigning themselves as
Clay into the hands of the Potter, that by the power of Jesus, who came to save
his People from their Sins, they may attain unto it.

But Thirdly, Mark 4.28.
There is a Perfection of Glory, which in Bethania, is called, A Perfection
Promised. Now this Perfection is a State of Reward, but the Perfection of Grace
is a State of Labor, The Perfection of Nature, and the Perfection of Glory are
easily believed. The only doubt is about the Perfection of Grace, although it
runs through the very Veins of Bethathania's Divine Charter; and was commanded
by God to Abraham, saying, Jer. 17.1. Mat. 5.48.
Walk before me, and be thou perfect; and by Christ to his Disciples, Beye
therefore perfect, as your Heavenly Father is perfect; and if thou will be
perfect, Mat. 19.21. Luke 16.40. Col. 1.28.
Go sell all and come follow me. And, Every one that is perfect shall be as his
Master, is often pressed unto by the Apostles; That I might prsent every man
perfect in Christ Jesus: whereunto I also labor according to his working that
works in me mightily: Col. 4.12. Ephesians. 4.13. 2 Cor. 7: 1. 1 John 4.17.
That ye may stand perfect and complete in all the Will of God: Unto the
measure of the Stature of the fullness of Christ, unto a perfect man;
Perfecting Holiness in the Fear of God. And herein is our love made perfect,
Phil. 3.15. EpheI. 3.9. 2 Cor. 3.18.
because as he is, so are we in this World: Let us therefore, as many as be
perfect, be thus minded; being filled with the fullness of God, changed from
Glory to Glory into the same Image with him, even as by the Spirit of the Lord:
And he that has this hope in him, 1 John 3.3. 2 Pet. 3.14.
purifieth himself even as he is pure: Wherefore Beloved, Seeing ye look for
such things, be diligent, that ye [may be found of him in peace, without Spot
and Blameless: that he might present it to himself a Glorious Church, Ephesians.
5.27.
not having spot or wrinkle, or any such thing; but that it should be Holy and
without blemish. For Pure Religion and Undefiled before God, is this, James
1.27.
To visit the Fatherless and Widows in their Affliction, and to keep our
selves unspotted from the World: many more Scriptures might be alleged to the
same purpose, But because it is an hard saying to the fleshly part, therefore
who can bear it? Matt. 7.14.
This is indeed the narrow way which Flesh and Spirit mixed together cannot walk
in: Therefore, He that is Christ's in Esponsed Union, has Crucified the Flesh
with the Affections and Lusts, Gal. 5.24. John 3.6. 1 Cor. 2.15. Gal. 5.25.
Jude 24. Romans 8.13. 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
and is born of the Spirit, and so is a complete Spiritual Man; And therefore
walks in the Spirit, hating even the very Garments spotted with the Flesh,
having through the Spirit Mortified the Deeds of the Body, by the which
suffering in the Flesh, he has ceased from Sin, and lives to God in Newness
of Life.

Therefore do we begin Christianity in the Principles before written, that we
might finish it in Perfection; 1 Cor. 9.24. Verse 25. 2 Timothy 4.7.
and so our ruaning to end this Race, and our fighting to accomplish this
Warfare; yea, all our laboring, tends to finish this Course: And here at
last the Reward will stand.

But while this Salvation is working out, Phil. 2.12. Job 12.5. Gal. 6.1. Isa.
30.26. 1 Cor. 8.12.
it is with much Fear and Trembling; and many slips, falls and wounds, poor
Souls receive in this difficult Passage; and were it not for the Intercession
of Christ, the which to us in this Case is of an unspeakable Advantage, we
might uttecly despair of coming to our journeys end: By Virtue of which, in
most true Repentance, and right humble Confession, looking to him in the true
Nature of the Christian Faith, who is Exalted at the Right Hand of his Father
for this very end; Heb. 9.24. Numb. 21.9.
the Soul is cured again from the Stings of Wilderness Serpents, by which it
was wounded in its Travels toward the Milkey Land; and so in true Watchfulness,
walking in the Light as he is in the Light, 1 Thessalonians. 5.6. 1 John 1.7.
receives Remission of its Sin, and is cleansed from all Unrighteousness: and
thus being recovered, he hastes on his way again, Psalm. 55.8. 2 Pet. 3.14.
Cant. 2.3. 2 Cor. 10 5.
performing his work with Diligence and Cheerfulness, till at last every
thought is brought into Subjection unto the Obedience of Christ. This
Perfection is not pretended to in Bethania; to be a Perfection in parts, 1 Cor.
12.11.
for that is the Gift of God, and he distributeth thereof severally to every
one as he will; but it is a coming up to all the Requirements of God that are
or can be known, with diligent search, John 15.14. 1 Pet. 1.10.
with a careful abstaining from all Actions and appearances pearances from
Evil; giving up the whole Heart and Soul to God, 1 Thessalonians 5.12. Prove. 23.6. Jer.
29.12, 13. Romans 6.19. Verse 22. Cant. 1.6.
and yielding the Members of the Body as Instruments of Righteousness in his
Service, and to his Praise: And so having the whole fruit of the Soul, and also
the whole fruit of the Body, unto most pure Holiness; the end will be
Everlasting Life. Let none of our Mothers Children be too angry with us though
we go a little out of their Vineyards in this difficult point of Doctrine; for
if they will enquire further about it, we readily shall in the best manner we
can, explain and confirm the same in all Humility and Meekness of Spirit, Col.
3.15.
which is the ruling Spirit in Bethania.

EIGHTEENTHLY.
The Catholic Church of Christ it believed in Bethania according to the
Scriptures, Ephesians. 1.23. 1 Cor. 10.16, 17. Romans 15.5. 1 Cor. 12.27. Rev. 11.1.
Psalm. 45.13. Ephesians. 1.19. Cant. 6.13. Isa. 9.6.
and that Ancient Article of the Apostles Creed, to be a Communion of Saints or
Holy ones, Constituted by Divine Appointments, and ordered by Rules from
Heaven; being richly adorned with Divine Virtue, and possessed with exceeding
great Power. She is the Blessed Sbulamite, deriving her Name and Divine Nature,
from Shulim; for Shallom, the Prince of Peace, being his Sister, and also his
Spouse, she does and wi^^ appear in a Threefold State:

The first of which, Mat. 5.14.
is Formal; I which she is as a City on a Hill, from whence True Doctrine, and
Divine Purity shines forth unto the World. In this Estate, Her Worship is
visible confisting of Forrus and Ordinance Goings-out, Ezekiel. 43.11. John 10.9.
and Coming in: And ^ this belongs those two Blessed Sacraments viz, Baptism,
and the Lord Supper; But Her formal State ^ measured from Heaven, and He whole
visible Limits round about, Ezekiel. 43.11.
must be most Holy.

Her Second State, is Spiritual; Wherein She is veiled and unknown unto the
World; John 3.2. Cant. 6.10. John 4.24. Phil. 3.3. 1 Cor. 12.13. Rev. 2.17.
John 6.55. Isa. 32.2. 1 Cor. 10.4. Cant. 8.13. Chap. 4.12.
and in this Estate. She Worshipeth the Invisible Father, in Spirit and Truth;
Enjoying a Baptisin which is inward and Spiritual; and a Supper that every one
knows not of. For the hidden Manna is Her Divine Food, and the Spiritual Rock
gives Her Water: In this Spiritual Estate, She is a close Companion with the
Blessed Lamb; and dwells within the measuring Line: So is a Garden enclosed, a
Spring shut up, a Fountain sealed; and though Her outward and visible Limit be
often assaulted, and sometimes trodden under feet by the Gentiles: Isa. 32.2.
Psalm. 91.4. Cant. 2.10.
Yet here She is secure under the Shadow of the Rock of Agess; Even under the
wing of Christ as his only Fair and Unspotted Virgin, Chap. 6.9. 2 Cor. 11.2.
Chap. 6.16. Psalm. 50.2. Isa. 60.8. Verse 1. Psalm. 87.30.
This ^s Christ's Holy Temple, wherein he dwells and walks; and the Perfection
of Beanty, out of which he shines: So that those who are fleeing as Doves to
his windows, may clearly see, That the Glory of the Lord is risen upon Her;
This is Spiritual Sion of whom many Glorious things might be spoken: But we
must come into Bethania, and be poor in Spirit to hear them.

But Her third Estate, is Glorious, Rev. 21.23. Verse 16.
and every way Perfect; In which the Light of the Sun, Moon, and Stars, are
needless: Her length, breadth, and height are now equal, for Soul and Body
both, are got beyond all Corruption, Verse 9.
and arrived at fullness of endless Glory, in which She is become the Lambs
Beautiful Bride, who in Her Spiritual Estate, was only Espoused to Him, and
therefore is Exalted with Him upon a Throne of Glory, Rev. 3.21. Chap. 19.7.
Mal. 4.2. Isa. 60.20. Nah. 3.4.
and all the Heavenly Host rejoices at it. Thus the Lamb who was before Her
Sun of Righteousness, is now become Her Sun of Glory, and will never more be
Ecclipsed from Her.

But Bethania has heard of a well-favoured Harlot, Isa. 4.1. Isa. 33.14. Rev.
18.7.
yet delights not to have any Acquaintance with her; who though she derives her
Name from Christ, yet in Nature is far different from Him: But she will at last
appear in her own Estate, being stripped and made bare, and unclothed of all
her Forms of Godliness; and so these Sinners in the visible Sion shall be
afraid: Isa. 27.4. John 15.6.
and that Fearfulness shall surprise the seeming Christian, who being a
fruitless Fig Tree, and but a wellfavoured Harlot, must together with the
pricking Bramble, and Defiled Strumpet, be Fuel for Everlasting Burnings.

NINETEENTHLY.
The true Ministers of Christ; and such as are approved in Bethania, Eusebius.
Eccl. Hist. Lib. 3. Chap. 21.
are men of passing pure lives; be-dect with every kind of Virtue, Divinely
instructed out of the great Charter of Bethania, Tit. 1.6, 7, 8, 9. Jude 3. 1
Pet. 5.1. Verse 4. Luke 22.32
by the Holy Spirit of Jesus: keeping close to those Principles upon which
Christian Religion is founded; carefully pursuing those Principles by which it
is carried on, and contending earnestly for those Principles by which it is
completed. These being inferior Shepherds, are to be guided by Eupoimenos the
Prince of Shepherds: And so being first Converted themselves, are carefully to
strengthen their Brethren, and diligently to feed the little Children; John 21,
15.
that so as their Ears do hear, and their Eyes do see; even so also, their
Hands may handle the Word of Life, going still before the Flock in the
difficult Passages of every kind of Suffering, 1 John 1.1. Jer. 50.8. Phil.
4.9. Cant. 1.8. James 5.10. Act. 20.19. 2 Cor. 6.6. Acts 6.4. 2 Cor. 6.5. Chap.
11.26, 27 Acts 20.20. Tit. 2.15. Prove. 28.1. 1 Thessalonians. 2.10. Mat. 10.16. 2 Cor.
6.4. 1 Cor. 4.1. 1 Timothy 1.11. Mat. 5.12.14. 2 Cor. 8.23. Acts 1.1.
and leaving the Print of their Feet in the narrow Path of Self-Denial: giving
them good Examples of great Patience, Deep Humility, and Divine Purity; given
much to Prayer, Fastings and Watchings: Often contented to be in Weariness and
Painfulness in their frequent Journeys or Journyings; taking care of all the
Churches; teaching also from House to House, that the Guilt of Souls may not be
upon them. Being bold and undaunted in Reproving. Sin in high or low; like
Lions that turn not aside for any: And yet in Nature, Meek, and Tender like
Lambs and the harmless Doves of the Valley; carefully encouraging the least
Spark of Virtue, and in all things approving themselves as the Ministers of
Christ, as such who are put in trust with the Mysteries of the Gospel; That
they may be a Light unto the World, a Salt of the Earth, and a Glory in the
Christian Churches; that so as the great Shepherd, their Master, whose work was
both to Do and Teach: They also may say, What ye have heard and seen in us,
That do, and the God of Peace shall be with you; walking as we have given you
an exact Example; Phil. 4.9. Phil. 3.20.
For our Conversation ^ in Heaven, be therefore followers of us, as we have
followed our Lord Jesus.

And so as every one has received a Ministerial Gift, 1 Pet. 4.10. Mat. 19.28.
having first made Experimental Trial of the painful Passages of Divine
Regeneration, Isa. 50.4. ^ Tim. 2.18.
he is to minister unto others with much freeness, having the Learned Tongue of
Divine Teachings; that he may rightly divide the Word of Truth, Luke 22.32.
Mark. 10.21. 1 Samuel 24.24. Heb. 10.38. 2 Cor. 2.14. John 3.10. 1 Cor. 8.1, Heb.
8.12, 13, 2 Cor. 11.3. 2 King. 4.40. Heb. 8.7. Job 15.2. Zach. 11.17. Isa. 2.16.
and speak a Word in Season to weary Souls; Taking their own Purse till it was
wholly empty, and so giving Examples to live by Faith on him, the savor of
whose Knowledge they carefully manifest in every place; but such as know not by
most true Experience, the very Nature of Divine Regeneration, though as great
Masters in the fleshly Israel, they eminently flourish in the Gifts of
Knowledge, are still unskilful in the Word of Rigteousness, and great Strangers
to the simplicity of the Gospel. Therefore, They make indeed a Pottage like the
Sons of the Prophets, but there is Death in it, and it does fill the Head with
Notions, and the Belly with the East Wind. These therefore are but
idol-Shepherds, setting up the pleasant Pictures of their own Excellencies, and
thereby forming lifeless less Images of an outward Profession in the Souls of
men, where the living Image of God should stand; such as these may build a
fleshly Jerusalem, and engrave upon it a confused Babel. But Bethania, who is
poor in Spirit, desires them not in her Divine Corporation; Prove. 14.1.
least as the foolish woman, They should pull down many Houses with their
hands, and turn the little City Bethania, into the great Contused Heap of
Babel; Isa. 28.7. Prove. 20.1. Jude 19. Psalm. 14.4.
being very apt to err through Wine, and to be mocked by Strong Drink; having
their Senses Stupefied by fullness of Dainty Meats, and other Flesh-pleasing
Enjoyments, by reason whereof, They forget the Law, and pervert the Truth of
Christ, and lay that upon others which themselves will hardly touch with one of
their Fingers. Mat. 23.4.
Therefore, The Ministers of Bethania do drink but very little Wine, 1 Timothy
5.23.
and that chiefly for their Stomachs sake, and in case of often Infirmities;
and scarce any Strong Drink at all, but in case of great necessity, and to
revive the Spirit when it is ready to faint through weakness; Prove. 31.6.
according to the usual Order and Gustom carefully observed in the House of the
Poor; whose Ministers as before described, are to be submitted unto, and had in
great Estimation; as such who watch for Souls, 1 Thoss. 5.13. Heb. 13.17.
who must also give an account thereof to Jesus the Prince of Shepherds:
Therefore, Their Doctrine is to be belie^ed, their Counsel to be regarded, the
Order to be observed, and their Examples to be followed; Matt. 9.37, 38. Ephesians.
6.29. 1 Pet. 2.1. Rev, 1.20. Isa. 62.6.
who also are earnestly to be prayed for, even for their increase in Number and
Divine Excellencies: That Bethania may have pleaty of Ministerial Bread, and
her little Children nourished with sincere Milk; Her Starlight may be
Glorious, Her Vision Plain, and the Gates of her City carefully watched,
against all the hurtful Spirits of Babel.

TWENTIETHLY.
And now forasmuch as we have already signified, that the Holy Scriptures are
the great and only Charter of Bethania; by virtue of which, she holds all her
Privileges, and from whence she deriveth her whole Doctrine: Together with her
Discipline and Rules of Life. We have also thought convenient to lay down in
writing, from whence she has received this Divine and Ancient Charter.

First, Then she believes, That there is an Essential and a Ministerial Word
of God, which Essential Word; is that, by which the Eternal and Invisible Deity
does utter his most Sacred Mind, Heb. 1.1. Prove. 8.22.
and reveal his Secret Counsels to his Creatures, both Angels and Men. This
Word, is He who was with the Father before ever the World was made; Jehn 17.5.
John 1.12. Heb. 1.3. Col. 1.15, 16, 17. Psalm. 78.24, 25. Mat. 4 4. Deuteronomy. 8.3.
John 6.5, 7. Chap. 14. Heb. 4.12.
and by Him were all things made that were made. Being the Word of His Eternal
Power, by which they are upheld and do consist. He is the Food of Angels, and
immortal Souls of Holy Men; by virtue of whom, they live for-ever. For in him
is Life, and this Life, is the Light of Men; This Word is Quick and Powerful,
and sharper than any Two-Edged Sword; and pierces into the deepest parts of
the Soul, dividing between the very Soul and Spirit, the Joints and Marrow; and
discerns all the Thoughts and Intents of the Heart; and there is no Creature
that can be hid from his Sight. Rev. 10.13.
He will shortly be clothed with a Vesture dipped in blood; whose Name is
called, The Word of God; This Word became Flesh and dwelt among us: And we
beheld his Glory, the Glory of the only Begotten of the Father, John 1.14.
full of Grace and Truth. From this Essential Word, Mark. 4.35.
springing immediately from the Eternal Deity, proceeds that Ministerial Word
which Mortal Creatures are capable to hear; Col. 3.16. Gal. 3.19. Acts 7.53.
Heb. 2.2. Rev. 1.1. Genesis 18.19.
which Ministerial Word, was at first received by Angels, and by them utered to
Holy Men in ancient Times; who carefully taught it to one another from Father
to Son. And so the Gospel was Preached to Abraham long before the Scriptures
were written: Gal. 3.8. Heb. 4.4. Exo. 24, 4, 7, 8. 1 Cor. 10.4. Chap. 5.7.
This Word that was uttered at diverse times, and in diverse manners, by the
Ministry of Angels, was at last committed to Writing by famous Moses, and so it
lay hid in Types and Figures; secretly couched in the Names of Men, and things
mentioned by him in those five Books which he has written; and these are they
which we call the first part of Holy Scripture: The which, by the Spirit of
Jesus were unvailed unto, and by famous Prophets, who wrote more clearer
Visions out of Moses, being Expounders of him, then Moses himself before had
discovered; uttering many Divine Prophesies touching the Messiah, Hab. 2.2.
Neb. 8.8. Act. 10.43.
who was the subject which, all the Prophets pointed at or unto; still making
the Vision more plain and clear, as they drew nearer the coming of Christ.
These also wrote fully of the State of those who kept, and also of those who
did transgress this Ministerial Word of God, whose writings were designed also
for our Learning, and these are the second part of the Scripture. Romans 15.4.


But at last, John 1.14, 1 John 4.14. Mat. 3.15. John 19.28. Mat. 5.18. Luke
1.2. Acts 1.1. 2 Pet. 1.16. Mark 16.15. 1 Pet. 1.12. Acts 26.18. 1 Cor. 3.6. 2
Pot. 3, 16.
The Essential Word was made Elesh, and became visible, and uttered himself by
a humane Tongue to mortal Men, and so fulfilled those things in clearness, in
his most Sacred Person, which Moses and the Prophets had written of him: The
fulfilling of which, together with his famous Sermons, and mighty Miracles were
written by those who were Eyewitnesses of what he did and taught, whose Holy
Apostles having received a Commission to preach the Gospel to every Creature,
were assisted thereunto by an infallible Spirit, and so turned many Souls from
Darkness to Light, and Planted many famous Churches, unto whom they sent
certain Divine Epistles; The which, together with the Holy Evangelists, makes
the Third part of Scripture: Rev. 22.18.
and this altogether, with the Mysterious Book of the Revelations, is the
Divine and Ancient Charter of the little City Bethania; which proceeds,
first, from the Eternal Deity, by the Essential Word of his most mighty Power,
by whom it was committed to Angels, and by them Ministered unto men: and first
written by Moses, then Expounded by the Prophets, fulfilled by Jesus, further
written and Exemplisied by the Apostles and Evangelists, 2 Chronicles. 34.27. Acts
24.28. Psalm. 119.46. Rev. 12.17. Heb. 11.35.
whose Authority makes many impresses upon the Consciences of Mortals; has
made Tyrants tremble, and humble Souls to triumph; has remained firm and
uncorrupted, especially in its Essence, in the midst of its very Enemies. And
they who have witnessed for it in all Ages, have easily passed through inhumane
Tortures; it has outlived many Cities and all their firmest Charters; and
has seen many Laws repealed that have been made against it: Has been
frequenty pleaded for by the Inhabitants of Bethania, Psalm. 19.110. Psalm.
119.72. Jer. 15, 16.
before high and mighty Mortals, and is a mavelous Precious Jewel in the
House of the Poor.

Discipline and Order Observed in BETHANIA.
Thus having briefly hinted at diverse Points of Doctrine, Held and Believed in
the little City Bethania: Of the Signification of which Word, we have given an
Account in our Epistle to the Reader, and in our last Article, have more
plainly declared her Divine Charter; And from whence also she has received the
same. We hope now to give a Brief Description of the Discipline, Order, and
Manner of Life, Owned and Observed in the House of the Poor. And,
FIRST.
THERE be Solmn Meetings for Divine Worship of the Holy God, Heb. 10.28.
and Instruction and Edification of Mortal Men; seriously, diligently, and with
great Reverence and Godly Fear, Observed and highly Esteemed in Bethania; Acts
20.7. 1 Cor. 11.20. Heb. 12.28. Psalm. 89.7. 1 Chronicles. 22.19. 1 Cor. 7.22. Mat.
26.40. Isa. 42.4. Job 22.22. Jer. 15.16. Psalm. 119.24. Isa. 44.4. Psalm. 119.98,
99, 100. Ephesians. 1.18. Psalm. 119.93. Cant. 6.11. Psalm. 23.2. John 6.45. Genesis
27.27. Isa. 5.13.
In which for that time, all other things, whether Actions of Soul or Body, are
suspended and laid in Silence: That with great Retiredness of Spirit, they may
watch with Christ one Hour: And like the little Islands of the Poor in Spirit,
wait for the Law from his Mouth, to lay up his Word in their Hearts, that it
may be for good Counsel and Comfort for their Soul^^ By which means, improved
in this manner, the House of the Poor grows rich in Divine Virtue and deep
Wisdons; being Fortified also in their, Soul with the exceeding great Power of
God; of which retired Spirits have sensible Experience, and by which they are
quickened yet farther unto Spiritual Things. And so feeding in the Valley of
great Humility, by the still Waters of immediate and Ministerial Teachings,
they grow like Willows by the Watercourse, and flourish like a Field which
the Lord has Blessed: When the Inhabitants of Babel, that discomposed
Multitude, and all the carelese Daughters, are famished and dried up with
Thirst.

SICONDLY.
The Inhabitants of Bethania are very careful to observe those Hours Dedicated
to Divine Worship, Acts 3.21. Isa. 58.3. Verse 13.
as time that then is none of Theirs, but the Lords; and therefore they think
it dangerous to steal away any part thereof from him, and convert it to their
own private use; Acts 5.1.2. Verse 5. Verse 10.
like Annanias and Saphira, which stole away part of that from God, which they
pretended to give unto him, but felt the dreadful Effects thereof by the loss
of Life. And for mocking the Lord, and lying against his Holy Spirit, is is
greatly to be doubted also, Isa. 32.9. and 12. Ephesians. 4.30.
they have lost their Souls. And hence it comes to pass among the careless
Daughters, who suffer the Lord to wait for them, till his Spirit be greatly
grieved, and fore wearied with their intolerable Delay; That they have little
else in their coming to Meetings, but dry Breasts, Hos. 9.14. Jer. 17.6. Isa.
24.16. Psalm. 106.15. Job 16.18. Isa 58.2.
and a Barren Womb: The Lord having withdrawn himself from their careless
Souls, and left them to inherit the parched places of the Wilderness, in great
leanness of Spirit, as their wrinckles testify to their Faces: And
notwithstanding, They are frequently at Meetings, and evi learning in the
visible Temple; sitting constantly in the place of drawing Waters; 2 Timothy 3.7.
Jude 5.11. Isa. 65.23.
yet they d^^ but labor in vain, and bring for^^ Trouble, because they observe
not the^^ accustomed Meetings in the care^^ Spirit of Bethania.

THIRDLY.
It is the Custom of that little City, when they come to their Meeting place,
and the Hour of Meeting being at hand, remembering that the time is now the
Lords, to retire ea^^ to their proper Place or Seat, for bearing to salute any,
though never ^^ dear unto them; and there to betak^ themselves to some silent
Meditation or reading of the Holy Scriptures, Luke so. 4. 2 Kings 4.29. Hab,
2.20. Psalm. 104.34. Psalm. 94.19. Mat. 22.11. Chap. 18.21. 1 Cor. 13.5. Eccles.
3.1. 1 Pet. 3.8.
^^ some other Spiritual Exercise; the so when the Lord shall come to see the
Guests, and visit the Two or Thre^^ that are gathered together in h^^ Name, he
may find none of the^^ distracted, whispering, dircoursin^ or in any unseemly
Posture; for there is a Time and a Season for ever^ lawful Custom; and
Salutations all in their proper Seasons, with other friendly Discourse, are
convenient and comely in Bethania. But it ^^ meet that the Lords work, Phil.
3.8.
the which also concerns our immortal Sou^^ should in the first place be
accomplished; 1 Kings 17.13. Luke 10.42.
and herein Mary was more approved of, in sitting at the Feet of her Lord, and
waiting for his Divine Counsels, then Martha was in making unseasonable
Provision for him: Therefore, when the Disciples were sent forth in the work of
the Lord, they were commanded to salute no man by the way; John 9.61.
for he that would bid them of his house farewell, when a greater Work was
before him, was judged unmeet for the Kingdom of God. Piety is to go before
Courtesy, the which being finished, Courtesy follows in his right season.
Exodus 31.18.
The Law was written in two Tables, and though the second Table in which is
contained our Duty to man, have more Precepts in it, then that which contains
our Duty to God; yet the Precepts of the first Table are to be observed in the
first place: Even so the holy Apostles first ended the Divine Matter of their
Epistles, Romans 16.4.
and then after saluted the Brethren. Therefore, Bethania, when Divine Worship
that appertains to God in the first place, is performed, then after they
proceed in courteous Salutations one to another; and not only to themselves
neither, like the Publicans, Mat. 5.47.
who will also salute their Brethren: But likewise also to those besides
themselves, who do usually frequent their Meetings; Romans 12.9, 10.
all which Salutations are performed in unfeigned Love, 1 Cor. 14.40.
and without Diffimulation; also in great Humility, a decent, orderly, and
serious Exercises, in Bethania.

FOURTHLY,
If in any of the Assemblies of Bethania Offenees happen to arise, between
Brother and Brother, in a matter that is not simply a sin against God; Then the
offended goes and tells the Offender his Fault, Mat. 18.15, 16, 17.
who if he repent is readily forgiven, and so all (...) well; but if he repent
not, then he is admonished by two or three, and so it is done the second time:
If he still persist in stubbornness, then the Church does hear it; and if he
refuse to hear the Church, it is plain Rebellion; and so like that dreadful Sin
of Witchcraft; 1 Samuel 15.23.
and such kind of Persons, are in no wise sufferred to inhabit in Bethania,
Deuteronomy. 18.10.
not be Freemen within the Corporation of it.

FIFTHLY.
Again, if there be found any Person in the aforesaid Assemblies, that is
slothful, Romans 12.11. 2 Timothy 3.18. 1 Thessalonians. 5.14.
and does neglect his Duty, either in natural or in spiritual things, then he
is seriously admonished unto it. If he strive to amend, although he cannot
presently alter the inbred Habits of an unconverted State, it is sufficient
for the present; and he is counseled, encouraged, and comforted, as one of the
feeble-minded. But if he be careless, and gives way to those evil habits, 1 Timothy 5.11,
he is suspended, and noted as a Person not meet for Christian Communion, yet
in no wise exempted from friendly Admonition. But if after all these manurings,
he still remains an unfruitful Tree, Luke 13.7. John 15.6.
and as a deyed Shrub in which there is no hope, then he is cut up as a
Cumberrer of the Ground, and as a lifeless Withered Branch taken quite away.

SIXTHLY.
But if any sin a Sin that is directly and immediately against God such as
Fornication, Idolatry, an^ Murder, 1 Cor. 6.9, 10.
is Effeminate, or does abu^^ themselves with Mankind; is a Thi^^ or Covetous,
or a Drunkard, or a Reviler, or an Extortioner, or such like then those to whom
such things appear, though it be their Father, Deuteronomy. 13.6. Verse 8. James 2.1.
Wife or Husband, or any the nearest Relations whatsoever, do bring the^ things
immediately to the Church, a^^ there testify unto them, without any respect of
Persons, which spring^ from Envy or Flattery, and that i^ the same Spirit, in
which they give wholesome Physic unto their dearest Friends. 1 Cor. 16.14. 1
Cor. 5.5, 6, 7. Josh. 7.20. Verse 24.28. 1 Cor. 4.19. 2 Cor. 13.2. Phil. 2.3. 2 Timothy 2.24, 28.
And if the thing become evident by sufficient Testimony, the^ notwithstanding
all Manifestations of Repentance, and free Confession of the sinning Party, in
a very grave and sober manner, and with that Severity, yet Lamb-like meekness,
which becomes the Executioners of Gospel-Discipline; The Sinner is immediately
cut off, and excluded from the Christian Communion of Bethania. By virtue of
that Exclusion, he is not only deprived of Communion at the Lords Table, but
also of being present within that place where Preaching and Praying, Lev. 13
45, 46. 1 Cor. 5.13.
with other Divine ^xercises relating to the Worship of God, are performed. And
though ^his little City be greatly inclined to Compassion, and readiness to
forgive Offenses, and very unwillng to be ^xercised in sharp Severities; yet
^er Divine Charter will in no wise ^^llow it in this case; but that a visible
^mpiety must needs be corrected by a ^ublick Punishment. 1 Timothy 5.20.
Seeing the end ^f Discipline is not only the recovery ^f Sinners, as some
suppose, but also ^he Vindication of the Purity of the Church of Christ,
against those that would accuse her of bearing with evil; Rev. 2.2. Verse 20. 2 Samuel, 12.12.
but this thing could not possible be done by any means, if all Offenses were
forgiven upon Repentance, and Confession of the sinning Party, without
immediate Excommunication: Therefore though God forgave the sin of David and
Miriam upon Repentance and Confession; Number. 12.13, 14, 15. 2 Samuel 12.14. Psalm.
38.5. Psalm. 39.11.
yet though David were a Prophet, and Miriam a Prophetess, she must be put out
of the Camp seven days; and David endure many sore and grievous Chastisements:
for God will have it known, both to Churches and also to the World, That this
little City is no harbor for Sin nor Sinners. Yet after public and severe
Discipline has been duly executed, and t^^ Offender has been put to op^^
Shame for his open Offenses; Th^^ is great Pity, 2 Cor. 2.5, 6.7. Mat. 3.8.
and tender Compass^^ found in the Breast of Bethania; a^^ from thence it
proceeds freely a^ readily to the truly Penitent a^ Brokenhearted Sinner,
and when the Fruits of Repentance have sufficiently manifested themselves in
him, the^ according to her usual and Ancient Custom, they do with all Solemni^^
in one of their solemn Meetings, rig^^ humbly confess the Sins and Offenc^^ of
the Penitent Soul, Dan. 9.20. Ezra 9.5, 6. Gal, 2.9. Col. 3.17.
with earne^^ Prayers to the Father of Mercies for the Remission of the same;
and the^ the whole Society, by one of h^^ appointed Ministers, reaches the
Right Hand of Fellowship, unto th^^ now recovered and absolved Person^^ and
receives him again in the Name of the Lord Jesus, into the Christian Communion
of Bethania.

SEVENTHLY.
Rebuke in Bethania is a certain Divine Censure which spring from pure
Justice, Rev. 3.19. Job 33.17. Jer. 19.29, and 30.
and yet Mercy is designed in its Execution. It is the same Word with that,
John 16.8. where it is said, The Spirit shall convince or reprove the word of
Sin; and though sometimes it is Excommunication it self, which is the highest
degree of Rebuke, yet oftentimes it is found a degree below it, 1 Timothy 5.20.
and so is only in this degree a Public Censure, frequently Executed both by
God and Man upon those Persons, whose state does not render them immediately
Excommunicable, being a cutting and piercing means, designed mainly to chastise
a present and prevent a future Evil; and thus God corrects man with Rebukes,
Isa. 39.11.
by reason whereof his Beauty consumes like a Moth, but his end is to bring
back his Soul from the Pit, to be enlightened with the light of the Living; and
it seems that David was content to be Rebuked by God for this end, so that it
might not be in Wrath and hot Displeasure; Psalm. 6.1. Psalm. 38.1. ver. 5. 1 Timothy 5.24. 1 Cor. 11.32. Rev. 3.19.
whose mere foolishness, as himself has said, had brought these sharp Rebukes
upon him, and so some men's Sins go on beforehand to Judgment, that being
Judged and Chastned of the Lord, they might not be Condemned with the World by
this Censure; therefore the Lord dealt with the Laodiceans, that they might not
be Spewed out of his Mouth; for whom, says he, I Love, I Rebuke and Chasten,
be ye Zealous therefore and amend. After this manner therefore Christ our Lord
Rebuked Peter, saying, Get thee behind me Satan, Mark 8.33. Prove. 9.8. Job
12.15.
for thou savourest not the things that be of God but the things which be of
Men; even so also in Bethania, if a wise man happens to slip with his feet,
he is quickly Rebuked, and it is accounted as precious Oil; Psalm. 14.5. Prove.
27.6.
open Rebuke being preferred before Secret Love, and the Wounds of a Friend,
above the Kisses of an Enemy; therefore if a Brother Trespass against a
Brother, Luke 17.3. Lev. 19.17.
he is Rebuked, and the Neighbor by his Rebuke^ is delivered from his Sin; so
that when this Divine Censure is Executed in the Spirit of Bethania, the
effects thereof are of great advantage; Tit. 2.15.
for the very Doctrine of Grace it self is sometime to be fastened in the Minds
of Professing Christians by Exhortations and Rebukes with all Authority; 2 Timothy
4.2.
therefore, says Paul to Timothy, Reprove Rebuke, Exhort, with all
long-Suffering and Doctrine: And again to Titus Rebuke them sharply, that they
may be sound in the Faith, for Correction, Reproof and Instruction in
Righteousness, Tit. 1.13.
are in order to make the Man of God perfect, thoroughly furnished unto all good
Works; 2 Timothy 3.16.17. 1 Timothy 5.13. 1 Pet. 4.15. Tit. 2.13. Rev. 3.16.17. ver.
19.
therefore Bethania Executes this Censure against busy Bodies, in other men's
matters, against Vain Talkers, and such as teach things they ought not for
filthy Lucre sake; as also against those of the Laodicean Spirit, who sit down
secure in a lukewarm Self-conceited State; neither are they exempted from this
Censure, 2 Pet. 2.16.
who too much incline to the things of this World, conforming thereunto in
Fesh-pleasing Vanities, Romans 13.14. 2 Timothy 4.3.
or having itching Ears, are therefore wandering after diverse and strange
Doctrines, 1 Cor. 3.15.
or any way behave themselves unseemly, contrary to the pure Principles of
Virtue. Which Charity teaches toward any, either in the Church, or in their
Families, or in the World.

These and such like things as these, being open and manifest Errors, are
therefore Rebuked before all, that others may fear and avoid the like offenses;
for that which is openly committed, is not censured in a corner; and they that
are not ashamed to Sin, must not be excused from the shame of Suffering, seeing
the Rebukes of God against his own People are of greatest Antiquity, and remain
in lasting Characters in sacred Scriptures.

EIGHTHLY.
Heresy in Bethania is counted a very noisome Weed, 1 Timothy 6.4, 5. 2 Pet. 2.1.
that springs up in a corrupt Mind, and is evermore accompanied with an
Impious Life, and then it is of a very Damnable Nature, and the way thereof
very Pernicious; the which also ends at last in most swift Destruction; 2 Timothy 2.17.
it is a kind of a Canker-eating Mischief, which men involved in it, take much
delight to promote, and so are rightly called Heretics.

But every Error is not properly called Heresy, seeing many may be guilty of
Error in their Judgment, who are notwithstanding of Pious and Virtuous Lives;
therefore as there is a Body of true Faith, the which also is contained in that
Ancient Creed, called the Apstles; Even so also the direct contrary thereunto
is real Heresy; for to deny the only Lord God, by whom all things were Created,
which is the first Article of that Christian Creed; 1 Cor. 8.6.
and our Lord Jesus Christ, by whom all things consist, Jude 4.
which is the second, is the ready way to overthrow all pure Religion; and then
the next thing that follows, is to turn the Grace of God into Lasciviousness;
and such as these are absolute Heretics, and are of old ordained to this
Condemnation. Besides to let pass all other Articles of the Creed aforesaid,
which are all sufficiently confessed before in the Articles of Bethania's
Faith. The Catholic Church is declared in this Creed, to be a Communion of
Saints or holy Ones, whose privileges are the Remission of Sins, Resurrection
of the Body, and Everlasting Life; therefore to believe and maintain that to be
the Church of Christ, which is a Communion of Impious and Ungodly Persons,
whether we respect National or Congregational Societies, is very near of Kin,
if not the very same with Heresy; for to father Children on the most pure God,
which are not of his own Begetting; and to cast a Spouse upon his Blessed Lamb,
that is of a different nature from him, is a very high degree of Indignity,
therefore the Earthly Jerusalem, as well as Confused Babel, are in great danger
of being guilty of Herely. Now the way by which Bethania Executes her Censures
against Heretics, is such as is contained in her great Charter, therefore when
the Heresy begins first to appear, and the direct Tendency thereof clearly
foreseen, the Persons thereunto inclined are the first and second time
carefully to be Admonished; if they reform, and so are reduced to the right
Faith, Tit. 3.10.11. Luke 15.11.
then there is Joy in Bethania for the return of the wandering Sheep; but if
they perfist to nourish this noisome and poisonous Weed, then they are finally
Rejected, Isa. 59 5. Chap. 11.18.
and so the Cockatrice Egg is not permitted to grow up into a
fiery-flying-Serpent. And thus the hole of the Wasp being delivered from the
Viper, the little Children in Bethania are secure from danger.

NINTHLY.
Communion in Bethania is threefold, and first Formal, which is that state of
Communion wherein Persons are conformable to one another in External
Principles, Exodus 12.6.8. 1 Cor. 11.20. Acts 20.7. Psalm. 55.14. Psalm. 42.4.
Romans 6.17. Eze. 43.11. ver. 8. Rev. 11.2.
and are United in the Forms and Ordinances that relate to Visible Worship.
This Communion is held only in the outward Court; it is the right Visible way
into an higher degree of Communion, and is only bounded with a strong Wall, but
has no Covering over it; the Storms of Temptation and Persecution often Times
deface the Steps of this Communion: Those who only Worship in this outward
Court, are liable to be trodden under foot of the Gentiles. Nevertheless this
Communion is of great Estimation in Bethania, Rev. 2.17. Heb. 9.4. John 10.9. 1
Cor. 5.2. John 10.9.
and those whose proper Food is chiefly the hidden Manna; the which they also
Eat in the most holy Place; yet they have learned of their great Master to go
out into the place of little Children, and with them to Feed of those Crumbs,
which are suitable to the Capacity of the little Childish Nature, and so they
experience the true meaning of that Scripture, viz. They shall go in and out
and find Pasture.

The second state of Communion is Congregational, by virtue of which, 2 Cor.
8.5. Acts. 2.41.
a company of Persons who have first given up themselves to the Lord in Vifible
Profession of Truth; Now secondly, Give up themselves one to another in
Congregational Union; in which Estate they have a special and more particular
Interest in each others Persons and Enjoyments, then when they were only
Members one with another in a formal Union; and so the Pastors in this state of
Union are more especially engaged to their Flocks, Acts 20.28. Heb. 13.17. 1
These. 5.12, 13.
and they on the other hand are deeply enjoined to submit to their Pastors, as
such who watch for their Souls, and must give account thereof in the day of the
Lord.

But the third state of Communion is Spiritual, 1 Cor. 10.17. Chap. 12.18. Romans
12.15.
which consists excellently in this; In that many Bodies have but one Soul,
for by one Spirit Souls in state of Union are Baptized into one Body, and so
are all Members one of another; and hence it is that the whole Church of
Christ, though consisting of many distinct Congregations, Psalm. 46.4. ssa.
27.2, 3. Cant. 4.12. Chap. 2.14. Chap. 4.11.
is notwithstanding in holy Scripture often spoken of in the singular number,
and is called a City, a Vineyard, a Garden, a Dove, a Virgin, a Wife, and so
Christ's Beloved is but one, and their Communion in this state is Celebrated in,
and maintained by the Divine Nature, 2 Cor. 11.2. Rev. 19.7. Cant. 6.9. 2 Pet.
2.4. Jam. 1.18. 2 Cor. 5.17. Heb. 12.23. Joh. 1.3.
in which they are of one kind, even a kind of first Fruits of Gods new
Creatures; and by virtue thereof we have Union and Communion with those we
never saw, and highly esteem of those who long since are departed out of this
World; as Abel, Enoch, Noah, Abraham, Moses, and the Prophets, Apostles, and
those holy Servants of God that succeeded them; yea those that differed in form
with each other, now in the present time are notwithstanding in Union with one
another in this Spiritual state. So Moses and Job, though one circumcised, and
the other not; by reason of which it was not Lawful for Job to eat the
Passover, nor for Moses to suffer him, and therefore they could have no formal
Communion one with another, yet their Spiritual Communion was held firm
together, as their Souls were both Instated in the Divine Nature; Acts 2.41.42.
and though it be not Lawful for Persons Baptized and Unbaptized, to have
Communion one with another at the Lords Table, because that is formal
Communion; and therefore they that would enjoy it in one part, ought not to
reject it in another, yet so far as their Souls are Instated into the new
Creature Life, they have close Union with each other in this part of Communion
of which we are now speaking. Therefore the Baptized do keep their formal
Communion at the Lords Table, with baptized Persons only; yet not reject from
spiritual Union those who differ from them in that particular, By reason of
which Difference, though there is not a perfect Agreement in all things, 1 Cor.
19.1^.
yet there is maintained a friendly Distance, which is carefully observed in
Bethania.

TENTHLY.
Sympathy in Bethania is a certain Divine Quality, which springs up in the
Souls of the Inhabitants thereof, by reason of their close Union one with
another. 1 Cor. 12.25. Verse 26.27.
And so it is that by which one Christian does feel another's Estate.
Therefore, if any serious Soul, in the House of the Poor, by the Violence of
Temptation, at any time be overthrown, and the Iniquity of his heels does
overtake him though he flee away from it, Psalm. 49.8.
but yet cannot escape it: Therefore is forced to fall by it. And so by this
his fall, his Conscience become wounded, his Spirit become sorely broken, Psalm.
31.12. Psalm. 16.3.
his Soul sorely terrified, his Peace even wholly extinguished, his Joy
fearfully ecclipsed: insomuch that his State is now become an heavy burden,
Gal. 6.2.
too heavy for himself to bear. Then by virtue of this Sympathy, the
Inhabitants of Bethania make this Estate their own. And thus they bear one
another burdens, Romans 12.15.
and so fulfill the Law of Christ; Mourning for them that Mourn, Praying for
them, Comforting of them, Administering all relief unto them, being even
restless in themselves, until they see their Brethren again restored.

Yea, This Sympathy is so great in the House of the Poor, that we have known
some who have made the State of others, so much their own, that they have
offered unto God the very Comforts of their own Souls for them, and that with
very great seriousness, and earnest Entreaties; till at last, the the Lord has
accepted thereof; and relieved the Afflicted Party, but withdrew his
Soul-refreshing Influences from the Sympathizing Person, leaving the
Sympathizer in right poor and low Estate. Insomuch, that some Complaints have
been made to God, for the which he has given, a mild and gentle Rebuke. By
virtue of which, there has been a sinking into great Patience, till the former
State has been recovered again. Moreover by virtue of this Divine Sympathy,
they are Partakers of one another joy: Prove. 14.10. Acts 4.35. Verse 24.
the which no Stranger unto it can intermeddle withal. And so they rejoice with
them that rejoice, and are comforted in each others relief. Therefore, Bethania
appears as one entire single Body, and all the Members thereof, are concerned
in each others Estate. Now, as it is so in Spiritual things, even so it is in
Natural things. Therefore, these three troublesome Words, Mine, Thine, and Our
Own, are seldom the Native Language of the House of the Poor. Neither yet does
this Sympathy stand between themselves alone, but also between Jesus our
Savior, Hos. 11.8. Isa. 63.9. Heb. 4.16.
and the whole Society of Bethania. So that his Bowels are turned in him
toward them; and in all their Afflictions he is afflicted, and takes Pity on
the distressed, and sends them Grace and Mercy from the Throne of Grace, to
help in time of need. Zeph. 3.17. Mat. 25.36. Chap. 10.40. Psalm. 44.16. Jer.
13.17. Psalm. 119.136,
And then when they are restored, he does rest in his Love toward them, and
joyeth over them with Singing. And thus, when they are visited, he is visited;
and when they are rejected, despised and neglected, he looks upon himself to
be concerned in it. Even so they also on the other hand, when they hear his
most Sacred Name Blasphemed, or taken in Vain, see his Truth despised, his
Mercies abused, or any Dishonor brought unto him; are greatly concerned in it,
and it is wounds in their own Souls, and pierces more deep therein, then any
thing they feel in themselves in any Case.

But this Sympathy between Christians and Christians, and between Christ and
them, Ephesians. 1.10. Rev. 21.16. Ephesians. 4.16. Isa. 61.3. Heb. 11.40. Rev. 21.9.
ends not only here. For in the fullness of times, when all things shall be
gathered together into one, and the length, breadth, and height thereof become
equal; as one entirely Compacted, and perfectly completed Body. Then in this
Estate poor Bethania shall put off all her Garments of Mourning, and be
clothed with Perfection of Glory, and so become the Lambs most Beautiful
Bride; being now taken into Personal Union with himself: who is therefore
Instated in his whole entire Possessions, Rev. 21.7. Mat. 20.10.
insomuch that every one inheriteth all things. For there shall be no
Inequality in the Reward of the Laborers, when Union and Sympathy is fully
completed in the Glorious Day of Bethania.

ELEVENTHLY.
Prayer in Bethania is a Divine Discourse between mortal Men, Genesis 18.27. Heb.
12.18. Mat. 6.7. Psalm. 19.10. James 5.16.
and the immortal God; and therefore is performed by the Inhabitants thereof,
as all other Divine Exercises are, with great Reverence and godly Fear. It
confisteth not so much of the Multitude of Words, and Excellency of Speech, as
in the Strength and Fervency of Desire. Therefore the Prayers of Divine Men,
Romans 12.11. Mat. 26.39. Romans 12.12. 1 Thessalonians. 5.17. Acts 6.4. Luke 18.7. Eccles.
5.1.
and also of Jesus our Savior, was usually short in the Tongue, but very
fervent and lasting in the goings forth of the Soul. And in this sense the
Christians were exhorted to Pray continually, and without ceasing; and after
this manner, the Elect of God do cry day and night unto him. But this cannot
possibly be done by a continued Speech, and constant Exercise of the Tongue.
For then all other Actions must in a manner be wholly suspended; and so one
Duty would destroy another. Besides, we should thereby greatly weary the Lord
with our Words; Mal. 2.27. Isa. 49.4.
and also send our strength for naught. Therefore, as the Soul of man is a
spiritual Essence, it only is most meet in the out-going^ of it self, to make
its Adresses to the Father of Spirits. Therefore, says Paul, I will Pray with
the Spirit, I will sing with the Spirit; Heb. 12.9. 1 Cor. 14.15. Romans 1.9. 1 Timothy 4.8. John 4.24.
and God (...) my Witness whom I serve with my Spirit. For bodily Exercise
profits little, or for a little time; but the constant Exercises of the
Spirit, are delightful to God: Therefore it is the Desire of Bethania, when
they have spread a thing before the Lord, in a few serious and weighty Words,
to keep their Minds steadfast in a Praying Posture, Psalm. 40.1. Psalm. 39.7.
Psalm. 103.1.
waiting upon the Lord from whom is their Expectation, until they obtain their
Hearts desire, the which being obtained, is a great Experience of Mercy, and
engages the Soul in Songs of Praises.

But if at any time they have presented a thing before the Lord, 1 Samuel 16.1.
Ezekiel. 14.16.
that does greatly concern the Ease of their Soul, or the comfort of their
outward Life, or have entreated for a Mercy, for Mercy-Rejecting Sinners, or
have desired the Removing of some bodily Distemper, or natural Impediments from
Natural or Christian Friends; and the Lord does flatly deny them, or long defer
therein to answer them, Luke 18.7.
then they cast their Eye upon Jesus, who has taught them to say, Our Father,
thy Will be done. And in great Calmness of Soul, Mat. 6.10. Heb. 2.7.
quietly sink down into the Will or God; subjecting themselves as is most meet
to the wise disposings of the Father of Spirits; Luke 11.8. Genesis 22.2. Luke
1.7. Isa. 57.16.
yet in some cases the Lord allows of restless Importunity. And therefore
Bethania will not hold her Peace, but wrestleth strongly with great Jehovah,
until the Daybreak of Mercy appears. And he being of a wonderful condescending
Spirit, suffers himself oftentimes to be overcome in such cases that be of
great weight, about which he is importuned. So then Prayer is a serious
business, and accordingly is very seriously performed, Eccles. 5.2.
being mainly and chiefly the work of the Soul, about which the Tongue is but
little concerned. But in great Babel, and also in the Earthly Jerusalem, Prayer
is wholly another business, and is mainly and principally the work of the
Tongue, in which these two Cities have many very skillful Artists, Mat. 6.
who like the Heathens, seem to act as if they should be heard in their much
speaking, but their Sacrifice is but as the Sacrifice of Fools, and like Smoke
in the Nostrils of the Heart-searching God, Eclces. 5.1. Isa. 65.9. Jer. 17.10.
who is greatly wearied with the Words of Men; Therefore Bethania is not rash
with her Mouth, neither is her Heart hasty to utter Words, or any thing before
God, knowing that he is in the Heavens, and she on Earth, therefore her Words
are weighty, Mat. 6.11.
but few.

TWELFTHLY.
The Gesture used in Bethania in the time of Prayer, is such as becomes
serious men, Dan. 10.10. Acts 7.60. Ezra 9.5. Ephesians. 3.14. Josh. 7.6.
when they are talking with an immortal God. And therefore in that Divine
Exercise they either bow their knees upon the Earth, or fall down flat with
their faces upon the ground, or else stand upright upon their feet. In all or
any of which gestures, they have the most glorious Majesty of God still in
their Eye, whom in every part of his Worship, they desire to serve with great
Reverence and godly Fear. Heb. 12.28. Psa. 89.7.
But this last gesture of standing, is most used in Bethania, when they are
giving Thanks or pronouncing Blessings upon Persons, or craving them upon
things they are to use. But as for that unseemly gesture of sitting in the time
of Prayer, although it be in frequent use among the careless Daughters in these
Flesh-pleasing times, 1 Timothy 3.2.
wherein men are Lovers of themselves; It is a great stranger in the Charter of
Bethania, and therefore is but very seldom used there: and if at all, yet it is
upon the Account of some Infirmity, proceeding from Age or Weakness
constraining thereunto; neither do they usually kneel upon Cushions, if ever at
all in that Soul-Exercising time of Prayer. For they know that Christ had none
in the Mount, when he continued all Night in Prayer to God; nor had Solomon,
Luke 6.12. 2 Chronicles. 6.13. Dan. 6.10.
as yet appears, when he kneeled before the Lord, and before the Altar in the
Temple. Neither do we find that Daniel used Cushions when he Prayed in his
Chamber upon his Knees three times a day, with his Windows open toward
Jerusalem; nor is it likely that there were any Cushions in the Mount of
Olives, where our Savior kneeled down and Prayed in the time of his Agony;
Luke 22.41.
and it may be much supposed, that Paul had none when taking his leave of the
Ephesians, he kneeled down and Prayed with them all. And to be sure, there were
none on the Shore of Tire, Acts 20.36. Acts 21.5.
when Paul and his Companions kneeled down and Prayed. And it is very unlikely
that James the Disciple of Jesus, used to kneel on Cushions, when his Knees
were benumbed like Camels Knees, and bereft of the sense of feeling, by reason
of his continual kneeling in Supplication to God, Eusebius. Eccles. Hist. Lib. 2.
Chap. 23. And therefore it is concluded in Bethania, that those things which
are easy to the Body, 1 Pet. 4.1, 2.
are not always profitable for the Soul. And therefore they used to suffer in
the Flesh, and through the Divine Spirit mortify the Deeds of the Body, Romans
8.13. Psalm. 55.6.
that the Soul being unclogged of sensual Delights, may as with the Wings of a
Dove, hasten its escape, and find rest in the Heavenly places. But if any shall
instance Moses and David, Exodus 17.12.
about sitting to Pray. It is to be considered that Moses case was a case of
Necessity; Therefore Aaron and Hurr when Moses was tired, by reason of
standing, and continual spreading of his Hands, took a Stone and sat upon it,
and they held up his Hands between them. But this was when he could neither
stand nor lift up his Hands, nor spread them out any longer: and as for David,
2 Samuel 7.18. Verse 25.26, 27. Psalm. 95.6. 1 Cor. 13.15.
he went in and sat before the Lord, and then spoke unto him, and after that
he Prayed, in which most serious Exercise his Practice was to kneel, as is
said, Psalm. 95.6. O come let us fall down, and let us kneel before the Lord our
Maker. Therefore, as Charity does not behave it self unseemly, neither does it
seek its own, either Ease, or any other delightful things. Even so Bethania,
who is greatly possessed of Divine Virtue, takes great care according to the
uttermost of her Capacity, to avoid all superfluous Words, and needless
Repetitions, long and tedious speakings, with all unseemly Gestures, in that
most serious and Divine Exercise of Prayer.

THIRTEENTHLY.
Time in Bethania is accounted a very precious Jewel, Eccl. 9.12. 2 Cor. 6.2.
Ephesians. 5.16. Tit. 3.14.
and therefore she is very careful of spending any part thereof in waste; for
which cause the Inhabitants thereof are very much given to Diligence, being
exercised in maintaining good Works or honest Trades, to such necessary uses,
by which they may not be rendered Unfruitful, either in Church or State; and so
glorious Elohim moved himself in vast Eternity; by virtue of which Motion, the
whole Creation was produced; for it is written, Genesis 1.2.
And the Spirit of the Lord moved upon the Waters, and so a moving and working
God brought forth a moving and diligent Creation, and so every thing therein,
except depraved from its natural state, has still some proper kind of
Employment: So the Sun, Psalm. 19.5, 6. Genesis 1.14.
Moon and Stars in the Firmament of Heaven, duly observe their Motion and
Order, and with great diligence, exactly perform their daily and yearly
courses. Cant. 2.12. Psalm. 104.12. Ver. 17.
The Fowls move and sing right Cheerfully, and swiftly in the open Air, and
painfully build their Nests, provide their Food, bring forth their Young, and
carefully feed them till they be able to help or feed themselves, and then they
seek their own Provisions. Ver. 27.
So also the Creatures on the Earth and in the Waters, Universally observe and
show forth a natural diligence; yea also in the Vegitable Kingdom among the
Herbs, Plants and Trees, time and motion are carefully observed; the Trees in
their proper Season send forth their tender Leaves, then their beautiful
Blossoms, and afterward their desirable Fruit; the which being once perfected
in ripeness, they deliver to whom they were dressed: So also the Seed in the
Field and the Flowers in the Garden, Heb. 6.7. Psalm. 104.14.
are very diligent in their nature, in the time that is allotted them, until
their Fruit and Glory is brought to full perfection. But in Bethania there is
far more diligence used then is among other Creatures, Phil. 3.20. Col. 3.2.
Genesis 15.24. Prove. 15.24.
for when their Hands are busy upon the Earth, their Hearts are more
diligently employed in Heaven; and while their Feet are walking among men
below, their Souls are walking with God above; and herein they exceed all other
Terestial Creatures whatsoever, in that they can do many works at once, 1 Cor.
7.29. Psalm. 55.6. Act. 22.16. 1 The. 2.29.
for they know that time is short, and that their business requires haste,
therefore they are constrained to labor night and day, and have no time to
spare for Idleness, for this is accounted by them a Monster in nature, and
therefore they fly from it as Moses fled from his transformed Rod, when it was
turned from a Rod to a Serpent; and though Sleep, and Rest, and Bodily
Nourishment, be all things very desirable and pleasing to nature, yet they use
as little of these as well they may, and what they use of these needful things
at any time, their only design herein is to supply the necessities of nature,
and to assist it in the exercise of Humane and Divine Affairs. But time, though
never so precious, in it self, is of little or no account at all in Babel, for
it is a City of Idleness and great Voluptuousness; they live, that they may
eat; not like Bethania, Amos 6.4.
who eats that they may live; they spend their precious time in Fleshly
Pleasures, and call it Pastime, and so live many of them as if they had not
proceeded out of the Loins of him, Genesis 3.19.
who in the Sweat of his Brows was to eat his Bread: Rev. 11.18. Jam. 2.6. Jer.
8.20.
These are they which consume the Creation, destroy the Earth, oppress the
Poor, and spend their precious time in Vanity, till the Summer of time is past,
and the Harvest of Grace be ended, who then will be forced to cry out too late,
And we are not saved; but in Bethania, Neh. 4.17.
the City of Diligence, there ye may see the Workmen building the Walls with a
Tool in one Hand and a Weapon in the other, working out their own Salvation
with fear and great trembling, every on pressing forwards to the mark that i^
set before them, Phil. 2.12. Chap 3.12.
and exercised in that proper calling to which he is designed some as Porters
at the Doors, some a^ Watchmen upon the Walls, Mark. 13.34. Isa. 62.6. Rev.
11.1. Isa. 57.2. Rev. 14.14. Psalm. 126.6.
others la^^ bouring in the outward Court, other again Worshipping in the
Sanctuary and others Ministering before the Altar, until all that is to be done
in time is wholly finished, and then Eternity opens it self, and receives into
her Bosom of everlasting Rest, this Laborious and Painful City, Bethania.

FOVRTEENTHLY.
There is no Swearing at all, either Judicial or Profane, used in the little
City Bethania, for Jesus our Savior in his most famous Sermon, the which he
Preached to his Hebrew Disciples, Mat. 5.24.
as he was with them in the Mount, has fully repealed, that sometime a Lawful
Custom; and James a Disciple of Jesus in his Epistle also written to Hebrews,
among whom Swearing had been an usual Practice, lays a straight Injunction on
them, not to use it, saying above all things, My Brethren, Swear not, Jam. 5.12.
neither by Heaven, neither by the Earth, neither by any other Oath, but let
your Yea, be Yea, and and your Nay, Nay, least ye fall into Condemnation; so
that as it was Lawful in old time, to require an Eye for an Eye, and a Tooth
for a Tooth, to hate their Enemies, Mat. 5.28. Deuteronomy. 24.3. Heb. 1.19. Chap.
9.11.
and to put away their Wives for other causes then for Fornication; yet now in
the more perfect and more glorious Dispensations, all these things, together
with that of Swearing, are quite Repealed, and so those Oaths, the which in
time past were carefully to be performed, are not now at all to be made, and
therefore those Judicial Oaths which in time past were unto men an end of
strife, Mat. 5.27.
and are used by them still for that end, yet it is not to be so among
Christians; for it is not said, An Oath for Confirmation is unto us an end of
stife, nor that we verily Swear by the greater; but it is said, Men verily
Swear by the greater, and an Oath for Confirmation is to them an end of strife;
Heb. 6.16. Mat. 28.29. John 15.14.
and Christians are not to follow the Examples of men, but carefully to observe
the Precepts of Christ. And there is no City in the whole World that is more
faithful in their Allegiance to Princes then Bethania, nor that has lived more
Peaceable under their Government in any Age then she; 1 Pet. 2.18. Ver. 17.
Mat. 5.41. Ver. 39.
so that if they Magisterially compel her to go with them a Mile, she goes
with them twain; and if they Magisterially smite her on the one Cheek, Luke
6.30. Deuteronomy. 6.13. Jer. 4.2. Mat. 5.34, 35. Jam. 5.12. Mat. 28.16.17 18, 19, 20,
21. Jer. 10, 3. Prove. 4.14, 15. Psalm. 1.1. Amos 5.5.
she turns to them the other; and if they Magisterially take away her Goods,
she asks them not again. But yet further, There is nothing in the whole
Charter of Bethania, from first to last, that may in the least warrant her to
Swear upon such a Book, wherein Swearing is so flatly forbidden, therefore she
concludes that the Root of this whole matter was Planted first in Babel, and
from thence sprang up as a custom in the Earthly Jerusalem; but Bethania is a
little City, that has little or no Affinity with any of these.

FIFTEENTHLY.
When Persecution arises against Bethania, Act: 14.22. John 16.2. 2 Timothy 3.12.
Psalm. 137.7. Ecles. 9.14. Acts 20.24. Psalm. 121.4. 1 Pet. 5.7.
as often times it comes to pass, for great Babel cannot endure this poor
little City, and therefore the great King comes often against it; yet when he
comes sitting upon a Seat of Violence, they take but little notice of him; for
the poor wise man who is the Keeper of this City, has wit enough to cicumvent
the greatest designs of Humane or Iufernal Enemies and Furies; therefore they
cast their whole care upon him, who they know greatly cares for their Souls;
and their great care is on the other hand when they are brought before the
Judgment Seat of men, to beware of men, Mat. 10.17. Psalm. 125.5. Rev. 12.17. 1 Timothy 3.15. Rev. 12.17. Heb. 10.34.
least by them they should be entangled in the crooked Paths of Error: And in
the next place, to maintain a constant Testimony unto the Manifest Truths of
the Blessed Lamb; that so Truth may not fall in the Streets for want of
Suffering Pillars to uphold it. Then as for their Lives, they love them not
unto Death, Romans 8.28. Luke 21.17, 18. Mat. 10.29. Luke 22.3, 5. Joh 2.6. Luke
13.32.
who also suffer joyfully the spoiling of their fading Treasures; steadfastly
believing, that all things shall work together for the best, and that there
shall not one Hair of their Head perish; and seeing that a Sparrow cannot fall
to the ground without their Heavenly Father, and that the Power of Darkness
has but one Hour, and so is limited both to Time and Measure. Therefore, if it
be told them, as it was told to Christ, That a cruel Herod seeks to kill them:
Yet they are ready to answer and say with him, Behold, We must Work to day and
to morrow; Prove. 11.6.
and in the Morning of Prosperity must sow our Seed, and in the Evening of
Adversity, must not withold our Hands. For they know the Truth is sometimes
planted in Blood, and the Sufferings of some Christians, Phil. 1.12. Heb. 10.25.
have been the Conversion of others. So that a sharp Winter may, and does
oftentimes produce a fruitful Harvest. Therefore, the manner of Trading in this
City, Dan. 11.14. Esth. 4.16,
greatly differs from the manner of Trading in other Cities; for the Earthly
Jerusalem, when she hears of a storm of Violence, lets fall much of her
Trading is Truth and Virtue; but Bethania increases hers the more. And when
the Robbers begin to Exalt themselves to Establish the Vision, then this City
brings forth the best of her Wares: Their Prayers now are most Fervent, and
their Sermons most Divine, their manner of Life most Circumspect, and their
Faith very steadfast; Cant. 8.6.
their Hope reaches furthest within the Veil, their Charity is now more
strong than Death, and all their Graces takes the deepest or firmest Root. So
the Innocent stirs up against the Hypocrite, the Righteous also holds on
his way, and he that has Clean Hands, shall grow stronger and stronger. At
last, Bethania comes out of her Tribulation, having washed their Robes, Rev.
7.14.
and made them white in the Blood of the Lamb; and so she enjoys a Life,
which Death can never approach unto; and a Substance that no Thieves can steal
away; inheriting a joy, Mat. 6.20. Isa. 60.20.
which shall never more be Ecclipsed with sorrow, in the glorious Morning of
Bethania.

SIXTEENTHLY.
The frequent Discourse in Bethania, is for the most part very savoury; 2 Cor.
2.14. Ephesians. 4.29.
and their Words do generally, that are the Inhabitants thereof, stand for
something; and they are very careful of avoiding Superfluity of Speech,
knowing, That of every idle Word that men shall speak, Mat. 12.36.
they must give an Account thereof in the Day of Judgment. Therefore, their
Words are very much seasoned with Grace; designed in Spiritual Things, namely,
for the Edification of the Hearers: and in Natural Things, to Express the
Conceptions of the Mind touching humane Affairs: otherwise, they are very much
given to Silence, being swift to hear, slow to speak, carefully keeping the
Bridle upon the Tongue, James 1.19. Psalm. 39.1.
least that unruly Member run headlong into Disorder, and so the Heart be quite
deceived, and all their Religion prove to be a mere Vanity; For in the
Multitude of Words, there wants not Sin; Prove. 10.16.
and he that restrains his Lips is wise. And they consider, that God has
given unto men, two Eyes, two Ears, two Hands, and two Feet, yet but one
Tongue; that the Actions of all these might be twice as much as the Tongue
shall speak. Therefore, when any of the Inhabitants of Bethania meet together,
Job 32.4. 1 Cor. 14.29. 2 Timothy 2.7.
and there be some Divine Matter about to be uttered; they all wait and hear in
Silence, carefully avoiding all Interruptions; and if any thing be wanting that
ought to have been spoken, another supplyeth that Defect; when the first has
left off speaking; and so all things are done to good purpose, in much Decency
and Order. Job 32.11, 15, 16.
For to speak two or three at once, either in Humane or Divine Matters, is
counted ridiculous and a mere Confusion, proper only to Babel. But if they have
no Divine matter to Communicate, 1 Cor. 14.40.
nor yet any Natural Thing that is needful to be spoken, then they retire
themselves into some serious Exercises of the Soul; and in the Multitude of
such thoughts within them, they meet with great Consolation from the Father of
Spirits, Psalm. 94.23.
whose Heavenly Virtue is a quickening Influence to every true Bethanian.

SEVENTEENTHLY.
Laughter in Bethania is counted madness, Eccles. 2.2. Romans 8.6. Luke 6.25.
and like the crackling of Thorns under a pot, being a Vanity that springs up
in a carnal Mind; and it is frequently found among such kind of Persons who are
hastening into Eternal Mournings. For the Triumphing of the wicked is but very
short, Job. 20.15.
and the Joy of the Hypocrite but for a moment. Therefore says Jesus, Woe to
you that laugh now, for ye shall mourn and weep. This unseemly Vanity is none
of the first Actions of innocent Age; for some of the first Actions of a Child
are to weep, and after it has lived about forty days in the World, it then
will begin to smile, but it is a great while before it breaks out into plain
Laughter. Therefore this mere Vanity is wholly of this World, unto which
depraved Nature inclines after it has lived a little while in it. And
therefore, when the Souls of men begin again to return out of this World, into
their first Estate; some of their first Actions in which they are usually
found, are Sorrow, Fear and Mourning, 2 Cor. 7.11.
and so that precious Seed, Phil. 2.12.
from whence Divine Virtue and Nature springs up in the Soul, is known to be
sown in Tears; yet those that go forth of this World weeping, bearing this
precious Seed from whence Divine Virtue springs, Psalm. 126.5, 6.
shall certainly enter the World to come Rejoicing in the glorious Reaping-time
of the Effects of Virtue. So Jesus our Savior, while in this World, Isa. 53.4.
John 11.35.
was a man of Sorrows, and acquainted with Grief, and oftentimes known to weep,
but never known to laugh at any time. Even so all true Bethanians being
instructed with the very same Spirit, are usually found as mourning Doves of
the Valley. Ezekiel. 7.16.
And though Jesus had not, and Christians may not be supposed to have any true
cause of Sorrow, with Respect to themselves, yet with Respect to others, there
is still now in them, as there was heretofore in him, Occasion enough for
mourning. And as for the Christians, the Sins of their Youth, and the Errors of
their former Li^^, Psalm. 28.7.
together with the present Dangers that attend the Wilderness Passage, makes
their Walks oftentimes a Vale of Tears. Psalm. 84.6.
Yet as Jesus our Savior did sometimes rejoice in Spirit, Luke 10.21.
and also gave forth true Tokens thereof to others; even so the Poor in Spirit,
sometimes greatly rejoice in the inward man; especially when they can see the
morning without Clouds, 2 Samuel 23.4.
and show forth such Signs thereof, by a cheerful Countenance, which will
manifest to others that they are refreshed. But forasmuch as their walking is
in the Spirit, and Laughter is a more fleshly Vanity; Therefore, a more sollid
grave Countenance, with a sober and discreet Behavior in all Estates and
Actions of the outward Life, is of great Estimation and frequent use in
Bethania.

EIGHTEENTHLY.
The Apparel in Bethania is very modest, and for the most part, 1 Timothy 2, 9. 1
Pet. 3.4, 5.
is used in plain Necessity, to cover the Secrets of fallen Nature, and to
fence it against the Influences of cold. But the Fashions of the World are a
great Abomination in the House of the Poor, 1 Pet. 1.14. 1 John 1.16. Isa.
32.11. Chap. 3.18.19, 29, 21. Heb. 11.13. 1 Pet. 2.11.
and are more proper to the Mother of Harlots, and the Faithly Jerusalem, the
Society of careless Daughters, than that City whose Name is Bethania, whose
Inhabitants do well know, that this World is not their Native Country; but was
at first the Kingdom of those Creatures, that have no rational Spirit; and that
man when by reason of Sin, he was thrust out of his own Kingdom, which was
Paradise; was permitted to dwell in it a little while only as a Stranger, and
his first Garments were only Figleaves, Genesis 3.7. Chap, 3.21.
but these were of his own making: His second Garments were Coats made of
Skins, and these were of the Lords making, which was partly to note unto him,
that as he was now fallen into the Kingdom of the Beasts, even so their Habit
did most become him; but man was not contented with this Fashion, therefore his
roving fancy run through the whole Terrestial World, Eccles. 3.11. Prove. 17.24.
Isa. 2.7. Chap. 14.4,
and of the Mines of the Earth he borrowed great store of Gold and and Silver,
and then gloryed in it as if it were his own proper Substance. Then he went out
also, and borrowed the Fleeces of Beasts, of which he made him Garments of
diverse Fashions, and shod his Feet with their Skins; extracting fine Linen out
of the Earth, and procured Silk from the Silkworms Bowels. Of these things man
made himself a shining Mortal; and gloryeth in his borrowed Substance, as if by
right of Nature it had been his own; when indeed it is no such matter, for he
is born wholly Naked, and comes into this World only as a Stranger, and
leaves it again only possessed with a few Grave-Cloaths, Job 1.21.
but all the rest of his borrowed Substance is left behind: yet there is one
more Vanity and great Impiety, Psalm. 49.51. Job 21.13.
that seemed to spring among men in these our very times, the which Bethania
greatly Detesteth; That whereas Women have one only Natural Ornament which is
their Hair, given them by Nature also for a Covering: 1 Cor. 11.5, 1 Cor. 6.9.
Rev. 9.7, 8.
the which man borrows now of them, whereof he now makes himself an
Effeminate Monster, much resembling those Locusts which ascended out of the
Bottomless Pit, whose Faces were as the faces of Men; but their Hair was as
the Hair of Women. And whereas other Creatures who know the Mysteries of their
own Kingdom, which is this World, do by the mere instinct of Nature perform
very ingenious Actions, Prove. 30 28. Psalm. 104.17.
as the Spider thereby to weave his curious Web; the Bird to build his
ingenious Nest; the Be to make his dainty Comb: Man knows only little, but
what he gets by Art, or is given him by Revelation; Job 11.12. Isa. 28.26.
Ephesians. 3.3.
He knows not how to speak a Language till he has learned it; nor to prepare
his Food, or make his Garments, nor yet to build himself an Habitation: and
with very great Difficulty, and that but rarely neither, he finds out Physic
to relieve himself against the Impediments of Nature. Therefore Bethania most
clearly perceives, that man is only a stranger in this World because he is so
naturally unskilful in the Affairs of it, Job 14.2.
and possesses so little of the fullness thereof, but such things, for which
things he is constrained to be beholding to other Creatures. Therefore she
casts away the Pride and Vanity of Babel, Jude 19.
as also the sensual Delights of the earthly Jerusalem, and betaketh her self
to a sober, Gal. 6.14. Heb. 11.26. Psalm. 45.18. 2 Cor. 5.2. Dan. 2.3. Phil.
3.21. Heb. 9.28.
modest, self-denying kind of Life; Embracing the Cross, and Esteeming the
Reproach of Christ greater Riches then all the Glory and Treasure of this
present World; Rejoicing greatly in that her Soul is beautified and enriched
with the inward Ornaments and substantial Riches of Divine Virtue, waiting
therein to shine forth at last in her Glorious Paradisical Body; when Jesus
shall visit the second Time, Poor Despised Bethania.

NINETEENTHLY.
Marriage is Honorable in Bethania, Heb. 13.4. 1 Cor. 7.40. Mat. 22.30. Genesis
1.27.
and the Bed Undefiled, yet Virginity is greatly preferred. For this was the
Estate of Angels in their first Creation, and in that State they did perfectly
remain. In that Estate God Created man in the Beginning, but he soon left it,
and after fell a fearful Fall. In this Estate of Virginity Jesus our Savior
continued all the time of his abode in this World; Isa. 7.14. Jer. 31.22.
in this Estate, the Virgin Mother of our Lord having compassed a Man, and so
fulfilling the Sacred Prophecy, continued also till the time of Her Departure
out of this World. For the Lord God of Israel having entered through the
Eastgate of her Sanctified Womb, shut it afterward perpetually, Ezekiel. 44.2.
that so no other man might enter in thereby any more. In this Estate shall
Blessed Souls again appear in the Glorious Resurrection of just Men, Luke 20.35.
and be as the Angels of Heaven in that World, where Marrying and giving in
Marriage is wholly out of Date; yea the state of the Church of Christ in the
highest Degree of her Perfection, 2 Cor. 11.3. Rev 4.4. Mat. 23.1.
that she arriveth unto in this World, is a State of Spiritual Virginity, and
in it she is Espoused unto the Blessed Lamb, of whom she is then a faithful
Follower. Therefore no marvail if Natural and Spiritual Virginity be of very
high Estimation in Bethania. 1 Cor. 7.29.
Nevertheless all her Inhabitants are left free to choose a Married or a single
State as they were able to bear it; only it is utterly unlawful there to mingle
in Matrimonial Conjunction, 2 Cor. 6.14.
with any but those only that are within the Liberties of her own Corporation,
Genesis 6.2. Ezekiel. 9.2. Mat. 11.29. Ephesians. 4 20.
and have learned of Jesus our Savior to embrace such Principles, and to walk
in those steps of Virtue which are approved and owned in her Divine Charter;
neither is it at all the practice of this little City to go out unto great
Babel, Amos 5.5. 1 John 4.5. 2 Cor. 6.17. Isa. 65.11.
or the Ministers of the worldly Churches, to seek their assistance in the
celebration of such Marriages as are concluded between the Members of her own
Society; but all her Marriages are celebrated within her own Corporation, the
which are performed there with very great Solemnity, as is meet in so weighty a
case; therefore when any of the Inhabitants of this City have engaged
themselves to each other by and in a Matrimonial Covenant, then they present
themselves before some considerable Assembly in Bethania, Ruth 4.9, 10, 11.
and there in a very grave and serious manner publish their secret Contract;
the which being accomplished, certain special Witnesses unto this solemn
Marriage, record their Names in the Register-Book of this Society; after which,
serious Prayers are made to the God of Heaven, Ephesians. 5.31.
who at first was pleased to make two of one, so now that he would make one of
two again. After which the Parties are dismissed with some grave Admonition
about the state of Marriage, Ephesians. 5.24, 25.
and exhorted to live as is meet for Christians in that estate, according to
the divine Charter of Bethania.

TWENTIETHLY.
Watching, Mar. 13.37. Mat. 24.42. Ephesians. 6.18. 2 Timothy 4.5.
in Bethania is accounted of great necessity, and is the last work of a
Christsan, being a constant Exercise of the Soul; after the Warfare is wholly
ended, it is to be a Companion with all Actions and Enjoyments, and to attend
diligently on every State. The Bethanians divide it into three Parts, and
desire to be found always in that Posture, in which every one of them may be
performed.

The first Part of Watching is an Abstenance from Sleep at some times, 2 Cor.
11.27. Chap. 6.5.
and to use as little thereof at all times as well you may: For they know that
Sleeping began the Fall of man, and something else helped it forwards, but
eating fully completed it. Genesis 2.21.
Sleep is very near of kinn to Death, therefore has the very same Name with
it, and so is an unmeet Exercise for living Souls, for it consumes much
precious time; and the Excess thereof greatly stupifieth the sensitive Life,
Prove. 6.9.
and makes indisposed to the Exercises of Eternity. It extends no further than
the Animal Kingdom, and so wholly ends in Death, and is never seen any more
after the Resurrection. Both the Heathens and Christians have shunned it as
much as they could, Rev. 4.8.
for it is in the Excess thereof, often reproved by an awakened Conscience. We
read of very many Actions of Christ, but very little of his sleeping. Once he
was found sleeping on a Pillow, while the Ship was tossed, Mark 4.38.
and the Disciples terrified, but he quickly awoke, and wrought a Miracle. The
Gospel Ministers who are appointed by Christ to awaken Spiritual Sleepers, have
been often themselves Exercised in Watchings. Ephesians. 5.14.
So says Paul, In Stripes, in Imprisonments, in Travels, in Labors, in
Watchings, in Fastings; yet further, in Weariness and Painfulness, in Watchings
often, in Hunger and Thirst, in Cold and Nakedness. Therefore, though Sleep be
pleasing and incident to Nature, yet the Cross of Christ does Crucify the
Superfluity thereof in all true Bethanians.

But the second Degree of Watching, is a careful observing of the outgoings of
the Soul in all its Exercises and Employments; Prove. 4.23. Luke 21.34.
for there be Snares attending upon every State; yea Eden it self was not
secure from them; and seeing the Soul is so apt to wander, before it is fixed
in the immutable State, Psalm. 119.10
therefore the Man of God is to be watchful in all things; and Prayer it self,
that most serious Business, is carefully to be attended with it. For if the
vigilant Enemy cannot distract us by gross Corruptions, 2 John 8.
yet he will endeavor to do it by unseasonable Exercises. The Soul that is
dispossessed of an unclean Spirit, being swept and garnished with many Virtues,
may be Re-possessed again through want of Watchfulness, with Seven Spirits
worse than the former. Decays are incident to all unfixed things, Mat. 11.43.
therefore the Church of Ephesus left her first Love, unto which she is advised
again to return, Rev. 2.5. Chap. 3.2. Chap. 15, 16.
and keep the same with Watchfulness. Blessed therefore is he that Watches and
keeps his Garments, least he walk Naked, and they see his Shame.

The Third Part of Watching, is an earnest Expectation of the Accomplishment of
all Gods Gracious Promises; Psalm. 40.1. Isa. 28.16. Heb. 6.12. Heb. 2.3. Rev.
3.20.
yet he that believes, makes not haste, but quietly waits till the Vision
shall speak. Therefore Bethania is Porter at the Door of her own Heart, and
watches to open to Christ, in all his Appearances, that she may answer him in
all his Requirements, and so become a Follower of the Lamb, Cant. 5.2. Rev.
14.4.
whithersoever he goes, in all things expecting to be supplied with that
Grace, 2 Cor. 12.9.
which is suffieient for every State, and so quietly enduring the Burden and
Heat of the day, watching dilligently for his Glorious Appearance, who then
will call watchful Bethania into a perfect Rest, in Eternal Joy.

ONE and TWENTIETHLY.
Fasting in Bethania is of great Antiquity, and was first commanded in Eden;
especially from some things, of the Tree of Knowledge, of Good and Evil; Genesis
2.17.
and it has run through all Dispensations from the Beginning until this time,
in which serious Exercise, many Holy Men of God have been very famous: yea,
those that have been filled most with God, have often enjoyed the least of
Creatures. Moses fasted twice forty days, yet in that time he was close with
him, Deuteronomy. 9.9. Verse 18. Exodus 34.30. 1 Kings 19.8. 2 Kings 2.11. Dan. 10.3,
and came from him with a shining Face. Elijah fasted forty days, and at last
God sent for him from Earth to Heaven. Daniel he fasted three full Weeks,
though not from all kind of Food, yet from that which was accounted pleasing;
and he was a man greatly beloved. David chastened his Soul with fasting, and he
says, That his Knees were grown weak thereby, Psalm. 109 24.
yet he was a man dear unto God, and sometimes enjoyed much of his presence.
Esth. 4.16.
Esther was a very Glorious Queen, yet in a weighty case, yielded her self unto
three days fasting. Jesus our Savior, fasted forty Days and forty Nights, Mat.
4.2.
in the beginning of his most Sacred Ministry. So likewise his Apostles and
approved Ministers were, and are often in Fastings. 1 Cor. 11.27. Luke 2.36, 37
Hannah served God with Fastings and Prayer, Night and Day. Christ gave
Directions to his Disciples about fasting, and the Disciples of John were
Exercised therein. It was not only found among Jews and Christians, Mat. 6.16.
but Heathens also were famous in it. For King Darius passed the Night in
Fasting, Mat. 14. Mark 2. Dan. 6. Act. 10.30.
and the Prayers of Cornelius were performed with it. Therefore it is an
approved, and a dilligent observed Custom in the City Bethania, who also for
diverse Ends, and in diverse Manners observes the same. Sometimes it is used for
the chastening of the Soul, Psalm. 69.10. 1 Cor. 9.27.
and beating down of the Body, that the Flesh may become weak, and the Spirit
strengthened in Virtue. At other times, when they go about any weighty
Undertaking, or desire to obtain any special Mercy, or to remove any sore
Affliction, all or any of these are attempted and managed by Prayer and
Fasting. Dan. 9.4. Esth. 4.16.
If there be a public Design on foot, then Fasting is public also; yet not
made common to any but only those who are concerned in it. Joel 2.12.
These retire themselves into the greatest Retirement as possible may be, and
there with earnest Prayers and silent Groans, with frequent Sighs of Soul to
God, spend their time in most serious manner, Romans 8.26. Ezra 9.4.
little minding their own Ease, or moving from place to place, except in great
Necessity, suspending all other Actions but those only that appertain to the
present Exercise, else it is not Fasting; Isa. 58.4.
for Fasting is an Abstenance. Neither do they mind any business, nor take any
Food or Natural Refreshment, but with great Watchfulness keep their Minds
retired to the Lord, waiting to see how he appears unto their Souls. And all
their time is not spent in speaking Words, but mostly in the Exercise of their
Soul, and working of the Mind with the Lord. Verse 9.27.
But private Fasts, if it be to beat down the Body, and bring it into
Subjection, that it may not be too strong for the Soul; then that kind of
Fasting is accompanied with Labor, or any Exercise whatsoever. But if it be
for obtaining any special Mercy, or for the removing of any sore Affliction, or
for Assistance against any dangerous Temptation, or for the subduing of any
prevailing Corruption; ^hen it is performed in great Retirement. 1 Cor. 7.5.
And so Wives and Husbands withdraw themselves from one another, during that
time of Fasting; the which, if it be for many days, then they take a little
Food and a little Water, and after enjoy each others Company again, Dan. 10.3.
Phil. 4.5. Amos 4.6.
with such moderate Refreshments of Nature, that will stand with Christian
Sobriety. But much Wine and strong Beer, and dainty Meats, and gorgeous
Apparel, with soft and pleasant Resting places, being inconsistent with the
state of Pilgrims, Heb. 13.14.
are therefore mere Strangers in Bethania.

TWO and TWENTIETHLY.
Singing of Psalms in Bethania, is a certain Divine and Spiritual Exercise, by
which the Inhabitants thereof do celebrate the Praises of the most High God,
and it is mainly and chiefly an Exercise of the Soul, being performed by the
lifting up of the Soul and Spirit unto great Jehovah; Psalm. 32.7.
and this Divine Mirth springs up in the Souls of those who are in Experience
of some Spiritual Refreshments. Psalm. 101.1.
Therefore, when any is merry, they sing Psalms, in which they teach and
admonish one another with Hymns and spiritual Songs singing with Grace in their
Hearts to the Lord, James 5.13. Col, 3.16. Ephesians. 5.19.
speaking also to themselves in Psalms and Hymns, and Spiritual Songs; making
Melody in their Hearts to the Lord; giving thanks always for all things, unto
God, and the Father in the Name of our Lord Jesus Christ. Verse 20.
So Jesus our Savior rejoiced in Spirit, and then said, I thank Thee, Luke
10.21. Psalm. 25.1. Psalm. 103.1. Job. 29.30. Isa. 65.30. Jer. 31.25.
O Father, etc. Even so David lifted up his Soul to God, and then set his Soul
to bless his Holy Name; and Job caused the Widows Heart to sing. Even so faith
the Lord, My Servants shall sing for joy of Heart, for I have satiated the
weary Soul, and I have Replenished every Sorrowful Soul. By all which, and much
more that might be said, it appears that singing is a Work of the Heart and
Soul, the which being inwardly refreshed, calls to the Tongue to awake and
declare it. Psalm. 57.8.
And it is only proper to those and none but those, who are in Communion with
the Blessed Lamb, in some of Sions Glory. For none can learn these Spiritual
Songs, Rev. 14.3. Chap. 5.3.
but such who are Redeemed from an Earthly State, and have gotten the Victory
over the Beast, and over his Image, and over his Mark, and over the Number of
his Name, so that it be the Redeemed of the Lord whom he has recovered from
Spiritual Babylon, that can say and sing, Psalm. 107.2.
Thy Mercy endures for ever. Therefore, Singing of Psalms, and Spiritual
Songs, 1 Cor. 12.4. Romans 12.6. 1 Cor. 14.26. Psalm. 40.3. Psalm. 137.4.
is no Gospel-Ordinance, neither is every individual Member of Gospel-Churches
able to perform it: But it is properly a Gospel-Gift, and only belongs to those
into whose Mouth the Lord has put the New Song; For who can sing the Songs of
Sion, while they sit by the Waters of Babylon? who though they do often
remember her, and greatly desire to be there, yet they cannot sing her Songs:
But their going forth is with Weeping, and they sow their precious Seed in
Tears; Psalm. 126.5. Phil. 2.12. Isa. 9.3. Isa. 35.10.
working out their own Salvation with Fear and Trembling; yet at last they
rejoice as in the joy of Harvest, and the ransomed of the Lord do return and
come to Sion with Songs of Deliverance. Nevertheless, there be some in
Gospel-Churches, who have both Power and Right to Sing, and they do it partly
to Express the joy of their own Spirits, Exodus 15.16. Judge. 5.20. Rev. 19.9.
Isa. 27.2.
and partly for the Edification of others, In which Song they set forth the
Glorious Acts of God, his great Love to mortal men, the precious things to
come, the Soul-refreshing Supper of the Lamb, the Blessed Union between Christ
a^^ his Spouse, Chap. 5.1.
and such like. Therefore to these it is a peculiar Gift; A^^ that Spirit that
gives the Gift of Doctrine, of Revelation, of Tongue^ of Interpretation, does
also give the Gift of a Psalm; 1 Pet. 4.10.
and as every (...) has received the Gift of any kind (...) Nature whatsoever;
Romans 12.6, 7.
even so he is (...) Minister as a good Steward of the manifold Grace of God
and to wait upon his proper Ministry, with great Diligent for the Glory of God,
and for the Edification of all that hears, that all may learn (...) all may be
comforted. 1 Cor. 14.31.
So that every th^^^ is done by Gift in Bethania. Rev. 18.22.
And (...) for Art and Craft, they leave it to th^^ Crafts-men of Babel; Lev.
10.1. John 4.24. 1 Cor. 14.21. Acts 2.4.
for God (...) not be Worshipped with strange Fite^^ but is looking into the
Churches for spiritual Worship, and spiritual Worshippers; and therefore Paul
would Pray in the Spirit, and Sing in the Spirit, and the Preachers would
Preach as the Spirit gave them Utterance. But if any say, We have not such
Gifts now, and therefore cannot Act by them. It is answered in Bethania, That
o^^ Cause is our being so full of Art. And so when the Crafts-men bid us sing,
Psalm. 40.3.
then we sing, and they put the Song into our Mouths, when indeed the Lord
should put it there. And so when we should weep, because by the Waters of
Babylon, we fall to singing, Psalm. 137.1.
according as men do teach us, otherwise we could not sing our selves. So that
we may see, that we be yet within the Limits of Babel, but do not hearken to
the Voice that says, Rev. 18.4. Mich. 4.10.
Come out of her my People; and again, Go out of the City into the Field.
Therefore Bethania, who is poor in Spirit, and has left Art and Craft to
Babel, and to the Earthly Jerusalem; if any of them have a Gift to Preach, Romans
12.6.
then he preaches according to his Gift, and all the rest are silent while he
Preaches; and so it is observed also in Prayer, and all the rest are silent,
only Act in their Spirits, 1 Cor. 14.30. Verse 26.
And so if any have the Gift of a Psalm, then he only sings to whom the Psalm
is given, but all the rest hold their Pe^ce, and are Exercised only in their
Spirits, and so are Edified. For if all the whole Congregation should say the
same Words, 1 Cor. 14.23.
after the Preacher has said them, it would be great Confusion; and if all
should Pray the same Words that the Minister prays, it would appear
Ridiculous. Even so, when one sings by a Gift, and all that are present sing
the same things after, or with him, is it not great Confusion and Disorder? For
he only sings by a Gift, and all the rest learn of him, and speak his Words,
and so are wholly guided by another, Job 19.28.
and there is nothing springs from any Root of Matter in themselves; and
after this manner we may teach diverse Birds to say, what we have said to them:
Yea, Profane Persons, and Carnal Professors, that have nothing of Divinity in
them, may sing as well as the most Divine and Spiritual. Therefore this cannot
be Gospel Worship which consists not in bodily Exercise, 1 Timothy 4.8.
but in Spirit and Truth; an^ therefore we are to observe a spiritual Method in
the Management of it. A^^ did not sing in the time of the Law for there were
Masters of the Music who did instruct and order the Singe^ in the Exercise of
Songs. 1 Chronicles. 15.19. Chap. 16.42. and 25.1.
These were Asaph, Heman, Ethan and Jeduthan Asaph and Heman were Seers in the
Words of God, and These with their Brethren was set over the Song, to instruct
and train up Singers in that Divine Exercise; and the Number of them with their
Brethren, that were instructed in the Songs of the Lord, Al^ that were Cunning,
was Two Hundred Fourscore and Eight; 1 Chronicles. 25.7. Heb. 9.1.
but this was during the time of the first Tabernacle and Temple, which was
called, A Worldy Sanctuary. And yet that Service of the Song was only peculiar
to those who were instructed in it. But we are now, or should be at least under
a more Spiritual Ministration. Therefore all our Service should be done in
Spirit, Romans 1.9.
also in Newness of Spirit, and not the Oldness of the Letter. Chap. 7.6.
Now when the Spirit of the Holy God has inspired the Spirits, and Refreshed
the Souls of any of the Inhabitants of Bethania; so that the Tongue of the Dumb
is prepared to sing; Isa. 35.6. Psalm. 45.1.
then the Hearts in which the Root of the Song does lie, Inditeth a good
Matter, and so they have liberty to use their Tongues for ought appears, and
sing in Meter or in Prose, as the Song of Moses, and Deborah, Exodus 15. Jude.
5. 2 Samuel 22.23. Luke 10.21.
and David. Also the Song of Jesus, when he rejoiced in Spirit, and said, etc.
Moreover, the Song of the Four Living Creatures, and the Twenty Four Elders, is
in Prose, both in English and Greek. For they said, Thou art worthy to take the
Book, Rev. 5.9. Chap. 15.2, 3.
and to open the Seven Seals thereof; for thou wast slain, and have Redeemed us
to God by thy Blood, etc. So the Song that was sung upon the Sea of Glass, is
uttered in Prose; for they sing the Song of Moses, and the Song of the Lamb,
saying, Great and Mavelous are thy Works, Lord God Almighty, just and true
are thy Ways, thou King of Saints. Even so also the Song at the fall of
Babylon, which is an Hebrew Song, is in Prose, and is concluded by the Four
Living Creatures, and Twenty Four Elders, Rev. 19.4.
in these two Hebrew Words, Amen, Hallelujah; yet they sometimes, and often use
a certain kind of Meter, not exactly according to the Method of the Poets,
which only Elevateth the Affections of the sensitive Life, but in the Spirits
Dialect; and such that pierces through the sensitive. Life, into the rational
Soul, and Edifieth it; which is the only Design of Divinity, in all its various
Operations.

So then, Singing of Psalms is used in Bethania, For the Song of Hosannah was
sung very near it; Mat. 21.9.
but it is used there as a Gift of the Holy Spirit, peculiar only to him that
has it; and not as an Ordinance of God, which respects all. Yet
nevertheless, Praising of God is an Ordinance of God, according to the
Principles of Nature, proper to all Creatures; and so all the Works of God do
Praise him, but do not Sing unto him, except only when their Spirits are
Elevated; and then the Trees of the Wood sing out and clap their Hands, Psalm.
145.10. Isa. 24.7. Isa. 55.13.
when the Celestial Influences have quickened them, in the Spring and Summer:
and their Voice is uttered in their Leaves, Blossoms, and Fruit. But when those
Influences are withdrawn, then they retire, and are silent all the Winter
Season; and so the Sun, Moon and Stars, Psalm. 148.3.
do Praise the Lord by the Influences of his own Virtue that is in them; yea
Dragons, and all Deeps, Fire, Hail, Snow, Stormy Wind, Mountains, Trees,
Cedars, Beafts, Cattle, Creeping Things, Flying Fowls, all these, Psalm. 148.7,
8, 9, 10.
in their proper Nature, Praise the Lord, and Sing unto him in that Season when
he puts the Song into their Mouth.

Bethania's Walks WITH GOD.
Now last of all, having briefly hinted, First, At the Doctrine of Bethania:
And Secondly, At some part of her Discipline and Order: We hope now Lastly,
Briefly to lay down her Manner of Life, and serious Walks with God; and to what
Place this Motion Tends.
CHAP. I.
THe Conversation and Manner of Life in Bethania, is very Divine and Heavenly,
Genesis 5.22. Chap. 6.9.
being a serious Walk with God, and a careful Imitation of the innocent and
pure Life of Jesus; so that as her Inhabitants are begotten by the immortal
Seed of the Word of God, and born of the Divine Spirit, 1 Pet. 1.2, 3. John 3.6.
[which Birth is from above;] even so their Conversation isin Heaven, as the
way of Life, which is above to the wise, Phil. 3.20. Prove. 15.24. Ephesians. 1.3.
Col. 1.3. 1 Pet. 1.4.
to deliver from the Snares of Hell beneath; in which place and State they are
and shall be blessed with all Spiritual and Eternal Blessings, in and by Christ
Jesus. And therefore their Affections are set on things above, as things that
are incorruptible, and will never fade away; The which being their Everlasting
Treasure unto which they are begotten and born, as right Heirs of the same;
even so their Hearts seriously incline toward that place where this Treasure
is laid up for them, Heb. 11.14.
and their Life is framed here on Earth among men, as becomes those who expect
to live with God in Heaven, among Angels; and is such a life, Phil. 1.27.
which is proper and natural to the glorious Gospel of our Lord Jesus, in which
the Grace apeareth, which teaches us, To deny all Ungodliness, and Worldly
Lusts, and to live Righteously Soberly, Tit. 2.12, 14.
and Godly in this present World; looking for that blessed Hope, and glorious
Appearing of the great God, and our Savior Jesus Christ, who gave himself for
us, that he might Redeem us from all Iniquity, and Purify unto himself a
peculiar People, zealous of good Works, that they might show forth the Praises
of him, 1 Pet. 2.9. Phil. 2.15. 2 Cor. 4.11. Chap. 2.14. Mark 3.45.
who has called them out of Darkness, into his mavelous Light; in which they
shine as lights in the World, and manifest the most pure Life of Jesus in their
Mortal Flesh; making manifest the Savor of his Knowledge in every place, which
Heavenly Offspring are of near Affinity with most pure Jesus, whose Divine
Nature has deeply Penetrated into their very Souls, and changed the Properties
thereof from Devilish and Beastial, into Divine and Spiritual; Tit. 3.3. 1 Cor.
6.11. Romans 8.28, John 3.1. 2 Cor. 3.18. Ephesians. 2.19. Chap. 7.15. Heb. 12.13.
Rev. 13.8. Gal. 4.25.
and so he is but the firstborn among these many Brethren, as the glorious Son
of God, by Natural Generation; and the Children of the same God with him, by
Divine Regeneration. So that there is but one Nature, Spirit, Life and Image in
Christ and Christians; therefore, they are called, The Household of God, and the
Family in Heaven, the General Assembly, and Church of the firstborn; whose
Names are written in the Book of Life, of the Lamb stain from the Foundation of
the World, and so are Fellow-Citizens with the Saints in that Spiritual
Jerusalem which is above, and is the true Mother of all real Bethanians.

CHAP. II.
BUT now forasmuch as Bethania is situate on the Mount of Olives, and the
Earthly Jerusalem is beneath it, yet scarce two Miles distant from it; and the
direct Motion of the true Followers of the Lamb, being still upward, ascending
from a fleshly Glory in a visible Profession, Mat. 5.3.
into Poverty of Spirit, and Resignation to Jesus; Ephesians. 3.8.
and so through that Estate into Spiritual and Eternal Riches, we shall a
little consider the walk of Saints, and the walk of the World, as they are both
hastening apace into Endless Eternity.

And forasmuch as the Sovereign God, in whose hands is all Power, and at whose
dispose all things must be, has appointed Heaven, Earth, and Hell, these three
places, to be the Habitation of all Creatures in time and Eternity, according
to their proper State. Eccles. 3.1.
It is Earth only that is allotted to Time, and Heaven and Hell to Eternity; so
that Earth stands between Heaven and Hell, equally distant; and there are three
steps by which men ascend from Earth to Heaven, and three steps by which they
descend from it to Hell. Now Bethania chooses the way of Life, which is strait
and narrow, Mat. 7.13.
and ascends upwards; but Babel imbraceth the way of Death, Job. 21.13. Isa.
5.14. Rev. 3.16.
which is broad and pleasant, and descends downwards; and the Earthly
Jerusalem not well liking either of these, yet having but a Lukewarm Spirit,
settleth upon her Lees just between, but at last must sink down with Babel like
a Millstone, Rev. 18.21. Isa. 33.14.
into the Bottomless deep of Gods Eternal Wrath; which the Sinners in Sion, as
well as the Sinners in Babel, shall not be able to escape. Now these three
steps by which Bethania ascends upwards, she has learned of Christ our Lord,
who himself has traveled the same way; and they are First, Deny your selves,
Secondly, Take up the Cross, and Thirdly, Mat. 16.24. John. 21.26.
Follow me; and then, Where I am, there shall also my Servant be. But those
three steps by which Babel descends toward her Infernal Den, are wholly of
another Nature, as they are laid down by the Apostle, Phil. 3.19. And are
First, Their God is their Belly, Secondly, Their Glory is their Shame, and
Thirdly, Who mind Earthly Things; the fearful issue of all which, is
Destruction in the end: But Bethania's likes not this way, though seemingly
pleasant, therefore takes her leave of Babel; who on the other hand despises
the way of Bethania; Prove. 29.27. Zeph. 1.12.
and so these two Cities turn back to back, and leave the Earthly Jerusalem on
her lees, each one hastening in his proper Motion, and never see one another
Faces any more; therefore we shall endeavor, and desire to prosecute the way
of Bethania, and declare those things, as the Lord shall enable us, wherein she
is said, To be a Follower of the Blessed Lamb, who is our Savior, Rev. 14.3.
and the Prince of Peace and Life.

CHAP. III.
THere is a right precious and most Holy Faith belonging to Christians, as
proper to the Elect of God, of which we have spoken somewhat before, 2 Pet.
1.1. Romans 10.17.
and it is a certain Divine Principle begotten in the Soul, by the Word of God;
from whence springs that Virtue in which the Saints do walk; the which Virtue
is sevenfold, as is noted in 2 Pet. 1.15. And it shines forth in the Souls of
Christians, by the influence of that Grace, which streameth unto them from the
Seven Spirits of God, which are before the Throne. Rev. 1.4. 2 Pet. 1.8.
And where these things are, and also abound, that Soul is neither Barren nor.
Unfruitful in the Knowledge of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. But Entrance
is administered abundantly into his Everlasting Kingdom: These are the seven
Pillars, as it seems, upon which Wisdom has builded her House, the
Foundation of which House is laid in the Foundation-Stone of Sion; Prove. 9.
Isa. 28.16.
and by these Pillars it is exposed to open View, and when any of these Pillars
are wanting or out of Order, there is a Breach, and when they all disappear, it
is a total Ruin. Now these Seven Spirits of God which are before the Throne,
are also the seven Pillars upon one Stone; Rev. 1.4. Rev. 5.6. Zach. 3.9.
the which seven Spirits are sent forth into all the Earth, noted also to be
seven Eyes and seven Horns, possessed by that Lamb which was slain, Rev. 1.18.
but is now alive for evermore. So that seven being a Number of Perfection, it
is proper to Christ who received the Spirit not by measure, John 3.34.
for in him dwelt the fullness of the Godhead bodily, and it pleased the
Father, that in him should all fullness dwell. By these seven Spirits, are also
seven Eyes, Gal. 2.4. Rev. 15.6.
and seven Horns, signifying Power. It pleases the Glorious God through
Christ, to look upon, and finally to dispose of the whole Creation, according
to his own Will; Now these seven Spirits, are First, Isa. 11.3.
The Spirit of Wisdom, by which the Lord did first contrive the Creation which
he made. Secondly, The Spirit of Power, 2 Timothy 1.7.
by which he formed and supporteth the same. Thirdly, The Spirit of Judgment,
Romans 1.3.
by which he orders and disposes thereof. Fourthly, The Spirit of Holiness,
by which he gloriously shines before and among his Creatures. Fifthly, The
Spirit of Humility, by which he vouchsafes to behold the Creation as the Works
of his own Hands. 1 Cor. 4.21.
Sixthly, The Spirit of Meekness, by which he is tender and pitiful to all; so
careful too of the Creation, which cannot subsist without him. Seventhly, The
Spirit of Love, 2 Timothy 1.7.
by which he delights in the things that he has made. These are the seven
Spirits of Jehovah, the which, as seven Glorious Lamps of Fire, do burn
continually before his Throne; Rev. 4.5. Rev. 3.1.
by which seven Spirits, the Glorious Lamb being also seven Eyes, as we have
said before, looked into the state of the seven Churches, and knew the lifeless
state of the Church of Sardis, and the self-conceited, yet Lukewarm Condition
of the Laodiceans; Rev. 3.17. Rev. 1.20.
and by his Spirit of Judgment will render unto them, and to every one else,
according as their Works shall be. From these seven Spirits John saluted the
seven Churches, whose Operation upon the Souls of Christian Men, form therein
those seven Glorious Excellencies, which are Essential to pure Christianity,
before mentioned in the 2d Epistle of Peter, chap. 1.5, 6, 7, Verses, by which
it may evidently appear, that they are walking in the Spirit. And First, From
the Spirit of Wisdom that is in Christ, is formed true Knowledge in the Souls
of men. Secondly, From the Spirit of Power that is in him, is produced that
Virtue that is in them. And Thirdly, From his Spirit of Judgment, proceeds
the Temperance in which their Souls do live. Fourthly, From his Spirit of
Holiness, springs forth that Godliness in which their Souls do live. Fifthly,
From his Spirit of Meekness, is begotten that Patience which is famous in
Christianity. Sixthly, From his Spirit of Humility, it shows forth the
Brotherly Kindness that becomes Gospel-Professors. And Seventhly, From his
Spirit of Love, naturally arises that Charity in which all Bethania's things
are done. These are the seven Pillars that Wisdom has hewn out, and by Virtue
of which, 1 Cor. 16.4. Prove. 9.1.
Christianity is made to appear; in which also, the Saints do walk in their
Ascent toward their Everlasting Inheritance, and by which they do shine as
Glorious Lights in the World; of which we shall speak particularly. And first
of Virtue.

CHAP. IIII.
VIRTUE is the inward Essence and Life of every living Form, and is that by
which those Forms become profitable and delightful unto those by whom they are
used.

Virtue is of two kinds, The first is Natural, the second Divine and Spiritual.

Natural Virtue, is that by which the Flowers in the Fields yield forth unto
men a Pleasant Savor, and also a Medicinal Profit. By Natural Virtue, The
Fruits of the Fields and Trees do nourish and feed the Bodies of Men and
Beasts: And besides, by Natural Virtue, the Needle in the Compass, being
touched with the Loadstone, turns always toward the North, in which the
Rocks of Loadstones lie; even so also, the Virtue of Fire penetrateth into
whatsoever things comes near to it, and changes the Properties thereof into a
Similitude with its own Nature: it causes cold Water to become hot; so that
the Flesh that is boiled therein, 1 Cor. 6.17. John 8.12.
is made savoury. Cold Iron is changed into a burning State, and therein is
capable of being wrought into diverse Forms; it is not the Form nor Color of
Salt, for Snow has both these, but the Virtue thereof, which makes it to be
so useful to the Sons of men. Water has the same liquid Form as Wine, but not
the same powerful Operation: Therefore the Bodies of men are in that Estate, in
the Excess of Wine, unto which the same Measure of Water will in no wise reduce
them. So every living Form subsisteth and works by Virtue of that Spirit,
which is proper to its own Nature; therefore, every Herb, Plant, and Tree, live
and work by Virtue of a Vegetative Spirit; so the Beasts Fowls, and Fishes, and
Creeping Things, live by Virtue of a Sensitive Spirit; also all Angels and
Souls of men, live immortal Lives, by Virtue of a rational Spirit. Even so all
real and true Christians live and move in a Divine Life, by Virtue of that
Divine Spirit, which is the very Life and Virtue of Jesus our Emanuel; which
Virtue was in him, in such exceeding Fullness, that from his sacred Body Virtue
issued out, to cure by touching, all the Impediments of Nature; for by
touching, He cleansed the Leper, drove away the Fever, Mat. 8.19. Chap. 9.29.
opened the Ears of him who had been Defective both in his Speech and Hearring;
raised the Widows Son, as he was carrying to his Burial, Mark 7.37. Luke 7.4.
Mat. 9.20, 21.
stanched the Bloody Issue which the Physicians could not do, yea, by touching,
He Expelled Fear out of the Spirits of his Disciples, when sorely surprised
therewith, in the Mount of Transfiguration: Mat. 17.7.
So that the whole Multitudes of People sought to touch him, by reason that
Virtue went out of him to cure all their Maladies. Luke 7.19.
Even so also, the precious Faith of Christians, that Divine Principle begotten
in the Souls of God Elect, goes forth from thence as a touching Instrument,
Tit. 1.1. Mat. 15.2. Gal. 2.20.
which reaches into the very Heart of Christ, and draws forth that Divine
Virtue which dwells there, into its self; and so by that Virtue it lives
Divinely, Acts 6.5.
and walks with God. Now according to the Greatness and Perfection of the
Instrument, even so is the Measure of Virtue obtained by it; Heb. 11.33.
Therefore, in ancient Times, when Faith in the Prophets and Apostles, and Holy
Men of God, was strong and famous, so accordingly their Souls were possessed
with great Degrees of Virtue, by which they wrought many famous Miracles, Heb.
2.4. Deuteronomy. 2.1.
and in which they flourished in a Life of Eminent Piety; but as a little Fire
can give but a little heat, and a little Candle can yield but a little light,
even so Faith, since it became weak, Miracles, are for the most part ceased,
and Piety does but meanly flourish. Therefore Bethania, who is poor in Spirit,
is letting out her whole Heart and Soul to Christ, Isa. 26.9. John 21.14.
offering up her whole Will to him, and so presses after a great increase of
Faith, by which her Soul may be fast linked to her Savior, in which most
Blessed Union, she may obtain much of his Virtue, Luke 1.75.
and shine forth in it right gloriously, before her fellow-Mortals; in which
most pure Life, she lives to the Praise of him who has called her to Glory
and Virtue, 2 Pet. 1.3. Prove. 12.4. Chap. 30.10. and 29.
and so this Virtuous Woman is a Crown to her Espoused Husband; and when she
can be found, Her Price is above Rubies, and though many have done virtuously,
yet she in that that is Divine has Excelled them all. Virtue is the Direct
contrary to Vice, and so is of God, in whom dwells all good things; but Vice
is of the Devil. Virtue makes man like God, James 1.17. Psalm. 119.68. Acts
10.38.
and in it man is good; but Vice makes man like the Devil, and in it he is a
mere Monster. Virtue is always profitable both in Church and State, but Vice
brings Ruin upon both. Its Property is ever to do good, even in Natural and
Spiritual Things, but is altogether a Stranger to Evil. Col. 1.10. Romans 16.19.
In either of these, Virtue is of great Antiquity, even from Eternity it self;
but Vice is but of yesterday, and had a Beginning; Mat. 10.16. Verse 6.16. Romans
6.12. Rev. 21.25.
and at last all Iniquity shall have an End. Virtue lives in the whole
Creation, except in that part that is Degenerated from its first Estate, and it
a very Courteous and of good Behavior, always letting out it self for the good
of others, that it may transform other things into its own likeness: It is very
humble, gentle, and exceeding harmless; helpful to all, and needesh help from
none. It will shine before the Face of Tyrants, Cant 3.16. John 2.14. Romans 5.3.
Rev. 15.4. Heb. 1.14. Rev. 12.11. 1 Cor. 20.24.
and stand in a modest boldness against the Threats of most furious Mortals.
Virtue is a Conqueror of the Devil, and triumphs gloriously over all
Temptations, it stands in perpetual Friendship with God; and Angels delight
to become Ministering Spirits unto those who are Professors of it. It makes
nothing of Death, and Fear can never make it hide its Head; yea, those that
hate it, Genesis 39.2, 3.
and will not entertain it in themselves, do yet desire to be served by it in
others; Dan. 2.4.
hence Joseph and Daniel became famous in the sight of Heathens, Psalm. 11.7.
Acts 10.39. Psalm. 63.8. Rev. 14.4.
for it is faithful in its Service both to God and Man. Virtue has great
Communion with an Holy God, who also will own it wheresoever it appears; for it
keeps constantly at his Right Hand, and will follow the Lamb whithersoever he
goes. John 4.17. 2 Pet. 15.
It has great boldness in the Day of Judgment, and knows that it shall not
be condemned; and where the precious Faith is, there it is also as a perpetual
Companion, and so those that have walked with God by Faith, have also walked
before him in a state of Virtue. It makes uncomely Bodies very Beautiful, when
Vice deformeth the most comely Creatures. So then Virtue is a strong Pillar in
the House of Wisdom, and a Street in Bethania, in which Bethania has many a
Walk with God. In this street stands her Marketplace, from whence are
dispersed many precious things. Therefore, O ye that pretend to Faith, be
careful to prove the Truth thereof, James 2.18.
by its Companion, Virtue; and whatsoever things are true, whatsoever Things
are honest, whatsoever Things are just, whatsoever things are pure, Phil. 4.8.
whatsoever Things are lovely, whatsoever things are of good Report; if there
be any Virtue, if there be any Praise, think on these Things.

CHAP. V.
THE Second Pillar in (...) House of Wisdom, is Knowledge; in which there are
two Party. First, Speculative, by which we look at things without us. Secondly,
Experimental, by which we know things from within us. It consistent mainly in
two Things: First, In (...) Knowledge of God. Secondly, In the Knowledge of our
selves; and in both these Bethania desires to walk (...) Wisdom. Without all
Controversy God is a great Mystery, and so also is man; Col. 4.5. 1 Timothy 1.16.
Psalm. 139.14. Mat. 13.33.
Therefore says David, I am fearfully and wonderfully made. Man is to be
considered in a Threefold Life, the which are the three Measures of Meal in
which the Leaven is to be hid. The first of these is Rational, in which man is
in Union of Life with Angels. The second of these Lives, Col. 3.18. Job. 14.2,
is Sensitive, in which he is in Union with Beasts and Fowls. The Third of
these is Vegetive, in which Man has Union of Life with Herbs, Plants, and
Trees; Thus God breathed into Man the Breath of Life, when Man became a living
Soul. Man is also to be considered, and to know himself in a Threefold State;
First, His State in Creation, Genesis 2.7. Col. 7.29. John 8.44. John 3.8.
^n which he was a pure man. Secondly, His State in the Fall, in which his Soul
bears the Image of the Devil, and his Body has the Properties of a Beast.
Thirdly, His State in the Restoration, in which only he is a Christian, and his
Soul bears the Image of Christ; Eccles. 3.20. Col. 3.10. Phil. 3.12. Romans 6.3.
and in the Resurrection, his Body also shall be changed into shining
Immortality. Thus man descended out of the Image of God into Sin, and so
through Sin into Misery. Therefore, his Ascent must be out of Sin into
Holiness, and so through that into Safety. The great desire of God in his
outgoings to man, is to make him know himself; Therefore the first Question
that God asked Man after the Fall, was, Adam where art thou? So also, Genesis 3.9.
Heb. 4.12.
it is the Property of his most sacred Word, to pierce between the very Soul and
Spirit, and to discover the very Secrets and Intents of the Heart. The first
work of the Spirit of God toward man, John 16.8.
is To convince him of Sin, and to set it all in order before him, that he may
see himself to be unclean and miserable, and so look for a Premedy; but it is
the Desire of the Devil to keep man from knowing himself, that he might believe
he is what he is not; thus (...) would persuade the Woman in Edea that they
should be as Gods, Genesis 3.5. 2 Cor. 4.4.
when he designed to make them as Devils: For the God of this World blinds
the Minds, and darkneth the. Understanding of those that hearken to him, that
so he might lead there Souls blindfold to Hell. Ephesians. 4.8. Genesis 3.7. John
3.20. Isa. 29.21. Isa. 5.14. Rev. 4.8. Psalm. 19.12. Psalm. 25.21. 2 Cor. 1.12.
Romans 8.16. 1 John 5.10. Heb. 10.34. Gal. 4.9. 1 Cor. 15.4. Romans 5.9. Luke 21.28.
Man therefore cannot endure to see his ow^^ Nakedness, nor to have his in side
made manifest, but hates him that reproves in the Gate, and striveth to p^^^
out that light by which his Deeds (...) made manifest, and so covers himself
either with worldly Glory, as (...) Painted Mortal, or else with Fig. leaves,
as a seeming Christian; wh^^ his Soul is full of Deceitful Hypoc^sie: But that
Knowledge in which Bothania is walking with, God, is (...) Knowledge that
springs from an Eye within, and this is still looking into the Secrets, and
searches into th^^ most inward State of the Soul; and from hence arises all
true Peace and Comfort, when the Root of the Matter is found within, the Spirit
of God bears Witness with man's Spirit; so he that believes has the Witness
in himself, and the rejoicing of a Christian, is the Testimony of his own
Conscience. The reason why men so much love the World, is because they want an
inward Evidence for Heaven, Heb. 10.34.
and no such Evidence can possibly be obtained, 1 Cor. 15.1.
but ^s the Soul appears in a New Creature-State. To know that Jesus our
Savior was born of a Virgin, and dyed for our Sins according to the
Scriptures, Gal. 4.19.
is a true and needful Knowledge; but except his Image be formed in our Souls,
1 Cor. 15.4. 2 Cor. 4.11.
and they quickened by his Spirit, and beautified by his Grace, so that his
precious Life may be made manifest in us, this Knowledge will signify but very
little. Salvation was begun by Christ in the Flesh, Romans 5.9. Luke 21.28. John
17.3. John 15.20. Jer. 9.24. Heb. 11.27. Exodus 3.14. Isa. 9.6. 1 Timothy 6.16.
Job. 11.7. Isa. 5.7, 15. Jer. 23.23, 24. 2 Chronicles. 6.18. Col. 1.15.
it is carried on by Christ in the Spirit, and fully ends when he shall appear
in Glory. The second part of Knowledge, is of the only true God, and his Son
Jesus Christ, the which indeed, is the Substance of all Knowledge, and in it
consists Life Eternal; but the most pure Essence of God is invisible, and
unconceivable; for he dwells in that light unto which no man can approach. In
this sense therefore, none by searching can find out the Almighty unto
Perfection, for as he inhabiteth Eternity, even so also he fills it, being
infinite and incomprehensible; yea, Infinity it self; and no Finite Creature
can possibly in its greatest Capacity, comprehend or conceive of an Infinite
Essence. Heb. 1.3.
Nevertheless it has pleased the invisible God, to give forth an express Image
of his most pure and unconceivable Substance, John 1.18.
and by that Image which is in the Bosom of the Father, Angels and Men see him,
which otherwise is invisible. Thus the Father in himself is God Concealed, but
the Son his express Image, 1 Timothy 3.18.
is God Revealed: Therefore in the Name Jehovah, 1 Timothy 3.16. Rev. 4.8. Mat.
1.23.
he is beyond all Angels, and unknown by them; but in the Name Emanuel, he is
God with us, and known by men. God in his Eternal Substance, is the only God in
himself, but in the Image of that Substance, he appears to be the only God to
his Creatures: Thus the only Son of God Reveals the Father, who is the only
good, and makes all the Goodness of God that concerns Creatures to pass
before them: Mat. 19.17. Act. 3.3, 19. Col. 1.19. Chap. 23.
For it pleases the Father, that in him should all Fullness dwell, in whom also
are hid the Treasures of Wisdom and Knowledge; so he that causes Light to
shine out of Darkness, has shined in the Hearts of those whose minds are
turned to him, and gives them the Knowledge of his Glory in the Face of Jesus
Christ; and thus the invisible God through this Glorious Mediator, makes
manifest his Unsearchable Goodness to the Sons of men, 2 Cor. 4.6. Ephesians. 3.8.
that he might engage them, and encourage them to believe in him; also to Love,
Fear, and Serve him, Psalm. 9.10.
and to trust in him from whom they have received their Life and Being, and
whatsoever good they enjoy. But till the minds of men be turned to God, and so
the Devil, World, and Sin be left behind, they can know but little of his
Goodness; Ephesians. 4.18. Isa. 5.20.
therefore they call Evil, Good, and Good, Evil, and so hate the Good; and say
to God, Depart from us, Job 21.14. Isa. 59.15. John 16.3.
for we desire not the Knowledge of thy Ways: Moreover, also they hate and
despise those men in whom the Image of Goodness appears; and these things will
they do, because they know not God, and his most pure Image: So then the World
which lies in Wickedness, 1 John 5.19. 1 Cor. 1.12.
by all its Wisdom knows not good. For the Workers of Iniquity have no
Knowledge; and when the Sons of Ely became the Sons of Belial, then they knew
not the Lord; Yea, the Priests said not, Psalm. 14.4. 1 Samuel 2.11. Jer. 2.8. 1
John 2.5. James 2.19.
Where is the Lord? And such as handled the Law, knew him not. Therefore he
that says, He knows him, and keeps not his Commandments, is a Liar, and
the Truth is not in him; so that to know God by a Speculative Knowledge,
signifies little; The Devil may be more Excellent herein then men. But the
saving Knowledge of God, Job. 42.5.
which in Bethania is added to Virtue, and it is an Experimental Knowledge, by
which he is known to be the only good, Psalm. 73.26. Luke 10.42. 2 Kings 4.9.
John 14.21. Psalm. 73.24. Psalm. 121.8.
and therefore is chosen to be the only Portion. His Counsels are embraced as
infallible, his Way is chosen and greatly approved, his Image is loved wherever
it appears, and Conformed unto with all possible Exactness: Unto such as these
he will manifest himself in his Wisdom, to guide them; in his Power, to defend
them; in his Love, to comfort them; Cant. 1.2. Heb. 11.6. 2 Pet. 3.18. Col.
4.5. Luke 12.5. 2 John 1.2.
in his Mercy, to relieve them; and in his Bounty, to reward them; so that as
Persons grow in Grace, and in the Knowledge of our Lord Jesus, in this
Experimental Knowledge, it will enable them to walk in Wisdom with him, to fear
none but God, to love nothing but for his sake, Acts 20.24. Dan. 6.10. Lam.
1.16. Mat. 3.26. Acts 8.3. Psalm. 17.15. Cant. 3.4.
to leave his Service for no Peril; for they see him to be their only good, and
all things to be but empty without him. Therefore, Bethania enters into the
inside of Scriptures, and looks through all Ordinances, and searches into
the depth of whole Nature; that she may know him who is her only good, with
whom her Soul is greatly satisfied, and in whose Communion as her Soul is
walking with him, she enjoys unspeakable solace. In this Street stands the
Schools of Learning; and the Perfection of the Knowledge that is there attained
to, is for man to know himself and God.

CHAP. VI.
A Third Pillar in the House of Wisdom, is Temperance; and it is a famous
street in Bethania; it comes from the Word which signifies Strength:
Therefore when it dwells in the Soul, every thing therein is subjected to
Reason and Divinity. Gal. 5.22, 23.
It is a Fruit of the Holy Spirit, and a State wherein Heaven-born Souls walk
with God, it is meet to be observed in the Management of the Christian War, he
that striveth for Masteries is temperate in all things: it is a Qualification
that must be found in a Bishop, and with great Diligence is to be added to
Knowledge. Sound Doctrine teaches that Aged Men be sober, grave, temperate, 1
Cor. 9.25. Tit. 1.8. 2 Pet. 1.5. Tit. 2.2. Acts 24.25.
sound in the Faith, in Charity, in Patience; when Paul reasoned with Felix, of
Righteousness, Temperance, and Judgment to come, that Doctrine made him
tremble: For Temperance is a great Enemy to Voluptuousness. Where Temperance
stands firm in the Soul, as a stable Pillar, Lust and Self-will are conquered;
for Temperance is to overcome our selves, Tit. 1.7.
and so all the Affections to Creatures as Creatures, are Crucified in true
Temperance, and the Soul is kept in a quier Calm, Gal. 6.14. Lam. 3.26. 1 Thessalonians. 4.13.
and is not discomposed either by Love or Fear. Where Temperance is a ruling
Principle, joy and sorrow appear in a great Modesty. When Temperance guides the
Stern, and stears the Course, there is no Natural Object so delightful, nor
Cross so distasteful, Genesis 22.16. Heb. 11.35.
but it can freely leave the one, and quietly bear the other. Where Temperance
is a constant Walk of the Soul, Anger and Passion are mere strangers; for
Temperance is very Meek, but Anger i^ very Outrageous; Therefore says Seneea,
Prove. 27. Chap. 25.2.
Anger and Frenzy are but tu^ several Ways of a man's losing (...) Wit; but the
temperate man that rules his own Spirit, has that Evi^ Passion in Subjection,
Prove. 16.2. 1 Timothy 6.8.
and so is better than he that takes a City. Temperance is contented with
Food, and Raiment, though both but mean, and makes no Provision for the Flesh
at all, but only to supply the Necessities of Nature; Romans 13.14.
but Lust and Envy are never satisfied, who having obtain and one thing,
straitway desires anoter, and like the Horse-leach cry Give, Give: Prove. 30.1.5
Temperance manageth strife, both with Men and Devils, in great Sobrieties; and
to the one it says, The Lord forgive thee; Luke 25.34. Isa. 59.11.
and to the other, The Lord Rebuke thee. But Railing and Immodesty spring from
Lust, and are never found in Temperance. Temperance bears an Eclipse from
God with great Submission, and only mourns like a Dove, not roareth like a
Bear; so Jesus our Savior in his great Agony, ruied his Spirit with much
Modesty; saying, If it be thy Will, Luke 22.42.
let this Cup pass from me. Therefore Temperance is a pleasant Walk in
Bethania, and most of the discourse of her Spirit there, is not my Will, but
thine be done; and so the whole state of the Soul, Act. 26.14.
and all the Affections of the sensitive Life, are ordered, and composed by
Temperance, John 2.10.
and in this Estate she walks with God, and finds no Occasion of stumbling.
Isa. 28.17.
Thus Judgment being laid to the Line, and Righteousness to the Plummet; a
Narrow Path is marked out by these, to be a constant Walk of Bethania.

CHAP. VII.
THE Fourth Pillar in the House of Wisdom, is Patience; the which is also
divided into three Parts; The first of which, Luke 21. Numb. 12.3. Isa. 28.16.
is that by which we quietly endure Adversity. The second, is that by which we
bear with great Provocations and Reproaches. But the Third, is accounted
waiting for the Accomplishment of all Promises till their proper Season; this
is a long Street in Bethania, and she has many a walk with God therein, whose
mind being firmly fixed there, her State is always comfortable, and her Soul is
kept in perfect Peace: Isa. 26.3.
But as a curious piece of Work is formed out of Iron, by Fire and Blows, even
so also Patience is wrought out by Suffering; Romans 5.3.
as it is said, Tribulation works Patience. He that will turn a Withered Tree
into shining Glass, must first burn it to Ashes; and as a Silver or Golden
Vessel is made by melting in the Fire, so Patience in the first Degree thereof,
springs out of Afflictions, and therefore he who will have it firmly Rooted
in his Soul, must dig deep therein; for Patience will grow no where but there,
and is like the Rainbow, Genesis 9.13.
never seen but in the Clouds; that is no Patience which seems to be so when
it has nothing to endure; therefore, when Patience is begotten by Adversity,
then it begets Experience; and at last a Deliverance out of them works
Hope, Romans 5.45.
and Hope encourages the Soul against future Adversity, and setleth it self in
God, and so the expectation of the Soul is not cut off, neither is it exposed
to shame; Pro. 23.18, Jam. 1.4.
Patience therefore is to have its perfect Work, if we intend to have
Experience and Hope; for both these are formed by Patience in the Fire, that
the Soul may be entire and want nothing. Patience takes up the Cross
willingly, not like Simon of Cyrene. Mat. 27.32.
who was compelled to bear it; and quietly endures the same, Heb. 12.2.
despising the shame and reproach thereof; only sometimes these words may
possibly be u^^ered, viz. This is a Grief, Jer. 10.9.
but I must bear it: Jesus our Savior, was condemned in Gabatha, the Pavement,
a place of walking for the Feet; but he suffered in Golgotha, Joh. 19.16.
the place of a Scull, with a Crown of Thorns upon his Head, and so Head and
Hands, Side, and Feet, were all concerned in the Cross; yet Patience in him,
did quietly endure it; but at last he went from Golgotha to the Grave, thence
again ascended to Mount Olivet, Luke 24.50. Acts 1.12. Ephesians. 4.10. Heb. 12.2.
Ephesians. 1.11, 22. 1 Pet. 3.22.
as if he would bid Bethania farewell; and thence he proceeded in ascending, and
never left till he was gotten far above all Heavens, where he sat down on the
right hand of the Majesty on high, Angels and Principalities being subject unto
him: So then Patience, though its Root be in Adversity, and may be trodden under
foot of Men and Devils, Job 39.18.
yet its Fruit grows out of the reach of both, and like the Ostrich,
despises the trampling Horse and all his furious Riders. Patience proceeds
from one of the seven Spirits of God, viz. The Spirit of Meekness; and that is
the quality of a Lamb, Isa. 53.7.
who, though he be slain like a Swine (both for Food) yet he is not like a
Swine in crying; being wholly dumb, and not opening his mouth, while the Life
is taken away. Those who will follow Christ in good earnest, must expect to
have Self, World and Hell, all against them; therefore they have need of
Patience, Luke 21.17. Heb. 10.36. Phil. 1.4.
and that will help them upwards in the right hand passage, out of the reach of
all these, and at last set them in a quiet Repose in the quiet and perfect
peace of Bethania. But a second degree of Patience, is long-suffering under
great provocations and reproaches; Rev. 5.6.
so he that looks through the seven Eyes, Romans 9.22.
which also are the seven Spirits, endures with much long-suffering the
Vessels of wrath almost fitted for destruction; therefore be would not destroy
the Old World, Genesis 6.3. Zach. 7.13. Genesis 15.16.
till he had given them an hundred and twenty years warning, in which he waited
with the strivings of his Spirit (which yet will not always strive with man)
till Mercy was out of date. So also the Iniquity of the Amorites was four
hundred years in ripening, till at last, Lev. 18.28. Deuteronomy. 32.19.
the Land which they had defiled with their Iniquites, spewed them out of its
possession. So also he waited upon the City Jerusalem, 2. Chr. 36.16. Verse. 15.
because he had compassion upon his People, and upon his dwelling place, till,
by reason of the provokings of his Sons and Daughters, wrath seized upon them
at last, when there was no remedy: Patience in God, is like a Dove with wings,
Isa. 65.2. Nah. 1.3. Hos. 5.4.
always flying swiftly with the O^ive-Branch of Peace in his mouth, still
inviting provoking Souls to Mercy; but Justice follows it like a Snail, yet
those which it overtaketh, 'twill tear like a Lion. God is flow to Anger; but
when the Day of wrath is come, who shall be able to stand? Patience in
Bethania, stands against many, an Affront, Rev. 7.6.
and if he be smitten on the one cheek, yet it will turn the other also; it
blesses them that curses it, and prays for them that despitefully use it.
Acts 7.60.
Stephen looked more at heaven, whither also he committed his Spirit, and from
whence he called for Mercy for his enemies, than at the Stones that flew about
his ears. So also James, when he was thrown from the Pinnacle of the Temple,
made more haste to his knees, that he might pray for his Enemies, than to his
feet, to fly from the Fuller's Club, which, while he was praying, beat out his
Brains. The Reproach of Christ, in Bethania, is counted great Riches, and she
is content to go with him out of the Camp to bear it; Heb. 13.13.
she cares little for an evil Name, seeing she has obtained a divine Nature:
there is a time for the rebuke of Christians to be taken quite away, Isa, 25.8.
but there must be a time first to bear it: We got shame and reproach to our
selves, Isa. 54.4.
by sin, and it must be endured a time by suffering; Est. 6.13.
but when Sin is gone, shame and reproach will quickly follow it; it is time
enough to be honored in Heaven; and that honor is eternal; but the Honor
obtained in this world, begins to decline, like that of Haman, before it be
come to full perfection; therefore provocations and reproaches are but little
minded, nor yet credit and estimation lightly regarded; 2 Cor. 6.8.
and so good report and evil report are passed through much alike, in the
patient Spirit of Bethania. But the Third Degree of Patience consists in the
waiting the accomplishment of Promises, Heb. 6.12. Prove. 13.12.
and herein Patience is often exercised; and though Hope deferred makes the
Heart sick, yet Patience is an effectual Medicine, He that believes makes not
haste, Hab. 2.1.
and the just shall live by his Faith; therefore Patience sinketh into the Will
of God, as well for the obtaining of Mercies, as for the removing of
Afflictions, and after it has patiently waited, it inheriteth the Promises. C.
7.9.
In this Street are the working-houses of Bethania, and here she is often
laboring in the Fire, Mat. 20.
and endures the burden and heat of the Day; nevertheless when she passes
through the Fire, the Lord is with her, Isa. 43.2.
visiting the Laborers in the Vineyard, and in the form of the Fourth, which
is the Son of God, he walks with her in the midst of the burning fiery
Furnace, Dan. 3.28.
and she with him in this Divine Principle of Patience.

CHAP. VIII.
THE fifth Pillar in the House of Wisdom is Godliness, Prove. 4 18.
and is also a glorious Path, even the Path of the Just, as a shining light
shines more unto the perfect day; in this famous street of Bethania she has
many a close walk with God, Pro. 3.17.
and there finds great pleasure and profit, for all the ways of Wisdom are
pleasantness, and all her paths are peace. So also godliness is profitable unto
all things, 2 Timothy 4.8.
having the promise of the life that now is, and of that which is to come.

It signifies a likeness unto God, being a conformity to his Will in matters
of Worship, 3. Jo. 11. Ephesians. 5.1. Ja. 1.17.
and also in manner of life, and so it is God's likeness. Now he is altogether
good, and ever was so even from eternity, and when he created the Creation,
Genesis 1.13.
it was also good; yea very good: and Lucifer himself was the anointed Cherub,
Esa. 20.14.
and was perfect in all his ways in the day that he was created, till iniquity
was found in him; Jude 6.
it was first found in himself through his own default, and there it had its
proper beginning, 1 Jo. 3.8.
and he introduced it into man, and by man it entered into the World, and now
has infected all Mankind, Romans 5.12. Ps. 82.6.
and the whole foundations of the Earth are out of course, and sin has spoiled
and brought disorder into that Creation which at first was good, so that evil
is not of God, for he made things like himself, and that was pure and very
good: yet he made no Creatures immutable in that goodness as they stood in
their own single Essences, for then he had made gods and not creatures, so that
all things went out from him, and therefore must needs be good, for a good Tree
cannot bring forth evil fruit. So also it was according unto his unchangeable
Decree, Mat. 7.18.
that the very principal of his Creatures, Angels and Men, should live in an
absolute dependence upon him, resigning their wills wholly unto him, yielding
most humble subjection unto the Sovereign Lord of the whole Creation, that so
through that resignation, subjection and dependence, they may be by him
confirmed in that goodness, Act. 17.28. Ephesians. 1.22. 1 Cor. 2, 8.
in which they were first created; so then God did not divide his. Essence in
the Creation of the most excellent creatures, viz. Angels and Souls of Men, Ja.
1.17.
for then they must have been immutable in state, and so could never have
fallen, but he produced a fruit, Ja. 1.11.
and left it in freedom of will, not compelling it to any thing which lived by
it self, in that glory and purity in which God created it, and did not resign
its will to God, as the Tree from whence it has its being and nourishment, and
so like fruit fully ripe it fell (because it was not made immutable) and sunk
into another change of state through its own default. Thus the Creation lost
its first and primitive glory, and changed quite into another estate, but the
Creator is still the same, even yesterday, to day, and for ever, Jer. 4.23.
and in the second Creation, which produces the new creature, he makes things
good still, and so like himself, therefore those souls who are regenerated and
made anew, are regenerated into Christ's nature, 1 Pet. 1.4.20.18.
and formed in his Image, quickened by his spirit, nourished by his flesh and
blood, that so it may be in the life of God, and like him in all things, Jo.
6.5, 7.
in which a Creature may be like its Creator, and this is the true godliness,
Ephesians. 4.18.
when the Souls of men are given up into the will of God, to be holy as he is
holy, 1 Pet. 1.16.
and to serve him with reverence and godly fear, cleaving to the truth which is
after godliness, Heb. 12.28. Tit. 1.1. 2 Cor. 1.12.
walking in simplicity and godly sincerity in that quiet life, which is in all
godliness and honesty. Such godly men God the Lord has set apart for himself,
who though they are godly in Christ Jesus, 1 Timothy 2.2. Ps. 4.3. 2 Timothy 3.12.
oftentimes suffer Persecution: Yet the Lord knows how to deliver the godly
out of all adversity, and to put an end to those light afflictions, 2 P. 2.9. 2
Cor. 4.17.
which for a few moments attend upon a godly life, so that Godliness is a
strong pillar in the house of Wisdom, and therefore if that be wanting in the
power thereof (though the form remain untouched) there must needs be a great
breach, and where this breach is, 2 Timothy 3.5.
the house will quickly fall, Luke 10.39. Mat. 11.19. Heb. 7.26. 2 Pet. 2.22.
therefore Bethania chooses to sit at Jesus feet, and to enter into his Yoke,
learning of him with that diligence who is holy, harmless, undefiled, meek,
gentle, lowly, and every way virtuous, a perfect pattern of true piety, who did
no evil, neither was guile found in his mouth, and has left us an example,
that we should follow his steps, and this godliness springs up in the soul,
by virtue of the operation of one of the seven spirits of God, viz. the spirit
of holiness, Romans 1.3.
whose Divine tincture changes their nature into its own; even as Wine by
entering into Water, makes the Water talte of it self. So also their whole life
savoureth of the spirit, and tastes of the virtue and grace of God which
appears in the Soul; teaching us to deny ungodliness and worldly lusts, that
the mind may be exercised in that godliness, Tia. 2.11. 2 Timothy 4.7.
by virtue of which the conversation may be as becomes the Gospel of our Lord
Jesus. In this street of Bethania stands her place of Worship, in which she
performs Divine service to the Holy God with great reverence and godly fear,
who is greatly to be feared in the Assembly of the Saints, Heb. 12.28. Ps. 89.7.
and to be had in reverence of all that come about him.

CHAP. IX.
THE sixth Pillar in the House of Wisdom is Brotherly Kindness, the which is
also produced out of one of the seven Spirits before the Throne, viz. the
Spirit of Humility, and is a very beautiful Street in Bethania, in which she
has great communion by walking with God in the Brotherhood and fellowship of
the Gospel, 1 Pet. 2.17. Phil. 1.5. Heb. 2.11. Mat. 23.8.
for as there is a very near relation between Christ and his Disciples, even so
there is also a Divine brotherhood between Christians and one another, but
there is a two fold brotherhood generally considered, the first is natural,
wherein all mankind are of one blood, and children of the first Adam, Act.
17.26.
and descended all out of his Loins, and have all one kind of Soul, 1 Cor.
15.48.
and one manner of sensitive life, and also one kind of humane flesh, and have
all equal interest in the Privileges of Nature, Jer. 38.16. 1 Cor. 15.39.
Psalm. 24.1. Romans 5.18. John 2.2. Heb. 9.27. Acts 24.15. Chap. 17 31. Dan. 12.2.
and are all equally involved in the Fall; and are accordingly concerned in the
benefit of the Restoration, (for Jesus our Savior is the Propitiation for the
Sins of the whole World,) and are all alike designed to Mortality, and must be
all equally concerned in the Resurrection and Eternal Judgment; and so at last,
according to their proper State, must be centered in a woeful or Blessed
Eternity. But the second Degree of Brotherhood is Spiritual and Divine, in
which Estate Christians are of the Second Adam; being Members of his Body,
Ephesians. 5.30.
of his Flesh, and of his Bones, John 16.57.
and so are nourished by that Virtue which issues out from the living Father
unto them through Christ: So that as he in Conjunction with the Father, lives
in and by the Fathers Virtue and Fullness, John 14.6.
even so Christians by their close Union and Conjunction with Christ, live by
him; and his Fullness and Virtue is the Life of their Souls; according as it is
written in the Holy Scriptures, He that Eats me, shall live by me; therefore
all our Union with the Father is mediately, not immediately; and that through
Christ, unto whom it is only proper to enjoy immediate Union with the Father;
Chap. 10.30. John 14.10. Romans 9.5.
and by Virtue thereof, the infinite Fullness of the Father dwells it him, so
that he is very God, being the absolute and perfect Image of the Fathers
Substance; Heb. 1.5.
and if we did live immediately upon the Father, and had all the incommunicable
Properties of the Divine Nature, John 2.25.
as well as those which are communicable; (which is impossible either for
Angels or men) Then we might be Gods and Christ's as well as he; but this is
Blasphemy for any to imagine; and also Lies for them to speak: Therefore, this
Brotherhood or Heavenly Offspring, are Branches that grow upon Christ the
Stock, Romans 11.17.
who is in perfect and immediate Union with the Father, who is the Root, from
whence the Virtue goes into the Stock, and so through him into the Branches;
from which Branches, the fruits of Virtue springs forth unto the World; John
3.21. Hos. 14.8. Acts 11.16. 1 John 2.20. Verse 27. Ephesians. 3.14.
and thus all their Works are wrought in God, in whom also all their Fruit is
found; therefore these Souls are not Christ's, but Christians; not the Anointed
ones of God, but the Anointed ones of Christ: so that as he lives by the
Father, even so they also live by him; and so being of a Heavenly Descent, and
born from above, they are of the Family in Heaven, and Brotherhood that is
Divine and Spiritual, between whom there is great Brotherly Kindness;
Therefore, Heb. 13.1.
as the Branches of a Tree do link themselves into one another, and so support
and help each other to bear the Burden of their Fruit; winding themselves for
that Purpose into a certain kind of round Body, by which the Tree is made
comely to behold, and so showing a Natural Kindness one to another; even so
this Brotherhood, all acts as one man, Phil. 1.27. Rom, 12.10. Prove. 31.26.
and Charity being a Ruling Principle in their Souls; these are kind one to
another. Be kindly affectioned as becomes Brethren, in whose Tongue appears
the Law of Kindness.

Now Kindness is a Quality that looks not only to it self, but goes out of
it self, and emptieth it self to others, imparting unto them somewhat of that
which is its own; for none can love themselves, and keep their own, that dwell
in Kindness, for that would be great Cruelty; Prove. 5.27.
the which consists, not only in inflicting Misery upon men, but also in
detaining from them that by which Misery may be removed. Kindness if it cannot
help its Friend, will therefore mourn because it cannot help him, and evermore
extends it self to them that have need of Succor: Luke 10.34.
Sometimes it respects the Body, at other times, the Soul; sometimes in one
way, and then again, in another; so the Wounds of a Friend, are better then the
Kisses of an Enemy; For when the Righteous smites, it is in Kindness, Prove.
27.6.
and his Reproofs are as precious Oil; but when the Wicked smites, Psalm.
141.5. Prove. 27.4. 1 Thessalonians. 2.8. Zach. 4.12.
it is in Wrath, and their strokes are full of Cruelty. If kindness has
received any Spiritual thing, straitway it desires to impart it to others, but
Cruelty keeps all to its self: if it has any natural thing that will profit
its Brother, it rejoices when it is accepted. For that End, Kindness does
divide not its Natucal or Spiritual Enjoyments between it self and others, 2
Cor. 8.9. John 1.16. Romans 5.10.
but emptieth it self of all, if the call so requires; even as Jesus our
Savior, who emptied himself both of Comforts of Soul and Body, and became
exceeding poor in that which was his own, that we may be filled with that
Fullness which by right is none of ours. John 3.16.
Kindness in him laid down his Life for the Brethren, yet Kindness in
Christians extends not it self only to the Brotherhood in the last Degree,
but also to the Brotherhood in the first Degree: Romans 12.20.
Therefore, when the Enemy is Hungry, it feeds him; and when he is thirsty,
it gives him Drink: it cloatheth the Naked, relieveth the Oppressed, and
succoureth the helpless Enemy. 2 Timothy 2.25.
Therefore, there is no Cruelty nor Persecution in Bethania, no Heartburnings
against any that will not in all things conform to her Charter, Luke 13.34.
In Meekness she instructs them that oppose themselves, and waits, if
peradventure God will give them Repentance. Chap. 19.41. John 2.18. Mat. 13.30.
Jer. 17.16. Isa. 53.5. Jer. 4.19. Psalm. 33.15. 1 Timothy 6.5. Rev. 18.24.
She weepeth over the Earthly Jerusalem, but will not set it on Fire, and when
she takes a Whip in hand, it is only to purge the Temple of the Lord, and then
it is made but of small Cords neither: She will let the Tares grow in the
World, though not in the Church, and by her Prayers does not hasten the woeful
Day: She cries out against the Spirit of Babel, but not against those who are
Baptized with it: Her Heart is often bleeding for others, but her Hands are
dyed in the Blood of none; so that sharp and proud Contentions are found in the
Earthly Jerusalem, and Blood and Cruelty dwell in Babel, but Brotherly Kindness
in both Degrees of Brotherhood, takes up its Habitation in Bethania. Psalm.
112.9. Mal. 25.36. Heb. 13.2. James 1.27.
In this Street stands the great Hospital in which the poor are relieved, the
Sick are visited, Strangers are entertained, and the helpless succored; and
there also she has many a pleasant and comfortable Walk with Her Dear Emmanuel.

CHAP. X.
THE Seventh Pillar in the House of Wisdom, Gal. 5.22. 1 John 4.9. Romans 5.5.
is Charity, and it is produced by one of the seven Spirits before the Throne,
being a precious fruit of the Spirit, and a divine Principle springing up in
the Soul, by the Love of God which is shed abroad into it; this is the number
of perfection, and highest degree of Virtue; it is the highest Stone in
Zerubbabel's Temple (who is a stranger to Babel) and the bond of Perfection;
Zech. 4.7. Col. 3, 16.
it is that wherein Bethania enjoys her highest Communion with God, and is
the chiefest Street in all her City; for there the Palace of Emanuel stands;
as it is written, John 4.16.
He that dwells in Love, dwells in God, and God in him; She has many a
Walk with God in this Street, and while she walks with him there, she sees
nothing but Glory in his Face; in this Street she is fearless of Men or Devils,
and the Terrors of God do not make her afraid; 2 Cor. 4.6.
for perfect Love casts out Fear; Psalm. 27.1.
in this Principle of Love, God moved himself in all Eternity, and produced
that Image, 1 John 4.17.
who is called the Son of his Love; Light and Love are the pure Essence of the
glorious God, and in that Principle were the Angels of Light created, whom the
Father appointed to attend that Throne on which the Son of his Love sits;
who being the glorious Head of their famous Principality, Col. 1.13. 1 John
1.5. 2 Cor. 11.14. Isa. 6.1, 2. Col. 1.10. Rev. 4.10. Psalm. 84.11. Job 38.7.
was therefore by them most humbly worshipped, and so the heavenly Host of
resigned Spirits vail their Faces, and cast down their Crowns, when the Son and
Glory of all these Morning-Stars ascends the Throne. Out of this Principle of
Light and Love, issued forth that Light that was in the beginning, before the
Sun, and Moon, and Stars were created; the which, after they were created,
seized upon their Bodies, as Fire seizes upon an unlighted Candle, when it is
touched therewith, whose Bodies being thus enlightened, they carrylight from
Heaven, round about the Earth in twenty four hours. In this Principle was the
Soul of man breathed in his Nostrils in the day of his Creation; Genesis 1.34.
Verse. 14. Genesis 2.7.
therefore Man's Soul did bear the Image of God, and God is Love; yea, the
whole Creation was brought forth in this Principle of Light and Love, therefore
the Fruits do grow so quietly among the Leaves together upon the Tree, and the
great Multitudes of Flowers of so many several Colors, Forms and Virtues, all
peaceably together in one Meadow, so that nothing of Strife and Contention, or
any other Disorder did immediately proceed from God, whose Essence and dwelling
place was Light and Love from all eternity; so that the contention that is now
among the Creatures, arises from some other remote Cause, and though there be
generation and corruption among those Creatures which are under the influence
of the four Elements, Genesis 1.31.
yet in the beginning there was no contention; for the Herbs, and Plants and
Trees, with the Fruits in the vegetable Kingdom, grew up by the influence of
Heaven into the perfection of their own Nature, and yielded up their Spirits
into the sensitive Creatures, and so live in a more excellent state in the
Animal Kingdom, than when they lived in their own: These again, when their
Bodies are grown old and feeble, resign their Spirits into the four Elements,
who, according to the course of Nature, produce new Vegetables and young
Animals, to possess the places of those who are gone into a formal decay:
therefore the first disorder of Nature began in the Kingdom of Lucifer, who set
his Seat above the Stars of God, Isa. 14.13.
upon the Mount of the Congregation in the side of the North, Isa. 6.2. Rev.
4.1. Ezekiel. 28 6. Isa. 9.6.
and did not vail his face at the appearance of the Son of God's Love, nor yet
cast his Crown before his glorious Throne, but would set his Heart as the Heart
of God, and so be like the most High; this kindled Wrath in the Father of
Eternity; or or rather stirred up pure Justice in him, which lay before as Fire
is hid in the Flint until it be smitten upon, and hence it is that God became a
consuming Fire; Heb. 12.28.
but the next disorder began in the Garden of Eden, where Man should have
obeyed the Voice of God, Genesis 3.6. Romans 5.12. Ephesians. 2.3. Genesis 1.28. Jer. 2.21.
Genesis 3.17. Psalm. 82.2.
and have turned to the Tree of Life, and so have eaten of that Fruit without
which he could not long securely stand; but he turned the quite contrary way,
and Eat of the Tree of Knowledge of Good and Evil, and so brought Sin and Death
into his first Nature, and in that Nature he is still a Child of Wrath: Thus
the King of the Creatures being degenerated, the Earth is cursed for his sake,
therefore the whole Foundations thereof are out of Course, and the Devil is
become Prince of the World, and so there is little but Confusion and Disorder
in it; Isa. 24.1. John 1.18. 2 Cor. 5.17. Dan. 9.24.
for which cause the great Jehovah moved himself again in the Principle of
Love, and sent the Son of his Love out of his own Bosom to make all things new
again; even to put a final End to Sin, and so take away the Curse, and to turn
out Death, Rev. 22.3. Hos. 13.14. Rev. 20.10.
also to send the Devil into his infernal Den, and to create Souls anew for
Heaven; into which New-Created Souls he infuseth the Spirit of Power, of Love,
and of a sound Mind; and in this Estate, they become followers of God, as Dear
Children, 2 Timothy 1.9.
walking in Love; so that all their things be done in Charity or Love; and this
Love fulfilleth the whole Law, Ephesians. 5.1. 1 Cor, 16.114. Romans 15.8. 1 Timothy
1.5. Cant. 8.7. Romans 5.3. 1 Pet. 4.13. Mat. 11.29.
and goes to the end of the Commandment. For the end of the Commandment is
Charity, out of a pure Heart, and of a good Conscience, and Faith unfeigned;
and where it is shed abroad in the Hearts of Christians, it is more strong then
Death, and many Waters cannot quench it; passing through all Tribulations very
cheerfully, rejoicing therein, because it is then in Communion with Christ,
being Partaker of his Suffering, and walking with him in the Kingdom of his
Patience; John 5.3. John 6.6. Gal. 6.16. Romans 8.37. Cant. 5.10. James 3.24.
it counts his Yoke easy, and his Commandments are not grievous, and those
things which to others appear as hard sayings, are unto it as Words of Eternal
Life, It glories in the Cross, by which it is more then a Conqueror, and
nothing separates it from the Love of God: It lets out the whole Soul after
Christ, and counts him the chief of ten Thousand, and the only Portion of the
Soul; Cant. 2.5. Psalm. 71.20. Col. 1.3.
so that if he go but behind the Curtain, it is sick of Love, but when he
shows his Face again, the Spirit is greatly revived, and the Lips that were a
sleep begin to speak: This Divine Charity being the Head Stone of all, is still
looking upwards, and sets its Affections on things above, Heb. 11.24.
so that all Earthly things are of a small Esteem with it; therefore if it lose
all its worldly Possessions for Jesus sake, it grieveth not. If it have but one
Isaac, and he also a Child of Promise, yet Love will give its firstborn to
God, who did not withold his firstborn from men. Nevertheless, Charity
loves every Creature, yet not for their own, but for the Creators sake, and so
it loves the Earth, and all that grows upon it, because Gods Vegetative
Spirit is the Life thereof; it also loves the sensitive Creature, because Gods
sensitive Spirit dwells in them; it loves all Angels and Souls of men, John
21.16. John 4.2.
because Gods national Spirit has inspired their Essences; it loves Christ
and the Saints most dearly, because God by his Divine Spirit lives in them; it
loves the Sun, Moon, and Stars, Romans 1.20. Job 31.27. Rev. 5.13.
with all the whole Host of Heaven, because they possess the light of God, and
show forth his Eternal Power and Godhead to men. Yet it will Worship no
Creature whatsoever. God and the Lamb are the only Objects of Divine Worship
with it; 1 Cor. 13.4, 5, 6, 7.
therefore Charity envyeth not, but suffers long, and is not easily provoked,
yea, it thinks no evil, but is kind and bears all things, endures all
things, vaunteth not it self, is not puffed up, seeks not her own, neither
does it behave it self unseemly; it rejoices not in Iniquity, but rejoices in
the Truth; Verse 8. Verse 13.
it stands firm and unchangeable, when all Prophecies fail, and Tongues do
utterly cease; yea, it outliveth Faith and Hope, and will at last swallow up
all the Heavenly Offspring into it self, and become their Glorious Habitation
in Endless Eternity: this is the longest Street in all Bethania, and we have
not yet traveled unto, nor yet seen the End thereof: Therefore cannot give so
full a Description of it as we would, and possibly as many also may desire; yet
all the Freeborn Citizens of Bethania often walk in this Street, and all other
Streets have a Dependence upon it.

CHAP. XI.
THese are the seven Pillars of the House of Wisdom, Prove. 9.1. Ephesians. 5.2.
Verse 15. 2 Cor. 2.14. Ephesians. 5.1. Rev. 14.4.
and upon them pure Christianity most firmly stands, and so is thereby
exposed to open View; The savor of the Knowledge of Christ being manifest by
these things in every place; they are the seven famous Streets in Bethania,
wherein she is carefully walking with an holy God, and is a faithful Follower
of the Blessed Lamb; and in this Path of the Just, which is as a burning light,
shines more and more to the perfect day. John 14.23, John 15.11. Isa. 26.3. 2
Cor 4.4. Job 29.3, 4.
She experienceth great Communion with God, and in that Communion is often
filled with Divine and lasting joy. And being steadfast in Spirit, in these
Paths of Virtue their minds are kept in perfect Peace, and the light of the
glorious Gospel of Jesus Christ, shines in and round about their Tabernacle,
by which many famous Mysteries are plainly discovered; for unto these it is
given to know the Mysteries of the Kingdom of God; who are therefore enabled in
the Spirit to speak Mysteries, Mat. 13.11. 1 Cor. 14.2. 1 Timothy 3.9. Rev. 5.5. 1 Timothy 3.16. Mat. 11.27.
and also to hold the Mystery of the Faith in a pure Conscience; for it is the
Lamb whom these do follow, that opens the seven Seals of the Mystery of
Godliness, which without Controversy, is exceeding great, and it is his proper
Work to reveal the Father; and in his times, to show who is the Blessed and
only Potentate, the King of Kings, and Lord of Lords; Heb. 1.3. Acts 5.19. Lev.
25.9, 10. Rev. 14.14.
who only has Immortality, dwelling in the Light which no man can approach to;
whom no man has seen or can see, but by the Revelation of him who is the
express Image of his invisible Substance, which are the times of refreshing,
which will shortly come from the presence of the Lord, Ephesians. 1.10. Rev. 10.7.
being the glorious Jubilee and Year of Rest for all laboring and painful
Christians; in which Dispensation of the fullness of times, all things in
Christ will be gathered together in one, both which are in Heaven and Earth.
These also being the days of the Voice of the seventh Trumpet, in which the
Mystery of God will be fully finished, and the Eternal Light and Love of the
Father, 1 John 1.7, Chap. 4.16.
in which he moved in all Eternity, most gloriously Unvailed, the which Divine
Brightness, and the Everlasting Love will then be the State and Habitation of
all Holy Souls, who have walked in light, and dwelt in Love, while they were
strangers in this World; and so God shall be all in all, and the Eternal
Admiration of all Divine Creatures, both Angels and Men, who now in these
times, through the glorious Son of Righteousness see the Face of the invisible
God, Rev. 22.4.
and have his Name written in their Foreheads.

CHAP. XII.
EVEN so also to such as Walk with God in these Divine Paths, Luke 24.22. Isa.
16.11. Psalm. 25.14
The Lamb opens the Mystery of the Holy Scriptures, and shows unto them the
Paths of Life, making manifest the Secret of the Lord to them that fear him;
teaching the humble his most pure Way, and guiding the Meek in Judgment; Isa.
42.16. Chap. 29.18. Psalm. 119.99. Mat. 13.2.
for he will bring the blind by a way they knew not, and make them see out of
great Obscurity; so the humble and holy Souls in Divine Wisdom, often excels
their very Teachers, and grow so skillful in the Word of Righteousness, that as
Scribes greatly instructed into the the Kingdom of God, Wisdom 2.
they can bring out of their Treasures things both New and Old: and thus the
pure Wisdom which in all Ages enters into Holy Souls, still makes such kind
of men Friends to God; Psalm. 63.5.
and Prophets, by whom the inside of Scriptures and Divine Ordinances are
clearly discerned, and invisible things which are signified by External Forms,
are the satisfying and Nourishment of the Soul; for the Soul of Man heing a
Spiritual Essence, cannot be perfectly satisfied by a Corporal thing; therefore
as it is tinctured by an Heavenly Influence, it still looks into inward
things, and through the pure Humanity of Jesus our Savior, it spyeth out his
glorious Divinity, and through the Ministerial Word, the Holy Scriptures, it
searches into the Essential Word, which was before the Scriptures were written;
and through the Baptism of Water which concerns the Body, it reaches into the
Baptism of the Spirit, which concerns the Soul; and through the Bread and
Wine which nourishes the outward man, it discerns the Lords Body, which is
the Life of the Spirit: Therefore it is the Desire of this Author, that all his
Fellow-Travellers who are seeeking and walking in the way of Life, that they
would turn their Minds into themselves, and carefully weigh the State of their
own Souls, to see that the Root of the Matter is in themselves; neither casting
off any Truth of Christ, nor yet resting therein, till they have found the
inside thereof, neither yet to satisfy themselves until the inside of Truth be
firmly settled in the inward parts of the Soul: For the All-seeing God looks
for, Psalm. 51.6. Psalm. 19.11. Jer. 15.16. Psalm. 119.105.
and desires Truth in the inward parts, and there only it is profitable unto
men, and will stand them in great stead in their greatest and deepest
Necessities. For it will be a light in the Land of Darkness, Psalm. 119.143.
Psalm. 9.4. Mat. 4, 4. Isa. 32.2. Psalm. 25.21.
a Comfort in the time of Trouble, an hiding place in the Hour of Temptation, a
Shield and Buckler against the storms of Violence; it will be for Food in the
time of Famine, and Refreshing Water in the Land of Drought: For Integrity and
Uprightness, will still preserve those who really possess it, and cause them to
lift up their Heads before the Face of the most insulting Adversary; Psalm. 19,
6. Verse 14.6. Heb. 10.34.
neither shall they be ashamed before Kings, that have respect unto all Gods
Righteous Judgments. Truth in the inward parts fortifieth the Soul against the
Fear of Men and Devils, and possesses it only with the pure Fear of God; it
seals unto it an inward Evidence for Heaven, Psalm. 17.14. Mat. 13.21.
and where that Evidence is, Earth and its Fullness are easily forsaken; but
where this Evidence is wanting, the Mind is frequently filled with Fear, and
all the known Portion being the things of this World, the Thieves are suspected
to be likely to steal, and the Moths to corrupt, that which is within the
reaches of their Power; and many a time, through want of Truth in the inward
parts, with which also the inward Evidence stands, diverse Souls desist the
Service of the holy God, and through the Fear of Mortal men, Isa. ^1.12, 13.
when it can but kill the Body, and deprive us of the Comforts of this outward
Life, they wander into a Spirit of Apostasy, and forget the fear of him, which
is able to kill, Mat. 10.28. Verse 29. Luke 12.20. Prove. 14.26. Acts 20, 24.
and Eternally to torment the Soul; and hence it comes to pass, that by
seeking to save the Life of the Body, we lose the Eternal Life of the Soul, by
possessing our selves of Earth for a few Moments, we lose Heaven to all
Eternity; but the pure Fear of God, drives away all other Fear, and causes
the Soul to pass through all Difficulties, with much cheerfulness, keeping it
clean from all Impurity; but while men possess themselves only with the outside
of Truth, and have the glorious Forms of Godliness shining forth in a visible
Profession; this being but the outward Court of Gods holy Temple, and Suburbs
of his little City, Dan. 8, 12. Rev. 11.2.
will not secure in the hour of Temptation, nor be a shelter from the Storms of
Violence. For Men and Devils can invade this place, and cast down this part of
Truth to the ground, and tread under Foot those Persons who have their
Habitations only here. Therefore, our Safety consists not in Forms only, but
also in the Power of Godliness; yet the greatest Contention among men, is about
the Wall, and outward Court of the House; where also many poor Souls have been
sore wounded and discouraged by Reason of the Divisions of Reuben, Judge. 5.15,
16. Numb. 32.5.
who chose to dwell on this side Jordan, where his Possessions lie open to
diverse kinds of Dangers; but when this outside of Truth is used only as
Spectacles to help us to the light of invisible things; then it stands in its
right place, and so every part of Truth is very precious when observed in that
Order, whereunto the Lord appointed it, and when the visible things have done
their Office, and the time of Figures is come to an End, then the light of this
Sun, Moon, and Stars will disappear; and Prophecies fail, Rev, 21.23. 1 Cor.
13, 8.
and Tongues shall cease, and Faith and Hope have a final End; and so those who
have rightly used these Spectacles, shall see no more through a Glass darkly;
but shall see as they are seen, and know as they are known: For in the glorious
Resurrection, 1 Cor. 15.44.
the very Bodies of men shall be made Spiritual, so that which is perfect being
come, that which is in part shall be done away: Therefore, have I endeavored
according to my weak Ability, to hint at things through these Papers; both in
their Formal and Spiritual Natures; that so none might despise the one, or miss
the other; but if it be possible, might be brought to conform unto the Walk, in
the whole will of God; and it is very much to be supposed, Col. 4.12
that I shall be censured by many, and not understood by all; yet I hope
quietly to bear the one, and carefully to inform the other, according to my
utmost Capacity; and I commit these Writings (which have been Composed in the
midst of many Distractions) to the disposing of the most wise God, beseeching
him of his great Mercy to perfect all my Imperfections that in them appear, and
to guide the serious Reader, by his most pure Counsel, that in the use thereof,
he may attain to greater Wisdom then that which at present is my little Talent;
and when he has found any thing in the use of this short Breviate of things,
that he be as ready to impart to me, as I have now at last been to communicate
these things to him; and though I have used diverse Allegories, and Figurative
Speeches in these Writings; Hos. 12.10. Psalm. 1.8. 1 Cor. 4.34.
yet I know how to excuse my self therein, and entreat that I may not be too
fiercely condemned before I come to Judgment. And forasmuch as our Brethren
called Particular Baptists, were the principal and only Occasion of the first
part of these Papers: I entreat them to consider, that both of us might come
nearer the Truth, as it is in its own Nature, if we did not set our selves too
much to wander into extremes, by reason of which, we have been smiting each
other in the dark, and so weakening each others Spirits, while Piety and Virtue
the Substance of all true Religion, does but meanly flourish on either side;
and though we should share alike among the rest, Isa. 33.18. 1. Cor. 4.1.
in the outward Knowledge of outward things, yet in the end it will signify
little, for it is Charity only that edifieth, and Contention and Vanity are
all, or very near the Earthly Spirit; but Unity is from above, and nearly
related to the only wise God, whose Name is One, and to our Lord Jesus Christ
whose Work is together in One: Unto whom, who is the most Glorious and Blessed
Lamb, 1 Cor. 4.3.
with the Eternal Father, The only Wise and Invisible God, be all Glory, Might,
Majesty, Dominion, Love, Service and Obedience, throughout all Ages, Ephesians.
3.21.
and to all Eternity. Amen.

FINIS.

