WITTY William of VVilt-shire.

His birth, Life, and Education, and strange adventures: with his unmatchable
Cheats, witty feats, and merry conceits; setting forth his travels, what
Dangers he escapt by the help of his wits, and how he was himself Cheated of
fifty pounds by a Lady of pleasure, and yet knew not whether she was a man or
woman, but by her hands and face.

With merry songs and sonnets.

You that this book shall hear or read,
and understand the same,
You cannot choose but laugh indeed,
for it deserves no blame.
Except it be for modesty,
the which he did defy;
And then you will confess with me,
that herein is no lie.
Read and laugh, then laugh and read,
both wit and mirth it fill,
Read it quite over, and never give over,
till you have laughed your fill.
And if that this your palate please,
with mirth and eke with art,
You will obliege the Author then,
to write a second part.
Printed for C. Passinger, next door to the Spur-Inn in Southwark, 1674.

WITTY William of Wiltshire.
Showing his Merry pranks, pretty Feats, witty Cheats; being full of Wit and
Mirth, and very delightful to read.
THere was a Man which had a hopeful son by his wife, whom he named William,
and because he had been long in Wilt-shire, the Man's bye name was called
wilt-shire: this stripling was put to School, and took his Learning so well,
that in short time he out-learned many of his fellows, and became well stild
both in his Latin and Lying tongue, and frequenting the company of Gypsies,
which did often frequent to their town, became very eloquent in canting,
insomuch that all men admired his dexterity, in that (...) ^aught and strange
language, he was well (...) with deceits from his childhood, and (...) ^ell
dicemble an injury till he had opportunity to avenge the same; for whilst he
was yet little he used this his excellent courage, rever to beat any less nor
younger then himself, but bent his revenge with great ardensie against those
biger then himself, and would defend the weaker and lesser sort of his fellows,
from those that were too strong for them, this his deportment gaind him the
favor both of old and young, rich and poor.

One time in a bitter cold day he espied a boy that had lately done him an
injury, stand peeping into a shallow well, he came softly behind him, and
thrust him in the feet forward, that he stood up to the Neck in cold water; not
knowing who thrust him in, he cried out aloud for help, but William decembling
the matter, as not knewing thereof, came with some company and dragged him out,
as dry as and owned Mouse: William smiling, said, Thank me your Godfather, for
this good turn that I have done you: the boy mistaking his real meaning, said
in good earnest, I thank you kindly God father, I had certainly been drowned
had it not been for you.

At another time he and his Companions went for to ^ob^an Orchard, some of
which head discovered his misdemeaners to his master, which he bare in mind,
they were eight in number, he sent five up into the trees to shake down apples,
when he had sent the two others laden away, and himself had hid his own share,
he went immediately to the owner, and sends him into the Orchard, where he
caught the five boys in the trees, who all of them were soundly whipped the next
day; unto whom he said now I am sufficiently revenged for telling tales of me
to my master, (if this does please you tell again but after this all the boys
made friendship with William.

William having often observed a company of vacrant fellows that were
counterfeits, to lie basking in the sun in his fathers close, in the long grass
under a great hedge, came by them and asked if they lay there all night, yea
Master said they, if that we had but a little straw; well said he, come to me
at night and I will give you straw, in their absence he laid a train of
Gunpowder under the long grass that came quite through the hedge; Will
according to his word had furnished them with straw, for which they were very
thankful; about midnight came William, when they and their doxies were fast
asleep, puts fire to the train, this fired the hedge and all the low trees,
made all the Criples run away, most pitifully burnt in their Limbs, their cries
with the great blaze of fire raised the whole town, which apprehended these
strangers, who were all whipped for the fact; never since that time durst any
such persons approach that town.

But the foresaid William growing to 9 years of age, and so expert in all
villainies, his father fearing that some great mischief would follow determined
to send him to London to a friend, but whilst this was determining there came
to their town a crew of Gypsies, who viewing his countenance, which was fresh
and rudy, asked him if he could speak Lattin, yea that I can said William, so
he answered them partly in Lattin, and partly in Canting, which caused the
chief Master for to admire his dexterity in that sort of Pedlors French, what
tricks they used was unknown, but at their departure they took William away
with them, with whom he continued till that he was fifteen years of age, and
then returned home to his Father, both in good liking of body, and well
clothed.

After this his father sent him to London, where he was bound Prentice to a
salesman, but before the year was quite out, he having found the sweetness of
fingering of Crowns, what with keeping evil Company and much drinking, he had
run his Master out above an hundred pounds, for which debe he was cast into
prison, where he lay a long time, till by the assistance of some friends, and
the late act of Parliament he was set at liberty.

Imediately he writes both to his Father and Brother, but he received but a
churlish answer, because they were ashamed both of his life and actions, and
because his father had lost his moneys he put him out withal, he durst not
press two hard upon their kindness and being in great distress, wanting both
moneys and clothes, he Writ to a Young Man sometimes his School-fellow, a
pitiful letter in these Words following.

Sir to your hands these lines I do present
beseeching you to yield your free consent
tome that with these lines does you salute
And also grant to me one needful suit.
Imprisonment has wrought my full decay
and all my clothes are torn and worn away,
My hats so full of holes on every side,
That ^^ch the same my face I cannot hide.
My hatband which before I used to wear,
I changed it with the tapster for strong beer
My ribons gay of crimson blew and red,
truct for Cand les to light me to bed.
My powdered perriwig unto my grief,
I sold away to buy me powder beef;
My shirts so rent, so torn and tattered,
I cannot devise to pul't over my head.
My scarlet wastcoat with the tits thereon
and broad gold sace are all cashir'd and gone
My doublit that is grown very thin and bare
Like to a boan for which no worms do care
My coat and Shash I turned them into chink
And with the same I bought beef bread and drink,
My doublit makes me seem a monster strange,
As if man's habit did his nature change.
My wastbands wasted, and my sneezing tears it,
Quite off o'th hooks, just like to him that wears it,
My breeches peticots do more resememble
Then any Lawyers gown within the temple
My belly pieces still are fat I well observe,
If baked well for belly pieces serve,
My stockings they are sound as any bell,
But how to draw them on I cannot tell.
my shoos about my feet keep rouling round,
As if no stockings in them could be found,
My shoos and soals both separated are,
So that my feet upon the ground goes bare.
When I behold the gallants by me pass,
Methinks I see my self in natures glass,
Not like the fish that sports to swim and sink
whilst I want coin to buy me meat and drink
Nor like those fields that are both fresh and green,
Whilst I ashamed am for to be seen,
Nor like those gardens that yields sweet content,
Whilst all my Clothes are both torn and rent
Nor like the trees that yield delicious fruit,
For I go daily in a tattered suit,
Nor am I trimmed like Butter-flies and Bees,
For here and there a tatter I do lease.
You are my approved friend and do confess,
The only one that can my wants redress,
Remember Sir you are of friends my chief,
Turn pray you quickly, send me some relief.
So fare you well, I pray say me not nay,
Necessity admits of no delay.

No sooner had the young man received his Letter, but he forthwith showed it to
Williams brother, that was his bosom friend, he out of compassion to his
brother, showed it to his father, the father out of love to William to keep him
from further danger, and willing to be a father in distress, but not to be seen
in it, least he should depend upon it, furnished him with these following
things, caused the young man to answer his letter as follows.

His friendly answer.
THy kind salute came safely to my hand
Thy nakedness I plainly understand,
When I consider thy industrous care,
thy long confinement and extreme hard fair.
thy words and actions seem both most witty
My heart and soul upon thee takes pity,
My friend, thou shall not want whilst that I have
A life or livlihood without the grave.
As for the promise I to thee did make,
To ease thy wants that I would undertake,
Some few things unto thee I have sent,
For to cashear thy suit that is torn and rent.
A perriwig that once my self did wear,
Crisped and curled, all made of flaxen hair,
A Beavor fair for to adorn thy head,
A golden band with fancies green and red.
Two Hollon shirts, and two half shirts beside,
With fair half sleeves that are both large and wide,
Two pair of drawers that are both clean and white,
Two Cravats and bands for thy delight.
A handsome suit that's of the newest fashion
To wear when that thou take recreation,
Likewise a Casock of a comely hugh,
My loving friend now I have sent to you.
A riding coat to keep out rain and wind,
For you to wear when you a caution find,
Two pair of stockings that of silk are made,
So dyed in grain, the color will never fade.
Two pair of shoos with Colotious beside,
one pair of boots when you have need to ride
I have sent thee a gelding that is all white,
With all accowterments for thy delight.
A sword and belt a trusty Ornament,
To guard thy self, and dangers to prevent,
Likewise a Cain I have sent thee withal,
To stay thy self when thou art like to fall.
What else thou want I to thee have sent,
the which may yield thee pleasure and content
Methinks thy hands into thy pocket go,
But thou have not one penny for to show.
Yet for all this thou seem full of sorrow,
Having no coin, nor know not where to borrow,
Clear up brave spirit, cast off discontent,
By such a one ten pounds I have thee sent.
But use it wisely, spend it not in vain,
When that is gone then send for more again
Thou shall not want thy need for to suffice,
till death me cease, and close up both my eyes.

William being thus bravely accomodated, and his man at his heels, upon a
gallant ge^ding. and well apparalel'd with each of them a trusty sword, and a
case of Pistols, takes upon himself the name of a country Squire, by which
means he might the better deceive all that he dealt withal, and with what
tradesman soever he met he pretended that he had some commodities fitting for
their use, and that he dealt in exchange, for many sorts of Merchandise: both
himself and his Man, coined to themselves several names, and had their several
changes of habits, and Perri-wiggs according to the several places that they
came unto, they had also their several colored plasters, or if that you
please patches of Mastick ever about them in a rediness, and their riding coats
were made both inside and outside perfect work for two several coats, they were
easily chan'd by turning the iner-side outward.

How he served a rich Salesman.
William and his man walking through the City, where was great store of
Salesmen, which did so ply pull, and hawl him to buy apparel, that by the
Shopkeepers perswastons and his man's, he went into the shop, perused of many
clothes ready made, as came to near or about an hundred pounds, pretending for
his family at his country house, well, to the Tavern they go with all speed,
where he treats the Salesman thus; Sir, I perceive that you are willing to
sell, but I question whether you be as ready to buy if a man would sell you
never so good and great penniworths. Sir said the Salesman if you have any
commodity in my way I had as lead take Commodity as moneys, what is it? Sir
said William, it is broad cloth, six quarters wide, and therewith showed him
a sample of all the several sorts, they bargin, that if the buyer like in when
he sees it, then to take cloth, if not to have ready money. But stay Sir, said
William, you know not me, neither do I know your dealings, and I would not
deal deceitfully with any, nor yet receive any wrong my self, will you except
of my propositions. Yea said the other if I like them. Then said William I will
leave two hundred pounds in my Landlords hands till my cloth comes to town if
you will deliver me the Commodities upon that condion, how like you this? Well
said the other, if the Innkeeper will secure me the moneys, I will with all my
heart, then from the Tavern to the Inn forthwith they go together and having
treated with the In-keeper, he consents, then said William bring you the
Clothing that I have bought hither to Morrow Morning, and you shall see the
Moneys told, for I love plain dealing, then went William to another Salesman of
his old acquaintance, appoints him to meet him at such a Tavern next day, at
ten a clock, and to bring Moneys with him, and he would sell him a good
penniworth.

In the Morning came the Salesman with Porters laden with the Clothing to the
Inn where William waited for their coming, having prepared a large colation of
an Angel price, where William in the presence of the Salesman, the Innkeeper
and others, poured out two hundred pounds upon the table of good and lawful
Money, draws it over, puts it into the baggs again, seals it up with his own
seal to prevent mistakes, lays it upon the table; asks if that be not
sufficient security, according to Law, they all allow it for good: it so fell
out that the Salesman went out of the room to ease himself, and the Innkeeper
to be called to the door, then Williams Man claps down two other bags just like
these first in all points both magnitude weight and seal, and away he goes to
his masters chamber, then in came the other two, then said William to his man,
send these goods away to be pact with the first, his Man well knowing his
meaning, sent them away imediately to the place appointed, where the other was
ready, and upon sight paid him his ready Money, for he had a great Pennyworth,
then his Man commanded the Horses to be made ready with all speed, saying, that
his Master and he must have home to send up the cloth, or else his Master
would be damnified above an hundred pounds: In the mean while William plies the
Innkeeper and Salesman with Wine, Tobacco, and merry tales, till both their
hearts were merry, then delivered he the two baggs to the Innkeeper in the
presence of the Salesman, and diverse others (who did comend him for his
loyalness) so they drank one quart of wine more, and so parted.

How far he rid that night.
So William and his Man mounted with all speed, and was very bountiful to the
Servants of the house, and so they set forward as to go into the country, but
being gotten out of sight they wheeled to the left, and took up their quarters
near Westminster, as if they had come but then out of the Country, this booty
made our Monnsier very jocond and lively for that night; as he walked the
street he met with a gallant damosel, and guessing by her habit, carriage, and
answers, what she was, he courts her to lie with him that night, she consented
for three go den angels to be his protector for that night, then they supt
together, and drank Wine in abundance, so William went into his bed, she was
tedioous, and made delay in undressing her self, in the mean time he fell fast
asteep, she seeing that, took out of his Pockets thirty pound in gold, a Watch
worth five pounds, and a Diamond King worth fifteen pound, in all to the value
of fifty pound, and so departed, but Mounst^er slept till break of day, and
then mist his fair Lady, his Gold, his Watch, and his ring, but could not tell
whether she was a Man or a Woman that cheated him but by her hands and face.

where dwells the man that now can me advise
To find her that has won this golden prize,
He swore the next and first he could trappan,
Not to be baukt, but prove himself a man,
Full vexed he was for truth, as I am told,
'Cause she him baukt, and stole away his gold,
How he was served the next day.
As ill-gain'd Goods never thrives, so it proved with William, for all the next
day he walks the streets to see if he could set his eye upon this gay Lady, but
could not, but walking through the Strand he met with a beautiful Woman, which
he courted, she yielded to go to the Tavern with him, where they call for a
Chamber, and Fagets to make a fire: Now sir, said she, that I have condescended
to come to the Tavern, I pray give me leave to Drink what Wine I will, and as
little as I please, for I drink nothing but mul'd sack, whilst the sack was a
mulling, he that know well how to take measure, first took notice of her
handsome foot and leg, her stiken stockings, and silk garter, with gold and
silver lace hanging down to the midleg, then next of her smock, that was laced
with a Flanders Lace, six inches broad round about the bottom, what with these,
the virtue of sack and the heat of the fire, set him into such a heat that it
made all people admire.

More of this I could say but I dare not,
But thought is free, think what you will and spare not;
Being full of pain, in rage he deeply swore,
That whilst he lived he would touch lace smock no more.
He describes his last Mistress and first thus.
To be man's misery, her voice like the seriching of an Owl her eyes the poison
of a Cockatrice, her hands the claw of a Crockadile, her heart the Cabinet of
horror, she is the grief of nature, reasons trouble, wits wound, abuse of time,
her pride unsupportable, her anger is unquenchable, she fears no colors, nor
cares for no counsel, she is a servant, but not of good, the taste of
bitterness, the digestion of death.

Now return we to the Salesman and the Innkeeper.
William never sends up the cloth, the day is past, the Salesman comes to the
Innkeeper and demands his money the b^g is produced fast sealed as it was
delivered, the seal is broken up before persons of note, and being poured out,
caused great admiration, for the substance contained therein, was only lead and
glass cut round, all not worth five shillings at the most. William is not to be
found, the Innkeeper is arrested, and pays the money, for both the bags prove
alike.

After all this, William betakes him to his shifts, and furnishes himself with
a fair gold ring, having set therein a fair square Topas, and a most excellent
hatched silver hilted Kapier, whose puni^ was most glorsously pullished, like
any looking-glass, both this stone and Pumel represents whatsoever is set
before them like to a Looking-glass, then he fell to Card-playing amongst great
persons putting on his ring on his little finger on his left hand, which he
turned toward the pack which discovered every Card that he drew what it was,
at other times he laid his rapier just cross his waste under his left hand, in
the pumil thereof he might deserne every Card he drew most plainly, by this way
be won or rather cheated several persons of much coin, but he was discovered
and laid open by one it is thought that is as cunning in that art as himself,
and so was cashear'd that Company, and that part wherein this act was performed.

What tricks he played in the Country.
William being cashear'd the C^^^, he with his Man fled into the Country,
having first obtained a firm Cathologue of all the names of the Lords, Kts. and
Gentlemen in those parts, and how many miles it was betwixt every particular
place, so he traveled into the country about an hundred miles from ^ond. to a
great shire town, to the greatest Inn there hires a boy to go with them some
s^^^miles to the said Inn and his groom by him, he senes ba^^ his horses to a
place appointed, there he continued 3 days, spending moderately, but paying
freely, and would never sit down till his heast was placed at the upper end of
the table, in this time his m^n was diligent in making inquiery what Country
man the master of the House was, and from whence the tapster, chamberlain, and
maids came, and what country Gent. frequented that house, and from what parts
they came, then his man gives out amongst the Servants that his master was from
such a place, that was far enough distant from that place, that he had so many
hundred pound coming in by the year, that he came thither to sojourn a while
till he could sell a parcel of Land with a stock of cattle upon it, which would
amount to twenty five hundred pound at least, this report caused him to be
honored like to a deem god.

Late in the Evening comes in a counterfeit Footman, delivers William his
message in the great hall, so told, that all men might hear that such a Knight.
living ten miles from thence, must needs speak with him next day by ten of the
clock because he heard he would sell his land, and forasmuch as it lay
convenient for him, he would give him as much for it as any man. At this
William stamps and scratches, saying; O what a rogue was I to send back my
horses, his Host believing that it was a curant truth, furnished him with two
horses: he promised to return again within two days at most, and would pay him
what he would desire, but did not, when six days were expired they sent to the
Kts. house, but he professed he knew no such man.

By this his will his hoast-he was defeated,
Of two-brave horses the Innkeeper was cheated,
There was no truth in the words that he did say,
For he rid quite the clean contrary way.
How he released a man from prison.
So he traveled from thence to another great to in, where it was his chance to
pass by the Country Prison windows, wherein amongst many other prisoners, he
found one poor man that had six small Children, that did all depend upon his
honest labor, whom he questioned, and found that he had lain their now a long
time at the suit of a hard-hearted Richman for twenty pounds, being bound for
another man, which ^ eved h^ to pity and compassion, and to try his wits how
to clear the poor man, then sent forthwith for the creditor to the tavern, and
there treated him to set the poor man frer, but could by no means prevail
without either the ready money or sufficient security, unto which William
replied, saying: Sir I do ingeniously profess that if I had not parted with all
my money to ten pound but yesterday for a parcel of Land that I have bought of
such a man, naming a right seller, and the other took it for curant, I would
have paid you your money down, and the poor man should have oven my servant. So
William plied the creditor with sack, which he lickt in as freely as a thirsty
horse does fair water, after eating of parched beans, till be grew as mellow as
a pair, when he saw all the Family honor William with the title of
worshipful, he believed him to be the same Man that he presented, and in a
merry v in tells William that if his Worship would give him a bond of forty
pounds, to pay him twenty at the next quarter day, he would set the Prisoner
free, unto which William consents; saying: I question not but that the poor man
will work it out by little and a little. Then send they for the prisoner to
come with a Kerper, he consents to serve his new Master, a Scrivener is sent
for, who by Williams instructions fastened the debt wholly upon him, and
cleared the prisoner quite for ever from the debt, which pleased the mizard
well, William pays the Scrivener, clears the Prison fees, permits his new
servant to go home to his Wife and Children, biding him to be sure to come to
him to his Inn by six a clock next morning, and after William had paid for the
wine, he threw a shilling to the drawer, and another to the maid, and so they
parted for that night.

Next morning William sends for this miser again to the same tavern, he gives
him a colation, in the intrem of time comes in a country fellow tells him that
the cattle which his Bayl^y had bought to stock his new purchased Land was
come, and put into the pastures, and that the Farmer that sold them and the
Bailey was at the Inn and furdermore that the price of the cattle came to twenty
pound more then he had delivered his bayley, and that the farmer staid there
for to receive it: then said the Churl, Let them come hither: No such matters
(says William) my servant shall be no fellow of mine, pox apont (says William)
I must away to such a gentleman my Cosen to borrow twenty pounds for I love to
keep my word. That shall not need, sir said the other if your worship please I
will supply you with 20 pound upon your own bond, what is that betwixt you and
me, the 20 pound was produced, and bond given to be paid the next quarterday,
then says William to his man, carry this money to my bailey to pay the farmer for
his cattle, and bid him make have home, and make ready for my coming, bid the
hostler make ready the horses, for I long to be gone to see what bargin of
cattle my man has bought, why sir said the miser how many has he bought?
truly sir said William I know no more then you do how many head of meat he has
bought, but I am sure that I delivered him 400 pound in good money why then said
the other, they stand you in 420 pound yea said William, and 5 pound more, then
come in his servingman, and said, sir if it please your worship the horses are
ready, so they drank one merry cup more, and so parted the Miser to carry home
his 20 pounds worth of paper, and William to his horse with 2^ pound in silver,
then he c^l'd the released prisoner, and there before the Innkeeper and other
persons, he discharged him from his service and gave him 10 pound to carry home
to his wife, and to begin the world anew, and so departed.

The Conclusion,
To the Tune of, The clean contrary way.
William of Wiltshire was a valiant Knight,
if you will believe it you may,
For unto all men he loved to do right,
the clean contrary way.
Ah, the clean contrary way.
To live by cheating his heart it did thirst,
and for to go gallant and gay,
And he that is not like him he thinks is accursed,
the clean contrary way, etc
Those that with moneys his wants have supplied,
he at his return will them ^ay,
When that his worship they once more have spied,
the clean contrary way, etc.
No Ranter, nor Canter, could yet overthrow him,
but he showed them very fair play,
But he that knew nothing could wisly forestow him,
the clean contrary way, etc.
When he comes to London to s^e the S^^man,
his hundred pounds then he will pay,
The Innkeeper shall receive it if he ca^,
the clean contrary way, etc.
The Lady of pleasure will bring back his gold,
if you will believe it you may,
She Will kiss and embrace him to make him more bold,
the clean contrary way, etc.
And he will return to the gallants their guilt,
the which he has won by foul play,
By help of the Topas Stoan, and the brave hilt,
the clean contrary way,
ah, the clean contrary way.
FINIS.

